Lectures Upon The Eleventh Chapter To The ROMANS.

Preached by that learned and Godly Divine of famous memory, Dr. SUTTON, in
St. Marie Overies in Southwarke.

Published for the good of all Gods Church generally, and especially of those
that were then his Hearers.

APOC. 14.1^. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea
says the Spirit, that they rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Nicolas Bourne, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT Lord BROOK, Baron of Beauchamp-Court: I. D.
Wishes all increase of saving graces, with true honor and prosperity in this
life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
I Shall not need (Right Honorable) to spend much time and many words in
commending this Book to your Lordship, and all sincere Lovers of Gods truth,
seeing the name of the Author, surmounting my best praises, can much better
grace it to them (and many were they) that knew him; and the work it self may
worthily commend the Author to them that knew him not. It presents unto your
Lordship the labors and Lectures of that faithful Servant of God, and famous
Preacher of the Gospel, Doctor Sutton, in his weekly exercise at S. Marie
Overies in Southwarke, which when they were delivered, were received with the
general applause and approbation of all his Hearers, that were godly and
judicious A man furnished with many rich endowments, and entrusted by our great
Lord and Master with not a few of his choycest talents, which, whilst he
lived, he employed faithfully and fruitfully, to the glory of God, and the
edification of his people in his painful Ministry. But (alas) too little a
while did this burning and shining light appear unto the world, setting in our
Horizon, and (without any Poetical fiction) dying in the Ocean by an
unnatural motion, before he had attained unto the high noone of his
perfection, that he might shine much more clearly among those bright Stars,
who with him have been the means upon earth of enlightening and converting many
others. Some little glympse has he left behind him of his greater light (like
the rays in the sky after the Sun setting) in these his labors penned by his
own hand, for his own use: which wanting the gracefulness of his elocution,
and powerful spirit to enlive them, in which he excelled; are but like a naked
body stripped of its ornaments, or a dead picture compared to a living body:
and this picture as far short in beauty and likeness of that it would have
been, if himself had lived to perfect it with his own pensill, as a picture
taken of a dead man in comparison of one which is drawn to the life. But yet I
supposed, that this dimmer candlelight of his fruitful labors, was too
useful and profitable to lie any longer hid under a bushel, and that it was
in me a kind of sacrilege, to rob the Church of the use of his talents after
he had done trading with them, and to hide them in a manuscript (as it were in
a napkin) which being published might become profitable for the enriching of
many.

And therefore that God might be yet more glorified by these fruitful labors
of his faithful servant, and the Church thereby might be also further edified,
J have caused them, by being imprinted, to be laid out in common, for the
benefit of many, especially those who having been his ordinary hearers, were
much addicted to his Ministry, and will highly esteem the work for the
Authors sake.

The which I humbly present and dedicate to your Honors Patronage, being
emboldened hereunto by your fervent love to Gods truth, and your zealous
profession of it in these cold and declining times: as also for that honorable
respect which I have observed in your Lordship to Gods poor Ministers, and
your cheerful receiving of them and their message, for their Masters sake:
and finally, that I might take occasion hereby of preserving and continuing
your Honorable acquaintance with me the least of Gods Servants, which J highly
esteem, not for any worldly respects, but that J may be still honored by your
Noble and Christian love, and be always ready by my best services to honor
you in it. The Lord more and more multiply all his graces in you, that you may
long remain, as a Noble Peer of our Commonwealth, so a firm Pillar of our
Church, adorning your religion, which as your best ornament chiefly adorneth
you, and gracing that truth by your holy profession and practice, which above
all other titles will most enoble you, and make you truly honored in this
world, in the sight of God and all good men, and eternize your glory in the
life to come. The which shall be the hearty prayer of me a poor Minister of
Jesus Christ, who shall ever remain much devoted to your Lordship in all
Christian duty and service,

John Downame.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is no small part of man's misery, that being created by God in a state of
happiness and immortality, he has made himself mortal by his sin and
fall. And it is an evidence of Gods infinite and never sufficiently admired
mercy, that he has not only by the death of his best beloved Son,
restored all his elect to a state of incorruption, and eternal life, and
blessedness in the world to come, but also in this world has provided
certain means and medicines, for the curing, in some sort, even of death and
mortality it self, which in their own nature are apt to bury us all in
perpetual oblivion. Namely, that whereas by Gods just and unchangeable
sentence we must all dye, yet by generation we propagate our kind, and so,
though mortal in our selves, we are immortalized in our posterity. Besides
which benefit, common to all mankind, God vouchsafes a more peculiar blessing
unto those whom he calls to be spiritual Fathers in the Church, begetting
children unto God by the seed of the Word, and preserving them in this life of
grace by their fruitful and powerful preaching of the Gospel. Especially if
he also enableth them to leave unto their children the riches of their holy
writings for their instruction, and increasing of their spiritual growth, in
all grace and goodness, as it were holy legacies bequeathed by their last will
and testament. For those spiritual births of the brain are herein much to be
preferred before the fruit of the womb, in that they continue an honorable
memory of their Father after his death, whereas the other often degenerating
from the virtues of their Ancestors, do stain their names with their vices
and dishonorable actions. But much more does God honor those who thus honor
him, in giving them power to speak unto his people, even when their bodies rot
in the grave, and making them instruments of his glory, and of much good unto
his children, even for a long time after death. So that as wicked men do not
only whilst they live, by their sins treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath, and prepare a fire in which they shall everlastingly be burned, but also
by propagating their sins unto posterity, and leaving behind them the
example of their vices, whereby others daily are successively corrupted, do
add fuel to that hellish fire, and increase their never ending torments: So
Gods servants, even after they are dead, have still a stock going, when as
they leave behind them their Christian virtues for examples, and their holy
writings, teaching and persuading others to follow them, whereby a daily
addition is made to their glory and happiness. Such legacies after his
departure has this reverend and faithful servant of Christ left for the use
and benefit of the Church, and such children to perpetuate his name and memory
unto all posterity, I mean the sum and substance of many his learned
Sermons, which he preached in his place and charge, at S. Marie Overies in
Southwarke, to the great benefit, comfort, and contenment of those that heard
him. The which though he had not polished and perfected for the Press, (as he
might have done if it had pleased God to have prolonged his life) yet I thought
it not fit that they should always be hidden from the world, because they had
not on them their best apparel. They were, I assure thee, his own legitimate
children, conceived and bred in his own brain, which were thus far fitted
for their birth, and prepared for the Press, though himself wanted life and
strength to bring them forth. Esteem them not the less because they are
Orphans, but entertain them rather with the more love; and if thou find in
them any defects and wants, pity them the more, because they have lost their
father, who would (had he lived) have supplied them: and esteem them both in
their own worth, and also for their fathers sake. And if I find that thou
give this kind entertainment, to these his fruitful labors, as it were,
his first borne; there are diverse other children of the same father, which
shall ere long be brought to light; I mean his Lectures on the twelfth
Chapter to the Romans, and on a great part of the ^19. Psalm, with some
others. In the mean while I commend them to God, and the word of his grace,
which is able to build thee up, and to give thee an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. J. D.

The Contents.
GOds Ministers must not conceal comforts from the wicked. page 5 Wicked men
presume upon outward privileges. page 9 No outward privileges exempt from Gods
anger. p. 12 The faithful cannot finally fall away. p. 14 All that carry the
name of Christians are not in the Covenant. p. 17 Those of all Nations that
believe and repent shall be saved. p. 19 A man may be assured of his salvation
in this life. p. 22 Parentage can neither hinder nor further salvation. p. 40
Grace is above greatness. p. 42 Sin will ruin a people notwithstanding
outward privileges. p. 46 God predestined us in Christ. p. 52 We are
predestinate to the means as well as the end. p. 53 Faith nor works forseene
no cause of election. p. 60 No means to glory but by Christ. p. 71 All that
do good works are elect, and shall be saved. p. 74 The elect cannot finally
be cast off. p. 76 The Scriptures able to make wise to salvation. p. 79 There
is a familiarity between God and his children. p. 85 Prophets and good men
stand in the gap. p. 87 Prayers the Churches best weapons. p. 89 The wicked
persecute the best most. p. 93 When the Prophets are gone the people fall from
God. p. 95 Wicked men overthrow the means of Gods service. p. 98 Wicked men
dispute against the truth with the sword. p. 99 Christ's Church scarsly visible
sometimes. p. 100 Wicked men requite Gods Prophets evil for good. p. 102 When
Gods servants cry to him he answers them. p. 104 A great grace in corrupt
times to be preserved from sin. p. 109 God owneth not Idolaters for his. p.
110 God has always a Church, though invisible to man. p. 113 To bow before an
Idol is idolatry. p. 117 God at all times preserves his Church. p. 118 Those
that belong to God are not many. p. 120 God saves man of his free grace. p.
126 God in electing man respects not good works. p. 129 All men shall not be
saved. p. 134 No man can attain life by his own righteousness. p. 135 Those
that stand upon their own holiness are hardened. p. 137 We must seek God in a
right manner. p. 138 A man elect shall certainly be saved. p. 139 Hardness of
heart a sign of reprobation. p. 141 The written Word should be Judge of
controversies. p. 144 Causes of hardness of heart. p. 145 God punishes one
sin with another. p. 162 An heavy judgment to neglect the means to know
God. p. 163 Means of salvation abused turn to destruction. p. 168 A misery
to hear and not profit. p. 169 Means contemned are not profitable. p. 173 God
receives all that turn to him. p. 164 The best things of wicked men turn to
their destruction. p. 177 They that seek life in the Law find destruction. p.
181 God repayes men in the same kind. p. 182 God punishes unbeleevers with
spiritual blindness. p. 187 God hates, and severely punishes infidelity. p.
193 When wicked men abuse their power, God deprives them of it. p. 194 Prudence
in Ministers in denouncing of judgments. p. 200 Men stumble at those things
that should support them. p. 203 The best may stumble, reprobates fall finally.
p. 206 God works good out of evil. p. 208 God works good to his by unlikely
means. p. 213 God takes al oportunities to do his children good. p. 214 When
the Gospel is abused God takes it away. p. 216 Where the Gospel is preached
salvation is offered. p. 218 God requires an holy emulation. p. 221 The good
that is in others should provoke us to follow them. p. 223 Gods kindness
should make us ashamed of unthankfulness. p. 225 The grace and knowledge of
God and Christ is true riches. p. 231 The Jews at their conversion shall be
enriched with graces. p. 239 Faithful Preachers turn all they say to their
peoples use. p. 241 Good people fear the loss of their faithful Preachers.
p. 243 Ministers should intend the good of their people. p. 247 Ministers by
preaching and living should grace their calling. p. 250 Good Ministers aim at
the salvation of souls. p. 252 A good Minister Gods instrument to save souls.
p. 256 Preachers must neglect no means to convert souls. p. 258 We ought most
to tender the salvation of those that are near us. p. 259 Living in sin is
an estate of death. p. 261 We should not despair of the calling of the Jews.
p. 264 The Gospel the means of raising men from the dead. p. 266 What is due
to God of his own blessings. p. 271 Gods promises belong to posterity. p. 273
Some of any man's seed may be cast off. p. 278 Our former vileness should keep
us from pride. p. 279 Without true grace no fruit pleases God. p. 282 All
truly called become fruitful. ibid. Sinners converted well esteemed by God. p.
285 Our rising by others falls must not make us proud. p. 288 We must not be
proud of any gifts. p. 290 The Gentiles inferior to the Jews in many things.
p. 294 Every sin has some plea. p. 296 None but God discernes true branches
from false. p. 299 No Nation so exalted, but sin will bring them down. p.
301 Men are ready to trample on the afflicted. p. 302 Men are subject to be
proud of gifts and graces. p. 304 Men are apt to ascribe Gods gifts to their
own merits. p. 307 Infidelity separates between God and man. p. 309 Man is
the cause of his own ruin. p. 312 All our good of Gods mere mercy. p. 314
Faith distinguishes men. p. 315 A good Christian must live in continual
fear. p. 317 The faithful cannot fall away. p. 319 No outward privileges
exempt sinners from punishment. p. 332 Others examples must warn us. p. 335,
342 God fits his punishments to man's sin. p. 341 Gods bounty should make us
loath to offend him. p. 343 Not sufficient to have grace, but to continue in it.
p. 347 Threats and terrors necessary. p. 348 No sinner so great, but God will
receive him if he turn. p. 351 God alters the course of nature for his
childrens good. p. 357 The experience of Gods former favors should work
assurance. p. 358 Gods greater favors should assure us of the less. p. 359
Gods children, though they sin, shall not be cast off. p. 360 Men are
willing to learn of those they love. p. 362 Ministers and people should live,
and love as brethren. p. 364 Weighty points should be heard with greater
attention. p. 365 God would have none proud of that they enjoy. p. 366 Other
sins punished with hardness of heart. p. 367 Sin causes punishment where
mercies have abounded. p. 369 In greatest revolts God preserves a Church. p.
372 The Gospel, though opposed, shall convert the full number. p. 378 None of
the Jews within the Covenant shall be lost. p. 384 Man under sin in a
miserable servitude. p. 386 Deliverance from all misery depends upon Christ.
p. 390 Heaven must be gotten with violence. p. 397 Christ alone reconciles
sinners to God. p. 398 God will perform all his promises. p. 401 It is proper
to God alone to forgive sins. p. 405 God in forgiving sin takes it quite away.
p. 409 Man before grace is an enemy to God. p. 415 They that receive not the
Gospel are enemies to God. p. 417 God works good out of evil. p. 420 In
regard of Gods immutabilitie the elect cannot finally fall. p. 422 God the
Author of every good gift. p. 424 If we considered our selves, we would not
judge our brethren. p. 431 The estate of unbeleefe miserable. p. 432 Jews and
Gentiles alike by nature. p. 433 All hope depends upon Gods mercy in Christ.
p. 435 Many now in the state of sin shall find mercy. ibid. All men naturally
guilty of death. p. 438 Gods elect shall only find mercy at the last day.
p. 440 Against universal grace. p. 443 It is proper to the godly to admire
Gods counsels. p. 454 We must not curiously search into hidden secrets. p. 458
We must search no further than the written word. p. 462 God effects great
matters in a short time. p. 469 God is in nothing beholding to any creature. p.
470 God can do what ever he will without any help. p. 471 God proposed his
glory the end of all his works. p. 473 God expects glory from every thing
he has made. p. 474 Man should do nothing whereby God may not gain glory.
p. 475 We should choose callings wherein we may glorify God. p. 476
The End of the Contents.
Errata.
Page 14. lin 10. read consilium. page 17. lin. 17. read played. p. 21. l. 3.
dele David. p. 23. l. 10. dele that. p. 25 l. 30. a fine, read that all such.
l. 31. read the end. p. 29. l. 17. dele it. p. 34. l. 18. read the seventh
sign. p. 40. l. 7. read is our God. p. 43. l. 9. read her doors. p. 56. l.
24. read cruelty. p. 58. l. 20. dele his. p. 63. l. 4. that he may make, and
l. 17. read that there. p. 103. l. 3. dele of. page 106. lin. 24. read lest
thou should. page 108. lin. 18. dele the. page 117. lin. 7. read sound page
122. lin. 27. read mercy. That it is. lin. 28. dele: p. 128. l. 10. read
copies. They, and Aphorism. p. 130. in marg. l. 17. read Causa causati. p.
131. in marg. l. 5. read mori, non quia been vixi, sed etc. p. 146. l. 23. read
hardens his. p. 151. l. 21. read God. Not. p 156 l 26. read Counsel. p. 158.
l. 7. read formally sin. l. 8. read good will. p. 160. l. 16. read withdraw. p.
164. l. 16. read a confluence of sins. p. 178. l. 17. read Theseus out of
the. l. 28. read goods. p. 208. l 11. read An evil man. page 254. l. 1. read
the wiredrawing. p. 275. l 4 read place. Hereditarie. p. 278. l. 24. read I
have loved. p. 291. l. 9. read doing evil. page 303. l. 14. read their
favors. p 311. l. 5. read Isa. 56. and Isa. 58.13, 14. p. 316. l. 22. read
Simon Peter. p. 317. l. 14. read pia solicitudo. p. 334. l. 12. read an
asymmetrie p. 375. l. 7. read this was not the. p. 378. l. 2. read in the
clouds. p. 431. l. 14. read an eye. p. 434. l. 5. read the Apostle propounds p.
442. l. 19. read but ^ew. p. 443. l. 20. read but that it is not. p. 445. in
marg. l. 5. read gratiam. p. 448. l. 21. read for that number. p. 451. l. 18.
read believe; this is. p. 458. l. 1 dele both. and l. 6. read even to (O
Father) p. 462. l. 28. read things: hence we learn that the course. p. 466 l.
1. read first given unto him. p. 468. l. 16. read made and created p. 472. l.
16. read and waste us. l. 17. read cruelties.

D. SUTTONS usual Prayer before his Sermons.
OH most gracious and most glorious God, before whom the Sun and the Moon
become as darkness, the blessed Angels stand amazed, and the glorious
Cherubims are glad that they may cover and hide their faces, as not daring to
behold that incomprehensible greatness, and that infinite goodness which thou
art; with what considence shall we forlorn sinners be ever once able to
appear before thy all-seeing providence, that terrible and angry countenance,
that sin-revenging justice of thine, which is so fierce and terrible, that it
will shake the heavens, melt the mountains, dry up the seas, and make the
tallest Cedars in Lebanon to tremble: Good Lord, where shall we hide our selves
from thy presence? masses of corruption, mountains of sin, dead and dry trees,
fit fuel for thy fierce wrath to work upon: If we should climb up into
heaven to hide us from thee, thou art there; or go down into the bottom and
depth of hell, thou art there also; or take the wings of the morn, and fly to
the utmost part of the seas, even there also will thy all-seeing eye behold us,
and thy right hand will quickly visit and find us out: we will therefore here
dissolve and melt our selves into a flood and fountain of many tears,
bewailing and bemoaning our woeful and miserable estate; for albeit by reason
of that foul Chaos, and stain of natural corruption and original sin, we
have deserved long since to have had the sweet issue of all thy good blessings
to be stopped and dried up, thy mild and gentle corrections to be turned into
the sudden execution of bloody to ^utes and fearful judgments upon us even
in this life, and at ou^ departing out of this world to be plunged
everlastingly into a pi^^ destruction, there to be fried and scorched with
Satan and his Angels for evermore. And yet for all this, O Lord, we have never
ceased to add oil unto this flame, and to blow up the coals of thy fearful
displeasure, through the hot and eager pursuit of many loud crying actual
sins and transgressions; so that from the crown of the head to the sole of
the foot, there is not one place sound or whole within us, but we are full of
sores and swellings, and botches, full of sin, full or corruption: our
understandings which should have known thee to be our true God, and him whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ our Redeemer, these are blinded and misled with
ignorance and doubting, our affections which should have been good guides to
have directed our feet into the way of peace, they are become swift messengers
of Satan to buffet us; our bodies which should have been sweet Temples for thy
blessed Spirit to dwell and lodge in, they are sinks of sin, and cages of
filthy birds: Our eyes, O God, are like open windows, and doors to receive
sin, our hearts like common Innes to lodge sin, our heads like skillful
Politicians to contrive sin, our tongues smooth and sweet Orators to plead
for the maintaining of sin, and all our hands like stout Soldiers and
courageous Champions to fight in the defense of sin. Thus have we waged and
managed war against thee our God, ever since we were borne, so that now thou
may justly sp^e us out of thy mouth, cut us off in the midst of our sins,
come amongst us this very present, and bind us hand and foot, and at the end
of these few and miserable days send us all into hell together, that so Satan
might pay us our wages only, whom thus long we have obeyed and served: thus
emptying our selves from all trust and confidence in the arm of flesh, we fly
unto thee, O God, the anchor of our hope, and the tower built for our defense,
with many deep sighs and groans from our perplexed consciences and diseased
souls, most humbly entreating thee to be gracious and merciful to all our
sins, for they are wondrous great, make it thy glory to pass by and to wink
at them; pour into our souls the oil of thy mercy,, supple our hard and dry
hearts with the sweet influence of thy best graces, and cure all our swelling
wounds with the true balm of Gilead; Purge (good Lord) and cleanse all the
polluted and infected corners of our hearts, that though (...) this day our
sins be as old as Adam, as numberless as the stars o^ heaven, as high as the
tallest Cedars in the Forest, Lord pluck them up by the roots, bury them in
everlasting forgetfulness, that they may never stop the issue of thy
blessings, nor draw down upon us the vials of thy wrath, nor be a wound and
grief to our troubled consciences in this life, or work despair in us at the
end of our days, nor stand up in judgment to be the utter ruin and
condemnation of our souls and bodies at the last day. Good Lord prepare us all
for a better life, sit us all for the Kingdom of thy Son Christ Jesus, guide
us all with thy blessed Spirit, tutor us out of thy holy Word, humble us by thy
merciful corrections, and by thy fatherly blessings, wed our affections, and
knit our hearts more near unto thee in newness of life, than ever heretofore
they have been: that living as becomes thy obedient children and servants an
holy and a religious remnant of our days, we may by thy grace and mercy be
partakers of a joyful and a comfortable death, and after death of a glorious
resurrection to everlasting life and peace among thy Saints. Neither do we
pray to thee for our selves only, but for all people and Nations of the earth,
but more particularly for the place in which we live, and therein according to
our bounden duty for thy servant and our Sovereigne, Charles. by thy special
Providence, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the most
true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith, and in all causes, and over all
persons, within these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions next under thee and
thy Son Christ Jesus supreme Governor, add unto his days, as thou did
unto the days of Hezekiah, that he may enjoy a long and a prosperous reign
over us; and in the mean time remember him in goodness for the good he has
done already to thy Church. Bestow the sweetest of thy blessings upon our
gracious Queen Marie, our hopeful Prince Charles, and the Lady Marie, and the
rest of those royal Branches beyond the seas; season them in their young and
tender years with thy fear, that they may be great in thy favor: and if it
may stand with thine eternal Decree, let us never want an holy and a religious
man of that house and line, to govern the Scepters of these Kingdoms, and to
maintain the preaching of thy glorious Gospel within these his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, so long as the Sun and Moon endure. Bless (...) King
with an honorable valiant, and a religious Council and ^obilitie, bless him
with a learned, painful, and a zealous Clergy, by what names or titles soever
they be called, whether they be Archbishops, or Bishops, and all other
painful Laborers in this thy Vineyard: bless him with a wise, prudent, and a
religious Gentry: bless him with a peaceable, a loyal, and a religious
Commonaltie, and good God we beseech thee to shower down thy blessing upon
the right hand and upon the left, to them whom it has pleased thee to send to
this Congregation, that by the blessing of thy good Spirit, whenever they
shall stand on thy Mountain to deliver a Message from thee. give them good
Father, (what will thou give them?) give them wise and understanding hearts,
that they may open to thy people the wondrous things of thy Law; good Father
touch their tongues with a coal from thine holy Altar, that by the blessing of
thy holy Spirit they may be able to work some holiness in the hearts of a
sinful and unbeleeving people: and cut down the head and strength of some
sin that remains in us: and to this end and purpose make them sound in thy
Doctrines, terrible in thy threatenings, sweet in thy comforts, powerful and
effectual in all thy persuasions; and merciful Father make thy word like the
bow of jonathan, and like the sword of Saul or Gideon, that never returned
empty from the blood of the slain, and the fat of the mighty.

Lastly, we come unto thee for our selves again thy most unworthy servants,
that are here assembled in a reverent fear of thy most holy and blessed name,
most humbly entreating thee in Jesus Christ to be gracious and merciful to all
our sins, and to be effectually present with thy blessed Spirit in the midst
of us all, and grant that thy word may drop and distill upon our tender
consciences, like rain upon the mowen grass, and as dew comes down from
Heaven to water the earth; take away the scales of ignorance from all blind
and dark understandings, remove far from us all lets and hindrances,
whereby the blessed seed of thy Word has been too many and sundry times made
unfruitful in the hearts of sinful and unbeleeving people: and to every
soul that is present in thy house this day, or at any other time, grant (...)
all holy diligence to seek thee, godly wisdom to know the^ and sanctified
understanding to find thee aright; that so the Word may prove the the sweet
savor of life unto everlasting lift ^^ough Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior; in whose most holy and blessed name we are bold to conclude these our
weak and imperfect prayers in that perfect form of prayer which Christ has
taught us, saying; Our Father, etc.

AN EXPOSITION UPON The eleventh Chapter to the ROMANS.
VERSE 1. I say then, has God cast away his people? God forbid, for I also am
an Israelite of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
IN the former Chapter the Apostle disputed at large touching the fall and
rejection of the Jews, The Coherence and Argument.
Quatenus little causa, and culpa contigit. In Romans 11.
so far forth as it came to pass through their means and fault, says Solo;
applying that unto them which was prophesied of them, so long before in the 65.
of Isaiah, verse. 2. Tota dit expendi manus meas.
All the day have I spread out my hands unto a rebellious people: and Romans
10.21. And in this Chapter he disputes of the casting away of the jews,
Quatenus a Deo ob bonam causam permissa suit. Zab. de necess. lib. 1. cap. 2.
so far forth as it was permitted by God for a good cause, they were cut off,
that the Gentiles might be planted in, Romans 11.19. yet after this he goes about
to comfort them, by laying down two conclusions, which make the two maine and
principal parts of the Chapter. The first; That the rejection was not
uniuersall, respectu subjecti, i. in respect of the subject: that is, The Jews
were not all cast off, from the first to the eleventh verse. The second; That
their rejection was not universal, respectu temporis, i. in respect of the
time; that is, eternal and forever, from the eleventh verse to the end.

Or with Calvin more particularly thus. In Romans 11.
The mitigation of their despair after their rejection consists in these six
Theorems. 1. That all Israel is not rejected, God has not cast away his
people, (...), i. which he fore-knew, verse. 2. The 2. That by their fall the
Gentiles have obtained salvation, verse. 11. The 3. That in the end the Jews
shall be converted to the faith and kingdom of Christ in great number, verse.
12. The 4. That Abraham who was the root was holy, and therefore has some holy
branches among them, verse. 16. The 5. That God can as easily graft them into
the Olive tree again, as he cut them off, verse. 23, 24. The 6. That Gods
purpose and counsel to graft them in again, is like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, (...), i. For, the gifts of God are without repentance, verse. 29.
This is the Coherence and Argument.

I have no purpose to insist upon the Author Paul, so named of Sergius Paulus,
Of the Author of the Epistle.
the Pro-Consull of Cyprus, whom he and Barnabas converted to the faith, Act.
13.7, 12. as Hierome avoucheth; Lib de claris Scriptoribus.
nor of the signification of his name, which in the Hebrew signifies
Mavelous, or as Buxtor^ius Etymol. In the Greek, Ease and Rest, a (...),
cesso, or (...), quies: or small and little, as Augustine: De spiritu and
litiera. cap. 7. In Psalm. 72.
nor why his name was changed; it is done by Augustine. He was first Saul,
viz. superbus, i. proud, then Paul, viz. Humilis, i. humble: Nor of the
authority of this Epistle, Lib. 4. de verbo Dei. cap. 4. Non debet esse
admirationi aliqua^na arbor, ubi in candem proceritatem ^otasylva surrex^^.
Quid primu^ in eo admirer, quid post a comprobem, quid postremo laudibus
inestimandis vehendam arbitror, planesum animi dubious.
which is known and believed to be divine, by the witness of Gods Spirit, in
Scripturis, non ex traditionibus, i. in the Scriptures, not by Traditions, as
Bellarmine vainly goes about to prove: nor of the excellency of this Chapter,
which I have select. It was an excellent saying of Seneca in one of his
Epistles, Some one tree is not to be wondered at, when as all the whole wood
has grown to the like tallness. I am altogether doubtful what I should first
admire, what afterward I should approve, and what finally I should judge
worthy to be extolled with inestimable praises. Convivium sapient^ae, singuli
libri, singula ^ercula. Ambr. script o^^ic. lib. 1. cap. 22. Hieron. de Psalmis
Epist. ad Paulinum.
It is a banquet of wisdom, and every book a dainty dish; as Ambrose
speaks. And as one said of the writings of Salvianus, there is not one Iota,
or phrase in this whole Chapter, which is not pregnant and full of
supernatural knowledge; Thesaurus sapientiae, i. even a treasure of wisdom;
as Hierome styles the Book of the Psalms. I come to the Analysis.

The parts are five. 1. A consolation of the rejected Jews, Analysis.
that notwithstanding God had cast them off, yet such a remnant of them as were
within the covenant of election, should be saved through grace, from the first
verse to the seventh. 2. A confirmation of the rejection of the stubborn Jews
by Testimonies of two Prophets; the one David, Psalm. 69.22. Let their table be
made a snare: the other of Isaiah, Chap. 6.9. They shall see and not perceive;
hear, but not understand; from the seventh verse to the eleventh. 3. The happy
product and event that will follow this rejection of the Jews, and this
calling of the Gentiles; And this is double, the one, Salus Gentium; i. The
salvation of the Gentiles, verse. 11. The other in the same place, Vt Iudaei
conversione Gentium ad zelum provocati, resipisoant. i. That the Jews being
provoked to jealousy by the conversion of the Gentiles, shall repent. The
which is enlarged by circumstances, to the seventeenth. 4. An exhortation to
the Gentiles, that they wex not proud, nor insult over the Jews. First,
because they may be cast off again, if they stand not constant in the faith.
Secondly, because the Jews shall again be called home before the end of the
world, as Luke 21.24. this is from the seventeenth verse to the three and
thirtieth. 5. A conclusion of his disputation, containing an admiration and
astonishment of Paul, to see the deepnesse (or rather, because he cannot see
the deepnesse) of Gods wisdom in the ordering and effecting of man's salvation
and happiness, to the end of the Chapter.

I begin with the consolation. Consolation


It consists of a question, and an answer. The question, I say then, has God
cast away his people?

(...); and the answer in the next; God forbid. Which answer is proved and made
good by three arguments. First, his own example, I also am an Israelite, verse.
1. Secondly, A Dei praecognitione, From the prescience of God: Non potest
repellere quos praecognovit, God has not cast away his people whom he
fore-knew, verse. 2. Thirdly, from the state of the Church in the time of Elias,
verse. 4.

I begin with the question ( Has God cast away? etc.) which seems to carry
this sense and meaning; If it be true, that God has cast away the Jews, then
God has cast away his own people, then is God unfaithful in his promise made
to Abraham their father. Genesis 17.7. Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed for ever: will
God make such fair promises, and then let his mercies fail, forget to be
gracious, Psalm 77.9.
and shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? Then it is to no purpose to
be in league with God, neither any privilege of Gods people above others.
Before I come to the question it self, you may observe, that though in ten
Chapters he had proved against them, yet now he begins to speak on their
sides; and to question in their behalf, whence I gather this conclusion.

Be a people never so wicked and sinful, yet if the Word afford any comfort,
the Minister may not conceal it from them: Simon Magus offering to buy the
gifts of the Holy Ghost with money, and purposing by them to get money,
committed such a sin as made Peter denounce a heavy judgment, Acts 8.22.
Thy money perish with thee; yet affords him that comfort, which might raise
him again; yet go and pray, it may be the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven, Act. 8.22. The people of Israel, after they came out of Egypt,
grieved the Lord and Moses, sometimes murmuring for flesh, Exodus 16.
Exodus 16. sometimes for water, Chap. 17. sometimes by idolatry, Chap. 17.
for they made a molten calfe, Exodus 32.5, 6.
and said, These be thy Gods, O Israel, Exodus 32.5, 6. Sometimes by wantonness
they sat down to eat, etc. Exodus 32. Yet Moses must not deny them that
comfort, which God has in store for them; but bids them pluck up their
hearts, and be strong, dread not, nor be afraid, for the Lord God himself
will go before them, Deuteronomy. 31.6. Deuteronomy. 31.6.
Isaiah prophesies thus unto Ezekiah; Behold all that is in thine house, thy
sons and thy children shall be carried captives to Babylon, Isa. 39.6.
Isay 39.6. Yet will there be a day, when he will bid his Prophets speak
comfort to his people again; Comfort ye, Chap. 40. 1.
comfort ye, etc. chap. 40. 1. It is required of a dispencer that he be found
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2.
1 Cor. 4.2. that if judgment belong to a man, he denounce it; if after
judgment comfort, he administer it: and therein must endeavor to have always
a clear conscience in keeping back nothing that God would have spoken, Acts
20.20.
Acts 20.20. I add no more but that of God unto Elijah touching Ahab; See
thou how Ahab is humbled; God meaning him but so much comfort, as to defer
his punishment, till his sons days, yet God will make the Prophet, and the
Prophet make Ahab acquainted with it, 1 King. 21.28, 1 King. 21.28, 29.
29. The Minister must break, but he must bind again; wound, but he must
heal again, cast down, but he must raise again; they must not be only like
Bonarges, sons of thunder, but like Barnabas, sons of consolation, to
preach not only captivity, but deliverance; not only judgment, but mercy;
not only desolation and misery, but joy and comfort; Misericordia and juduium
sunt duo pedes Domini. In Cant. Sermon. 6.
Mercy and judgment are the two fect of the Lord, says Bernard. Therefore
we must not conceal them, but tell them the people when God comes in
judgment, and when in mercy.

Therefore their course cannot be justifiable, Psalm. 101.1. Nemo sibi ad
impunitatem blandietur, quia est judicium; nemo ad melius commutatus exhorreat
judicium, quia est misericordia. Aug. in Psalm. 101.1.
and mild lenitives may be as profitable as biting corrasives: It is good to
follow David's rule, Psalm. 101. I will sing of mercy and judgment. Augustine
says, No man will flatteringly promise unto himself impunitie, because there
is judgment; no man changed to better will tremble at judgment, because there
is mercy. The long suffering of God leads to repentance, Romans 2.4. The long
suffering of God is salvation, 2 Pet. 3.15. God is as much to be feared for
his mercies as for his judgments: Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.15.
For there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared, Psalm. 143.4.
Psalm. 143.4. We will not bruise a broken reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
but like Christ himself, Isa. 42.3.
Isay 42.3. Stengthen the weak knees, and comfort the feeble minded; and as we
destroy, so we will plant, as we throw down by judgment, so we will by mercy
build you up again to be lively temples for Christ to dwell in. So I come to
the question it self.

(...); Of the Question.
etc. Has God cast away his people? There be employed in this question two
arguments, to make them doubt of that which the Apostle taught in the former
Chapter, touching the casting off of these Jews: The one taken from the person
of God forsaking; The other from the condition of the people, His; And both
make up this sequel; If God have forsaken the Jews, then is he not
unchangeable, but false and unjust in his promises; And if the people that be
his once, may be cast off again, then is it to small purpose to be one of
his: there is no certainty that a man shall be saved, though he be elected.
I do purposely forbear these maine points, till I come to Paul's answer; and
in the mean time observe only how they misconstrue Paul's words and meaning:
when he spoke of the casting off of the Jews, he meant not such as God had
eternally elected; but such as were ordained of old to condemnation: they
understand him of all, as if God had now in time forsaken them whom he elected
before time: I might note how ready men are to misconstrue the soundest points:
but I pass over this, only I wish you to observe how all that are called
Jews do call themselves his people, and therefore argue that God has not
cast them off, from whence I note this second conclusion.

Wicked men think themselves safe, if they have the privileges of Gods
children, they call themselves his when they are the seed, but have not the
faith of Abraham. So in John 8.33. Ioh. 8.33.
when Christ told them of making themselves free, they answer, we be Abraham's
seed, and were never bound to any, this only privilege was their protection
and their refuge. In Ierem. 7.4. Ierem. 7.
They cry, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord; as if they should
have said, we have the privileges that few have; God dwells in the midst of
us, Deus habitat in medio nostri, apud nos habet domicilium. Calv. in Ier. 7.
Haec prima bypocritarum munitio. Quam vendicare praerogativam Cathol. ci and
religiosi nominis qui Gothos and Vandalos superat heretica pravitate. De
provid. Dei, lib. 7. Isa. 47.8.
he has his habitation with us, says Calvin. This is the first fortress of
hypocrites, says Calvin. There is nothing more common with wicked men, says
Salvianus, Than to defend themselves by the name of Catholic, when they are
in life more profane than Goths and Vandalls. If proud Babylon have but one
privilege of Gods people, viz. that God spare her, and bear with her, then
she calls herself the Lady of Kingdoms, she says in her heart, I am and none
else, I shall not sit as a widow, nor know the loss of children, Isa. 47.8.

The reason hereof is this, outward condition, if they see him outwardly
troubled, then they think him one whom God has forsaken; Tull. in verrem
action sexta, and Ioachimus Vadiauns.
as the Barbarians of Malta, an Island in the Mediterranean sea, seeing but a
viper on Paul's hand judged him to be a murderer, whom after many escapes,
vengeance had then overtaken, Acts 28.4.
Acts 28.4. So Zophar the Naamathite judges Job to be forgotten of God, and
cast off, because of his present misery, Job 11.6. Job 11.6.
So they judge others happy by outward prosperity: It was the saying of the
Queen of Sheba, 1 King. 10.8.
1 King. 10.8. Happy are thy men, and happy thy servants; when she had seen
the state of Salomons house; and so they judge of other men; whereas God
judges otherwise: Nemo scit an sit odio, Eccles. 9.1.
vel amore dignus; No man can tell by outward things, whether he be one of
Gods people or no: Dives may have more wealth, and Herod more eloquence, and
Saul more command than many of Gods people: Dragons and Ostriches, Zim and
Ochim, the Sparrow and Swallow may dwell in the Temple, and make their nests
under the very Altars of the Lord of Hosts; rare privileges, when David the
dear child of God dares not, nay cannot come near to the porch of Gods
house, Psalm. 81.2, 3.
Psalm. 81.2, 3. Augustine brings in man speaking thus: In Psalm. 33.
Beatus est vir cujus est ista possessio, i. Blessed is the man who has this
possession; and that is judicium impii; i. the judgment of the wicked; but
answers thus, Beatus est cujus possessio est Dominus, i. Blessed is the man who
has the Lord for his possession. And again, Beatus est qui ad honores, ad
consulatum, ad praefecturam promovetur; i. Blessed is the man who is advanced
to honors, to a Consulship, or a Captainship: and that is Iudicium impii, i.
the judgment of the wicked: but answers thus, Beatus est qui in domo tua
habitat, i. Blessed is the man who dwells in thy house: and that is judicium
pii, i. The judgment of the Godly.

Which makes me like a Cynthius, A vain name without a body, Vanum sine
corpore nomen.
as Salvianus long since said of them; and yet this is the argument of Costerus
the Jesuit: In Enchirid. de notis Ecclesiae. Note 8.
Hoc nomine Ecclesia sola Romana gloriatur: It is the prerogative of the name
that can make her, let her play and please her self with the name: Quid
prodest praerogativa re^^iosi nominis, quod nos Catholicos dicimies.
What does this privilege of a religious name profit us, which we call
Catholics? So we may say of the Catholic faith and profession.

2. Content not your selves with outward prerogatives and privileges,
Quiaedificat domum non in petra, sed in arena August. in Psalm. 103.21.
to rest in the bare hearing of one, Who builds the house not upon the rock,
but upon the sand. It is the note of such as shall be refused when Christ makes
the distinction between the sheep and goats, to rest secure in the outward
privileges, and never to labor for the secret and inward marks of the children
of God; you may have as many outward privileges as these Jews had, and yet be
cast off as they were; which is the second observation.

No outward privilege can acquit a people, that is obstinate and rebellious,
from Gods anger, nor prove them to be the people of God. Jerusalem, the Vine
which Gods right hand had planted; In Jerusalem the Arc of the Covenant, and
the Temple which Solomon built. Quis cladem illius urbis, quis sunera sando
Explicat? aut possit lachrymis, etc. Virgil. 2.1 Aeneid.
Babylon, who could say of herself, as Isay 47.8. I am, and none else beside
me, I shall not sit as a widow, etc. Yet now she is laid waste, Ostriches cry
there, and the Satyrs dance there, Isay 13.21. Few places had such
prerogatives as Nineveh; so much state, that Volateran reports that it was
eight years a building, and all that time no less than ten thousand
worke-men; and Diodorus Slculus, that the height of the walls were an hundred
foot, the breadth able to receive three carts on arow, it had fifteen hundred
turrets, and yet none of these have sense, but paper-wals to preserve their
memori^^ So the seven Churches of Asia, I am seges est ubi Troja fuit. Ovid.
Epist. 1.
Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, famous for general Councels, and now the ruins
and rubbish of them cannot be found, they are turned into pastures for oxen
and sheep. 2. Outward privilege is no proof of election; for then all the
Jews enjoying the same privileges should be saved as well as any one of them.

Beware then you deceive not your hearts, Follow holiness, for without that no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. not Herod's holiness, nor Pharisaicall
holiness, not Popish holiness in rites and ceremonies: will you know that are of
the Church? I know you desire it; for, alas, what good will it do a man to
have Princes to bow unto him, and doubt what shall become of his soul? That
saying of Trajan the Emperor will be but cold comfort at the day of death: and
though my words perish in the air, yet When that day shall come, that Christ
shall set some on his right hand, and others on his left, you will have no
comfort but in this, that you led good lives, kept clear consciences, served
God in singleness of spirit: for then he will take you by the hands, and
bring you into his Palace, admit you into his Court, make you Inheritors of his
Kingdom, invest you into his glory, where I hope we all long to be, and where
I hope we shall all meet to praise the blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to whom be glory. So I come to Paul's answer in the next words.

God forbid: for I also am an Israelite. Paul's reply. (...). God forbid. The
other, the strength of his reply in three Arguments. 1. From the person Paul.
2. From the foreknowledge of God. 3. From the state of the Church in the time
of Elias. I begin with the reply, God forbid. It seems to be a bare negation,
but is indeed in sense, Bipartita propositio. Ad Romans 1.
a twofold proposition, says P. Martyr. 1. God has cast away none that are
within the Covenant, God forbid that. 2. Which follows by way of corollarie.
All that are Jews are not within the Covenant, They that are within the
Covenant of grace cannot finally be cast away.


1. They that are within the Covenant of grace cannot finally be cast away. 2.
All men are not within the Covenant of election and grace. I begin with the
former, and lay down these grounds,

The 1. God who elected them is unchangeable, I am. 1.17. I am God and change
not, Mal. 3.8. Sine mutatione facit mutabilia, moderatur mobiiased sine motu.
Aug de Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
He being without change does make things changeable, and governs things
moveable, but without motion, says Augustine. Et qui mutat opera non mutat
concilium. consess. lib. 1. cap. 4.
And he who changes his works, changes not his counsel. Et quodsemel habet
nunquam admittit.
What he once has he never loses. Tempus ab aevo esse jubes, stabilisque
manous das cuncta manert. Boet deconsol. philos lib. 3.
From all eternity thou command time to be, and remaining stable thou
causest all things to abide, says Boethius. They that would see more, may find
it in De Ecclesiast Hierarch. cap. 3.
Dionysius the supposed Areopagite, that though a man would fall, yet God will
be sure in his Covenant.

The 2. Institut lib. 3. cap. 24.
second given by Calvin: All the elect are committed by God the Father to the
keeping and protection of God the Son, All that the Father gives me shall
come to me, Ioh. 6.37. and in Ioh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them
to me; and therefore Christ calls himself the true Shepherd in Ioh. 10. and
knows every one that God puts into his keeping, verse. 14. If a Shepherd, then
he is to tend and keep all that is committed to his trust: and if you will
know how faithfully Christ does keep them, see Ioh. 17.12. All that thou have
given me I have kept, and not one of them is lost, save the son of perdition,
etc. And Ioh. 6.37. Him that comes to me from the Father I put not away: nay,
there is not one that God has commended to my keeping, but I will show him to
my Father, and be accountable for their souls at the day of judgment: For I
will raise him up at the last day, says the Shepherd of Israel, verse. 39.

The 3. if any of them sin, they have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ, 1 Ioh. 2.1. He will present them blameless, and without spot, and in
the mean time keep them that they shall not fall, Jude 24. nor can the
stratagems of Satan prevail: for, I give unto them eternal life, and none
take them out of my hands, and they shall never perish, Ioh. 10.28. If the
elect could be deceived, it should be by false Christ's, and false Prophets,
Matthew. 24.24. they would deceive (if it were possible) the very elect.

The 4. The assurance of salvation is sealed; the covenant is not only made,
as Genesis 17.7. but it is also sealed, Cor. 1.22. So Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the
holy Spirit of God by whom you are sealed, etc. So 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation
of God remains sure, and has this seal: The Lord knows who are his. I do
not at this time mean to dispute the question; for then I should prevent my
self hereafter: I use but that place of Peter for conclusion, and come to the
Use: it is in 1 Pet. 1.5. All the elect are kept by the power of God, through
faith unto salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last times: if kept
by God, who can hurt them? if unto salvation, who can hinder them? if prepared
for them, who can either take them from it, or it from them? and with that of
David, Psalm. 121. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord preserves thy soul. 7. and
this keeper will neither slumber nor sleep. Venit Diabolus ut seriat caput,
and manus Dei sub capite, ut eripiat animam, sed dextra ejus me amplectitur.
Aug. in Psalm. 1.1.
4. His left hand is under thy neck, and his right hand embraces thee. Cant.
2.6. The Davill comes that he may strike my head, but the hand of God is
under my head; that he may take away my soul, but his right hand embraces
me; says Augustine.

To stay the trembling hearts of many of Gods people in the day of temptation;
The just falls seven times a day, Prove. 24.16. The dearest of his servants
are subject to such foul slips. David was a man after Gods heart, before he
came to the Kingdom, when Samuel told Saul that David should be King, 1 Samuel
13.14. but commits both murder and adultery long time after, 2 Samuel 11. Peter
beloved of God, and blessed; For blessed art thou Simon, for flesh and blood
has not revealed this, but my Father; yea, then Peter had so much faith, that
Christ gives him this commendation; Thou art Peter, and on this rock, viz.
which thou by faith have confessed, will I build my Church. Matthew. 16.17, 18.
Peter had the spirit, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit
of God, and Peter says here, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
Matthew. 16.16. and it was a long time after that Peter denied him, yea Peter
after his effectual calling plied the hypoerite, and dissembled, Gal. 2.12.13.
If therefore thou can sinde inwardly by the witness of the Spirit, Romans
8.16. and outwardly by the fruits of true faith, 2 Pet. 1.10. that thou art
within the Covenant, then if thou sin with David, repent with David; if thou
sin with Peter, repent with Peter; if thou be drunk with Noah, repent with
Noah; God will be entreated, and his mercy shall appear. Though thou run
from God, he will follow thee; though thou forsake him, he will overtake thee,
though thou break with God, yet God is faithful in his Covenant, and will not
break with thee. I come to the second Conclusion.

All that are Jews, and carry the name, are not within the Covenant, which
God has made with Abraham, in Romans 9.6. All they are not Israel, which are of
Israel, verse. 7. They are not all children which came of Abraham; for in Isaac
shall thy seed be called. And verse. 27. Though the number of the children of
Israel were as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved. And verse. 29.
Except the Lord of Hosts had reserved a seed, we had been as Sodom, and like
unto Gomorrha. Though God set his heart upon that people to do them good.
Deuteronomy. 32. As the Eagle stirs up her nest, etc. Yet there were some that
crucified his Son, and some that spit in his face, and some that were mad
upon him till they saw him dead, and some that mocked him, some that cried,
Away with with him, and some cry out, His blood be upon us, some that came of
Ishmael. and be the children of Hagar, as well as of Sara and Isaac; but this
point I meet directly in the fourth verse. I proceed therefore from the
proposition of Paul's answer to the three Arguments.

The 1. is taken from his own person, where by one particular instance being
negative he infringeth their universal affirmative. That all the Jews were
cast off, as if in an Enthymeme he should thus dispute; I Paul, an Israelite,
of the seed of Abraham, am not cast off: Therefore, not all the Jews. He
describes himself. 1. In general, an Israelite. 2. That they might not think
that he was only a Proselyte, turned to the Jews religion, Sermon. in monte,
lib. 2.
as there were many, as Augustine, And our Savior, Matthew. 23.15. Ye compass
sea and land to make one Proselyte; he tells them that he is a Jew by birth,
as well as by profession, of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin, a
famous Tribe: for Benjamin and Joseph were not of the handmaids, but of
Rachel: but I rather think, that by noting his Tribe to be Benjamin, he would
have us to remember that story in Judge. 20. and the three last verses, where
we find, that the other Tribes fighting against Benjamin, slew at one time
25000. only there escaped some few, and yet of these few God will save some.
So that the argument seems to run thus, Though the most men of Benjamin be
slain, though the remnant be but few, yet even some of those few will God
save; for I am one, and if God take me out of that one Tribe, then it is
likely, that in those Tribes where the people are greater, the number of the
elect is also greater; And if some amongst so few, then are not all cast off.
Before I come to these particulars, we must observe.

1. That his nation is no disparagement to his election, and future happiness;
Hunnius observe: In Roman.
That God does never cast off any nation so general, but such of it as do
believe and repent shall be saved. The Apostle in Heb. 11.31. By faith Rahab
the harlot perished not, when she had received the Spies peaceably; this was
it that Peter taught Cornelius, in Acts 10.34, 35. Of a truth I perceive that
God is no accepter of persons; but in every nation, he that fears God and
works righteousness is accepted with God; that Paul taught the Romans; to
every man that does good shall be glory, and honor, and peace, to the Jew
first, and also to the Grecian: Romans 1.7, 9.
God will receive the Jews that repent at the preaching of Peter, the Gentiles
that repent at the preaching of Paul, the men of Achaia that repent at the
preaching of Andrew, of Asia that repent at the preaching of John, of India
that repent at the preaching of Thomas: for thither were they sent to preach
the faith, says Gregory upon the four Gospels, Homil. 17. there is nothing
that can prejudice a man's salvation, if he believe in Jesus Christ: not his
wicked nation, for Paul was a lew; nor his mean condition, for Peter a poor
Fisher; nor his ignoble parentage, for Amos an herds man, Amos 7.14. nor sex,
for Rahab the harlot; nor want, for poor Lazarus shall be accepted of God at
the judgment.

A singular comfort for such as live in profane and wicked places, David did,
Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, that I dwell
in the tents of Kedar: for though the place where thou live be as Sodom,
and the sins of it mount as high as Heaven, yet if thou be a Lor, that
love holiness and hate iniquity, thou shall surely be saved from the
fire. Though the place where thou live be like the old world; so sinful that
God repented that ever he made it, Genesis 6.6. yet if thou be a Noah, faithful
and holy, thou for thy part shall surely be saved from the water: what if thou
live in Mesech amongst the untoward Ishmaelites, that bend their bows against
the Lord, and shoot their arrows against Heaven, like the Thracians in
Herodotus his Melpomene. For if thou be a David, David after Gods heart, when
thousands fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, the plague
shall not come nigh thee: what if thou dwell amongst thorns, prepared for the
fire? yet if thou be a Lilly, or a Rose, it shall go well with thee in the day
of vengeance: what if thou live in the salt sea? yet if thou retain thy sweet
and pleasing relish, there shall no harm happen unto thee. What if thou pass
through the weeds and gravel of a brinish Ocean? yet if thou be like the river
Arethusa, commended for that rare quality by Virgil in his 10. ^clogue,
Quamvis fluctus subterlabere Sicanos,
Dor is amar a suam non intermiscuit undam.
Thou shall be e mult is millibus unus, one of a thousand. Titio ereptus ex
igne, one whom God will choose out of the midst of a perverse, and crooked
generation: what then remains but this, that we continue constant and
unmovable in our most holy faith? and though we live in such evil days, and
dwell in such profane places, where wickedness over-flowes the banks, as the
sea at an high tide and a full spring: though we be reserved ad tempora
novissima, to the last times, and dwell near the outsides, and the common
sewers, where all Heretics make their nests, and like to Toads and Frogs
engender in these sens and puddles, Aug. de temp. Scrm. 232.
as Augustine is pleased to style them; though we dwell amongst Papists,
Anabaptists, Familists, and have our residence amongst the Bastards of Barrow,
Brown, etc. yet if we believe and repent, if we turn to the Lord, though we
turn from them, if we cleave to the Lord and renounce them, if we keep our
selves unspotted, our consciences untouched, we shall undoubtedly be saved,
and received unto mercy, notwithstanding all their peremptory sentence of
condemnation which they pass upon us.

Before I come to the two other branches, let me note unto you the drift of
all; it is to prove that the Jews are not all cast off, and how it is proved,
because Paul knows that he himself is not cast off. Here we have Paul sure
and certain of his own salvation. From whence gather.

A man while he is in this life may be sure and certain of his own salvation,
and life eternal: And I add ordinarily, because I mean to oppose the Trent
Council, denouncing the deep Anathema upon them that say it. Si quis dixerit
bominem ronaium and justificatum toueri ex side ad credendum se esse ex numero
praede stinatorum, anathema sit.
If any man say, that a man regenerate and justified is bound by faith to
believe, that he is in the number of the elect, let hm be accursed: as
Chemnitius notes to be in the 6. Session, Canon 15. Possunt quidom bon: sperare
peccata sibi remitti, sed sine cerid siducia.
They may indeed hope well that their sins are forgiven, but not with any
certain assurance: In any particular man; yet says Christ, Son thy sins
are forgiven thee, to one, and to another, Thy faith has saved thee, viz. the
woman that had the bloody issue, Mar. 5.34.

I fetch my reasons first from the nature and property of a free promise made
by God, as unto Joshua, I will never fail thee; unto Abraham, Genesis 17.7. I
will be thy God, etc. So that if Gods promises be certain and sure, then is
the salvation of the faithful certain and sure: and because some men might
doubt, the Apostle tells us, Heb. 6.17, 18. that God was willing to confirm the
promise, And therefore bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable things,
wherein it is impossible that God should lie, that they might have strong
consolation; the one is his word, the other his oath, and whosoever shall not
believe God in these two, makes God a Liar in this, that he says he has
given eternal life through his Son, 1 Ioh. 5.10. That which the Papist
replies, that the promises of God are true in general, but are not certain to
particular men by the certainty of faith, because it is no where faid in
special, I will give thee, is most frivolous and idle: for if the promise be
made to all that believe, then when I know that I believe, I know the promise
is made to me: and besides it is false to say, that the promises are only
general. See Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
etc. thou shall be saved. Here is certainty of faith, which is nothing else
but that assured confidence of our heart, by which it perceives and doubts
not that it has right to what is promised; and this is that new name written
in the white stone, Apo^. 2.17. by this faith God dwells in our hearts, and
suffers none to perish, says Lombard, Book 3. Distinct. 23.

Secondly, from the property of justifying faith. First, (...), that is, an
infallible persuasion, Heb. 10.22. Hebr. 11.1. Thirdly, (...), through Christ
we have boldness, Ephesians. 3.12. Upon these the Holy Ghost in Heb. 6. by an
excellent metaphor compares faith to an anchor fastened in firm earth, which
the ship-man knows to be sound and constant, against which no storms can
prevail: Which we have as the anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,
Heb. 6.19. And Paul, Romans 8.38. (...), For I am persuaded, that neither death
nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And verse. 16. The Spirit of God witnesses to our
spirits, that we are the sons of God; which Pighius and Andradius setting down
the Trent Council (as Chemnitius recites it) contend to have been not by
faith, but by revelation: But I will make it appear, that Paul grounds not
this assurance upon revelation, but on a ground common to all true Christians
as well as Paul. As first, on the death of Christ: He that spared not his own
Son, but gave him for us all, etc. verse. 32. Secondly, on Gods free
justification, Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is Christ
that justifies, etc. Thirdly, upon Christ's intercession, He is at the right
hand of God making request to God for us, verse. 34. Upon these grounds commonto
all true Believers, does the Apostle ground his resolution.

Thirdly, to all the promises of God are added the seals in the true use of
the Sacraments, if any of the faithful should doubt of the general promises,
he might there have it sealed to his particular person. Circumcision a seal of
the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. So Ephesians. 1.13. After ye believed the
Gospel, you were sealed with the spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance. And 2 Cor. 1.22. He has sealed us, and given us the earnest
of his spirit in our hearts, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit, whereby
ye are sealed to the day of redemption. 2 Timothy 2.19. I end it with the
consideration of the phrase the Apostle uses; (...), He has given us the
earnest of his spirit, the word signifies a pledge given, or a seal annexed,
that we may not doubt of the promises, as men that lend a little money, and
take a good pawn, are sure to be no losers: So has God given us not only
his word, but his covenant, nor only his covenant, but a seal; nor only a
seal but an oath; nor only his word, covenant, seal, and oath, but a pawn
and pledge, and that no ineane one, it is his holy Spirit, He has sent the
spirit of his Son into our hearts, Gal. 4.6. I come to let you see, how a man
may be sure of his salvation by infallible signs and marks.

1. A conscionable care of the means of salvation, and a desire to use them
when we do enjoy them; The signs whereby we may be assured of our election.
for the end and the means to the end are never severed in Gods purpose and
decree; and therefore it follows, that all such as do carefully use the
means of salvation, are sure in the end to attain salvation. For example the
best means of salvation is the hearing of the Word, that is the Bread of life,
whereof he that eats shall live ever, Ioh. 6.27. that is the treasure hid in
the field, Matthew. 13.44. They that seek Christ there, shall not miss of him.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, Ioh. 5.39.
And our Savior allows of this doctrine, Ioh. 10.27. They are my sheep that
hear my voice and follow me. Audiunt lupi and boedi, sed non sequuntur. Musc.
in Joh.
Wolves and goats hear, but follow him not, says Musculus upon John. They
that seed in the green pastures, and are led forth to the waters of comfort,
have the Lord for their shepherd and keeper, and then he converts their
souls, and brings them forth into the paths of righteousness: these men need
fear no evil; for with his rod and staff the Lord comforts them, they that
follow the steps and the voice of that heavenly Mercury, Qui pias laeth anlmas
reponis sedibus, Virgaque levem coercet anrea tur bam. Hor lib. 1. Od 10. He
amnica nobu incumbit sellicitudo, ut audiamus vocem and sequamur. Aug. lib. de
ovibus, cap. 3.
Who seateth holy souls in joyful places, and with his golden rod rules the
unconstant multitude; as Horace Lib. 1. Ode 10. need never fear what death and
hell can do against them. This only care lies upon us, that we hear his
voice and follow him, says Augustine. Therefore much too blame are they, that
are so slack in this duty, that they much care not whether they hear or no,
and are kept from this house upon small occasion; it makes me fear they want
a love of the means, and therefore in the end must want the consummation of
all comforts, the salvation of their souls.

2. The spirit of supplication and prayer, The second sign of our Election.
when a man can open his heart, and pour out his soul in strong cries, and
effectual prayers unto God, confessing his sins, and suing for mercy and
forgiveness. For this prayer is a work, and effect of the Spirit, which by
means natural cannot be attained, for we know not what to pray for as we
ought, Romans 8.26. And therefore they that have a mind, and love to pray, they
that find a sweetness and comfort in it, have surely the Spirit of God in
them; There is an holy anointing that teaches us what to pray, 1 Ioh. 2.27.
that anointing is the Spirit, and that very Spirit witnesses with ours, that
we are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. a good comfort for such as love to be
talking, and conferring with God, that are still commending their souls to him
in prayer: I would have you to be like James the Just, whereof Eusebius Book
2. Chap. 23. Genua epu in morem Cameli obdurata, sensum contaclus amiserunt.
His knees being hardened like to a Camels, lost the sense of feeling: and
resolve with Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, when he was to be exiled by Iustina
the mother of Valentinian, told them he would never run away, but if they had
any purpose to kill him, they should at any time find him in the Church
praying for himself and his people, as Charion remembers it, Chron. Book 3. I
would have you to be like Anna the daughter of Phanuel, that never departed
out of the Temple, but served God in prayer night and day, Luke 2.37. so might
you know that Gods Spirit is in you indeed.

3. To be wained and estranged from the world, The third sign of our election.
to entertain heavenly conference, to mind heavenly things, as Phil. 3.20.
(...). Our conversation is in heaven. If our hearts (...) and that his soul is
not filled: O wretch that I am, etc. Romans 7.24. Lastly, a greedy desire of that
which is able to satisfy an hungry soul, for I follow hard toward the mark,
Phil. 3.14. If any thus hunger and thirst, blessed are they, If any man thirst,
let him come to me and drink, etc. Ioh. 7.37. what shall he drink? see Apoc.
21.6. I will give to him that is a thirst, of the water of the well of life
freely: Yea, but will that save? Yes: For he that drinks of this shall never
die, nor be thirsty again, Ioh. 4.14. So that we may say with Marie, He
will surely fill the hungry with good things, Luke 1.53. If any man thirst
after God and his righteousness, the Lamb that sits in the midst of the
throne shall guide him, and lead him to the fountains of living waters, Apoc.
7.17. If then you can say with David, Psalm. 42. Like as the Heart desires the
brooks of water, so thirsts my soul after thee, O God: you are then
blessed. There be two things notable in an Heart, says Augustine on this
Psalm: First, swiftness in running, especially when she desires the soil.
Secondly, when she feeds she kills a kind of Serpent, Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 9.
says Aelian, wherewith her mouth is so inflamed, that she cannot rest till
she have some water, and she is then more thirsty than before. Serpents tui
vitia sunt, occide serpents intquitatu, and desiderabu avide sontem veritatis.
The fifth sign.
Thy Serpents are thy vices, kill the Serpents of iniquity, and thou shall
more greedily desire the fountain of truth.

5. The conflict and combat between the flesh and the spirit, whereby on the
one side a man is drawn to sin, on the other to obedience, by the one he is
drawn against the tide, and his own carnal affection; and by the other
carried down the stream with violence: for naturally we all go one way, viz.
the broad way, and naturally we all move to one point, viz. destruction, and
naturally we all serve but one Master, and that our common enemy, and
whatsoever the Spirit moves, the flesh abbors, what the flesh suggesteth the
Spirit forbids, and this combat is in those that belong unto God: I see another
law in my members leading me captive to the law of sin, though in the inner
man I delight in the Law of God. Romans 7.22, 23. In the most regenerate the
spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and these
two are contrary. Gal. 5.17. which Hieronymus led by Origin understands of the
literal and spiritual sense of Scripture. Lyra and Dionysius Carthusianus of
the difference of sense and reason, as Bellarmine notes in his fifth Book of
the sense of sin, Chap. 15. But the true meaning is, that in man regenerate
be two principles of doing; 1. The flesh, whereby the regenerate being partly
carnal is drawn to sin; And 2. The spirit whereby a man in part carnal, is
also in part regenerate, and drawn to delight in things that be good, Tundit
mentem sluctus uterque tuam.
Either wave does beat upon thy mind. He is like a man in an Isthmus, the
waves of both sides do beat upon him: While the strong man keeps the house,
the things that he possesses are in peace. Luke 11.21. But when there comes
a stronger, he casts him, out of his possession. So that a man begins not to
feel this combat till Christ come to lodge in him. The people of Israellive
reasonable quietly, till they desire to go three days journey in the
wilderness to worship God; and then Pharaoh bids lay more work upon them.
Exodus 5.9. Do thou feel this fight between the Spirit and the flesh, then
surely this Spirit is in thee.

6. The sixth sign.
New obedience, and application of the heart, to keep conscienably all the
Commandments of God: as 1 Ioh. 2.5. He that keeps the word of God, in him is
the love of God perfect indeed, and hereby we know that we are in him, and by
this are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil; he that
does not righteousness is not of God, 1 Ioh. 3.10. Now this obedience must
have three conditions. 1. It must be total, both in respect of subject, that
is, we may not serve one with our lips, and another with our heart. 2. In
respect of the object, that is, we must not content our selves to mend many
things with Herod: but with David, Psalm. 119.6. we must have respect unto all
Gods Commandments. 2. It must be perpetual, not begin in the Spirit and end
in the flesh, as Gal. 3.3. not serve in youth and in age give over, not bring
forth fruit, when they are young, and grow barren in their age: But they must
be like those trees that be planted in the house of God, Psalm. 92.19. that
bring forth most fruit in their age, and are fat and well liking: Although the
root under the ground be dry and without moisture, Quan vis arida sitradix sub
terra, p^chra coma sub coelo.
yet the branches under Heaven are goodly and beautiful. In a race, if a man
run and then give over; Neither shall his obedience deserve praise, nor his
patience a crown. Certe nec obedientia laudem, nee patientia coronam. Bernard.
Epist. 129. Adfratres in Ercmo. Scrm. 8.
That Horace in his Book of the Art of Poesy requires as a Decorum or a grace
in his Tragoedian, that S. Augustine prescribes as the rarest quality of a
sound and godly Christian.

Principio medium, medio ne discrepet imum. That a bad conclusion do not
disgrace a hopeful beginning. Religion and goodness must have but two
seasons, a spring time and a summer, the least blast of Autumn, or the least
nipping of a winters frost they must not feel; a good man in the deadness of
Autumn casts not a leaf, in the sharpness of winter loses no moisture, sap,
nor beauty: for as it is to no purpose for a man to dig in a golden mine,
except he continue: so is it in this case. It is the observation of Virgil, in
1. of his Georgie. That though the Sun be never so glorious at her rising,
yet if she set in a cloud at night, -- Quid cogitat humidus Auster,
Signa dabit. --
It is a sign that foul weather will follow. Look to it then, that your
goodness be not like the goodness of the men of Ephraim, Hos. 6.4. like the
morning cloud, or like the morning dew, not like Dans Image, not like
Arislotles Lion, not like Mandrabulus his Offering, Plin lib. 8. ca. 16. Lucian
and Quintilianus.
not like Quintilians lazy Athenians; good tolerable Orators at the first, but
mere wranglers in their latter days. O let it never be said of you, that the
longer you learn, the less you profit; the longer you live, the less good
you do; the more time you have to do good, the worse you bestow it; that the
more ye grow in years, the less ye grow in knowledge. 3. Obedience must be
grounded upon Gods word, and performed conscionably, because God commands it;
It must proceed from faith, which will make a man go through evil and good
report, 2 Cor. 6.8. And I will give you this mark to know it by; it will make
a man as conscionable of secret, as of open sins, as ready to serve God when
there is no man to witness it, as if all the world stood looking upon us: It
will make a man as loath to offend in his Chamber, as in the Church, or Market.
That is no obedience, whereto a man is brought by fear of men, and not by
conscience; we must be like Joseph, Genesis 39.9. Pudet id facere in conspectu
Dei.
I am ashamed to do this wickedness in the sight of God.

The seventh means is, The seventh sign of our election.
the love of God. We know that we are translated, etc. 1 Ioh. 3.14. By this
are we known to be Christ's Disciples, Ioh. 13.35. and the trial of this must
be first, if it make thee bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4. especially to the household
of faith. Gal. 6.10. For he that sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his compassion, how dwells the love of God in him? 1 Ioh. 3.17. We add that
of our Savior, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom, for I was hungry and ye fed me: and surely they are highly in Gods
love, for God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9.7. so that is the first of
your love. Secondly, if you be ready to forgive wrongs, for love is not
provoked to anger, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. If we observe the Apostles rule, Romans
12.14. Bless them which persecute you, etc. If any man forgive not his
brother, he is without hope of being the child of God. Which makes me to
wonder at the cutting Gallants of our days, who will not put up the smallest
wrongs done to them, nay nothing shall wash it away, but the hearts blood; it
is a dishonor to me, and a discredit to all my kindred.

I end with that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.32. Be courteous one to another, and
tenderhearted, forgiving one another: and with the same Apostle, Coloss. 3.12,
13. Put ye on the bowels of compassion, tender mercy, kindness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake forgave you.

8. Love to Gods Ministers, The eighth sign.
(as a good child loves those that tell him of his father, and brings him
home) for they that love them do show that they have gained peace with God by
their labors, which makes them think that all their temporal goods will not
be sufficient to requite them for those spiritual graces, which by their
means and ministry they have reaped. This kind affection was in the
Galatians; I bear you witness, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and
have given them unto me; Gal. 4.15. They will be had in singular honor, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. in double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. If their hearers have profited by
them: Every man loves them, by whom he gains, and there is nothing under
Heaven, whereby you can so much, as by your Minister. You may gain knowledge,
Eccles. 12.9. You may learn the truth, for they preach the word of truth,
Ephesians. 1.13. You may be sure of reconciliation with God, for they preach the
word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. You may obtain peace, for the Word is
preached that ye might have peace, Ioh. 6.33. You may gain life, for they
preach the Word of life, Acts 5.20. inestimable is that gain and treasure
which you reap from them; they plow and sow, you reap the benefit; they cast
in the seed and manure the ground, and you carry away the harvest; they toil
like oxen in the plow, you sit still and have all the profit; no marvel then
if Paul cry out; O how beautiful are the feet of those that preach glad
tidings of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15. which
makes me to think that there are but few that have benesited by the Word, few
that reaped comfort, because there be so few that reverence and love the
Ministers as they ought. For great men, few of them do love Ministers,
Quianullo discrimine agendum Tros Tyriusie fuit.
That must in their Ministeries have no respect of persons, nor make any
difference between Trojan and Tyrian. Because they must speak against their
ambition, their atheism, therefore they love them not: for Patrons, the most
part of them, like a Minister so far as his money goes; but if there be no
other metal than schollership and learning, they will rather salute Philips
Ass than a learned Divine. They that profess most love to Ministers, are some
forward Citizens, and they love no longer than he pleases their ill and
predominant humor: Some must be pleased only by length, some by lowdnesse,
some by squeazing of zeal, some by pushing at a Father, some by declaiming
against a Lutine sentence, others by betraying their silliness in squibbing
authority. If he do none of these, he shall find the love of many burning
Professors as cold as snow water. They will many times reward the Prophets, but
not in the name of a Prophet, but because they are built up in their itching
quality. If a man would have any thing of them, he must declaime against
other men's sins, and not theirs; and it is a wonder, but some or other will
show his impatience against me even for this. I will not speak of those, that
think all too much, with a Dicite Pontifices in templo, or with a Ne capiat
Christus capit and rapit omnia sisous. My conclusion is. If you love the
Ministers truly, blessed are ye, for then you love Christ that sends them,
then you have surely got some wisdom by them, then you take pleasure and joy
in hearing them, then you esteem them as men set over you by God to do you
good. It is a good sign that you either have been built and grounded, or
strengthened and confirmed in your holy faith by their pains and preaching;
and I pray God that they may build you, and you may love them every day more
and more.

The last evident token, The last sign of our election.
that a man is sure of salvation, is an earnest longing for Christ's coming to
judgment, when a man cries with the Spouse, Apoc. 20.22. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, and with the souls that lie under the Altar, How long Lord, how long,
Apoc. 6.10. It is a peremptory sign that a man is certain of the crown of
salvation; as 2 Timothy 4.8. From henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
glory, and not for me only, but for all such as love his appearing. And the
Apostle, Romans 8.23. They that have the first fruits of the Spirit, do sigh in
themselves, waiting for the redemption of our bodies. Whereas on the other
side, reprobates and they that are without hope, cannot endure to hear of the
day of his coming, They shall say unto the mountains and rocks, fall upon us,
and hide us from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb, for the day of wrath is come, and who can stand? Apoc.
6.16. Prisoners that have no hope, do quake and tremble at the name of Judge,
but a prisoner that has his pardon sealed, that has no Judge but his Father,
that knows the Judge to be his Savior, that knows the Judge has ransomed
his life with his own life and blood, thinks every hour a year till the
Judge come, that he may be free. When we are the Spouse of Christ, then we long
for the coming of the Bridegroom; if we be ingrafted and incoporate into
Christ, then we long to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Excellent is that
meditation of Augustine, Inquictu^ est cor nostrum, O Domine, dones in te
requiescat Aug. Confess. l. b. 1. cap. 1.
Our heart is restless, O Lord, till what time it rests in thee. So that all
that long for his coming are sure of a crown.

The Use is: teaches that Paul had this assurance by revelation; for so both
Pighius and Andradius out of the Trent Council; for if you look, Romans 8.32,
33, 34. you shall see that Paul grounds this certainty not on revelation, but
upon a ground common to all believers: as first, on Christ's death, verse. 32.
Secondly, on Christ's free justification, verse. 33. Thirdly, on Christ's
intercession, verse. 34. As before has been showed.

But the principal use is to note the happiness of all true believers, and of
all that fear God. Whatsoever grief and sorrow, meannesse and want they
endure here, they know they shall have honor in stead of it hereafter. They
may be like Lazarus in Fulgentius, without a garment, but if not without faith,
without a house; but if they be not without a Lord, without meat; but if they
be not without Christ in the world here, know that they shall not be without
glory, without a Kingdom in the world to come. When men suppose them to be
quite forsaken, then can they look with joy up to Heaven where they shall
dwell, and they can see, though not the rooms and seats, yet the glorious
house and mansion, which is theirs by inheritance; and this point will lighten
all our burdens, mitigate all our sorrows, ease all our griefs, that though
here our heads be covered with ashes, we know that there they shall be crowned
with glory; though here we be esteemed base, we know that there we shall be
happy; though we be here as yet but servants, we know that there we shall
reign as Kings; though we be yet as strangers, we know we shall be received as
sons; though here we have a fit of mourning, we know we shall rejoice for
ever; though we labor hard for the six days, we shall come to keep a Sabbath
that will last ever. What comfort like this, to be men, and yet to know that
God our God? what comfort like this, to be the meanest of men, and yet to know
that Christ is ours? what comfort like this, to dwell on earth, and yet be sure
aforehand that Heaven is ours? what comfort like this, to be here very
emblemes of baseness, and and yet be sure that glory is ours? to dwell in a
base cottage, and yet be sure that we are borne to an immortal inheritance:
So that my conclusion is that of David, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the upright man, and
behold him, for the end of that man is peace: Peace with Angels, peace with his
own conscience, peace with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Lord bring
us to that glory, invest us to that Kingdom, give us that peace for thy
Sons sake.

So I come to the second part of this description.

Of the seed of Abraham.] Of the seed of Abraham.
The seed of Abraham, not only a Convert, or a Proselyte, but deseended from
Abraham's loins, and it seems to be thus in sense; that though some of
Abraham's seed be cast off, yet some are not, and it will easily carry this
Doctrine.

That parentage can neither hinder a man's salvation, nor further it. One
Abraham has Isaac and Ishmael, one called to an inheritance, the other not.
One Isaac may have an Esau and a Jacob, one loved, and the other hated of God,
Mal. 1.2, 3. A man may be borne of a wicked father, and yet be dear unto
God. Amon a wicked King, one that did much evil in the sight of the Lord, as
his father Manasses had done, 2 Kings 21.20. yet he has a son that does
uprightly, and walks in all the ways of God, as David had done, 2 King. 22.2.
So that the Spirit of God gave him this testimony, that like unto him was no
King before him, that turned not aside, etc. nor any like to him that came
after him, 2 Kings 23.25. and he may be a godly father of a wicked son, as
Isaac of Esau, and Abraham of Ishmael. One man may be the son of a
Patriarch, and himself damned; another the son of some poor Carpenter, and
be saved; one may creep in purple, as Quintilian, Lib 1. de Instit.
another has not a rag to cover it; the father and mother forsake it, and yet
the Lord takes him up, and sets him near to himself, and in the end crowns
it.

The Use is: To teach us first; Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Alacidae similis, Vulcamiaque arma capessas, quamte Thersitae similem producat
Achilles. If thou be not good thy self, it is not thy fathers virtues that can
commend thee unto God. Let every man adorn and trim up his own heart, that
it may be a sweet lodging for Christ to dwell in. Though Christ should lodge in
thy fathers house, thou may be a cast away, if he reside not in thee also.
Trust not then in parents and friends, for there is no help in them: If good,
doubt not of happiness, thou shall fare no worse for them: Thus it is no
privilege to be great.

Secondly, that it is no prejudice to be meanly borne; for be a man never so
poor, if he work righteousness, he is accepted, Acts 10.35. be he never so
mean, to him shall be glory, and honor and peace, Romans 2.10. She that
grindes at the mill is as near Heaven, as he that sits on the throne: what if
thy father have nothing? yet the earth is the Lords, what if parents forsake
thee? the Lord will take thee up; what if without food? the Lord will send thee
the bread of life; what if without clothes? he will cloth thee with the
righteousness of Christ, if thou belong unto him: Thus parentage can neither
help nor hinder us from God. Before I proceed, observe that Paul speaks not
only of his carnal descent from Abram, but of the spiritual privilege, that
he was one of his faithful seed: for in Gods account, they only that have
the promises, are counted for the seed, Romans 9.8. The one, says Augustine,
will do a man honor, the other none; from whence I build a second Theoreme.
It is more honor to be faithful, than to be Abraham's seed.

It is more honor to be a faithful child of God, than the son of the
greatest Prince. Moses, Heb. 11.24. counts it greater honor to be amongst the
children of God, than to live in Pharaohs Court, and be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter. David takes more honor to dwell one day in Gods Court, than
a thousand elsewhere; and had rather be a doore-keeper in Gods house, that is,
have the meanest place, than to dwell in the Tabernacles of ungodly men, Psalm.
84.10. Solomon accounts it happiness enough to stand at wisdoms gates, and
give attendance at the posts of thy doors, Prove. 8.33. Si iste versus esset in
hominum cordibus, currerent ad convallem plorationis: If that verse were in
men's hearts, they would run into the valley of tears, or bewailing, Aug. in
Psalm. 84. When the Apostles seemed to grow proud, that they could subdue the
Devils, our Savior bid them rather rejoice in this, that their names are
written in Heaven, Luke 10.18, 19. There be two things that make holiness
above greatness. 1. The work of holiness. 2. The reward of holiness. The
work is, to hear the Lord, sometimes threatening in the Law, sometimes wooing
and persuading in the Gospel, sometimes to be praying unto him, sometimes to
be praising him, sometimes to be feeding him in his servants, sometimes
clothing him in his members, to have our whole conversation with him. It is
the repairing of Gods image in us, and the quieting of those clamorous
consciences, that will never be friends with us, till we be friends with God.
2. The reward, is blessing; Blessing shall cover the head of the righteous,
Prove. 10.6. Blessed in the things of the earth, Psalm. 37.20. For the righteous
shall inherit the earth. Blessed in his name, for the memorial of the just is
blessed, Pro. 10.7. yet if he should have none of these, the glory hereafter
would recompense all: for if either life, or glory, or kingdom, or
inheritance will do it, they shall have it in abundance. What so much to be
desired as life? What life so much as the life of glory? The faithful behold
the image of the Lord with open face, as in a myrrour, and are changed into the
same image from glory to glory, from this to eternal glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. So
that when you have named the highest titles of honor and majesty, you may say
with David, Psalm. 149.9. Such honor have all his Saints. Or as Haman said of
Mordecai, when he had upon him the royal apparel, Esth. 6.9. I add but one
word more. God is so strong with them, that he will have great ones to esteem
them above their greatest favorites, as Zeresh told Haman; If Mordecai be of
the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail, but shall surely fall before him, Esth. 6.13. To be the sons of
Nobles, is nothing to the sons of God; to be borne of Princes is but
baseness, in comparison of this, to be borne of God: Moab is but a washpot,
Edom but a wiper of shoes, Psalm. 108.9.

Let this pull down the pride of wicked men. Abraham: for howsoever they may
spit at the name of slave, yet such they are. See the Apostle, Romans 6.16. See
August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 3. An evil man although he reign, he is a
servant, a good man although he serve, he is free, etc. And this sin has
such a command in them, as the Devil had in the man possessed: sometimes it
casts them into the fire, where they burn in lust, sometimes into the water,
where they swim and are drowned in vain delights; sometimes it blows them
into the air, with a giddy desire to hunt after preferment; and sometimes
casts them on the ground, and weds them to the world, and what baseness was
ever like unto this? It was Plato's judgment, Neminem regem non esse ex servis
oriundum, neminem non servum ex Regibus. Seneca Epist. 44. asks the question,
who is honorable, and answers it thus: Non facit nobilem atrium plenum fumosis
imag^ibus, an mus sacit nobilem: A Court full of smoakie images makes not
noble, but the mind makes noble. Quis fructus generis tabula jactare capaci,
Corvinum, and posthac multa deducere virga
Fumosos equitum cum dictatore magistros
Si coram lepidis male vivitur? etc. --
-- Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. L^^ en^l. Sat. 8.

I conclude this point with that 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me will I
honor; Think not to get you honor at the Court, that honor is but glass;
not by policy, Achitophel had as much as any, and yet died basely, 2 Samuel
17.23. nor by great buildings, they will fall down again on heaps, if the
foundation be not laid in holiness: nor by your eloquence, Herod could not
persuade the silly worms, Acts 12.23. But be once the children of God, Et nil
poterunt regales addere manus. All the Kingdoms of the earth cannot make thee
so honorable. I come to the last, of the tribe of Benjamin.

The tribe of Benjamin.] The Tribe of Benjamin.
When Moses blessed all the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 33.1^. he blessed Benjamin thus: The
beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, the Lord shall cover him all
the day long, and dwell between his shoulders, that was, because the Temple
should be built in Sion, which was in the tribe of Benjamin, and in the Temple
the Lord would dwell; and yet for all this privilege, that Tribe was destroyed
as well as any others, and though destroyed for their sins, yet some of them
saved: from whence come two conclusions.

The one: There is no people so graced with privileges, so crowned with
blessings, so beloved of God, but sin will bring ruin and destruction upon
them, as it did upon Benjamin. That Commonweals and Kingdoms have their falls
and periods, Let Athens, Sparta, Babylon, Nineve, and Carthage be witnesses,
who have at this day no other fences, but paper-wals to keep their memories.
But what have been the causes of these subversions, most men have been very
ignorant. The Epicure ascribes it to Fortune, the Stoicke to Destiny; Plato,
and Pythagoras, and Bodin, Method. 6. to number; Aristotle Book 5. of Polit.
Chap. 12. to an asymmetrie and disproportion in the members; Copernicus to the
motion of the center of excentricke circle; Cardanus, and the most part of
Astrologians, to stars and planets. But all these have groped in the darkness;
for if we consult with the Oracles of God, we shall find that sin is the
only cause why God falls out with his dearest children, turns Cities into
ashes, ruinates Kingdoms, makes States but Ludibria fortunae; The mocking
stocks of fortune: Everlasting monuments of desolation: ask of Jerusalem, she
will tell you that this Doctrine is too true; she will not stick to tell you
what she was, and whither she is fallen, etc. So I come to the second argument,
from foreknowledge.

VERSE. 2. God has not cast away his people,
THe second argument to prove that all the Jews are not rejected, Exposition.
is taken from Gods foreknowledge, and seems to be thus framed. God has not
cast away his people which he knew before, but some Jews are such people as
God knew before; therefore some Jews are not cast off. The terms are most of
them easy: for God has not cast away his: they are called his, whom he from
eternity did purpose to save. For rejection, it is either temporary, or
eternal: he does cast off his for a time, and seems to hide his face and
loving countenance from them: I will go away until they seek me, Hos. 5.
But eternally he casts off none, but such as were of old ordained to
condemnation; for this foreknowledge, some say, was of them whom he fore-knew
to be apt to receive faith, but this was the error of the Greeks,
attributing too much unto man's free will, and was much opposed by Augustine.
For it is thus said, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord set his love upon you, not because
you were many, but because he loved you freely; That is, without any cause in
you. Oecumenius understands it comparatively, he fore-knew them before the
Gentiles, that is, to be called before the Gentiles: But as Beza well
observes, here is no mention of calling, but of eternal predestination. Some
take it thus, which he knew, that is, enlarged and endowed with excellent
benefits and privileges: But this is sufficiently controlled by Tolet, Annet. 1.
and has indeed no warrant in the Text. This foreknowledge of God, says
Paraeus, in Scripture is taken four ways. First, most largely, for his
general knowledge, whereby he knows things to come, and not to come, all
things that are done in heaven and in earth: of this spoke Peter unto Christ in
Ioh. 21.17. Lord thou know all things, and this knowledge is only of the
understanding, and speculative; this is not the cause of any thing, nor is to
be called his predestination, because he knows many things to be done, which
are not done by his counsel and will, Aquin. Sum. 1. quaest. 14. ^rt 8.
as Aquinas. Secondly, it is used for the foreknowledge of those things, which
he decrees to be, both of good which he purposes to do, and of evil which
he purposes to permit. This practicke knowledge is not without counsel, and
is the infallible cause of all things that are, and is that providence whereby
the world is governed, called the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, Acts 2.23.

And yet this differs from election, The difference between foreknowledge and
election.
as the whole from a part: for election is but one part of predestination and
providence, and in this sense the reprobates are fore-knowen, viz. preordained
to punishment for their sins. Thirdly, strictly, for the election and
predestination of the Saints unto grace and glory, and so Augustine expounds
this place, whom he knew, viz. whom he did predestinate: So to foreknow is to
approve, as by this he knows not the wicked, Matthew. 7.23. Fourthly, for the
proegumenicall cause of election, the free favor and mercy of God; we are
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father unto sanctification
through obedience and sprinkling of blood, where there is both the principal
cause of predestination, God the father. Secondly, one end of it sanctification
as well as glory. Thirdly, outward, or procatarcticall cause, the suffering
and blood of Christ. Fourthly, the inward cause, his fore knowledge, that is,
his mere love unto us, for from eternity he beheld us in Christ, and in him
loved us, for he has chosen us in him, Ephesians. 1.4. Of predestination, and what
it is.
Before I come to gather the scope and drift of Paul, give me leave to instruct
you in that great point of predestination; and therein I will make choice of
these principal heads. 1. What it is. 2. The order of it. 3. The parts. 4. The
causes of predestination. 5. The effects. I begin with the first.

Bellarmine says, Degratia, and lib. Arbit. lib. 2. cap. 9.
that it is a certain providence of God, whereby certain men out of the mass
of perdition are mercifully chosen, Ex massa perditionis, misericorditer
electi, and so are by means infallible directed to eternal life. But this
definition does extend predestination only to the elect, which is both of the
elect and reprobate, and therefore unsound. Secondly, he makes predestination
and providence all one, which in themselves are different: for 1. Providence
reaches to all creatures, but predestination does not so. 2. Providence
directs all things to natural ends, says P. Martyr: but predestination leads
to those things that exceed nature, as to be adopted, to be sons of God, to
be regenerate, to be seasoned with grace, Lombard. Distinct. lib. 1. Did. 40.
to come not only to the hope, but also to the fruition of glory. It is
preparing of grace in this life, and of glory in the life to come. True, but
this contains not all; Est praeparatio gratia, and est praeparatio donorum
Dei, quibus certo liberantur qui liberantur, coeteri in massa perd tionis
relinquuntur De praedest. Sa^ct. cap. 12.
Augustine thus desines it, It is the preparation of grace, and of the gifts of
God, whereby they are certainly freed, that are freed, the rest are left in the
mass of destruction. But I will give out of all, both ancient and modern, a
more complete definition thus. It is a most wise part of that most wise purpose
of God, whereby he decreed before all eternity, some should be called to the
adoption of sons, should be justified by faith, and in the end glorified;
others should be passed by, that both by mercy on the one, and justice on the
other, his glory might be manifested. Every clause whereof I will demonstrate
out of Scripture.

The 1. The proposed Genus, a thing common to election and reprobation: Paul,
Ephesians. 1.5. He has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. And Romans 9.11. That the
purpose of God might remain according to election. And this (...), purpose,
and this (...), good pleasure, I take to be all one. 2. I call this purpose
most wise, for God does nothing rashly or unadvisedly, nothing that can be
corrected, amended, or repented of. 3. He constantly decrees it, that it is
immutable: So Paul, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure. I am God
and change not, Mal. 3.6. And the gifts of God are without repentance, Romans
11.29. My counsel shall stand, Isai. 46.10. And though God say, Ierem. 18.8.
that he will repent, that is to be meant not of predestination, or of the
will of good pleasure, but of the sign, that is, of those punishments which
he threatened by the Prophets; Nam qui mutat opera, consilium non mutat. Ang.
Confess. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Though God changes his works, yet changes not his counsel. 4. I add, they
whom he loved in Christ; for whatsoever good the Lord promises, as we
receive it, it is per and propter Christum, through and for Christ. He has
predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. yea, no man is
predestinate but for this purpose, that he may be a member of Christ; for, he
predestined us to be adopted through Christ into himself, viz. into Christ.
5. That they should be justified and glorified. So Paul, Romans 8.30. Whom he
predestined, them he will call; whom he called, them he will justify; whom
he justifies, them he will glorisie. 6. That he passed by others. So Malac.
1.2. I loved Jacob and hated Esau. Lastly, to manifest his glory in mercy and
justice, that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, Romans 9.23. But of this definition thus made and proved, may arise these
comfortable observations. 1. God predestined us because he looked favorable
on us in Jesus Christ, both to holiness and happiness: So the Scripture
every where attributes all the good that we have from God, to be through
Christ; He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ. Ephesians. 1.2. He has chosen us in Christ. Ephesians. 1.4. He has
predestinate us to be adopted through Christ. Ephesians. 1.5. He accepted us in
his beloved, viz. in Christ. Verse. 6. He redeemed us by the blood of his son
Christ. Verse. 7. He has gathered together, and reconciled all things both in
heaven and in earth by one, that is Christ, ver. 10. And therefore when we beg
any thing of God, we are taught to beg it in the name of Christ. So Christ
himself, John 14.13. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, that will I
do for you, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. So Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Whence we
learn to disclaim our worthiness and our own works from being meritorious
causes of Gods blessings: Excellently Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set
his love upon you, because ye were more in number, for ye were the fewest of
all people; but because he loved you.

O then let us feed Christ, if we cannot in himself, Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17.
The same Jesus Christ our Lord and our God, which has loved us, and given us
everlasting consolation, must also comfort and stablish our hearts, etc.

2. That whom God has praedestinated to the end, which is glory, them also he
predestined to use the means, which is holiness. See Ephesians. 1.4. He has
chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and as
the Apostle speaks of spiritual creation, that we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that we should walk in them, Ephesians.
2.10. So of election; and We are redeemed to be a peculiar people zealous of
good works, Tit. 3.7, 8. I add no more but that of Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2. We are
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father to sanctification of
the Spirit, and to obedience, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal
life believed: Whence, they are most justly to be blamed, who make
predestination a liberty to their sinful lives, and use sinfully to reason
after this manner. If I be predestinate unto glory, then I shall be sure of
it, howsoever I live; for Gods decrees be immutable: If I be in Gods decree
and purpose a reprobate, then if I should strive never so much, I shall be no
better; I cannot alter it, Contra Colsum, lib. 2. Vide P. Martyr. Com. lec. p.
447.
like those in Origin. Whereas thou should rather reason thus; If I belong
to Gods election, then shall I use the means to come unto glory: I will
therefore use all holy and godly courses, that I may get my election sure and
sealed; as Peter wills us, a Pet. 1.10. when Paul had that promise, I have given
unto thee the life of all that sail with thee, Acts 27.24. Yet except they use
the means to come to land, the help of their ship; if they shall now leap
into the water, they cannot be saved, verse. 31. So when Jacob feared his
brother Esau, and yet had that assurance from God, that he should prevail
with men, Genes. 32.28. Yet see how careful he is of all means to pacify
him; he will do it with gifts, (Munera, creed mihi, placant hominesque
Deosque) and sends one drove before another, Genes. 33. And so I come from the
definition to the order observed in it.

God he conceives all things at once with one act of his understanding, 2. Of
the order of predestination.
to which all things both past and to come are present, and as he conceived,
so he decreed all things at once: but the reasonable creature being finite,
conceives one thing after another. Therefore for our understandings we may
distinguish the counsel of God concerning man into two acts, or two degrees.
1. The purpose of God in himself, in which he determines what he will do,
and the end of all his doings, and that is to create all things, specially man
for his own glory, as Isa. 43.7. partly by showing mercy on some, and partly
by showing of his justice upon others. 2. Is another purpose, whereby he
decrees the execution of the former, and laves down means to accomplish the
end thereof, which two acts of the counsel of God are not to be severed, nor
yet confounded, but distinctly considered with some difference; for in the
first God decrees some men to honor by showing mercy, and some to dishonor
by showing his justice upon them, and this man more than that out of his will
and pleasure, and that is the only cause that we can give, even his will. In
the second are set down the causes of the execution of the former decree, and
these are known, and manifest: for no man though left out of clection, is
condemned but for sin, no man though elected is yet saved, but by the merits
of Christ: But I pass over this, and come to the parts of predestination,
which are two.

The parts of Gods predestination are two. 3. The parts of predestination.
The first, the decree of election. The second, the decree of reprobation. A
diftinction plain out of Romans 9. and may be thus confirmed; of some it is
faid, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. And of others, Christ shall
say in judgment, Depart from me ye wicked, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23.

In the former, viz. election, note 1. what it is. 2. Of election, and first
what it is.
the execution. 3. the knowledge of particular election. 1. Election is defined
thus; It is a decree in which God according to the good pleasure of his will,
has certainly chosen some men to life for the glory of his grace; as Ephesians.
1.4, 5. in this one I note these points. 1. The impulsive cause, (...), the
good pleasure of his will, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
Romans 9.18. 2. If his decree, then it is immutable, he is not as man that he
should repont, 1 Samuel 15.29. 3. There is an actual election made in time, I
have chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 15.19. 4. The end, his glory: for of
the execution, and the knowledge of particular election, I will speak
hereaster. I come to speak a word of the other part of predestination, viz.
Reprobation, which is, A decree whereby God out of his pleasure purposed to
refuse some men by mean^s of Adams fall, and their own corruption, for
manifeslation of his justice. In this, note only the matter or object of this
decree, viz. The rejection of some men in respect of mercy, or the
manifestation of justice upon some; which howsoever men call it cruelty, yet
the Word tells it us, Jude 4. They were of old ordained to this condemnation.
And Romans 9.22. God makes vessels of wrath for destruction. But this is a
Doctrine that seems to be hard and cruel: for first, men say, it must needs
be cruelty, to create a great part of the world to damn them in hell: But
they should know, that by this decree God does not create any to damn them,
but to the manifestation of his glory in their due and deserved damnation for
their sin, which is but justice, and not cruelty.

2. They say that by this, God should hate his own creature, and that before
it is, whereto first I answer; That God did not actually hate, but purposed to
hate justly and deservedly, and if. he did, I may say with Paul, Romans 9.20. O
man what art thou, that disputest against God? shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it, why have thou in de me thus? Number. negandum quo^ as crtum,
q^^a intenni (...) sotest ^^d (...) Aug. De buno persever. lib. 2. cap. 14.
And with Augustine, May we deay that which is plain and evident, because
that which is hidden and secret cannot be found out? It is plain out of
Scripture that so it is; and therefore it must needs be sin to object
against it. But that which makes the principal question is that, which in the
fourth placed proposed, and which now I come unto; to wir, The causes of
predestination, Of the causes of election.
and because the parts of predestination are two; I will take them severally,
and first begin with election.

Howsoever Gods will be the reason whereinto all causes must be resolved, and
end in that, yet some imes there may be given a reason of Gods will, yet that
reason must not be called an efficient cause of Gods will. The reason why God
placed Adam in Paradise, was that he might dress it and keep it; the reason
why God drove not the Canaanite out of the land, was because the wickedness of
the Amorites was not yet full, Genesis 15.16. The reason why God brought Israel
through the desert, rather than per compendia, by more compendious and nearer
ways, was, that they might not easily be met by their enemies. Yet then only
must a reason of his will be given, when he himself has given it in his Word.
Of the final causes of election.
For the final causes of predestination they are plainly set down by Paul,
especially citing that of Pharaoh, Romans 9.17. For this same cause have I
stirred thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
glorified thorowout all the earth, or for this very cause have I appointed
thee, as it is, Exodus 9.16. And of the elect he says, it was that God might
show the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, Romans 9.23. and as
there is a final, so there may be a material cause. Men who are
predestined, and the benefits which God bestows on the elect, vocation,
justification, sanctification, glory: But the question is touching the cause
impulsive, whether it were his mere will, or his foreseen faith and works.
That faith and works be, Of the impulsive cause of election.
was the Tenent of the old Pelagians, renewed in latter times by some
counterfeit Lutherans, at the first maintaining faith simply to be the cause of
election, yet afterward only the isntrumental, and not the meritorious cause
of election; See the Rhemists In Annotat. in Romans 9. Observe then, 1. what we
hold: 2. our arguments: 3. the opposition of the adversary.

In the decree of election there is a double act. The first concerns the end.
The second the means. I ground this proposition upon Romans 9.11. That the
purpose according to election might remain, where I see first in Gods decree
an election, before the purpose of damning, or saving. And Romans 8.29. and 30.
Those whom he foreknew he did predestinate to be made like to the image of his
Son, and whom he predestined, them etc. where there is a manifest
difference between the decree, viz. predestination, and the execution of his
decree, which consists in these three. 1. Vocation. 2. Justification. 3.
Glorification. The first act I call a part of Gods divine purpose, whereby he
brings some men into love and favor, passing by the rest, and makes them
vessels of honor, and these are the acts of the sole will of God, without all
respect to either good or evil in the creature. Neither does God wrong any,
though he choose not all, because he is tied to none; as a man having no child
of his own, and seeing a multitude of beggars, adopteth one of them, and
leaves out the rest, though he show mercy on him whom he adopts, yet does
no wrong to the rest; so is it with God. The second act is a purpose of saving,
or conferring glory, and this has no other impulsive cause than the former,
viz. the good pleasure of God, as Ephesians. 1.5. He has predestinare us to be
adopted through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will; where
note that this purpose of saving, is with regard to Christ the Mediator, who
was first ordained to be a Mediator between God and man, as 1 Pet. 1.20. He
was ordained before the foundation of the world. Secondly, promised by the
mouth of the Prophets, as Isa. 9.6. Thirdly, revealed. Fourthly, applied, when
Christ is given unto us of God the Father by the right use of the Word and
Sacraments, and received of us by true faith, the last is the accomplishment of
the application, which is glory, when God shall be all in all by Christ in
all the elect: So that our point is this: God did predestinate all that shall
be saved, both to grace and glory for his good pleasures sake, not for any
faith that he did foresee should be in them, Faith soreseene no causes of
election.
nor for any works which he knew they would does and we can confirm it by
these reasons following.

First, Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God might remain according to election,
not of works, but of him that calls; that is, of the sole good pleasure of
him that calls; from whence the argument may be collected thus: If election
were for foreseen faith, then not of the sole good purpose of him that
calls, but that is contrary to the words of the Apostle.

Secondly, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, not because we were, but that we might be holy. So in Tit. 1.1. it is
called sides electorum Dei, the faith of Gods elect. In Acts 13.48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed.

Thirdly, Faith is the gift of God; by grace are ye saved through faith which
is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. And Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given for
Christ's sake, that you should believe in him, Initiorum sidei, incrementique
lagitor Deus. Ambros de vocat. Gent. lib. 2. cap. 1.
and suffer for his sake. God is the giver of the beginnings and increase of
faith. Now this being granted, it follows, that God was not moved by foreseen
faith to elect: for that which God in electing did give to man, could not be
the cause that moved God to elect man. I might urge the argument of Augustine.
De predest. Sanct. lib c. 16. Works foreseen no cause of election.
That grace goes before faith in the order of nature, as the cause precedes the
effect. I come to show that God had not respect to men's works.

I will not stand to show how Bellarmine, Bellarm. de gratia and libero Arbit.
lib. 2. cap. 10. Sect. 9.
affents unto my proposition, and consirmes it, contrary to the Rhemists upon
the Hebrews, who bring for themselves that in Heb. 5.9. He is made the Author
of salvation to all that obey: Hence they say, a man is not elected without
condition of obedience. And that in 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood, etc. and if any man
purge himself, he shall be a vessel of honor; where say they, by free will
and good works a man is made a vessel of honor, whereto I will shape them no
other answer than that which is given by Bellarmine. Deor^^^e, lib. 2. cap. 13.
For answer to the second testimony the Apostle faith not: That a man by
purging himself is made a vessel of honor, but is a vessel of honor; that
is, shall by this be known to be a vessel of honor: as if he should say,
there be two seals of man's being a vessel of honor, one inward, which
cannot be seen of us in this life, that is the knowledge of divine
approbation. The other outward, the avoiding of sin and iniquity; that is,
by these it appears, that we are surely predestinate, and so we are exhorted
by Peter to make our calling and election sure. Now the reasons whereby I prove
my proposition, are these.

1. That which is the effect of election cannot be the cause: Ephesians. 1.4. upon
which words Augustine; Elegit nos ut essen us sanch, non quia crornus, and
secundum voluntatem suam non nostram, quae bonaesse non possit, nisi isse ut
siat bona sabveniat.
He chose us, that we might be holy, not because we were about to be holy,
and according to his will, not ours, which cannot be good, except he help
it, that it may be made good. And very excellent is that of the same Father
against I ulianus the Pelagian, He chose no man worthy, but by choosing made him
worthy.

2. Lib. 5. cap. 3.
Romans 9.16. but of God showing mercy; but if it were for our foreseen
works, it were not of mercy, but of him that wills and runs: Liberautur
per gratiam, and aicnutur non vasa suorum meritorum sedm sericor diae. August.
dexatura and gratia. lib. 5. cap. 1.
They are freed by grace, and are said to be vessels not of their own merits,
but of mercy. Yea, the Rhemists upon Romans 9.14. have confessed that election
is a work of Gods mere mercy contrary to themselves, and if of mere
mercy, then without all respect of our works, or foreseen faith.

3. Luc. 12.32. It is the Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And Ioh.
15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: but if God should choose
men for good works, then they had first chosen him; nor does God choose men,
because he sees that men will do good, but chooses men, that he make them
workers of good, and to persevere in good; as Bellar mine proves it
sufficiently. Degratia, and lib. Arbit. lib. 2. cap. 10.
If any man be scrupulous and doubtful, let him but look Aug. Epist. 105. to
Sixtus. Epist. 46. to Valentinus. and Bellar mine in the place before noted. I
come to see what the adversary has against this doctrine, that we may soon
shape them an answer, and shake them off.

The first may be out of Romans 8.29. Those whom he knew before, he did
predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son; therefore Gods
prescience of men to be like, etc. is the cause of Predestination: whereto I
answer first, that their prescience is put for the proegumenicall cause, that
is his free mercy, and the meaning is, that whom God looked upon in mercy, he
did also predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son by
righteousness and holiness: So the word is used, Job. 10.14. Psalm. 1.6.
Secondly, the Apostle says not, he knew them to be like, and therefore did
predestinate them; but did predestinate them that they might be like.

Secondly, they dispute from Matthew. 20.8. Call the Laborers, and give them
their hire: therefore Heaven is ordained for men's good works. Whereto I answer
first, that the place shows that good works are the way, wherein men must
walk that come to Heaven, but they do not prove that God in his decree had
respect unto them. There is a difference between the decree of predestination,
and the execution. Good works go before the possession of Heaven, but not
before the purpose and ordination of God. Lib. 1. cap. 3.
And S. Ambrose, Of the calling of the Gentiles, frames the argument of the
place quire otherwise, that Christ's meaning in that Parable, was to show only
that men converted at the end of their days shall be by Gods mercy partakers
of glory and happiness as well as others.

And so I come to the second part of predestination, Of reprobation, and the
causes of it.
which makes the greater doubt, whether reprobation have any other impulsive
cause or reason, besides the pleasure and will of God: that is, whether their
foreseen infidelity and impenitencie in sin, did move God to reprobate any.

This latter, that it was for sin, was anciently maintained by the Pelagians,
as may appear by S. Augustines disputations against them: in latter times by
Stapleton, Antidot. in Epist. ad Romans only of purpose to contradict Calvin:
his reasons be, 1. Because the Apostle calls reprobation the hatred of God,
citing that of Malachy, chap. 1. verse. 3. I have hated Esau. Now God hates
nothing in man but sin, therefore God must needs foresee that Esau would
sin, and therefore hated him. 2. From the Apostles words, whom he will he
hardens: God hardens none but such as have an ill will already, for which
he hardens them. 3. From those words, He suffered with much patience the
vessels of wrath, Romans 9. verse. 22. 4. Upon those words, God being willing to
show his anger; now God shows his anger against nothing but sin; and
therefore did foresee sin which moved him to anger. 5. The Apostle makes the
cause why God did cast off the Jews, to be partly their pride and vain
boasting of the Law, Romans 9.31. Israel which followed the Law of righteousness
could not attain to the Law of righteousness; partly their incredulity,
through unbeleefe they are cast off, Romans 11.20. and these do show that the
sins of every reprobate are to God a cause lawfully moving him, why he does
absolutely reprobate him.

On the contrary, Calvin in that excellent book of predestination confuting
Pighius, cites that of the hating of Esau to prove that it was not for sin. 2.
That in Romans 9. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens;
therefore his will is the only cause of mercy and induration. 3. The potter
makes one vessel to honor, another to dishonor, only because he will, much
more God. 4. That which is common to all, both elect and reprobate, cannot be
the cause of reprobation; now sin was foreseen not only in the reprobate,
but in the elect also; For by nature we were all the children of wrath as well
as others, Ephesians. 2.3. 5. Christ attributes the cause of illumination in some
to Gods good pleasure, and of Excaecation in others to his good pleasure. Some
hear, and have wisdom revealed unto them that they may be saved; some hear
not, but wisdom is hid from them. I thank thee, O Father, Lord, etc. and it
is so, because thy good pleasure was such, Matthew. 11.25, 26. Thus you see what
is said on both sides, hear now for resolution what is to be established for
conclusion. Stapleton makes a twofold reprobation; Antid. page 567.
the one comparative, the other absolute. The comparative, whereby one man and
not another, and this man rather than that, being in the same mass and
condition, is ordained to punishment, and the cause of this he makes the sole
will of God, without any respect at all unto sin. Quaest. ad Simplicianum,
lib. 1. quaest. 2.
So Augustine has fully resolved the question. The other absolute, whereby God
ordained this or that man to destruction, and the cause of this is their
foreseen sin. But this cannot be true; for God did fore see sin in the
elect, as well as in others, and yet did not reprobate them; and therefore
sin could not be the cause of absolute reprobation; any more than of the
comparative.

Bellarmine writing of grace and free will, Lib. 2. cap. 16.
comes nearer than Stapleton, and resolves it thus, that in reprobation there
is a double act; the one negative, whereby God did decree not to have mercy on
some, whereof says he, there is no cause in man, but it is only of the will of
God. The other act is positive, whereby he decreed to damn those, upon whom
he decreed not to show mercy, and the cause of this he makes the foresight
of man's sin: But I think that Paraeus upon Romans 9. has gone as near to the
truth as any other, whom I am content to follow, till I see a sounder than he.

1. We are to hold, The causes of reprobation spoken of in the Scriptures two
ways.
that the Scriptures speak of the judgments of God, and of the causes of
damnation and reprobation two ways: 1. According to that absolute power which
God has over man and all creatures, and then ascribes the cause of all to his
good will and pleasure. So in Isa. 45.7. I am he that for me the light and
create darkness, I make peace and create evil, etc. So Ephesians. 1.11. He
works all things according to the counsel of his will. 2. According to that
ordinate right, that is the rule of distributive justice revealed in the Law
and in the Gospel; to which Law God does (as it were) submit himself, and
according to that which is there revealed, he would have us to think of his
judgments, and so the cause is to be referred partly to Gods will, partly to
man's sin. As Levit. 18.5. Ye shall keep my statutes, which if a man do, he
shall live in them. And Ezech. 18.4. The soul that sins shall die. They
which commit such things are worthy of death, Romans 1.31. And 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It
is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you. And out of this ground arise the conclusions thus.

1. If we speak of Gods absolute justice and right, the cause of both,
election and reprobation is the sole will of God. So Romans 9.11. Ere ever the
children were borne, and before they had done either good or evil, that the
purpose might remain, etc. And verse. 15. I will show mercy on whom I will,
and have compassion on whom I will. And verse. 21. Has not the potter power of
the clay? And Matthew. 11.26. Even so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was
such: Neither can any reason oppose this: for if the Pope should carry many
thousands to hell with him, no man might say so much as what do thou,
Gratian. distinct. cap. 40.
and shall any dare to question with God in the same? 2. According to his
ordinate right, the Apostle speaks of it. Romans 9.22. What if God would, to
show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long patience the
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction? where there is the cause of election,
the good will, and the cause of reprobation, his will, according to the rule of
justice revealed in the word. Where I find that nothing deserves anger but
sin, and God by damning such does both prove himself to be a just Judge,
and takes away all cause of complaint from damned reprobates, who run upon
their own damnation by their own sins, and so acquit God of it. But to make
the Doctrine plain, give me leave to premise three propositions, and I will
set down my judgment in four conclusions.

1. A twofold reprobation.
There is a twofold reprobation, eternal, viz. Gods counsel eternal to
reprobate those whom he does actually reprobate in time. Of this speaks Paul,
Romans 9.22. Vessels prepared to destruction. And Jude, verse. 4. Temporal, viz.
the manifestation of his eternal counsel, in reprobating those in time, whom
he decreed to reprobate from eternity. Of this God speaks, 1 Samuel 15.23. 2.
Reprobation has two acts, the one negative, will not show mercy. The other
affirmative, will condemn. Two acts of reprobation.
The one called the decree of not showing mercy; the other the decree of
punishing: each of them has two degrees. The negative has first the negation
of the means, or of grace. Secondly, the negation of the end and glory. The
affirmative has 1. a just hardening. 2. An appointing to the punishment. The
3. premise is this: Reprobates may be considered, either simply in themselves,
or comparatively with the elect; whence come three questions. 1. Why did God
reprobate any at all indefinitely. 2. Why this or that man definitely. 3. Why
this man rather than that, Esau rather than Jacob, comparatively. These things
being thus premised, I come to the conclusions. 1. Reprobation, whether
considered definitely or indefinitely, containing both the decree and
execution, is not to be called merely absolute in respect of impulsive and
final causes, but is grounded partly in Gods will, partly in man's sin, a
proposition partly proved already, and these that follow will confirm it the
more. The 2. therefore is this. The impulsive cause why God did reprobate some,
and not all, according to both the negative and affirmative act, was not the
foreseen sin of any, but the will of God: for first God did foresee sin,
not only in some but in all. If therefore it had been for sin, he would
have reprobated all as well as any one. Secondly, the potter makes not all to
be vessels of dishonor, because he will. So God, Romans 9.21.

Thirdly, why God did reprobate indefinitely some, definitely these by the
negative act from grace, the cause was his mere will, why from glory partly
his good will, partly the sin of the wicked. For the first, see Esau
reprobated from grace, by no desert, but of Gods mere will, Romans 4.11. God
calls to grace whom he will, gives the means of salvation, the Word and
Sacraments, to whom he will, and calls not others because he will not. Paul
did not preach in Bithynia, why? Because the Spirit suffered them not, Acts
16.7. To you it is given, to others it is not given, to know the secrets of the
Kingdom, Matthew. 13.11. Thou have hid these things from the wise, and revealed
them to babes, because it pleased thee, Matt. 11.25. The cause why he
reprobates indefinitely some, definitely these from glory, is especially the
sin of the wicked, and I take it to be sound for this reason. God did
eternally decree to reprobate men from glory, for that for which he does
indeed reprobate them in time: but God reprobates from glory, that is,
debarres from it for sin and impiety: for, for this cause comes the wrath
of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. therefore for sin he
did decree not to give it. The cause of the affirmative act of reprobation to
the punishment of induration, is Gods will, whom he will he hardens, Romans
9.18. to the punishment of damnation, for sin; for the soul that sins
shall die, Ezech. 18.

Fourthly, why God did these more than others, this man more than that, both by
the negative, and affirmative act, there is no cause in men, but only the will
and pleasure of God, because he would so. Why he freeth this man rather than
that, let him that can, search it out, so great is the depth of Gods
judgments, but let him take heed of a downe-fall; Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Cur illum potius quam illum liberet, scrutetur qui potest judiciorum Dei tam
magnum profundum; ver untamen caveat praecipitium: says Augustine. And, De
bone perseverant. cap. 11.
Cur his potius quam illis detur misericodia, quis cognovit sensum Domini? i.
Why mercy is given rather to these, than to those, who knew the mind of the
Lord? says the same Augustine. So Ambrose, De voeat. Gent. lib. 2.
Cur illorum misertus non sit, and horum sit misertus, nulla comprehendit
ratio. i. No reason does comprehend why he should not have mercy on those, and
should have mercy on these. Latet discretionis ratio, ipsa discretio non
latet. i. The reason of this separation lies hid, the separation it self
lies not hid. And so I come to that which in the last place I proposed
(omitting the many by-doubts touching free will and universal grace) to wit,
the effects and fruits of predestination.

1. Christ himself, Of he effects and fruits of predestination. 1. Christ.
who was predestinate to be the Mediator and Savior of all the elect, as in 1
Pet. 1.20. he was ordained before time, but in the last times declared for your
sakes; when God did purpose to save some, then did he purpose to send his
Son: as Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc.

Whence follows this conclusion. That there is no means to glory but by
Christ. Wherefore he calls himself the way, Ioh. 14.6. What way will thou go?
Qua vis ire? ego via; quo vis ire? ego veritas; ubi vu permanere? ego vita.
August. 10 bune locum.
I am the way; whither will thou go? I am the truth; where will thou abide? I
am the life. A man caunot come to God by repentance, but by Christ; for no man
comes to the Father but by me, Ioh. 14.6. a man cannot come for a blessing
but by him, Ioh. 14.13. The Father gives nothing but by him, Ioh. 16.23. O then
let every soul (that looks for glory) embrace Christ as Zacheus did, Luc.
19.6. He came down hastily and received him joyfully; let him take that babe
in his arms with old Simeon, and say, Lord now let thy servant depart in
peace, etc. Luke 2.28, 29. Let him fall down and worship him, and with the
wise men of the East offer unto him gold, Aurum sidei, thies devotionis,
aromatapretatis; mentes bumiles, probos mores, animos digues Deo. Tom. 10. page
622.
incense, and myrrh: The gold of faith, the frankincense of devotion, the
myrrh of godliness; humble minds, good manners, souls worthy of God: says
Augustine. Let us embrace Christ, that he may embrace us; let us welcome
Christ into our hearts, that he may welcome us into his Fathers kingdom; let
us serve him, that he may preserve us, go to him that goes to the Father for
us; rejoice in Christ, that when we do well rejoices over us; weep for
grieving him, who for our doing ill has wept for us, and bled for us, and died
for us; let us glorify him with our hearts and tongues, that must glorify us
in our souls, and I pray God that he may be with us here, and we may be with
him for ever. I come to the second. Of the second effect of our election.


2. Vocation, justification, glorification, and a conformity to the image of
the Son of God. So Paul, Romans 8.29, 30. The first conformity, whom he
fore-knew, them he made like to the image of his Son, verse. 29. The image of
his Son is holiness, and holiness is a fruit of predestination. See Ephesians.
1.4. He has chosen us from the foundation of the world, that we should be holy
and without blame before him. The same are we taught by Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2. We
are elected according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, to
sanctification of the spirit, and unto obedience. From whence it follows, that
if a man be once appointed to holiness, he shall be sure of glory, because
God does never predestinate a man to the means, but he has predestined him
also to glory; wherefore comfort your selves, you that thirst after holiness,
as the Heart after the rivers of water; for whatsoever your troubles be, your
end is glory. So David, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the upright man, etc. Behold the
just man, for the end of that man is peace. If a man can find that engraven in
his heart, which was written upon the Priests miter, Exodus 28.36. Holiness to
the Lord. He may be sure of glory and happiness with the Lord. Three
Conclusions.
From all of these I infer, that no man can be partaker of life that is not
called, justisied, sanctified; for so the place affords it. Secondly, that all
our hope of glory depends upon Gods eternal election, which he made of us in
Christ. Thirdly, that all the means whereby we can have this glory made sure
to our souls are, by obeying when God calls, by our justification by faith in
Christ, by true holiness, whereby we are made like to the image of his Son:
But I come to the last fruit.

The third effect of election are good works. Of the third effect of our
election.
So Paul, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them: by these must we
study to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. from whence follows
another, that is, certainty of our salvation; for good works are fruits of
election, and by these must we make election sure. That all that do good
works are certainly elected, and shall certainly be saved: for none can do a
good work in respect of the ground, and form, and end, but he that has true
and justifying faith; Romans 14.23.
for, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: The best sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination, Prove. 15.8. Though a man could prophecy, and work miracles, and
cast out Devils, and have not true faith, the Lord will say unto him, Depart
from me, Matthew. 7.23. See Isai. 66.3. He that kills a bullock is as if he
slew a man; he that sacrifices, as if he cut off a dogs neck; he that
offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns incense,
as if he blessed an I doll. Only he can do good works, that is in Christ
by faith, and he that is in Christ by faith, is sure of salvation, though he
have no extraordinary revelation: a damnable presumption, says the Rhemists
in their Annotat. on Romans 8. verse. 16. The Spirit witnesses with ours that we
are the sons of God. And in 1 Cor. 9.27. They say it is a faithless
persuasion, it is the faith of Devils, not of the Apostles. So the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. chap. 9. But alas, alas, these be but paper-bullets, we are
defended against them with a wall of brass. First, 2 Pet. 1.10. We must
study to make it sure, therefore it may be made sure. Secondly, Paul, Romans
8.38. I am persuaded, which was not by revelation, but upon Christ's death,
verse. 32. Christ's justification, verse. 33. intercession, verse. 34. Ho^ non sit
nisi revelante spiritu, sed ea r^vela^^o nou est aliud quim insusio s^i^tualu
gratie, per quam caruis opera mortisicantur. Bernard. Epist. 108.
This is not done but by the spirit revealing it, but that revelation is not
any other thing than the infusion of spiritual grace, by which the deeds of
the flesh are mortified: says Bernard. It was an excellent saying of M.
Tyndall, as it is remembered by M. Fox; Christ is thine, and all his deeds are
thine, neither if thou be faithful, can thou be damned, except Christ be
damned with thee. We know we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren; 1 Ioh. 3.14. We know it by our hungring, Matthew. 5.6. By our
desiring to meet Christ with joy and comfort, 2 Timothy 4.8. And seeing we know
it so w^ll, no Popish squibs can beat us off it. I come to make some use of it.

Are good works fruits of election, be in Heaven rewarded for them, for there
is nothing that God would have done, but there is a reward to the doer of it:
if he bid run, it is that men may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. If to fight, there is a
crown, 2 Timothy 4.8. If to labor, there is a penny, Matthew. 20.7, 8. If
obedience, Thou shall eat the good things of the land, Deuteronomy. 28.2. If he
command to be righteous, then blessings shall be upon thy head, Prove. 10.6.
Excellently Augustine; True honor shall be denied to none deserving, Verus
^^nor nulli digno negabitur, prae^^ium pietatis crit i^se Deus, qui pietatem
dedit. Aug. Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30.
the reward of godliness is God himself who gave godliness. I am thy buckler
and thy reward, Genesis 15.1. From whence we all may have a wonderful
encouragement to bestow our time in doing of good works. It remains that I
now descend from the explication of this term to the pith of Paul's argument,
which is comprised in this conclusion.

Men once elect can never be finally cast off. Ioh. 10. 4. Upon the sealing of
Gods covenant. Unto these I may add the authority of Augustine; Si quispiam
eleclorum pereat, tum fallitur Deus, sed nemo little perit quia non fallitur
Deus. Aug. de corrept. and gratia, cap. 7.
If any of the elect should perish, then God is deceived; but none of them
perishes, because God is not deceived. Herum si quispiam peroat vitto bumano
vincitur Deus, sed nemo eorum perit, quia xulla re vi^citur Deus.
If any of these should perish, God is then overcome by humane vice; but none
of them perishes, because God is overcome by nothing. And against the Romanist
I oppose their own Espencaeus on 2 Timothy page 51. citing that of Augustine, of
catechizing the simple, chap. 11. out of that Jerusalem there was not any that
perished. And Lombard, Non potest utrumque esse, etc. Dist^^ct. lib. 1. did.
40.
Both these cannot be true, that any should be predestinate, and not saved.
And Aquinas, Part. 1. quaest. 23. Art. 3.
One predestinate may die (in respect of himself) in a mortal sin, yet not
in supposition, or in a compounded sense. And again, Quaest. 24. Art 3.
They that are written in the book of life can never be blotted out.

The Use is: The most just man falls seven times, and rises again, Prove.
24.16. The dearest of Gods servants may sin, as Peter did, and as David, and
yet be pardoned and received to mercy again. Yet observe a difference
between to sin, and to make or commit a sin. They sin that deflect never
so little from the strictness of the Law, whether it be of ignorance,
infirmity, or malice, they do do and commit sin, who sin purposely,
although they have not performed the work. As Christ said to Judas, knowing
what was in his heart, what thou do, do quickly: So that to d^e a sin,
is, in ones mind to purpose or devise a sin; and of this is the Apostle to
be understood, 1 Ioh. 3.8, 9. Every one that does sin is of the Devil, and
he that is borne of God sins not. So the conclusion stands good, that
though the elect may sin, yet they cannot finally be cast off. You may be
tolerably well armed against Popish objections, if you remember that there is a
twofold election. 1. To the undergoing of a certain office, as of Saul to a
Kingdom, of Judas to an Apostleship, Ioh. 6.70. Have not I chosen you, and one
of you is a Devil? 2. To eternal life; as Luke 10.20. Your names are written
in heaven: In this Gods people are to rejoice.

Secondly, that many seem to have faith, which indeed have not, and therefore
make shipwreck of a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. Of such Ezechiel; If the
righteous man fall away from his righteousness, Chap. 18.24. which places are
alleged by Bellarmine, De justifi. lib. 3. cap. 12.
to prove the falling from grace. And thus S. Luke himself speaks, Luke 8.18.
From him that has not, that which it seems he has, Perdiderunt fidem quam
viderentur potius babuisse quam habu sse.
shall be taken away. They lost their faith which they seemed rather to have,
than to have indeed; says Espencaeus on 1 Timothy 1.19.

Thirdly, that hypocrites and unbeleevers may for a while be counted amongst
the branches of Christ's own planting, though they be not such. Every plant
which my Father has not planted, etc. Matthew. 15.13. They are branches,
secundum praesentem justitiam, according to the present righteousness, non
secundum praescientiam, not according to foreknowledge, as Ambrose
distinguishes of them.

Fourthly, Faith in Scriptures is sometimes used for the sound doctrine of
godliness. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1.
Sometimes for the gift of miracles. If I had faith, etc. 1 Cor. 13.10.

Fifthly, the faith of the best of the elect may decay and be shaken, be like
fire under the ashes, like the soul in the time of a swounding, like the Moon
under a cloud: Sed electorum fides aut non deficit, aut si deficiat, reparatur
antequam v^ta finiatur. De Corrept. and gratia, cap. 7.
But the faith of the elect, either fails not, or if it fails, it is
repaired before life be ended; says Augustine. I end all with that of Lombard,
Sinihil a charitate Dei nos separet, quid non solum melius, sed certius hoe
bono esse potest? Lib. 1. di^^. 17. Analysis.
If nothing can separate from the love of God, what can be not only better,
but more certain than this good? So I come to the third Argument.

Know ye not what the Scripture says of Elias, etc.] This Argument stands
upon a comparison of Israel in the days of Elias, with the present estate of
the Jews in Paul's time. The estate of the Jews in Elias his time, is
expressed in 1 Kin. 19.14. Elias complains, Lord they have dug down thine
altars, etc. To which the Lord answers, verse. 18. Yet have I left me seven
thousand in Israel, etc. The state of the Jews in Paul's time, is Romans 11.5.
Even so at this time is there a remnant. In the Argument I observe, 1. Whither
Paul goes for resolution, to wit, the Scripture. 2. The resolution, which
contains, 1. Elias his complaint, verse. 2, and 3. 2. Gods answer; But what
says the answer of God, verse. 4. 3. The application that Paul makes of it to
his present use; Even so at this time, verse. 5. I begin with the first: whither
Paul goes for resolution, that is, the Scripture.

The Scripture is able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith that is in
Christ Jesus, and is profitable, etc. 2 Timothy 3.15. That the man of God may be
absolve and perfect. Or as Solomon speaks, Prove. 2.9. The word will make us
understand righteousness, and judgment, and every good path: we must repair
to the Law and testimony, Isa. 8.20. and above that which is written we may not
presume, 1 Cor. 4.6. When one asked Christ what he might do to be saved, he
referres him only to the Scriptures, How read thou? and, What is written?
Luc. 10.26. So Abraham answered the rich Glutton, They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them, Luke 16.29. So the conclusion stands good. That
for resolution of doubts in things to be believed, we have recourse only to
the word of God: The Scripture alone is a sufficient Judge of controversies;
unto this, for satisfaction mark ye what Basil says to Eustatius a
Physician: Epist. 80.
Let the holy Scriptures be arbitrators between us, and whosoever hold opinion
consonant to the divine Oracles, let the truth be adjudged on their sides. Lib.
5.
And Optatus, disputing against Parmenian the Donatist, presses him thus; A
Christian cannot be judge between us, he is one party; a Pagan cannot, he
knows not the mysteries of Christianity; a Jew cannot, In iis quae aperte
positasunt in Scripturis inveniuntur illaomnia quae continent fidem moresque
vivendi, spemscilicet atque charitatem. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9
Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
he is an enemy to baptism: quaerendus e coelo judex, we must seek for a
judge from heaven. And yet to what end should we knock at heaven, when we
have one in the Gospel. If they will believe the authority of Austen it is
plain: In those things which are openly set down in Scriptures, are found all
those doctrines which contain faith and manners of living, to wit, hope and
charity. And the Emperor Constantine made this speech to the Bishops of the
Nicene Council, as Theodoret reports it; Laying aside all contentions, let us
out of the divinely inspired Scripture take the resolution of those things we
seek for. See Augustine against Maxim. Arian. Bishop, Book 3. Chap. 14. Nec
ego Nicenum, nec tu Arimense concilium, etc.

And therefore this serves to blame our adversaries of Rome for denying this
truth, The Papists confu^ed.
and making not Scripture, but the Church, and that Church the Pope to be
supreme Judge of all controversies: The causes of this I conceive to be two.
1. That they make themselves Judges in their own cause; for who sees not, that
if the Church be Judge, and rule, and themselves the Church, which way the
verdict will go; especially when they see the Pope with infallible judgment
mounted upon the Tribunal, and made Interpreter of all evidence that can be
brought in. When Scriptures, Fathers, Councels must all be expounded by his
judgment: for by the Church we mean her head, that is to say, Tom. 3. disput.
1. quaest. 1. punct. 1.
the Roman Bishop, says Gregory Valence. Yea, the whole authority of the
Church universal abides in him, says Aquinas. In brief, ^a. ^ae. quaest. 11.
Art. 2.
this is it that they would have, that no trial may pass, unless you be
resolved to stand to the word of themselves that are arraigned. 2. Because they
know and confess the most and greatest points of their religion, yea, welnigh
all wherein they dissent from us, have no foundation on the Scripture,
Orthodox. Explic. lib. 2.
but as Andradius speaks, would reele and stagger if tradition supported them
not. Therefore Brislow in his last Motive dealt surely and circumspectly for
his Romish faith, where teaching his Scholl^r how to deal with his adversary,
he bids him first get the proud heretic out of this castle of only
Scriptures, into the plain field of Traditions, Miracles, Councels, Fathers,
and then like Cowards they cannot stand. And it is most true, that put
Scripture to silence, set up the Pope as Judge, give him authority to make and
repeal Laws, use Traditions, approve Councels, expound Fathers and Councels,
make something of nothing, use his will for a reason, let us say as they do,
and then the Protestants must needs be convicted. In that one assertion of
Bristow I note; 1. That the most of their religion hangs only up on Tradition.
2. It is but vain to allege Scripture, for they grant that it cannot be
proved but by Tradition, and therefore Saunders was surely in some Irish fit,
when he cried out so vehemently, we have most plain places of Scripture for
all points of our faith. I should here defend the perfection of Scripture
without Tradition, but I rather draw a word of use for you, and so proceed, viz.

The second Use is, this is that lamp to our feet, etc. Psalm. 119.105. If we
want wisdom, that is your wisdom and understanding, Deuteronomy. 4.6. If you be not
resolved of the truth, this will resolve you, for it is the word of truth,
Ephesians. 1.13. If you doubt of life, they will restore it, for it is the word of
life, Acts 5.20. If you doubt of your reconciliation, this will seal it, for
it is the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. If thou be not as yet
regenerate, this will work it, 1 Pet. 1.23. this is the field where the
Merchant may find treasure, Matthew. 13.44. O then let this Book be always
about us, as Alexander kept Homers Iliads, pro viatico rei militaris, for his
fellow and companion in all wars; Let us not spare to be ambitious of that
commendation which Eusebius gives of S. Origin, Histor. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 2.
that he could repeat all the Scriptures at his fingers end, let us follow the
advice of Macrina, Basil. Epist. 74.
foster-mother to S. Basil. who would have Parents to bring up their sons
after the example of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. Let us not spend more time in
reading the writings of men, than in perusing the Tables of God, nor spend that
time in reading of Plays and unprofitable Pamphlets, which we might spend in
reading the Scriptures, which would make us wise unto salvation, nor plod more
upon the Laws of men than of God, but devour this Book as the Angel
commanded John, Apoc. 10.9. feed upon this roll, as the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.3.
Be careful to perform in deed, as much as God gave Joshua in charge, Josh.
1.8, etc. And in regard we have all these blessings by the Scripture, let us
ever bless God for giving us such a glorious light, and desire of God, never
to take away this mercy from us. And so I come to the request that Elias makes
unto God against Israel.

He makes request unto God against Israel. Exposition.
] There is, says P. Martyr, a double expostulation of men with God. In Romans
1. When they lament in Gods hearing, the sin and impiety of the people, and
signifies how highly they are grieved when the people start away from God. 2.
When men carried with too much zeal do, as it were, charge God of negligence
in his own cause, and seem to be offended that God suffers the wicked so far
to prevail against his Church. The one was surely in the Prophet, and it is
well if not the other; and again, he makes request not out of hatred, as
desiring of God their everlasting ruin, for surely he was acquainted with
Samuels rule, 1 Samuel 12.23. But out of the nature of the Prophets, says Soto,
In Romans 11.
who many times by the phrase of praying against, do prophecy what shall come
against a people, as Ierem. 18.21, 22, 23. Deliver up their children, and let
them drop away by the sword, forgive not their iniquity, put not out their
sin, but deal with them in anger. And yet is it not unlawful to pray
against a malignant Church, O^imus in malis malit am, d^^igi mus natural and
ercaturam. odim^s qued se^ it homo, amam^s quod fecit Deus, f^cit Deus bominem
bomo p^ccalum August in Psalm 139 Medi^us d^ligit aeg^otum, ^orbum odio hob^t.
Aug. de Te^ pore, Sermon 148.
that God would restrain their wrath and fury, as doubtless Elias did here
against Ahab and Iezabel. So that we observe the rule of Augustine; we hate
malice in evil men, we love nature and the creature; we hate that which man
made, we love that which God made; God makes man, man sin. And again, A
Physician loves the patient, hates his disease. Thus the words being plain,
the first thing I observe is this:

The mutual conference between the Prophet and his God: one complains, the
other answers: Whence observe that There is a familiarity between God and his
children. Phil. 3.20. therefore he could not choose but be familiar with God,
and how this familiarity grows, the Prophet tells, Micah 6.8. Do justly, love
mercy, humble thy self, this is to walk with God. So did Enoch before the
flood, Genesis 5. he walked with God, verse. 22. So did Elias, he talked familiarly
with God, the Lord questioning and Elijah answering. what do thou here
Elijah? and he answered, I have been very zealous for the Lord, etc. 1 King.
19.13, 14. So was Abraham familiar with God, Genesis 18.11, 23. to the end. So
Moses sometimes tarried with God forty days and forty nights together, Exodus
24.28. Sometimes the Lord talked with him face to face, Exodus 33.11. And this
is signified by many phrases in Scripture, as that he will come into a man and
sup with him, Apoc. 3.20. That we are made near unto God, Ephesians. 2.13. That we
are the habitation of God by the spirit, verse. 22. That we are the temples of
God, 1 Cor. 6.19. Sometimes that we are his friends, Ioh. 15.14. Sometimes his
brethren; sometimes that Christ and we are all one; For he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified are all of one, therefore he is not ashamed to
call them brethren, Heb. 2.11. And there is such a league and familiarity,
that the Godly have a kind of command over God, as one friend of another.
Sometimes it appears in staying his judgments, as Genes. 19.22. H^ste thee
away, etc. So God to Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wex hot, Exodus
32.10. So when God purposed to destroy Israel, Moses stood in the gap, Psalm.
106.23. Sometimes to procure blessings. Eusebius. Hist. Eccle^. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Eusebius reports, that when the Romans warred with the Germans and Sarmatians,
being undone for want of water, the Emperor was informed, that there were some
in the Army, which were a Christian Legion, that could command any thing they
needed, who being moved to give their assistance for the relief of the Army,
fell down upon their knees and prayed, upon which presently followed a
terrible th^nder that destroyed the enemy, and plentiful rain, whereby the
Army was releeved; in memory whereof they were honored with the name of
Fulm^nea Legio, i. The thundering Legion. And not only Christians, but even old
Heathens have had a familiarity with their Gods, as Plut rch reports in the
life of Numa, that Numa was always with the Goddess Aegeria, though amongst
the Phrygians At, amongst the Bithynians Herodo^us, amongst the Areadians
Endi^ion, have familiarly parlied with their Gods. So was Hyacinthus and
Admetus with Apollo, Sopho^les with Aesculapius, Hesiodus, Pindarus, and
Hipp^litus, who as often as he passed the sea, the Oracle would utter this
Heroicke, Dulceiterum caput Hippoliti, etc.

If you desire to know how we may come to this familiarity. See Micah 6.8.
where there are set down three ways to attain it. 1. Deaing justly. 2.
Loving mercy. 3. Humility. And Isidore, He that will always be with God,
ought to pray often, to read often. Qui v^^t s^mper esse cu^ Di^, debe^
srequenter ^^are, frequenter le^^re Isict. de Sun. mo B^no, lib. 3. cap 8. Use
of comfort.
The which may teach us to admire the happy estate of Gods children, even then
when in the hardest exigents, in the height and rage of Fortunes malice, they
seem to sit as widows without comfort, mourning; as orphans without hope,
lamenting; as the rejectany off-scoure and impurest metal they seem to be
washed and swept away without regard; for even then they hold a sweet parley,
and pleasant conference with God; their hearts are fixed upon their Maker,
their love is upon Christ their head, and Christ he is in heaven, and therefore
they can fear no drowning. O happy you that are godly, when men oppress you,
you may make your complaint unto God, when they wrong you, you may open your
minds unto God; whatsoever you endure; you may ease your hearts, by telling
your grief unto God; whatsoever you ask, you may have it of God; and here I
might honor the godly above the wicked: The worldling has familiarity with
Mammon, the other with God; the wanton with his Dalilah, the other with his
God; the Drunkard with Bacchus, and his Priests and Knights, the other with his
God; thou art more familiar with men, he with God; thou have more countenance
from men, he from God. So I proceed to a second conclusion. Elias stands up
against Ahab and Iezabel in behalf of Israel: from whence the proposition is.

Prophets and good men must stand in the gap to defend the people of God from
persecution. So did Moses for Israel; God had destroyed, had not Moses stood in
the gap, Psalm. 106.23. And not only against persecutions of men, but even
against God himself. As Ezekiel. 22.30. I sought for a man that might stand in
the gap. So did Phinchas, Numb. 25.11. Phinehas the son of Eleazar has
turned mine anger away from the children of Israel. So did Abigail stand in the
gap to turn away destruction from the house of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.34. As the
Lord lives, except thou had hasted and met me, there had not been left unto
Nabal by the morning light, any that pisseth against the wall. And they that
hinder God himself from hurting, can easily hinder man from destroying, now
God cannot destroy when his servants stand against him, as Genesis 19.22. and
Exodus 32.10. Let me alone: nay he will not, Genes. 18. and most plainly,
Ierem. 5.1. Plutarch reports that at the sacking of Cities, those houses which
were built near to any Temple of the Gods were never touched, when all the rest
were ruinated and burned. Such are the Prophets and good men, even temples of
God, 1 Cor. 6. which procure immunitie and freedom from all dangers in the day
of trouble, which may bring us in love with good men, and make us labor to get
them amongst us, that we may say with Micah, Judge. 17.13. Now know I that the
Lord will do me good, etc. But I will not dwell on this, but come to the
weapons which they use, viz. complaints, requests, and tears; from whence I
observe this conclusion.

Prayers and complaints unto God are the Churches best weapons against enemies.
Elias that was skillful in the Christian war, makes choice of this. See when
Israel warred with Amalek, in Exodus 17.11. While Moses held up his hands Israel
prevailed, but when he let his hands go down then Amalek prevailed. You
shall find in 1 Chronicles. 5.20. when some of Israel warred with the Hagarims the
sons of Ishmael, that in the midst of the battle they cried unto God, and
he heard them, and gave their enemies over into their hands. This was it that
Solomon desired of God after the building of the Temple, When thy people shall
go out to bettell, and shall pray unto the Lord toward the house that I have
built, hear thou in heaven their prayers, and judge their cause, 1 Kin. 8.44,
45. O admirabilem p^arum precum ^^m, quibus coe^^stiacedant, ^ostes (...) m^^us
illa, quae victoriae suae ^^ophaea in ipsis coe^^ or bibu^ sigit.
O the admirable power of godly prayers, to which heavenly things give place,
that hand terrifieth the enemies, which fasteneth the tokens of its victory in
the celestial orbs; says Bucholcerus. S. Augustine giving the reason why
David put off Saul's armor when he went to fight with the Philistim. My (...).
ratio^^ (...), sed spiritua^^a. (...) st. (...) 31.
By a mystical reason signisi^ the Churches weapons not to be carnal but
spiritual. He was (...) non ^^rro, sed side and votis.
armed not with iron, but with faith and prayers; says Bernard. Pl^tarch in
the life of Pyrrhus, says of Gyneas a Thess^^ian Orator, that he overcame moc
by words and sp^e^hes, than Pyrrhus by the sword; so in this ease. And
therefore Paul describing the Christian armor, having mentioned the girdle of
verity, the brestplate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the helmet of
salvation, the sword of the spirit; in the last place says, that we must pray
always with all manner of prayers and supplications, etc. Ephesians. 6.18. So that
we must use for our weapons, prayers and tears, wherewith the Christians in
the Emperor Antoninus his Army procured victory over the Quades, as Dion in
the life of Antoninus. And with which Ambrose opposed Valentinian, In Theod
Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 12.
when he would have excluded him out of his Church. It was well said of
Gregory Nyssen of prayer, Optimus d^ mientrum cus^^s, cert^ssi anavigan^^
msal^s, t^tissi^^um viatoribus scutum.
that it is, The sleepers best keeper, the S^ylers surest safety, the
Travelers safest shield. Surely one prayer is more powerful to procure a
victory than ten swords; wherefore when we begin to fight for the Church, let
us take the same weapon as David did in Psalm. 3. Lord how many are mine
enemies, how many are they that rise against me, etc. through the whole Psalm.

Which shows, David said to Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.47. that salvation is of the
Lord, Psalm. 3.8. that the horse is but vain, Psalm. 33.17. That so we may give
all the honor of our victories, and the glory of our deliverance only unto
God.

2. viz. prayers, and tears, and complaints unto our God. We must pray that
our King and Queen may be nursing fathers, etc. Isai. 49.23. not like Ahab and
Iezabel to devour the people of God. If you fear that a barbarous nation
should possess our Land, pray against it; if you fear that we may live
miserably in our Land, you have tears, and sighs, and groans, and
complaints, and prayers, pour out these to withstand, and when this people
prays, then Lord hear thou in Heaven, and judge their cause: And so I come
to the complaint it self.

VERSE. 3. Lord they have killed thy Prophets,
WHerein I note first, to whom it is made; to the Lord: not Elohim, nor Adonai,
nor lah. but I^hovah, a name of four letters, and (...), unspeakable, as
Hierome speaks in an Epistle to Marcella, not only for reverence of the
Deity, Lib. de Trinitate.
as Tertullian, but also because it can be affirmed of none but God. The word
signifies the eternal, simple, perfect being of God, the Creator, Author,
Preserver of all things, which were, are, or shall be. And one that is most
true and faithful in his promises. Of the first the Apostle speaks, Apo^.
1.4. Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Of the second, Romans
11.36. Of him, and by him, and through him, etc. Of the third, Exodus 6.2, 3. I
appeared unto them by the name of Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not
known; he was known by his name Almighty, in creating the world, and
destroying it by water, but not by Jehovah, because he had not yet performed
the promise of bringing his people out of Egypt. All of these are noted in
Isa. 43. I am the Lord, there is the first, at verse. 11. Secondly, None can
deliver out of my hand, there is the second, at verse. 13. Thirdly, I will do
it and none shall let it, ibid. verse. 13. there is the last. From these do
arise three conclusions.

1. That he alone is God and none other, he only is Jehovah, as Deuteronomy. 4.35.
Unto thee it was showed, that thou might know that the Lord is God, and that
there is none but he alone.

2. That God alone rules, commands, and governes all things, gives life and
being unto all things.

3. There is not a word gone out of his mouth, that shall not most certainly
come to pass.

The Use of the first is, Lib. de Here Is. cap. 46.
the other of evil; as Augustine taxes them; which the Marcionites first
learned out of Plato his first Book of Laws, Stromat. lib. 5.
as both Clemens Alexandrinus, and Danaeus upon Augustine show.

The Use of the second is a wonderful comfort to the hearts of Gods servants;
friend, and who can be against us? Romans 8.31. We may say with David, Psalm.
56.4. I have put my trust in God, and will not fear what flesh can do against
me: And most excellently in Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my light and salvation,
whom should I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom should I be
afraid?

The Use of the third: That if God be true,

They have killed, The branches of E^^as complaint.
etc.] The branches of the complaint are three. 1. That they had slain his
servants the Prophets. 2. They had dug down his Altars. 3. They sought his
life. I begin with the first. The Prophets were men of special use, place,
service, near unto God, the guides and teachers of the people, and the fury
of Ahab and Iezabel were directly bent against them.

In time of trouble and persecution, the wicked persecute none so much, as the
best and nearest unto God. This Christ himself foretold the Jews; I shall
send unto you Prophets, Wisemen, and Scribes, but you will kill them, and
crucify them, and scourge them, and persecute them from City to City, Matt.
23.34. When the Church endured persecution under Herod, who was also called
Agrippa, nephew unto Herod the Great, he bent himself against the brother of
John, and killed him with the sword, and when he saw that this pleased the
Jews, he proceeded against Peter also, Acts 12.2, 3. that the holy men of God
may take up that complaint of Hypemnestra in the Poet, when she was cast into
prison, because she would not slay her husband, as her other sisters had done.

Clausa domo teneor, Ovid. Epist.
gravibusque coercita vinclis,
Est mihi supplicii causa fuisse pium.
Sometimes they are vexed by seeing the ungodly deeds of the wicked, Carda pie
viventium perditu suu morrbies cr^ciant. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap.
51. Male vivens ctsi non faciat consentientem, tamen cr^ciai sentientem.
Ars^lm. in 2 Timothy 3.
as Augnstine, They do by their naughty manners vex the souls of the godly.
And the Sodomites vexed the soul of Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. And, The wicked although
he cannot make him consent unto, yet vexes him seeing and perceiving his
wickedness; as Anselmus. But always they bend their bows against the best.
If Herod behead but one, it shall be John: if Ahab put but one in prison, it
shall be Micah: if Jeroboam banish but one, it shall be Amos: there is nothing
that stopped the mouths of the Jews, but the delivering up of Jesus: wicked
Barabas shall escape, but Christ shall not, as the King of Aram did with
Israel, 1 King. 22.31. See above in Matthew. 4.1. If there be a Moses like to
deliver Israel, he must be banished, Exodus 2.15. If a Nehemiah, then
Sanballat, Tobias, the Arabians will fight against him, Nehem. 4.7. If
Zerubbabel, etc.

The Use is: To teach us, that if ever we begin to be good, we look for
trouble, Paul breathed nothing but threatenings, studied nothing but to suck
the blood of the Disciples, practiced nothing but cruelty, aimed at nothing
but the ruin of all the Churches; we read of no enemy that opposed him: but
when he was once wrapped up in a heavenly vision, baptized into the name of
Christ, and preached in the Synagogues, then did the Devil raise arms against
him, and suborne desperate Jews to murder him, Acts 9.24. It fares with good
men, as it does with the silly bird that is taken in the snare, so long as she
is still, she feels no hurt, suspects no danger; but when she prepares to
flee away, then she feels her self entangled, etc.

Again observe, that when they mean to beat all profession of God to the
ground, and to bring all the people to worship Baal, they lay sore to the
Prophets, and in the first place dispatch them, from whence it follows,

That if the Prophets were once made out of the way, the people would quickly
fall from God. them when they fall from God to idolatry, if they refuse to
hear the Prophets when they have them? In 2 Chronicles. 24.18, 19. they left the
house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served Idols in groves; yet God
sent Prophets to bring them again to the Lord, but they would not hear. The
Prophets are such as Elisha called Elias, 2 King. 2.12. My father, my father,
the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen of the same. Father, to signify the
love and good will of Prophets to the people; and the chariots and horsemen,
that is by a metaphor, the power and strength of Israel, says Iunius; the
Prophets they are the Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9. He is now called a Prophet, that was
in old time called a Seer; and if the Seers were once out of the way, into what
error would not the blind multitude suddenly fall; and the point will be
clear, if we consider the Prophets duty, which if undone, the people must
needs fall. First, he reproves them for sin, as Moses did Aaron and the people
for making the golden Calfe, and had there been no Prophet to reprove, they
would have gone on in their idolatry, Exodus 32.21. Secondly, to denounce
judgment upon Idolaters, to keep the people from that sin. So Elias, for
idolatry erected by Ahab, proclaims a famire and want of rain for three
years and six months, 1 King. 17.1. Thirdly, they be messengers to acquaint
the people with the will of God, as Iethro wished Moses in another case;
Admonish them of the ordinances and laws, and show them the way wherein they
must walk, and the work they must do, Exodus 18.20. Now if the Prophets be
taken away which should admonish, if the Prophets be made away which must
threaten sinners, if there be no Prophets to lead them, or speak to the people
from God, how should they choose but fall to every sin against God? And
therefore when wicked men would mislead the people into a wrong path, they take
a ready course to put out their eyes, and take away the Seers which are the
Prophets. Therefore it is that they contend especially with the Prophets, that
they may all lament with Jeremy, Woe is me that I am a contentious man that
strive with the whole world, Ierem. 15.10.

The Use is: Bernard said; Veritas illa quae non sine stupore auditur, non sine
timore praedicatur. Be^n. De Coena Domini, Sermon. 2.
That truth which is not heard without asto nishment, is not preached without
fear. Or as Vives; Non audent dicere quae tenentor scne, pericul^su^. est
docere quod bonesium est disce^e. De causis artic. corrupt. lib. 1.
They dare not speak what they are bound to know, it is dangerous to teach
that which is honest to learn. O love them that teach you, that be eyes to
guide you, that be Seers to go before, that stand in danger of their own
lives to save yours, pray that God may still open their mouths, that they may
speak the truth boldly, that they may be preserved from evil men, 2 Thessalonians.
3.1. pray that the swords of the wicked may never be stained and embrued with
Prophets blood, but that they may be preferved by God, and you may be taught
by them, that they may preach, and you may hear, and both may live in the
fear, and die in the favor of God. And so I come to the second part of his
complaint.

They have dug down thine Altars,] The second part of the Prophets
complaint.
Not the Altars of the high places, for they are commended who destroyed them,
as Josiah, 2 King. 23.12. nor were they those altars which Jeroboam set up for
his golden calves, these were not the Lords Altars; nor the Altars in the
Temple at Jerusalem, for they were not in the dominion of Israel, against whom
Elias complains: But Peter Martyr thinks they were Altars erected by Abraham,
as Genesis 12.7. and Isaac, Genesis 26.25. and Jacob, Genesis 33.20. though it is likely
these continued not so long. Paraeus thinks it to be a figurative speech,
understanding by Altars, the true worship of God, Haimo is of opinion, that
they were Altars built by the godly of the ten Tribes, because they could not
go to Jerusalem. I do best approve the judgment of Osiander, that they were
Altars built or erected by the command and direction of God, as by Samuel and
Elias, who had Gods extraordinary direction for erecting and building of
Altars. From whence I do observe.

When bloody men go about to overthrow Gods worship, Doct. Wicked men
overthrow the means of Gods service.
they do not only make havocke of the men, but take away all means and
helps that others might have to serve him. They killed the Prophets before,
and now the Altars must down.

Carrion Book 2. Chron. reporting the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes,
says, that when he would bring all the people from God to worship the Idol of
Jupiter Olympius, he first slew all that would not forsake the Law of Moses;
yet this would not serve, but he caused all the books of Moses to be burnt,
that so they might have no means to worship God. So Julian drawing the people
from Christ, not only slew them, but forbade them the schools, and took away
all means that the Christians had of knowing Christ. When Gebal, Ammon, and
Amalek conspired against the Church, they hold a council how they may destroy
them, Psalm. 83.3. they take counsel and consult; and what do they determine?
1. To cut them off from being a nation, verse. 4. 2. Let us take the house of
God for our own possession, verse. 12. and Psalm. 74.9. They say in their
hearts, let us make havocke of them, and then burn up all the houses of God in
the Land.

And if God suffer the wicked to prevail thus far, what hope may his
children have? surely they have an Altar in heaven whereon to offer spiritual
sacrifice unto God, even Christ who is called the Altar under which the souls
of the Martyrs lie, Apoc. 6.9. And there is no other Altar from whence God will
receive a Sacrifice but from Christ, says Augustine. Contra Faust. Manich.
lib. 20. cap. 18.
From whence it follows by way of corollarie, That though wicked men do what
in them lies to hinder Gods worship, yet still in Christ they can please God;
The wicked dispute against Gods truth with the swords


Again observe, That wicked men when they cannot evict Gods children by
arguments, fall upon them with the sword, as Alexander did Gordius his knot.
Thus they disputed with Elias; thus the Scribes and Pharisees with Christ, when
they could not evict him, then they would stone him, as when he had proved
himself to be God, they took up stones, Ioh. 10.30, 31. and at last crucified
him. So Heathens always disputed against Christians with fire and sword: as
when they would disprove the resurrection, they kept them from burial, they
tore them in pieces by beasts, burnt them to ashes, cast them into Rhodanus, as
Eusebius. Lib. 5. cap. 10.
And thus do those soldiers that fight under the banner of Antichrist at this
day, when they cannot defend their rotten religion by argument, then sword, and
blood, and fire, and powder must make it good.

Dumque ego pugnando superem, Ovid. Metam. lib. 13.
tu vince loquendo.

They are not content to hear us dispute, they will sight it out. But this by
the way. I come to the third part of the complaint.

I only am left.] No, The third part of the Prophets complaint.
Elias not alone. Obadiah has hid an hundred in a cave, 1 King. 18.4. and are
there not seven thousand that have not bowed the knee to Baal, how art thou
alone? Yet he is alone in regard that in all the ten Tribes, there is none that
outwardly professes God, but he a lone. Observat. Christ's Church son ctimes
searcely visible.
Whence note: That Gods Church may sometimes be so small, that there is scarce
one professor to be seen: In a sloore there may be much chafe and little
wheat, in a rock many stones and few jewels, Satan may have a kingdom, and
Christ but a little flock, Luke 12.32. It is like Bethlem in Judah, a little
one, Micah 5.2. Like Noah's flood, ebbing and flowing; like Noah's Dove, going
and coming; like the Moon waining, as well as growing; and sometimes so
eclipsed, that the Sun of righteousness seems utterly hid. It was once
contained in the family of Seth, they only are sons of God, Genesis 6.2. once
in a narrow fold, the Arc; after Abraham's time in Canaan, and yet in Canaan
more goats than good sheep: for, Though Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.27. Divide the whole world into three parts with
Ptolomie, or into four with some later writers, or with some Geographers into
six, and you shall not find one of six that profess the true God. The true
professors are driven into a narrow compass of the North-west, and in that
company take out Atheists, Papists, Neutrals, Worldlings, Hypocrites, the
remainder will be very small, a man may almost say of them, as Iuvenal,
Satyr. 13.
Rari quippe boni, numero vix sunt totidem, quot Thebarum portae, etc.

The use is: Use. Lib. 2. cap. 16.
To censure the Papist for making multitude a note of the true Church. So
Theod. brings in Constantius the Emperor disputing with Tiberius Bishop of
Rome. De notis Ecclesiae, cap. 7. Noli numerare sed appende, noli numerare
turbae hominum incedentes vias laetas, etc. Pauci per angusta^^ viam incidunt.
Aug. in Psalm. 39.
The whole world is of this opinion, and who art thou. So Costerus in his
Enchiridion, and Bellarmine argue quite against the doctrine of S. Augustine;
Do not number, but ponder, do not number the multitudes of men, walking in
joyful ways, etc. Few walk by the strait and narrow way. Quite against
Chrysostom; A Church consists not in the multitude of number, Non in numeri
multitudine, sed in virtutis probitate consistit Ecclesia. Chrysostom. Ad pop.
Antiech. Homil. 40.
but in the goodness of virtue. Elias was one: But where was this note in the
time of the ten persecutions? yea quite contrary to David's complaint, Psalm.
12.1. Help, Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from
among the children of men. I should here show, 1. That there was a Church
though many corruptions were in it. 2. The comfort that we may have, though we
live in evil times, that as Elias appeared glorious, so we. But I pass to the
next point.

They seek my life also.] He would do them good, they would hurt him, he
would save their lives, they would destroy his; this is the reward that
Prophets have at the hands of wicked men, The more a man seeks to save them,
the more bitter they are against him. Jeremy is sent to the men of Anathoth,
the man rises early and cries in the city, Chap. 11.7. And what is his
reward? Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, cut him out of the Land
of the living, that his name be no more in remembrance, verse. 19. Prophecy no
more lest thou die, verse. 21. Thus did Ahab with Micaiah, Herod with John,
Jeroboam with Amos; Hic pietatis honos, This the reward of piety. The more we
cast holy things before dogs, and pearls before swine, the more we are rent
and torn of them. It was a true saying of Lactantius, Veritas loquendi grande
praesagit malum. Lactant. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Truth does presage great evil to the speaker. And a true saying of Augustine,
Amantimpii veritatem lucentem, oderunt redarguentem. Aug. Confess. lib. 10.
cap. 23.
The wicked love the truth shining, hate it reproving. And a true saying of
Hierome against lovinian, Amara est veritas, and quisquis eam praedicat,
amaritudine satiabitur. Hier. contralovin. lib. 2.
The truth is bitter, and whosoever preaches it shall be filled with
bitterness. This is the misery of Prophets, they cannot speak the truth to the
wicked, but they question of their lives. Well then, shall we look back when
we have put our hand to the plough, and spare to speak the truth? God forbid.

Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito. For what are they that trouble you,
Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 34.
but Nubeculae cito transiturae, Clouds soon passing away: as Athanasius said
of Julian, they must answer God and you for the hurt they do you: Carrion.
Chron. lib. 5.
as John Husse said of those that put him to death, After an hundred years ye
shall answer God and me. And therefore we must comfort our selves with that
which Fulgentius said of Lazarus; Quid si sine domo and non sine Domino, sine
vest si non sine fide, sine cibo and non sine Christo? O pedes seliciter
vincti, quisolventur non a Fabre, sed a Damino. Cypr. Epist. 77.
What if without an house and not without a master, without a garment if not
without faith, without meat and not without Christ? And with that of Cyprian to
the Martyrs, O feet happily bound, which shall be loosened not by a Smith, but
by their Lord and Master. And therefore they must be warned of this that enter
into this high calling, and you must be taught to pray for their preservation,
2 Thessalonians. 3.1. And so I come from Elias his complaint to Gods answer.

VERSE. 4.
IT is Gods reply to Elias his request, wherein observe, 1. A short preface,
what says the answer of God. 2. The answer it self, I have reserved, etc.
Before I come to the answer which is the substance. In the Preface I observe
this conclusion. That when the servants of God cry and complain unto him in
the bitterness of their spirits, the Lord does always answer them; when this
Elias strove with Baals Prophets, see how he cries; Hear me, O Lord, hear
me, and let this people know that thou art the Lord God; and presently the
sire fell, and consumed the burnt offering, 1 King. 18.37, 38. When Israel had
sinned, and God threatened, that his wrath should wex hot against them; Then
Moses complained, and cried unto the Lord, and said, Why does thy wrath wex
hat, why should the Agyptians say, he has brought them out maliciously to
slay them; turn therefore from thy fierce wrath, and change thy mind from
this evil toward thy people: then the Lord changed his mind from the evil
which he threatened, Exodus 32.14. So when they murmured, and God threatened, and
Moses cried, and the Lord answered; I have forgiven them according to thy
request, Numb. 14.20. There is a most pregnant example, 1 Samuel 7.6, 9. When
Israel was oppressed by the Philistims; It is said that they gathered together
in Mizpeh, and drew water, and powered it out before the Lord, and fasted, ver.
6. The Chaldee says, they drew water out of their hearts, and after this
Samuel cried, and then the Lord answered, verse. 9. and this God has promised
to strangers and widows. If thou vox and trouble such, and they cry unto me,
I will surely hear their cry, Exodus 22.23. I need add no more, if you take
with you that of David, 2 Samuel 22.7. The pangs of death compassed me, the
floods of ungodliness made me afraid, the sorrows of the grave compassed me
about, the snares of death took hold of me: But in tribulation I did call
upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, and he did hear me out of his Temple,
my cry did enter into his ears. And this is a rare privilege, which none have
but his servants; The righteous cry, and he hears them, Psalm. 34.17. as for
the ungodly it is not so with them. God hears not sinners, Ioh. 9.31. God
hears not the enemies of his servants; They looked about, but there was none
to save them, even unto the Lord, but he answered them not, 2 Samuel 22.42. God
will not hear contemners of his Word and Prophets; Though they cry unto me, I
will not answer them, Ierem. 11.11. I may conclude with that of John 9.31. If
any man be a worshipper of God, and do his will, him hears he. But if they
pray, and he answers not, then it is either because he will increase their
faith, and make them pray again, as with the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. or
because they ask amiss, Iam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, etc. or because
they ask not such things as are most fit for God to give, I dignesert Deas, ut
quis a se exiguum petat. Monaslic. Coosl. tut. cap 2. Hoc minus esse qaum quodd
ce^et Regen dare. Seaec. de Brue si. lib. 2. cap. 17.
he would not have his servants to beg small matters. It was an excellent
speech of S. Basil, God takes it ill, that any one should ask of him a small
trifle, I find in Seneca, that when the Cynicke begged of Antigonus a penny,
his answer was; This to be less than become^ a King to give. Lastly, God many
times is more gracious in denying, than in granting; He gives that often being
angry, Dous saese dat watie, quod negat pro itius. Aug. Epist. 21. Explets
full concupis. entia. sed grav ter casligata impatien. tia.
which he denies being favorable. As the Israelites in Numb. 11.33. Their lust
was fulfilled, but their impatiencie grievously punished. So God gives them a
King, but punished them for desiring him, 1 Samuel 8. If then we will have God to
answer us, let us first see, that we ask the best things, that may honor God
most: as in Solomon, 1 King. Orandum ut non tribuatur quod non petitter. De
Quadrag^ss. Sern. 4.
3.5.9. 2. We must pray that it be not given, which is not well asked for. Or
thus with Bernard, If a man that prays be good, and the thing desired good,
then the Lord will answer: if thy prayer be not either fearful, one depth
calls on another, therefore fear not because of thy misery. 2. Rash, and
therefore Solomon bids not to be rash to pray, Eccles. 5.1. 3. Lukewatme, quae
in ascensu languescit, whith faints in the asoent; like him that prayed in
the Poet: Labra movet met uens audiri. -- He moves his lips, as though he
were fearful to be heard. It must not be like the cold prayer of Augustine;
Damil i cesi tatem and centinentiam, sednc^ modo, timebam caim ne n c cito
auuires and san^res anr^ lo concupiscontlie, qun malebam explirs quan extig ut.
Aug. Confess. lib. 8 cap. 7.
Give me chastity and continency, but not yet; for I did fear lest you
should quickly hear me, and eure me of the disease of concupiscence, which I
would rather have fulfilled, than extinguished.

The Use is: 1. To teach the wicked not to wrong the children of God, lest they
cry and complain unto God of the wrongs they e^dure, and the Lord answer their
cries and groans. If they be wronged and complain, the Lord is bound to
hear, Exodus 22.23. And if the Lord take the matter into his own hand, He will
speak unto you in his wrath, and vex you in his sore displeasure; he will
break you in pieces like a potters ves sell, and bruize you to powder with a
rod of iron. The complaint of the servants of God that endure wrong, is like
Abels blood, that calls to heaven for vengeance, Genes. 4. And therefore if you
would not have the heavens to frown upon you, God to be angry with you, the
hammer of his wrath to beat you to ashes, take heed you make not his poor
servants to complain of you: take one place for all, Amos 5.11, 12. Forasmuch
as you tread upon my poor, and take from him the burdens of wheat, you shall
build houses and not dwell in them, plant vineyards, but not drink the wine of
them; for I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, you
afflict the just; you take rewards, you oppress the poor in the gate;
therefore says the Lord God of hosts, mourning shall be in all your streets,
and they shall say in the high ways, alas, alas, and they call all that can
mourn, to mourning. verse. 16.

The second Use is: Blessed are the people that be in such a case, yea happy
are all they that have the Lord for their God, Psalm. 144.15. So I come to the
answer it self.

I have reserved to myself seven thousand, etc.] Wherein I observe, 1. By whom
Gods children are kept from falling, l. 2. To whom they are known and
manifest, to myself. 3. From what they were preserved, they have not bowed
their knees to Baal. From the first I may collect this conclusion as Olerian
does, That it is the singular grace of God in corrupt times, to keep a people,
or some private persons from idolatry; A grace that he affords to none but the
elect, as Apoc. 13.8. All that dwell upon the earth shall worship the Beast,
whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world: and when the Prophet in Isa. 1. declaimes against the
apostasy and backsliding of Israel, that they were a sinful nation, a seed
of evil doers, children that were corrupters of others, that had forsaken the
the Lord, and gone backward, therefore he would lay her waste, Zion should be
like a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and as a
besieged city, yet a remnant whom he by his grace had kept from apostasy,
must be kept from the that desolation: For except God had reserved a remnant,
we had been as Sodom, or like to Gomorrha, Isa. 1.9. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.10.
and 12. He kept them as the apple of his eye, that they should not follow
strange Gods; signifying both how ready man was to follow strange Gods, if he
were not hindered by Gods especial grace; and also that they who are kept are
most dear to him, and are therefore resembled to the apple of his eye. And that
which makes this grace more manifest, is the greatness of the danger wherein
men live in corrupt times: for the greater danger we are in, the greater is the
grace to be preserved; now there is nothing more hard, than to live amongst
corrupt persons without corruption, as hard as to walk upon coals and not
burn his feet, or to carry fire in his bosom, and not singe his clothes,
says Solomon, Prove. 6.27. For admit (says Isidore) that a man were made of
iron, yet if he stand continually before a great fire, he is in danger to grow
supple and soft as wax: Nan ques velap as non p^tuit sup. ra^e, oss^dui^as
superat.
For whom pleasure could not overcome, continual diligence overcommeth. Though
a man greatly like not the sin, yet company with a sinner may work him to
it. And whom the vice could not overcome, Et quos vitium non potuit vincere,
familiaritas vinc. 1.
familiarity overcommeth. Me thinks they may fitly be compared to those two
rivers mentioned by Maginus, (...). egr. descript. ^^^span.
near to Carm^n^a in Spain, whereof the one drinks up all, the (...)
refuses all.

The Use is: Lot in Sodom; though we pass the sait sea, as that Sicilian
river Arethusa, yet we retain our sweet relish; though we be in Egypt, yet
we feed not upon the garlic of Egypt; though we be in the world, yet not
of the world; and let us pray that God would vouchsafe this grace to us still,
that though we live in corrupt places, we may be clean; though among profane
persons, yet we may be holy; though among Idolaters, yet we may follow our
God; though among such men as are polluted and unclean, yet we may be
sanctisied through out, that both our soul, and spirit, and body may be kept
blameless until the great day. Thus having showed by whom we are preserved, I
come to show to whom they are known.

To my self.] God only knows certainly who belong unto him, 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of God remains sure, etc. Where note that Gods children have two
marks to be known by, as Bellarmine, Of grace and free will, Book 2. chap.
13. The one inward, the knowledge of divine approbation, this mark is manifest
to God only; the other outward, the avoiding of sin, and the outward
performance of good works, and the hearing of the Word, as Ioh. 10.27. but the
point that is meant I comprize in these terms.

The Lord acknowledges none of them to he his who fall to idolatry. Apoc.
14. If any man worship the Beast, and receive his mark in his hand, or his
forehead, he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea, of the pure
wine which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in
fire and brimstone. And 1 Cor. 10.21. You cannot drink the cup of the Lord,
and of Devils; as if he should say, they that have any communion with Christ,
must have no communion with Devils; but they that sacrifice to Idols, sacrifice
to Devils, verse 20. Wherefore Christ has no portion in them, nor they in him;
and therefore the holy Ghost excludes such from Heaven, Apoc. 22.15. Without
(meaning the celestial Jerusalem) shall be dogs, enchanters, murderers,
liars, Idolaters. And the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.5. Neither unclean persons, nor
Idolaters have any part or inheritance in the kingdom of God.

Whence we must learn, A hold of foul spirits, a cage of unclean birds,
Apoc. 18.2. And this Babylon is Rome, as may be proved by all circumstances. I
urge against them the authority of Hierome, whom they urge so often against
us. Contra Iovin. lib. 2. cap. 19.
And Canisius the Jesuit cannot deny it in his common place of sin,
commending the City of Rome, that it was a powerful City, the head of the
world, praised by the voice of an Apostle, exhorts it to avoid that judgment,
which the Lord has threatened in the Apocalypse under the name of Babylon. And
that the Church of Rome is idolatrous, appears by this argument: Whosoever
gives to a creature divine worship, commits idolatry; but Papists do thus,
etc. in the worship of Saints, Relics, Images, Consecrate things, and the
Eucharist. The proposition is evident out of Scripture, which terms them
Idolaters, who give divine worship either to an Idol properly so called, as to
the image of a Calfe, Exodus 32.4. These be thy Gods, etc. They made a Calfe,
and sacrificed unto the Idol, Acts 7.41. or figuratively, as Mammon, ye
cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6.24. The assumption is proved both from
Scripture and their own mouths. The Scriptures teach, that to put trust in
any thing is divine worship, Ierem. 17.7. To invocate, as Psalm. 50.15. Thou
shall call on me, and glorify me. Sacrifice, Exodus 22.20. Vows, Isa. 19.21.
Bowing, Exodus 10.5. Now that Papists give some of these to Saints, some to
Relics, some to images, some to Things consecrate, some to the Eucharist,
themselves confess it; as in their Missall commanded to be published by Pius 5.
and the Breviarie corrected by the Trent Council, and authorized both by Pius
5. and Clement 8. may sufficiently appear. I instance only in one. They
commit idolatry, in giving divine worship to an image, for an image may be the
same with an idol. Stephanus in his treasury of the Latin tongue says, that
(...) signifies every image or picture representing a divine power which is to
be worshipped: and the Septuagint translate the Hebrew word (...). De Eccles
triumph. lib. 2. In Exodus Hom. 8. Quaest. in Exodus 10. quaest. 38.
But Bellarmine, out of an error of Origin, and of Theodoret, makes a
difference between an image and an idol.

Let us therefore express our thankful hearts to God, Josh. 24.2, 14. Your
fathers served strange Gods, but I have brought you out: now therefore fear
the Lord, and serve him in up rightnesse and truth, and put away the Gods which
your fathers served. If we be restored to light, let us walk as children of
the light, Ephesians. 5.5. We are now temples of God, let us have no fellowship
with Idols; we are restored by Christ, let us have no concord with Belial; we
are now settled in the truth, let us have no commerce with Infidels. So Paul, 1
Cor. 6.14.

And so I come to show how many were reserved. Seven thousand: by seven
thousand God would signify the whole multitude that belonged unto him, and it
is the putting of a certain number for an uncertain, as the virgins, five
wise, and five foolish, Matthew. 25. And the rich man had five brethren, Luke 16.
Origin is somewhat curious, and thinks, that God used the number of seven,
because seven was the day of rest, to signify that they who came to Christ by
faith, had rest in him: And Gorrhan descants upon it, and shows that the
number of seven signifies the universalitie, because all things were made in
seven days; and of a thousand, to show their perfection, because that is a
perfect and absolute number. The point is, God always has a Church, though
invisible to the eye of man.

The Use is, That there are not many of the invisible Church.
that many are not of the invisible Church, because most men affect no more
than a Pharisaicall purity, which appears by these four signs: 1. Because
the keeping of a good conscience is put out of countenance, the very seeking
after it is made a mock and a word of reproach: who is so much branded with the
odious name of Puritan, as they that most labor for the testimony of a good
conscience: most men think that preciseness of life is the only stain of a
Church and can more easily bear with an Atheistical and time-serving Papist,
than a Protestant, if there be in him one spark of zeal more than ordinary.
2. Because most men spend most of their time in a slender disputation, and so
they can say something, but do not much care for practicing any thing; such as
are taxt by Paul, 1 Timothy 6.4. puffed up and dote about questions and words. Do
you dispute, I will believe, I will practice. 3. By the general ignorance
partly affected, as Job 21.14. They say unto God, depart from us, etc. partly
of mere negation, where they want means of knowledge, where the childrens
bread is cast to dogs, where Church livings maintains hawks and dogs; and the
Levites portion is made a childs portion for the Gentleman's youngest son. Add
to these such men as can spare no time from wordly cares to hear the Word;
Lucrantur denarium, amittunt regnum. A^per hoc nil ^^ud est s^^entia ^^stra
qu^m culpa.
They gain a penny, and lose a kingdom. 4. Because men do not live as they
profess, And by this our knowledge is nothing else but a fault, says
Salvianus. Christ cries, Let your light shine before men, etc. Matthew. 5.16. We
so live, that men seeing our wicked lives, have cause to blaspheme God; will
Seythians, Moors, and Pagans do it? they read the Gospel, and live
immodestly; they hear the Apostles, and are given to drunkenness; they follow
Christ, and steal; in us Christ suffers a reproach, in us the Law suffers
a curse, the name of God is blasphemed, and religion ill spoken of for our
sakes, Romans 2.24. And I fear that this want of practice will enforce the Lord
to take away the Gospel, and give it to a people that will bring forth fruit.
Remember what befell the figtree, Matthew. 21.19. Remember what is written Heb.
6.7, 8. The earth which drinks up the rain that comes often upon it, and yet
bears nothing but thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned. So I come to show from what they were preserved.

They have not bowed their knees to Baal.] In 1 King. 19.18. there is in the
Hebrew somewhat more, as every mouth that has not kissed Baal; The bowing of
the knee is a token of subjection; therefore they that bowed, acknowledged
thereby their subjection to Baal, as Isa. 45.23. Every knee shall bow unto me;
and Phil. 2.10. At the name of Jesus, etc. Secondly, they kissed the Idol, so
they kissed the golden calves, They say one to another while they sacrifice a
man, let them kiss the calves, Hos. 13.2. Now the kiss is a sign of love,
and by it they signified that they loved Baal; right as the Papists at this day
do bow at the Cross, the picture of Marie, and the Apostles, creep to them
and kiss them. Now if you will know what this Baal was; The word in the Hebrew
signifies an Husband, or Lord; and here is meant a strange Lord or Husband, for
though Baal signify an Husband or Lord; and God be the Lord and Husband of
the Church, yet he will not be called by this name, as Hos. 2.16. Thou shall
call me Ishi, but not Baali: and it is worth the observing, that it is here
(...), in the feminine gender, understanding (...), the image, and they are
preserved from bowing to the image: but in 2 King. 17.16. it is (...), viz. to
an Idol: So that the Scriptures make no such difference between an idol and
an image; nor between the worshipping of an idol and an image, as the Papist
does. It was an idol, the idol of the Sydonians, and had his beginning thus.
Ninus the third Monarch of the Persians, was the son of Jupiter Belus, and
this Ninus, when his father Belus was dead, erected a Statua over him, and
there promised in writing, that if a man were guilty of never so great
offense, yet if he should repair to that image, the King would pardon him; and
when offenders found so great benefit by this Statua, they began to give to it
divine honor; and when afterward they erected other idols, they called them by
that name, as Bell, and Baal, and in the plural number Baalim; as Zancheus
shows in Precept. 2. cap 15. So that Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Herodotus
in Euterpe went amiss, when they said that idols were first invented by the
Egyptians; for you see, they came first from the Babylonians, and as for the
Romans, they worshipped their Gods for an hundred and seventie years, as both
Plutarch in Numa, and Augustine de Civitat. Dei, lib. 14. chap. 31. testify.
Thus the sense and meaning being plain; I descend to the note, viz.

To bow, bend, and kneel before an idol is flat idolatry. So when the
Israelites danced before the Calfe, Exodus 32.19. That which is by some alleged
touching Elisha, 2 Kings 5.18. that he approved the act of Naaman the Syrian
is not found; for first, that (Go in peace) was but the ordinary speech of
men, when they took leave one of another; so Zancheus: or rather thus: Naaman
does not desire indulgence, for that he meant to do afterward; but for that
he had done already; and so the Hebrew imports, and besides, at the
seventeenth verse he protests against all idolatrous service. In the third of
Daniel they were commanded to bow to the image: But the three children refused,
saying; that they would not serve those Gods, nor worship them, verse. 18. and
therefore God forbids it in the second Commandment. Sozomenus reports, Eccles.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 16.
that when some Christian Soldiers were circumvented by Julian, and by his
persuasion moved to offer to the Idol, they afterward in detestation of their
former act, would be avenged of their hands which offered, by the burning of
their whole bodies. I proceed to the application of this story unto Paul's time.

VERSE. 5.
THis Application contains four points: 1. The time of this preservation,
this time. 2. The number, a remnant. 3. The means efficient and ground of
preservation, the election. 4. The impulsive cause of election, grace, and not
works. I begin with the time, whence the observation is, That God does at all
times preserve a Church that embraces the true worship of God. In Isa. 6. ult.
There shall be desolation in the midst of the land, but yet in it shall be a
tenth, and shall return, etc. The Assyrians may make the people of Jerusalem
so few, that a child may tell them, Isa. 10.19. yet the remnant shall return,
even the remnant of Jacob, verse. 21. Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem
from generation to generation, in Joel 3.20. whereby is signified, that there
shall be some of Gods Church preserved to the end of the world; and if ever God
had wanted a Church, it would surely have been in the time of those ten bloody
persecutions begun under Nero, Onpbius Fast. lib. 2.
in the year of Christ 65. when Peter and Paul were beheaded; continued under
Domitian, when John was banished into Pathmos; under Trajane, when Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch; under Antoninus, when Polycarpe; under Severus, when
Leonides father of Origin was martyred; Quo tempore universus orbis sacro
martyrum cruore insectus erat. Neque unquam ma^ri triumpho vic. mus, quam ci^n
decimorum annorum strage non potuimus vinci.
until the the time of Dioclesian, When the world did swim with the blood of
Martyrs: Neither over came we ever with a greater triumph, than when we could
not be overcome with ten years slaughter. Or if ever the Church could have
been quite pulled down, it would have been in the days of Antiochus
Epiphanes, when he entered the temple at Jerusalem, burned the books of Moses
and the Prophets, proclaimed feasting and riot in the house of God, and put to
death young and old, Carrion. Chron. lib. 2.
that would not renounce the Law which Moses had delivered.

The reason: I will marry thee unto me for ever, Hos. 2.19. yea in
faithfulness; to show, that he will never part with his Spouse again, verse.
21.

From whence we may take just occasion to answer the objection of the Papists,
M. Luther. My reply, that the Apostles and the Primitive Church, for almost six
hundred years after Christ, taught as we do; and since those times has
Popery had her growth, and ever since some have maintained our religion till
this day. In matter of supremacy they taught as we do, till after Gregory's
times, which was six hundred years after Christ; yea, Gregory writing against
John Bishop of Constantinople: Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
If any calls himself universal Bishop, he is Antichrist. In matter of the
Sacrament, Th. Aquin. in 1 Cor. 11. Lect. 6.
for a thousand years together, the people received the wine as well as the
bread.

Secondly, to stay the malice of the Churches enemies, for they labor but in
vain; Romans 8.31. And when she has none to take her part, the Lord himself
will do it, Isa. 59.16.

Thirdly, a comfort for all good and religious hearts,

There is a remnant.] Those that belong unto God are not many, which must not
be simply understood; for in themselves they be many, even an hundred forty
and four thousand, Apoc. 7.4. among the Tribes of Israel, and among the
Gentiles a multitude which no man could number, of all nations and languages,
stood before the Lord, and before the Lamb, with long white robes and palms
in their hands, etc. verse. 9. But in comparison of those that shall be cast
away, they are but few, as Matthew. 20.16. the Apostle is peremptory, Though
Israel were as the sand, yet a remnant shall be saved; there is much chafe,
but little wheat; many stones, but few pearls. If a man should divide the
world into three parts with Ptolomie, or into four with some later writers, or
into six with our last Geographers, as Quade and others: Lib. 1. cap. 2.(...)
and you shall not find one of seven that professes Christ aright, they are
all confined into a narrow corner in the Northwest. And in this corner remove
Atheists, Heretics, Neutrals, Worldlings, Hypocrites, and the remainder will
be very small; and there ^e does Christ call it a little flock, Luke 12.32.
and the gate a strait gate, Luke 13.24. and the way a narrow way, Matthew. 7.14.
And if you should but look upon the lives and actions of most men, and see how
every man wastes his life in sin and vanity, you would join with me, and
say there are not many that can be saved; if you do but see how all care for
earth, and few for heaven; you will say that surely very few can be saved:
how every man lives and rots in one sin or other, dandles and hugs one
Dalilah or other, you will say that few can be saved: how every man spends his
days in liberty and looseness, both of life and conscience, how they gather
and build upon earth, and strive how they may continue their names here, never
dreaming of a building in heaven, of writing their names in heaven, you will
say, surely few can be saved.

What use may we make of this, but to see,

And so I proceed to that which is the foundation and ground of this
preservation, viz. the election of grace. S. Origin in his wandering
speculation, Origin. in Romans 11.
would here make a difference between those which are called by grace, viz.
those that believe in Christ, and those which are called by election of grace,
which beside faith in Christ have good works; as if true says could ever be
without them; and Chrysostom, that they were elected of grace, Chrysostom. ibid.
whom God foresaw would believe; and the Pelagians, of grace: that is, they who
have chosen grace, both of them ascribing too much to man's will. The meaning
is, that this remnant is reserved according to the election of grace, not
whereby men chose grace, but whereby God of his mere grace has chosen men,
says Iunius, Iun. in Romans 11.
and there is in them an Hebraisme, (...), according to the election of grace,
for according to free election, says Beza and Aquinas. Beza and Aquin.
In them I note, 1. The foundation and ground of salvation, and that is Gods
election. 2. The impulsive cause of Gods election; grace, not in us, but in
God, as Pareus and Soto. Pareus and Soto.
In the handling whereof, and here, note, 1. what it is.

Election is that part of Gods eternal predestination, Election described.
whereby he decreed before all eternity, that they whom he loved in Christ,
should be called to the adoption of sons, justified by faith, should do good
works, be glorified, and made conformable to the image of his Son; which
conformity is begun when we are justified, increased daily by good works;
finished in eternal glory: and all this that God may show upon them the riches
of his mercy, that it is of those whom he loved in Christ: it is manifest; for
whatsoever good we have of God, it is by and through Christ. 2. That they
should be called. So the Apostle, he has chosen us to be adopted through
Jesus Christ unto himself, Epes. 1.5. 3. That they should be justified. See
Romans 8.30. whom he called, them he justified. 4. To be glorified. Ibid. 5.
That they may be conformable to the image of his Son. See Paul, 8.29. Out of
all these arise three conclusions. 1. God did elect and chose because he
looked mercifully upon us in Christ. 2. Whomsoever he did chose unto glory, he
did predestinate to be holy. Homines non producit Deus ad gloriam per scelera
and flagitiae. Peter Martyr.
God brings not men to glory by villainies and wickedness, says Martyr, as
above. 3. All our hope of glory depends merely upon our election in Christ,
that we are, or shall be called, and justified, and in the end glorified. Romans
8.29. and 30. This election is the first and most ancient charter that Gods
children can show for their right to their Fathers inheritance; for though by
vocation we be manifested to be the sons of God, and by justification
ingrafted in Jesus Christ, and made partaker of all that is his, and by
glorification we be entered into our Fathers inheritance, yet is our election
the foundation of all these, as 2. Tim. 2.19. Our hope that we are of his
Church, for only the elect are the Church, and the univocall members of Christ
the head, though it be denied by Bellarmine in opposition to Wickliffe, Hus,
and Calvin. Bellarm. de Eccles. mil tant. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Our hope that our calling is true, and effectual; for they only are
effectually called, who are eternally elected, as may appear in the golden
chain, whom he did predestinate, them he called, Romans 8.30. Our hope that we
shall never be cast off, that we are preserved by Christ, and shall be raised
up at the last day. John 6.39. That we are kept by the power of God the father
through faith unto salvation prepared but showed in the last times. 1. Pet.
1.5. If all depend on this, let us learn whether we belong unto it or no,
that we may know whether we shall ever be glorified or no. There is no way to
know it but by the fruits, as 2. Pet. 1.10. The fruits are many, I will note
for your comfort some. 1. good works. 2. a conscionable care of the means of
salvation. 3. The spirit of prayer. 4. Abalienation from the world. 5. Hungring
and thirsting after righteousness. 6. Conflict between the flesh and spirit. 7.
New obedience. 8. Love to Gods ministers. 9. A longing for the fullness and
complement of Christ's coming as above: and so I come to the impulsive cause of
election, Grace. Amongst men they are said to have grace, Cui favet populus.
Who have the good will and love of the people. And so with God, they are said
to have grace, who have found grace with God. But here is a manifest
difference: men favor none, but in whom they find something whereby they may
be allured to love them: but God loved not because he saw us to be lovely, for
he loved us first, and by loving us, gave us that which pleases him. So that
the name of grace in Scripture is used two ways. 1. For the free love and
favor of God, wherewith he imbraceth the elect. Ephesians. 1.6. We are
predestinate to the praise of the glory of his grace. 2. Grace signifies the
gifts freely bestowed upon us by God, as Romans 11.29. The gifts, that is, the
graces of God, are without repentance, as Aquinas has well distinguished.
Quaest. 110. Artic. 1.
By understanding of which distinction it will appear with what difference the
Protestant and the Papist agree in this tenent, that man is justified by grace,
as the same schooleman. 2a 2ae. quaest. 113. Artic. 2.
But the Papist by grace understands the gifts of grace conferred upon them
that be justified, as the infused habit of faith, good works, etc. We by
grace in the act of justification understand, not the works of grace, which by
our faults and sins be made imperfect, and not able to satisfy Gods
justice, but the good will and the love which God shows unto us out of his
mere mercy. Lib. 2. distinct. 26.
Peter Lombard has distinguished grace into working and co-working, and fathers
it upon S. Augustine. Degratin and lib. Arbit. Cap. 7.
But these be the same; grace distinguished only in the effects: for grace
does first cure the will, and so it is working. 2. It caused the will being
cured to do rightly, and so it is co-working. In the first, man's will concurs
with grace passively and grace only works; but in the other, when man's will is
regenerate, it concurres both actively and passively; and so grace and man's
will be co-operant. I will not trouble you with those distinctions into
prevenient and subsequent, which are but one, and by the same grace he
prevents us that we may will, he follows us by making us to do, he prevents
us by moving us to good works, he follows us by giving perseverance: nor
with that of grace into grace freely given, and making acceptable. Grace freely
given is whereby one man works with another to salvation, and is called grace
freely given, because it is granted to man above the faculty of nature. Grace
making acceptable, by which man is joined to God, as Th. Aquinas: Th. Aquin.
quaest. 12. Art. 1.
That which is here meant by grace, is his free mercy and love: from whence
the point is.

That which moves God to save man, was nothing in man, but the free mercy of
God; and therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. He has chosen us in him.
He has chosen us according to the good pleasure of his will. He has
accepted us in his Beloved, to the praise of the glory of his grace, we have
the forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace. And Ephesians. 2.8. By
grace are ye saved, not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Ob. Yea, but
the Apostle says, Ye are saved by grace through faith, therefore not only
grace but our own faith is the cause of salvation. I answer: Faith is not here
considered as any work of ours, but as an instrument whereby we receive grace,
and he must needs receive grace, who will be saved by grace, and how is grace
received but by the hand of faith? therefore faith does not properly justify,
and save a man either in whole or in part, but receives righteousness and
salvation; and therefore is said to justify, because it receives salvation
and righteousness; and is the hand or instrument receiving, but not deserving
grace and salvation. And when we say that faith does justify, it is in respect
of the object apprehended, viz. Christ, who only effectually and properly does
justify by his grace. So that this faith is so far from being derogatorie
from grace, that no man can have grace that has not faith to receive it; and
the Apostle joins them fitly together, grace whereby we are saved, and faith
by which we apprehend it; that which saves effectually, and that which saves
instrumentally, that is, grace and faith. As the Israelites stung by serpents,
were healed by the brazen Serpent, so are we by Christ, Ioh. 3.14, 15. But
they did nothing but only look upon the brazen Serpent; so are we to do
nothing for our justification, but to fix the eye of faith upon Christ; whence
we see who must have the glory for our salvation, namely God. 2. How vile and
miserable we were before grace, that there was nothing in us why God should
love us, or look mercifully upon us, or purpose to save us.

Before I proceed, there is yet one general note to be collected hence. viz.
That though the sins of the Jews deserved a full rejection of them all, yet
God did not consider what they deserved, but what might stand with his own
goodness and mercy. So he did with rebellious Ephraim, I will not destroy
Ephraim, for I am God and not man, Hos. 11.9. which is a wonderful comfort to
us poor sinner; who many times deserve to be cast from Gods favor, to have
the means of salvation denied unto us, to be cast for ever from Gods
presence; yet God will not do it: for he considers what is sit to be done in
mercy, and therefore deferres his judgment from us, and so I come to the
conclusion of the application in the sixth verse.

VERSE. 6. And if it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else were grace
no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace: or else were work
no more work.
THis latter part of the verse is left out by Origin, Chrysostom, and the
Spanish Edition, as Soto has observed, and also by the vulgar Edition, but is
constantly read by Arias Montanus, Beza, Casaubonus, and in all the Greek
copies they contain in them a porisme or inserence upon the former
proposition; the argument is raised from the nature of immediate contraries,
whereof the Law is in Aristotle, that the putting off the one, necessarily
implies the removing of the other. The two contrary terms, grace and works,
which cannot both be causes of election. The Syllogism seems to be made
thus. Both grace and works cannot be the causes of election; but grace is;
that was concluded in the fifth verse. The reason of the sequel, because then
grace were no more grace, but works: But these be contraries. Grace gives a
reward not due, a work requires it as due. As Paul distinguishing between
faith and works. To him that works the wages is due, not by favor but by
debt, Romans 4.4. I will not insist upon the Apostles reciprocal argument, I
draw all to an Enthymeme; we are elected of grace, therefore not by works; and
because the antecedent was handled before, there remains now nothing but the
conclusion, which I comprehend in one bare proposition thus.

God in man's election had no respect unto man's good works. Bellarmine, who
strongly confirms the point in hand, De great. and lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. 10.
In Hebr. 5. Sect. 7.
contrary to the Rhemists Annotation, alleging for themselves, 2 Timothy 2.20,
and 21. In a great house there be vessels of honor, etc. If any man purge
himself: where say they by purging a man's self, he is made a vessel of
honor. Bellarmines answer is good; that Paul says not he is made, but he is,
that is, it is hence manifest that he is a vessel of honor; as if he should
say, there be two seals of man's being a vessel of honor; the first inward, that
knowledge of divine approbation, which is known only to God: the second
outward, the purging of our hearts, and the cleansing of our consciences, and
reforming of our ways, of which Peter, 2 Pet. 1.10. But for the further
clearing of it, I propose two or three reasons. 1. That which is the effect and
fruit cannot justly be called the cause impulsive of election: But all good
works are effects and fruits of election, as the Apostle witnesses, He has
chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy. Vt
essemus sancti, non quia suturi eramus, and secundium veluntatem suam non
nostram, quae bona esse non potest, nisi ipse subveniat (...) bona.
That we might be holy, not because we were about to be holy, and according to
his will not ours, which cannot be good, unless he makes it good, says
Augustine. And writing against Julian the Pelagian, Nullum Dominus elegit
dignum, sed eligen. do efficit dignu^. Lib. 5. cap. 3.
The Lord chose none worthy, but by electing man made him worthy. 2. Our
election depends not upon him that wills, Romans 9.16. but of God that shows
mercy. Vbi nune opera, ubi merita praeterita velfutura, liberi arbitrii
viribus impleta. Aug. in huncloc. Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Where are works now, where are merits past or to come, filled with the powers
of free will, says Augustine. So that I may say of those who attribute
election and justification to their works, as he does to Valentine;
Glorianter quasi non acceperint qui opera jactitant, in seipsis non in Domino
gloriantur. Epist 46.
They glory as if they received not, who boast of their works, they glory in
themselves, not in the Lord. And his conclusion against them shall be mine,
Liberantur per gratian. and dicuntur vosa non meritorum, sed misericardiae.
Lib. 5. de natura and gratia, cap 1.
They are freed by grace, and are called not vessels of merits, but of mercy.
Unto these I add a fourth reason, if you read the ninth to the Romans, where
the Apostle sifts and searches out the impulsive cause of predestination, he
brings all to one of these four heads. 1. To the purpose or good pleasure of
God; that the purpose might remain, verse. 11. 2. To the will of God: He has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, verse. 18. 3. To his
power: Has not the potter power, etc. verse. 21. 4. To his mercy: It is not in
him that wills, but in God that shows mercy, verse. 16. But wheresoever he
does mention election, he never makes mention of works, unless to exclude
them, as P. Martyr speaks, as here he does; if of grace, then not of works.
Lastly, if works be the causes of election, then in necessity they are of
justification also, for that rule in Logic is constant; Whatsoever is the
cause of the cause, Quicq. id est causa causae, est causae causati.
is the cause of the thing caused. But good works are not the causes of
justification; for first, that which justifies is that which can answer the
extremity of Gods justice: But man's obedience cannot do it, being only a
begun conformity, as Chemnitius speaks. Exam. Trident. Council. Sess. 6.
To them that will do good, evil is present. Secondly, if justified by
works, then all boasting is not excluded, but all boasting is excluded; For
we are justified freely by grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 3.24. So that that which justifies a man, is the satisfaction and
obedience, the justice of Christ our Mediator proposed in the Word, apprehended
by faith, and by God imputed to all that believe: So that we dare stand before
God, if that Christ stand between God and our sins; that is our buckler
wherewith we are protected from judgment; by which we are emboldened to go
and appear at the Tribunal of God, and are there pronounced just. So that
though in respect of Christ it be satisfaction, merit, and righteousness, yet
in respect of us it is grace and mercy. I could muster great Iuries of
Scriptures and ancient Fathers to pass verdict on our side, but I need not,
only remember what Possidonius reports of Ambrose; Etsi non sic vixt ut pudeat
inter vos vivere, tomen non t^neo mors, sed quia Don inum habeo bonum. In vita
August. cap. 27.
Though I have not so lived, that I may be ashamed to live amongst you, Pateor
non sum dignus ego, nec propriu pessum meritis reguum abtinere culorum,
caeterum duplic^ jure illud b^inens Dominu^, hae reditate patris and merito
pessionu, attero pse contentus alter^^^ ihi dorat, exenjus do^o jure illud
vendans non cons. n^or. cap 12.
yet I fear not to die; not because I have lived well, but because I have a
good Lord. And I find in the life of Bernard, that seeming to be before Gods
Tribunal, and Satan opposing him, and when Satan had done, the good man seemed
thus to reply; I confess I am not worthy, neither can I by mine own deserts
obtain the kingdom of Heaven, but my Lord obtaining it by a do able right, by
his Fathers inheritance, and the merit of his passion, being content with one
himself, gives me the other, of whose gift challenging it by right, I am not
confounded. And therefore Bellarmine out of Bernard; Because of the
uncertaintie of our righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, Propter
incertitudinem propriae j^^tiae, and peric^lum in ^^is gl^ria, tutissius. ^^
est fid^i. am totam insole Dei misericordia, and ben^gnitate reponere. De
justif. lib. 5. Cap 4. and lib. 5. cap 7. propos. 3.
it is safest to put our whole trust in the sole mercy and goodness of God.

The Use is; to teach us first that we must not set up an Idol in our own
hearts, and thank our selves. Secondly, an infinite comfort, that our
happiness depends not upon our selves; for then we should even be driven to
despair, in regard of many sins and waverings; which would breed not only
doubt, but certainty that we should never be saved; but seeing it depends
upon God who is unchangeable, Yea and Amen, upon God who is the same for ever,
we may be sure that we shall not miss of glory, which he has laid up and
prepared for all that love him.

And so I descend from the consolation of the rejected Jews, which was the
first, to the confirmation of their rejection, which is the second maine point
in the whole Chapter.

VERSE. 7.
IN the confirmation I note: 1. The proposition to be confirmed. 2. The
testimonies and witnesses confirming it. The proposition is aggregate, and has
three branches. 1. Israel has not obtained what he sought. 2. The elect have
obtained what they sought, for there is a taking of the abstract for the
concrete. 3. All the reprobates in Israel are given over to hardness of heart.

The witnesses to confirm all these are David and Isay, that by the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed. The testimony of David is
in Psalm. 69.22. Let their table be made a snare, and a net, and a stumbling
block, let their eyes be darkened that they see not: which seems to be
spoken by way of imprecation, but is to be understood by way of prophecy. The
testimony of Isay is in Isa. 6.9. God has given them the spirit of slumber,
eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear till this
day. I begin with the first branch. viz.

Israel has not obtained:] Where note, 1. Who is meant by Israel, not the
whole number of the twelve Tribes, for then had Paul been one of them: for he
was of the seed of Abraham of the Tribe of Benjamine; nor must we understand
by Israel those that be called Israel, Romans 9.6. viz. the elect: for then the
second part of the proposition were false; viz. the elect have obtained: But by
Israel we must understand the outcasts of Israel. 2. Note what this Israel
sought; it appears, Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, went about to establish their own righteousness: and then the meaning
is, that they sought life by their own righteousness, and therefore obtained
not what they sought; but for the elect, who sought life by faith in Jesus
Christ, they found life: where I would have you first note in general the
division of Israel into two parts. Some elect, some not; some hardened, some
not; some obtain salvation, and some do not. That all men shall not be saved.

For though it may seem a charitable error in Origin, to think that all shall
be saved at last, and the Patrons of universal grace build upon that in 1 Timothy
2.4. God will that all men shall be saved: yet this must be meant either of
the kinds of all, not of all of every kind, as Anselmus. Some Jews, some
Gentiles; some noble, some ignoble; some rich, some poor; some old, some
young; some learned, some unlearned; or else of his outward will offering them
the word, to leave them without excuse, not of the will of his decree or good
pleasure. The Scripture is plain, Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be
able, Luke 13.24. Many are called, but few chosen, Matthew. 20.16. There be goats
as well as sheep, chafe as well as wheat, and bad fish that must be thrown
away: there be some to whom Christ will say, Depart from me, Matthew. 7.22. some
to whom Christ shall say, Go you cursed into hell, prepared, etc. Matthew.
25.41. there be many that shall be thrust out of doors, when Abraham shall be
received; there be many dogs, Apoc. 22.15. They have been without God, and now
they shall be without glory, and without the Kingdom. Vain therefore is the
presumption of many profane and wretched miscreants, who will needs live, and
die, and rot in sin, and yet think to be saved by the blood of Christ, and
say in their hearts, that although they do all these abominations, yet God
will be merciful unto them. But what is the Law against such in Deuteronomy. 29.19,
and 20. The Lord will not be merciful unto such a man, but all the curses
that are written in this book shall lie upon him, etc. Though now they say he
is merciful, he is merciful; yet when they begin to sink into the grave,
and to slide into hell, and feel the worm that dies not, and lie in that
fire that never goes out; then they will say, he is just also; and as the
thief said upon the cross, We are most justly here: But to come to the words.

Israel obtained not life, because he sought it in his own righteousness.
There arise two maine points: the one; No man can obtain eternal life by his
own inherent righteousness, but the righteousness whereby we are saved is
the Lord; not essentially, but effectually, as Osiander: as in Ier. 23.6.
speaking of Christ, This is the name whereby they shall call him the Lord our
righteousness: and in him have we righteousness, Isa. 45.24. it is the
imputed righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, whereby we obtain life,
as Romans 4.24. not our own, which is but like menstruous and polluted clothes,
Isa. 64.6. And therefore Paul praves that he may befound in Christ, not having
on his righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God through faith,
Phil. 3.9. For in this righteousness of Christ, there is 1. Purity of humane
nature, to answer for our corrupt nature. 2. Integrity and obedience of life,
answering for our disobedience and looseness of life. 3. Merit and passion
upon the cross answering for that curse, and torment which we deserved in hell.

Bellarmine of justification, Lib. 1. cap. 7.
demands how Christ's righteousness is ours? and how the righteousness of one
can save many thousands? nay is not ashamed to say, that it is never read
(neither in Scripture, nor in Father) that the righteousness of Christ is
imputed to us for righteousness, though in, Epist. to Romans chap. 4. we find it
twice, 1. at verse. 22. It was imputed to him for righteousness; and at verse.
24. This was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to him, but
also to us, to whom it shall be imputed; and if it be lawful for such a Novice
to say it, he is out in his reading: for Augustine in Psalm. 7. has it three or
four times. I am just in thy righteousness, not in mine, and by the
righteousness given me of thee I shall be righteous; and though Bellarmine
dislike the word of imputation in us, yet he allows it in himself, chap. 9.
out of Psalm. 32. and he allows it in Iustine Martyr in his dialogue with
Trypho Iudeus, in Origin in Epist. to Romans 4. in Hierom: in Commentary on Psalm.
32. in Augustine on the same Psalm, in Gregory on the second penitential
Psalm, Lib. 2. cap. 9.
as you may see in Bellarmine of justification, yea in the Trent Council Ses.
6. chap. 9. but dislikes it in Calvin: that which is good and equal in
Quintius, is evil and unequal in Naevius. 2. Christ's righteousness is not
the righteousness of a mere man, for then it could not save above one at most,
though never so perfect; but of him that is both God and man; and therefore is
of infinite merit and sufficiency to save all that believe.

The 2. point to be noted is, that they are here called Israel, who in the end
of the verse are called the rest, and here they that are said not to have
obtained, are in the end said to be hardeed: from whence the point is. Math.
7. and 8. Ask and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened; for he that asks receives, and he that seeks finds:
and yet Israel seeks him and cannot find him? I answer, that promise is made
to those that seek after a right manner, and for a right end: for in seeking
as we ought, are required two things. 1. The manner. 2. The end. 1. The manner,
that we seek in faith; for though he be never so far gone, yet faith will
fetch him: and in prayer; for if he be never so closely hid, yet prayer will
find him, as Gregory on the 6 penitential Psalm: and in humility; for if he
be never so high, yet humility will reach him; this is a wonder says
Augustine. 2. The end, Aug. de civitate de, lib. 14 cap. 13.
that Gods glory may appear, and not to establish our own righteousness: now
Israel failed in both. 1. In the manner; for they sought righteousness, but
not by faith, Romans 9.32. 2. In the end, for it was not to glorify God, but to
establish their own righteousness, as Romans 10.3. and therefore found him not:
from whence arises this conclusion.

If ever we will find God and life, we must seek them after a right manner
and for a right end. Non aliud tanqiam illum, non aliud praeteral^llum, non
aliud post illum. Adsratres in Eremo, se^m 2.
1. Him only; Not any other thing as it were him, not any other thing beside
him, not any other thing after him, as Bernard speaks. 2. In time and season,
For they that seek me early shall find me. Pro. 7.17. 3. Sincerely, for they
that seek him with all their heart shall find him. Deuteronomy. 4.29. 4. In the time
of grace, Whilst he may be found. Isa. 55.6. 5. In faithfulness without
Hypocrisy; for Hypocrites shall come with their sheep and oxen to seek the
Lord, but shall not find him; for he has withdrawn himself from them, Hos.
5.6. And besides the manner we must seek him for a rightend, viz. not our own
praise and glory, but Gods, and Christ for himself. In which point they
offend, who seek Christ because they gain by him, as they in John 6.26. You
seek me not because you saw the miracles, but because you eat of the loaves;
Vt vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum. Trect. 25. in I^hanem.
he so, he thus, That Jesus is scarcely sought for Jesus, says Augustine: and
therefore no marvel, if they that defer their repentance do seek and not
find; for they seek not early, if Hypocrites seek and not find, for they
seek not sincerely; if proud justiciaries seek and not find, for they seek
not in faith. But if a man seek him early, as Elkanah and his wife, 1 Samuel
1.19. if sincerely with all our heart and soul, as Josiah did, Adsiar (...)
Er^^no, sert. 2.
2 King. 23.25. then that of Bernard will be most true. It is more easy for
Heaven and earth to pass away, than that he that so seeks should not find,
Facdues est transire calum and terram, quam lit sic quaerens non inveniat, sic
petens, non acc^piat, sic pulsantium aperiatur. In Cant. 3.1.
that so asks should not receive, to him that so knocks should not be
opened; for this is his word, and though earth and heaven should pass, yet not
an Iota of my word should pass, Math 5.18. I conclude the point with that of
Bernard in Cant. 3.1. I sought him whom my foul loved, but found him not.
There be three causes that hinders a man from finding God. 1. When they seek
not in time, he is departed without doubt when he cannot be found, this early
is the acceptable time. 2. If negligently. 3. Because not as she ought, she
sought him in her bed; but he is risen, he is not here: Do you seek the
valiant one in a bed, Quaeris in licto fortem, in lectulo ma^nu^, in stabulo
glo^^ficatls? Aug Conf. lib. 4. chap. 12. Quaerite quod quaerit^, sed non ubi
quaeritu, luce intenebris, and vitam inregione mortis, non est illic.
him that is great in a little bed, him that is glorified in the stable? no no
says Augustine; Seek what you seek, but not where you seek, light in
darkness, and life in the region of death, it is not there. So I come to the
second part of the proposition, The election has obtained it.

But the election has obtained it,] It is a Metalepsis, the abstract for the
concrete, as if he should say, though such as seek for life in their own
righteousness cannot find it: yet they that seek it in faith cannot miss of
it, and who are these? all that were eternally elected; and he says that the
elect have obtained it already, to note, that it is as sure as if they were in
full possession. I will take the very purpose of the Apostle for my conclusion.

A man once elected shall certainly be saved. A point which I use to build
upon these four props against all the contrary winds of Popish opposition, as
above; and so I come to the third clause in the proposition: The rest have
been hardened.

And the rest have been hardened: I meet with it again in the next verse,
where I shall show you in what sense and how far God is said to harden and to
will sin, and yet be far from being author of it. In the mean time, see
the meaning of the word, and one doctrine. In the greek it is (...), which the
vulgar and Erasmus translate, they are blinded, of (...), which is as much as to
change into a stony hardness, and amongst Physicians is as much as to harden
with an overgrowne-thicke skin, as much as the brawne, or hardness of a man's
hands or feet by much labor. And in the Hebrew the word sometimes signifies to
harden that it cannot be bent; and notes, 1. a natural malice and hardness,
2. a contracted hardness, and under this understand both that hardness when of
soft a thing is made hard, and when of hard is made harder, as iron hard of it
self, yet softened with fire, and then put in cold water, is harder than
before. Sometimes it signifies to aggravate, as if the heart were then hindered
with some great weight, that it could not lift up it self to contemplate the
works of God, and embrace grace when it is offered. In Isay 6.10. It is
applied to the ears of men, when the hearing faculty is hindered by the
access of some vicious humor, either within or without it, that it can either
not at all, or hardly perceive any sound; what kind of hardness this is, (
viz. that it is not of the hands or fingers, but of the eyes, the ears, the
heart) will appear in the two next verses, out of Isay and David. So I come to
Doctrine.

Induration and hardness of man's heart is a fearful sign of reprobation;
for whereas in reprobation there be two acts; 1. Affirmative. 2. Negative. The
affirmative has two degrees; the one a just induration. 2. An ordaining to
punishment; and where there is the one, it is to be feared the other will
follow: and therefore you read not in Scripture that any people were hardened,
but surely destruction followed. In Josh. 11.20. when some of the Hivites that
inhabited Gibeon made peace with Israel, it came of the Lord to harden the
hearts of the rest, to the intent that they might be destroyed, and have no
mercy showed to them: So it is said of Sion King of Heshbon, Deuteronomy. 2.30. that
when he would not let Israel pass by him, The Lord hardened his spirit, and
made his heart obstinate, because he would deliver him up to be destroyed. So
it is said of Pharaoh in Exodus 7.4. He shall not hearken but his heart shall
be hardened, that I may lay mine hand upon Egypt. So that when God has a
purpose to proceed to judgment against wicked men, he lets them alone to work
ungodliness, to live in disobedience; to be hard-hearted and obstinate in
sinning; as in the sons of Eli; they obeyed not the voice of their father,
viz. God left them, and gave them not grace to hearken because he meant to slay
them, 1 Samuel 2.25. and all this is not meant of that hardness, which is
naturally even in the best; for God many times takes away that hardness, and
gives hearts of flesh, that may bleed and weep for sin, and turn to be
saved, as Ezech. 36.26. I will take away your stony heart, and give you an
heart of flesh: but it is principally meant of a contracted kind of hardness,
when men hearing the word whereby they should be converted, and judgments
whereat the heart should melt, as did the heart of Josiah, 2 King. 22.19. yet
notwithstanding make their faces impudent, and their hearts hard, and resolve
to march on in their sinful ways; this hardness is the very harbinger of
death, and the forerunner of everlasting destruction.

Which makes mine heart to tremble, Application.
and my bowels to yearne, and my soul to mourn in secret for many of our
people, whose hearts be like to anvils, the more they are beaten, the harder
they grow; who have both seen and heard the judgments of God, and tasted the
sweet mercies of God, yet have neither been affrighted from sin by
judgment, nor allured to holiness by mercy; surely all the signs and
symptoms of destruction are upon them: when man breaks the Sabbath, hears
the promises, Isa. 58.14. and Isa. 56.5. and casts it behind his back, the
threats and punishments, as the man stoned, Numb. 15. that he will kindle a
fire in their gates that shall never be quenched, Ierem. 17.27. and makes his
face hard against them, and goes on still in his wickedness, must needs be in
the state of reprobation, and has all the marks and tokens of a castaway upon
him. The contemner of the word, that hears the gracious promises, Prove. 3.2.
Luke 11.28. (...) are they, etc. Josh. 1.8. The judgment against them that
refuse to hear, Prove. 1.24. Because I (...) called, and you refused, etc.
Zach. 7.12, 13. The (...) made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they
should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit
by the ministry of the Prophets: therefore came great wrath from the Lord of
hosts; Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried and they would not
hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts. He that
hears this, and yet hardens his heart against it, and will neither mend for
mercy nor judgment, is in the estate of damnation, and has all the signs
and symptoms of a reprobate upon him; and therefore let us labor for soft and
tender hearts, that (if God threaten) may melt and tremble; if he promise
mercy, may rejoice and be glad; if he do us good, let us take the cup of
salvation, Psalm. 116.13. Let us pray God that we may weep, because we have
not wept; mourn, because we have not mourned, that our hearts may not be in
the hand of the Devil like hard clay, but in the hand of God like wax. And so
I come from the proposition to the confirmation, verse. 8.

VERSE. 8. According as it is written, God has given them the spirit of
slumber: eyes that they should not see, and cares that they should not hear
unto this day.
HEre is the confirmation of the rejection of the Jews, proved by two
testimonies, wherein I note; first, the Oracles whither he resorts for
determination of this point. In these words, as it is written; from whence the
conclusion is; That the written Word ought to be the Judge of all
controversies and doubts: It is able to make us wise unto salvation, through
the faith that is in Jesus Christ, and is profitable for doctrine, reproof,
correction, and instruction, as above on these words, What says the Scripture.
And so I come to the confirmation, if I may first clear a doubt.

Origin says, There is no place of Scripture where it can be found in the
written Word, which is as much as to say that Paul lied; indeed it is not to
the Word, but to the sense and meaning, both in Isa. 29.10. The Lord has
covered you with a spirit of slumber, and shut up your eyes; your Prophets and
your chief Seers has he covered, and their visions are as a book that is
sealed. Buxtorfius and Arias Montanus translate the Hebrew word thus, the
spirit of slumber. And it is again in Isa. 6.9. Make their ears heavy. The
Apostle adds of himself, (...), unto this day; that they might not think
that this prediction was already finished, but that the judgment was upon them
till this day; I will not insist upon the difference between the Septuagint,
(...), He has made them drunk. So they use the word in Isa. 19.14. and the
original which signifies, he has covered them. Nor is it material that the
Septuagint express it by the active, referring it to the people, that they
have shut their eyes: and so Luke cites it, Acts 28.27. they have winked with
their eyes that they should not see: and S. Paul referres it unto God, God has
given them, etc. For it is a good observation of Peter Martyr, That is said to
be done of God, Id dicitur fieri a Deo, quod sit Dei imperio.
which is done by Gods command. Nor will I insist upon the signification of
this word (...), translated slumber, or compunction, which some take from
(...), which is to move, or drive, and interpret it the spirit of perplexity,
or malign spirit, as Anselme. Some call it the spirit of envy, whereby they
were offended at the calling of the Gentiles, but this is but conjecturall; yet
appears no reason why the Hebrew word Tardemah should be rendered by (...),
signifying pricking, and compunction of heart: Therefore Beza and Tolet are of
opinion that it signifies slumber, or sleep, rather than compunction, yet
seeing that Chrysostom, Origin, and Theophylact, who best knew the
signification of the word, and the Scriptures also used the word in this sense,
Acts 2.27. They were pricked in their hearts, I think it had not been amiss,
if it had been rendered, the spirit of compunction. And yet I hold the sense
and meaning to be all one, and Osiander gives a reason; because they are
pricked and stirred, when they are called to the Gospel; but as men asleep are
loath to awake, my judgment is, that this spirit of slumber or compunction is
the same, which Paul in 1 Timothy 4.2. calls, (...), a conscience burned with an
hot iron, and that is all one with the spirit of giddiness, and answers fitly
to that in the seventh verse, (...). I shall more fully expound the words, when
I come to them in particular.

In the first proof I note: 1. The judgment. 2. The Author. 3. The
continuance. The judgment, the spirit of slumber: 1. General. 2. In two
particulars, the excaecation of the eyes, the other the obturation and stopping
of the ears. The author, he. God has given, etc. The continuance, to this
day: of these in order; and first of the author, he, he has given: Hardness
of heart is brought upon man by God; yet say I, not by God only; for there be
three efficient causes of man's induration; Man, the Devil, and God. 1. The
first cause of hardness of heart.
The wicked hardens of his own heart, so did Pharaoh, Exodus 7.13. Pharaoh
hardened his heart, and did not let Israel go. And Exodus 8.32. Pharaoh
hardened his heart at that time also; Therefore says Moses to Israel, Harden
your necks no more, Deuteronomy. 10.16. And 2 King. 17.14. The Lord bade them turn
from their evil ways, but they would not obey, but hardened their hearts and
necks, like to the necks of their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord
their God. And Ierem. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed;
consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, and have made their
faces harder than a stone; which phrase is frequent in the Prophet Jeremy, as
in Ier. 7.26. They hardened their necks, and did worse than their fathers. And
Ierem. 17.23. They made their necks stiff and would not hear: by which it
appears, that ungodly and wicked men are a cause of their own hardening, when
they either oppose the truth acknowledged, or persevere in sin against their
conscience, as may be seen in Cain, Pharaoh, Judas, and the Jews.

A second cause is the Devil, The second cause of hardness of heart.
helping forward the wicked and sinful purposes of man, plunging him every
day further than other into finne, and easting thick and foggie mists over his
eyes, as 2 Cor. 4.4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, in
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that the light of the
Gospel might not shine unto them: which God of this world is not the true and
everliving God, as Chrysostom, Augustine, and Ambrose expounded it, when they
dealt with the Manichees and Arrians; but the same which is called, the Prince
that rules in the air, the Prince of darkness, viz. the Devil, and these
two efficients of induration do both sin most grievously, man by his own
will, Satan by instigation; man's corruption is as the coal that sends forth
sparks, the Devil blows the coals and kindles the fire.

The third cause is God: for first, The third cause of hardnese of heart.
man's heart sends forth fire, Satan blows it, and then God strikes on the
anvill, and frames and disposes every thing to his own will. The first and
nearest cause is man's corruption, the Instigator and Tempter Satan, and God as
a just Judge. I will harden Pharaohs heart, says God, Exodus 4.21. The Lord
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.12. And the Prophet Isay 63.17.
questions thus with God, O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways,
and hardened our hearts from thy fear: So God is said to give men over to a
reprobate sense and reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. To blind, Isay 6.10. To
deceive, Ezekiel. 14.9. If that Prophet be deceived, then I the Lord have deceived
him; to put a lying spirit in the mouth of his Prophet, 1 King. 22.23. Behold
the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these Prophets. Now how
God does harden and blind is not agreed. Some say, that all those Scriptures,
He hardened Pharaohs heart, and he gave them over to a reprobate mind, etc.
are to be expounded, by the word of permitting, that God did suffer them to be
done, and not without show of Scripture, Psalm. 81.12. They would not hearken;
therefore I gave them up to the hardness of their heart, and let them walk in
their own counsels. And also from the speech of Barnabas and Paul, Acts
14.15, 16. when the people of Lystra would have sacrificed unto them, Why do
you these things? we be men as you are, who preach unto you the living God, who
made all things, and in times past suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own
lusts; and when it is said, that God gave them over to do such things as are
not meet; they understand it, that God suffered them to do such things as were
not convenient, and that God has no more to do in hardening man's heart, than
a man that stands upon the shore, and sees a ship to be drowned when he might
have helped it, which was the interpretation of Julian the Pelagian, August.
contra lu^^anum Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3.
as Augustine shows. But Augustine shows there, that God does it not by
patience alone, but by his patience, which implies an action: for if he would
not, for no reason would he have permitted it. So that he does not only
suffer it, but will it, for Gods permission is voluntary, and he suffers
willing, not unwilling; See Calvin. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 18. se^^. 2.
God permits nothing against his will, so that when God suffers sin to be done,
he also wills it to be done.

Some say, that they must be expounded by the word of substracting. That God is
no otherwise said to harden, or blind, but by withdrawing his grace, which
they that are blinded and hardened are unworthy of: As the ship-man withdrawing
his help, lets the ship be drowned, or a man that takes away the pillar that
sustained the house, then the house falls of it self; and there be two causes
why God uses to withdraw his grace and spirit: sometimes to punish the
unthankful that abuse his grace, sometimes that they might better acknowledge
the necessity of grace; that without it we can do nothing that is good, that
we may be more enflamed with a desire of it, and embrace it joyfully when we
feel it; and for these causes God sometimes denies his servants the powerful
working of his Spirit, and suffers them to fall into foul sins, and that not
only in justice to punish former ingratitude, but also in mercy and for their
good; both in the sight of our own weakness, and in seeing the necessity of
Gods grace, and in making us more careful not to abuse grace when we have it;
So that God does blind when he takes away his light; for take away light,
darkness follows; take away grace, hardness follows: and therefore Peter
Martyr says; That God is such a cause of sin, as is called in Philosophy,
the removing prohibiting cause, that takes away the help by which they should
be kept from induration; and though this be somewhat, yet it is not all: for
surely these sayings, God did harden, give over to a reprobate mind, lead into
temptation, and incline the hearts of men, do signify some action of God in
man.

Some come a little nearer and say, that God does blind and harden not by his
own, but by an outward act indirectly, that is, by proposing to the eyes and
ears such objects whereby they should be softened, and enlightened, and
reclaimed from sin; but yet it comes to pass by their own faults, that they
are thereby blinded, and hardened, and plunged further into sin: These
objects are, the preaching of the Word, Sacracraments, miracles, mercies,
judgments. These God gives to man for his good, and man turns them to his
own destruction. As for example, God proposed the Word to Pharaoh by Aaron,
miracles by Moses, by these his heart should have been softened, but by his
own fault, it became more hard; so were the Jews at the preaching of Isay:
And to this purpose says God in Ierem. 6.21. I will lay stumbling blocks
before this people, the fathers and the sons shall fall upon them, the
neighbor and the friend shall perish; Yet surely, though all this be true, it
is not all the truth; for in the story of Pharaoh I observe three things. 1.
The preaching of the Word by Aaron. 2. The working of miracles by Moses. 3. The
hid action of God in the heart of Pharaoh. And these three God did thus order;
that Aaron should speak the word, Moses should do miracles, but he would
reserve to himself the action of induration; I will harden the heart of
Pharaoh, Exodus 4.21. as if he should say, I will reserve that to my self: So
that besides the outward objects of the Word, and miracles proposed by Moses
and Aaron, there was an internal action of hardening wrought by God; not to
go still about the point, the conclusion is. God does blind, harden, and give
over to a reprobate mind, not only by suffering it, not only by withdrawing
his grace and helping hand, nor only by proposing of outward objects, against
which the wicked may stumble; but also by an inward and strange working in the
heart of man, and all these be acts of Gods just judgment, whereby he
punishes man's sin. So that hardness and excaecation in respect of it self
is sin, In respect of the consequents, the cause of sin, and it is in
respect of (...)God works, is difficult; from the blame God is free, from the
guilt he is also free: let man look to both these. But the punishment of sin
being an act of his justice, he acknowledges; and in the punishment note
three things. 1. The matter wherewith a man is punished. 2. The contrariety
between the party and the punishment. 3. The order of consequence; that where
such an offense went before, such an evil shall follow, to make the offender
feel the smart of it: In those punishments which be punishments only and not
sins, God is the Author of all things employed. In those which be sins as
well as punishments, God is only the Author of the order of consequence, and
of the contrariety between the punishments and the parties punished; as for
example: Pride is punished by envy; now envy is not of God. But there is a
contrariety between the soul of a proud man and it; which makes it bitter
and afflictive, and there is an order of consequence, that where such a sin
went before, there such a punishment should follow; This is of God: So that God
works in sin. 1. Positively, as it is a physical act. 2. Morally, as it is
a just punishment of sin. 3. Permissively, as it is a sin, not by giving
consent to the doing of it, but in not hindering it.

Yet in all this we do not say that God is the author of sin, Antid. in Romans
page 715.
as Stapleton accuses Calvin and Becanus, p. 6. who says, that the God of the
Calvinists is the author of sin, nor as Bellar mine (...) Beza. First, that
we say, God to be truly and properly the cause of those sins, which men
commit. De amissione gratiae et statu peccatt. Lib. 2. Cap 4.
Secondly, that we say God truly and properly to sin. Thirdly, God alone
truly to sin; whereas Calvin holds the quite contrary. Ins^^ut Lib. 1. Cap.
14. Sect. 16. and Lab. 2. Cap. 4. Sect. 2. Neminem indurat nis^ ^e^^o. Epist.
106. Non in^u^dendo malitiam, sed ^^b^r ^^endo gratiam. Aug. ad Sixtum Epist
105.
But we say that induration and excaecation be just judgments of God. He
hardens none but deservedly, says Augustine; and in Calvin's judgment there
be these parts to be considered. First, the withdrawing of his divine help;
Not by infusing malice, but by withdrawing grace. The punishment of precedent
sin, when God takes away those helps of grace which formerly they had, and
when man wants this help, of his own accord he rusheth into sin. Hence
Pharaos heart grew hard, because God would not give him grace to hearken to his
ministers Moses and Aaron: And the Gentiles having their cogitations darkened;
that is, God not enlightening them with his grace, they gave themselves over
unto wantonness, and to work all iniquity with greediness: Ephesians. 4.18.19. and
this denying of grace is no sin, because it does not confer grace.

Secondly, the delivering of man into the power of Satan, which is Gods just
judgment upon man for sin: as 1. King. 22.22. when he bade Satan deceive
the false Prophets. Thou shall entice him, and prevail, go forth and do so;
and in this no sin; for Satan being the executioner of Gods anger and
judgments, does so plunge those that are turned over to him into eternal
destruction, that he punishes their former sins by making them commit
greater than they did before: thus did God with the wicked people. Romans 1.24.
Because they regarded not to know God; therefore God gave them over, that
Satan might punish them by driving them into greater sins than ever they had
committed before.

Thirdly, divine permission, when God suffers Satan and wicked men to run
into sin, but without his furtherance, as Psalm. 81.12. My people would not
hearken, Israel would not obey; therefore I gave them over to the hardness of
their heart, and let them follow their own imaginations: and as he did here
with the Jews, so did he with the Gentiles. Act. 14.16. The God that made
heaven and earth in time past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own
ways: and in Zach. 8.16. I set all men every one against his brother; and yet
in this permission God is neither altogether unwilling that it should be done;
for it were impossible to be done, if God were wholly against it; neither is
he simply willing, because he does both hate sin and punish it, as Psalm.
5.5. So that if permission be referred to the act of sin, God hates it, wills
it not, but unwilling permits it, but if referred to the end (not which the
agent does intend, but which the divine wisdom deduceth from thence) then he
permits it willingly.

Fourthly, the determination of sin, when God will not suffer the wicked to
go on in sin so far as they desire, but sets them bounds that they cannot
go beyond; and as he did with the seas, Job 38.11. Hither shall thou go, as
he did with Satan in the tempting of Job, All that he has is in thy power,
but upon himself put not forth thy hand, Job 1.12. as he did with Pharaoh, he
suffered him to vex and persecute Israel: but when Pharaoh would have
maliciously brought them back again, and intended more exquisite cruelty for
them, then the Lord stayed him and stopped his passage, by bringing in the sea to
drown him and his host, Exodus 14. as he did with Saul when he would have
taken away David's life, the Lord set down how far he should proceed, to
chase him from place to place, but not to death: By all which it appears, that
we make not God to be an idle looker on, which suffers every creature to do
what they will: But when God gives men over to be blinded and hardened by
Satan, and suffers wicked men for a time to work mischief, yet sets bounds
and limitts to their rage and fury, and in the end wonderfully rescues his
servants from trouble: This surely is not to do nothing.

Fifthly, a reducing of the ends to the rule of justice. The bringing of some
good out of evil, for though Satan and wicked men propose their ends, the
wicked that he may serve his pleasures, the Devil that he may destroy; yet
such is the goodness of God, B^^um est mala esse vel ^ieri, alioqu^^ sum^^e
bonus non permitte^et ca ficri. Lo^ hard. lib. 1. distinct. 46.
that he will never suffer evil to be done, if it were not to bring good out
of it. It is good that evils be, or be done, otherwise the most good God would
not suffer them to be done; and such is the wisdom of God, that out of worst
things, he can chose the best ends; as for example, Joseph's brethen sold him
for envy; but God sent him to provide for his old father and his brethren, to
preserve their lives. Genesis 45.5. So in the death of Christ, Satan and the
Jews intended only his death; but God turned it to the salvation of all that
believe. As poison is in it self evil, but the skillful Physician by
tempering it cures the sick, and works good out of it; So does God with
sin. Shimei by cursing would show his hatred of David; but God would make
known the patience of David, which was good. Now these works, as they proceed
from the next cause (man and the Devth) be evil; they be evil trees, which
cannot bring forth good fruits: But as they proceed from the supreme cause, and
(as he brings good out of them) they are good. God and Satan will both have
Jerusalem destroyed: But Satan, that he might be avenged on them; God, that
he might punish their rebellion. Christ is delivered to death; the Jews they
do it only in malice; But God has another end, the redemption and salvation
of man, and therefore in Act. 4.28. Pilate and the Jews and Gentiles gathered
together to do whatsoever thy hand and Council had determined. S. Enchirid ad
Laurent. ca. 101.
Augustine shows how God and man may will the same thing, and God in willing
it does well, and yet man sins in willing it. The father of an ungratious
child is sick; Vt citius perveniat ad haeredita^em pa^ris. Vu^t Deus j^^s^e,
fill u^ i^ pie.
God will have him to die ^n his just judgment: the son, That he may sooner
come to his fathers inheritance: God wills it justly, the son wickedly.

Albeit God do order, Res mala non habet ^aulan essi cientem, sed desi ie
(...). De (...) ta^e Dei Lib 12. cap 7.
determinate and govern sins that be done, yet is he not properly the
efficient cause of sin. It was a good saying of Augustine, An evil thing
has no a cause efficient, but defficient, as the corruption of judgment and
the perverseness of will; and further I say, that though the Papist accuses us
for making God the author of sin, yet I will change my religion if I will not
show to any Romanist that will challenge me, that we of this Church teach no
otherwise than the Papists themselves have written, not only out of Occam,
Durand, and Bannes, but principally out of Thomas Aquinas, and Bellarmine
himself. In R^m 9. Dea ^ass. gratiae. lib. 2. Cap. 13.
By a figure he commands it, and incites men unto it, as a Huntsman sets the
dog upon the Hare, by letting go the slip. That God does not only permit the
wicked to do evil, nor only forsake the godly, that the wicked may do what
they will against them: But he oversees their wills, he rules their wills, he
governs their wills, nay he bows and bends them by working invisibly in them,
and not only inclines the will to one evil rather than to another, by
permitting them to be carried into one sin and not into another, but also
positively, he bends them by inclining them to one evil and turning them from
another, occasionally and morally as he speaks out of Thomas Aquinas. Let
them look well into these speeches and they shall find that we say no more
than they; and if they would expound ours as heartily as their own, there
would be small or no difference.

Briefly then we say first in general, That God is not the author of sin,
but the devil and man's corrupt will, and the contrary we defy as blasphemy.
Secondly in particular, we believe, that God wills nothing which is formerly
sin (but he fulfills his good wills by our evil wills, as P. Lombard) as
he wills that which is good, Lib 1. Distinct. 48.
but hates it rather; whence it follows, that he inspires it into no man, nor
creates any corruption in our wills which was not there before, but forbids it
absolutely, within us by the light of his spirit, as Romans 2.15. without, by the
commandment, Thou shall hear a word behind thee saying, this is the way
turn not out of it. Isay. 39.21. etc. The first entrance of sin into the
world, and the continuance of it in the world, was the voluntary action of man's
will, God infusing no evil into him; for God is not the cause why man is
worse: but that which God does about and concerning sin is contained in three
actions. First, as the universal cause of all things he sustaines mankind,
and upholds his being, yea the being and motion of all his actions good and
bad: So that no man could either move to any action, or have being himself, if
God sustained him not, as Act. 17.28. whence it follows, that the very
positive act, which the schoolmen call the subject of sin, and the material
part of sin whereto sin cleaves, is of God in the same sort that all other
actions of the creature are; and this proposition does Zanchius well
illustrate: A man rides upon a lame horse: in this action are two things,
Motion and Halting; the motion is of man, man makes him move, but his halting
is of himself: so in sin, the action or motion is of God, but the deformity,
of man himself.

Secondly, he withholds his grace, as John 12.39. Therefore they could not
believe, because Isay says, he has blinded, etc. as being bound to no man,
but leaves the wicked to themselves, whereupon it follows that their hearts
grow hard, and they cannot chose but sin. The manner how he hardneth, is not
by creating the sin, as Augustine, Not by infusing malice, but by withdrawing
grace, as he does grace in the elect; but by denying them the power of his
grace, which should mollify them, and by offering them sundry objects as the
Word and Gospel, which they convert into occasions of sin and ruin, and
whereby they stand exposed to Satan's temptations, and have neither power, nor
will to stay themselves.

Thirdly, he ordinates the sin, which is nothing else but the directing of
it in such manner as he pleases, that it proceed no further, nor otherwise
than his good pleasure wills; sometimes he restraines it, that it shall
reach no farther than he wills; sometimes he turns it to another end than
the person doing it thought of, he would Christ should suffer by the Jews, he
would not that the Jews should slay him, as Lombard: Lib. 1. Distinct. 4^.
sometimes he makes way for it to pass, that he may punish one sin with
another: and this is all that we say touching this point, wherein when we say
that God wills or works, and positively ordaines it, we mean it not of Gods
formal will, but of these three inferior actions, whereby he governes it. A
word of Use, and proceed.

First, Psalm. 104.29. Yet he suffers us to have a part of his general
providence over his creatures.

Secondly, Apolles, and Tertullus, and Gamaliel: But as little fruit is to be
seen here as any where else, and as small respect to a Minister, or his
message, as among any other people. Take heed, lest God strip you of this
grace, and after the seven years of plenty send seven of famine; after the
full ears send some to devour all that we have sown, and bring upon you
that famine in Amos 8.11, 12. The ground that has often had rain, and brings
forth no fruit (if God once restrain the rain and influence) is near to be
burned, Heb. 6.8. Therefore let the Word work upon you, and be like a hammer
that breaks your stony hearts, Ierem. 23.29. else will it work as hammers do
upon anvils, make them harder; for the word shall prosper, it cannot be
preached for nothing; if it softens not, then it hardens; if it reclaim not
from sin, then it drownes you in sin, if it bring you not to holiness, it
will leave you in sin excuselesse; if you profit not by it, yet when God
shall come, you shall know that there has been a Prophet amongst you: If God
punish one sin with another, let man take heed. See Romans 1.24. and 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11. If you will not come out of sin, God will let you fall into others,
that you shall never come out. So I come from the Author to the judgment it
self that is set down.

1. In general, the spirit of slumber. 2. In particular, and they be two. 1.
Eyes that they cannot see. 2. Ears that they cannot hear. To begin with the
general. Thomas Aquinas would have us read it compunction, and makes it to be
twofold. 1. Good, whereby man grieveth for sin. 2. Evil, whereby man grieves
at another man's good. But I will take the reading of Beza, that it is of
amazement, or slumber: and as Isa. 19.14. It is called The spirit oferror, that
is, an ill spirit that leads into error: So here, The spirit of slumber, that
is, an ill spirit that possesses their hearts with slumber and heaviness; and
it is such a heaviness and astonishment, which takes away all sense, as
Iunius. A lethargy, or such a heaviness as God cast upon Adam, Genesis 2. as
Paraeus. And this is the spirit wherewith the Jews are possessed at this day,
brought upon them by former sin. That God punishes one sin with another.
So did he with the Gentiles, Romans 1.24, 27. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because
they believed not the truth; therefore God gave them over, and sent them strong
delusions to beleevelies: David committed adultery and murder, and God
suffers one of his children to commit incest with another, one to murder
another, 2 Samuel 13. Lot is drunken, and then commits incest, a just
punishment upon him, Genesis 19.30. I need no more but that in Psalm. 81.12, 13. My
people would not hearken, Israel would not obey: therefore I gave them over to
their own hearts lusts: pride, wantonness, lust, covetousness, discontent,
murmuring, etc. which be lusts of man's heart, and sins against God. See
further, Prove. 22.14.

This Doctrine may be a threefold cord to restrain us from all kind of
sin, and keep us from doing one, for fear that bring another upon us: To
keep us from drinking, lest God plague us with uncleanness, as he did Lot:
and therefore God fore warnes us of it by Solomon, Prove. 23.31, 32, 33. Take
heed of uncleanness, lest God punish it by suffering us to commit murder, as
he did David, 2 Samuel 11. Take heed that we be not disobedient, lest God punish
us, by giving us over to our own lusts, as he did Israel, Psalm. 81.12. Take
heed of an unbeleeving heart when the word is preached, lest God give us over
to believe lies, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Take heed of doing any one, lest God
punish it with another, and we have two to answer for: But I come to the point.

It is an heavy judgment of God, that men have means to know God, and yet
never be better for them. See Isai. 29. from 9. to 13. These Jews had the
Prophets rising early and late, God sent them wise men, and Prophets, and
Scribes; but you shall kill some of them, and others you shall persecute from
City to City, Matthew. 23.34. and this judgment he brings upon a people, when
he gives them up to fill up the measure of their sins, as verse. 32. Fulfill
ye the measure of your fathers sins. How is that? Behold I send unto you,
etc. The old world was sinful, yet never filled up the measure of their
sins, till they despised Noah. Sodom, till they despised Lot. The
Egyptians, till they despised the means offered by Moses and Aaron. The
Jews, they slew Christ and the Apostles, and upon this followed the judgment.
Then came the flood upon the old world, fire upon Sodom, the sea in upon
Aegvpt, the spirit of slumber upon the Jews. There cannot be a greater
judgment, than to be struck with a spiritual lethargy, that nothing will
waken; to have hearts so hard, that nothing can soften them, to be like
Epimenides in his cave, or like the famous sleepers in the time of the Emperor
De^ius, o^ like Dionysius of Heraclea, etc. But this will better appear in the
two particulars, whereof the first is.

Eyes that they should not see; Salvian. Lib 2.
The eyes of the body, which are fenestrae mentis, the windows of the mind,
should guide from corporal, and the eyes of the mind from spiritual dangers.
Tria imp^^iunt occulum. 1. Ten^brae, viz. peccata. 2. Humor concretus, viz.
conflu^us peco^torum. 3. Cura terrenorum.
With the former they looked clear enough, not a mote in them; but in the eyes
of their minds there were great beams, that they could not see: Three things
hinder the eye. 1. Darkness, to wit, sins. 2. a Concrete humor, to wit, a
concusse of sins. 3. The care for earthly things.

This Christ upbraided them with, I speak to them in parables; because seeing
do not see, etc. Matthew. 13.13. which was a just judgment, says Musculus,
Quia cum loquebat^r perspicue noluerunt intell^gire, in paenam jam loquitur
obscure.
Because they would not understand when he spoke clearly, to their punishment
he now speaks obscurely. And again in Ioh. 12.40. He has blinded their
eyes, etc. Will you know a point by the way. When the Jews bewrayed their
blindness, that was in the time of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, as
Musculus observes, and he gives this note upon it; Malum ingenium impiorum
nunqua^ cl^rius deprehenditur, quam ub^lux veritatis splendere incipit.
The ill disposition of the wicked as never more clearly discerned, than where
the light of the truth begins to shine. As Splendente solenoctuae and
vespertiliones naturae defectum ostendunt, sed nocte circum circa volitant and
hae solae aves.
The Sun shining, the Owls and Bats show the defect of their nature, but
these birds alone in the night fly about here and there: So wicked men show
themselves most vile, when the best means are used to do them good; when this
light came into the world, then did this people bewray their blindness; when
Christ preached powerfully, professed himself to be the Messiah, then did
they most of all whet their malice and rage against him; when he said I am of
God, and would have instructed them in his divinity, then they go about to
take him, Ioh. 7.30. When he taught that high mystery, I and the Father are
one, then they go about to stone him, Ioh. 10.31. The more light they had, the
more their blindness appeared. In the night time all colors are alike, the
foulest fogs and fens are not discerned from the crystal streams, but in the
morning they are discerned. Reprobate men are never so bad, as when the best
means are used to do them good: Herod never worse, than when John preaches
against Herodias; till then all is well: but if he lay a plaster to that
sore, off goes his head.

Whence make a difference between the good and bad at the hearing of the word.
The one trembles, and therefore only is fit to hear, as Isay 66.5. Hear ye
that tremble at my word. The other rages, as Zidkijah did with Michaiah, 1
King. 22.24. When this Sun shines, the one is mollified like wax, the other
hardened like clay; when the Law is read, the one melts like the heart of
Josiah, 2 King. 22.19. the other is never harder than then, like as Pharaoh,
the more miracles Moses wrought, and the more Aaron spoke from God, the more
he was hardened: to be short, we may see here both the nature of the word,
that it can discover a man's blindness, and find out every unclean corner in
his heart, as Heb. 4.12. It is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Secondly, it is a mark to know a castaway by his hearing of the word;
the seeing the light makes him more blind, the hearing, more hard: Let them
take heed then, that have heard so many Sermons against pride, and yet study
new tricks to cover foul carcasses more than ever they did: So many against
neglect of the word, and now absent themselves more than ever they did: Against
greediness, and yet woo and solicit the world more than ever they did. I
will not say what I fear, not that they are reprobates: But as old Jacob said
of Simeon and Levi, Genes. 49.6. Into their secrets let not my soul come. I
come a little nearer.

It is not, Eruit illis ^culos, Soto in Romans 11.
He has plucked out their eyes, that they should not see: But though he give
other eyes to to see, he gives them eyes that they should not see, a greater
judgment than if he had quite taken away their eyes: Qui privati sunt oculis
non possunt videndo seduci.
For, They that have no eyes cannot be seduced by seeing: But the purblinde,
though he have eyes and see somewhat, as he in Mark. 8.24. Menlike trees, is
many times more wronged by seeing, than if he were quite blind; for so our
Savior tells this people, in Ioh. 9.41. If ye were blind, ye should not have
sin; but now you see, therefore your sin remains. They had eyes to see
cor^icem Legis, the bark and outside of the Law; sed non penetrabant oculi
little ad medullam, but their eyes pierced not to the marrow thereof. The points
are many. 1. That the word, which is the best salve for some men's eyes, does
take away the sight of others, yet the fault is not in the word, but in
themselves: Non crimen Phoebus, noctua crimen habet.
The fault is not in the Sun, but in the Owl. 2. When God gives a blessing,
as eyes to see, and men abuse it, and regard not, God in justice deprives them
of the use of it: So in the Word and the Ministers, which is the note of
Anselmus.

But the note which I insist on is, Observat.
that they saw his miracles and believed not. The eyes of their body saw him
do those works, which none could do but God, and by delegation from him, as
healing the sick, cleansing Lepers, raising the dead; yet they smoaked out the
eyes of their understandings, that it might not sink into their hearts, and
for all that they saw, they believed him not; and therefore God in judgment
casts such a mist upon their understanding, that now they cannot see though
they would, and such a distemper is now in their eyes, that the sight not only
fails but deceives them, and seduceth them; their eyes are not only dark and
see not, but deceitful and seducing, making them think that they see what is
right, when they see it not, which I think to be here meant: and therefore
Christ in Ioh. 12.40. adds these words (not understand with their hearts) from
whence the point may be.

When good means of salvation be not used aright, then God turns them to
their hurt and destruction. Their eyes that once saw his works, Go make the
hearts of this people fat, shut their eyes that they may not see, Isa. 6.10. If
rightly used, it is the savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.16. but if not, it
is a stumbling block to make men fall, Ier. 6.21. But to keep to the Apostles
instance, The eye: It is first as a watchman set in the top of a tower to
discover the enemy a far off: but if not rightly used, it proves like a
treacherous Sinon, to open the gates of the City, and let in the enemy: to let
lust into the heart: And therefore Job made a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.
And David prays, Turn away mine eyes, Psalm. 119.37. and how many the eyes
has undone, you cannot be ignorant. The sons of God, (as they are called,
Genesis 6.2.) saw the daughters of men, and took them wives; It brought Sichem to
commit folly with Dinah, Genesis 34.2. David to lie with Bathsheba, 2. Sam. 11.
Therefore says Bernard, that the eye is Prima sagitta, The first arrow
offornication; that it is the window of the mind, Demodo been vivendi, Ser.
23. Etin Psa^. 91. Sertn. 7.
Occ^lus deprae. dat^r animam. Epist. 107.
The eye robs the soul; about his 107 Epistle.

Let us then hear aright, for fear the word which is in it self the savor
of life unto life, be not the savor of death unto death. As meat indigested
rots upon the stomach, and poisons the body: So does this best means of life,
if only heard, and not digested with zeal. It is a fearesull case when God
lets our Pilot and our guide deceive us, our eye the best director to misleade
us, our meat to poison us, the light to be like an Ignis fatuus to seduce us;
I pray God it befall not us, who have a long time had eyes to see the wonders
of God, and yet make small use of them. And so I come to the second particular,
Ears that they should not hear.

Ears that they should not hear.] In Pro. 20.12. God has made both these,
the eye to see, and the care to hear. These Jews have them, but neither see
nor hear: God has made man two ears for two reasons, First, Vt (...) actliu^.
That words may more easily be gathered; as L^^l intius of Gods workmanship.
Chap. 8. Secondly, Qua spo^tet dupla ad disciphna^ Consequen^am au^nt, cum ura^
linguim dederit, ut meminerimus pau toraci enda plura audienda.
Because we must hear with a double care to the attaining if learning, whereas
he gave but one tongue, that we might remember, that sewer things are to be
spoken, more to be heard. As Basil in his book of virginity; and though the
eyes be the organ of a most excellent sense, of seeing the workmanship and
wonders of God, yet the ear is more needful, Institut. Lib. 3. Cap 9.
because as Lactautius says, Learning and wisdom is perceived by the ears
alone; not by the eyes alone. It is a great misery to be blind, for then he
sees not Gods workmanship; but greater misery to want the hearing, because then
they cannot hear of their Savior, nor of eternal life. Thomas Aquinas tells
us, that outwardly they could hear and perceive well enough; but the judgment
was, they did not hear with fruit. as Deuteronomy. 29.4.3.6. You have seen the great
tentations, the miracles and wonders, how I led you sortie years in the
wilderness, your clothes waxed not old on your backs, nor your shoes, yet
you want a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear until this
day. The first thing that I observe, I comprize in these terms.

It is a misery unspeakeable to hear the mysteries of salvation, and be no
better for it; for hearing without obedience has no blessing: he only that so
hears the will of God to do it shall enter into the kingdom, Matthew. 7.21.
shall be blessed, Luke 11.28. shall be justified before God. Romans 2.13. But
the hearers otherwise, if they look for any mercy from God, they do but
deceive themselves, James 1.22. Ille ^cre a^dis, qui mo^bus non contrad cit. In
quatuor Evan. (...) 29.
He bears aright, that in his manners does not contradict it, says Gregory.
F^de^ni presi. ^u, ^vita pra^a est. Chrysostom st in lib. Homd (...)
Faith profits nothing, if the life be wicked. Frus^ a audit qui non amat. Encl
(...) Cap. 17.
He leares in vaint, that loves not, says Augustine. Grave estse catum non
(...) sse quoctsac as, ^ avnis nonseetsse qu^ (...). De^ss^ (...) Lib. 2 20.
It is a great sin not to know that which thou do, a greater not to do
what thou know, says Ambrose. I here be three kinds of bad hearers, in
Mat. 13. every one of them miscrable. The first compared to stores, and the
stones are cast cut of the vineyard, in Isa. 5.2. The second to thorns, and
thorns are to be burned, Heb. 6.8. The third, to the way side, and that is a
double misery. First, the way is ever left without the hedge, and without
defense. Secondly, it is trodden under soot of all passengers; Woe be to thee
Chorazim, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if these works had been done in Tire
and Sidon, etc. and We to thee Capernaum; for if these works, were done in
Sodom, etc. Mat. 11.21. These three Cities, Chorazim, Bethsaida, and Capernaum
were Cities of Galilee; very fruitful, by reason they were near to Jordan,
which made them as rich as Nilus does the country of Egypt; Ioachi^ us,
Vadianus.
not far from the lake of Gennezareth, where Christ often preached, and where
most of his great works were done, as Mat. 11.21. Out of Bethsaida he called
his first disciples, Peter, Andrew and Philip: In Capernaum he did many
miracles, he preached almost every Sabbath day, and made them astonished at his
doctrine, Luke 4.31. and because they had all this means, heard all this
preaching; the refore is their case more miserable, and their judgment heavier
than that of Sodom and Gomorrah. Gratiu^ eos punit Deminus q^ plura
perceperant dona.
The Lord punishes those more, who have received more gifts, says Ferus. To
whom God gives much, of him he requires much: he requires either a larger
fruit, or a larger punishment. Hearing without profit is the forerunner of Gods
wrath and destruction; As the sons of Eli obeyed not the voice of their
father, because the Lord would slay them. 1. Sam. 2.25. I cannot read without
astonishment. Ier. 7. from 13. to 17. I rose up early and spoke unto you, but
you would not hear; therefore I will do unto you as unto Shilo: I will cast
you out of my sight, and then he speaks to the Prophet. 16. Thoushalt not pray
for this people, nor lift up a cry for them, nor entreat, for I will not hear
thee; and from 25. to 28. Since your fathers came out of Egypt to this day: I
have sent my Prophets rising early, but you would not obey. Therefore the
carkases of this people shall be meat for the beasts and fowls, and none
shall fray them away, and I will make to cease the voice of mirth and
gladness, verse. 34. I will forbear the application, desiring that if ever you
remembered a lesson, remember this and apply it to your selves; and give me not
occasion whenever I shall leave you, to say as it is said of the sigtree in
Luke 13.7. This three years have I preached, and sought fruit of this figtree,
and find none. God forbid, but that when Peter shall bring the converted
Jews, Paul the converted Gentiles, Andrew couverted Achia, John converted
Asia, Thomas co^verted India, In quatuor Evangelia. Homil. 17.
as Gregory speaks, when Augustine the men of Hyppo, Cyprian the people of
Carthage, Hierome the people of Stridon; and when all the faithful shepherds
shall bring to God at the last day the souls they have won, and the sheep
they have kept, and fed: God forbid, but I may bring many of you with me, and
say unto the Lord, as Heb. 2.13. Behold Lord here am I, and the children whom
thou have given me. I descend to one point more.

If God give good means, and man's contemn them, then though God take not away
the means, yet ^ee denies them grace to profit by them; God gives meat, and
yet denies it the blessing of feeding, filling, and strengthening; as in Hag.
1.6. nay he makes meats as poison, light deceitful, physic hurtful, the
word the savor of death, as above. What good news the cares might have
brought to the Jews by Christ's preaching; yet because they regarded them not,
now they cannot profit, though they do hear him. He often preached the word,
which might have wrought faith in them; they contemn it, and therefore now
they get no benefit, though their cares be open to it: They might have profited
by seeing his miracles; but because they would not before, now they cannot. God
at this day in many places continues to men the gift of hearing, and amongst
them the blessing of preaching; yet it is a just judgment, that though they
hear, yet they understand not, and though the word be preached, yet they
profit not; as when Isay preached, in Isay 6.10. the hearts of the people were
heavy, and Isay 49.4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in
vain and for nothing. and verse 5. I shall be glorious, though Israel be not
gathered. But I pass it over, and add a word of the last.

Until this day] noting that it shall not be perpetual, but when the time
appointed of God shall come, then this wicked nation shall have this judgment
removed.

God does never so utterly cast off a people, but when they turn unto him, he
will receive them. What people in all likely hood farther gone than the men of
Ephraim, which willingly followed the commandment, viz. of Jeroboam? Hos.
5.11. And when God showed that they were sick, and would have them come to him
to be cured; Then Ephraim went unto Ashur, and sent unto Iareb the King of
Assyria. Hoc accedit ad superio^a peccata.
This was added to their former sins, says Mercer on Hosea. Yet if there be
a come, let us return, then after two days will he revive them; and the
third day they shall live, Hos. 6.2. Or what city so far gone as Jerusalem,
she justified Sodom and Samaria, Ezekiel. 16.51. She sinned so much, Tantum
p^ccavit, ut et Sodom^ comparata justa videatur. Contra Faust. Manich. haer.
lib. 22. cap. 61.
that Sodom compared with her might seem righteous, as Augustine. Yet if she
would turn, the Lord would gather her as a hen, etc. Matthew. 23. Or what man so
far gone as Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. He built altars to strange Gods, he
sacrificed his sons to Moloch, he gave himself to witchcrast, charming, and
sorcerie, he used them that had familiar spirits, and he did evil in the
sight of the Lord to anger him; yet when he was in tribulation, and prayed, and
humbled himself greatly, then the Lord heard him, and was entreated, and he
knew that the Lord was God, at verse. 12, and 13. There be yet two points more.
1. When God lays a plague upon a people, he determines how long it shall lie
upon them, and that no man knows. 2. Great and crying sins have long and
lasting pun shments. The sin of these Jews was great, and their plague has
lasted toward 1600. years, and how long it shall yet last, God only knows.
But I pass these, and come to the second testimony cited out of David, at the
ninth verse.

VERSE. 9. And David says,
10. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their
backs always.
IT is taken from Psalm. 69.22. wherein David complains of the calamities and
oppression which he endured; and in himself (as in a type or figure) foretells
what the Jews would do to Christ and his members, as verse. 20, 21. I looked
for some to have pity on me, but there was none, neither found I any to
comfort me; They gave me gall to eat, etc. In the citing of which Text, S.
Origin observes, that the Apostle does not precisely tie himself to the
Prophets words; But adds somewhat unto them, as (...), for a trap, or net. And
though the new translation add those words, yet surely there is no word in the
Hebrew Text to yield it. Secondly, Paul adds, (...), for a recompense. Whereas
it is in the Hebrew Lemochesh, for a stumbling block, and no more. But to
pass these discordances in the reading; I come to the words, which are a
bed-roll, or long catalogue of heavy judgments that God laid upon the nation
of the Jews, and they are in number three. The first lights upon their table,
the second upon their eyes, and the third upon their backs. Upon their table,
four. 1. (...), a snare. 2. (...), a trap. 3. (...), a stumbling block. 4.
(...), a recomcompence of their wickedness. The second upon their eyes,
blindness and darkness. The third upon their backs, stooping and
crookedness. I begin with the first, and there must first enquire what we must
understand by table.

By table, Origin, and Soto, and the most part of Interpreters mean the
Scriptures, which became a snare unto them, in that they perverted them to
their own hurt: as where the Scripture speaks of a deliverer, which was to
be understood of a spiritual deliverer from sin; they dreamed of a
temporal deliverer of their nation, and of an earthly glory. Haymo and some
others, that their table is Collatio verborum in mensa: Their meetings and
conference to take Christ: whereat they did but lay snares to take themselves.
Lyranus does distinguish these three, their table became a snare in perverting
the Scriptures, a trap, when they were taken by Titus and Vespatian, and a
scandal to the infamy and disgrace of their nation; Their nobles were put to a
shameful death by the Romans: But rather I subscribe unto Chrysoslome, who
understands by table, Omnes Iudaeorum delicias, their prosperity, their public
state, Quidquid est in vita optabile and beatum, etc. Calv. in Rem. 11.
their temple; unto Calvin, Whatsoever is desirable and blessed in this life,
he gives them to their ruin and destruction. To P. Martyr, who terms it an
elegant allegory, wherein is signified, that whatsoever is sweet and acceptable
becomes dangerous, and deadly. At the table they use to be cheerful in the
lawful use of Gods creatures, to rejoice in the society of friends; And if
Varro may be believed, it is mensa, a table, quasi mesa, a mediatrix between
men: Now this table (which should be joyful and pleasant) is become deadly and
pernicious. To be short, the table is that wherein a man does either take
pleasure, or hopes for it; as when Pompey was overthrowen in the Pharsalian
fields; Aegyptus and Ptolomaeus were his table: for there he thought to have
help and succor, but there he lost his head. The table of the Jews was their
place, Nation, dignity: The table of the Roman Church, the name of the Church,
Counsels, Fathers, the splendour and pomp of the ceremonies. Secondly, it is,
Non estoptantis sed prophetantis, ut non fint, sed quia fiet. In Psalm. 69.
Let their table be made, which let it be made; It is of one not desiring, but
prophesying it; not that it may be done, but because it shall be done: as
Augustine expounds it. I descend to the point.

First, God makes the best things that the wicked enjoy, to turn to the
destruction and fall of those that have them; what had this nation so good as
the oracles of God? or wherein can a Nation enjoy a greater blessing than that?
Here they may find Christ, and life eternal, John 5.39. By this they may
increase the length of their days, and their years and prosperity, Prove. 3.2.
out of this they may take pibles (as David did out of the brook) to wound the
brazen forehead of sin. This is the treasure of knowledge, Epist. ad
Paulinum. Convivium sapientiae, singuli librisingula sercula. Offic. lib. 1.
Cap. 22.
as Hieronie speaks; and A banquet of wisdom, how many books, so many
messes, says Ambrose. They are like to Tagus in Lusitania, or Ganges in India,
which the Scripture calls Pishon whose very sand and gravel is gold, yet when
the Jew seeks Christ in them, he falls into mazes and labyrinths, and loses
himself; when he should feast at this table, his meat becomes his poison, the
savor of it kills him, for it is the savor of death unto him; when he seeks
for gold, he is blindfolded and slips into a pit; for the veil is over his
face, 2. Cor. 3.15. That which should be his Pilot, is like Ignis fatuus to
seduce him; that which should be like Alexanders sword to dissolve Gordian
knots, or like Ariadnes thread, wherewith she holp Thesus out the labyrinth,
became a snare to entangle them, a stumbling block, Ier. 6.21. What does a man
delight in so much as his riches? they are his strong hold, Prove. 10.15. his
strong City, and a high wall in his imagination, Prove. 18.11. The ancient
heathens called their great God Jupiter by the name of Pecunia, Aug. de
civitate Dei lib. 7. cap. 12.
money, because they adore and worship it as God: and surely, they be good
blessings in themselves, yet to ungodly men they be but snares to take them,
and feathers to choke them: the good they have will nor suffer them to profit
by the word, for they choke it; the care of the world and deceitfulness of
riches, etc. Mark 4.19. the care they have in getting and keeping them; Mammon
makes them unable to serve God, Matthew. 6.24. You cannot serve God and Mammon.
Mammon in the Chaldee, and Mammon in the Syriack is all one with riches, as
Hierome. In the Punick tongue (which is allied to both the Hebrew and Chaldee)
it is gain, as Augustine affirms. They make men high minded, 1. Tim. 6.17.
to forget God, Deuteronomy. 8.14. Sermon. in monte Lib. 2. Sermon. 35.
Prosperity is more hurtful to the mind, Periculosier prosperitaes animo,
quam adversitas corpori. August. in Psalm. 41.
than adversity to the body; and therefore Seneca; Nemo unquam hostis tam
periculosus, quam in improbos prosperitas sua. Epist. 39.
No enemy so dangerous, as is against the wicked their own prosperity; So you
may say of honor, Mergit longa atque insignis henorum pagina. Iuvenal in Sat.
10.
Many climb high, that they may break their necks with a greater fall. Run
through all that the wicked have, all wherein they delight, all whereof they
boast, all whereto they trust, and it will hence appear, that all these are but
snares wherein they do entangle and hang themselves: their table a snare, their
riches snares, their honors snares, the Word preached a snare to take them;
and they may say of all their glory, as God said of the wicked Priests; You
have been as a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, Hos. 5.1. I come
to the use.

First, fall, and therefore small cause to rejoice in that; In their wealth?
alas, this is but their opportunity to sin, and strength to do evil, and
power to work mischief, and liberty to heap sin upon sin, and wrath
against the day of wrath; and what cause to rejoice in that? when they are in
the midst of their friends, in the midst of their wealth, in the height of
their honor, in the prime of their strength; then are they (though they know
it not) in the midst of the snare, in the midst of their danger; they are
snared and know it not, Deproviden. Lib. 7.
entrapt and feel it not, they are intoxicate with that herb that Salvianus
mentions, that makes them laugh at the point of death.

Secondly, the savor of life, but to him the savor of death, 2. Cor. 2.16. In
it self the fountain of wisdom, This is your wisdom and understanding,
Deuteronomy. 4.6. But to a blind Jew it is a stumbling block, and to the wicked
Grecian the preaching of Christ is but foolishness, 1. Cor. 1.23. It alters
the condition of the heavens, which of themselves do drop their dew, and of
the earth, which of it self does bring forth fruit: but sin makes the one as
brass, and the other as iron, Deuteronomy. 28.23. It alters the nature of goods, and
makes those that in themselves be blessings to be the incentives of sin, and
the occasions of falling; and therefore if we would have joy in any thing that
we possess, if a blessing upon what we have, and not snares and traps to
entangle us, let us put off our sins, labor to be in Christ; for then only
have we them in the right use, then will they be blessings and not snares to
us.

Secondly, I observe out of Beza: That as unhappy birds are there ensnared, and
lose life, where they seek to uphold it: So do these Jews, they lose life
where they seek it, they seek it in the Law wherein they are ensnared, and
there lose it. They that seek life in the Law shall find destruction; the
righteousness whereby we are saved is the Lord, Ier. 23.6. This is the name
whereby you shall call him, the Lord our righteousness; not essentially, as
Osiander, but effectually: in him have we righteousness, Isay. 45.24. It is
the imputed righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, whereby we obtain
life, Romans 4.24. And therefore Paul prays that he may not be found in his
own righteousness, but clothed with the righteousness which is of God
through faith; and therefore durst not appear in the righteousness of the
Law, Phil. 3.9. In Christ there is purity of nature, answering for our corrupt
nature. Secondly, integrity and obedience, answering for our disobedience.
Thirdly, merit and passion that takes away our curse and torment; none of these
can be found in the Law: but the Law is an unsupportable yoke, which neither
we nor our fathers could bear: the strength of sin 1. Cor. 15.56. the
ministration of damnation and death, 2. Cor. 3.7.9. how then can they find
life in it? And though Bellarmine say, stif. Lib. 2.
that this proposition, Christ's imp^ted righteousness is ours, is never read,
neither in Scripture, nor Father; yet (as we have before showed) it is a mere
untruth.

The use is to confute the Papist,

For a recompense.] God repayes wrong done to Christ and his members in the
same kind that they were done. They wronged and used him unkindly in his meat,
they gave him gall to cat, they gave him vinegar tod: ink mingled with gall,
Matthew. 27.34. And as they use Christ, so they used David before, who was a type
of Christ, Psalm. 69.20, 21. And now the Lord pays them in the same kind;
their table is a snare, and a net to take themselves. The Jews had a Law,
Levi. 24.19, 20. If a man cause a blemish in his neighbor, as he has done, so
shall it be done to him Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; such
a blemish as he has made, such shall be repayed to him. Like to this is that
of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you. His qui vos (...) ^nt ^uj ste^am rependet
^ictionem.
* He repayeth just affliction to them that afflict you unjustly, says
Zanchius. It was one of the Laws of the twelve tables a nong the Romans;
Simembru^ pit moum, v^ ^ssim ^um, membrum. Aut. Geliu 20. Cap. 1. A^sta Etl Lib
2. Cap.
If he has broken my member, in like manner let his member be broken. And
the Pythagoreans call it (...), simply just: But these were but temporal
recompenses, but God will pay affliction with eternal affliction; and though
this may seem hard, that God should afflict them for ever who afflicted his
son and servants but for a while; yet it is quite contrary: for God in
punishing does not so much respect the action, which is temporal, as the
object against whom it is done, who is that eternal and immense good.
Secondly, the will of sinners, which is for ever extended with their malice;
for if they did still live, they would still persecute them. Let them therefore
see what they do, who persecute the innocent. Unto these let me add a most
pregnant example of Adonibezok in Judge. 6.7. Israel pursued Adonibezek, and
caught him, and cut off the thumbs of his hands and his feet; And Adonibezok
said, Seven kings (having the thumbs of their hand and feet cut off) gathered
bread under my table; as ^ave done, so has God rewarded me: thus is that of
Christ fulfilled, With what measure you mete unto others, it shall be measured
unto you ^g^ine. Matthew. 7.2. and that of Habac. 2.8. Because thou hay spoiled
many nations, all the remnant of the peopl shall speile thee. Take heed of
wronging the people of God by disgraces, by oppression; by impoverishing them,
lest God in the same kind reward you seven fold into your bosoms.

2. The Lord does punish the sins of men by the best things that they have:
Sometimes by their children, Eli, 1 Samuel 2.22. And David's sin in Amnon, and
Thamar, and Absalom; but especially wicked men, that they may say as it was
said of the Emperor Antoninus; Antoninum fuisse soelitem si nullum reliquisset
filium. Bucholcer. in Ann. Dom. 181. Hist. not. lib. 34. cap. 8.
Antoninus had been happy if he had left never a son. Sometimes in their
wits, which God turns as the edge and point of a weapon against themselves;
such was the wit of Achitophel. And Plinius reports of one Perillus an
Athenian, who framed for the Tyrant Phalaris a brazen Bull, wherein men being
tormented, should low like Oxen, not speak like men, his wit proved his death;
for himself was the first that died in it: Sometimes in their wealth, he
makes the rust of it to be a witness against them, and to eat their flesh
like fire, Iam. 5.3. There is since Adams fall in every creature a poison and
a curse. Since God cursed the earth, which to a good man is taken away, and all
that he has is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. But the wicked
(because no wicked man can pray) have always the curse and poison with it. So
I come from the judgment on their tables, to the eyes and backs.

VERSE. 10.
WHat an heavy judgment this is, you may perceive by the former; there is
laid for them a snare, a trap, a stumbling block, this were fearful enough,
though they had eyes to look well about them; But to have these snares laid
for them, and they want eyes to see them, is most miserable; though there be
snares laid, and a man have eyes to see and look about, he may prevent them.

The speech is metaphorical, borrowed from the body and applied to the soul:
and the judgment here meant is not corporal but spiritual, namely, the
depriving of the mind which is the eye of the soul, of all spiritual
understanding in heavenly and divine things, belonging to Christ and his
kingdom, of all sound judgment and discretion, to discern between truth and
falsehood, right and wrong, good and evil: And conrrariwise, the darkening of
it with the mistie fogs of palpable ignorance, and the yielding of them up to a
reprobate sense, whereby they should become as unable to discern the mysteries
of Christ's kingdom, notwithstanding the light of the Gospel shining clearly
round about them, as a blind man to judge of colors, when the Sun brightly
shines in his chief strength. Now this judgment is expressed rather in a
borrowed, than plain and proper speech, to make them more sensible of the
weight and terriblenesse of it; seeing men naturally are more quick in
discerning corporal than spiritual punishments, and are more affected with
the blindness of the body, than of the mind, though this be incomparably the
greater and heavier judgment.

Whence first observe, That one sin voluntarily committed, (...).
is necessarily attended with another, as the just punishment of it. Because
the Jews willingly winked, when the Sun of righteousness, which (as the
Prophet speaks) did arise unto them, bringing healing in his wings, so as
they would not see him, notwithstanding he so clearly shone unto them, both
in his doctrine (for never man spoke as he spoke) and in his miracles, which
none could do but he that was equal with his Father: therefore the Lord gave
them up to the blindness of their minds, so as they could not, though they
would, see the light of the Gospel, and the ways of salvation revealed by it.
Because Nebuchadnezzer having the understanding of a man, carried himself like
a furious beast toward God and his people, even as a raging Lion, tearing them
in pieces, and treading them under his feet; therefore his reason was taken
from him, and so becoming brutish, he was driven out from amongst men, to
consort with beasts. Because the Israelites would not hear Gods word in the
mouth of his Prophets; therefore he threatens to send such a famine of the
word, that they could not enjoy the spiritual Manna, (...) 12.
though they did run from one end of the Land to the other to seek it. The
unprofitable servant, that will not use the talent when he has it, shall be
deprived of the very possession of it, so as he shall not be able to use it
though he would.

Which should move us to make high account of Gods ordinances whilst we enjoy
them, and embrace the truth of the Gospel with ardent love, walking in the
light thereof in all holiness of conversation, whilst it shines unto us,
lest the Lord in his righteous judgment cause our Sun to set at noonday,
and leave us to grope in that Egyptian darkness of Popery and superstition,
and because we will not retain the love of the truth that we may be saved,
do send us strong delusions, that we shall believe lies, as the Apostle
threatens, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.

Secondly, observe from hence, (...).
That God punishes them, who resect and persecute Christ with spiritual
blindness, so as they do they know not what, and go they know not whither.
Thus the Priests and Pharisees refusing to retain Christ as the Messiah and
Savior of the world, were so blinded in their understanding, that though this
Sun of righteousness shined unto them most clearly, both in the light of his
doctrine and divine miracles, yet they neither could nor would discern and
acknowledge him. Yea, being utterly blinded with brutish rage, they take
occasion by his miracles the more to traduce and slander him, saying, This
fellow casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Matthew. 12.24.
Yea, even to persecute him to the very death; for when he had raised Lazarus
from the dead, though their consciences were convinced with the ^^^acle, yet
presently they conspir his death, Ioh. 11.47. And surely they must needs be
bruitishly blind, that reject Christ, seeing be is the light of the world, and
they who are opposite to him must needs live in darkness and shadow of death.
He is the wisdom of his Father, and in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. And what then can be in those that malign
and refuse him, but blind fury, folly, and madness?

The which should serve for the terror of all those that oppose and persecute
Christ, Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and
blindness, and astonishment of heart: And thou shall grope at noone-dayes, as
the blind gropeth in darkness. And how great this punishment is, we may in
part discern, if we compare it with bodily blindness, which nevertheless is
incomparably less evil than it. For like the blind man, he that wants the
light and sight of the mind cannot guide himself in his ways, but is ready
every step to err and go astray into the by-ways of error and sin; he is
apt to stumble at every stone of offense that lies in his way, and so to fall
into ruin and perdition; he is in danger to slip into every hole, and to fall
into every pit which the enemies of his salvation do dig for him, to be
catched in every trap and snare of tentation that is laid in his way; he
cannot discern between the fair and sure path of holiness and
righteousness, and the foul sloughes and deep ditches of sinful corruptions
till he fall into them; he is ready to run into briars and bushes, and
obnoxious to all injuries which the enemies of his salvation shall be pleased
to offer unto him. They may rob him of all he has, and he cannot avoid them;
they may deceive him with any bait, and he cannot discern them, yea, they may
wound and stab him to the heart, and he cannot defend himself from their rage
and violence. We have an example of this heavy judgment in Pharaoh, who being
smitten with this spiritual blindness, thought that he then did most wisely,
when like a Bedlam he went on in that way, which exposed him and his people to
Gods searefull plagues, and at the last brought them to utter destruction. So
Paul before his conversion, had his mind so blinded, that when like a mad man
he raged against Christ in his members, he supposed that herein he did God
good service, Acts 26.11. And so bruitishly blind were the Priests and
Pharisees, that they thought it was the only means to bring safety to their
people, to kill their Savior, Ioh. 11.48, 51. which afterward proved to be
the cause of their destruction and utter desolation.

Again, approve to be unsained, by walking according to this light of
knowledge, in the ways of holiness and righteousness, that we may glorify
him who has been so gracious unto us.

Finally, prevent, or be delivered out of them? And how much more then should
we stand thus affected toward those who lie under the punishments of
spiritual frenzy and blindness, which without all comparison are greater
than the other, and much more durable and desperate?

The third judgment or punishment which he prophetically denounces by way of
imprecation against the people of the Jews, The third judgment.
for rejecting Christ and the Gospel, is set down in these words:

And bow down their backs always.] Exposition.
In which consider, 1. The judgment it self: 2. The continuance of it. The
judgment is expressed like the former, in a metaphorical speech taken from
the body; where consider, 1. the matter, and 2. the manner of it. The matter is
their utter weakening, and disabling to all good actions spiritual, civil, and
corporal, inward, and outward. For the Hebrews seat the chief strength of
man in his back and loins, which being broken, bowed, and buckled together, he
is thereby made utterly unfit for any actions and employment. So that the
meaning is as if he had said; Disable them wholly unto all holy and Christian
duties, so as they may have neither power not will to perform any holy service
unto God, to receive Christ as their Lord, or to yield unto him obedience as to
their Sovereigne; let them bow down under the intolerable burden of their
sins (especially that of crucifying their Savior) without ease or comfort.
Deprive their state of all strength, and pull out of their hands all civil
government, which they have abused to Gods dishonor, to the opposing of Christ
in his Kingdom, and to the damage and hurt of all his subjects and members:
overthrow their whole policy and Commonwealth, subdue them as vassals and
slaves to all their enemies, and make them wholly desolate. The which heavy
judgments we see accordingly inflicted upon that Nation. For their Kingdom
was quite overthrowen by Titus Vespasian, their politic Laws and government
taken away, their cities and towns sacked and fired, their people for the most
part slaughtered, and the remainder sold for slaves, and scattered among all
Nations, under whose servitude they remain in great scorn and reproach even
unto this day. And thus also we see their backs broken in respect of
spiritual strength. For no Nation under Heaven is more desperately wicked, and
averse to all goodness; none so maliciously opposite to Christ and his
kingdom, whom they delight to disgrace with reproaches and blasphemies; none
more given up to a reprobate mind, to covetousness, sordide baseness,
injustice, and all manner of deceit. A people separated from all nations, that
they may be the scorn of of all. And this is the matter of the judgment. The
manner or quality of it is employed by that phrase of bowing, or making
crooked. For as those whose backs are broken and bowed, do bend their faces
downward toward the earth, and are not able without great difficulty to lift
them up toward heaven: So this nation being broken with Gods heavy
judgments, and weakened in all their strength, spiritual and civil, had this
heavy punishment added to all the rest, that hereby like bruit beasts their
faces were bowed toward the earth, ascribing all their calamities to worldly
accidents and inferior causes, and never looking up unto God as the chief
Author of them, that they might humble themselves under his mighty hand, see
and acknowledge their sins, which were the causes of these heavy judgments,
and turning unto God by unfeigned repentance, might obtain the pardon of them,
reconciliation with God through Christ, and freedom from their punishments.

And this is the judgment denounced against the unbeleeving Jews. The time of
the continuance of it is expressed in this word always: whereby is signified the
durablenesse of these heavy punishments, which were to continue so long, as
though they should never have end. The which we see verified in the event,
seeing since their destruction and desolation, almost 1600. years are passed,
and yet in outward appearance they are as far from deliverance out of their
great calamitles, as they were the first day.

The points to be observed from hence are these: How much God hates, and how
severely he punishes the sin of infidelity, whereby Christ the Savior of
the world is rejected; Seeing for this sin principally the nation of the
Jews, who were so highly in Gods favor, and partakers of all the prerogatives
of his Church and people, have been rejected and fearfully punished, and that
for the space of so many hundred years. Neither indeed can it be otherwise;
for how can his sores but fester, that refuses to apply that only plaster,
whereby they may be cured? How can they but continue lost, and in the state of
perdition, who reject their only Savior? How can they be reconciled unto God,
that refuse to have any part in him in whom alone he is well pleased? Finally,
how should they but remain under the guilt and condemnation of all their
wickedness, that having slain the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world, do not repent of this their horrible impiety.

And therefore let this teach us carefully to shun this fearful sin of
infidelity,

Secondly observe, That when wicked men abuse their power and authority, by
opposing Christ in his Kingdom, and persecuting him either in himself or in
his members, God will break their backs, and deprive them of all their
strength, that they may not for ever rage against his Anointed, and offer
violence unto his Holy Ones. According to that, Psalm. 2.9. Thou shall break
them with a rod of iron, and dush them in pieces like a potters vessel.

The which serves; first,

And secondly,

In the first part of this Chapter, from the first to the end of the tenth
verse, the Apostle has showed and proved, that the fall of the Jews was not
total. And now in the latter part, from the eleventh verse to the end, he
proves it should not be final. Unto which he makes way by a Prolepsis or
preoccupation, answering an objection which might be made by the Jews against
his former Doctrine to this purpose; If it be so as you say Paul, that God has
exposed the Jews to those judgments foretold by the Prophet Isay and David,
that is, brought them into such snares, laid stumbling blocks before them,
blinded their eyes, and bowed and broken their backs, whereby they are utterly
disabled to all good actions, civil, moral, and spiritual; then belike you
conclude that their case is desperate, as being cast off by God without hope of
recoverie. Unto which the Apostle replyeth, that though this were the state of
the Jews for a time, yet it should not be so for ever, but there should be a
time (namely, when the fullness of the Gentiles was come in,) that they also
should be called and added to the Church, that so both Jews and Gentiles might
make but one flock, in one sheepfold, and under one Shepherd. From whence he
takes occasion to exhort and admonish the Gentiles, that they should not
insult over the Jews, because they were chosen and these rejected, and to
comfort the Jews, seeing their rejection should not be final, but they also
in Gods good time should be converted, gathered into the Church and so saved.
And this is the Coherence and maine scope of the Apostle in this last part of
the Chapter. I come to the words themselves.

VERSE. 11. I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid.
But rather through their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to
provoke them to jealousy.
IN which words the Apostle sets down the first ground of his exhortation
and admonition, Exposition.
which is taken from the ends for which God rejected the Jews. Which were not
that they should perish and be damned, but that way hereby might be made for
the calling of the Gentiles, and thereby also the Jews might at last be
stirred up to jealousy and emulation, and so also provoked to come in by
following their example. For seeing the Jews would not receive Christ
themselves, nor (as much as in them lay) suffer the Gentiles to receive him as
their Savior, therefore it was just with God, that by their rejection way
might be made for the bringing in of the Gentiles into the Church, that
receiving and embracing Christ by faith, all of them which belonged to Gods
election might be saved.

Whereby he acquitteth God from being such an one as delighted in the
destruction of his own people, and shows that the maine end at which he
aimed in their rejection, was not that they might be destroyed and condemned;
but partly to glorify his justice, in punishing them justly for their
infidelity; and partly and chiefly to magnify his mercy, in the effectual
calling and salvation of the elect Gentiles, and at last that he might also
extend it more fully and generally to his ancient people in their conversion to
the faith of Christ, that they also by him might be saved.

The prolepsis is propounded by way of interrogatio^, for the greater emphasis:
I say then; have they stumbled, that they should fall? that is, have they so
stumbled, according to the prediction of the Prophet, as that they shall fall
finally, and never recover and rise again. In which the Apostles meaning is
not, as though he would demand whether it was the intention of the Jews to
stumble that they might fall, or fall finally, that way hereby might be made
for the calling of the Gentiles; (for none are so foolish as purposely to
stumble that they may fall, or to fall finally that others may rise) But his
question is concerning Gods intention, whether it were his purpose and end that
they should be blinded and so stumble that they might fall finally into
everlasting destruction: and this he denies as being a thing contrary to Gods
nature, seeing he delights not in the death and destruction of his
creatures, but rather in exercising his mercy and goodness in their conversion
and salvation, neither will he who in his Law forbids us to put a stumbling
block before the blind to cause them to fall, Levit. 19.14.
himself put such a stumbling block before those that he has first
spiritually blinded, that thereby he may cause them to fall into the pit of
everlasting destruction. But he aims at far other ends, that is, the
calling of the Gentiles, and the recalling of the Jews: yea, but will God do
evil that good may come of it? I answer, no. But there is no action in it
self absolutely evil, which has not some respect and relation of good in it.
And so this, for howsoever this rejection was evil to them, yet not simply and
absolutely evil in it self, seeing as it came from God, it was an act of his
justice, whereby he punished the Jews for their infidelity and rebellion
against Christ, whom by wicked hands they had crucified. Now as he justly
punished the Jews by blinding, hardening and rejecting them who had stumbled at
Christ the corner stone, and so fallen into that fearful sin of crucifying
with wicked hands the Lord of life, Act. 2.23.
as Peter speaks; so the Apostle here comfort them by showing that this
punishment should not for over extend to all their posterity and to the whole
nation, but that there would come a time when as they should be ingraffed into
Christ the true vine and olive tree, as well as the Gentiles.

And this he does first negatively, according to his custom and phrase, when
as a thing is propounded which he abominateth and abhors as monstrous and
blasphemous, God forbid; and then affirmatively, where he sets down that
God had far other ends of their rejection, as before has been showed. We
see the meaning, let us come to the observation.

And first whereas he says; Observat.
I say then] I might observe with Chrysostom the Apostles wisdom, In hunc
locum.
in that when he denounces Gods fearful judgments against the people of
the Jews, he does it in the words of the Prophet, but when he does raise
comforts against these terrors, he delivererth them in his own words, because
being a Preacher of the Gospel it better suited with his calling and
profession to comfort than to terrify: and also because by this course he
might better wind himself into their love and affections, as being a
messenger of glad tidings, Romans 10.15.
that so affecting his person, they might more readily receive his doctrine.

When carnal men hear the doctrine of Gods predestinatiou, Observat.
they are ready to cast upon it this calumny and slander, (...) though we
should teach that when God reprobate (...) any, he does in this decree
principally aim at their destruction and condemnation; and so tyrannically
delight in the perdition and torment of his creature. And this is the cause why
the Apostle here propounds and answers this objection, namely, that the
Lord aims at far other ends, that is, besides the glory of his own
justice, the calling also of the Gentiles, and the provoking of the Jews to
jealousy and emulation by their example. It is true, and we must not deny
it, that God by his long-suffering fitteth the vessels of wrath to destruction,
Rom 9.22. that these like natural bruit beasts are made to be taken and
destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. yea that these men of old were ordained to this
condemnation, as Jude speaks, verse. 4. But this is not Gods maine end at
which he aims in their reprobation, but the manifestation of the glory of his
justice, and to show his wrath and power in the punishing of sin, as the
Apostle Paul speaks in the same place. Neither does he absolutely ordain men
to destruction, without any other thing coming between his decree and their
condemnation; but only he decrees to pass by them, to withold his grace
which he is not bound to give, and to leave them to their own sinful
corruptions; and so being left to themselves, and falling into all sin and
wickedness, they are justly by God in respect of their sins in a second
place ordained to condemnation, as Jude affirms. And so the Apostle Peter
joyneth both these together, namely, that they were made to be destroyed, and
also that they shall utterly perish in their corruption. So that the perdition
of the wicked is not the end at which God only or chiefly aims in their
reprobation; yea indeed if we speak properly and distinctly, it is no end of
it at all simply, absolutely and immediately, without respect and relation unto
sin, that comes between the decree and the execution of it, but only an
event which follows upon the decree (though in some sort necessarily in
respect of Gods purpose, and not any coaction of their will, who go
voluntarily on in the way of perdition) seeing none can be saved whom he
passes by and does not choose unto salvation. In which sense the Evangelist
says, that at the preaching of Paul and Barnabas all they and they only who
were ordained to life believed, Act. 13.48.

The which should teach us, Exodus 34.6. and to that which the Prophets say of
him, namely that he delights in mercy, Micah 7.18. Yea contrary to his
own oath, Ezech. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. For if
he do not willingly (that is, with an absolute will without a kind of
necessity put upon his justice by our sins) afflict us with temporal
punishments, then how much less with those that are intolerable and endless?
Lam. 3.33.

But let us come to some particular observations from the words of the
question. And first, whereas by this demand he presupposes that the Jews had
stumbled even at those things which should have kept them from stumbling and
falling:

From hence I observe; That men, through the carnal corruption of their
sinful nature, are apt to stumble at those things which in their own nature
should stay and support them, as namely Christ himself, his Gospel and holy
ordinances. For the Jews here stumble at Christ, who was purposely sent to
uphold and keep them from falling. He was in himself the chief Cornerstone
to support the whole building of his holy Temple and Church: Isa. 28.16.
And they, through their infidelity, make him to become unto them a stone of
offense, at which many of them stumbled, and fell into the pit of perdition.
According to Simeons prophecy, that he should be set for the fall and rising
of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. Agreeable to that which Isay foretold of him long
before; namely, that he who was unto his Saints a Sanctuary of safety,
should be for a stone and stumbling block, and for a rock of offenses to both
the houses of Israel, for a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. At
which, Many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared,
and be taken, Isa. 8.14, 15. The which prophecy the Apostle fitteth to the
Jews, Romans 9.32. And as many stumble at this Corner stone, so also at his Word
and Gospel, as the Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2.8. The which as it is to
the Jews a stumbling block, so unto the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18,
23. Yea, not only strangers and enemies, but even many that follow Christ in
an outward profession, and boast themselves to be his Disciples, yet when he
preaches high and holy mysteries of his spiritual union with his Church, do
stumble and fall at this stone of offense, and take occasion thereby to leave
and forsake him, Ioh. 6.60, 66. Yea, even his holy Apostles, through natural
blindness, did stumble at his heavenly doctrine; as Peter, when our Savior
foretold his passion, Matthew. 16.22. And all the rest, when he taught them the
unlawfulnes of being divorced, unless in the case of adultery, Matthew. 19.10.
So when he taught with what difficulty rich men should be saved, they so
stumbled thereat, that they were astonished out of measure, Mark. 10.26. And
thus when the Ministers of the word cross men's corrupt humors, and convince
them of their sins, they stumble at it, and will not endure them and their
Ministry. Moses is cast out of Pharaohs presence, when he delivers Gods
message faithfully. Elias and Michaiah are counted Ahabs enemies, when they
deal plainly with him, and tell him of his sins. The Jews will not endure
Jeremy, Ierem. 44.
when he crosses their humor, and challenge him to be a false Prophet, who
spoke his own word to them, and not the word of the Lord. Herod goes on
smoothly a good while, but when the Baptist reproved him for taking his
brothers wife, he stumbleth at this stone, and is so incensed against him, that
he must lose his head for it. Thus also men make the word a stumbling block,
when they make it a Sanctuary to secure them in their sins, and countenance
themselves in their wicked courses, by wresting and mis-applying of the
Scriptures. So reprove some men for the abuse of the Sabbath, show them how God
will bless them that keep it, out of Isa. 58. they quickly find a stumbling
block to make them sin, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath. Tell wicked and voluptuous men, who spend their whole life in sinful
delights; that it will not hold out before God, nor stand in judgment: They
reply; What, will you allow a Gentleman no recreation? must man live without
all delight? The Scripture affords recreation; then every place of Scripture
that allows any recreation, must be an Advocate to plead in defense of their
voluptuous and wicked lives; and all this tossing and canvassing of Scripture
is not a note of more wit, but of more wickedness, and near acquaintance with
the Devil. Such men's tongues are set on fire of Hell, and blown by Satan's
stinking breath; and when they have said what they are able, they do but make
their sin more grievous, their heart more hard, God more angry, themselves
more justly and more deeply accursed than before.

The third sort that make the word a stumbling block, are they that refuse to
hear it, because it makes against their sins, wherewith they are in love,
and discovers those sinkes of sin in their hearts, which they cannot endure to
be detected and laid open: Amont (...) oderunt ridargu (...). Aug. Confess.
lib. 10. cap. 13.
They love the truth shining, hate it reproving, says Augustine. They like the
shining of the Sun, but the discovering of unclean corners they like not.
This is their greatest torment, that they cannot hear the word, but their
sins must still be beaten at: when men be thus minded, surely their
destruction and fall is near.

2. The best may stumble, the reprobate only does fall finally: Thomas may
doubt, David may lust, Peter may deny his Master, Paul may for a while
persecute the Church, these be dangerous slips and falls; yet when the night is
past, and the light appears, they rise again; if their names be once in the
book of life, they can never be put out. S quispian el^^ (...) percat, (...)
Deus, ^t nemo ^ctorum perit. Aug. de corrupt. and great. cap 7.
If any of the elect perish then God is deceived, but not any of them
perishes, says Austine. Ei si quispiam pereat, tum vitio h^^ano vincitur Deus.
If any one perishes, then God is overcome of human vice Ex Jerusalem illa non
suit qui periit. Fspen^^n 2 Timothy
Out of that Jerusalem there was not one that perished, says Espencaeus. Non
potest utru^^q. verum esse, (...) predestinitur, and non salvetar. Lo^b. lib.
1. dij. 40.
Both these cannot be true, that one should be elected, and not saved; says
Lombard: and the reasons be pregnant; 1. Gods immutabilitie. 2. Christ's
keeping of the elect. 3. Christ's testimony, Ioh. 10. 4. The sealing of Gods
covenant. But they that sinally fall, were eternally reprobated and ordained to
it, Jude, verse. 4. For your better remembrance note these five propositions. 1.
There is a twofold election. 2. Some seem good, and to have faith, which have
it not. 3. Hypocrites and unbeleevers may for a while be counted amongst the
branches of Christ's own planting. 4. They are said sometimes in Scripture to
have faith, who make profession of the doctrine of faith, as 1 Timothy 4.1.
sometimes when they have the gifts of miracles, as 1 Cor. 13.10. 5. The faith
of the best of Gods elect may decay, and be fearfully shaken, as above has
been showed.

From hence the best must learn to be humble and repent; for they may stumble:

God forbid, etc.] The answer is twofold. 1. Negative, God forbid. 2.
Affirmative, and that, 1. That the Gentiles might be called in their steads.
The other, That by the Gentiles adoption he might provoke the Jews to
emulation. I begin with the negative, God forbid: As if he should say, Far
be it from me to think, that either every particular Jew should be cast off,
or the Nation cast off for ever; or that God in rejecting them, should have no
other respect, but even to see their fall, and keep them down, that they
should never rise: for all are not rejected, himself was one. 2. The Nation
not rejected for ever; for abundance of them shall be called, verse. 12. And
besides, God out of their fall, has wrought the happiness and rising of the
Gentiles. The only point that I select is this.

God never gives way to any evil (whether it be sin, or punishment) but he
works it to a good end, and brings one good or other out of it. In evil man
has one end, that he may serve his pleasures; The Devil another, to draw him
from obedience to his God; and God has a third, which is sometimes secret, but
always good; as in the selling of Joseph; his brethren for envy, Genesis 37.11.
But God sent him before for the preservation of Jacob, and to provide for him
and his household, Genes. 45.5. The death of Christ in the intent of Satan and
the Jews, was only his death, and to rid the Country of him: But God out of
this intolerable evil works the happiness and salvation of all that believe:
As poison in it self is evil, yet by the art and skill of the Physician it is
made a remedy against sickness. So God does with evil, Ve de veneno fiat
spirituale antidetum. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
That of poison may be made a spiritual antidote, says Ambrose. God brings
good out of Shimei's cursing, though he show his malice: But God works
patience in David, and made him hope that God would do him good in stead of
that cursing. It may be the Lord will look upon my affliction, and do me
good for his cursing this day, 2 Samuel 16.12. S. Augustine shows how God and
man do ^ill the same thing, Enchirid. ad Lawent. cap. 10^.
and yet the end of the one is evil, of the other good. A son desires the
death of his father, which is evil; God to take him to him, an happiness
ineffably good. All evil is either sin or punishment, God brings good out of
both. So Lombard; It is good that evils be, or be done, Benum est mala esse
^el fieri, alioquin summus bonus non permirteret ca fieri. Lombard. lib. 1. d
stinct. 46.
otherwise God the chiefest good, would not suffer them to be done. Out of
sin he works, 1. Acknowledgement of our wicked hearts and corrupted nature;
and makes us to detest our selves for it. 2. Of our own unability to stand
against the assaults of sin, which are suggested by Satan, and makes us to
magnify Gods goodness, who keeps us from sin, though not from all; whereas
he might in justice suffer us to fall into all sins as well as any. 3. It
makes us to take special notice of the wiliness of Satan, who notwithstanding
we labor to avoid sin, yet does cunningly deceive us, and draw us to it,
sometimes by the delight and pleasures of it, as Heb. 11.25. sometimes by
coloring with the habit and cloak of virtue; and lastly with profit, as
Achan, Judas, Gehazi. 4. God by suffering us to sin, makes us take notice of
his mercy in sparing us. First, to teach us to magnify him for sparing us
when we did sin. Secondly, to give us hope that he will be merciful still,
and spare us, though by infirmity we sin again. 5. Out of our sins he
works meekness in censuring and judging of others when they sin, as we have
done. Augustine says, that God brings out of our sins these good effects,
Aug. De Tr^^t. lib. 13. cap 16.
1. Relictione^ peccati, Forsaking of sin. 2. Probationem sidei, Trial of
faith. 3. Demonstrationem miserae hujus vitae, Demonstration of this miserable
life. 4. Vt vita illa ubi vera erit beatitudo desideretur ardentius, and
instantius inqutratur; That that life where shall be true happiness, may be
more ardently desired, and more earnestly sought for. Out of the evil of
punishment he works, 1. Knowledge of the Statues and Laws of God, Psalm.
119.71. Before I was afflicted I went astray. Verse. 67. But now I have learned
thy Statutes. Afflictior es prorum sunt^^ media en^rum. Vt eo sere eniant, ubi
adgi omm^^ non possunt. Aug. ad Largum, Epist. 82.
The note that Musculus gives is this, The afflictions of the godly are the
remedies of their errors. Then it is their care, To come thither, where they
cannot at all be afflicted, says Augustine. These be testimonies of a good
God, of an evil servant, says Salvianus. 2. Humiliation for sin that brings
it, as Lam. 3.20. 3. Denial of all worldly pleasure, which is wrought in man
by Gods special grace, as Heb. 11.25. As a little wormwood makes children
forbear their mothers breasts, so does affliction weane from carnal delights.
4. It makes us conformable to the glorious image of the Son of God; the
Prince of our salvation was consecrated through affliction, Heb. 2.10. And to
that Image all the predestinate must be conformable, Romans 8.29. But concerning
this, I may say as the Philistines did of Sampsons riddle, Judge. 14.1. How can
sweet come out of that which is sour, and meat out of the eater? So say
worldlings, How can tribulation bring forth patience, and how can a light
affliction cause unto us a most excellent weight of glory!

But the children of God have learned by experience, that albeit no visitation
be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings the quiet fruits of
righteousness to them that are thereby exercised, Heb. 12.11. There is more
solid joy in enduring rebuke for Christ, than in all the pleasures of sin: for
as Moses, the typical Mediator of the old Testament, by prayer made the bitter
waters of Marah to be sweet, Exodus 15.25. so Chrrist the true Mediator by his
passion has mitigated to his children the bitterness of the Cross, yea made
it profitable to them.

The prodigal son concludes not to return till he was brought low by
affliction: Hagar was proud in Abraham's house, but humble in the wilderness:
Jonah sleeps in the ship, but watches and prays in the whales belly, Jonah
2.1. Manasses lives in Jerusalem as a libertine; but bound in chains at Babel,
he turns his heart to the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. Corporal diseases
enforced many in the Gospel to come to Christ, whereas others that enjoyed
bodily health would never acknowledge him. The earth (if not tilled) bears
nothing but thorns; the vines wax wild if they be not pruned and cut: So
would our wild hearts overgrow with the noisome weeds of unruly affections, if
the Lord by a sanctified trouble should not manure them. I will add no more
but that example of Joseph: Jacob sends him to Dothan to visit his brethren,
Genesis 37.18. his brethren cast him into a pit, Reuben releeves him, the
Midianites buy him and sell him to Potiphar, his mistress accuses him, his
master condemns him; the Butler after long forgetfulness recommends him, and
at last Pharao exalts him. What strange instruments are here, and how many
hands about this one poor man of God! and yet never one of them looking to
that which God proposed. So much of the negative: I proceed to the affirmative.

But through their fall.] Th. Aquin. in hunc locum.
Tho. Aquinas produces that in the fourth of John [Salvation is of the Iewes]
to prove this, that the salvation of the Gentiles was occasionally by the fall
of the Jews, and makes a threefold interpretation; First, because by their
fault in killing Christ followed the redemption of the Gentiles. Secondly,
because they refused the doctrine of Christ, which therefore came to the
Gentiles: Act. 13.46. Seeing you put the Gospel from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of eternal life, we turn to the Gentiles. Thirdly, because
the Jews (for falling from God) were dispersed through the world, and by that
means brought the Scriptures and Word to the Gentiles: and to this purpose
brings that Psalm. 59.11. Kill them not, but scatter them. Secondly, we must
not think that the fall of the Jews was any cause, but only an occasion of
the salvation of the Gentiles. Thirdly, there was no necessity that the one
people should be cast off, before the other could be received, for God might
have called both at once. Fourthly, though the Jews had not been cast off,
yet the Gentiles should have been called, because there is no such dependencie
as effects have upon their causes. The first thing that I collect is;

God works good for his servants by contrary and most unlikely means. Thou and
Bohu upon the earth, and Choshec-panai Tehom, darkness upon the face of the
deep, in Genesis 1.2. then did the Lord make Light of it. So in the work of
redemption, he wrought by unlikelihoods and contraries, when by a cursed death
he brought a happy life, by yielding to death he overcame death, by his Cross
he won the Crown, and through shame he ascended into glory. The same order he
keeps in our second creation: he casts down, that he may raise up; he kills,
that he may make alive; he accuses his children for sin, that he may cause
them to seek remission; he troubles their consciences, that he may speak
peace unto them; and most commonly the means which he uses is contrary to the
work which he intends for his children. He sent on Abram a most fearful
darkness, even then when he was to communicate unto him most joyful light,
Genesis 15.12. He wrastled with Jacob, and shook him to and fro, even then when
he was about to bless him, Genesis 32. He struck Paul with blindness, even then
when he came to open his eyes, Act. 9. Sometimes he frowns upon his beloved,
as Joseph upon his brethren, when with loving affection he is about to embrace
them: he seems angry at our prayers, and puts us back with the woman of
Canaan, when he is about to grant a favorable answer unto them.

Learn,

Secondly, at the fall of the Jews he takes occasion to call the Gentiles;
from whence observe, That God watches any opportunity, and takes all
occasions to do his children good. How gladly would he have taken occasion to
have spared Jerusalem, when for one man's sake he would have spared it, Ier.
5.1. How passionatly did he affect the cure of Babylon, when he entreated her
with as powerful oratory as the heavens were able to compose, and the Angels
to utter, till she made this the burden of her song, I will not be cured, Ier.
51.9. How did he watch an occasion to spare Sodom, when for ten men's sake he
would have spared it. Genesis 18.32. Deus secat ut sanet.
He cuts and sliceth our flesh, that he may have occasion of show mercy in
healing it. So Augustine on Matthew. Ser. 15. Deus savit ut parcat Aug. in Matthew.
ser. 15.
He casts into despair, that he may show mercy in sparing it. And in another
place; He kills us, that we may not die. And again; He strikes to death,
O^id^t ne neriamur. Aug. in Johan sern. 38. Aug. Confess. lib. 2. cap. 2.
that he may have occasion to do his servants good in restoring them to life.
So that a man may fitly take up that speech of Themistocles when he was first
banished by the Greek, and then highly honored by the Persian; We had
perished, if we had not perished. Petiramus, nisi pertissemus.
If Job be naked, the Lord takes that occasion to cloth him; if the Shunamites
child be dead, the Lord quickly takes that occasion of showing mercy, in
quickening it.

These be the steps wherein our Father walks, Othniel must watch his
opportunity to do good in hearing and judging the causes: Ladies and Matrons
must watch their opportunity to do good in hearing the afflicted: The
Courtier (like Mordecai) must watch his time and opportunity to procure the
peace and welfare of Gods people, by stopping the way against all malicious
complaints and bills commenced against them. Let us watch occasion to do good,
if none be offered, devise occasion, and delight in doing them good, that you
may be sons and children of that Father, who seeks and watches all
opportunities to do good to you. I come to a third conclusion.

When God gives his word to a people, and offers them means of salvation, and
yet they turn it off, and fall away, then God takes it from them, and gives it
unto others. That Is the note of P. Martyr, and may be backed with that place,
Act. 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas said, it was necessary that the word should
first be preached to you; but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy, we turn to the Gentiles: By that parable of the Vineyard, in Mark.
12.9. He will destroy those husbandmen, and give the vineyard to others: By
that parable of the Supper, in Luke 14. from 16. to 25. A man made a supper,
and invited many, and said, come, for all things are ready: but they began to
make excuse, etc. The bread is first provided for the children, and they must
first be fed, and by the children are meant the Jews; but if they refuse, it
must be cast to the whelps under the table, as Christ said to the woman of
Syrophenyssa in Mark. 7.27. In all this you may see the fulfilling of that
saying in Matthew. 21.43. Therefore shall the kingdom of God be taken from you,
and given to a nation which will bring forth the fruits thereof. It was the
saying of our Savior, Matthew. 25. To him that has, that is, to him that uses,
shall be more given: but from him that has not, that is, uses not, shall be
taken away even that which he has, De doct. Christiana Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
verse. 29. for so Beza seems to expound that text, and Augustine.

Which point may be a fair warning for us, who have thus long enjoyed the
Gospel and the means of salvation; we have heard wisdom cry in the streets;
the Prophets have risen early, and wooed us with arguments full of passion: but
may not the Lord say of us as he said of his vineyard in Isa. 5.4. What could I
do for this people that I have not done? We were like Egypt when the plague
of mist and darkness was upon it, even darkness that might be felt, Exodus
10.21. and the Lord has made us like Goshen, or like to those people that
dwell under the poles, who have no night, but the Sun still shining upon
them. Blundevil. de Sphaera. lib. 20. Cap. 16.
We were like the mountains of Gilboa; but now the Lord has watered us with
the dew of heaven: we were overgrowne with weeds, our fields brought forth
nothing but cockle and darnell, sown by popish husbandmen; but since that
time, the Lord has gathered out those weeds, and has sown amongst us the
seed of the Gospel, and he yet continues to be kind and good unto us, we
have our Churches open, the Lord holds out unto us a candle, like to that which
Alexander held out to the City which he besieged; let us yield, and turn
before the lamp be out, for fear the Gospel be removed from us to another
people. What grief did Israel conceive when they sat in Babylon, as they make
their complaint and moan, Psalm. 137. By the waters of Babylon we sat down
and wept, etc. The same may befall us, and we may be enforced to complain
with David, Psalm. 84. that the case of the poorest creatures is better than
ours; The sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest wherein she
may lay her young. Nidificant, they build their nests, and prope altaria, near
the altars: Ego prohibeor, Calvin. ia Psalm. 84.
I am forbidden it, says Calvin. Learn then, that if God gives means,
embrace it; if the word of salvation be preached, hear it; if the way to
heaven be chalked out, follow it; if the Gospel be revealed, receive it with
cheerfulness, and make much of it, that God may not take his mercy from us,
nor bring that terrible famine threatened Amos 8.11. I come to one point more,
which I comprise in this conclusion:

Wheresoever the Gospel is preached, there is salvation offered by God unto
the people: how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
declares and publishes peace, that declares good things, and publishes
salvation, Isa. 52.7. And therefore in Heb. 2.3. The Law given by Angels is
called the great salvation, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation, which at first began to be preached by the Lord, and was afterward
confirmed by them that heard him? This is the great power of God to all that
are saved, 1 Cor. 1.18. that is, it is the instrument divinely efficacious to
salvation, and is the power of God to salvation, First, in judgment, because
we account it so; Secondly, in effect, because indesalutem consequimur, thence
we obtain salvation, as Paraeus speaks, that when the Gospel is preached to
a people, it may be said as it was to Zaccheus, Luke 19.9. when Christ lodged
with him; Behold, this day salvation is come into thy house; and therefore you
should do as he did, run down hastily, and receive him gladly. Imitate the
rich Merchant, Matt. 13.44. See first how gracious the Lord is in offering you
salvation so many years together: Secondly, how they that contemn the
Gospel, do exclude themselves from all hope of salvation. Thirdly, they that
esteem meanly of preaching, esteem meanly of salvation, they that will not
maintain it, are enemies to their own salvation: They that pay much preaching
with small rewards, are unnatural Gadarens, and think their idols in their
chests more precious than the salvation of their souls. But I pass this, and
come to the second part of the affirmative answer.

To provoke them to follow them.] There is (says Tho. Aquinas) a double
emulation; First, of imitation, when one does imitate another, and then the
sense is, that the Jews should imitate the says and conversion of the
Gentiles, and strive to come into favor with God, as the Gentiles were.
Secondly, of indignation, and then the meaning is, that the Jews might
emulate, that is, should be moved with anger and indignation against them,
according to that in Deuteronomy. 32.21. They have provoked me to anger with that
which is not God, and I will move them to jealousy with those which are no
people, meaning the Gentiles. The true and proper sense I take to be this: The
Jews manifestly saw, that the spirit, and grace, and knowledge of the
Scriptures, and almost all spiritual blessings were translated from them to
the Gentiles; and therefore could not choose but grievously complain, that they
who were sons, who were the proper and peculiar inheritance of God, who were
the Lords portion and lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. should now be cast
off, and the Gentiles who were Heathens, Idolaters, ignorant of heaven and
heavenly things, defiled with all kind of pollution, as in Romans 1. should come
in their stead, possess their rooms, be graced with privileges, and that not
by the judgment of man which might be erroneous and repealed, but by the
judgment of the immortal God who erreth not, who establishes his decrees; so
that God would have the Jews to take heavily the admission of the Gentiles,
and our salvation sharply to bite them; that seeing what privileges they have
lost, and we enjoy, they might imitate us, and come unto Christ from whom they
have fallen.

But who is it that does provoke them? The vulgar Latin and Origin understand
it of the faith of the Gentiles, which should provoke the Jews to emulation.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Ambrose understand it of the Gentiles, that they
should provoke the Jews (by their example) to believe. Anselmus, quite
contrary to the Apostles purpose, understands that the Gentiles should imitate
the Jews. P. Martyr says, that all this is referred to God; it is meant that
God would provoke the Jews, Annotat 6.
contrary to Tolet; and his judgment I rather embrace, because of that saying,
Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will provoke them to jealousy. But it will be objected, that
this is no commendable thing, by envy or by emulatio^ to be brought to believe;
whereto I answer, That God simply does not approve such emulation, or envy:
but as he can use evil to good purposes, so by this emulation it pleases him
to incite and stir up the Jews to turn unto him, like as the husband puts
away the adulterous wife, that she thereby may be provoked by a kind of
emulation to seek reconciliation, lest another should come in her room.
Beside this you must conceive this of the better sort of the Jews, they shall
be provoked, but not all; for the obstinate shall be made worse: lastly,
conceive it not of the Jews in particular; for they which stumbled and fell
away, were not restored: but of them in general, that though some were
believers, yet the whole nation was not cast off. Thus much for the sense: for
the reading there is no great question, only me thinks that the vulgar does
ill translate it, (...), That they might emulate them; Vt amulentur eos.
for (...), answers to the Hebrew word Hikni, which Moses uses, and comes of
Kanah, aemulari: now those verbes which in Kal are absolute, in Hiphil do
import the efficient and impulsive cause, as Grammarians speak; and therefore
the word cannot signify only aemulari, but provocare ad aemulationem, to
provoke to emulation. I descend to conclusions.

First, God would have men to be at a holy emulation and strife amongst
themselves, which should be nearest unto God. It is the Apostles doctrine, 1
Cor. 12.31. Covet the best gifts. En quomodo maxima cum land vobis licet
aemulari: See how with greatest praise you may emulate, says Beza. In this
only it is lawful to be ambitious, and lawful to contend. This is (...), a
holy and good contention, says Hesiod. We may contend who may do the most
good, who may lead the best life, who may express the most holiness: though
we may not strive who should build the highest palace, yet we may strive to
enter in at the strait gate: though not strive for lands and livings, yet to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living: Though we may not
supplant one another, as Jacob did his brother, yet we may contend as children
do, who may please their father best, and best deserve his love, and which of
us may provide the sweetest venison for our fathers diet. There is a glory
which if a man seek for, runs away from him; if a man runs from it, it
follows him, as Augustine says of Cato: Quo nanus setebat gl^riam, comagis
^ll^m ^^quebatur. Aug. de ^ivit Dei, lib. 5 cap. 12.
How much the less he sought for glory, by so much the more it followed him.
But there is a glory which cannot be got without toyling and laboring, that's
the true and perfect glory. Plutarch reports of Themistocles, that when he
heard that Miltiades had got him honor in the Marathonian battle, he was not
able to sleep, because Miltiades was so honorable, and he came so far short
of him. So should we in ^^irituall things.

The use is, not mortal, but immortal honor, and wherein it is lawful for
Christians to contend and ^trive; for grace, and not for greatness; where in
it is lawful to emulate one another, in seeking who should be nearest unto God
^ and therefore we should resolve, that if any man do faithful service unto
God, that we will do it as w^^^s he; if any merciful, we will be as
merciful as he, if any keep the Sabbath, we will keep it as well as he; if
any hear the word, we will hear it as well as he. And so I come to a second
conclusion.

The good that we see in others should be strong provocations for us to follow
them; Be ye followers of me, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.16. Your selves
know, how that you ought to be followers of us, 2 Thessalonians. 3.7. But most
powerful is that place, Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them which through faith
and patience inherit the promises: As if he should say, The faith and patience
of the Fathers, the virtues and godly qualities of the Patriarks, who have
inherited the promises, not the earthly Canaan which was promised, for that
they all obtained not, as Heb. 11.13. All these died in faith, and received not
the promises, but saw them af^^re off: But it is meant of the promise of
salvation in and by Christ, as Act. 13.32, 33. And we declare unto you, that
touching the promise made unto the fathers, God has fulfilled it unto us their
children: and verse. 23. God according to his promise has raised up to Israel
the Savior Jesus. It was the advice of Socrates in Lacrtius, that young men
should have always a looking-glass to look themselves in it; if they were
deformed outwardly, they might labor to recompense it with inward comeliness.
The glasses wherein the Lord would have us to look, be the gracious orna nents
and qualities of his servants. We should look on Abraham, and learn to
believe that it shall be done, if God say it, though we see not how, and part
with that we love best, to please h^^: Upon Job, and learn patience in all
such crosses as are most near unto us: Upon Lot, and learn to be chaste in
the midst of Sodom, even when we have most occasions; that's praiseworthy, as
Tully said of Muraena, non quod Asiam viderat, not that he had seen Asia: Upon
Elias, and be zealous; Abigail, and releeve those that sight the Lords battles:
Upon the Centurion, and be good to the Church: Upon Nehemiah, and stand for
reformation of the Sabbath: Upon every good man, and see what is excellent in
him, that do affect and imitate. As Tully reports of Xeuxis, that when he was
to make the picture of Helena in the temple of the Crotonians, he sent for five
of the most beautiful virgins, that out of all their excellencies he might
compose a perfect beauty; and as a man makes a garland or poesy of all the
best of flowers in the garden; so should thou pick out all the best
qualities of men, wheresoever thou see them.

Whence learn, learn to follow it; they may read holiness in their lives,
conscience in their doings, wisdom in their carriage, and learn to affect the
same commendable and gracious qualities in themselves. There is no grace which
they may not observe, nor virtue which they may not see lively delineated in
them, and study to come to that degree of holiness which they have, that they
may live as they do, and have it in that glory which they hope to have. I come
to a third.

I observe the great wisdom and loving kindness of God toward his children,
Observat.
who by his favor showed unto others, and substituting others in their places,
makes them ashamed of their unthankfulness, and labors to stir up in
them a desire of reconcilement. For confirmation, see Deuteronomy. 32. Because they
have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God, I will provoke them
with those which are no people. And herein God deals with them as a tender
father with his unkind and disobedient child that will not come unto him, he
takes another son in his arms, sets another on his knees, embraces him,
commends him, makes much of him, hereby correcting the stubbornness of his
other son, and provoking him to seek for the like favor and acceptance.
From whence learn;

First, to condemn those who by their idolatry, no marvel though the Jews
follow neither the one nor the other; when he sees that the Papist believes not
well, that the Protestant lives not well, its a rock of offense to him, that
he can approve neither the one nor the other.

Secondly, Ioh. 10.16. Example is very powerful. There is nothing more
availeable to the winning of one that believes not, than the good conversation
and life of him that does believe. I know not if S. Peter do not make a good
conversation more powerful to convert an unbeleever, than the word it self,
in 1 Pet. 3.1. Let the wives be subject to their husbands, that they which obey
not the word, may without the word be won by the good conversation of the
wives, while they behold your pure conversation coupled with fear. To this
purpose Bernard speaks well: Eff^a^ior est vo^ bonioperis quam elegantis
sermonu: illius dectoris libenter audio vece^^, qui non fibi plansum, sed m^^ip
anctum movet, etc Ber. in Cant. ser. 59. Segnius irrita^t etc. sivi^ me fle^e,
dol^ndu^ prius ipse libi. Confess. l. 9. c. 9.
The voice of a good work is more effectual than of an eloquent sermon: I
willingly hear the voice of that Teacher, who does not move applause to
himself, but weeping to me; and if thou will persuade, thou may do it more
by weeping than by declaming. And Horace himself in his book of the Art of
Poetry: If thou will have me weep, thou must first thy self grieve. S.
Augustine reports that his mother Monica gained her husband Patricia from being
an impure Manichee (not by strength of argument) but by piety, wisdom,
chastity: So there is nothing can more hinder the Jews from professing as we
do, than our profane life and bad conversation; to persuade them by good
words, and yet let them see our bad lives, is, but to weave Penelope's web, to
untwist as fast as we weave, and to pull down as fast as we build, and to
destroy faster with one hand, than we build with the other. We must therefore
learn to let the light of our good life and conversation so shine, Matthew. 5.16.
that men may see our good lives, and good works, and holy conversation, and
so glorisie our Father which is in Heaven. Let us so behave our selves toward
the Jews, as S. Peter taught once the Jews to behave themselves toward us, 1
Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they by your
good works which they shall see, may glorify God in the day of their
visitation, for fear we cause them to blaspheme the name of God, which they
polluted among the Heathen, Ezekiel. 36.23. See Romans 2.24. So I come to the
illustration of his answer in the 12. and 13. verses.

VERSE. 12.
WHerein there is first an answer to an objection, for it may seem that the
one end does quite overthrow the other: for if the Jews fell that the Gentiles
might have place, and the Jews be to be converted again, then it seems
that the Gentiles must be cast off again, and so the conversion of the Jews
shall rather hinder the salvation of the Gentiles, which is contarie to the
first part of the affirmative answer. This inference the Apostle denies, and
inferres the quite contrary, by an argument taken from the less after this
manner. If the fall of the Jews be the riches of the world, then much more
shall their abundance be the riches of the world: if their poverty were the
riches of the world, how much more shall their plentiful calling be? If God
turn that which is evil to the good of the Gentiles, how much more will he
turn that which is good to the welfare of the Gentiles? Before I come to the
observations, see the exposition of some hard and difficult terms. 1. What is
meant by riches of the world. Both the multitude of the Gentiles called to the
knowledge of Christ, as Paraeus, and also that wherewith they were enlightened;
namely, the saving knowledge of the Gospel, the grace of Gods spirit,
remission of sins, and the assured promise and expectation of eternal lise.
2. What is meant by diminishing. Some understand it of the Apostles, which were
but few, and abjects of the people, yet they enriched the Gentiles by their
preaching, and make the sense thus: That if the conversion of so few (as the
Apostles were) did so much good to the world; how much more the conversion of
the whole Nation at the end of the world: So Lyranus and Gorrhan. But I think,
that by diminution, is not meant the conversion of a few; but their falling
away to a few. And that the Apostle uses these three words, as equipollent and
of one sense, (...), their fall; (...), their diminishing; and (...), their
casting off. And in that he says they are diminished, he shows that they
are not quite perished; for diminution is not Rei excisio, sed decisio; Not the
wasting or destruction of a thing, but a paring off, as Paraeus. 3. What is
meant by (...), their fullness, or abundance, not only (...), viz. the
multitude of Jews which shall be called, but also the excellency of
spiritual graces wherewith the Jews at the end of the world shall be adorned
at their general conversion. 2. By fullness we must not understand, that
every particular Jew shall be called at the end of the world; but of the most
of them: and this fullness is not to be understood with relation to the
Gentiles, as though their number should be more; for their fullness must first
be come in, as verse. 25. Obstinacy is come to Israel until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in; but with reference to the whole number of Christ's
Church; that although there be a fullness of the Gentiles without them, yet as
Origin says, Plenitudo portio nis Dom^ni nondum dicu^r completa.
The fullness of the Lords portion is not complete without the Jews. But how
can this fullness of the Jews do the Gentiles good? It shall do them good;
1. By confirming the faith of the Gentiles; so P. Martyr. 2. It shall enrich
the Gentiles with doctrine and example; so the Ordinary Gloss. 3. The Church
shall be increased by the glorious access of a people; so Osiander: So these
benefits shall accrue to the Gentiles by the conversion of the Jews. 1. The
consociation and joining together both of Jews and Gentiles, the partition
wall being broken down again. 2. The Church shall be increased; for then the
children of Israel and of Judah shall be gathered together, etc. as Hos. 1.11.
3. The faith of the Gentiles shall be confirmed, by seeing the zeal of the
Jews after their conversion. 4. God shall receive greater glory, when his
goodness and the truth of his promises shall be made manifest, both in Jews
and Gentiles. But here is yet another doubt to be resolved.

For seeing the Apostle said before, that the fall of the Jews was the
salvation of the Gentiles; and now that the ruin and diminution of the Jews,
the riches of the world. 1. God may seem to deal hardly, in casting off his
own people to receive strangers; and besides, it seems contrary to the rule,
Romans 6.1. Evil must not be done, that good may come of it. Whereto I answer,
that it were hard, that God should cast off some to receive others. 1. If they
were cast off without their own fault. 2. If the Lord were tied by bond not to
cast them off. 3. If their casting off did not tend to their further good; But
every one of these will acquit God both from injustice and hard dealing. For
1. The Lord did not cast them off, but for their unbeleefe, as verse. 10. So
that they indeed cast off themselves. 2. God is not bound either to bestow or
continue his grace, he may confer it and withdraw it upon whom, and from whom
he will. If he deny grace, Debita redditur poena damnato; A due punishment is
given to the damned; If he give grace, Indebita redditur gratia liberato;
Undeserved grace is bestowed on him that is freed; says Augustine. Ad Sixt^m,
^pist. 103.
3. For full answer; Their rejection was not simply the cause of the vocation
of the Gentiles, but by accident: for it was properly the punishment of the
infidelity of the Jews, and a demonstration of the justice of God: But God
(that can turn evil into good) did use this (as an occasion) to induce the
Gentiles to believe. I come to observations.

Thus the Text being plain, Three Doctrines.
in general the Doctrines are three. 1. The accomplishment of the great
mystery of the restoring of the Jews. 2. That the conversion of the Jews
cannot hinder the Gentiles, but they may be in favor both together, and God
will have a Church, which ought to breed an agreement between them. 3. That it
beseemes not Christians, one to envy the happiness and salvation of another,
but to be glad and rejoice in it. But I come to particulars. 1. Their fall,
that is, the Gospel (which by their fall was preached) is the riches of the
world, gives this note.

That the grace and knowledge of God, and his Son Christ, and the preaching
of the Gospel is the only true and lasting riches, that makes the owners and
possessors blessed; this is that riches of the world. S. Luke chap. 12.21.
makes a twofold rich man; The one to himself, the other to God. So is he
that gathered riches to himself, and is not rich in God, in godliness, and
wisdom. And S. James, chap. 2.5. The godly poor are rich in faith, and though
not heirs, yet heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised. These he
chooses to enrich with heavenly riches, not a Senator; for he would have said,
my dignity is chosen; if a rich man, my wealth is chosen; if an Orator, my
eloquence is chosen; if a Philosopher, my wisdom is chosen, Aug. de verbis
Dom. S^rin. 59.
says Augustine. This is riches that cannot be taken away, that will fill the
soul with content, that it can desire no more, want no more: They that drink
of this shall never be thirsty, Ioh. 4.14. That is, he that is enriched with
the Spirit of God and his grace, cannot want any thing, Habenti Deum nihil
pot^st deesse, nisi desit ipse Deo, qu^a Dei sunt ^mn^a. Cypr. orat. Do^. lib.
he is rich enough. To him that has God nothing can be wanting, unless he
himself be wanting to God, because all things are Gods, says Cyprian. This
wisdom and knowledge of God is truly the treasure that is in the field of the
Church, which when a man finds, he hides and preserves it, and for joy
goes, and sells all that he has to buy it, Disce home ubi sunt verae
d^vitiae. Regnum coeloru^ vere divit^m facit, praeslat vera bona, Deum ^p^um,
quo ^raesente, quid poterit deesse?
Matthew. 13.44. Learn, O man, where are the true riches, says Ferus. The
kingdom of heaven makes truly rich, performs the true good, God himself,
who being present, what can be wanting? The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore can
I want nothing, Psalm. 23.1. And as a man were he for land, money, house,
friends, as poor as Lazarus; yet if he have a precious and costly jewel,
cannot but be rich; So is he that has this precious jewel of grace, and the
knowledge of God, albeit he want worldly riches, yet he is rich before God: If
you have Christ, all is yours, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.21. If you have him,
you have all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge which are hid in him, Col.
2.3. For conclusion, if you will know what a great riches this knowledge of God
is, see Prove. 8.11. Wisdom is better than precious stones, and all pleasures
are not to be compared to her: and at the tenth verse, Receive instruction
rather than silver, and knowledge rather than gold. All wisdom (in comparison
of this) is but foolishness; all riches (in comparison of this) but dross and
rubbish, all liberty (in respect of the liberty to hear the Gospel) but
captivity and bondage; all outward pomps and greatness (in respect of this)
but (...), loss and dung, Phil. 3.8. All the gold of Ophir, Antiquit. lib. 8.
cap. 2.
which (as Josephus affirms) is terra auri, a land of gold; all the water of
Ganges and Tagus, which (as Suidas of the one, and Pliny of the other) have all
the gravel gold, are but dung and dross, in comparison of the riches that are
in the Gospel: For that shows the glad tidings of our salvation, Luke 2.10.
remission of sins by Christ, Romans 4.25. It gives eternal life by Christ unto
the chosen of God, according to his purpose and grace, Ephesians. 1.7, 9. It
reveals the promise of eternal life, The grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared: Tit. 2.11. He that has this treasure is rich enough,
though he have nothing else; and he that forsakes all for this, shall receive
an hundredfold more, and in the end eternal life, Matthew. 19.29.

Which first may serve to confute that gross conceit of the Heathens, Te^ull,
in Apolog. cap. 40.
And what they were wont to say; S^ Tybur is ascendat in maenia, si Nilus non
t^s^uat a^va, si cerra movit, si coelum s^^tit, si f^mis, s^ lu^s, statim
acclamatu^, Christiani ad L^on^n. Arnob. lib. 1. a^^^ers. Geut. Postqu^^^ gens
Christiana coepit essein munde, ^rbis t^^rum ser. i^, multisorn ibus affectum
fuit bumanum genus ma^^^. Cypr. contra Dem^trianum.
If Tybur ascend to the walls, if Nilus does not flow into the fields, if the
earth moved, if the heaven stood, if famine, if murraine, presently they
shouted, the Christians were at the Lion. After that the Christian Nation began
to be in the world, then the whole earth perished, humane kind was affected
with sundry kinds of evils. The same I find in Cyprian; That they were wont to
say, that the Gospel and Christianity were the causes, that in winter they
wanted rain to feed their corn, in summer the warmth of the Sun to cherish
it. That montes were fatigati, The mountains were wearied; and Metalla
exhausta, and venae pauperes; their metalls exhausted, and veins poor: Fontes
(qui venis exundantibus largiter profluebant) vix modico sudore distillant;
Their fountains (which (their veins overflowing) did abundantly gush out)
scarcely distill with a small sweat: Much like to those unto whom Jeremy
preached, Ierem. 44.17, 18. All these be slanders; for the Gospel is so far
from being the cause of poverty and misery, that in truth it is to be
esteemed the greatest riches that the world enjoyes, as Eusebius shows in his
History, Eccles. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 7.
where he consutes the gross imputation of Maximinus the Emperor, who laid
the cause of all their hurts and wrongs upon the Gospel and the professors of
it: if you will know the reason why praedicato Euangelio mundus tot mala
patiebatur, the Gospel being preached the world suffered so many evils; see
Aug. Epist. 122.

Secondly, let us learn, not to dote and set our minds upon any riches so much
as this: There is no other riches that can make the possessors happy; They are
not long profitable to the soul, Nec animae prosont, nec co^pori d^u.
nor to the body, says Bernard: This can make one blessed; for blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it, Luke 11.28. God never charge us
to be rich in worldly things, but he commands us to be rich in knowledge,
Coloss. 1.10. he never commands us to be sure that we get our purses full of
silver; but by his Apostle he commands and prays that we be filled with the
knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, Coloss. 1.9.
We have no charge to gather wealth about us plenteously; but we have charge to
let the word of God dwell in us plenteously, Coloss. 3.16. The word is (...),
richly. And though this be the rich mineral wherein we must dig for the true
treasure which is Christ, yet I think not amiss to persuade it by two or
three arguments.

First, because it teaches how the most vain may learn to reform their
ways, and be reclaimed, as Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man etc.
Though they be like wax in the hand of Satan; though led with the sollies of
youth and heat of their blood, yet this Word will cleanse them. Caereus in
vitiu^ st c^, (...) niteribus asp^^. Hora:.
Secondly, it will never fail to bring a man to life that follows it, and
therefore the Angel that came by night to the prison, where the chief Priest
had shut the Apostles, bids them go and stand in the Temple, and speak to the
people all the words of this life, Act. 5.20. Never man that went this way,
mist of life and happiness. Thirdly, it is the word of reconciliation, and the
Ambassadors are ministers of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5 19. which assures of
atonement and peace with God, of the glory that is to be revealed, and is the
key of the kingdom of heaven, which opens and no man shuts; and if that shut
out of heaven, nothing can open it.

Thirdly, Apoc. 3.17. Thou say thou art rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked. When thou buyest a village, bonam emis, thou
buyest a good one; when thou marriest a wife, bonam eligis, thou chusest a good
one; when thou desire children, bonos optas, thou desire good ones: and
when thou have all these riches, thou art but poor inter tot dona, amongst so
many gifts, and malus inter tot bona, and evil amongst so many good things,
Aug. se^m. 16. in Matthew.
says A gustine. Many may welter upon their gold like Heliogabalus, as
Lampridius and Herodian report of him; and yet for spiritual wisdom have
hearts like stones, and heads like beetles, and be beggars destitute of all
heavenly riches. My conclusion is an exhortation to bestow more of our time,
spend more of our life in reading the book of God, than in any thing besides,
all our other studies, etc. I come to the second part of the proposition; If
their diminishing be the riches of the Gentiles; the word is (...), viz.
diminishing, the same with (...), their fall, (...), their casting off; and
being in sense the same with the precedent clause, I note from the iteration:
That the fall of the Jews is diligently to be observed and noted by us
Gentiles: for that is a doctrine of weight, full of profit, and has in it many
lessons of special use. 1. That no nation, be they people never so dear, so
graced with blessings, so beloved of God; but sin will set God and them at
variance, and hazard the ruin both of their state and government: That Common
wealths and Kingdoms have their periods; Let Sparta, and Babylon, and Nineveh
witness. 2. We learn that when the Word and Gospel is become a stumbling
block, the fall of that people is not far off, as in verse. 12.3. Infidelity
and contempt of the Gospel makes God in justice take it quite away from them,
as verse. 12. There be many other points, but I meet them hereafter, and come
to the inference that is made upon these two premises.

(...), How much more shall their fullness be? By (...) is meant (...), the
multitude of the Jews that shall be called; the plentiful restoring of the
Jews, as Paraeus. And thence it follows, that the conversion of the Jews
shall not be of some small, but of a great and plentiful number. 2. The
excellency of spiritual graces wherewith they shall be adorned and beautified
after their conversion; and therefore some have expounded the 60. of Isay, to
be meant of Jerusalem after the conversion of the Jews; That then God would
beautify the house of his glory, verse. 7. Glorify the place of his feet,
verse. 13. That he would again call it the City of the Lord, Zion of the holy
one of Israel, verse. 14. That in stead of brass they should have gold, in
stead of iron they should have silver, in stead of wood they should have
brass, in stead of stones, iron, verse. 17. That the Lord will be their light,
and God their glory, verse. 19. Meaning that after their conversion, they shall
have all restored more glorious than they had before. Thus the meaning of the
words being clear, the conclusions follow.

1. The Jews shall be converted in great numbers toward the end of the world:
And therefore says my Apostle at verse. 26. All Israel shall be saved; whereby
understand not the spiritual Israel, that is, the people of God consisting of
Jew and Gentile, though Melancthon and Calvin do so expound it. For, 1. In
this sense Paul had not delivered any mystery, as it is called, verse. 25. 2.
The Apostle means to minister some consolation to the Jews, in hope of their
future conversion, which (unless it were more general than in the conversion
of a Jew) it would have ministered small comfort to the whole Nation, as Martyr
and Paraeus make the reason. 3. The Apostle gives this as a reason, why he
brings in this mystery, that the Gentiles should not insult over the Jews,
and therefore had been little to his purpose, if he had not opened some
secret concerning some special calling of the Jews: and S. Chrysostom
expounding that place, Apoc. 7.4. There were sealed of the tribes of Israel
1440. says, that it is to be understood of the general conversion of the
Jews. But this point I defer to verse. 26.

2. The Jews after their conversion shall be endued with excellent gifts of
wisdom and knowledge. I will not be so adventurous as some have been, to
understand (that Jerusalem, that new Citic which came down from God, Apoc.
21.2. which is said to have no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon; for the
glory of God does light it, and the Lambe^^ the light of it) to be Jerusalem,
or the Church of God after the conversion of the Jews; for that may seem to
be meant of Jerusalem which is above; yet do I think that saying of the
Prophet, either to be meant of them, or may be fitly applied unto them, Isa.
24.23. when after many days they shall be visited, and come out of prison, the
Moon shall be ashamed, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall
reign in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and glory shall be before his ancient
men; that is, when God shall restore his Church, the glory thereof shall so
shine, and his Ministers which are called ancient mien, that the Sun and
Moon shall be darkened in comparison of them; The light of the Moon shall be
as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold more:
But these be points that must be handled hereafter; I therefore proceed to the
farther explication of this argument in the thirteenth and foureteenth verses.

VERSE. 13.
THe second end that God had in rejecting of the Jews, was the salvation of
the Gentiles, and in the end the conversion of the Jews again; so that he
aimed at the welfare of both, now in this verse he illustrates all this by
the end of his Ministry, and shows that he does do and meditate the same;
that in his preaching he proposes the same end that God did in rejecting the
Jews, to wit, the salvation of the Gentiles, and by them the conversion of the
Jews. Di^idi^se Apostolus inter Gentes and Iudaeos, and tam horli quam illorum
salutem ^^d (...) ^os^endit.
The Apostle divides himself between the Gentiles and the Jews; and shows
that he meditates on so well the salvation of these, as of those; says
Paraeus. The one end at verse. 13. the other at verse. 14. I begin with the
first, which notes the end why he preached the salvation of the Gentiles.

The parts of his speech are two. 1. How God graced him with an Apostleship and
Ministry. 2. How he labors to grace and magnify it: But before I come to
these, observe somewhat out of the direction of his speech. I speak to you
Gentiles. In the beginning of this Epistle, the Apostle, handling the common
cause of faith, directed his speech to all the people of God, To all you that
be at Rome, beloved of God, and called to be Saints, Romans 1.7. But here
handling particularly the cause and case of the Jews, he directs his speech
particularly to the Gentiles. So to gives the reason; lest the Gentiles should
suspect that Paul, who was appointed to be teacher of the Gentiles, should
forsake them, and go preach to the Jews: whence I observe a double affection,
the one in Paul toward the Gentiles, the other in the Gentiles toward Paul.
Paul's affection to them, in that he would have them think, that though he
spoke of the Jews, yet it was with respect to their good and benefit; all that
he did was for their sakes, and gives us this plain note,

That though the Preacher speaks of other people, and of Gods dealing with
others, yet still it is for your learning, that you may have profit by it:
Vobis dico, I speak it unto you. When we speak to you of the faith of
Abraham, it is for your learning: 1. That you may rest upon Gods promises. 2.
Sacrifice those things that be dearest unto you: when of the sacrifice of
Abel, it is to teach you to offer the first and the best, Genes. 4.4. as also
to get God to accept our persons, that so he may accept our sacrifice. 3. That
you may learn the lesson of Solomon, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
riches, and with the first fruits of all thine increase. When of Jerusalem,
that you may not trust to any outward prerogatives; but if you sin, down you
must as well as others: when we speak to you of Sodom, it is to teach you to
take heed of pride, fullness of bread, and idleness, these were her sins
when she was destroyed, Ezekiel. 16.49. When of Peter, that you may learn the
weakness of the best man's says, and that without Gods assistance we shall
yield to every weak and small temptation. When of the these upon the cross,
that you may learn, that Heavens gate is never shut, when penitent sinners
knock, but that while life lasts, there lasts hope of mercy also:
whatsoever we speak, it is for you; of whomsoever we speak, it is to you,

Learn from hence the wonderful care that men ought to have in applying all
the stories of other people and nations unto themselves: the blessing upon
Abraham belongs to thee, if the believe; the fall of the Jews will light upon
thee if thou believe not. Think not, when we speak of Sodom, Jerusalem,
Babylon, etc. that we speak of things that concern thee not; for thou art
lerusalem, if thou kill the Prophets and stone them that are sent unto thee;
thou art Sodom, if thou live in uncleanness; thou art Babylon, if thou live
in pride; and whatsoever we speak either of Jew or Jerusalem, of the
preserving of some or overthrow of others, all is for you and to you: The next
is the peoples affection toward Paul.

They feared that he should leave them, Good people will stand in fear of
leaving and losing their godly Teachers, which are set over them, and labor
for the happiness and salvation of their souls: For that is the reason of
Paul's speech, Vob^ dico, I speak it unto you. Will not a child be loath to
leave his father, and a tender infant his mother, whose breasts he has sucked?
How will it grieve their souls to part with them? But the Preacher he is the
father that begers men unto God, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. And in this sense the ancient Doctors of the Church
are called Fathers; and they are your Mothers also, that endure hard travail
to bring forth one of you; Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travail in
birth again, till Christ be formed in you. How then can they endure to part
with them? Many can, and therefore it seems they are not begotten: But they
are converted, in whose hearts God has wrought grace by their Ministry.
There is nothing that can grieve them more than such a loss; What loss is it
for a man to lose his eyes? They are the Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9. What Iosse for a
man in the night time to lose his guide? They are the gui^es that give light,
their words are as a light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Learn from hence, whether a Preacher has wrought goodness in your heart, or
no, If he have, you will be loath to forgo him; See the Galatians toward
Paul, Gal. 4.15. If you have gained peace by them, you will have them in
singular honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Every man loves them by whom
be gains, etc. And so I come from the direction of his speech to the parts of
it. And, 1. how God graced him with the Ministry and Apostleship. The word is
taken sometimes in an equivocall and improper sense, and that is sometime in
the better sense; as Andronicus and Iunia are said to be notable among the
Apostles, Romans 16.7. viz. in a large signification; as Titus and others are
Ambassadors or Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13. Sometimes the word is used univocally,
and properly, and that either in a kind of excellency, as Christ is called
our High Priest and Apostle, Heb. 3.1. Or else it is applied to the chiese
Ministers of the new Testament, which were properly called Apostles. S. Hierome
makes four kinds of Apostles: 1. Some were ordained only by God, as Isay,
Jeremy, and the Prophets. 2. Some ordained of God, but by men, as Moses
consecrated Aaron to be High Priest, and Joshua to succeed him. 3. Some are
sent by men, and not of God, which are thrust into the Ministry by letters,
corruptions, bribes. 4. Some shoulder in themselves, being appointed neither by
God nor men: Sometimes the word signifies any one that is sent, generally and
properly the highest office, and dignity of the Apostles in the new Testament;
and sometimes it signifies those that were ordained of Christ to be of equal
authority with the 12. Apostles, such as were Paul and Barnabas.

The grace and excellency of an Apostleship consists especially in these
points. 1. They were immediately called by Christ to preach his Gospel through
the world; Go teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. And it is no small credit to be
Gods Herald at arms, to be Tuba Evangelica, Gods Trumpet, both to give
warning of a fight, and to sound the retreat, to proclaim peace, and rest when
the combat is done; to deliver Gods will, to stand in his room, to plead his
cause and speak for his honor, can be no mean or small prerogative. 2. The
Apostles were such men as had known Christ in the flesh, were eyewitnesses of
his miracles, and heard his Sermons, as in 1 Ioh. 1.3. That which we have heard
and seen, declare we unto you; His glory that they saw, Matt. 17. Secondly,
his resurrection, for he appeared to the twelve, as 1 Cor. 15.5. His ascension
into heaven, while they beheld he was taken up, Acts 1.9. And though S. Paul
had not known Christ in the days of his flesh, yet he saw him being immortal
and in glory by revelation, as Augustine and Lyranus affirm on 2 Cor. 12.
Thirdly, they could discern canonical books of Scripture from others, they
had the keys of the Kingdom after a more special manner, that whatsoever
they bound in earth should be bound in heaven, etc. as Peter bound up the sin
of Simon Magus, and pronounced sentence against Ananias and Saphyra. Fourthly,
they had power to work miracles, heal diseases, cast out Devils, yea Peter's
very shadow, Acts 5.15. and Paul's napkin, Act. 9.12. Fifthly, they gave the
Holy Ghost by laying on of their hands, Acts 8. They were free from error in
doctrine, for the Spirit promised to lead them into all truth, Ioh. 16.13.
Lastly, they had the gifts of tongues, whereto Pererius adds further, that
they had another special grace, that speaking in their own tongue, yet men of
diverse languages did so understand them, as if they had spoken diverse
languages; and of the same opinion is Erasmus Annot. in Act. 2.8. But I incline
to the judgment of Beza, who shows against Pererius and Erasmus, Mirac^lum
suisset non in Aposlelis, sed in auditoribus.
that if that had been true, It had been a miracle not in the Apostles, but in
the hearers. But to leave this and fall upon the point, these words are the
reason that Paul gives of his speaking to the Gentiles; In as much as I am the
Apostle of the Gentiles, therefore I speak to you Gentiles; for it is not
(...), quamdiu, as long as I live. I speak to you Gentiles, as Origin thought,
and is the translation of the vulgar Latin; but (...), in quantum, or
quatenus, nothing the cause, because I am your Apostle, therefore I speak to
you. I might note, 1. That no man was ever so far gone in sin, but God
could call him home again, Paul once a persecutor, now an Apostle. 2. God is
so far after conversion from thinking a man the worse, that he will place
him near to himself, Paul now an Apostle. 3. Gods providing of means for
them whom he will save; The Apostle of the Gentiles: But these are not so
proper to this Text; but that which I chiefly note is the Apostles drift, That
his chiefest care was to speak for the good of the Gentiles, to whom God
appointed him to preach; from whence note.

When God sets a man over a people, Doct. Civitas est, vigila ad custodiam;
ager est, studeto cultui; spa^nsa est, studeto crnatui; grex est, studeto
pastui. Bernard. super Cantic. Sermon. 76.
he ought chiefly to intend their good and welfare. Is it a City, watch to
keep it; is it a field, study to till it; is it a spouse, study to adorn
her; is it a flock, study to feed it; says Bernard. If a City, then he must
labor to build and defend it, a vi tyrannorum, a fraudibus haereticorum, a
tentationibus Daemonum; from the violence of Tyrants, from the deceits of
Heretics, from the tentations of the Devil: If a Spouse, he must labor to
trim her, that she be all glorious within, viz. 1. An acknowledgement of the
will of God. 2. True and solid comfort in distresses. 3. Hearing of prayers. 4.
Famous deliverances. 5. Diverse virtues kindled in them by the Spirit; as
Mollerus on Psalm. 45.13. If it be a field or vineyard, he must labor both to
gather out of it the briars and tares, and to sow it with good feed, and then
to watch for fear the envious man sow tares in it. If it be a flock, he must
drive them to the green pastures of Gods word, and lead them out by the waters
of comfort, Psalm. 23. When Christ in Ioh. 21. asked Peter thrice, Simon,
love thou me? 1. Plusquam tua. 2. Plusquam tuos. 3. Plusquam te. More than
thine, more than thy self; as Bernard expounds it: and Peter still answered,
Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee; Christ gives him this mark to know it
by, Pasce oves, pasce agnos, it may be known by thy care in feeding my
lambs, and tending my sheep; I have set watchmen upon thy walls (O Jerusalem)
which all the day and all the night shall not cease; and ye that are mindful
of the Lord keep not silence, Isay 62.6. Son of man I have made thee a
watchman, Ezekiel. 3.17. By which metaphor it may appear, that as in times of
war the watchmen are tending all the day in their watch-towers, but
especially in the night time; and if there be any danger, give the people
warning: So in the Church, Bishops and Ministers, they must be always in their
watch-towers, but especially when the night of errors arises; they must
remember that in Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church which he
purchased with his own blood. When I remember that saying of Jacob, Genesis
31.40. I was in the day consumed with heat, I was parched with frost in the
night; and read of the shepherds watching their flocks in the night; then do
I consider their early rising, and late going to bed, how their eyes have not
time to sleep, nor their eyelids to slumber, nor their heads to take any rest
from tending the souls and studying the welfare of their people; and therefore
the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 4. calls Ministers (...), of (...), to row, as if they
were captives condemned to the oars, whose arms must row the ship of Christ
to shore, yea the winds being conspired against them. Excellently Sace dotum
nonuna accepunus, non ad quie^em, sed ad laborem, ut inveniamur in osere quod
signa mur in n^mine. Greg. l. 4. epist 8.
Gregory: We have received the names of Friests, not to rest, but to labor,
that we may be found in work that which we are sealed in name; that we may
give a good account that day, when God shall say, Restore my sheep, or your
souls; all his work must be either to pray for his people, or to teach his
people. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for
you, 1 Samuel 12.23. Sometimes he must be providing meat for them, sometimes
discovering the wolves that lurk amongst them, sometimes devising remedies
which may heal their diseases. But I meet the point in the next verse, and
will rejourne the application till I come unto it, and come from Gods gracing
of Paul with an Apostleship, to see how Paul labors to grace and magnify it.

(...), I magnify mine office, with gravitie of manners, with maturitie of
counsels, with honesty of actions, as Bernard: Ipist. 28. Non in his quae
ad^on^re^. sec^aren. spectant
Not in these things which belong to secular honor, says Tho. Aquinas; but in
adorning himself with good manners, enlarging his care of the salvation of
all. I magnify, by diligence and faith, by life and doctrine, says Origin.
Non ^p^bus, non vestibas, hae^ sunt oruamenta sophist^a, sedut multi
convertantur ad Dei^ 2 Vt minister. (...) sit efficax in cordib audiet.
Not with wealth and garments, these are sophistical ornaments, but that many
may be converted to God: Secondly, that my ministry may be effectual in the
hearts of the hearers, says Martyr. Non ver borum lenocinis, nam sermonisi
animae med. tur abiectus est. Cent. 6 c 4.
Not in the pleasant allurements of words, for a sermon (unless it eures the
soul) is rejected, say the Magdeburgenses out of Ennodius: but pret: osum
pastoris diadema etc. The precious diadem of a Pastor consists in this, Vt
docirina institunt, bonis no ribas one not, sad cos custo^^ vigilet, a malo
decli^are fa^at.
that with doctri^ he instructs, with good in inners he a lor^es, with a godly
custody he, watches over them, that he makes them decline from evil, as
Gregory on 1 King. 1. Then Paul is said to magnify his ministry, if he can
win both Jews and Gentiles unto God, as 1 Cor. 9.19. I have made my self
servant to all men, that I may win the more: to the Jews I became a Jew, I am
made all things to all men, etc. From all, this conclusion follows in general:

It is the duty of every Minister of the Gospel, so to preach, and live, as
that he may honor and grace his calling and ministry: he must for life be
unreproveable. Accipimus his injurias, quibus impis optime ^ eritis nunquam non
gravarunt. B^ er in 1 Timothy 3.6.
1 Timothy 3.2. We here receive injuries, with which the ungodly never have not
burdened the best deserving, says Bucer. For knowledge he must be able to
teach, 1 Timothy 3.6. Bonaventure requires three things to the honoring of the
ministry: Tract. de Christi paupertate. In Apo: cap. 2.
1. Authority; 2. Truth; 3. Profit. Aquinas says, there must be in him that
will grace the ministry, 1. Charity to love: 2. Magnan mitie to sustain: (
Clausa domo tenere, was the complaint of Hyperm^estra) 3. Severitie to
ext^rpate evil: 4. Humility to shun pride: 5. Stabilitie to persevere: 6.
Valiantness to do vehemently: he must have cleerenesse in knowledge,
servencie in life, shining and burning like John Baptist, Ardens in seipso
vebimentia ^steritate, ardens erga Christum amore, erga peccantes incre^atione.
Ioh. 5.35. he was lucens exemplo, verbo, shining in example, in word: he was
burning in himself with vehement austeritie, burning with love toward Christ,
with chiding toward sinners, says Bernard.

Here I should first lay down the duties of good Ministers, how they ought to
live and preach, that so they may magnify their offices. Secondly, the
lamentable face of our Church, in respect that so many of her children, who
should be like Barnabas, prove like Benoni, a heaviness and woe unto her; how
too many Ministers disgrace the ministry, and many that sometimes do preach
the Gospel, discredit the Gospel; many that are scrued (as it were) into this
office, are the great blemishes of it; sometimes in doing something else,
sometime in doing nothing, sometime in doing evilly. But this is a point that
is known well enough; I wish it were to be excused: I spare the handling of it
in this audience: It Is a thing rather to be lamented, than preached and
published; it is too well known in Gath, and published in the streets of
Askelon: I pray God we might live to see the day, that they who have authority
would either resorme, or root them out of the Church; that they who banish dead
idols out of Church windows, would not set living idols in our pulpits: That
they would not set them to speak against drunkenness, who be tospots
themselves; against Laodicean luke-warmnesse, who be hollow themselves; them to
pull down sin in others, who hug and dandle it themselves. These times
need no such aids and patrons. God has no need of such, Nec talianxlio, nec
defensoribus estu, tempus egit. Virg. Aeneid.
and these ill times require better Preachers. There is small comfort, or hope
of health, lib. 2.
when a sick man must be cured by such a Physician as has the plague and sore
running upon himself. But what I leave in this unspoken, I shall find in the
next verse, which is the other end of Paul's preaching and ministry.

VERSE. 14. If by any means I might provoke them of my flesh to follow them,
and might save some of them.
HEre be two ends of Paul's preaching and ministry: the former, that he might
provoke; the other, that he might save: and in these there be two other
considerable points; the one, the great pains that he takes, if by any means;
secondly, the specification of the parties whom he so much tenders, them of my
flesh. I begin with the first; That he might provoke, viz. to emulation: from
whence observe, That Gods children should be at an holy emulation and strise
who should be nearest unto God; and secondly, the good that we see in others
should be strong provocations for us to follow them: Be followers of me, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.16. I come to the second end of his ministry, save some
of them.

The end whereat every good Minister must aim is the salvation of souls.
Praelatus deb^t prodisse, non praesse; nec^ proprium ambire commod my sed
anima^ is salutem. Bern. de lrib. ordin. and clesiae.
It is the rule of Bernard: A Prelate ought to profit, not to rule; neither to
desire his own profit, but the salvation of souls. What is Paul's hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not you it, in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming? Yes etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. This was the reason why Paul
became all things to all men, that he might save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. I s^eke not
yours, but you. The reason: First, because the Ministers must aim at that most
whereby God is glorified most, and that's the salvation of souls; he is
glorified in the wickeds destruction, but he glories more in the salvation of
one that believes and repents, than in the condemnation of a thousand that die
impenitent. Secondly, because the Minister must answer for his peoples souls,
as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 13.17. They watch for your souls, as they that
must give account unto God. He i^^o to watch, Vtetiamsi sancte vrvat, and
perdite viventes arguere erub^scat, aut ^ctuat, cum o unibus qui (ertacent^)
periere perit. Prosp. Aquitan. Devita ^ontemplat. cap. 20.
That although he live holily, and blusheth, or is afraid to reprove corrupt
livers; he perishes with all those that perish (he being silent,) says
Prosper Aquitanicus. Thus God speaks unto the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. Son
of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, and the word
shall thou require at my mouth. When I say to the wicked, O wicked man, thou
sh^lt die the death, if thou do not speak, etc. Hence arises to a Minister a
great care, he must care for souls; and great danger, he is in danger of
damnation, if he lose one of his peoples souls; and therefore I think that
Chrysostom might well use that speech of his, Non arbit or inter Sacerdotes
maltos essi qui salvi siunt, sed multo plures qui per. unt. Clnys. in Act.
Asost. Homil 3. Apud Stobaeum, cap. 49.
I do not think that among the Priests many are saved, but many more that
perish. If one of us have ten thousand souls to feed, it is many thousand
times more easy for you to go to Heaven, than for one of us: which if we
considered, we would say as Antigonus; If thou did know with how many evils
this Diadem is attended, thou would not take it up lying on a dunghill.

First then, dangerous is the case of those, the withdrawing of their matter,
and setting their words in knots and borders, placing them cheeker-wise, to
delight the care only; who come always from Placentia, never were at Verona,
to use the words of Lav^ter on Esther. These men wrong themselves, for they
bring other men's blood upon their heads, as Ezekiel. 33. They wrong their hearers,
for they see them like to perish, and Felpe them not; they see them posting
forward in the broad path of iniquity, and reclaim them not; they see them in
the fire, and they help them not. It was the saying of Sigismund the Emperor,
(...) um o^^ul^, qui ^aunico (...) in Car^^. ^in n^ 5. (...) Mared (...) 54.
(...) us, and urury. (...) and se^atur. ^^^ust. Sermon 15 in Matthew. Saevitin va
nus ut (...); nam si (...) ^crd. ur.
He sl^yes his enemy, that spares him; and these Ministers do kill you for
want of speaking. That which Ausken says of God, God sometimes by sparing
rigeth, is most true of the Minister, he kills you by forbearing to let you
blood, and to lance your sores; He that is to be burned, bewaileth, and yet is
burned; he that is to be cut, bewaileth, and yet is cut: says Augustine. The
sick weeps, yet the Surgeon cuts him; he laments, and yet the Surgeon seares
him; whether is this cruelty, or pity? He rages against the wound, that man
may be cured; for if the wound be handled gently, man is destroyed.

Secondly, open their mouths to preach; that a man may say as Seneca in
another case, Small cures speak, Cu^aeles ^^loquunlto, ngentes slupent.
great ones are dumb. When with Demoslhenes in Gedius, this is (...), a bull
in the tongue, then they (...) pati, suffer a kind of squman cie, they cannot
speak.

Thirdly, dangerous is the case of those, Harpoerates the Egyptian, who was
always painted with his singer in his mouth, as Erasinus notes, who are like
to those Idols, Psalm. 115. That have mouths but speak not: Ante Vacunales
stant que sedent que fucos. O^ d^^ ast^b. 6.
They are Vacuna's Priests, and she sit Mistress to bestow a liverie upon
such Drones. They are such to whom God will say, Why stand ye idle the whole
day?

Fourthly, dangerous is the case of those, Psalm. 50.16, 17. Ionoui m^^i to jua,
and otiosa ^anus. Lucida lectiveita, and tenebr ^sa vi^a, monsir esi res est.
A tongue that speaks great things, and an idle, hand: A ^l^ere doctrine, and
^darke life, is a monstrous thing. Loquere ut vide im; Speak as I may see you,
was the Philosophers rule; which is the sault of too many of my brethren, who
do more hurt in the week day (by yoking themselves with a pack of good
fellows) than they do good on the Sabbath, by many of their lean and
soule-starving Sermons: I come to a second note from hence.

The Minister of the Gospel is the instrument which God uses to save the
souls of his people. And therefore although God be the Author and efficient
cause of salvation, yet the Minister is said to save, because he is a
co-worker. So the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self and to doctrine,
continue therein; for in so doing, thou shall save both thy self and those
that hear thee. In Iam. 5.20. This know, that he which converteth a sinner
shall save a soul from death. In Mat. 18.15. If he hear, thou have gained or
won thy brother. The Minister is the savor of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.16. He
is a fisher of men, Matthew. 4.19. to call them from the world, to be of the
number of Gods Saints: So that a good Minister of the Gospel is said to save
men, either by working in them faith, as Romans 10.17. Faith is by hearing, or by
laying down the danger that comes by sin, as Moses did to Israel, Deuteronomy.
30.18. I protest you shall surely perish; or by preaching that word, which if a
man keep, he shall never see death, Ioh. 8.51. In brief, he that converts
souls does save them, but he converts souls, Iam. 5.20. He that begets
souls does save souls, but the Minister begets them, Iam. 1.18. He that so
instructs, reproves, exhorts, that he makes man absolute and perfect, does
indeed save; but that is the Minister out of the word, 2 Timothy 3.17.

And if he be the Minister of salvation, how careful should you be in
hearing him. Use. Devita Constant. lib. 4 c. 33.
Eusebius reports of Constantine, That when he had long heard disputations
concerning God, they being about to break off, he would not suffer them, and
when they entreated him to sit down, Nesas est habitis d^ Deo disputationibus,
etc.
he answered; It is a wicked thing, whilst disputations are held concerning
God, to sit down. How often have they cried out unto you, and you have not
heard; piped unto you, and you have not danced; mourned, and you have not wept?
how often has Manna fallen at your doors, and you have not stirred to gather
it; the word of wisdom been uttered, and you have shut your ears against it?
the Sun has shined, and you have been not like the Persian, or the Stoicke
in Lactantius, that adores and worships it; Instit lib. 2. cap. 5.
but like the Atlantes in the Comment upon Lactantius, who cursed the Sun
rising and setting. I say nothing unto you, but as the Holy Ghost does, Heb.
2.3. How can you escape in the day of Gods wrath, if you neglect so great
salvation, as has been preached unto you.

2. If they save souls, how high and admirable is their calling, how
wonderful should their gifts be; they should not be like those Priests
mentioned by Rhenanus, Derebus German. lib. 2.
that when the question was proposed in the Triburian Synod, whether golden
Chalices or wooden were to be used in the Sacrament; Boniface Bishop, and
afterward Martyr, makes answer; That in former times they had golden Ministers
and wooden Chalices, but now they had many golden Chalices, but wooden
Priests: If they save souls, with what comfort may they labor? If they save
your souls, what love should you bear them? How careful should you be that
they may not want any encouragement? If they save souls, how glorious shall
they shine? Dan. 12.3. And so I come to the pains that the Preacher takes.

(...), If by any means: The Preacher of the Gospel must spare no pains,
neglect no means to gain souls. Quod somnum laboribus vendidit. De causis
corrupt. artium, lib. 1.
That which Vives reports of Cleanthes, That he bought sleep with his labors.
That which Laertius reports of Aristotle, that when he went to sleep he had
a brazen globe in his hand, and under his hand a basin, that by the fall he
might be wakened. That which Valerius Maximus reports of Archimenides, Studiis
quibus obtinuit samam, amisit vitam.
that, By the studies (whereby he got fame) he lost his life, is most true of
every faithful Minister of the Gospel: His toil is like the heavy and
restless labor of Jacob, when he kept Labans sheep; In the day I was
consumed with heat, parched with frost in the night, and sleep departed from
mine eyes, Genes. 31.40. Or like those good shepherds at Christ's birth, that
were tending their flocks in the night, Luke 2. His pains must be in these
two, praying, and preaching, as 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I should sin,
Misericordiam Domint tibi pro te deprecatur, qui ^^minaris, vulnus tuum sentit,
quod ipse non sentis, pro te lachrymas sundit, quas for sitan ipse non sundis.
Cypr. ^e lapsis, Sect. 18.
in ceasing to pray for you. The same you may see, Romans 1.10, 11, 12. God is my
witness, whom I serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his son, that without
ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. He must pray; He desires
mercy for thee, who threatenest him; he feels thy wound, which thou thy
self feel not; he sheddeth tears for thee, which thou thy self sheddest
not, says Cyprian. He must preach in season, out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. And
all this he must willingly do for the gaining of souls; adversity is an
heavy thing, yet this must he endure to win souls, 2 Timothy 4.5. Persecution
an heavy thing, yet he must endure it to win souls, 1 Cor. 4.12. We are
persecuted, and we suffer it. Death an heavy thing, and yet Gods Minister must
endure it to win souls, as the Prophet did, Ierem. 11.21. Separation from God
an heavy thing, yet the Ministers must endure it, rather than not gain souls
unto God, as Moses, Exodus 32.32. and Paul, Romans 9.3.

This is the duty we owe to you; think ye, Hebr. 13.17. 2. Honor 1 Timothy
5.17. 3. Love and singular love, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 4. Continual and fervent
prayer unto God, Ephesians. 6.19. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. That we may be kept from
evil men. 5. Temporal things for the spiritual things we sow amongst you:
Let him that is taught in the word, make him that taught him partaker of all
his goods, Gal. 6.6. We willingly compound with you for the one half of what
you owe us. I come to the last; the specification of the parties whom he so
much tenders.

Them of my flesh.] We ought most of all to tender the health and salvation of
those that are of our kindred, and near unto us; Simon, confirm thy brethren,
Luke 22.32. First, look to our own hearts, then to our own houses, then to
our own kindred, and then let our light shine to all the children and people
of God; and so I come to the second argument noted in the fifteenth verse.

VERSE. 15.
THis is the second argument to persuade the Gentiles not to boast against the
rejected Jews, taken from the hope of their restoring: because though cast
off, yet shall they be received again; therefore boast not against them. The
words seem to contain two maine parts: The one, the fearful and dangerous
estate wherein the Jews were; intimated in the last words, where they are
compared to men that be dead. 2. The hope, that they shall come out of this
death, and at last be delivered from the danger, in these words, Their
receiving shall be life from the dead. Though a man be dead, there is hope to
live again; though a tree be withered, there is hope that when winter is past
it may wex green again, Such is the estate of the Jews.

In brief, the argument is taken from the less to the greater, thus, If their
casting away were good, how much more their receiving; and so being an
hypotheticall proposition, it consists of an antecedent and a sequel. From the
antecedent I observe: That God never gives way to any evil, but for a good end
and purpose: their fall was suffered for this end, to reconcile the world unto
himself, as in the eleventh verse.

I come to the sequel, wherein were noted, first their danger, dead; secondly,
their hope, received to life from death. From the first note, That living in
sin, out of favor with God, is to be in the estate of a dead man. The dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God, Ioh. 5.25. If you ask who be these
dead, surely you need not go down into the vaults of the earth to seek them,
they are buried above ground, they are dead souls in living bodies. That body
is their tomb, and this their epitaph, Hic siti sunt, Here are they buried.
Therefore awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14. It may
be thought a strange position, and savor somewhat of melancholy, that a man
that breathes, and moves, and speaks, and drinks, and swears, and fights,
and does all other acts which now adays are counted manly, should be induced,
that for all this he is no better than a dead man, a carcass. But let such a
man as this be brought before the Judge of life Christ Jesus, examined by the
rule of life, viz. the word, and you shall see what his case is. The life of a
Christian consists in the union of his soul with God, which is made by the
grace of the holy spirit dwelling in him; for as the life of the body is the
soul, so the life of the soul is grace; and where that is wanting, well may
the body live, but the soul is dead, as Paul speaks of the widow, 1 Timothy
5.5. Such dead men are all by nature, dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians.
2.1. yea dead even from the womb, and (if I may so speak) still borne; for no
man brought grace into the world, nor sucked it from his mother; he is made, not
borne a Christian. The word Soul is capable of life, if God be pleased to give
it: the best by nature, but dead. There be two things that argue life in the
soul of man; sense and motion: if man in the estate of sin has either, I
will confess him to be alive, and not dead. But first, he has no sense, for
he perceives not the things of the spirit of God, nor can he, for they are
discerned spiritually, 1 Cor. 2.14. Secondly, he has no motion, he has set up
his rest in this world, never dreams of aspiring higher. Tell him of a journey
to heaven, it is not in him to will it, it is not in him once to think of it, 2
Cor. 3.5. Now if this man may be said to live, which manifests life neither by
sense nor motion, then stocks and stones, and the dullest of spring of the
elements may as truly be said to live. So that we may conclude, as Christ
does, Matthew. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead; or I may say of such, as the
holy Ghost does of the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Apoc. 3.1. Thou have a
name that thou live, but thou art dead.

Hence learn first the error of the Pelagian and his natural son the
Papist, Luke 10.30. or the maid, Matthew. 9.24. But first, God finds no such good
in man, Genesis 6.5. Secondly, Paul finds nothing in the unregenerate part but
opposition, Gal. 5.17. Thirdly, leave the best man to himself, and he is dead
to all good actions. Fourthly, Paul could not find any good thing in himself,
Romans 7. Yet in this point I can make it good out of Bellarmine and others, that
they neither speak nor write what they think.

Secondly, servant of how many vices, Servus quot vitiorum, tot dominorum.
of so many masters, says Augustine. Stemmata quid prosunt, etc. Aug. de
Civit. Det, lib. 4. cap. 3. Iu^inal Satyr. 1.
When the Apostles seemed to be a little proud, that the devils were subdued
unto them, our Savior would not have them rejoice in this, but in that their
names were written in the book of life, Luke 10.18, 19. Wherefore if you
affect either glory, or honor, or life, see where you must seek it; seek
them not at Court, those be like glasses, says Augustine, bright and brittle.
Moses had rather be the child of God, than to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter. And so I come from the danger wherein they were, to their hope of
restoring.

Life from the dead.] First, the world shall be changed as it were from death
to life, after the receiving of the Jews; for though light be risen to the
Gentiles, yet while the Jew remains in blindness, The world has not yet
revived, says Beza. Secondly, Life from the dead] Their estate shall be more
glorious after their calling than it was before: Mundus nondum revixit.
So Ambrose. Thirdly, Life from the dead. The restoring of the Jews suddenly
shall follow the resurrection from death to life: So Aquinas out of Origin and
Chrysostom. I will not show my dislike to any of these, yet that which I
observe is different: That we should not despair of the Jews, though now
they be out of favor, and seem to be dead; Though a man be dead, he may live
again; though buried, he may rise again; though out of favor, he may be
received again; though he run away with the prodigal, he may return again;
though he be fallen, yet he may rise again. If a man be never so far gone,
we should not despair of his amendment and reformation. What people in all
likelihood farther gone than the men of Ephraim? They willingly obeyed the
commandment, that is, of Ierobo^m, Hos. 5.11. and when the Lord told them that
they were sick, and would have cured them, then went Ephraim unto Ashur, and
sent to Iareb King of Assyria. This was added to his former sins, Hoeaccedu
ad superiora peceata.
says Mercer: yet if once they say, Come, let us return to the Lord, Hoe est,
tantum piccavit, ut e^ Sedoma comparata justa videatur.
then after two days he will revive them, and they shall live in his sight,
Hos. 6.2. What City so far gone as Jerusalem? She justified Sodom and
Samaria, Ezekiel. 16.51. that is, She sinned so much, Aug. contra Faustum
Manachaum. lib. 22. cap. 61.
that Sodom compared to her might seem righteous, says Augustine. Yet will
the Lord gather her (as a hen gathers her chickens) under his wings, Matthew.
23. What man so far gone as Manasses, who built altars to strange gods,
sacrificed his sons to Moloch, gave himself to witchcraft, charming and
sorcerie, used them that had familiar spirits, and did evil in the sight of
the Lord to anger him? Yet being in tribulation, when he prayed and humbled
himself greatly, then the Lord heard him, and was entreated, and he knew that
the Lord was God, 2 Chronicles. ^3.6, 12, 13. So true is that of the Prophet, Ezekiel.
33.12. (...) non attendi? cum enim Deus ve^^ (...) qu abo^us, and ^^ssa quia
om^^pot^s, ipse contra fratrem ^d vinae (...) nam cla^dit, qui Deum credit aut
no^ velle, aut (...).
The wickedness of the wicked shall not heart him in the day that he turns to
the Lord. Be the sin never so great, I may say as S. Augustine does; O man,
who attendest to that multitude of thy sins, why do thou not attend to the
omnipotency of the heavenly Physician (...) for seeing God will show mercy
because he is good, and can because he is omnipotent, he shuts the gate of
divine piety against his brother, who believes that God either will not, or
cannot have mercy. And why will thou shut him out of heaven, whom Christ has
not shut out of it? David is far gone in a ^^lterie and murder, Peter in
back-^^d^ns, and apostasy, Paul in tyranny and (...) and Gods Church; Aug. de
te^pore Sermon. 58. Mali^ ut pes fraupatur, aut manus cum labor ad (...)
offierum revocat^^; ^^^^^ium, (...), non (...), ego non (...).
yet the word of a (...) Divid, the crowing of a (...), a light shining and a
voice sounding (...) brings Paul to Christ again. Yet (...) this to encourage
thee on in sinn^ (...) what Augustine says in the cited (...) foot or hand be
broken, it is with (...) its first office; if again, ^^t more hard (...) third
time, not without much pain; if daily, I judge not of it. But though I may not
despair of thy salvation, yet it may be God will not bestow salvation; though
I may not judge thee, yet it may be the Lord will; though I may not censure
thee, yet it may be that the Lord will condemn thee. I will hope God will show
thee mercy; but thou without repentance must feel his justice: Be thou never
so far gone, yet return to the Lord as thou art commanded, and God will
bestow upon thee that mercy which he has promised. But I leave this, and
proceed to touch the instrument wherewith the Jews are fet from death to life,
The Gospel.

In John 5.25. In Johan. tract. 22.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it
shall live: which Augustine expounds of the raising of men dead and buried in
infidelity and sin, at the hearing of the word: Transeunt a morte
infidelitatis, ad vitam side.
They pass from the death of infidelity to the life of faith: I am not
ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes, Romans 1.16. that is, an effectual instrument of power, as
Paraeus and Beza expound it. In this God reveals his true and absolute
righteousness, with which life and salvation is always joined, and by the
ministry of the word is salvation conveyed and communicated to all that obey
it; and is therefore called the arm of the Lord, Isa. 53.1. whereby he can
open the graves of sin, wherein men are buried, and restore them to their
lives again. Man without faith is dead, and faith is that which makes the
soul alive. Augustine upon the words of Christ to Lazarus, Ioh. 11.43. Lazarus
come forth, says, that surgere to arise, is credere to believe, to come forth
is to confess; and that which Christ said at the 44. verse, Loose him and let
him go, S^lvi (...), and (...).
is true of the Minister of the Gospel, who by the word loses the bands of
sin and iniquity, wherein they were tied. I might tell you of James, Andrew,
and Matthew, and the rest; but I will only remember you of S. Augustine, Aug.
Cons. (...) 8 (...).
as he writes of himself, that when he sat weeping, and speaking these
words, Quarenon^od^, q^^ren^^ (...), relle ^ege.
Why not to day, why not to day? he heard a voice saying, Take up and read,
take up and read; which he expounds thus, that he should open the book of God,
and read the first place he light upon: he took the book and opened it, and
he hit upon Romans 13.13, 14. Not in gluttony and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying; but p^t on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh. Thus (says he) was I
converted, and thus raised from death to life. When our parents have begotten
us to die, the Word begets us to life. The parent may say, I knew I begat a
mortal child; but he that begets by the Word may say, I knew I begat an
immortail one: Hereupon it is a manifest mark that we are alive, if we bear a
love to the Word whereby we are begotten; no better sign to know that thou
art a son, than thy love to that which begot thee, and it is the Word that
begets us, 1 Iam. 18. and 1 Pet. 1.23.

Hence, the dead) to our own souls. The Gospel is like to a medicine,
excellent only in the application; Think that every promise thou hear
belongs unto thee, every precept thou hear pertains to thee, every word
of reproof takes hold of thee; If I be convinced of any sin, I will endeavor
to reform it; if I hear of any judgment, I will endeavor to prevent it; if I
hear of mercy, I will surely embrace it; if I hear of a garland, I will run
for it; of a crown of glory, I will sight for it, if I have formerly presumed
to sin, because God is merciful, I will now tremble at his judgments; if
formerly despaired, because of mine own sin and Gods justice, I will now
cheer up my drooping heart, for mercy rejoices against judgment; if thou
be never so sick, apply this Gospel to thy soul, this will heal thee, as
it did the Leper, Matthew. 8.3. If never so blind, apply this Gospel, this will
cure thee, as it did Bartimaeus, Mark. 10.52. If never so long dead, apply this
Gospel, it will make thee alive again, as it did Lazarus, Ioh. 11.43. But
apply it to thy self, not to others; Be not like graceless Spend-thrifts,
that say; O, there were good lessons against this greediness, not like the
Usurer, there were good lessons against prodigality and unthriftinesse; not
like the strict Pharisie, O, there were good lessons against liberty and
licentiousness; not like the atheistical and loose companion, O, there were
good lessons against preciseness. This is to be like those Lamiae or
Gorgones, mentioned by Caelius Rhodoginus, who can find means to cure others,
but none to help themselves.

Secondly, Paul said to Titus, chap. 2.11, 12. The grace of God (that is, the
Gospel) that brings salvation to all men has appeared, and teaches us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: soberly toward himself,
righteously toward his neighbor, godly toward God, as Aquinas speaks. Let
us lead such lives, as beseemes the Gospel of Christ, having our conversation
honest, walking in the Spirit, giving good example, doing of good works, as
living, but ready to dye, having our bodies on earth, but our mind and
conversation in heaven; not spending our days in eating and drinking, but
thirsting after righteousness; not putting on robes and costly ornaments, but
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ; not seeking sinful pastimes, but making
melody to the Lord in our hearts; not rejoicing in jests and merriments, but in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs; not laying up treasure in earth, but
in heaven; not waiting for honors and preferments, but waiting for the coming
of the Son of God, and for that glory which shall be revealed. And so I come
from the proposal of this second argument, to the proof and confirmation of
it.

VERSE. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump; and if the
root be holy, so are the branches.
IT is the confirmation of the second argument, from the hope that the Jews
shall be restored, because an holy people shall not be cast off for ever: but
the Jews are hereditarily an holy people; therefore shall not be cast off for
ever. Of this argument, the assumption, or minor only is expressed, and is
amplified by two metaphors: the one from the holy first fruits, the other from
the holy root; the one taken from the Law of Moses, the other from the course
of Nature. The Law of Moses was this, as Numb. 15.20. You shall offer a cake of
the first of your corn; that was the first fruit, which being consecrate and
holy, the remnant was also holy; that is, was made good and wholesome. The
order of Nature is this; the juice, and the sap or moisture comes first into
the root, and then into the branches: So that if the sap be good in the root,
it is good also in the branches; now to apply, the first fruits were holy. The
root whence the Jews came was good, therefore they are good also. Who are
these first fruits, and who this root is? I cannot believe with Origin that it
was Christ; I acknowledge no other holy root but our Lord. Ego aliam radicem
sanctam non agnos^o, nisi Dominum nostrum.
But I believe with Chrysostom, and the whole stream of modern writers, that
by the first fruits, and the holy root, we must understand Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, with the rest of the Patriarchs, which are not these fruits or root in
respect of their persons, but in respect of the promise made to them and to
their seed, as Calvin has well expounded it. So that the meaning is, God has
has promised to be the God of them who are the fruits, and of their children
which are the lump; of them who are the root, and of their children who are
the branches; therefore in regard of Gods promise we must not doubt, but God
(who has mercy on the first fruits) will have mercy on the rest, he (that
loved the root) will also set his love upon the branches; from whence note in
general. 1. From the Law of paying the first fruits;

1. That of all the fruits of the earth, and of all the blessings that God
gives unto man, some part is due back unto God again: For though authority
have dashed and cancelled that Law of Moses concerning the paying of tithes; yet
Gods part and right in all the creatures can no man take away. God was to have
the first borne both of man and beast, Exodus 13.2. He was to have the first
fruits of the Land, Exodus 23.19. But who was to receive for God. See Deuteronomy.
26.12, and 13. It was given to the Levite, to the stranger, to the fatherless,
and to the widow: The Lord is Landlord of the whole earth, and of all that is
in it; man is but Gods Tenant at will, and is bound to pay unto God a vearely
rent, that is, some part of all the blessings of God, and this God receives by
his Deputies. Some is to be paid to the Levite, some to the stranger, some to
the widow, some to the poor and fatherless. So that such men as hold much
from God, and will not pay back unto God again that which is his own, are
such as God will at last turn out of doors.

2. The promises of God (made to godly Fathers) belong to their children also:
And that one promise made to Abraham, must be the judge of all others; I will
be thy God, and of thy seed, Genes. 17.7. So Peter speaks to those that were
pricked in their hearts; The promise is made to you, and to your children, and
to those are a far off, Act. 2.39. But I come to sift the words more
particularly; If the first fruits be holy; the first maine point is from the
letter of the Metaphor:

3. The paying of God that which is his, gives us a right and interest in all
the rest, as the paying of the best and first fruits, the paying of thanks and
prayer. The Ancients were not wont to drink of the grape, unless they had
first offered it to some God, Pluturch. Symposiac.

4. Gods promises made to the Fathers shall be fulfilled to some of their
children, though not to them all; and in Gods appointed time, though not so
soon as the promise is made. When he promised to send his Son, this promise
was made to the fathers, and God fulfilled it to their children, Acts 13.32,
33. The promise of giving the land of Canaan made to the Fathers, was long a
fulfilling, but at last fulfilled to their children: If God have made Abraham a
promise, that his seed shall be blessed, he will fulfill it in Isaac, though
Ishmael be rejected, Genes. 21.12. If he make the same promise to Isaac, he
will fulfill it in Jacob, though Esau be reprobate, Genesis 27. If the same
promise be made to Jacob, and Jacob die many hundred of years before, yet
some of his children shall inherit it; yet am not I come to the pith of my
Text, and therefore there must be a fifth conclusion.

5. Children of good parents are holy, for the promise made unto the fathers;
though children of wrath as they come from Adam, yet holy as they descend from
faithful Abraham: And this holiness which is derived from the fathers to the
children, is nothing but an inward and inherent benediction of the covenant
made between God and the fathers; God has bound himself to the fathers, to
be the God of them and their children; and therefore children are holy and
blessed because of that covenant. For the further explication of this hard and
difficult point, it will not be amiss to answer a few objections.

1. If the Jews be holy branches, Isay 65.2. says in the name of God, All the
day long have I stretched out mine hand to a stubborn people; and that the
Lord covered them with a spirit of slumber, Isay 29.10.

Whereto I answer, for I am an Israelite of the seed of Abraham, says Paul,
verse. 1. 2. Not perpetually, for it is but till the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come in, verse. 25. So that there is no contradiction betwixt these two
propositions; Israel is for a time and in part rebellious, and Israel is in
part and in the fullness of time to be called again.

2. Ezekiel. 18. If a man be just, verse. 5. has walked in all the judgments of
God, verse. 9. yet if he beget a son that is a thief, or shedder of blood, that
son shall die the death, verse. 13. The holiness of his father can do him no
good. Besides this, Christ himself calls the Jews sometimes a generation of
vipers, sometimes the sons of the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. Sometimes bad parents
have good, and sometimes good parents have bad children, wicked Ahaz has good
Ezekias, good Ezekias has wicked Manasses wicked Manasses has good Josias,
and good Josias has wicked Sallum and Iehojakim.

Whereto the answer must be, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This is not found in
every Israelite, but only in the regenerate; nor propagated from Abraham to
all his posterity, for Ishmael and Esau had it not; nor does the Apostle mean
it in this place; here ditarie holiness common to the whole Nation is an outward
dignity, or the grace of the Covenant, whereby all the children are within the
Covenant which is made to their fathers. The right to this Covenant is that
which the Apostle calls holiness; and from this the Apostles argument is good:
If the root be holy, that is, covenanted to God, then the branches are holy,
that is, within the same Covenant.

3. Abraham, whether does this belong to us, and to our children?

Whereto I answer: That branches, Thou being a wild olive tree, was graft in
for them, and art made partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree: So
that we are succeeded in their right, and therefore (me thinks) the reason is
good. If their sons were by the right of the Covenant borne Jews, why are
not the children of Christians by the same right borne Christians: and as this
Covenant of grace was not conferred upon them by Circumcision, but only
confirmed; so in Baptism, the same right is not conferred, but sealed.
Whereupon Tertullian calls Baptism the signing of faith; Chrysostom, the seal
of faith, Basil, the seal of faith; and Augustine, the Sacrament of faith. By
all which it appears, that there is no grace before Baptism: Therefore
Hierome says well, Nos non nasci Christianos, hoc est, condition naturae, sed
renasci Christian^s, hoc est, condition gratiae.
We are not borne Christians, that is, in the condition of nature; but we are
regenerated Christians, that is, by the condition of grace: Wherefore ignorant
are those men, and foul are those mouths, who affirm that infants dying
without Baptism are damned. Christ says, Mark. 16.16.
He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved; Qui non est
baptizatus, sed qui non crediderit condemnabitur.
but he that will not believe, shall be damned; He says not, He that is not
baptized, but he that believes not shall be damned. S. Augustine (who was
harsh and unfound enough in this point) confesses, Ad Scleucian. Epist. 108.
that Baptism of fire or blood, is called Baptism as well as that of water.
And S. Ambrose, in his funeral Oration at the death of Valentinian, who was
slain when he was but Catechumenus, Regnare cum Christo in coelis, ^tsi
tincius non erat.
affirms that he did reign with Christ in the heavens, although he was not
baptized: For though God have tied us to use it, yet he has not tied himself
to it; for he does not save all that are baptized, and yet will save some that
were not baptized; and as amongst the Jews, they were not all condemned that
died without Circumcision; so neither are all they now that die without
Baptism. In 2 Samuel 12.18. David's child died the seventh day, which was before
the day of Circumcision, and yet says David, I shall go to him, verse. 23. God
calls them his sons, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. so I come to the third argument.

VERSE. 17.
THis is the third reason, taken from the twofold condition of the Gentiles;
the one showing what they were in former time; the other, what now they are.
They were branches of a wild olive, now engrafted into the right olive tree.
More particularly thus; the argument consists of an antecedent in the 17.
verse, and a consequent in the 18. In the antecedent, I note, first the estate
of the Jews, which was like to a tree, whose branches be broken off in the
beginning. Secondly, the double estate of the Gentiles; the first, they were
like to a wild olive tree, without the compass and hedge which was about the
Lords garden, as also void of all good fruit; the other what they are,
engrafted into the right olive tree; where you may note, how God bestows upon
the Gentiles a threefold grace and benefit: first, an engrafting into the right
root; secondly, made partaker of the root; made of the same nature with the
root; thirdly, made partaker of the fatness, that is, of all the privileges
and benefits of the covenant made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. I begin first
with the condition; of the Jews, some of the bracnhes be broken off. First,
they were such as thought themselves branches good enough, because outwardly as
fair and freth as any other. And from thence note. Wicked men seek no
further, than to have the outward privileges of Gods children. Secondly, no
outward privilege can acquit a sinful people from Gods anger, nor prove them to
be the people of God: either proposition is before handled upon the first verse
of this Chapter. Secondly, they are but some of the branches whence note two
points; first, none that are within the covenant are broken off finally.
Secondly, all the Jews are not within the covenant made with Abraham, see
likewise on the first verse of the said Chapter. They are broken off; God has
not so tied his promises and graces to any man's seed, but some of them may be
cast off, if they degenerate; though God made the promise to Abraham and his
seed, yet Ishmael has no right unto it; Cast out the Bondwoman and her son,
for the son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac, Gal.
4.30. The same confirmed to Isaac, and yet, I loved have Jacob, and hated Esau,
Mal. 1.3. the same confirmed to Jacob, and yet with many of them God was not
pleased, Romans 10.5. The Jews say they came of Abram, and yet Christ has
censured them to be sons of Satan, Ioh. 8.44. But this I meet hereafter; I
proceed to the twofold estate of the Gentiles.

The first is, what they were; oleaster, a wild olive tree, quasi olea
sterilis, a barren olive tree. There be two kinds of olive trees that be
barren; the one made, as Pliny reports, Plin Not. Hist. lib. 17. cap. 24.
that if a goat do but lick it, it presently becomes barren, and never bears
olives more; the other naturally barren, and is here called the wild olive,
which has the shape, the leaf, the bough of the true olive, but it wants the
generous juice, it wants the fruits. Such were the Gentiles, they had outwardly
the same image and similitude with the people of God, they had some moral
virtues like unto leaves, outwardly resembling the good works of Gods
children, but wanting that generous juice, that is, the graces of Gods spirit,
without which there is nothing that God accepts. The first thing that may be
gathered, is, The remembrance of former wildenesse, wherein once we were,
should curb us from growing proud of that estate wherein now we are; We were
once wild, and must not now insult over those that are as we were. It is the
counsel of God himself, Isai. 51.1. Look unto the rocks whence you were
hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye were dug. Amos was once an
herdman, Peter a fisherman, Paul a maker of tents, Jacob a keeper of sheep;
and you read not (that when Amos became a Prophet, Peter an Apostle, Paul a
Doctor of the Gentiles, and Jacob a Lord in his Country,) that ever they
forgot their former estate, and mean condition wherein they had lived. Amos as
mild when he was a Prophet, as when he was a herdman; Peter as lowly when he
is an Apostle, as when he was a fisherman; Paul as courteous when he is a
Doctor, as when he was a tent-maker; and Jacob as humble when he is a Master
and Lord, as when he was a servant and keeper of sheep. This manner of
persuading does God often use to his people; You shall love the stranger, for
you were strangers in the land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 10.19. Thou shall not pervert
the right of the stranger, nor the fatherless, but remember that thou wast a
servant in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 24.17, 18. The remembrance of what we have been
should keep us from being proud of what we are.

Thou came naked from thy mother, remember this, and be not proud of thy
wealth. Thou wast polluted in Adam, remember this, and be not proud of thy
holiness. Thou wast a servant, remember this, and be not proud of thy
greatness. Thou wast a stranger, remember this, and be not proud of thy
privileges. Thou wast a prodigal, remember this, and be not proud of thy new
favor. Nebuchadnezzar was once amongst beasts; Job once on the dunghill; the
Governors once low, 1 Samuel 2.8.

A lesson as little practiced as any other; Herodotus in Euterp. Arist. pelit.
lib. 3.
most men are like to Amasis in Herodote, who being of mean descent, yet at
last growing great, took a silver basin, etc. or like to Fabius in Plutarch,
who being advanced to a Consulship, when his own father came to him in a
message from the Roman Senate, would give no answer till his father should
light and come on foot to him; or like unto the Israelite, who was a long time
a servant oppressed in Egypt, a long time almost starved in the wilderness;
but being come to Canaan, grow proud on a sudden, and forget not only their
former misery wherein they had been, but the hand that made them, and the God
that delivered them; He that should have been upright, when he waxed fat,
spurned with the heel, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.19. Or like to Pharaohs Butler, who being
in favor, soon forgot that ever he had been in prison, Genesis 40.23. If rich,
we forget that ever we were poor; if in honor, that ever we were base; if
masters, that ever we were servants; if free, that ever we were strangers. It
is strange to see, that man, who is but dust, and every handful of dust (that
flies) hits him in the teeth with his baseness, should be altogether made of
dry dust, that's so easily blown and carried aloft into the air above his
fellows, though they have the same father, God, and the same mother, the
Church, and hope for the same kingdom, heaven, borne alike, and die like, come
with nothing, and go away with nothing. The greatest will have no cause to be
proud, if he remember whence he came, from Adam; the most honorable no cause
to be proud, if he remember whither he goes, to the earth; the wisest no cause
to be proud, if he remember what he is, dust; the richest no cause to be proud,
if he remember whither he must return again, ^^ thalan o grandoribus literis
inscripta babuit, Willegesi, Willegest, recole unde veneris. Becolcerus in
Anno. 10 11.
to the dust of the earth, Genesis 3.19. We should be like to Willegesius, who
being the son of a Carpenter, and afterward Bishop of Moguntia, had this
written in his Bedchamber with great letters; Willegesius, Walligesius,
remember whence thou came; and like Jacob when he was grown rich, with my
staff came I over this Jordan, etc. Genesis 32.10.

Secondly, the Gentile being like a wild olive, which has the leaf and
outward proportion of the right olive tree, yet without fruit, because it wants
the inward form and moisture, gives us this observation; That without the
form of a Christian, which ^s the grace of Gods spirit, there is no fruit
wherewith God is pleased; because till then whatsoever is done is sin, either
for matter or manner; as first, not proceeding from a good sountaine, from a
good heart, or not in a good manner, in says, and out of a good conscience, or
not to a good end, for the improvement of Gods honor; or because there is some
blemish in it, because there is in it some stain and tincture of evil, which
is not done away in Christ, until they be renewed by the grace of
justification, according to the rule, Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin; The best sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, Prove. 15. and so I
come from what they were, (wild olives,) to show what they are, that is,

Engrafted for them, and made partaker of the root and fatness of the olive
tree.] Here note three benefits. First, Incision. Secondly, by whom, God.
Thirdly, how, by his free calling and grace; and what better are they now? They
were wild, and without fruit, but now full of good fruits. From whence note,
Though man before grace and effectual calling were like a barren tree, yet if
God once call him, and receive him to grace, he will be fruitful and full of
good works. For warrant, see Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. The grace of God has
appeared, and brings forth in man these excellent fruits: 1. Denying of all
ungodly and worldly lusts. 2. Sobriety. 3. Righteousness. 4. Godliness.
Sobriety in himself, righteousness in respect of his neighbor, godliness
in respect of God. 5. Expectation of a blessed hope, the appearing of the
mighty God, and of our Savior lesus Christ: So 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. God has called
us unto holiness, and the reason is pregnant. Who usoever God does effectually
call, them he had predestinate before; and therefore they cannot choose but
bring forth many good works, as Paul, Ephesians. 2.10. We are the work manship of
God created in Christ Jesus unto god works, which God has ordained, etc. And
whenever a man is effectually called, then is it certain that he shall be
glorified; as Romans 8.30. And therefore such an one cannot but abound in good
works, and be filled with the fruits of righteousness, as the same Apostle
speaks, Rem. 6.22. Being made servants unto God, you have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. That a man may say as Solomon, Eccles.
11.3. If the clouds be full, they will pour forth rain upon the earth: So of
a man, if he be called of God, and sanctified by his Spirit, and enriched with
his grace, he will resemble Titus the good Emperor, who when he had spent a
day, and done no good, was wont to lament it in these terms, O my friends, O
(...), diem perduit.
I have lost a day. Othniel will judge, Elias plead, Elisha build, Nehemiah
reform, Abigail releeve, Zaccheus restore: If the tree be once good, it will
bring forth good fruit; if the ground be once manured and tilled, it will
bring forth good corn.

Learn here to examine, Phil. 1.11. Ye were once darkness, but now light in
the Lord, walk as children of the light, Ephesians. 5.8. See 1 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11.
What those fruits are, you may see in Zach. 8.16, and 17. These are the things
that ye shall do, speak the truth, execute judgment, imagine no evil in
your hearts, and love no false oath, for these be the things that I hate. You
may see, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long
suffering, etc. You may see it, 2 Pet. 1, 4, 5, 6. Flying the corruption in the
world by lust, join with your faith virtue, with virtue knowledge, etc. Hence
is that of our Savior, a good tree is known by his fruit; if thou be changed
from a natural to a spiritual man, from a wild olive to a true olive, from a
servant of sin to a son of God, show it by your fruits. But first, let not
your fruits be like the apples of Sodom, Cap. 48.
mentioned by Solinus. Secondly, when you grow old, give not over bearing
fruit, but be as the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.13. and bring forth most fruit in
the time of age. Thirdly, bring it forth all the year. Religion and virtue
must have but two seasons, a spring time and harvest, etc. So I come to the
second benefit, a participation of the root.

Made partaker of the root.] The Gentiles (by adoption into the Covenant)
became one Church with Abraham and the Fathers. From whence may be inferred
this point: the old and new Testament to be one, the Church to be one, and
sprung from one root; but the point that I make choice of, is this.

When men have been formerly sinful, and now reclaimed, the Lord will think
as well of them, and make as much of them as any others. Matthew a Publican, a
gatherer of toll and customs, which kind of people were for the most part
unconscionable, odious both to God and men, but being once converted, the Lord
thinks no worse of him, but takes him near himself; and if he have but
twelve that he loves and respects, but twelve that he chooses to be his
Trumpetters, he shall be one of them, Acts 1.26. Paul once a persecutor, that
breathed nothing but threatenings, desired nothing but to suck the blood of
Gods Saints, yet being once converted by a light from Heaven, the Lord thinks
no worse of him for his former sin, but takes him near to himself, appoints
him a chosen vessel to bear his name, takes him up into the third Heaven,
fills him with abundance of revelation above all the rest.

God deals with sinners, as the father of the prodigal, Luke 15. So soon as
his son was coming (when he was yet a far off) he ran to meet him, and
fell on his neeke and kissed him, brought the best robe, and a ring, and killed
the fat calfe, Peccanti silio dat oscula non stagella, vis amoris non vidit
delicta, sic curat filii vulnera, n^ forte cicatricem, ne forte filio naevum
relinqueret. Chrysol. Sermon. 3.
etc. He gives kisses not stripes to his offending son; the force of love
sees not faults, he so heals his sons wounds, that he might not by
chance leave a scar, or the least freckle in his son, says Chrysologus.

1. From whence learn: that whenever God forgives, he also forgets, and if
we be good now, Ierem. 31.34. And though we have been never so far off, yet
if now we be holy, if now turned unto God, the Lord will think as well of
us, and do us as much good, and take us as near to himself, as Abraham
himself.

2. David have repented, thou must not think worse of him for his sin, but
magnify God for forgiving it. If Peter have played the Apostate, thou must not
say; I know the day when thou did deny thy Master; but bless God that has
pardoned it. Object not to Matthew that he was a Publican, for he is now an
Apostle; to Peter that he denied Christ, for he will now confess him, and lay
down his life for him; to Manasses that he was an Idolater, for God has
forgiven him; to the Gentile that he was a wild olive, for the Lord has
engrafted him into the true stock; and when God has received a man, and
forgiven him, it is sin for any man to object it against him. So I come to
the third benefit.

The fatness of the olive tree.] What may be meant by it, see Isa. 55.1, 2.
Come buy wine and milk without silver, hearken unto me, and let your soul
delight in fatness: So the Parable of the feast in Luke 14. By all which is
meant, the gifts and graces that concern salvation in Christ: and in regard
that grace is compared to fatness, wine, and honey, etc. We may first learn,
That grace and goodness is that which makes the soul fat, and makes man
favorable and comely in Gods eyes. 2. There is no grace, or gift, or
privileges, that ever the Jews enjoyed, but now the Gentile has them; God
has promised to dwell amongst them, we have him now with us, as Acts 2.39.
And we may say with David, Psalm. 46.11. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God
of Jacob is our refuge: They had the Temple, the Church of God is now amongst
us; they were the keepers of Gods Oracles, the Gospel now shines amongst us;
they had the promise of Canaan, we of Heaven, they were Gods peculiar people,
now we are his sons; (...)
they were first like Gideons fleece, watered with dew of Heaven, when all the
rest of the world was dry; but now the Nations and out-corners have the dew of
Heaven, and they are dry; they could never challenge any privileges which we
have not; and from hence we may comfort our selves with this, That no Nation or
Country can be any disparagement to grace and happiness, as above on the
first verse. So I come to the first proposition of the exhortation.

VERSE. 18.
THe verse has in it two members; the one a proposition, Boast not thy self;
the other a reason, thou bear not the root, etc. In the first note, first,
who may not boast, thou, thy self, the Gentile that was engrafted. Secondly,
against whom he must not boast, the natural branches; I put them both
together, and then the first conclusion that they afford is this;

They that rise by other men's falls, and grow great by other men's ruins, must
not grow proud over them that are fallen. Thus did the common soldier in
Tacitus repress Pompeyes pride, Nostra miseria magnus es.
Thou art great by our misery, therefore swell not against us. Though Matthias
come in Judas his place, he must rather lament for Judas his loss, than grow
proud of his own gain. If the Gentile be raised by the fall of the Jew, he
should rather bewail that the Jew is fallen, than grow proud of his (...)
rising; the one of these would God exceedingly commend, the other he cannot
choose but punish. The lamenting of other men's losses is the rule of Charity,
that seeks not his own, 1 Cor. 13.5. The nature of members in one body is,
that one bear another burden, Gal. 6.2. that if one member suffer, all suffer
with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. most excellent is the Apostles rule, Heb. 13.3. Remember
them that are in bonds, as if you were bound with them, and them that are in
affliction, as if you were afflicted in the body. If the foot, which is the
meanest part, be sick, the heart sighs for it, the soul and tongue pray for
it, the eye tends and watches it, the hand applies means and medicines to it.
Excellently Cyprian, Cum destentibus defleo, cum jacentibus jaceo, jaculis
grassantis inimi^^ membra mea percussa sant, cum prostratis fratribus, and me
prostavit offectus meus.
I weep with them that weep, I lie down with them that are sick, my members
are stricken with the darts of my cruel enemy, with my brethren overthrown,
my affection has me overthrown. But the rejoicing at other men's falls is as
hateful, as the other was acceptable to God. It is the counsel of wisdom,
Prove. 24.17, 18. Be not glad when thine enemy falls, let not thy heart
rejoice when he stumbleth; and for a threefold reason; first, for fear the
Lord see it; secondly, for fear it displease him; thirdly, lest God turn his
wrath from him, and bring it upon thee. If but an Ox or an Ass be fallen into
a pit, we must not stand laughing at him, but help him out, Deuteronomy. 22.4. much
more, if our brother have suffered either spiritual or temporal losses, ought
we to pity and help him with the spirit of meekness, as the Apostle wishes,
Gal. 6.2

How ought the consideration of this to amaze the hearts of some men, houses;
swell like to the milt in man's body, when the other parts decay; are ready to
entertain a mean conceit of such men, whose estates are decayed and weakened.
It is an error in judgment, and the pregnant mark of a vain and sinful
heart to think worse of a man because of his wants, and to grow proud over him
that is fallen; for though Job be in the ashes, he shall be restored, and
Joseph in prison, he shall be adranced again, and God likes a man no worse for
this. Surely he loves Jeremy in the stocks as well as in the Kings palace;
Joseph in prison as well as in Pharaohs house; Job on the dunghill as well as
in the midst of his wealth; his servants that wander in sheepe-skinnes, and
goat-skinnes, Heb. 11.37. as well as Dives that's clothed in purple and fine
linen; but I hasten to the second conclusion.

God would have no man to grow proud, because of either temporal or spiritual
graces wherewith God has honored him. So in the parable of the Pharisee, that
trusted in himself and despised others, Luke 18. from the 9. to the 13. Do
you despise the Church of God, and shame them that have not? shall I praise you
in this? I praise you not, 1 Cor. 11.22. Thus the Apostle instructs his
Corinthians; Who has separated thee? and what have thou that thou have not
received? Nullis opportunis insidiatur, quam quibus laus j sta debetur.
etc. 1 Cor. 4.7. God knows full well, that none are so subject to this sin,
as they that have the best gifts, according to that of Prosper: Epist.
advirginem Demetriadem.
He insnareth none better, than those to whom just praise is due. And therefore
he charges them especially to take heed of this sin; that his people be not
proud of their temporal blessings; see Deuteronomy. 8.14. Take heed that thy heart be
not lifted up; not of spiritual graces, for what have thou which thou have not
received? 1 Cor. 4. Other vices in sins, Caetera viti^ in peccat^^, super^^ in
(...) Superbia bones op ribus insidiatur ut pereant. Ad Dioscor. Epist. 56.
Epist. 109. ad Monachas.
pride in deeds well done is most to be feared, says August. Pride seeks to
destroy good works. When we have escaped common sins in dong evil, God would
have us take heed that we grow not proud of doing well: many times the devil
cannot keep man from doing some good, which yet shall never be but upon
record, and so he makes him proud of what he has done, and so in other sins.
Will you have a reason?

First, Ludovicus Vives writes out of Seneca, Multos pervenire potuisse ad
sap^^ttam, rusi co se pervenisse p^tarent. De Causis Corrupt. Artium l. 2.
Many might have attained to wisdom, but that they think they have attained
it already: Ineus existens prohibet alien^.
That which is already within, forbids the receiving any more. The heart may be
so full with a conceit, that it will sooner burst than receive any more. It is
impossible that ever he should be wise, who thinks himself wise enough
already; impossible for him to learn, that conceits his learning to be great
enough already. They that will grow in wisdom must come to say with So crates;
Hoc (...).
I know this one thing, that I know nothing.

Secondly, this keeps a man far from God and mal^es him unfit to come near
him, that which brings a man near, is humility; Hec (...) sursun. tenda^ Aug
de Civit. Det. lib. 14 cap 13.
This is a wonder of humility, that pride rends downwards, humility upwards,
says Augustine. And to Dioscorus he says, Epist. 56.
that that which Demosthenes answered one that asked, what in the precepts of
Rhetoric is first to be observed? answered, Pronuntiation; what in the second
place? Pronuntiation; what in the third place? Pronuntiation: may be most
truly said of humility. So Hierome of Paula; Minima suit ut esset maxima,
quanto magis se d ^^^ciebat, tanto magis a Christosuble vebatur, latebat, and
non latchat.
She was least that she might be greatest, by how much more she humbled
herself, by so much the more by Christ was she exalted, she lay hid, and yet
she lay not hid. (...) gloriam assiquebatur. Aug. de Civit. Det, lib. 5. cap 12.
By shunning glory, he attained glory. So Augustine of Cato.

Thirdly, thou have not these gifts because thou art better by nature than
they, for thou art a child of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. nor of thy
self, but of Gods favor; and God can, and often does for pride and
unthankfulness,

Which serves to take down the pride of a number of conceited professors
amongst us, Jane a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit. There are few men whom they
can prefer before themselves; their brethren are either more ignorant, or
more cold, or more easily yield to Church orders; but they thank God they are
not like other men. So more they are, for many that speak a great deal less,
do a great deal (...) good; many that make less shows, have better hearts;
and many that boast less, have better cause than they have. To conclude, the
more wisdom a man has, the more humble it will make him, not more proud; the
more learning and knowledge a man has, the more meek and gentle it should
make him, not more haughty and censorious; and there is good reason for it; they
that have least wisdom, least knowledge, least grace, commonly think they
have most, and they that have mose seotheir want. By seeing much, they see how
much they lack; and that which they have, being nothing to what they want,
makes them think that of all others they have the least. So I come from the
proposition to the reason.

Thou bear not the root, but the root thee.] Which is taken from an
absurdity that would follow. It were absurd for him that must be carried, to
boast against him that carries him; as if the arms should boast against the
feet, the chariot against the wheel, the branches against the root whereon
they are sustained. Or i^ may be from the unseemlinesse of it; it is an
unbonest part to receive a multitude of blessings, and never to acknowledge it;
and wretched unthankfulness to receive a blessing at ones hands, and crow over
him that gave it: but if the Gentiles insult over the Jews, then the branches
rejoice over the tree that bears them, the hands against the body that
sustaines them, the chariot against the wheels whereon it is borne, and the
roof of the house against the pillars whereon it stands. But the conclusion
which may be inferred is first in the position. How much men are beholding to
their holy ancestors, and children to be borne of holy parents, they are holy
for the promise made unto their fathers, as in verse 16.

Secondly, The Gentiles are in many respects inferior to the Jews, howsoever
for the present they are cast off, and plucked from the vine. Isai. 2.3. Many
people shall go and say, come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and
to the house of the God of Jacob; for the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the
Word forth of Jerusalem: according to that of Christ, Ioh. 4.38. Other men
labored, and you are entered into their labor. The Fathers and the Prophets
sowed the seed of the Church of the new Testament, which covenant is derived
from them to us, and we are changed into their commonwealth, not they into
ours; ingrafted into their stock, not they into ours.

Secondly, Romans 3.2. which the Apostle calls their preferment above others,
verse. 1. and hence it is that we approve as canonical all the books of
Scripture that they had and no more. Hence let us see what an honor it is to
have Gods oracles: Secondly, let us learn to use this treasure better than the
Jews did, for fear it be taken from us, as it was from them.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ, God blessed for evermore, had his beginning from
them: So the Apostle, Romans 9.3. Of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning
the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for evermore: and therefore
salvation is of the Jews, says Christ, Ioh. 4.22.

Fourthly, peculiar people of God, and a royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. They
were beloved, when we Gentiles were without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.

Lastly, all the particular promises, verse. 11. And so I come to a fourth
argument, in the three next verses.

VERSE. 19. Thou will say then, the branches are broken off, that I might be
grafted in.
THis third reason stands on two parts: The one, an argument urged, to show
that the Gentiles may boast over the Jews: the other, the Apostles answer. The
argument is verse. 19. the Jews are cast off for our cause, compelled to yield
unto us, the more unworthy to the more worthy; therefore, seeing we Gentiles
are the more worthy, we may lawfully boast. The answer to this is threefold.
1. They are not broken for thee, but for their infidelity, verse. 20. 2. Thou
art not grafted in for thy worth, but stand by faith, that is, art engrafted
out of grace and mercy, verse. 20. 3. Because God (who in justice cut off the
natural branches for unbeleefe, for the same cause may cut off thee, verse. 21.
And upon these he builds his exhortation; Noli altumsapere.
Be not high minded, but fear. I begin with the first.

Thou will say then.] Note that Paul had pressed many strong arguments, to
dissuade the Gentiles from pride and insultation over the Jews, and yet here
they have some thing to say for it.

There is no sin, be it never so predigious and foul, but his master has
some plea for it, and some reason to uphold it. Some have Scripture, as
covetousness has 1 Timothy 5.8. Usury has Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a stranger thou
may lend thy money upon usurie, though not to thy brother. Some have example,
as drunkenness in Noah, adultery in David, apostasy in Peter; some have
authority, as being practiced and allowed by stars and planets that reside
in the superior orbs. Some plead that their sins be but small, Is it not a
little one, said Lot to the Angel? when he was commanded to fly into the
mountain, he would go to Zoar, Is it not a little one and my soul shall
live? Some that the sin they harbor is but some one, as Naaman the Syrian;
God be merciful to me in this one, 2 King. 5. He will neither swear, nor
steal, but kneel in the Idols temple: Forsitan huic uni possum succumbere
culpae;
Sampson was not unjust, but must have a Dalilah,
Porsitan huic uni, etc.
Solomon wise, but must have strange wives;
Forsitan huic uni, etc.
Some (when they have sinned) lay it upon others, as Adam; some defend it to be
no sin at all, as here the Gentiles do; Some excuse themselves; Alii
excusant; 1. Non seci. 2. (...). 3. Si male, at no^m^ltum male fec^, aut si
multum male fec^, non nula intention Bern. Apolog ad Guilielm. Abbatem.
1. I did it not: 2. I did well. 3. If I did ill, yet not very ill, or if I
did very ill, yet not with an evil intention: as Bernard speaks.

Note first, the boldness of sin; It dares appear before the Revenger of
sin, the Punisher of sin, and plead not guilty to whatsoever is produced
against it: much like to Judas, who when Christ said that one should betray
him, boldly demands; Is it I? Is it I? And when they told Peter that he was
one that was a follows of Christ, he swear he knew no such man; but that which
we may chiefly learn is this: That sin (if it be borne with but a while)
will not know it self to be sin at all, but plead it self to be goodness
and honesty. Bern. de vita solitaria.
Custom (says Bernard) will become a second nature, and so must be called
good. Consuetudo pro lege est. Ter^^ll. de Coron^milit. cap. ^.
Custom is for a Law, says Tertullian, and so will be counted good. If a man
be but used to it a while, he will never take notice of it, nor know when he
does evil. Custom of sinning will take away all sense of sin. Man's heart is
like to a way, at first every coach makes a mark or print, afterward when it
is worn to the gravel it becomes like a pavement; and therefore Salvianus
holds it a wonder, that a man should long continue in sin, Et non cum ipsis
iniquitatibus m^riatur, in ipsit sepeliatur. Cuius finienda vita, quam vitia.
Aug. ad Cornel. Epist. 125.
and not die with his iniquities, and be buried in them. Augustine says, that
after sin becomes customarie, Life may sooner be ended than vices. Jeremy
impyeth that there is an impossibility that it should everbe left, Can the
black moore change his skin? etc. Ierem. 23.13. Job, that sin will be buried
with those that have used to keep it; His bones are full of the sins of his
youth, etc. Job 20.11.

Learn then to stop the current of sin in the beginning,

The branches are broken off, that I might be grafted in.] It contains two
members; the one, the disparagement of the Jew, The branches are broken off:
the other, the Gentile's proud conceit of himself, that I might be grafted in.
I begin with the first.

They are called branches only in respect of outward prerogatives; from whence
learn first.

That such branches as shall be cut off, are so like others, that God only
can distinguish them: Matthew. 13.29. When the servant would have plucked up the
tares that were among the wheat, Christ forbids him for this reason, lest while
you pluck up the tares, you pluck up the wheat, as not being able to
distinguish one from another, according to that of S. Augustine, Deus nobis
imperavit congregauonem, sib. reservavit separationem, ill^us est s ^parare
q^ines^^t errare. Aug. ad virgin Faeliciam, Epist. 109. Quidam tenent pa^^ral
s^athed^as, ut Dugregem custodiant, quidam ut suis honoribus servi^^t. Aug.
ibid. Aug. contra Petil^anum, lib. 3. cap. 55.
God has required of us the congregating, has reserved the separating to
himself; he must separate, who knows not how to err. Who can distinguish S.
Jude from the Traitor Judas, or Simon Peter from Simon Magus, but only
Christ: Some do sit in the pastoral chaires, that they may keep Gods flock,
some that they may serve their own preferments: says the same Father, Ibid.
Judas does preach and baptize as well as Jude, as the same Father speaks.
There be branches, says Ambrose, according to present righteousness, and
there be some according to the foreknowledge of God, and none can distinguish
them but God; there be branches which Christ has planted, and some which he
has not planted, and till God cut off the one, and leave the other, none can
make a difference between them. Our first parents have two children, the one
within the Covenant, the other not; yet so like, hat none can distinguish them
but God: In one Arc Shem, Ham, and Iaphet; none knows who is in, or who
without grace, but God: In one womb Esau and Jacob, which is predestinate,
which not, none knows but God; until the great Shepherd come, none can
distinguish sheep from goats; until the reapers come, none can distinguish
wheat from tares; until the Master of the house come, none can distinguish
between the vessels of honor and dishonor. If you ask the reason, why God
suffers the branches that must be cut off, to grow amongst others: I answer;
that it is for a twofold reason. 1. Because the coldness of devotion in the
one, should by an Antiperistasis stir up zeal in the other; as the wind
striving to blow out the fire, increases the flame. 2. That the glory of the
true branches might be more illustrious and eminent: Laus tr^buenda Murenae,
non quod Asiam viderat, s^d quod in Asia continenter vixerat. Cic. Orat. pro
Murena.
Murena is to be praised, not because he had seen Asia, but because he had
lived continently in Asia: says Cicero. Lots chastity appears more in
Sodom, than when he lived in the mountains.

Hence see how unsound they are, who take upon them to determine, Isa. 65.5.
Stand apart, come not near me, for I am holier than thou. I know not what to
say of such, but as Constantine said to Acesius, a Novatian Bishop; Erigito
tibi scalam, Acesi, ut s^lus in coelum ^scendas. S^^r. Eccles. H^st. lib. 1.
cap. 7. A tendi ^ z^zaenia, and tri^^^u^e non attendu.
Set up a ladder for thy self, O Acesius, that thou alone may ascend up to
Heaven. If they leave us because we have faults, by the same reason they must
needs fly into Heaven; for there is no place in earth for them: Thou look to
the cockle, and the wheat thou regardest not. When thou dividest thy self from
hypocrites in the Church, thou dividest thy self from the Church, And in
heterogene all bodies, a member cur off perishes; O then forsake not the
green pastures, Et membrum in h^^erog^neis ^e rit ^bs^^ssum.
because of the goats; nor Gods house, because of the vessels of dishonor; nor
Gods wheat, because of the tares; nor Gods net, because of the bad fishes that
are in it. Rather follow the rule of S. Augustine against the letters of
Petilianus, Tolera propter bonos comm^x^^onem ^ alorum, ne visles propter
^^alos claritatem bonor^m. Aug. Contra Petil^anum lib. 3. cap. 2.
Bear with the mixture of evil, because of the good, lest thou violate the
charity of the good because of the evil. Nee propter m^los bonos deseramus,
sea propter bonos malos s^sser^mus. Aug. contra Parme^an^^, lib. 2. cap. 8.
Neither let us forsake the good, because of the evil; but suffer the evil,
because of the good.

2. If no man can distinguish the good from the bad, learn first not to judge
of another that is ill, for he may prove good; nor of him that is good in
show, for he may prove ill; nor of thy self that thou art happy, because
thou have the outward privileges of true branches; but seek for the power of
godliness in thine own heart, to sinde those graces whereby thine election
may be sealed unto thee; hearing the word,

Secondly, the branches are broken off: Therefore no people, no Nation so far
preferred above others, but sin will bring them to naught, and cut them off
from God. That all Nations have their falls and periods is granted by all: but
what may be the cause of their subversion, the most be ignorant. The Stoicke
ascribes it to destiny; Plato, Pythagoras, Me^b^d. 6. Poly^ic. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
and Bodin to number; Aristotle to an asymmetry in the body; Copernicus to the
motion of an imaginary encentrique; Cardanus and the most part of Astrologians
to stars and planets: All these have groped in darkness, and (being
misse-lead with an Ign^^ fatuus) have supposed with Ixion in the fable, that
they had found the true Juno, when it was but a cloud of palpable darkness:
for if we consult with the oracles of God, we shall there find, that sin is
the cause why God falls out with his children, turns cities into ashes, makes
kingdoms but ludibria fortunae, the mocking stocks of fortune, etc. But I am
loath that it should be said of me as it was of Micaiah, That man does not
prophecy to us any good. There is one point more.

Thirdly, the branches are broken off: God can no sooner cast a man down, but
man is ready to tread upon him. Jobs case, who when he was cast down, and lay
upon the earth, humbled at the loss of his cammels, sheep, servants, sons;
his friends would have cast him a great deal further, persuading him that such
great plagues would never have come but upon great sinners: The Jew no so n^r
down. but the Gentile is ready to triumph over him. It was David's case; In
mine adversity they reioye dover me, yea the very abiects come against me,
Psalm. 35.15. God has forsaken him, therefore persecute him and take him, Psalm.
71.9. If God lay any judgment upon a people, man condemns them, as they did
those on whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, Luke 13. If any present
calamity, man judges them, as Paul, when the viper hanged upon him at Malta,
Act. 28. If God bring men low, and hide himself from them for a while, vulgus
iacentem calcat, there be those that will tread upon them, and insult over them
as boldly, as the frogs in the fable did over the lion when he was asleep. If
God take away the rich man's goods, the people despise him; If God take away the
great man's honor, the people scorn him: If Kings take away their favorites
from their followers, there be those that will soon see it, and keep them
from rising.

Whence we may learn, that if God should once leave us and cast us down,
David, Psalm. 27.2. When the wicked (who are mine enemies) come upon me to eat
up my flesh, they shall stumble and fall: though an host of men, etc. Secondly,
that God would not take away his mercy from us; Hide not thy face from me,
Psalm. 27.9. That God would be merciful unto us and bless us; that (though we
sin) he would not cast us off, but forgive us; though we run away, he would
not let us alone, but run after and overtake us; though we go astray, he
would not leave us to our lelves, but seek us out, and lay us upon his
shoulders, and bring us home, and keep us in his fold, and at the day when the
sheep shall stand on the one side, and the goats on the other, we may be of
that number to whom God shall say, Come ye blessed. And so I come from the
mean conceit that the Gentile has of the Jew, to the proud conceit he has of
himself, in the next words.

That I might be graft in.] As if the Gentile should say, I am more worthy than
the Jew, therefore in reason he must give place unto me, and God looking upon
my worthiness, does so far prefer me, that he has cut off them, that I
might be graffed in for them.

Wherein we may observe, Observat.
first, how subject man is to grow proud of his gifts and graces that are
bestowed upon him. Secondly, how, when God has bestowed upon man some greater
blessing, he is ready to say, that it is for his own worth, that I might be
grafted in: Both of them are noted by Lombard, 1. Gradus superbiaecum jactat se
habere qued babet. 2. Cum credit a Deo datum, sed pro suis meritis. Greg. lib.
2. dis^inst. 42.
out of Gregory. 1. A degree of pride, when he boasts himself to have that
which he has. Secondly, when he believes that it is given him of God, but for
his deserts. I begin with the first. The Apostle 1 Cor. 8.1. says, that
knowledge puffs up: and read Isa. 65. that holiness puffs up; Stand
apart, come not near me, for I am holier than thou. And in Luke 18. that the
performance of some outward duties puffs up; I fast twice in the week, I pay
tithe, I am not like this Publicane; that greatness puffs up, as Pharaoh,
Who is the Lord, that I should fear him? Exodus 5.2. Favor puffs up, as it
did Haman, who was carried so high in the smoakie cloud of a Princes affection,
that he forgate both God and himself, Esth. 5. Eloquence puffs up, as in
Herod, who was not ashamed of that vain applause that the people gave him; It
is not the voice of man, but of God, Acts 12.22. Power to cast out Devils
puffs up, as in the Apostles, Luke 10.19, 20. Caetera vitia sune in pecc^tis,
superbia mexime tunenda in rec^e s^ctis. Aug. ad Dioscor Epist. 56. Et
insidiatur Diabolus lit p^rdat. Aug. ad monochas, Epist. 109.
Other vices are in sins, pride is most to be feared in deeds well done;
says Augustine. God gives good graces, And the Devil lays in wait to
destroy them; says Augustine. If you consider what man is, lighter than
vanity; and whereof he is made, of dust; you will easily believe, that a
small wind will blow him high enough, and though a man have never so many
causes of humiliation and dejection, yet some one good gift will heave him up
more, than all these will cast him down: If Herod have only an eloquent
tongue, he will be proud of that, whereas he has a thousand scarres and
blemishes in his life, that cannot deject him: If a Pharisie have but one good
quality, that he will pay tithes justly, though his heart be full of
hypocrisy, his understanding full of blindness and ignorance, all these foul
sins cannot so easily keep him down, as that one good quality will hoyse him
up. Reasons to keep us from pride.


By what reasons then may a man be kept from being proud of his gifts and
graces, I have noted three. 1. Because that is the strongest argument to keep
us from growing in spiritual graces; as the way to be great, is to be small in
a man's own conceit; Latius regnes a^ idum domando spiritum, quam si Lybiam
^emo^is Gadibus j^ngas. Hora^. Oda. l. 2. od. 2. ad Salust. Crisp. Not. bist.
lib. 16. cap. 42.
He that rules his spirit, is greater than he that overcommeth cities, Prove.
16.32. 2. Because humility, in respect of our gifts, is the best way to come
near to God. 3. Because naturally thou art no better than they, as verse. 18. A
good man should not resemble the Palm Tree, whereof Pliny writes, that the
more weight is cast upon it, the higher it rises; but like to the canes that
be full of sugar, the more they bear, the lower they stoop; like trees that
be full of fruit, the more fruit they bear, the more they yield and bend;
much learning should make a man more humble, much grace should make a man
lowly, much honor should make a man more gentle, much riches should make a man
more meek: and so I descend to the second conclusion.

When God gives good things, man is always ready to ascribe it to his own
merit: This is it whereof the Lord forewarned Israel. In Deuteronomy. 9. When thou
shall pass over Jordan, and possess cities walled up to Heaven, say not thou
in thine heart, for my rightteousnesse the Lord has brought me in to possess
this land, verse. 4. Say not it was for mine upright heart, verse. 5. Say not it
was for mine holiness, verse. 6. If God give Israel a victory, they are ready
to say, Our high hand (and not the Lord) has done this, Deuteronomy. 32.27. If the
Canaanite be cast out, and Israel be come in his stead, Israel ascribes all to
his own merit; If Israel be cast off, and the Gentile come in his stead, the
Gentile ascribes all to his own deserts. Whereto you must mark the answer of
God, Deuteronomy. 9.5. Thou did not enter for thine own righteousness, but he was
cast off for his own wickedness: A fault whereof the Papist is most guilty,
who (as the Rhemists do confess) affirm Gods election to be because of faith
foreseen in us, Rhem. Annot. in Heb. 5.
or works foreseen; both against Scripture. For first, that which is the fruit
cannot be the cause of election: But good works are fruits and effects of it,
as Ephesians. 1.4. S. Augustine speaks thus; Elegit no^ non quiasanctieramus, sed
ut sancti essemus; nen inem elegit dignum, sed eligendo effecit dignu^. Aug.
contra Julian. Pelag. l. 5. cap. 3. Liberantur per gratiam, and dic^n^ur non
vasa suorum mer. tor^^^, sed vasa misericordiae. Aug. de natura and gratia,
lib. 5. cap. 1.
He chose us, not because we were holy, but that we might be holy; he chose
none being worthy, but by choosing made him worthy. Secondly, our election is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy, Romans 9.16. Upon which words Augustine speaks thus; They are freed by
grace, and are called not vessels of their own deserts, but vessels of mercy.
3. In Luke 12.32. It is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom: and
Luke 15.16. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: whereas if God
should elect men for faith and works, then should they choose him first, by
believing in him, and doing good works to please him; a point so gross, that
Bellarmine himself disclaimes it, De natura and gratia, lib. 2. cap. 10.
and answers the objection from 2 Timothy 2.20, and 21. If any man purge himself
from these, he shall be a vessel of honor, as if by free will and good works he
were made a vessel of honor, in his answer to the second testimony. That the
Apostle says not, he is made a vessel of honor, but he is a vessel: as if he
should say, There be two seals of election, or being a vessel of honor. The
first inward, the knowledge of divine approbation. The second outward, the
purging of our hearts from sin and iniquity; and thus Peter exhorts us to make
it sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. I meet the further use in the next verse, and therefore
come from the Gentiles plea to the Apostles reply, in verse. 20, and 21.

VERSE. 20.
THe reply has four parts. 1. A denial that the Jews were cast off because
the Gentiles should be received, It was their infidelity; through unbeleefe
the branches are broken off. 2. A denial that the Gentile was grassed in for
his worth; thou stand by faith. 3. To take down their swelling and proud
conceit, he affrights them with Gods justice, in dealing both with the
natural and engrafted branches; for if God spare not, etc. verse. 21. 4. The
gemination of the (...), or exhortation; Be not high minded, but fear. I
begin with the first: Insidelitie was the cause of the rejection of the Jews,
Quomodo excidit eos Dominus? Tum Dominus ex^^idit, quando prop^^r m^r^^u
li^a^em Evangelium ause^t and Sacra^ent^.
they believed not the Gospel that was preached unto them, nor in the Messiah
that was borne amongst them: How does the Lord out them off? then he cuts them
off, when for their incredulity he takes from them the Gospel and the
Sacraments: says Olevianus.

The points are many. 1. There is no sin wherewith. God is more angry, than
want of faith to believe the Gospel when it is preached: Acts 13.46. It was
necessary that the word should first be preached unto you, as verse. 11. and
hearing the Gospel without prosit and faith, is the forerunner of destruction,
as in Eli his sons, They hearkened not to their fathers voice, because the
Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2.25. I never read without astonishment the
seventh of Jeremy, from verse. 13. to verse. 17. I rose up early and spoke unto
you, but you would not hear, as verse. 8. I come to a second point.

Insidelitie, or want of faith, makes a divorce, and makes a separation
between God and man: It is most true of all sin, as Isa. 59. Your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, verse. 2. But most true of this, as
Heb. 3.12. Take heed (brethren) lest there be in any of you an evil heart,
and unfaithful to depart away from the living God. The foulness of this
sin will appear, if we consider. 1. That all things they meddle with are
foul and unclean; unto the unbeleeving nothing is pure, Tit. 1.15. 2. How
they became Infidels, that is, by Satan's strong hand in blinding them: as 2
Cor. 4.4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. 3. If we
consider the judgments gone out against them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Because
they received not the truth that they might be saved; therefore God sent them
strong delusions, that they should beleevelies; that is one: and that all they
might be damned which believe not the truth; that is another. 4. If we
consider the end, What shall be theend of them which obey not the Gospel; as
if it would be some strange end, 1 Pet. 4.18. It shall be tribulation, and
anguish, and woe, Romans 2.5. If we consider the effects of it; in Adam and Eve,
it excluded them out of Paradise; in Israel, it excluded them out of Canaan;
and in all that hear the Gospel, and believe not, it excludes them out of
Heaven; For he that believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. Lastly, if we
consider it to be the mother and breeder of all the sins that are done
against God, according to that of Augustine, of faith to Peter, Qualitas malae
vitae^in ^^u^^ liabet ab infidelitate.
chap. 3. The quality of an evil life has beginning from infidelity. It
will make a man part with Heaven for any trifle, as Esau did with his
birthright: For if a man believe neither the judgments nor the promises, then
he reasons thus with himself; If I should live never so strictly, I could be
no better; if never sobadly, I can be no worse; why should I cut my self short
of any thing that I like. He that believes not the judgments, will never
stick to do any evil; he that believes not the promises, will never be
forward to do any good; so that all sins, both of omission and commission,
arise from this. Why does one steal, but because he believes not that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.10. No thief shall enter into the kingdom of God: What
makes another be covetous, a third a wanton, but because he believes not that
in Ephesians. 5.5. Why does another turn base Usurer, but because he believes not
Ezekiel. 18.13. Why will one break the Sabbath, but because he believes not the
promise, Isa. 5.6. and Isa. 5.8. Why will another see the member of Christ to
starve, but because he believes not that in Matthew. 25. that Christ shall say,
Come ye blessed, etc. Why do so many evilly entreat the Minister, and do him
little or no good, but because they believe not that, Mat. 10.40, 41. He that
receives you, receives me: and so in all other sins. Hence Gregory;
Resurgit infidelis ad tormentum, non ad judicium. Greg. Moral. lib. 26. cap. 24.
The unbeleever shall rise to torment, not to judgment: according to that,
Ioh. 3.18. He that believes not is condemned already.

The Use is: to make us labor for true faith, to believe all the promises and
judgments of God, Romans 10.17. Wait at the poole till the Angel comes, sit at
the feet of Gamaliel, wait at the posts and porches of Gods house to learn
wisdom. Men would tarry too long here, if it were an Exchange, where they
might bargain for wealth: why will they not tarry to hear him, and of him,
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Many would
rise early, and provide to come into this house, if it were to gather jewels
and pearls; But why will they not do so to learn wisdom, which is better
than precious stones? Prove. 8.11. Why will they not do so to receive
instruction, which is better than silver, and knowledge which is better than
gold, Prove. 8.10. O then if you would have faith wrought in you, use the word
as Alexander used Homers Odysses, as Saul used his spear, 1 Samuel 26.7. and as
God commanded Joshua, chap. 1.8. let it never depart from thee. I make short
with this point, because I meet it at the 30. verse, and come to a third
conclusion from this first answer.

Through unbeleefe they are broken off:] Man is the cause of his own ruin,
and his destruction is from himself. Therefore says God, O Israel, one thing
has destroyed thee, Nimirum iniquitas tua, desectio ad idola.
Hos. 13.9. To wit thy inquity, thy falling away to Idols, says Zanchius. It
seems that they were wont to lay all the blame upon God, whenever they were
destroyed; and here he instructs them where they should justly lay the blame,
to wit, upon themselves; for God never leaves a man, till man have first left
him; as S. Augustine proves purposely. Aug. De Civit. Dei, lib. 13. ca. 15.
The Apostle, 1 These. 5.3. tells us, That destruction comes on men that be
secure, as pain upon a woman in travail; now a woman in travail bears the
cause of her own grief within in her womb, so does man. If it be said, that
man's condemnation and destruction is of Gods will in the act of reprobation,
for answer observe three premises, and four conclusions out of the second
verse; so that still it stands, that man is the cause of his condemnation. Adam
shuts himself out of Paradise; the Angels shut themselves out of heaven; and
whosoever dies, draws that judgment upon himself by his own sin, God
being as free from it, as the Judge that pronounces deserved death upon a
wilful murderer, is free from the death of the murderer.

From whence learn, that whenever any judgment is upon us; Jonas in the ship
in the storm, said, Come and let us know for whose cause this evil is upon
us, Jonah 1.7. Seek not thy self without thy self; N^te quaesev^ris extra.
and when the secret sin (which brings the trouble upon us) is once found,
cast it out, as they cast out Jonas into the sea.

Secondly, learn, that if ever God cast us off from being his people, Babylon
is destroyed, she may thank her pride: Sodom is turned to ashes, she may
thank her wantonness: Jerusalem inhabited by Turks and Infidels, she may
thank her infidelity and Idolatry: If woe be to Capernaum and Bethsaida,
they may thank their contempt of the Gospel: If Laodicea be spued out of the
mouth of God, she may thank her lukewarmenesse: If ever we be enforced to sit
by the waters of Babylon, and to remember Sion with tears; if ever God make us
a prey to our enemies, stop the influence of the heavens, take away his
Gospel, and suffer us to walk in darkness, we may thank our selves, for God
may justly cut us off, as he did them: Sodom for her wantonness, our land is
full of the sins of Sodom: Babylon for pride, our land is full of it, men
and women are in travail of new and quaint devices; houses are made palaces,
gardens made Edens, women's heads and breasts like ped ers shops. Seek the
religions of all Heretics, we have them; the fashions of all Nations, we have
them; the symtomes of a dying and decaying people, we have them. I pray God we
may never see that day wherein God shall judge us; but if it come, we may
thank our selves. And so I come to the second part of the Apostles reply, in
these words;

Thou stand by faith.] To prove that they were not ingrafted for their own
worthiness. By faith; Whereby God has freely given it thee, says Paraeus on
Romans Qua t^ gratis donavit Deus. Quia Dei^ ise^icord a insiti sunt fi^e.
11. Because out of Gods mercy they are engrafted by faith, says Soto on Romans
11. Now by standing by faith, is noted both our entrance and continuance in
Gods favor, whence the maine point to be learned is this:

It is Gods mere favor and mercy that ever we are, or continue to be his
children, and no worth or merit of our own. Whatsoever good we have, it is his
mercy to us in his son. In Ephesians. 1.3. He has blessed (...) with all
stirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ. In the fourth verse, He has
chosen us in Christ. At the fifth, He has predestinate us to be adopted
through Christ. At the sixth, He accepted us in his beloved, viz. in Christ.
At the seventh, We have redemption through his blood, that is, Christ. At the
eighth, He has abounded to us in all wisdom. At the ninth, He has opened the
mystery of his will by him, viz. Christ. At the tenth, He has reconciled
things in heaven and earth, even in Christ. Thus if we have any good, it is
from Gods mercy to us in Christ. So if we be in a happy and blessed condition,
the beginning and whole progress is of Gods favor; as 1 Ioh. 3.1. Behold what
love the father has showed on us, that we should be called the sons of God.
If regenerate, it is his mercy and courtesy; Blessed be God, who of his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. If a man
have many good motions and desires, and so be said to begin well; if he hold
out till the end of his days in holmesse and integrity, till he have the
Crown upon his head, and the Garland in his hand, and so be said to run well;
yet the Apostle rels us, That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. Therefore says the
Apostle, That of our selves we cannot so much as think a good though, but all
our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. so that-if it go well with us, if we
please God, live in his fear, die in his favor, say as Deuteronomy. 9.4. It was not
for my sake, but his love, because he had a favor unto me. I come to a second
point.

It is faith whereby the branches of Christ's planting are distinguished from
those that are cut off: For first, it makes them that have it full of good
works, meekness, temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1. the other are barren, like the
mountains of Gilboa. Act. 15.9.
Secondly, it cleanses the hearts of those that have it, others remain
unclean, and polluted in their own menstruous blood. Thirdly, faith makes
those that have it bold and consident to come unto God, Ephesians. 3.12. It makes
them long for the approaching of the Son of God, and to say with the Spouse,
Apocal. 22. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: but they that want it, and shall be
cut off, are afraid of it; they cry to the hills, cover us, and to the
mountains, fall upon us, Apoc. 6.16. Fourthly, it makes them to sigh and
groan, waiting for the redemption of their bodies, Romans 8.23. which is not but
in such as have the first fruits of the spirit. Fifthly, it works obedience unto
God; It makes Abel to offer a better sacrifice than Cain, and Enoch to please
God, Heb. 11.5. whereas they that want it, cannot please God in any thing, Heb.
11.6. They that have this excellent gift of God, shall never be cut off, nor
fall away; they that want it, cannot escape the vengeance of eternal fire. Now
there is nothing else wherein they differ; to look to they are both alike,
Jude and Judas, Simon and Peter and Simon Magus in outward profession both
alike, in external dignities both alike, in riches both alike; but there is
one thing wherein they differ, viz. faith. The outside of the earth is all
alike, but some parts are more rich within, because of the veins of gold and
silver: So are the outsides of men.

From whence learn to know, In ipsa distinguntur filii Dei, a filiis Diaboli,
filii lucis, a filiis tenebrarum.
or not: that's by thy faith. In this the sons of God are distinguished from
the sons of the devil, the sons of light from the sons of darkness,
says Augustine. In this scrutiny and examination, Aug de Tempore Sermon. 53.
take heed thou beguile not thy self with a dead and counterfeit says; and
therefore for trial I commend unto thee Chrysostomes rule: Faith is tried by
works: without works, Fi^es probatur ^e^o ^a. Chrysostom. in 1 These. 1. Him. 1.
F^d^s ^lmilis e^t (...) tuto. Ch^^^^n 2 (...) 3 H^^^^l. 8.
faith is like to a fair body void of life; to a golden picture, or statue,
says the same Author. The fruits whereby thou must examine it, are, 1.
diligent hearing, 2. prayer, as in Romans 5.1, 2. If you have these, thou have a
true faith, and art a living branch; if not, it is a dead faith, and thou art a
brand provided for the fire. And so I come to the Apostles exhortation.

Be not high minded, but fear: (...), Be not pust in mind, (...). This fear
(says Bez^) is according to the Hebrews the religious worship of God, a godly
care; More ^ebrae^ i^ reug^^^^^ D^ic^l^us, p^o ^^^^ludo.
not because they need doubt of Gods love, but because they should fear to
offend him that loved them so dearly. Whatsoever is in the former part of the
exhortation, has been observed at the 18. verse; and that which is in the
second, may be contained in this conclusion,

A good Christian must live in continual fear to offend his God, and in a
continual fear of falling into siune. This is it whereto the Apostle exhorts
his Philippians; work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
and Peter his Jews, Pass. the time of your dwilling here in fear, 1 Pet.
1.17. and he whom Solomon blesses, Blessed is he that always fears, Prove.
28.14. and he whom God will spare in the day of his wrath, Malac. 3.16, 17. It
is not my purpose to explicate all the acceptions of fear; being taken, first,
for the whole worship of God, according to the He^brewes, as Beza and Marlorat,
so here, Romans 11.20. Secondly, for obedience, Give to every man his due, fear
to whom ye owe fear, Romans 14.7. Thirdly, for true religion, Is not this thy
fear? Job 4.6. Fourthly, for reverence, and an awful regard of God, Serve the
Lord with fear, etc. Psalm. 2.11. Nor to show the diverse kinds of fear, some
is filial, some servile, and they differ thus. Filial fear proceeds from
confidence and love of God, The differences between filial and servile fear.
servile fear from the accusation of sin, and sense of Gods wrath. Secondly,
filial fear shunneth the offending of God, but not God himself; servile, is
the shunning, not of sin, but of the judgment due to sin, and consequently
of God himself. Thirdly, filial fear is joined with the certainty of
eternal salvation; servile fear with the fear of eternal damnation. The
more curious difference of these two may be had from Thomas and Bonaventure,
noted by the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 13. chap. 4. Nor of that other distinction
of fear, into natural fear, such as was in Christ, Matthew. 26.27. and
distrustful fear, which is called the spirit of bondage to fear again, Romans
8.15. nor of the consistencie of servile and filial fear in the same subject.
That which comes most fitly in my way, is the clearing of that great and maine
point, to wit:

Whether man, to whom God has given saving grace, and is justified by faith,
can fall away from God finally and totally, and in the end die and perish
eternally. Adillam commentitiam fidem, quae est divinae benevolentiae numquam
amittendae certa persuasie, quam hodie dr^tissime. compleni sunt haretici
manifesic and invicte valet. Stapl. Antid. page 723.
This one Text (says Stapleton) To that counterfeit faith, which is a sure
persuasion of Gods good will never to be lost, which at this day the
heretics have embraced most strictly, does mvuifeslly and invincibly
prevail. Multis datur gratia, quibus perseverare non datur. Thom. Aquin. Sam.
1 a. 2 ae. Quest. 109. Art. 10.
To many grace is given, to whom persiverance is not given; says Thomas
Aqalnas. To this head tend the writings of Bellarmine, of the losing of grace,
of Tompson in his Diatriba, whose whole book is but froth and swelling,
sophistrle without any soundness, or clear and evident light. Observe first
some premises and grounds which shall be like the Delphicke sword, to take
away all scruples and doubts.

1. Is that of Augustine, Est quaedam votatio, qua^ vocatisunt qui noluerunt
adnuptias, est quaedam, q^d vocati veniunt, sednon been parati. Aug. de
praedest. Sanctorum, cap. 16.
There is a kind of caling, by which they are called, who would not come to
the marriage, and there is a kind whereby they that are called do come, but
not well prepared: as that guest that had not on his wedding garment, Matthew.
22.12. This is only external, where of it is said, Matthew. 20.16. Many are
called but few are chosen: whereas it may be objected; How he does call those
whom he knows will not come? To which Augustine thus answers, Dispusere vie
mecum? miraromccum, and clama, O altitudo! ambe consentiamus in timma. Aug. de
verbis Dom. Sermon. 11.
will thou dispute with me? wonder with me, and cry, O the depth of the
riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33. and so let us both
agree infeare. There is a certain calling according to purpose, mentioned Romans
8.28. which is the execution of Gods purpose, in setting those apart in time,
whom he in decree had set apart for himself from eternity: of whom says
Augustine, Nec quae illuminavit obcoecat, nec quae adisicavit destruit, nec
quae plantavit euellit. Aug. de pradest. Sanct. lib. cap. 16.
Neither does he blind those which he has enlightened, nor throw down those
which he has built up, nor pluck up those which he has planted. And Origin,
Impossible est quod semel vivificavit Deus, ab eodem vel alio occidi. Orig.
It is impossible, that that which God has quickened should be destroyed,
either by the same, or by another. And they that have this, cannot possibly
miss of glory, because of that of the Apostle, Romans 8.30. Whom he did
predestinate, them he called, etc.

2. That there is a twofold election: 1. To execute some charge or office, as
Saul to a Kingdom, Judas to the Apostleship, to a work which he served,
says Augustine, Judas electus ab eo qui novit etiam malis been uti, ut per cos
opus damnabile, Christiopus venerabile compleratur. Aug. de corrept. and great.
cap. 7.
Judas was chosen of him, who knew also how well to use those that were evil,
that by them might be fulfilled a damnable work, the honorable work of
Christ: And therefore when we hear that speech of Christ, Ioh. 6.70. I have
chosen you twelve: We must understand, that the rest were elected by mercy,
he by judgment; the rest to obtain a Kingdom, he to shed his blood. But
thou will say, Judas heard that speech of Christ, Matthew. 19.28. Ye shall sit
upon twelve seats, etc. It is true, but mark how Christ says, not you twelve,
but you that have followed me in the regeneration, etc. Judas followed only
in body, not in heart: Add, says Christ, twelve seats, per mysteriune, by a
mystery, Aug. in Psalm. 90.
says Augustine, non ad def^^iendam numerum, not to define the number, not to
note that whole number and no more; for this excludes Paul, who labored more
than they all, he would not have no seat: sed ad significandam universitatem,
but to signify the universalitie of them; and Christ, Ioh. 13.18. I speak not
of you all, I know whom I have chosen. There is another, to a kingdom and life
eternal; of these it is said, Your names are written in heaven, Luc. 10.20. Of
this the Apostle; He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
Ephesians. 1.4.

3. Faith in Scripture is sometimes taken for the doctrine of faith, as 1 Timothy
4.1. In the latter times many shall depart from the faith, that is, from the
true doctrine: So it is taken in Galat. 1.22. He now preaches the faith, which
before he destroyed. So in Acts 6.7. A great company of the Priests were
obedient to the faith. So in Tit. 1.13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith. In all these places is meant, the mystery of faith, which
a man may have, and yet with it have an unclean heart, and impure conscience:
as the Apostle witnesses, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. Fight a good fight, having faith
and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as concerning faith have
made shipwreck. Sometimes it is taken, as Calvin well notes, Inslit. lib. 3.
c. 2.
for a temporary sense of divine grace in reprobates, grounded upon that, Luke
8.13. When they have heard, they receive the word with joy, but they have no
root, which for a while believe: which proposition must bear these
limitations. 1. Solid percipere vim spiritualis gratiae.
Reprobates do not solidly receive the virtue of spiritual grace; but that
God may leave them without excuse, Insinuat se in little mentes, quatenies sine
spiritu adoptionis gustari potest ejus bonitas.
He insinuates himself into their minds, how far his goodness may be
tasted without the spirit of adoption. 2. They never receive but the confused
sense of grace, because they never apprehend the particular remission of their
sins, nor can they apply Christ to their own hearts. Semetem and primordia
quaedam fiati justifi. cantis habent reprobi, ad germen, ad herbam, fortasse ad
spicam procedunt, sed ad veram frumenti conditionem and naturam nunquam
pertingunt.
Reprobates proceed to the seed sown, and some first beginnings of justifying
faith, to the branch to the herb, perchance to the ear, but they never reach
to the true nature and condition of the corn: as Abbatus against Tompson,
chap. 6.

4. Hypocrites and unbeleevers are so like to Gods elect and faithful
children, that no man can distinguish them but God; and amongst men they are
accounted branches of Christ's own planting, though they be not such. It is the
position of Gregory; Aurum quod pravu Diabel persuasionibus sterni sient lutli
poterit, aurum ante oculos Dei nunquam fuit; habitam quesi sanctitatem ante
oculos hominum videntur omittere, sed eam ante ocules Dei nunquan. habucrunt.
Greg. Moral l. 34 c 13.
Gold, which is so by the wicked persuasions of the Devil, may be trampled on
like dirt, which before Gods eyes was never gold; had sanctity as it were
before men's eyes they seem to lose, but before the eyes of God they never had
it. The which agrees with that of S. Augustine; Sunt silt. D^i qui nendum sunt
nobis, sunt qua dicu^tur si ^a nobis, ne^a ^en sant Deo. Aug. deco rep and
great. cap ^.
There are sons of God, who are not yet so to us; there are who are called the
sons of God of us, but yet are not so to God: Of the former there is mention,
Ioh. 11.52 that he should die, not only for the Nation, but together the
children of God which were scattered: of the other there is mention, 1 Ioh.
2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; They be branches secundum
praesent em yustitiam, non secandum praescientiam, according to present
righteousness, not according to foreknowledge, says Ambrose.

5. The faith of Gods children has his degrees, it is subject to shaking, and
may be so hid and covered, that it yield no comfort, like the soul in a
trance, like the Sun in an eclipse, like a fire or candle under a a bushel,
like the Moon under a cloud: I believe, Lord help mine unbeleefe: Peter's
faith is shaken, but not lost; Theophylact. in Luc. 22. Bellarm. de Romans Pont.
lib. 4. c. 3.
Radix fidei in Petro vixit, says Theophylact. And Bellarmine, quite
contradicting himself, says, That Christ (in his ptayer for Peter) obtained a
twofold privilege: The one, Vt sidem nunquam amitteret, that he might never
lose his faith; which he proves by the testimony of Augustine, De corrept. and
great. cap. 8. of Chrysostom, Hom. in Mat. 38. of Theophylact. on Luke 22. of
Prosper Aquitanicus, Of the calling of the Gentiles, Book 1. Chap. last. These
grounds being laid, I come to the proposition, viz. Man justified, or man that
has true faith and grace, can never finally nor totally fallaway, can never
perish eternally: Note, That no man ever has sanctifying grace, or justifying
faith, but the elect only, and the elect being once called can never fall; and
this you may safely build on these grounds.

1. Upon the immutabilitie of God, Mal. 3.6. I am God and change not. His
purpose is unchangeable; He changes his works, Mutat opera, non mutat
consilium. Aug. cons. lib. 1. cap. 4.
he changes not his counsel: His gifts and graces are without repentance,
Romans 11.29. and faith is the gift of God: Now unless he that has faith and
grace should persevere, then his gifts were not without repentance, and it is a
trifling cavil to say, That God does not deprive them of faith, but they cast
away faith: Dcum non eripere, sed bominem abjicere sidem.
For no man can cast away faith, unless God withdraw his grace; which he does
not from any of the elect; For they are all kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And therefore says God, Ier. 32.40. I will
make with my people an everlasting covenant, that I will never turn away from
them to do them good; but will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Ierem. 31.3.
and, Whom he loves, he loves to the end, Ioh. 13.1.

The second is laid down by Calvin, Inflit. lib. 3. c. 24.
whosoever have true faith are elected before all time, as Romans 8.30. Whom he
predestined, them he called; whom he called, them he justified: and all the
elect are committed by God the Father to the keeping and protection of God the
Son; All that the Father has he gives unto me, Ioh. 6.37. O Father, thine
they were, and thou gave them unto me, Ioh. 17.6. Now if you make question
how he keeps them, see verse. 12. All that thou have given me I have kept, and
not one of them is lost. And Ioh. 6.37. All that comes to me from the
Father, I cast not away: In this respect he is called the true Shepherd, that
will suffer no man to pluck his sheep out of his hands, that gives his sheep
eternal life, and will not suffer them to perish, Ioh. 10.28. In Gen 31. Jacob
says to Laban, that he had not wasted his substance, but if any thing were
rent and torn, he made it good: So does Christ the good Shepherd, if any of
Gods sheep be stolen and lost, he redeemes them again by his own life
laid down for them. If any be dead, he is like to the Pelican, which as
Augustine affirms, In Psalm. 102.
spils her own blood to heal them. Nay, there is not one, whom God the Father
has commended to the keeping of God the Son, but he will show him to his
Father, and be accountable for their souls at the day of judgment, For he
will raise them up at the last day, Ioh. 6.39.

The third, upon the sealing of this assurance unto men's consciences. The
Covenant is not only made, Genesis 17.7. but also sealed, and we have an earnest
penny in this life; He has sealed us, and given us the earnest of his spirit
in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. Grieve not the spirit by which ye are sealed,
Ephesians. 4.30. The foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.11. After ye
believed ye were sealed with the spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13. Consider the word, it is (...), which as
Chemnitius observes, Exam. Council. Trident. part. 1.
signifies a pledge, a seal, a caution, which stands for a part of the paid
price; and whereby there is credit made of the sum remaining to be paid: To
note, that in regard that God unto all the elect has made a promise of a
Kingdom, he stands thereby indebted to them; and because it is long a
coming, and Satan still urging them to doubt; for the peace of their
consciences, and quietness of their minds, he has left them a pawn and
pledge; so that he has not only made a Covenant, but he has set to his
seal, not only so, but he has bound it with an oath, that we might have
strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. nononely so, but he has given us a pawn, and
that of no small value, for it is his holy Spirit; He has sent the spirit of
his Son into our hearts, by which we cry, Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. But to make
it more evident, it may be demonstrated by these reasons.

First, those that be married to Christ for ever, cannot fall away from faith
and grace; but all the Elect and children of God are such: I will marry thee
unto myself for ever, in righteousness, in judgment, and in compassion; I
will marry thee in faithfulness, Hos. 2.19, 20. Of which union and neerenesse
by marriage, when the Apostle speaks he says, that the Church, consisting of
his Elect, are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians.
5.30. Secondly, they are branches of Gods own planting, therefore not to be
plucked up, Ioh. 15. They build their houses upon the rock Christ, therefore
they cannot be overthrown, Matthew. 7. Thirdly, they are of his Church,
therefore the gates of hell cannot prevail against them, Matt. 16.18.
Fourthly, though they fall, yet they cannot be cast off, for the Lord puts
under husband, Psalm. 37.24. His left hand is under my head, the right hand of
the Lord embraces me, says the Spouse, Cantic. 2.6. The devil comes to
strike my head, but the hand of the Lord is under my head: to steal away my
soul, but the right hand of God embraces me, Aug. in Psalm. 121.
says Augustine. Fifthly, Christ did pray for his Church, that their faith
might not fail, Luke 22.32. And he was heard in that which he prayed; I know
thou hear me always, Ioh. 11.42. But that was only for Peter: No,
Bellarmine himself says, That Christ prayed mediately for the other Apostles,
Mediate pro alus Atostolis, nec si lum pro perseveramia Apostolerum, sed omnium
electorum. Bella^m. DeRoman. Pent^sdtb. 4. cap. 3. Rogavi ne deficiat fides
tua, intelligamus ei dictum qui adificatur super Petram. Aug. De Corrept. and
great. lib. cap. 12.
nor only for the perseverance of the Apostles, but of all the Elect. I pray
not for these alone, but for all that shall believe in me through the world,
Ioh. 17.20. Yea, and ask Augustine, I asked that thy faith fail not, we may
understand it spoken to him that is built on the Rock; he prayed, therefore he
was heard, nay, he sits now making continual intercession for us, Romans 8.34.
Sixthly, they that abide in Christ, and Christ in them, cannot utterly fall and
perish; but such be all they that are justified by faith, for they eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, and therefore Christ is in them, and they in him,
as our Savior speaks, Ioh. 6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Lastly, There is one reason unanswerable,
from 1 Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, nor can he sin: But
all reprobates do sin, and can sin, therefore reprobates were never borne
of God; which is not meant of every sin, for there is sin in the most holy;
If any man say he has no sin, he deceives himself, 1 Ioh. 1.8. but it is
to be understood of such sin, whereby any man does wholly fall back into the
power of the devil, wholly into falsehood and iniquity: But they fall from
grace, make shipwreck of faith, and must needs fall from God wholly into
Satan's power. But unto this Bellarmine answers, where he disproveth the
exposition of Ambrose, Bernard, and Augustine, He cannot mortally sin, so
long as he is borne of God. Non p^tell l^thalitee peicare, quamdiu natus est ex
Deo. Aug. De Iustist lib. 3. cap. 15. Hierome Contra Pelagion. lib. 1. page 268.
So Hierome in his Dralogue, taking leave to change the causall particle,
because, into a conditional, how long. But Saint John shows that Bellarmines
quamdiu, so long as, is as much as nothing; for his purpose is to teach, that a
man once borne of God, can never be given over wholly to serve sin and
Satan: the reason, because, he is borne of God. Excellently the same Apostle,
chap. 5.18. we know, that if a man be borne of God, the wicked touches him
not: The devil may throw his darts, and shoot his arrows, which may wound and
hurt him sore, but cannot touch him, that is, not lay so fast hold on him, as
to take him with him to death, to hell: So that a child of God sinding
himself in the state of grace, may with comfort meditate upon these
Scriptures, Job. 4.14. whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never be more a thirst, but it shall be in him a well springing and
growing to eternal life Matthew. 24.24. There shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, to deceive (if it were possible) the very elect. Ioh. 10.28.
Mysheepe hear my noice, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, nor shall any pluck them out of my hands. Romans 8.38, 39. I am
persuaded, not grounded upon extraordinary revelation, but upon the death of
Christ, verse. 32. On Gods free justification, verse. 33. On Christ intercession,
verse. 34. Phil. 1.6. I am persuaded of this thing, that he that has begun
this good work in you, will also peforme it, (...), will perfect it, until
the day of the Lord lesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.5. The elect are kept by God through
faith unto salvation. If you list to hear the judgment of ancients in this
point, mark the disputation of Augustine, Si quispiam clecterum sereat, tum
fallitur Deus; at nemo electorum poit, quia non fallitur Deus. Aug de Gratta
and Cerrept. cap. 7.
If any of the elect perish, then God ^ deceived, but none of the elect perish,
because God is not deceived. Si quispiam dicterum pereat, tum vitio humano
vincitur Deus, etc.
If any of the Elect perish, then God is over come of him inevice; but none of
the El^^l perish, because God is over come of nothing. So Gregory, Aurum quod
pravis Diabcli persuasion but sternt potest ut ^^tum, aurum ante ecules Dei
n^^q am, etc. (...) Meral. lib. 31. as. 13.
That gold which by the wicked persuasions of the devil may be stricken down
like dirt; never was gold in Gods account, had sanctity as it were before men
they lose, but in Gods accourt they never had it. Lombard likewise speaks to
the same purpose, No^ potest (...) que (...) praede^^tur, and non (...) tur.
Lo^^b. lib. 1 distinct. 40.
Both cannot be true, that one should be predest inate and not saved. So
Aquinas, Serepti in libro viti de^^ non (...) Aqe^n. 1. (...) 21. Art. 3. (...)
24.
Those that are written in the book of life c^^not be blotted out. Espencaeus
on 2 Timothy allows that of Augustine, of catechizing the simple, chap. 11. Ex Je
usal m ^sta non erat qui ser^it. Objections against perseverance grounded on
Scriptures, answered.
Out of that Jerusalem was not one that perished. And now for better settling of
your minds, let me take a briese survey of those Scriptures that seem to make
against it.

First, from Luke 8.13. There is mention of some, which for a while believe,
but in time of temptation go away. Answ. It is meant of temporary, not of
justifying faith. Secondly, the Scripture says, that some concerning faith,
have made shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19. That many shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4 1. Ans. Faith is there ta^ cannot for justifying faith, but for that
(...) of says. Thirdly, Ezekiel. 18.24.26. If ther^^ (...) turn away from his
right co^snesse he shall die. Answ. That is meant of righteousness
hypocritical, which carries the name, and goes in the habit of true
righteousness; and God by that speech does teach us: First, alacrity and
cheerfulness: Secondly, our own infirmity and pronenesse to faint in well
doing: Thirdly, the miserable condition of hypocrites: Fourthly, what we must
do. In praeceptione cagnosce quid debeas, in correptione, quid tuo vitio non
bileas, inoralione unde accipias. Aug Dc Gratia and Corr. pt. cap. 3.
In a precept know what thou must do^, in a reproof what thou have not done
through thine own fault, in prayer whence thou receivest, says Augustine.
Fourthly, Ioh. 15.6. If any man abide not in me, he is cast forth as abranch,
and withers, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and burn them.
Answ. He says, That if any branch abide not, and bring not forth sruit, he is
cut down; but it is impossible that any should be engrafted by Christ, which
should not both abide and bring forth fruit, and the elder they are the more
fruit, as Psalm. 92.13. The fifth, Matthew. 24.13. The love of many shall be
cold. Answ. It is meant of such Christian virtues as are common to the
faithful and hypocrites. Sixthly, Matthew. 25.29. Take from him that talent.
Answ. That talent is not saving grace, not regenaration; but meant of common
gifts, whether natural, or Ecclesisticall. Seventhly, 1 Cor. 9.29. I keep
down my body, etc. Answ. Reprobation is not opposed to election unto life, nor
does it signify the loss of eternal glory; but probato vita and moribus,
such a one whose life does answer to what he taught. Secondly. If it be meant
of reprobation to death, yet the argument holds not; Paul labored that he
might not be reprobate, therefore could he be a reprobate; for godly care and
holy fear may and does consist with certainty of election. Eighthly, From Heb.
6.4, 5, and 6. verses, It is impossible that they which were once enlightened,
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,
and have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
if they fall away, should be renewed. Ans. The Apostle speaks of hypocrites,
which profess Christ for a time, and afterward become Apostates; they are said
to have tasted the heavenly gift, but not in a saving mannner; and partakers of
the holy Ghost, that is, of the gifts which God gives indifferently both to the
Elect and reprobates, as outward sanctity, temporary faith, the gifts of
Prophecy, doing of miracles, but not the spirit of regeneration, and a
justifying faith. And to have been enlightened, and tasted of the good Word of
God; that is, to have attained to some knowledge in the mystery of the Word,
and the powers of the world to come; by world to come, we must understand the
Church of the New Testament; and by powers the doing of miracles; which Christ
in the primitive times granted both to the elect and reprobate. I pass a
multitude of places, and their reason from the Angels and Adam, who were just
and yet fell. They had the righteousness and grace of creation, we of
redemption; they were in a mutable condition, we in an immutable: Adam fell,
but not finally; the Angels were reprobates, therefore fell finally; we elect
and within the Covenant, and therefore cannot fall finally; but I cannot in
this Audience speak, as beseemes this question, only for conclusion I wish
you to admire the happy estate and condition of all that truly fear God, and
faithfully believe in his holy name, as verse. 1. And so I come to the reason of
the Apostles exhortation, at verse. 21.

VERSE. 21.
BY natural branches understand the Jews: By thee, understand the Gentiles:
the one a natural son, the other adopted; and it is an argument from the
greater, framed thus. God spared not the natural branches, not the natural
sons, not those that were nearest unto him, therefore let the engrafted
branches, the adopted sons, and those that are farther off take heed. They
contain two branches. 1. Gods proceeding with the Jew. 2. Paul's instruction
and admonition to the Gentile. I begin with the former.

There is no out ward privilege, as descent, as parentage, or any thing else,
that can acquit grievous sinners from Gods fearful punishments. God is as
resolute as Saul, when he had bound the people not to eat until night; As I
live, though it be done by my son Jonathan, he shall die; 1 Samuel 14.39.
Though Israel be never so dear, yet if they turn his grace into wantounesse,
he will send upon them great plagues, and of long continuance; sore diseases,
and of long durance. Deuteronomy. 28.59. And as the Lord rejoiced over them to do
them good, and to multiply them; so he will rejoice over them to destroy them,
and bring them to naught, verse. 63. Though Jerusalem be the Vine, though she be
the place where God promised to be resident, and to have the Arc of the
Covenant: yet if this faithful City become an harlot, her Princes Rebels, her
Judges murderers; then will God be eased and avenged of them, and turn his
hand against them, Isay 24. Though Manasses have never so godly a father, as
Ezekiah, yet if he commit those grievous sins mentioned 2 King. 21. he shall
be carried into captivity. Though Iehojakim come of as good a father as
Josiah, yet if presumptuously, and with an high hand he sin against God, he
shall be cast out, and buried with the burial of an Ass, and none lament for
him, and God will punish him and his seed for their iniquity, Ierem. 22.18,
19. and 36.30, 31. Though Cain have the privilege to be the first man that
ever was borne of a woman, yet if he murder his brother, God will curse him
from the earth, Genes. 4.11.

The Use is: First to blame them, Vindicare praregativam religiost nominis, and
Gothos baeretied pravitate superare. Salvian. lib. 7.
who (because of these outward prerogatives) think themselves in good estates,
and free from Gods judgments; They challenge the prerogative of a religious
name, and yet exceed even the savage Goths in heretical wickedness, as
Salvtan complains. They cry, The temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.4. when they be
unclean, and cages of filthy birds: they say they are children of Abraham,
when they want the says, and lead not the life of Abraham; which are no better
than fig leaves to hide from Gods eyes, and paper walls to keep out Gods
judgments.

Secondly, here apprehend the true cause of the jews subversion, not fortune,
as the Epicure dreams; not destiny, as the Stoic; nor number, as Plato,
Metbod. lit. 6. Politic li. 5. c. 12.
Pythagoras, and Bodin; nor as asymmetry, as Aristotle; nor the motion of the
center, as Copernicus; nor stars and planets, as Cardanus, and Astrologians
think. The Apostle teaches the true and undoubted cause of such punishments,
Ephesians. 5.6. For such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. I sinned, therefore am I derision, says Jerusalem, Lam. 1.8. I
sinned with a high hand, therefore has he filled me with bitterness, Lam.
3.15. I was sick of sin, therefore was I robbed by Shishacke, 1 King. 14.
And now utterly sacked by the King of Babel, 2 King 25. I sinned, and the smoke
of my sins ascended to heaven, thererefore am I now turned into a stinking
fenne, says Sodom, Genesis 19.25. I sinned, therefore dragons are in my pleasant
palaces, says Babylon, Isai. 13.21. O that in this point my voice were like
thunder, my pen like iron, my sides like brass, etc. Secondly, whereas the
natural branches are not spared, yet the godly amongst them spared; observe,
how far holiness exceeds greatness. See on the second verse. And so I
descend to the Apostles admonition.

Take heed lest he also spare not thee.] The Greek (...) is not expressed, but
conceived by an ellipsis, as may be seen both in Matthew. 25.9. and Romans 11.14.
They contain the exhortation and the reason; the exhortation, Take heed, and
this has in it the ground of their care and heedfulnesse, to wit, the fall of
the Jews. The sins and punishments of other men must be our instructions;
their afflictions must be our admonitions; their woes must be our warnings;
their (...) our (...); their sufferings must be our schoolemasters and
remembrancers. When the Gibeonites perceived what Joshua had done to Jericho
and to Ai, they would not stand out to war, but used all the means and
shifts they could devise, to make a league with him, Josh. 9.3. When Elijah
sent word to Ahaziah that he should not come down from his bed, but die the
death, because he had sent to consult with Baalzebub the God of Ekron, the King
sends unto him a Captain and his fifty, and there came fire from heaven and
devoured them; after him another, who was also devoured by fire: when the third
came, and saw the judgments fallen upon his fellows, he says not (as the
former) O man of God, come down quickly, but, O man of God, let my life and
the life of thy servants be precious in thy sight: there came sire down upon
the two former Captains and their fifties, but let my life he pre^iursi^ thy
sight; 2 Kings 1.13, 14. Hence the Apostles tell us, that So dome and Gomorrha,
and the cities about them, which followed strange flesh, are set forth for
examples, Jude verse. 7. In 1 Cor. 10. from 5. to 11. Be not ye idolaters as
were some of them, nor commit for nication as did some of them, nor tempt
Christ as did some of them, nor murmr like some of them, for all these were
destroyed in the wilderness, and all the judgdements came upon them for
examples, and were written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are
come. And the same Apostle, remembering how many of the Israelites were shut out
of the promised rest for their unbeleefe and disobedience, gives us this
exhortation; Let us study to enter into that rest, lest any fall after the same
example of disobedience, Heb. 4.11.

The reasons of this are, first, because their sins have a proportion with
ours, therefore our punishment must be like to theirs. We may read in
Sodom, what our own sins are, pride, idleness, fullness of bread. We may
read in Israel what our own lives are; unbeleeving hearts to depend upon Gods
providence, ready to murmr if we want any thing, still unthankful though we
have never so much. We may read in Adam how subject we are to yield unto
Satan: In David, how ready to yield to our own flesh: In Nebuchadnezzar, how
easily we grow proud, and when we see their sins like ours, then we may well
think, that our punishments must be like to theirs. If our sins be pride, and
fullness of bread, and idleness, then take heed our punishment be not sire and
brimstone: If infidelity and unthankfulness, take heed of exclusion from Gods
favor and love: If lukewarmnesse, take heed of spuing out of his mouth: If
Sabbath-breaking, take heed that God kindle not a sire in the gates of your
City, that will never be quenched, as Ier. 17.27.

Secondly, God is as much displeased with sin now, as in times past; his eyes
are as wide to epsy and mark it, his hand as just to revenge and censure it,
his wrath is as heavy against it as ever it was, and therefore if we would
not be punished as they have been, beware of the sins that they have done.
And from hence we may learn,

First, Adam, and thence learn somewhat; first, that Satan will seem a
friend, when he entiseth us to sin; secondly, that there is no man so
innocent, whom Satan dares not assault; Superbia illic, quiahemo potius in sua^
quam in Der potestate esse dilexit; homieidium, quia seipsum praecip^tuvit;
sornicrtio, quta integritas humanaser penuna persuasions corrupta est; etc.
Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 45.
thirdly, that some sin may seem but small in the judgment of man, which is
of intolerable weight in the sight of God; as this seems to be, but the
plucking of an apple, yet in the eye of God, a whole vo^ume of iniquity was in
it, as Augustine observes. Pride was there, because man loved to be rather in
his own, than in Gods power; manslaughter, because he overthrew himself;
fornication, because by the serpents persuasion man's integrity was corrupted;
sacrilege, because he believed not God; theft, because he took of the
forbidden fruit; covetousness, because he coveted more than would suffice.
Think upon the woeful downfall of Jerusalem, and thence learn somewhat;
first, that no city is so great, and famous, but sin will make God fall out
with it; secondly, that God never sends fearful punishments, but he gives
many admonitions and warnings before it; thirdly, that God would feign have his
people to prevent judgment by repentance; and when they will not, God is moved
with sorrow and grief for it. Think upon the fall of Babylon, and learn
somewhat; first, that no greatness, or outward glory, can persuade God to
spare, when sin and ungodliness provoke him to strike; secondly, that many a
people think themselves in good and happy case, when their destruction is
near, and death even upon them: see Isa. 47.8. She says in her heart, I am,
and none else, I shall not sit as a widow, nor know the loss of children:
therefore shall evil come upon her, and she shall not know the morning
thereof; destruction shall come upon her suddenly, ere she be aware, verse. 11.
Think upon the punishment of Laodicea, and learn, how they that halt between
two opinions; that sow with two kinds of seed; that have a heart for God, and a
heart for Baal; that speak half in the language of Canaan, and half in the
language of Ashdod; are as odious to God, as lukewarm water to a man's
stomach; that always provokes vomit and casting; secondly, that thou must use
sincerity and singleness of thy heart in the whole worship and service of
God, lest it be said to thee as it was to Laodicea, I will spue thee out of my
mouth. Let not pass one judgment of God upon others, for every one of them is
a lesson read unto thee, both to teach thee that sin always will have
punishment; and secondly, that if thou sin against God, as they have done,
the same punishment must light on thee.

Secondly, let us learn to have wise hearts,

Thirdly, These. 5.3. When they shall say, Comedo, bibo, ludo, quasi
pertransierim diem judicii, and tormenta inferni, and haec miseria supra omnem
miseriam. Bern. de in^ern. Dome. cap. 33.
peace, peace, then sudden destruction comes upon them. Let them remember how
Baltezar was surprised in the midst of his bowls, Dan. 5. Remember the 17. of
Luke, verse. 27, 28, 29. their destruction is never nearer, than when they put
it furthest from them. I eat, I drink, I play, as if I had passed over the day
of judgment, and the torments of hell; and this misery is above all misery,
says Bernard: For the ever watching eye of God is sixed upon them, and will
measure out a judgment against them, suitable and proportionable to their
crying sin. There is one point behind.

We should so live, as that Gods judgments might not seize upon us when they
are abroad; and therefore he gives this warning, take heed lest he spare not
thee; and to this end observe these three directions: 1. Beware of all sin:
2. Let no iniquity have entertainment with us; 3. Labor to be at peace with
God, then shall no judgment shake us; excellently David, Psalm. 112.7. He shall
not be afraid for any evil tidings. And so I come to those arguments wherewith
the Apostle closes his exhortation, in the 22, 23, 24. verses.

VERSE. 22.
THese three verses have in them two general and maine branches: Analysis.
First, a godly instruction to the Gentiles, to wit, the consideration of two
attributes in God, severitie, and bounty. Secondly, a word of consolation to
the Jews, putting them in mind of their receiving again, at the end of the
24. verse. The instruction in this verse contains four arguments to suppress
a proud conceit, and a swelling humor in the Gentiles: 1. (...) Iudaeorum,
Gods severitie in cutting off the Jews; that's one thing to keep them in awe,
and he gives it with (...), Look unto it, or take notice of it. The second,
Gods (...), or bounty toward the undeserving Gentile; it was not thy desert,
but his bounty: that's the next thing to keep thee in awe, and draw thee to
thankfulness. The third is taken from the condition upon which they have this
bounty, if they continue in his bounty, viz. in faith: for a good which is
had upon condition, stirs up in us a study to fulfill the condition. The
fourth, from the commination of cutting off; If thou grow proud and revolt,
thou also shall be cut off. I begin with the first, Gods severitie in cutting
off the Jews.

God sits his punishment both according to the greatness and quality of man's
sin. Apoc. 3.16. her sin was luke-warmnesse, a temper between hot and
cold, which is to the stomach most loath some and offensive; and her
punishment is suitable, God spues her out of his mouth; and as she by
lukewarmnesse was offensive, so now she being vomited up, is become an offense
to others, that they loath her. If the sin be great, he suits it with a
grievous punishment, as he did with Israel, when for a foul sin, and of long
continuance, he sent sore plagues, and of long durance, Deuteronomy. 28.59. If the
sin be of any strange quality, he suits it with a punishment answerable; as
he did with Sodom; she sinned by burning in unlawful lust, and he punishes
her by burning her with a shower of brimstone; the stink of her sin came up
to Heaven; and he punishes her by turning her into a stinking fen, Carrion.
Chron. lib. 2.
an Asphaltite lake, and a dead sea. If the sin be grievous, he pays it with
a grievous punishment; as he does unclean actions with unclean diseases,
backwardness in hearing him, with utter refusal to hear them, as Prove. 1.24.
and Zach. 7.11, 12, 13.

But the point whereat the Apostle principally aims, Phil. 4.11. and that in
Deuteronomy. 8.3. If he punish Cain, by setting upon him a mark, it is to teach us
to keep our hands free from blood; if Dives, it is to keep us free from
covetousness; if he set a fire in the gates of Jerusalem for breaking the
Sabbath, it is to teach us to keep it holy, and take a delight to make it
glorious, Isa. 58. If he punish adultery, it is to teach us to keep our
bodies chaste and pure, as sweet and fit temples for his Spirit to dwell and
tarry in.

The Use is: To condemn us for doing that our selves, Romans 2.4. make thee
better, not worse. Vide severitatem, Mark the severitie of God to other
sinner; and the same that pays other men their deserved punishments, will pay
thee, without speedy and sound repentance: But these be points that are near
of kindred to those I have already handled: and therefore I come suddenly to
the consideration of his bounty to the Gentiles.

Behold the bountifulness of God:] Gods children must take special notice of
Gods bounty and love to them: Therefore Paul beseeches the Romans by the
mercies of God, Romans 12.1. But that which is the maine point is this:

The consideration of Gods bounty should make man loath to offend him, or to
sin against him. Vide bonitatem. Consider his love in our election: See how
Paul concludes, 2 Timothy 2.19. the foundation remains sure: Therefore let every
one that has part in that, depart from iniquity. In our creation, consider
the efficient cause, God; this should make us do good and eschew evil: we
are his workmanship, etc. Ephesians. 2.10. The material cause, nothing but dust;
this should make us humble, and so come to God: this is a miracle of humility,
as Augustine calls it: In Psalm. 33.
this should make us praise God, as David, Psalm. 103. we are but dust, at the
14. Therefore praise him, all ye Angels; praise him, all ye his servants;
praise him, all his works; and in all places of his dominion; and praise thou
the Lord, O my soul. The formal cause, the making us after his image; which
contains the immortal substance of the soul. Secondly, all natural knowledge
of God. Thirdly, all just and holy actions. Fourthly, regiment over all the
creatures. Fifthly, happiness, and glory, and joy, and peace, plenty of all
things needful, without corruption and misery: all of them should be as
bridles to restrain us from sin. The final cause, Gods glory, as Isa. 43.7.
which should make us to say with the four and twenty Elders, Apoc. 4.11. They
fell down before him that sat on the throne, and worshipped him that lives for
evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, etc. In our
redemption, look upon God the Father, giving the Son of his love to be our
ransom; the Son like the good Shepherd laying down his life for us, like
the Pelican, Psalm. 102. shedding his blood for us, Live. Decad. 1. lib. 7.
or like Marcus Curtius. The use of all this is set down in that Prophecy of
Zacharias, Luke 1.74, 75. That we being delivered, or redeemed from the hands
of our enemies, should serve him in holiness and righteousness: He has
called us unto holiness, whereas he has left others wallowing in their
menstruous bloods. Behold the goodness of God in thy vocation; He has
justified thee, Romans 8.33. See his goodness, he has given thee health which
others want; see his goodness, wealth, which others want; see his goodness,
peace, which others want; see his goodness, the Gospel, which others want;
see his goodness, friends, which others want; see his goodness, he makes the
heavens to drop their rain, the clouds to drop their fatness upon thy ground;
whereas to others he makes the heavens as brass, and the earth as brass; see
his bounty; and there is not one of these, but it should work in thee
obedience and love; Gene osus animus bominis sacilius ducitur qua^n trahitur.
The generous mind of man is more easily led than drawn, says Seneca: The
heart of man that is sanctified, is more wrought upon by love and kindness,
than by judgments and threats: Slaves and servants obey for fear; but sons
and children for love and kindness: excellent is that Text, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do
ye so reward the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? thou should have
considered, that he has been unto thee as a father, that he has made and
proportioned thee; how he led thee in the wilderness, taught thee, and kept
thee as the apple of his eyes, and as the Eagle stirs up, etc.

The reason hereof is this: When men abstain from sin, because God has loved
them, then God continues his mercy and loving kindness: But when love and
kindness cannot make them love God again, then God takes his mercy away from
them. They that love thee and thy Law, shall have great prosperity, and shall
feel no hurt, Psalm. 119.165. But when God shows his mercy and love unto a
people, and it works not obedience; prevents and overtakes them with
blessings, and still they continue to sin against him: then God upbraids them
with the gifts he has given them, cease to do them good, and removes his
blessings from them. He made Israel fat and gross, and laded them with
fatness; But when they regarded it not; then the Lord was angry, and said, I
will hide my face away from them, Deuteronomy. 32.19, 20.

The Use is: Laertius reports of Thales Milesius, that he was used to account
himself much beholding to God for three things. 1. That he made him a man,
not a beast. 2. A man, not a woman. 3. A Greek, not a Barbarian. But what is
this to us? He has done for us more wonderful things; he has made us not
only not beasts, but little inferior to the Angels, Psalm. 8. not only men,
but adopted us for his own sons and children, Ephesians. 1.5. When we were dead,
he revived us; lost, he sought us; taken prisoners, he ransomed us; in
darkness, enlightened us; in want, provided for us; his mercies are renewed
unto us every morning, Lam. 3.23. Behold here the bountifulness of God, and
his patience, and let this draw thee to repentance, Romans 2.4. His love, and let
this bring thee to obedience. The Lord loved thee, and kept promise with thee;
keep therefore the commandments which I give thee this day, Deuteronomy. 7.11.
Remember all his mercies, and let this make thee break out in David's
passionate phrase, Psalm. 103. Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me praise his holy name. I come to the third; viz. The condition upon
which the Gentile has this bounty.

Si permanserint. The third condition to work modesty in the Gentiles; they
enjoy this bounty but upon condition, and must therefore be careful to
fulfill the condition; that is, that they continue in his bountifulness, viz.
in faith, says Paraeus. In a good and religious conversation, says Anselmus;
whethersoever it be, it ministers first of all this conclusion.

It is not sufficient to have once attained the grace and Gospel of God, to
have made a fair profession of it, to have gotten esteem and credit by it,
except we hold out, and continue in it unto the end. It was a false position of
Seneca, None endures to the end, Nulla ad exitum durat, nisilenta foeli. itas.
Senec. Consolat. ad Marciam. c. 12.
but slow felicity. Hieroglyph. lib. 16.
Pierius out of Gregory Nazianzene, and S. Basil, has very well compared the
Christian Professor to a Salamander that lives in the fire, as in 1 Cor. 9.24.
And so I come to the fourth commination of excision.

Or else thou shall be cut off.] In this commination the Apostle calls not the
salvation of the elect into question, as if they stood in danger of rejection;
for he will teach against that in verse. 29. And Christ says, it is
impossible, Matthew. 24.24. But he uses it as a bridle, to contain them in
their duty, to keep them from security. Now upon this premise, if thou
continue not, thou shall be cut off, neither of these conclusions will follow.
Therefore some of the elect do not abide, but are cut off: nor this, if they
cannot be cut off, therefore the commination is in vain. For first, these
comminations are against the whole body of the Gentiles: But not against every
particular of them; for many times the whole body of a Church may be cast off
for infidelity, and yet every particular not cast off: The seven Churches of
Asia cast off, yet none of the elect amongst them are perished: The Church of
the Jews cast off, yet Paul perished not. Secondly, in the whole body of
every Church there be evil amongst the good, hypocrites amongst believers:
In both then there is use both of exhortation and threatening. In the evil, ut
sint (...), that they may be without apology; In the good, that there may be
stirred up in them a study to please God, and eschew evil. Amongst many other
points I make choice of three. The first is that of Olevian, Quomodo excindit
Deus? How does God cut them off? and makes the answer thus; Quando propter
infidelitatem Evangelium aufert and Sacramenta; When for unbeleefe he takes
away his Gospel and Sacraments.

There is no sin wherewith God is more angry, than want of faith, to believe
the Gospel when it is preached; as verse. 11. Secondly, Infidelity cuts man
from God, and makes a separation between them, as verse. 20. Thirdly, it is
expedient and necessary for Ministers in a time of general security, and
corruption of manners; when they see their people to rest in titles and outward
appearances, to use arguments of terror, and lay open the heaviest judgments of
God that hang over them. So does the Apostle against those that often hear,
but profit nothing; that receive the dew, and the former and latter rain, he
threatens burning, Heb. 6.8. So does the Prophet for those three privative
sins, want of mercy, truth, and knowledge; and those five positive. That the
whole land shall mourn, that every one that is in it shall be destroyed, and
cut off; the beasts of the field, the fowls of the Heaven, and the fishes of
the sea shall be taken away, Hos. 4. This is meant in the Epistle of S. Jude,
when it is said, that some must be saved with sear, and violently plucked out
of the fire, verse. 23. Our lenity is lenitas saeviens, raging lenity, as
Auguistine speaks: say not, it was better to in in Christ's time; then Christ
spoke mildly, as to I^mas, do thou well to be angry? Now a man cannot
offend in a garment, meat, drink, or the use of his money, but the pulpit must
ring of it: I wish we might see those days, that we needed not: It is no
pleasure to us to sharpen our to goes like rasors, to speak by the pound and
talent, fearful words, if softer might suffice: But if we be briars in our
flesh, it is because we dwell with briars; if perverse, it is because we dwell
in the midd of a perverse generation.

The reasons are many. 1. this rough and round handling, the conceited
Hypocrite, the glosing Gospeller, the drowsy Professor cannot be thoroughly
convinced, much less awakened and converted: when the Preachers be like
Barnabas sons of consolation, and come with a soft and still voice; they will
mend no more than Eli's sons; they are so deadly asleep, like Epimenides in
his cave, or like Jonah in the ship, that a low voice luls them faster asleep
than they were before: they must be Bonarges, sons of thunder, and they must
come in a whirle wind that may awaken them: And therefore, me thinks, they
that mislike such teachers, are like to those Sybarites in Athenaeus, who made
a law that all the cocks should be banished. Those that speak low and softly
they like well enough; but those that rouse and start them, they feign would
banish.

2.

3. Ezekiel. 33.6. And therefore when we deal roundly, you must bear with us;
for thus we must both save our selves, and you that hear us, 1 Timothy 4.16. And
so I come to the last argument that the Apostle urges in verse. 23, and 24.

VERSE. 23. And they also,
THe argument goes thus: Their fall is not eternal, and irrecoverable,
therefore insult not over them. They contain a conclusion and a reason. The
conclusion: They, if they abide not. The reason: God is able to graft them in
again. The particulars I omit, till I come to verse. 25.

There is no sinner so great, but if he come home and return, God will receive
him. We are like unto prodigals, and God like that kind and loving father,
Luke 15. We are like sheep going astray, and God like a shepherd, that both
seeks us, and when we are found, receives us into his fold, as verse. 24. See
Ephraim, Jerusalem, Manasses. To this purpose says God to Israel, That though
a man have defiled his neighbors wife, oppressed, taken by violence, lift up
his eyes to Idols, given to usury, yet if that man return from his wickedness
that he has committed, he shall save his soul alive, Ezekiel. 18.27. Nay, if
he return, he shall live, and not die, verse. 28. And Paul so beseeches the
Corinthians in Gods name: Come out from these idolaters and polluted persons,
and I will receive you, etc. 2 Cor. 6.17. Therefore Peter sends Simon Magus to
pray that (if it were possible) his sin might be pardoned, Acts 8.22. And
Daniel having interpreted the dream to Nebuchadnezzar, that he should be
driven out amongst the beasts of the field, yet puts him in hope of a
restoring, If he will break off his sins by righteousness, and his
iniquity by mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.2^.

The reason i^ taken from the infinite dimension of Gods mercy, Simonides in
Tully, De nature Deor. lib. 1.
who being demanded what God was, still ^^sired more time, etc. He always
delights in mercy more than in justice; to be called a God of mercy is a
title wherein he delights much; but that he is called a God of judgment, I
find not passing twice, in Isa. 30.18. and in Malac. 2.17. Mark how he
proclaims himself, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Prophet tells us, Isa. 28.21. that it is
a rare thing with God to execute judgment. The Lord shall stand as upon mount
Perazim, that he may do his work, his strange work: He is much like to
Od^vius; Vtinam nescirem literas, Would I knew not my letters: Much like to
Cato, Non memini me percussum, I remember not that I was stricken: Much like to
Phocion, Filius men's non ulciseatur injurias, Let my son not be revenged of
injuries: Not like to Theodosius, who put the Thessalians to the sword for the
sake of few, but like Caesar in Plutarch, who made the men of Cnidium free
Denisons, because of Theopompus; or like Darius that mild Persian General,
who spared Delos; He is so glad of the conversion of sinners, that he stands
waiting and looking for them, Isa. 65.1, 2. It pleases him so well, that the
very Angels rejoice at it, Luke 15.10. And it is Gods ordinary course to
watch all opportunities, and seek all occasions to show mercy, as Genesis 18. at
Abraham's suit for Sodom, he would have spared the whole City for ten
righteous persons: and Ier. 5.1. If one righteous man might be found, he
promises to pardon all the rest for his sake.

Where I meet with the error of the Donatists and Novatians, who denied
repentance, Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. where the Apostle speaking of the incestuous man,
he says; It is sufficient to the same man, that he was rebuked of many; so
that now you ought to forgive him, and comfort him, that he be not swallowed
up of overmuch heaviness; Wherefore I pray you to confirm your love toward
him. And Matthew. 18.22. The brother must be forgiven until seventie times
seven.

2. nothing that I am a drunkard, for I am already out of all hope of Heaven:
That I profane the Sabbath; for I have no hope of glory: why should I serve
the Lord? I am none of his sons: please him? I am none of his servants: run?
I look for no garland: fight? I look for no crown: strive? I shall not enter
in at the strait gate: pray? I shall nor be heard: sow in tears? I shall never
reap in joy. But let a sinner acknowledge, and bewail his offenses before
God; labor to forsake sin, and lead a new life; learn David's rule, Eschew
evil, and do good, Psalm. 34.13. the Prophet Ezekiels rule; Cast away your
transgressions, and make you clean hearts, Ezekiel. 18.31. the Prophet Isay's
rule; Cease to do evil, and learn to do well, Chap. 1.16, 17. And then
comfort your selves as God comforts them, verse. 18. I would have all sinners to
resolve with the servants of Benhadad, when an hundred thousand of his army
were slain in field, and seven and twenty thousand by the falling of a wall
upon them, as 1 King. 20.29, 30. Then his servants said unto him, we have heard
that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful Kings; O homo, qui t^lam
attendis peccatorum multitudin^^, ^ar non attendis omni^oten^iam calestis
Medici; cum enim Deus velit quia bonus est, and possit quia omnspotens est:
etc. Aug. de temp. Sermon. 58.
we pray thee let us put sackcloth upon our loins, and ropes about our
necks, and go to the King of Israel, it may be he will save us alive, 1 King.
20.31. It was a good saying of Augustine; O man, that considerest the multitude
of thy sins, why considerest thou not the omntipotencie of the heavenly
Physician; seeing that God will, because he is good, and can because he is
omnipotent, he shuts the gate of Gods love against himself, who believes that
either God cannot, or will not have mercy on him. And an excellent meditation
of Chrysostom; If thou be wicked, think of the Publican; Si impius es,
cogita publicanum; si immundas, attend meretricem; si homicida, prospice
latronem; si iniquus, cogita blasphemum; peccasti? poenitere; millies peccasti?
millies poenitere. Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Psalm. 50.
if unclean, consider the harlot; if a manslayer, look upon the thief; if
unjust, think on the blasphemer; have thou sinned? repent; have thou sinned a
thousand times? repent a thousand times. Heaven gates are never shut when
penitent sinners knock: He that for ten men's sakes would have spared Sodom,
will spare them: Yet this is no encouragement to sin; for mercy must not
make us sin, but fear to sin; as Psalm. 130.4. He that sins in hope of
mercy, shall find none; for presumption is nothing else but a vain hope, or
an high house on weak pillars. He that says, I will sin, and be sorry,
and escape, God will not see, or not be angry, or not punish, and so wrong
God with his prayer, as much as with his offense, that suggests to himself
vain hope of never too late, as if he could command either time or
repentance, and defer the seeking of mercy, till he be between the bridge
and the water, shall find little favor. See Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. A word of the
reason.

For God is able:] It is a great comfort to men in distress, and sin, and
trouble, that the God whom they serve, is able to restore and to help them. In
Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, that every tongue shall swear by me, and every knee how
unto me. Thus the Prophet comforts himself; The Lord is King be the earth
never so unquiet, Psalm. 99.1, 2. This was it that comforted the three children;
Behold, the God whom we serve, is able to deliver us, etc. And so I come to
the proof and confirmation of this argument.

VERSE. 24.
BEcause an argument a posse ad esse is infirm, The Scope.
an argument showing that God can do it, to prove that he will do it, is but
weak: therefore here he goes about to show, not only that God can, but that
he will graft them in again: The argument goes thus: If God did that which
was so hard, much more will he do that which is more easy; if that which was
unlikely, then much more that which is ordinary and natural: But the
engrafting of a wild olive branch into the right stock, is hard and strange;
yet this has God done: therefore he will not fail to engraft the true
branches (though now cut off) into their own stock, which is both ordinary
and easy; this is the meaning. The parts are two: 1. An Antecedent. 2. A
Consequent. The parts.
In the Antecedent note a twofold condition of the Gentile. The former what
they were, cut out of the wild olive. Secondly, what they are, engrafted into
the right olive contrary to nature. To begin with the first. There be two
kinds of olive trees that be wild and barren, as Plinius relates. From
whence comes a twofold conclusion. See before, verse. 17. I come to the
condition wherein now they are.

Engrafted contrary to nature into a right olive tree:] 1. Because they bring
forth fruit according to the stock, not after their own kind; so Ambrose. 2.
By grace, therefore contrary to nature. 3. Beyond the power of nature to alter
and change themselves. The Conclusions are many, I make choice first of this.

That man's calling, and coming unto God is far beyond the power of nature. Or
thus. Man before grace can neither work, nor wish himself any thing that is
good; as in Romans 6.20.

2. God will alter the very course of nature for his childrens good: He
preserves quite contrary to nature, as Jonah, the three Children, and Daniel.
Of all beasts the Lion is most cruel; of all elements, fire and water most
unmercifull; of all fishes, Leviathan and the Whale is most devouring; yet
these he alters for his childrens good. The den of Lions like a soft and easy
bed for Daniel; the furnace like a pleasant garden for the Jews; the sea like
to a wholesome bath, or pleasant fountain, to Jonah. When Israel is in danger,
he alters then the course of the sea, and turns it into a wall; when they are
to pass into Canaan, he makes the rolling waves of Jordan to go back, and
stand on an heap; when Joshua is in the field against the five Kings of the
Amorites, if it be like to grow dark before the discomsiture; the Lord will
make the Sun to stand in the valley of Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of
Ajalon, Josh. 10.12. God does as Physicians do with poison, alter the venomous
quality, and turn it into a sovereign antidote, De Paeuit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
De veneno antidotum, says Ambrose.

Learn then,

How much more shall the natural branches be grafted:] The experience of Gods
former love should work assurance and confidence, that he will be good to us
afterward. Experience is the breeder of hope. So David, 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36,
37. So Jacob, Genes. 32.10, 11. In Heb. 11.30. By faith Israel passed over
Jordan, etc. As Matthew. 4.6. Gods proceeding with others should be lessons for
us, as whether it be in judgment, verse. 21. or in mercy: Thus God comforted
Isaac; I have been the God of Abraham, therefore fear not, for I will bless
thee, Genes. 26.24. They that desire more may peruse Deuteronomy. 11. it will give
abundant satisfaction.

The Use is: To teach us to keep a register of all Gods goodness to our
selves, King. 7. may comfort us in famine: How he defended Elisha with fiery
horses and chariots, 2 King. 6.17. may comfort us in time of war: How he
walked in the midst of the furnace amongst the three children, Dan. 3.25. may
comfort us in time of persecution: How he received the idolatrous Gentile, may
comfort us in the times of sin. I come to a second.

God working of great matters beyond nature for his Church, should make us
confident, that in matters that be more easy and ordinary he will not fail.
The bringing of a people out of a Kingdom bent to keep them in bondage and
subjection, should make us confident, that God (who is the same that he was
then, and loves his people as well as he did then) will bring his Church and
Children from the fury of all enemies. If he have formerly restrained the
mouths of Lions, he will keep the wicked mouths of reviling Rabshekehs,
that slander the hope of the living God. If he have quenched the flames of
fire, he will quench the flames of persecution and trouble. If he have
received Gentiles that were enemies, he will surely receive the children. If
strangers, he will surely receive his sons. If he have given life to the
dead, he can easily preserve it where it is. If he have fed and preserved when
all means were past; much more will he where the means fail not. Thus the
Holy Ghost reasons, Romans 8.32. He who spared not his own Son, but gave him
for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things. Quid
negabit filus, quidedet ut sit pater.
What will he deny his sons, who gave himself to be their Father; says
Cyprian: which is an excellent comfort and encouragement for us, for whom God
has wrought such extraordinary and wonderful things; he delivered us from
Egyptian darkness, a wonderful work; from a Spanish Armado, a wonderful
mercy; from a Popish Powder Plot, a wonderful favor; great and manifest
tokens of love; and such as ought to work in us, both faith to trust in him
for smaller matters, and grace to serve him with more obedience: I wish it
could not be said of us, as it was of Chorazim and Bethsaida, Matthew. 11. Woe be
to thee Chorazim, etc. for if the great wonders wrought for us, had been
wrought for Heathens and Pagans, they would long ere this time have both
believed and repented. There is yet a point or two.

God has a love to the natural branches, even when his hand is upon them.
Aug. Confess. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Percut is ut sanes, occidis ne moriamur; as Augustine speaks. But the maine
point is this: Though Gods children be sometimes far gone in sin, yet shall
they never be quite cast off: Lot far gone in incest, Noah in chunkennesse,
David in adultery and murder, Manasses in idolatry, Peter to a denial of
Christ, yet at last received again. The Prodigal far gone, but at last comes
home, and his Father receives him again; the reason is Gods infinite mercy,
who rejoices more in showing mercy, than in doing justice; as above. And so I
come from that part of the Chapter which was (...), or hortatorie to the
Gentiles, that they exalt not themselves; to that which is prophetical to the
Jews, that they may not despair.

VERSE. 25. For I would not brethren,
THe whole Prophecy reaches to verse. 33. The parts.
The maine proposition of it; God will assuredly call the people of the Jews
in his appointed time, verse. 25. The reasons to prove it, from verse. 26. to
verse. 33. I know not better how to part this verse, than into these two
branches: The one, a deep and profound doctrine; viz. Blindness in part is
come to Israel: The other, the attention craved, and the way that is made to
come unto it. With this I begin. The circumstances moving attention are, 1. His
kind compellation, Brethren. 2. His affection and godly desire for them, that
they should not be ignorant. 3. The depth and excellency of his doctrine, a
mystery. 4. The use of that mystery, to keep them from being arrogant, wise
and proud in their own conceits. I begin with the compellation.

Brethren:] A kind and gentle speech, intimating his love to them, begging
their love unto him; and ministers this conclusion:

That men are most willing to learn of him whom they affect and love: Romans
1.9. God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. So to
the Corinthians, he would win their love both by praying for them; I wish you
grace and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: and by
thankfulness and joy of his heart, that God had respected them: I thank my
God always on your behalf, 1 Cor. 1.3, 4. To the Philippians; Brethren, I
have you in mine heart, Phil. 1.7. And God is my record, how greatly I long
after you all, verse. 8. To the Thessalonians; What is our hope, or joy, or
crown of rejoicing, are not even ye, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. Thus do Gods
Messenges endeavor by love, by prayer, by taking pains, towed the hearts of
the people unto them, that being in love with their persons, they may give the
better ear to their instructions and lessons.

The use is, whom we teach: But how? Not by forbearing them in their sins,
not by applanding their ill ways, not always by coming in a soft and still
voice, not by such faint reproves as old Eli used to Hophni and Phinehas; This
is not well that I hear of you, do it no more: but by praying heartily for
you, this should make you love us; by preaching painfully unto you, this should
make you love us; by living honestly among you, this should make you love us;
by showing you your sins, this should make you love us; by pulling you out of
the fire, this should make you love us; not think us enemies, because we tell
you the truth, Gal. 4.16. but lovers and friends, because we show you the way
wherein you must walk, we teach you those graces that you must cherish, we
name you those weeds which you must pluck up, and those sinkes which you must
cleanse and purge, if you will be saved.

Secondly, to teach you, Ahab will not be ruled by Micaiah, nor hear the truth
he speaks, because he hates the man, 1 King. 22.8. Did you profit by them,
you would love them, as the Galathians did Paul, Gal. 4.15. you would have
plucked out your own eyes to do them good, and be as sorrowful for the loss
of them, as the Elders of Miletum were to part with the Apostle. They wept
sore, and fell upon Paul's neck, and kissed him, gushing out with tears to
hear the passionate words that came from him, that they should see his face no
more, Act. 20.38.

2. From the compellation, note; That the teacher and they that are taught,
should both live and love as brethren. Cor. 4.15. Sometimes to a mother and her
children, Gal. 4.19. This love they should manifest; first, in praying one for
another: he for them, as Paul, Romans 1.9. and they for him, Ephesians. 6.19.
Secondly, by supplying the wants of one another; He to minister things
spiritual unto them, and they things temporal unto him; as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 9.11. Thirdly, by a reciprocal and mutual rejoicing at the
welfare of each other: He must rejoice when they do well; for what is our
crown and rejoicing? etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. It is life to a Minister to see his
people stand fast in the faith, Cum plangentibus plango, cum singulis pectus
meum copulo. Cypr. de Lapsis, Sect. 3.
1 Thessalonians. 3.8. I mourn with them that mourn, I join mine affection with all;
says Cyprian. They also must rejoice at his well-doing, pluck their eyes to
give him, think his very feet beautiful, Romans 10.15. What member will not
rejoice at the welfare of the eye that guides it? What sheep will not
rejoice at the welfare of the Shepherd that feeds it? What child will not
rejoice at the welfare of the father that begot it, of the mother that bare
it, that toils and labors to bring it up? But I come to his affectionate
desire to them.

That they should not be ignorant: One maine care of a good Minister is, the
expelling of ignorance out of their peoples hearts: For the enforcing of this
point, mark, 1. The ill fruits of this sin. 2. The punishments for it; And
both of these should improve the Ministers care in redressing it. The second
Conclusion is positive: That the chiefest care of a Preacher of the Gospel,
should be to instruct his people, so that their souls may be saved, as verse.
14. I come to the third: the depth and profoundnesse of this matter; a mystery.

A mystery:] This word imports a thing unto men unknowen, or of men not
sufficiently understood. The first Conclusion is;

The depth and weightinesse of points delivered, should command devout
attention in them that hear. So David, being to teach the whole duty of man,
the fear of the Lord, bids them come and hearken, Psalm. 34.11. So Solomon; I
will speak of excellent things, my lips shall teach things that be right,
therefore hearken and give ear, Prove. 8.6. Therefore when God spoke to his
people of the extirpation of idolatry, and they gave no heed, the Lord grows
angry to punish them; Psalm. 81.11. My people would not hearken, therefore I
gave them over: It is very memorable that is reported of Constantine the Great
by Eusebius, who being requested by Divines that disputed before him, that
after long standing he would sit down and take his case, answered, Nesas est
habitis disputationibus de Deo, etc. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4. c. 33.
It is an impious thing (says he) to hear negligently disputations concerning
God. And it is written for the commendation of Mary, that when Christ spoke of
doing his Fathers business, she pondered them, and laid them up inher heart,
Luke 2.51. When the matter is deep and excellent, then must the attention be
devout and deep. When Moses his doctrine drops as the rain, and his speech
distills as the deaw, and as showers on the herbs, then must both heaven and
earth give ear and hearken, Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2.

The Use is; Tim. 3.16. But my purpose is not to discourse of this mystery,
until I come to the parts of it; only thus much I pray you remember out of
Calvin; That if any man wonder, why God will call this people, or why he will
not call them all, or why he will call them no sooner; Of him remember it is a
mystery, which no man can evidently demonstrate, until the effect and event
do make it plain: only a word of the use of this mystery, and then I come
to handle the parts of it.

Lest you should be wise in your own conceits.] I pass the common note; That
the more ignorant men are, the more proud they are of their knowledge; for
knowing but little, when they have that little portion they think they have
all: The note that I would commend is this:

God would have no man proud of any thing which he enjoyes: Luke 18. Therefore
is that sharp reproof of the Corinthians; You despise the Church of God, and
shame them that have not, Do I praise you in this? no; I praise you not: 1
Cor. 11.22. And so I come to the three branches of this mystery; whereof the
first is, viz.

That obstinacy in part is come to Israel:] Wherein note first the judgment,
what it is; (...), obstinacy. 2. Upon whom, it is Israel. 3. The extent of it,
in respect of the parties, it is not upon every particular; but (...), in
part. I begin with the first. The word in the original is (...), which is,
concretio in callum, a growing together into an hard thick skin.

In this observe; First, the author whence this hardness came; that you may
see at verse. 8. God has, etc. Secondly, why God sent it, to punish them for
precedent sins: From the author, the conclusion may be this; Hardness of
heart is justly brought upon man by God, as verse. 8. I come to the second. God
punishes them with this sin, for the committing of other former sins. Romans
1. They turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like a
corruptible man, etc. verse. 23. Therefore God gave them up to uncleanness,
verse. 24. They turned the truth of God into a lie, verse. 25. Therefore God gave
them up to vile affections, verse. 26. They regarded not to know God; therefore
God delivered them up to a reprobate mind, verse. 28. The same you may see in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because they believed not the truth, therefore God gave them
over to believe lies: And as he proceeded with these Gentiles, so he does
with the Jews; My people would not hearken, Israel would not obey; therefore I
gave them over: Psalm. 81.12. An example of this you have in David, he commits
adultery and murder, and God suffers first one of his children to lie with
another, and then one to murder another, 2 Samuel 13. Lot is drunken, and God
suffers him to commit incest after it, Genesis 19.32. So true is that of Solomon,
Prove. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: See August. De natura
and great. contra Pelagian. cap 22.
he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.

This may teach us to expel vice; it is as a threefold cord, Prove. 23.33.
Nunquam vidi ebrium and castii. Hier. in Tit. 1.
I never saw a drunken man a chaste man; says Hierom. Quem non vicoat Sodoma,
vicerunt vina.
Whom Sodom had not overcome, wines overcame; speaking of Lot. Et ad unius
horae ebrietatem undavit eafoenora, quae per annos sexcentos sibrietate
contexerat. Hier. ad Occan. Epist. 83.
And in one hours drunkenness he uncovered those thighs, which he for six
hundred years by sobriety had covered: says the same Hierome. Take heed of
adultery, lest that open a gate for murder, as it proved in David, 2 Samuel 11.
Take heed of disobedience, lest God punish it by giving us over to our own
lusts, Psalm. 81.12. Take heed of an unbeleeving heart, lest God give us over to
believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Take heed of doing one sin, lest God punish thee by
letting thee fall into another. The particular sin punished is contempt of
the Gospel: there is nothing that God punishes sorer than contempt of the
Gospel, as verse. 11. I come to the parties.

Israel] that is, by a metonymie, the people of Israel, that had the
prerogatives and gifts above others. Conclus. The importunate clamor of sin
will bring Gods hand to punish where his mercies have been most abundant. I
may say of him as Seneca said of Augustus, Paenas dat dum paenam exigit. Sen.
de Clement. lib. 1. cap. 10.
It is a grievous punishment to him to punish others: and yet so clamorous is
man's sin, that it inforceth him sometimes to whet his glistering sword, and
his hand to take hold of judgment, and make his arrows drunk with their
blood, Deuteronomy. 32.41. It is a grievous pain for him to punish, and therefore
when he goes to strike, it comes with Ah and Alas, Isay 1.24. and yet so
clamorous is man's sin, that it will let God have no rest, till he become to
Ephraim as a lion, and a lions whelpe to the house of Judah, as he speaks,
Hos. 5.14. It is most true which God proclaims of himself, He is merciful,
slow to anger, abundant in goodness, Exodus 34.6. It is most true which the
Prophet speaks of him; The Lord shall stand as upon mount Perazim, be wroth as
in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, Isay
28.21. He is like unto Octaviue, Would I knew not my letters: Vtinam nescirem
literas. Suetonius in vito Octavii.
yet such is the importunity of man's sin, that it may seem to say unto God,
as Jacob said to the Angel, I will not leave until thou have punished this
people. God would not punish, but they provoke him to destroy them, says
Salvianus. Deus noluit punire, ipse extorquent ut pereant. De providen. li. 1.
It deals with God as Dalilah did with Sampson, Judge. 16.16. importunes again
and again, until that tender father, whose bowels are rolled and turned
within him, turn angry Judge, to take revenge where he was wont to cherish;
And to give that Israel unto hardness of heart, whom he was wont to embrace in
the arms of his mercy and love. Therefore is sin sometimes said to smoke
up to heaven; sometimes to cry unto heaven, as Sodomes sin, Genesis 18.21. I
come to the use.

Come hither Jerusalem and learn: the vine which Gods own hand has planted,
thy spiritual whoredoms importune the Almighty to fill thee with
bitterness, and make thee drunken with wormwood, Lam. 3.15. Come hither Sodom
and learn: Though thou be like the garden of the Lord, and fruitful like the
valleys of Egypt, Genesis 13.10. yet thy uncleanness importunes the Almighty to
burn thee to ashes, and turn thee into an Asphaltite lake, to destroy thy
inhabitants, and all things that grow upon the earth, Genesis 19.25. Come hither
Babylon, and learn: Though thou be for greatness more like to a region than a
city; for beantie, the Lady of Kingdoms; for prosperity, can say of thy
self, I am, and no other, Isay 47.8. yet thy pride importunes the Almighty to
turn thy pleasant palaces into places for dragons and ostriches, a wilderness
for Satyrs to dance in, and for Zim and Ochim to lodge in, Isay 13.21. Come
hither Laodicea, and learn: Thy lukewarmnesse importunes the Almighty to spue
thee out of his mouth, Apoc. 3.16. And let us of this Land and Kingdom learn;
what though we have Kings like David, and Princes like to Josiah, Judges like
Othniel, Lawyers like Elias, Prophets like Elisha, Governouts like the
Centurion, women like Abigail, houses of learning beyond Najoh in Raniah, yet
all these cannot cover our heads in the day of wrath. The pride of our hearts
importunes the Almighty to deal with us as he did with Babylon; the
wantonness and looseness of our land importunes the Almighty to deal with
us as he did with Sodom; the idolatry that has got her self so many lovers
and favorites, importunes the Almighty to do with us as with Jerusalem. We
have those that swear and forswear, which makes God lay siege to the walls of
our Cities, till it devour the stones and timber of it, Zach. 5. We have those
that rise early to follow drunkenness, which calls for a woe upon us, Isai. 28.
We have those that profane the Sabbath, this importunes the Almighty to set a
fire in our gates, Ier. 17.27. We have those that are of the mind of Julian,
that would root out the learned: Carrion Chron. lib. 3.
Those that rob the house of God, like Bremis in Propertius, and say God is
rich enough: Those that muzzle the mouths of the oxen that tread out the corn,
and say with William the second, having in his hand at the time of death the
Bishoprics of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Winchester, and Salisbury, and
twelve Abbeyes, the bread of the Lord is sweet: Those that rob God in tithes
and offerings, and therefore bring a curse upon the land, Mal. 3. verse. 8, 9.
It would grieve a heart of iron to think what multitudes and nests of vipers
are bred amongst us, who are like the womb that bears them, and make to
totter and reele the very pillars and foundations of that land and kingdom
that breeds them: What then should our care be, but to reform these sins
that are able to sink whole towns and kingdoms: The custom of swearing, for
because of oaths a land mourns, Ier. 23.10. Ignorance, want of mercy, want of
truth, for because of these the land shall mourn, Hos. 4.3. To labor for the
suppression of all iniquity, for that makes the earth to reele to and fro like
a drunken man, Isay. 24.20. and let every man that loves our nation, that loves
our Church or Kingdom, help with their hands, if not with their prayers, and
the Lord be with us, and grant good success; and so I come to the universality
and reach of this punishment in respect of the subject.

(...), in part; that is, this obstinacy is not total, but partial, lies not
upon every one, but some only, as Anselmus; Ambrose referres it not to the
number blinded, but to the time that this blindness should last. But that's
noted in the next clause of the mystery. I take it to be meant of the number,
as if he should say, that even in the time of this general obstinacy God did
preserve some unto himself.

I conclude, There has never been any such general hardness and revolt from
God. but God has preserved a Church among them to himself. In the sixth of
Esaias and the last verse, There shall be desolation in the midst of the land,
but yet in it shall be a tenth, and shall return as an Oak or Elm, which
have a substance in them when they cast their leaves. The Aslyrian may make the
people of Jerusalem like the trees of a forest cut down, so few that a child
may tell them, Isay 10.9. Yet some of that few belongs to the mighty God, verse.
21. If ever God had wanted a Church, surely it should have been in the time of
those ten bloody persecutions, begun under Nero, An. Dom. 65. when Peter and
Paul were beheaded; Omphrius Fast. lib 2.
continued under Domitian, when John was banished into Pathmos; under Trajane,
when Ignatius Bishop of Antiochia; under Antoninus, when Polycarpe; under
Severus, when Leonides the father of Origin were put to death, until the end
of the bloody reign of Dioclesian. Que tempere universus orbis sacro martyrum
cruore insectus. Neque unquam. majori triumpho vicimus, quam cum 10. annorum
strage non potuimus vinci.
At what time the whole world was drowned and drunken with the holy blood of
the Martyrs. Nor at any time overcame we with greater triumph, than when we
could not with ten years slaughter be overcome. Or if ever Gods Church could
have been quite pulled down, in likelihood it would have been in the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes, when he entered the Temple Jerusalem, burned the books of
Moses and the Prophets, proclaimed feasting and riot in the house of God, and
put to death both young and old that would not renounce the Law which Moses had
delivered. Carrion Chron. lib. 2.


The reason is Gods true and constant promise touching the continual keeping
and preservation of his Church: I will marry thee unto me for ever, Hos. 2.19.
And to show that he will never part with his Spouse again, he says, he will
do it in faithfulness, verse. 21. From whence I may take just occasion to
answer that Popish slander: That undoubtedly we are not the Church, because
the Church was ever, we never heard of till Luthers time. My reply is: That
the Apostles and the Primitive Church, for almost six hundred years after
Christ, taught as we do, and ever since there have been some that have
contended for the maintenance of that faith which we profess. In matter of
Supremacy they taught as we do, till after Gregory's time, which was six
hundred years after Christ. Yea, Gregory himself writing against John of
Constantinople; Si quis se appellaverit Episiopum universalem, is est
Antichristus, considente. dico. Greg Epist. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
If any shall call himself universal Bishop, I say it considently that he is
Antichrist. In matter of the Sacrament, for 1000. years together, Cypr. Epist.
71.
the people received the wine as well as the bread In 1 Cor. 11. liect. 6.
Aquinas cannot deny. In the point of Images, at first the Church admitted no
Images at all, as In Catechism.
Erasmus and Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 109.
Gregory shows. Yea, De Invent. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Polydore Virgil confesses, That the Fathers condemned Images for fear of
idolatry. And this continued till the second Nicene Council, as Instit. lib.
1. cap. 11.
Calvin proves. But now of late the Sess. 25.
Trent Council, and De imagia. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Bellarmine have given unto them divine honor. Not to trouble you long; Jn
praesat. and n^tive 45.
Bristow confesses; The truth is, that some have been in all ages of the
Protestants opinion. And Catal. Test. very atie.
Illyricus remembers one Reynerius, who discoursing of the Waldenses, a people
for substance of the Protestants religion, says, they are in all the Cities of
Lombardy and Provence. No Sect has continned so long; some say it has been
since Pope Sylvesters time; some since the Apostles; They believe all articles
concerning God, but they hate the Church of Rome; so that we have had a
Church, and our religion before Luther. I come to a second point.

In part] There is no question but this was the greater part, only a small
remnant that God reserved, as verse. 5. Even so at this sime there is a remnant.
Though the people of the world be many, yet they that belong to God are not
many, as verse. 5. And so I come to the second branch of the mystery:

Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.] Exposition.
The Apostle taught them before, that the hardness of the Jews should come to
an end; here he sets down the time when it shall be, until the fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in. By this fullness is meant Gods Church gathered, out
of all Nations, by the preaching of the Gospel; not that all Nations shall be
converted: for then the Church should have no enemies, nor should there be any
truth in these Prophecies of the Apostasy of Antichrist, and the small number
of Believers in the last times. But this (...) signifies the turning of great
multitudes of all Nations to the faith of Christ; such as has not been of
old, no not in the time and at the preaching of the Apostles. I omit that doubt
and question, whether the fullness of the Gentiles shall be so come in, that
after the conversion of the Jew, no more Gentiles shall be called; for I
believe, that to the end the Word shall work upon the Gentile, as well as on
the Jew: I shall say somewhat of it in his proper place. In this branch of the
mystery observe, first, the period of the miseries of the Jews; secondly, the
complement of the happiness of the Gentiles, the one noted at the word (...),
until; the other in the word (...), fulness. In the former, which I call the
period of the miseries of the Jews, I note first, that there is no people so
far gone in sin, but when they return God will receive them, as verse. 23.
Secondly, though obstinacy lie upon them very long, yet before the end of the
world they shall be called again. The reasons: 1. The first fruits of the
Jews converted, as John the Baptist, old Simeon, and the Apostles; and here
and there some in later times, Egisippus, the writer of Ecclesiastical
History, a Jew. Bucolcerus, about the year 162. in the time of Antoninus the
Emperor: and the Magdeburgenses report of one in Spain, Cent. 13.
Anno 123. 2. From the testimonies of Scripture, which show that the first
fruit were holy, the root whence they came holy: Therefore the branches and the
whole lump is holy, not by internal sanctity, but Deo foederati, children of
the Covenant, and therefore shall certainly be called. 3. From the drift and
project of the Apostle in this Chapter: But this point meets me in the next
verse, only let us make this use, as verse. 11. 2. Upon this ground, me
thinks it is not well done to banish them our Coasts, Balaeus Appendix, ca 6.
cent. 4.
as from England, by a London Council, Anno 1291. in the time of Edward the
fourth: nor to murder, as Anno 1278. the Jews were murdered in England. Many
other hard presages, Balaeus cent. 4. cap. 6.
see Magdeburgens. cent. 13. chap. 15. It is unfit to use them so hardly, whose
conversion we must pray for, and hope for, and help forward.

I come to the complement of the felicity of the Gentiles, their fullness is
come in: Exposition.
By fullness says Beza, he means not every particular Gentile, but the
Nations in general; nor is it to be understood of an universal enlightening of
the whole world at the time of the Jews conversion; for in the Apostles time
the word was generally preached unto all the unknown and inhabited Nations of
the world; as Col. 1.6. The word of truth, which is the Gospel, as come unto
you, even as it is to all the world: and it is preached to every creature,
verse. 23. Now that the Gospel should the second time be published and divulged
over the world, we have neither Scripture nor commission for it. For first,
Apostolical gifts and callings, most necessary for so great a work, are ceased
many hundred years since. Secondly, at Christ's coming there shall be almost
no faith, that is, sound doctrine and zeal, as Luke 28.8. When the son of
man comes shall he find faith on the earth? and yet his coming will be
shortly after the calling of the Jews. Thirdly, it may be that the Gospel
shall be revived in many kingdoms where it was planted before, in and near
those places where the Jews shall be after their general calling, but shall
not be general. They therefore that look for an universal preaching, may
sooner see Christ coming the clouds of heaven. So that I say by fullness is
meant a great concourse, as Calvin; or the nations in general, as Beza.

The first point is the effect of the Gospel: Be it never so much opposed, it
shall convert in all Nations the full number that belongs unto God. Therefore
is it the power of God to every one that shall be saved, Romans 1.16. and It
shall prosper in that for which I send it, and not return void, Isay 55.11. By
it we must be saved if we belong unto him, 1 Cor. 15.2. and as it was in the
Apostles time, the word was opposed, and still it prospered; trodden down, and
still it grew; though the sower were martyred, yet the Gospel still took
root, and spread it self to the end of the world: So now, be it never so much
envied, opposed and hindered, it shall gather the elect from the four winds,
and be preached til all the Lords flock be gathered, and turned unto the Lord.

From hence learn, our evil days, the coming of Christ in the clouds, the
resurrection of the just, and hear that voice of Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom, etc. In a word to show the mystery. I do
conceive that the mystery in the fullness of the Gentiles is in this point.
Whether the fullness of the Gentiles shall be such, that after the calling of
the Jews no more Gentiles shall be converted; because he said that their
fullness is come in already. I do well remember the rule of Augustine;
Faithful ignorance is better than rash knowledge. Melior est fidelis
ignorantia quam temeraria scrert. tia. Aug. mverb. Apost. sermon. 20.
And though it may seem, that before the conversion of the Jews, the Gentiles
fullness shall be so great, and after their conversion the time so short, that
therefore there shall be no more converting of any more Gentiles; yet is it not
unlikely, that even after the calling of the Jew, some Gentiles may be
converted. First, some shall be converted at the eleventh hour, as it is in
the parable in Matthew. 20. not only at the end of life, but at the end of the
world there will be some wise virgins with oil in their lamps, some corners of
good ground that will receive the good seed that's cast into it. Secondly, after
the turning of the Jews, there shall be better means to convert the Gentiles
than ever before: First, more clear understanding of the Scriptures: secondly,
such zeal and practice of holiness in the Jews, as cannot choose but provoke
many Gentiles to follow them. Melto efficacior est vo^ boni opevis, quam
clegentis sermonis. Bern. su^er Cant. sermon. 59.
The voice of a good work is far more effectual than the voice of an
eloquent sermon, says Bernura For as it is most true which I find in Hierome
on Ezekiel. 16. Nothing corrupts more than a wicked life. Nil magis corrumpit
quam vita prava.
So it is most true, that nothing converts more effectually than a good life.
So the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.1. Thirdly, even after the conversion of the Jew; yea,
at the end of the world God shall find some of his own among the Gentiles
alive, as the Apostle shows, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. in likely hood converted after the
coming of the Jews: But in this secret mystery I am not acquainted; I
deliver nothing for certain, I do not desire to be of Gods Counsel, it is
enough to be of his Court. I confess mine own ignorance, and think no shame
to be ignorant in that, which God in his Word has not revealed. I come to the
third branch.

VERSE. 26.
THis is the third branch of the mystery, wherein the Apostle points at two
circumstances in the conversion of the Jews. The one, the time, at the end of
the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles. Secondly, the number, All
Israel; for the former, the Scripture has determined that it shall be; but of
the day, and year it has said nothing; all that I dare say of it, is by way
of probability, and it may be comprised in these propositions. 1. The
conversion of the Jews is not as yet past; for though some be here and there
converted, yet the promise being more general is not yet fulfilled. 2. The
stumbling block which hinders their conversion must first be taken away;
Babylon must first be destroyed and burnt, as Apoc. 18.20. For in Babylon they
see some sacrifice to Idols, some prostrate themselves before creatures, and
such horrible wickedness, and by them they judge of us all, that till this
Babylon be destroyed, the conversion of the Jews can hardly be expected. Now
where this Babylon is that must fall, let it be judged by De Civit. Dei, lib.
18. cap. 22
S. Augustine. Rome is the daughter of Babylon. By Adversus Iovinian. lib. 2.
Hierome, Rome is that Babylon, which God in the Apocalypse threatened: And John
by Babylon did Ad Marcoll. Epist. 17
mean that Rome standing upon seven hills. By Lib. 18. cap. 22.
Vives upon Augustine, who cites Hierome to say, that Peter the Apostle calls
Rome Babylon. By Lib. 3.
Tertullian against the Jews, and against Marcion. And is as good as confessed
by De Pontis. Romans lib. 3. cap. 13.
Bellarmine, in his answer to an argument. Thirdly, it will not be long before
the second coming of the Son of man, but toward the latter end of the world;
which time, though the Millenaries in Augustine, Of the City of God, Book 20.
Chap. 7. out of some books of Elias the Prophet, as Vives notes upon him, have
determined the end of the world to be at the end of six thousand years, of
which number two thousand were spent from the creation of the world to Abraham;
and two thousand from Ahraham to Christ; and two thousand from his first to his
second coming: whereof 1618. are already expired; so that there remains no
more but 382. years until the end of the world, in their account; and within
that time, nay near about the expiration of that time, must this Nation be
converted; Sex dicbus conditus mu^ dus, sex annorum m llibus consummabttur.
Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 9 per Magdeburgenses citetur. Ceul. 6. cap. 4.
In six days the world was made, in six thousand years it shall be ended. But
for my part, I will embrace the lesson of our Savior, Acts 1.6. It is not for
us to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power:
surely that day and hour, either when God will convert that Nation, or come in
the clouds of Heaven, to judge the earth, no man can tell. If any man say that
I have said little of so great a point, mine apology is, I love to speak
truth in the pulpit; and what I know not I speak not: If any man, out of a
proud spirit for oftentation, shall take upon him to determine the time; I
profess I believe him not. I dispute not whether they shall have a policy,
and recover the holy Land, and dwell there; for it is likely they shall never
recover it, because we find no such promise. I come to the number:

All] Some by all Israel understand the whole people of God, consisting both of
Jew and Gentile, according to that, Gal. 6.16. Peace be upon them, and mercy
upon the Israel of God: So Calvin, Osiander, Theodoret, and Augustine. But I am
rather of the judgment of Paraeus, who understands Israel properly of the
Nation of the Jews. And then the doubt rises, whether toward the end of the
world, all the Jews that then live shall be converted and saved? Pererius
produces Chrysostom upon the twelfth verse of this Chapter, All shall come to
the faith. And Aquinas upon my Text, Not particularly as even now, Vaiversi ad
sidem acetss ri suat. Non particulariter sicut (...), ad (...) sal. ter ^mac.
Greg set. Ezeth. ^iom. 12.
but universally all: So Scotus and Cajetane in their Commentaries. Some
prescribe the means how this whole Nation shall be converted, to wit, by the
preaching of Enoch and Elias, as Gregory, Theodoret, Lyranus, Anselmus, and
diverse others upon this Text, which is but a fancy, for Elias is come already:
for that Elias which Malachy says must come, Chap. 4.5. our Savior expounds
of John Baptist. If ye will receive it; this is Elias which was to come,
Matthew. 11.14. and Matthew. 17.12. Elias is come already. Mark. 9.13. Elias is
come already. But they that desire further resolution in this point, and would
see the dream of Elias, and Enochs coming again, let them read the
confutation of it, learnedly written by the Kings own pen in the premonition
to all Christian Princes. My judgment is; That toward the end of the world,
before the coming of Christ, the Jewish Nation shall be converted, yet every
one of that Nation I dare not say: for first, the testimonies which Paul cites
out of Isay, must not be understood of some particulars, but of a great number,
ungodliness shall be turned away from Jacob. And S. Origin fitly alleges
that prophecy, Hos. 2.7. I will return to my first husband, for at that time
I was better than now. Secondly, that prophetical vision, Apoc. 7.4. The
number which was sealed, were 144000 of the Tribes of Israel, is and may be
literally understood; and is by Chrysostom expounded of the general
conversion of the Jews. Thirdly, Beza in his Annotations shows, that all
Israel which must be saved, is an opposition to those that are hardened, and
those were (...), but in part. That all Israel here, is the same which was at
verse. 12. called (...), their abundance: so that great multitudes of them shall
be converted. Fourthly, of all ancient people that have been from the
beginning of the world, only the Jews do yet remain in so diverse
casualties, in captivity, in dispersion, distinct from all others where they
dwell in manners and religion; which out of question is a demonstrative reason,
that God has preserved them for some special purpose above all others.
Lastly, there is the consent of Fathers, Chrysostom of our Saviors words,
Sermon. 12. Hilarie of the Trinity, Book 11. Augustine, quest. on Genes. chap.
148. Dionysius Carthusianus, Ambrose, and Hierome upon the words of my Text.
The Conclusion is this.

Though obstinacy lie never so long upon the Jew, yet none of them within the
Covenant shall be lost: Which is built upon these grounds. 1. The immutabilitie
of Gods decree. 2. Upon Christ's keeping. 3. Upon the sealing of the assurance,
as verse. 20. And so I come to the proof and confirmation.

Then shall come out of Sion the deliverer, Exposition.
and shall turn away iniquity from Jacob.] It is not wholly set down
together in any place of the old Testament; but a collected Text from the many
prophecies of Isay and Jeremy. In it I do observe a place, a person, an
action. The place, Sion; the person, a deliverer; the work, turning away
iniquity from Jacob. To begin with the place. Beza observes, that in the
Hebrew it signifies Sioni, unto Sion. And so it is, Isa. 59.20. The redeemer
shall come unto Sion, and unto them that turn from iniquity in Jacob. And
that some Greek copies have it (...), for Sions sake, and that perhaps the
Printer made (...) for (...). I take it as it stands, Sion, a mountain of
Jerusalem, called the mountain of the Lord, and the holy mountain, in the top
whereof was the tower of David, which was also called the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.7. from thence the deliverer comes. Non quia ibi natus, sed quis inde
doctrina ejus exivit in universum muaedum.
Not because he was borne there; but because his doctrine went forth thence
into all the world: as Aquinas speaks on Romans 11. and it agrees well with the
Prophets words: The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. Wheresoever the word is preached, thither Christ comes,
and there he is. Or thus; When the Gospel is sent unto us, then Christ
himself is sent unto us. Hence is that speech of Christ; He that hears you,
hears me; he that despises you, despises me: Luke 10.16. as if it were no
question, but where the Word comes, there Christ himself comes also: Hence is
that, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. He that despises these things, despises not man, but
God: for wheresoever the Gospel is preached, there Christ is had in it, and
covered under it. Learn first what estimate we are to make of the Gospel, as
the treasure hid in the sield, for which the wise Merchant sels all that he
has. Secondly, that when we have the Gospel we can want nothing: Have enti
Deum n b l dcesse potest.
Nothing can be wanting to him that has God; as verse. 12. I hasten to the
person.

The deliverer.] (...). The signification, one that shall pluck them out of
their misery and servitude under which they groan, to note;

Man under sin endures miserable and woeful servitude: Isa. 24.20. that
over-presseth God himself, and makes him say of Moab, Judah, and Israel, Amos
2.13. I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. It
is that which made the Son of God to sweat drops and clods of blood, when our
sin was upon him, Luke 22.44. and therefore they that go on in sin, are
like to men that be pressed to death, and cry still for more weight to be cast
upon them; and they feel not this weight, because they are already dead, or
drowned in sin. A man on dry ground feels the least weight of a bucket, but
a man at the bottom of a water feels not, though never so great weight and
heap be upon him; and therefore no marvel if it made David to roar, Psalm.
32.3. Ezekiah to mourn like a dove, to chatter like a crane, Bonus etiamsi
serviat, liber est; ma^us, etianisi regnet, servus est. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib.
3. cap. 4.
Isa. 38.14. Secondly, it is a miserable servitude to live in it, and therefore
must have a deliverer. It is Augustines position: A good man, though he serves,
yet he is free; a wicked man, though he reigns, is a servant. I know not
whereby to resemble this servitude of man under sin, better than by the
subjection of him that was possessed, Mark. 9.22. The bondage of Istael under
Pharao, when they cried and groaned so loud, that they moved the heavens, Exodus
2.23. the slaverie of the Gibeonites, made to be hewers of wood and drawers of
water, Josh. 9.23. The matchless bondage endured by poor Christians under
Turks and Infidels, is as much as nothing, but like a yoke of reed in
comparison of the servitude which man endures under sin: therefore sin is
said to reign and tyrannize over them, Romans 6.12. It has them in awe, as the
Centurion had his servants, that says to one, Go, and he goes, Luke 7.8. If
it command the drunkard, he rises early in the morning to follow it, Isa.
5.11. The adulterer, he watches the twilight, be the night never so black and
dark, Prove. 7.9. And though in the acting of some sins there be great
difficulty, yet do they not excuse themselves, as men do when they should
do any good, like Moses, Exodus 4.1. They will not believe me; and at verse. 10.
I am not eloquent. And Jeremy, Chap. 1.6. I am but a child and cannot speak:
But be the danger never so great, the difficulties never so many, the profit
or pleasure never so small, they adventure upon it. What better can Ahab the
King be for Naboths vineyard? it is but to make a garden of herbs; yet his
master, sin, has commanded he must have it, though it be like to cost him
his life; for he lies upon his bed, turns his face to the wall, and will eat
no bread, 1 Kin. 21.4. Amnon can hardly have his purpose upon the body of
Thamar, if he have, it will be but a short and sudden pleasure; yet his master
sin has commanded, and though it vex him never so sore, and cast him into a
fit of sickness, and in the end cost him his life, yet he will do it, 2 Samuel
13. Be the action never so base, he that is servant to sin must act it: Be
it in the dead time of the night, he must break his sleep, and rise, and go
about it: Be it in the extremity of sickness, yet even then he must plot and
contrive it upon his bed. The bondage under sin will appear in this, That
though common sinners seem to lead a pleasant and merry life, yet there is no
greater toil and drudgerie than that which they undergo, in contriving and
acting of sin. Isa. 5.11.
Who rifeth so early as the drunkard? who walks so many dark nights as the
adulterer? who endures so many tempests as the Pirates? comes in so many dangers
as thieves and robbers? seldom do they suffer either their eyes to sleep, or
eyelids to slumber, or the temples of their head to take any rest.

The Use is; Rom 6.12. Let not sin reign, etc. 1. It is a base service, to
serve either the flesh that is our fellow, or the world that is our servant, or
the Devil that is our enemy. 2. After all the service, there will be a
miserable payment, death, Romans 6.23. the punishment of loss, loss of
happiness, peace, life, glory, of the blessed vision of God, the eternal
comforts of his Spirit, of that noise of heavenly music, which beats the
spheres, and makes the heavens toring with hallelujahs of glory, and honor,
and peace. The pain of sense, in every part pain and sorrow, in the
conscience convulsions and terrors, in the tongue burning and heat, and both
these eternal. Be the fire and brimstone never so hot, they shall not consume
it: their pain and grief never so violent, they shall not dye under it. The
Poets feign of Prometheus, that for some miscarriage he was tied to the
mountain Caucasus, with a Vulture gnawing upon his entrals. And as Natalis
Comes has it; Pascitur immortale jecur, and quantum luce volucris carpserit,
tantum huic misero nox una reponit Natal. Com. Myshol. lib. 4. cap. 6. Quae non
carpit he^bam sedpascit, ut semper renascatar ad pastum; itainsernus non
consumit hominem sed assligit, ut homo temper vivat ad mortem. Inno ^ent Sermon.
2. Frunt passibilia, j^am^rrupribi. lia. Tb. Aqen. quaest. 7. art. 11. Mortsine
morte, sinu siac fine. Greg. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 54.
His immortal liver still receives nourishment, and how much the Foul might
have torn away by day, so much one night restores to this miserable wretch.
Innocentius compares it to a sheep, which plucketh not up the herb, but
feeds, that it may always spring again to pasture: so hell afflicts a man,
but consumes him not, that man may always live near to death. They shall be
passible, but incorruptible; says Aquinas. Their worm dies not, their fire
never goes out; says our Savior, Marc. 9.44. Death without death, end
without end, says Gregory. To proceed, in the person there be three points I
mean to insiston. 1. Who was this deliverer. 2. From what we are delivered.
3. By what price and ransom. The person, who, is the Son, the second person,
but not excluding the Father, and Holy Ghost; for Creation, Redemption,
Sanctification, are common to all; for the Father redeemes by sending the
Son, Ioh. 3.17. sanctifies: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The very God of peace sanctify
you thorowout: And the Son creates, By him all things were made, Ioh. 1.3. and
sanctifies; for he is made unto us wisdom, sanctification, and redemption, 1
Cor. 1.30. and Ephesians. 5.26. He gave himself for it, that ^ee might cleanse and
sanctify it by the washing of water through the word: So of the Holy Ghost,
these works upon the creature are undivided, but with this order and method.
The Father does all things of himself, but by the Son, and by the Holy
Ghost: The Son does all things, but of the Father by the Holy Ghost: The Holy
Ghost does all things, but of the Father, and of the Son, by himself. There
is no doubt but this was Christ: From whence the Conclusion.

All hope of our deliverance from the tyranny of sin and pains of hell,
depends merely upon the Son of God. Who shall deliver me from this body of
sin? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 7.25. We are dead in
sins and trespasses, by him must be quickened: We have (...), an
handwriting; he must take it out of the way, and nail it unto his cross;
we are subject to the powers of darkness, He has spoiled principalities and
powers, and triumphed over them in his cross, Gol. 2.14, Derad. 1. lib. 7.
15. Livie reports of Marcus Curtius, a noble and worthy Roman, that there
being a strange vault or Chasma in the chief Marketplace of all the City,
when it could not be stopped with continual casting in of earth, they consulted
with their Prophets, and the answer was, that it would not be closed, until
the best thing in all Italy were cast into it, he leapt into the gulf,
devoting himself for the safety of the City: so our Savior, etc. When
Israel in the wilderness loathed Manna, the Lord sent fiery serpents which
stung them, in so much that many of them died; in the end, God prescribed to
Moses a remedy and cure; That he should make a sierie Serpent of brass, and
set it up for a sign, that whosoever was bitten should look upon it, and
live, Numb. 21.8. A type of Christ, whose arm has broken the head of the old
Serpent, and by his exaltation upon the cross, has taken away the sting of
death, which is sin, 1 Cor. 15. This type and the antitype is notably fet
down by S. John, Chap. 3.14. As Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness,
so must the Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have eternal life. If Lazarus be in his grave of earth, it is
he only that can say, Lazarus come forth, Ioh. 11.44. If Hierome be in his
grave of sin, it is he only that can say; Epist. 5. ad Flovent.
Hierome come forth. And this is the exposition of his name, as the Angel
gives it, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people: Hence are given to him the names of Redeemer, 1 Cor. 1.30. of Savior,
Him has God lifted up to be a Prince and Savior, Acts 5.31. And here the
Deliverer, in the words of my Text. Hence is that prophecy of Christ; O death,
I will be thy death, O grave, I will be thy destruction; Hos. 13.4. O mors, te
morte mea interimam: O death, I will be thy death, by dying; says Zanchius on
Hosea. Whence we may learn.

1. could not answer one of a thousand, Job 9.3. If thou Lord should mark
iniquities, who could abide? says David, Psalm. 130. Every sin is mortal
and killing, and therefore there is no more possibility to remove one sin,
than for a dead man to raise and revive himself again.

2. Julius the third, Sess. 4. Of the works of satisfaction, Chap. 10. Can.
12. Si quis dixerit totam poenam simul cum culpa remitsi semper a Dcoonathema
sit. Council. Trid. apud Chemnie. part. 2.
If any shall say, that the whole punishment, together with the fault, is
forgiven of God, let him be accursed. Grounded (as I suppose) upon some
hyperbolicall speeches of the Fathers; as of Origin, who calls satisfaction;
Praetium quo peccata redimuntur. Orig. super Levit. Hom. 15.
A price whereby sins are redeemed. Of Cyprian, Sordes post baptismum
contractae ablunntur eleemesynie, Cypr. de Elcemos. Sect. 1.
Filth contracted after baptism, is washed away by alms. Of Ambrose; Peccata
satisfactionibus expiari. Ambr. Epist. ad laps. virg.
Sins are expiated by satisfactions. Of Augustine; Propitiandus Per
eleemosynas est Deus. August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 70.
By alms is God to be pacified. And it is wonderful to see, how the
Schoolmen go mad in the point: Aquinas says, that a man may Supplem. par.
3. quaest. 12. art 3.
vindicare divinam vindictam, and compensare divinam offensam; deliver from
Gods vengeance, and may recompense God offended; and makes the satisfaction
equivalent to the wrong done, per aequivalentiam non quantitatis sed
proportionis, etiam pro alienis peccatis; by the equivalencie not of quantity,
but proportion, yea, for other men's sins. And the Trent Council; Sicut
Christus passione sia satesecit pro peccatis, ita nos satisfanendo patimur pro
peccatis.
As Christ by his suffering satisfied for our sins, so we by satissying
suffer for our sins. And yet, when the Fathers speak dogmatically, they
affirm no such thing: Nec Deo benis factis placemur, nec pro peccatus satu
facimus. Cypr. act Clerum and plebem, Ep. 8.
Neither please we God by our good deeds, neither satisfy for our sins;
says Cyprian. And the Schoole-man himself faith thus; Baptizato non est
injungenda satisfactio, hoc enim est injuriam sacere Christi morti and
passioni, etc. Sum. 3. quaest. 68. art. 5.
Satisfaction must not be enjoined him that is boptized; for this is to wrong
Christ's death and possion, as if that were not a full and sufficient
satisfaction for the sins of the baptized. And Chrysostom, speaking of Peter;
Lego lachrymas, satisfactionem non lego. Chrysain Luc. 22.
I read tears, satisfaction I read not. I need no more but that of the
Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2.1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Or that of the
Prophet; He has taken upon him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. Or that of
Paul; He was made sin for us, etc. 2 Cor. 5.21. Yea, but says De Purgat.
lib. 1. cap. 11.
Bellarmine, If Christ satisfied for everre fault and punishment, how comes it
to pass, that after sin remitted in Christ, we endure so many miseries, and
in the end die; aut cur infantes baptizati aegroti, and moriantur? or why are
infants baptized sick, and die? I answer him out of Tract. in Ioh. 124.
Augustine; 1. For the demonstration of deserved misery. 2. For the exercise
of necessary patience. 3. For the mending of unstable life; so that it is
castigatio, non damnatio; medicina non poena; a chastisement, not a
condemnation; a medicine not a punishment. 4. For the demonstration of the
works of God. But why is the punishment longer than the fault? He answers
in the same place, lest the fault should be thought small; therefore when the
fault is finished, the punishment remains. My Conclusion is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8. Though a man have multitudes of goods, yet no man
can red eme his brother, nor pay a ransom to God; it costs more, etc. There
be two other points. The one from what Christ delivers, that is intimated in
this, sin, death. I will take only the third. By what Christ does deliver
from sin and death.

Christ by his death upon the cross has delivered us from sin and the
curse: Isa. 53.10. Therefore says the Apostle, He took the writing that was
against us, or the bill of debts which we owed unto God, and nailed it to his
cross, that is, cancelled it, and spoiled principalities and powers, and
triumphed over them upon the same cross. Audiat hoc haereticus qui Christum
horntuem regat; audiat Christianus Christum tam despicatum prose sactum; and at
peccator quid meritus sit hemo, quam miser brmo, quid passus Deus homo.
Let the heretic hear this, who denies Christ to be man; let a Christian
hear that Christ was made so despicable for his sake; let a sinner hear what
man deserved, how miserable man is, what God and man suffered: says Ferus. He
must dye between heaven and earth, to note, that he was Mediator between
heaven and earth. Secondly, on a tree, because he would expiate sin
committed, in eating the fruit of a forbidden tree. Thirdly, with hands reached
out, to show that the way to his heart and merciful love was open. Fourthly,
with his feet nailed to the tree, to show, that he would not depart till we
were fully redeemed: much like the Apostles phrase: It pleased God by him to
reconcile all things to himself, and to sit at peace through the blood of his
cross, both things in heaven, and things in earth: Col. 1.20. Sangats Clristi
est clavis Parad si. litier. Epist. ad Dardonum.
I end with that of Hierome; The blood of Christ is the key of Paradise.

Mark ye here the nature of sin, Hebr. 10.4. It is a passionate speech of
Micah; Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high
God? shall I come with burnt offerings, and calves of a year old, will the
Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I
give my first borne for my transgression, even the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? Micah 5.6, 7. No, no, all the gold of Ophir cannot ransom
it, all the Fullers soap in the world cannot cleanse it, all the water of
Jordan cannot wash it, all the figleaves in the garden cannot cover one sin;
there is no salve but one, and the ingredientrare, The blood of the Son of
God: Consider ye that make so small a reckoning of sin, it had been better
that you had never been borne, or that your mother had tied a millstone about
your necks, and drowned you in the sea, than to dye with one sin unwasht,
unpardoned: How then dare ye be so bold to act that which can so hardly be
pardoned, or run on still upon score, which can so hardly be paid, or think
that sin to be light and small, which cast the Son of God into so many fits
and agonies, which caused him to utter so many passionate prayers; Let this cup
pass from me; which drove him to that holy despair, My God, my God, etc. and
at last put him to a shameful and ignominious death.

2. Cor. 6.21. Ye are bought with a price, an high Price, the Son of God;
bought with a price, an invaluable and inestimable price, the life of Jesus
Christ; with a price not corruptible, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.18. and what is the
inference? therefore glorify God both in your bodies and in your souls: He
endured pain in his body, whipping, spitting, scourging, buffeting, thorns,
nails, spears; pain in his soul, My soul is heavy unto death, Matthew.
26.38. therefore glorify him in thy soul and thy body; let thy hand feed him
in his members, thy tongue bless him for his mercies; let it rouse up thy
drooping soul like David's tongue, Psalm. 103. Praise the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me praise his holy name; Let us ever be singing that
Magnificat of Marie; My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices
in God my Savior; for he that is mighty has done great things for us, and
blessed be his name. And so I come to the action or office.

He shall turn away iniquity from Jacob.] But yet there is a point in the
very word which is here used, (...), qui eripiet, that shall snatch them as it
were out of some danger. Aquinas proposes that place in Amos 3.12. As the
Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion, two legs, or a piece, so shall the
children of Israel be. To give a double note: 1. That but a small part of the
world shall be delivered from hell and death, as verse. 5.

The Use is: Cor. 9.24. I come to the second Conclusion.

This: (...), one that shall deliver by pulling and snatching, affords this
point: That heaven must be got with violence and much hardness. Therefore is the
whole way to heaven a continual battle, marching array, or (...), a strife,
Luke 13.24. And when Paul was almost there, then he has fought the good
fight, 2 Timothy 4.8. And the Apostle, Heb. 12.4. There must be resisting unto
blood, many a troublesome day must a man see, in many an hot skirmish must he
fight, many sore and sour strokes a man shall feel, many a strait way a man
must pass before he see God in glory. The difficulty arises partly from the
nature of the way to heaven, and hard to be found amongst so many bypath, and
amongst so many false lights and deceitful Pilots, every one crying this is
the way, that many a poor soul not knowing which way to take, goes on in
none; My best direction is that of Jeremy, chap. 6.16. Ask for the old way,
which is the good way, walk in that, and ye shall sinde rest unto your
souls. 2. From the travelers in this way, who are the greatest hindrances
unto themselves: some by lingering and deferring the time before they set
forward, who are like the sluggard, Prove. 19.24. forgetting both the shortness
of their life, and the difficulty of coming to God when they are old: some by
stooping to gather treasures, or reaching for honors, lose heaven; Ovid.
Metam. lib. 10.
like Atalanta, who lost the race by stooping for the golden apples. But
because I will not fall upon the former point, I come from the place, Sion,
from the person, deliverer, to his office.

He shall turn away iniquity from Jacob.] The words are easy, It is the
proper office of Christ Jesus alone, to reconcile sinners to God. 1 Ioh. 2.1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. When we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5.10. There is no
salvation in any other, nor other name under heaven, whereby we can be saved,
Acts 4.12. His form and manner of reconciling sinners unto God, is first by
intercession, as Romans 8.34. he is not only Mediator of redemption, as the
Papist makes him; who make Angels Mediators of intercession. 1. The distinction
is without warrant. 2. The high Priest in the Law was Mediator (...),
typically, both of remission by sacrifice, and of intercession by prayer. Of
intercession, as Aaron, Numb. 16.48. The other ordinary, and if now they be
divided, the truth does not answer the figure, which must not be said. 3. By
him we have boldness, Ephesians. 3.12. Let them show where we have so by Angels.
4. He lives ever to make intercession, Heb. 7.25. let them show the like of
Angels. Let them hear S. Augustine; Whom should I find that might reconcile
me to thee? Qu^m invenirem quine reconciliarit ri^i? number eundum ad Angelos? qua
prece, quibus lachrymis? Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 42.
must I go to the Angels? with what prayer, with what tears? Secondly, by not
imputing sin, but by imputation of his righteousness unto them: He was made
sin for us which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God through him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Thirdly, by his death and passion, that so he
may make payment, and give satisfaction to Gods justice for his peoples sins:
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.7. We are
redeemed, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Fourthly, by abating the number, and
weakening the power of sin in them, by the Scepter of his Word, and the
efficacy of his Spirit. We know that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
sin, Romans 6.6. Fifthly, by quite abolishing and removing of all their sins at
the hour of death, and day of judgment. So Apoc. 14.13. Blessed are they that
dye in the Lord, etc. and therefore was Christ once offered to take away their
sins, Heb. 9.28. Hence was that excellent point and clause in Peter's Sermon,
Acts 3.19. Amend your lives therefore, that your sins may be put away, when
the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. The reason of
all is this: Because he is the blessed seed, in whom all Nations are blessed:
as God said of him to Abraham, Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of
the earth be blessed. He is the root and foundation on which all Gods promises
do depend, and in whom they are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Learn to seek for salvation in none other, Acts 4.12. Expect to be saved
only by his merits, righteousness, and sufferings, for he alone has trodden
the wine press, Isa. 63.3. Apoc. 19.14. What remains, but that every man
disclaim his righteousness, as a menstruous rag; renounce his own merits, as
deserving nothing but death; give all the praise to God, and cry with the
Psalmist; Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the praise.
And so I come to the second place alleged.

VERSE. 27.
THis Text is alleged out of Ierem. 31. at the beginning of verse. 33. This is
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; and at the end of verse.
34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no more. The
words conta ne branches of comfort for his his own Israel. The first, the
promise of forgiveness of all their sins. The second, the certainty of the
promise, this is my covenant. I will invert the proposed order, and take them
as the Apostle sets them down, and begin with the first, the assurance and
security which God has given to his Church.

This is my covenant to them,] As if he should say, why should any man doubt
of the conversion of the jews? for have not I made promise of it? or doubt of
their salvation; for have not I made a covenant with them concerning it? From
whence the point arises thus.

Whatsoever God has promised, or bound himself by covenant to perform,
though it may seem hard or long before it be fulfilled, yet it shall come to
pass at last. Therefore he bears the name of Jehovah, which, Exodus 6.3. gives
us above all his other names, to understand the assured fulfilling of
whatsoever he promises. The coming of the Messiah, promised almost four
thousand years, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, Genesis
3.15. foretold by the Acrosticke of Sybilla Erythraea, as Lactantius and
Augustine affirm. Lactant. Instit. lib. 4. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 18. c. 2^
And by the Prophet Isay, 720. years before his incarnation, yet it came at
last. The deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, promised 400. years before it
was fulfilled, Genesis 15.13. The means of bringing them out unlikely and weak,
but two old men, Moses and Aaron, the one eighty, the other eighty three
years old, Exodus 7.7. Which in Moses his time was a great age; for he says,
Psalm. 96.10. The days of man are threescore years and ten. And the weapons
but these, Aaron must speak, and Moses must carry his Shepherds staff; weak
men, weak means to assault a mighty King, to overthrow a mighty Kingdom.
Had a carnal man seen these two going to overcome Pharaoh, and bring Israel
out of Egypt, he would rather have laughed, than believed it. And yet if God
have said it, it shall come to pass; God will make the holding up of this
staff, to bring such plagues upon Pharaoh and all Egypt, that all the Kings
in the earth, by uniting of forces, and combination of Armies, could not have
vexed him more; and God after a long time (by weak means) made good his
promise, and brought them out of Egypt by their Armies, Exodus 12. ult. Has
the Lord spoken, and shall he not do it? says the Prophet: Are not all his
promises yea and Amen, in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.30? Those two promises, the one,
concerning the calling home of his people of the Jews; the other, concerning
his coming in the clouds to glorify his Saints, are longest deferred, in
likelihood they shall come near together, and that which shall be last, shall
not be long, (...), Apoc. 22.20. Surely I come quickly. Wait but a very little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.
(...), Tantillum, tantillum. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 7.
Augustine reports, that the Millenaries out of somes books of Elias (as Vives
notes) have determined the time of the worlds duration to be six thousand
years; whereof two thousand were expired from the crearion to Abraham, and two
thousand from Abraham to Christ, and since Christ 1619. so that the remainder
is but 381. year; but whether the Lord will come at that time, or sooner, or
tarry longer, he only knows himself; only we know thus much, that he
will come certainly. The day of the Lord is coming, Apoc. 6. ult. He will
come quickly, The coming of the Lord draws near, Iam. 5.8. Lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws near, Luke 21.28. (...). Little children,
these be the last times, and the ends of the world are come upon us, 1 Ioh.
2.18.

First, Hos. 2.19. therefore you are not to be cast off: You are branches
planted by Gods hand, Ioh. 15. therefore not to be broken off: You are houses
built upon the rocks, therefore not to be overthrowen: He has given you the
keys of his Kingdom, therefore not to be excluded: Though you fall, yet you
shall rise again, therefore you are not to be cast away. Psalm. 37.24. The left
hand of the Lord is under your heads, and his right hand embraces you. Cant.
2.6. therefore not to be stolen away. Comfort your spirit with an holy
meditation of these Scriptures, Ioh. 4.14. Matthew. 24.24. Ioh. 10.28. Romans 8.39.
1 Pet. 1.5. And let me add those grave axioms of the Fathers; Si qu^sp a^
electorum pereat, tum sallitur Deus. Aug. de co^ ep^. and great. cap 7.
If any of the elect perish, then God is deceived: says Augustine. Anrum quod
ut lutum s^^ nitur, aurum electum non sait. Greg. Moral. lib 34. cap. 13.
That which was strawed like dirt, was not choice gold: says Gregory. In^p
ssib^le est ut prae^essinetur and non salv^^ur. Lombard. lib. 1. distinct. 40.
It is impossible that any should be predestinate and not saved: says Lombard.
Scripti in libro Deinon possunt deleri. Aquin. Sum. 1. quaest. 23. a^tic. 3.
They that are written in the book of life cannot be blotted out: says
Aquinas. Qui habitat in Jerusalem coeles^^ non perit. Espenc. in 2 Timothy
He that dwells in the heavenly Jerusalem perishes not: says Espeucaeus on 2 Timothy out of Augustine, in his book of catechizing the simple, Chap. 11.

Secondly, if thou be holy, thou have hence a good ground and reason, o expect
whatsoever reward God has promised unto holiness: If poor in spirit, expect
the Kingdom, for he has promised it, Matthew. 5.3. If thou mourn for sin,
expect comfort, he has promised it, verse. 4. If meek, expect then an
inheritance, for he has promised it, verse. 5. If thou hunger and thirst after
righteousness, expect to be filled with happiness, for he has promised it,

Thirdly, Cain, Genesis 4. If thou burn in lust, he will make good what he has
threatened, and consume thee, as Sodom, Genesis 19. If a prophaner of his
Sabbaths, he will bring to pass what he has threatened, and set a fire in
thy gates, as in Jerusalem, Ierem. 17.27. If you will not help the Armies of
God, ye shall be cursed like Meroz, Judge. 5.23. Your sin will find you
out, though you be never so covertly hid, as Moses told Reuben and Gad, Numb.
32.23. and when once you are found out and started, evil shall hunt you and
chase you, till you be destroyed, Psalm. 140.11. What shall we do (miserable
men) in that day when the Lord shall come in a flame of fire, Quid sacien us in
ilid d^e miseri, quando dominus igneus vencrit, cadentibus slelli^, S^l in
tene^^ as, Lunain sanguinem mutabitur, montes lit ceral ques^^nt, mare
siccabitur, quando peccatores d^cent montibus, Cadite super nos, tegite (...),
qua^ dovocabunt homines mo^tem, and non veniet vocata. Hi^^. Epist. de Sc^^^
Legis, Tom. 4.
the Stars falling, the Sun shall be changed into darkness, and the Moon
into blood, the mountains shall melt as wax, the sea shall be dried up; when
sinners shall say to the mountains, fall upon us, cover us, when men shall
call to death, and death being called shall not come: says Hierome. And so I
come from the assurance and security (this is my covenant) to the grace
covenanted, or promised.

I will take away their sins.] These words have in them; first, a person;
secondly, an action, take away; thirdly, the matter removed. I will this time
go but to the person, I.

It is proper to God alone to forgive and pardon sin. It is the Lord, the Lord,
that forgives iniquity, transgression, and sin: Moses, Exodus 34.7. It is he
that is a just God, and Savior from sin, and besides him there is none
other, Isa. 45.21. It is our heavenly Father that forgives trespasses, Matthew.
6.14. Who can forgive sin but God only? Mark. 2.7. I say no more, but as
Nathan said to David, when he confessed his sin, and said; I have sinned
against the Lord: The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die, 2 Samuel
12.13.

The Reason. I, even I am be that puts away thine iniquities for mine own
sake, Isa. 43.25. It is I that put away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy
sins as a mist, Isa. 44.22. God sometimes forgives the sin, when man
forgives not the wrong, and man sometimes forgives the wrong, when God forgives
not the sin; as Stephen.

Secondly,

Thirdly, as men in outward punishments partly can do, but also removes the
guilt and corruption of nature, which none else can do.

Fourthly,

First, fellow-workers with God, to help and set forward, and to hasten their
conversion, that there may be one shepherd and one sheepefold, as our Savior
speaks in Ioh. 10.16. And of all means to do them good, there is nothing
more available than their observation of our good life, who profess Christ;
that will work when the word does not, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Essicacior von
bonioperu, quam elegantis ser^onu. Illius Doctoris libenter audio vocem. B^^n.
s^p. Cant sermon. 59. Horat. de art. poetic. Aug. confess. lib 9 cap. 9.
The voice of a good work is more effectual than that of an elegant speech. I
willingly hear the voice of that Teacher, etc. says Bernard. Si vis me flere,
dolendum prius ipse tibi: Thou must first grieve thy self, if thou will have
me to weep. S. Augustine reports, that his mother Monicha won her Patricius
from being an impure Manichee, by her prudence, manners, and chastity. Let us
follow the rule of Christ, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men,
etc. Let us behave our selves among them, as S. Peter wished them once to behave
themselves among us, Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that
they by your good works which they shall see, may glorify God in the day of
their visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12. Capat artis est docere quod sacis Hier de re
monach ex Cicerone.
The principal of an art is to teach what thou do, says Hierome.

Secondly, Psalm. 32.3. While I held my tongue my bones consumed, while I cried
all the day long. Tacui, and yet clamavi; I held my tongue, and yet I cried,
Tacuit unde proficeret, clamavit unde desiceret: tacui confessionem, clamavi
praesumptionem.
says Augustine. He was silent in that whereby he might profit himself, he
cried out whereby he failed: I kept silent my confession, I uttered my
presumption: all this while my bones consumed. At last he bethinkes another
course: I confessed, Agn^scit pe^^ator, ignoscit Deus.
and thou forgavest. The sinner acknowledges, God pardons. Before confession
no comfort, after confession no punishment. Let us leave them, let us hate
them, and pray for the pardon of them; spare not to speak, lest we spare to
speed; but cry with the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner: let us
confess with David, mourn with Ezekiah, weep with Peter, fall at Christ's
feet with Mary, wipe them with our hairs, and kiss them with our lips, and
cry, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. And so I come from the person, I, to
the action, take away.

I will take away their sin.] In the former verse, he will turn away
iniquity; in this verse, he will take it away: the word is (...), of an
^^nusuall word (...), signifying to take away that which troubles and hurts, to
note, that

When God forgives sin, he takes it quite away, that it can hurt no more; for
God will not remember it any more, as Ier. 31.34. I will forgive your
iniquity, and remember your sins no more. He will not remember to object it,
to punish it, to condemn us for it. He does not so take it away ut non sit,
that it may not be, sed ut non regnet, but that it may not reign, as
Augustine. Aug. de coni^g. and concupis^en. lib. 1. cap. 21.
When he brought Israel into Canaan, he did not cast out all the Canaanites,
still some of them dwelt in the land, but were made tributaries, and brought
under subjection, Josh. 17.12, 13. which is by Hierome in many of his Epistles
morally applied unto sin in a man regenerate. Velis nolis, habitabit intra
fines tuos lebusaeus.
Whether thou will or no, the Iebusite shall dwell within thy borders: but it
is made tributary, brought in subjection, and made serviceable for the true
Israelite: First, for the continual exercise of his faith, to make him war,
and fight the good fight of faith against it. Secondly, to make him still keep
his armor about him, lest he should be surprised unawares; when men have no
enemies, they put off their armor. Thirdly, to work humiliation, in regard we
must still carry sin about us, and cannot be rid of it; still a Dalilah to
solicit us, and we cannot avoid her. Fourthly, to move us to have recourse unto
God, that he would weaken it, and pray unto God that he would pardon it. Thus
God always works good out of evil, turns poison into an antidote, Lib. 1.
did. 46.
as Lombard.

God in forgiving sin takes it quite away, Conclusion.
that it shall never be remembered: As far as the East is from the West, so
far has he set our sins from us, Psalm. 103.12. He subdues our iniquities,
and casts all our sins into the bottom of the sea, Micah 7.19. If he suffer
any remembrance of it to remain, it is for our greater good, and his greater
glory. And so I come from the phrase of taking away, to the spots and stains
which are washed away and cleansed.

I will take away their sin.] Here is the happiness of Jew and Gentile, and
here is the glory of our redemption by Christ; here is the peculiar prerogative
of the Church, that our sins are pardoned, and the punishment removed and
taken away: This was John's message; he should go before Christ, and prophecy
of salvation, by the remission of sins, and the great benefit at the day of
refreshing, is the putting away of sin, Act. 3.19. And this is the great
cause of the Churches rejoicing, because he forgives all thine iniquities,
heales all thine infirmities, redeemed thy life from death, and crowned thee
with mercy and loving kindness, Psalm. 103.3, 4.

1. Ioh. 3.16. with Act. 3.19. all unbeleevers, all impenitent persons are
excepted; for albeit God bear long with them, he is but fetching his stroke
the farther, and the end of them will be that in Ioh. 8.24. Except ye believe
and amend, ye shall die in your sins. Mark the incomparable happiness of
the godly Christian beyond others: the wicked is all the time of his life like
to a green bay tree, Psalm. 37.35. but suddenly I went by and sought him, but
his place could not be found. But verse. 37. Mark the just man, for his end is
peace: he may be all the time of life like a tree in the dead time of winter,
without sap, lease and beauty: but as it is 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only
we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. Hence

First,

VERSE. 28. As concerning the Gospel,
IT is taken from the dignity of the Jews, Exposition.
though enemies of the Gospel for your sake, yet are beloved for the fathers
sake; therefore he will restore and call them. As if he should say; They are
indeed enemies, yet does not Israel cease to be a nation dear unto God,
because God once elected them; the infidelity of some cannot frustrate Gods
election, because his gifts be (...), without repentance; and if the vigor of
election be yet in the nation, then must we hope for their conversion at some
time or other: That's the argument. I come to expiscate the meaning of the
words. They are (...), enemies, which some refer to God, they be hated of
God; as Origin, followed by Paraeus and Beza: some referie it to Paul and the
Church, as Chrysos^ome, Theod. and Luther: as if he should say; They are mine
and your enemies, because of the Gospel which we preach: Or thus; Propter
Evangelium quod a^nuncia^us.
They are enemies while they continue in unbeleefe, but shall be loved, when
they are converted: Or thus; It is meant of diverse sorts of Jews: they are
enemies among them, who spurn against the Gospel; they beloved, who are the
remnant according to election: Or thus; It is not meant of particular men, but
of the whole nation, which at that time seemed to be rejected because of
unbeleefe, but was not utterly cast off in regard of Gods election, and the
promise made to their fathers. So then these are not contrary: The Israelites
are enemies, and hated; The Israelites are not enemies, but beloved: for first,
contraries must be (...), according to the same; but these are not, the enemies
being such of them as believe not, the beloved such as are elected. Secondly,
contraries must be (...), in one and the same respect, and (...), at one and
the same time: but the Jews are enemies, and yet beloved, both in diverse
respects; enemies for the Gospel, beloved in respect of election: and this at
diverse times; enemies in the time of their unbeleefe, but beloved after their
conversion.

Concerning the Gospel.] Some give this sense; If a man should judge of them
by their persecution of the Gospel, he could hardly hope for their conversion;
yet in regard of election and promise, we must do it. But it will appear
more plain, if you consider the next clause, (...), for your sakes: that is,
The Gentiles are by accident the cause why the Jews hate the Gospel; Quia
^nim Iudaei visebant Gentes Evangel um ans. plecti, id^o m^litios^ Evangeliis
abjiciebant.
For because the Jews saw the Gentiles did embrace the Gospel, therefore did
they maliciously cast away the Gospel. Now if you will know why they are
enemies, the text gives two reasons: First, from the occasion not given but
taken, to wit, the Gospel which they refused: Secondly, the end, that the
Gentiles by their unbeleefe might enter in. If you would know why there is hope
of their receiving, there be also two reasons: First, their election unto life;
Secondly, Gods promise and covenant made with their fathers, both immutable.
Lastly, how are they beloved for the fathers sake? 1. Not for their fathers
merits, as Lyranus thinks, Non propter mer^^a patrum.
on Romans 11. 2. Nor because that after their conversion the Lord shall put them
in mind of their fathers, as Ambrose thinks. Non quia sequuntur patrum sidem.
3. Not because they follow the faith of their fathers, as Origin thinks, for
that is true of believing Gentiles also: But they are beloved for the fathers
sake, that is, for the promises made to their fathers, as Tolet, and the
ordinary gloss, Propter promissiones Patribus factas.
because they are descended of those parents to whom God made that covenant,
Genesis 17.7. I will be the God of thee and of thy seed. Hence arise two questions.

1.

Yea: Paul before his conversion was loved in regard of election, for Gods love
was the impulsive cause of his election, yet an enemy to God in persecuting
his Church, which whosoever does persecute, does persecute Christ. Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me, etc. Act. 9.4. Thus Christ is said to give his life
for his friends, Ioh. 15.13. and Romans 5.10. to reconcile us when we were
enemies: So the elect are by nature children of wrath, and enemies; and yet
friends, and beloved before grace and sanctification, because by the mercy of
God they are from eternity chosen and beloved in Christ.

2.

The argument is not good: Habac. 2.4. Lastly, in that the Jews are beloved
for their fathers sake, (as Solomon was never wholly deprived of Gods Spirit,
and favor for David's sake, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. It proceeds not from their works,
or persons, but from Gods gracious and everlasting Covenant, which is the root
and fountain of it; For the sum of his Covenant is this; I will be their
God, and the God of their seed. And some there must be to whom this Covenant
is made, and that some is beloved for the Covenants sake.

The parts are two. The parts.
The present condition of that Nation, miserable, enemies as concerning the
Gospel. The future condition what they shall be, that is hopeful; Beloved for
the fathers sake. In the former observe: 1. Their miserable condition, enemies.
2. Whereby this appears, by their contempt of the Gospel. 3. The offense and
scandal, the Gentiles, for your sakes. I begin with the condition, enemies.
This is the condition of man before grace, and without the favor of God.

Man before grace is enemy to God. children of wrath as well as others.
Whatsoever is their state now, their hope now, their privilege now, that they
are engrasted into Christ, yet before that time they were children of wrath as
well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. In Romans 5.10. Before we were reconciled by the
death of his Son, we were enemies. In Col. 1.21. While our minds are set on
evil works, we are enemies: while our minds are on the earth, and our
affections to the things of the world, we are enemies; for the love of the
world makes us enemies to God, Iam. 4.4. If the world should love us, Si mundus
nos deligeret, diligendus non esset. Aug. ^e mundi venitate, cap. 1.
we should not love it: says Augustine. Hence is it that we are reconciled
to God: Who are reconciled but enemies? That we are set at peace with God by
the cross and blood of his Son, to note, That before the peace was
concluded, we were enemies.

The reason: Paul be witness, Romans 14. ult. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Be witness Solomon; His prayer is abomination, Prove. 15.8.

First, Joel 2.25.

Secondly, be at peace with God, labor to be friends with God; let your
tongues praise him, your lives please him, your souls rejoice in him, your
hands fight for him: so shall you be blessed of him, and invested into that
Kingdom, where shall be life that never dies, love that never cools,
beauty that never fades, a crown that never withers: God grant us all to
wear it. I come to the argument, whereby it appears that they are enemies:
Contempt of the Gospel.

Concerning the Gospel.] All men, during the time that they receive not the
word, but resist and withstand the course and preaching of it, are Gods
enemies, and hated of him. Those that submit not to his Scepter, that is,
entertain not, embrace not his word, are Gods enemies, who must be destroyed,
as appears by the closure of the Parable, Luke 19.27. In Apoc. 11. it is one
mark of Antichrist, that he shall make war with Gods witnesses, and put to
death them that can shut the heavens, verse. 6. In Apoc. 12. there is mention of
a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head
a crown of twelve Stars: with this Woman they that made war are Dragons, who
cast venom on them that keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ, verse. 17. There is a Text, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. that tells us of
some who killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, who forbid to preach
that men might be saved; and what is the reason? that they might fill up the
measure of their sins, and what is their condition? miserable: they are
enemies, and the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost. And when Paul
shows how Alexander the Copper-smith was enemy to God and goodness, and
wishes Timothy to beware of him, he gives this as the reason of all, he with
stood our preaching sore, 2 Timothy 4.15. And it stands with reason.

First, Cor. 5.19. And therefore continuing unreconciled, stands still in the
condition and state of an enemy.

Secondly, Cor. 5.20. and therefore continues an enemy.

Thirdly, The Lord shall send the rod of his power out of Sion, Psa. 110.2. By
which all his sons and children must be corrected and tutoured. It is Gods
Law, by which all that love him must be governed; it is his easy yoke, which
all that be his must take upon them and bear, Matthew. 11.29.

The Use is: Psalm. 87. The Lord loves the gates of Sion more than all the
dwelling; of Jacob: And the more he loves it, the more he hates the contemners
of it.

Secondly, Israel was mingled with the Heathens, that hated the Gospel, they
learned their works, Psalm. 106.35. They are like Jacobs Poplar rods, like the
two rivers in Mercator, Axius and Aliacmon; Market. and Magin. Geograph.
like the two fountains in Spain, whereof Maginus; 1. Omnia injecta respuit,
refuses all that is cast into it. 2. Omnia injecta sibi assimilat, makes all
things cast into it like to it self. The danger is noted by Solomon, Prove.
6.27. and by the sharp speech of Iehu the Prophet to Iehosaphat, who (when
Ahab asked him to join with him against Ramoth Gilead) made this reply, I am as
thou art, my people as thy people, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. But what says the Prophet:
Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord; therefore is
Gods wrath upon thee: 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Audi sabulam non sabulam. Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 4. c. 20.
Hear a fable not a fable, says Eusebius, speaking of a young man, whom John
the Evangelist commended to an ancient Bishop, to be entered and instructed, but
falling into bad company was perverted, as appears in the History. Therefore
is the exhortation of the Apostle; Wherefore come out from amongst them, and
touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. Love not those that love not God and his
truth. Thirdly, remember how God for many hundred of years has been enemy
to these Jews, for contempt of the Gospel, and punished them both with
spiritual and bodily punishments, and captivity: and for as much as we
profess our selves to be Christ's subjects, and servants. Let us suffer no
evil lusts to ruler and reign in us, otherwise we shall be slain before
Christ's face, Luke 19.27. Bruized with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2.9. Never enter
into this rest, Heb. 3.11. And so I come to the third branch of their present
condition, which is either the scandal and offense, which the Jews take, or
the opportunity that God takes to do the Gentile good, (...), for your sakes.

For your sakes.] Because the Gentiles are accidentally the cause why the Jews
hate the Gospel, and this (...), is as much as in vestram. utilitatem cedit,
it falls out for your good, says Th. Aquinas on this place. The first thing
that I observe is, how God works good for the Gentile out of the Jews sin,
and contempt of the Gospel.

God never gives way to any evil, but he works good out of it: as verse. 11.
Secondly, God works for his servants by contrary and unlikely means, ibid.
Thirdly, God takes all occasions to do his people good. ibid. I come from
their present condition, which I have showed to be miserable, enemies, to their
future condition, which I shall show to be hopeful; They are beloved for the
fathers sakes. The Conclusions may be these.

1. The promises made unto godly fathers belong to their children also. 2. Gods
promises shall be fulfilled to some of the children, though not to all. 3.
Children of faithful parents are holy, and beloved for the promise made unto
their fathers: See verse. 16. 4. God in his elect does not consider what they
deserve, nor respect them according to their present unbeleefe, but consider
what he has promised to Abraham and to his seed. Therefore we must not
despair, for our salvation depends not on our deserts, but upon Gods decree. I
come to a second reason.
VERSE. 29.
THe purpose of the Apostle is to prove, Exposition.
that God loves this Nation, and therefore will call them home; The reason is
drawn from Gods love, which is immutable; from Gods purpose, which is
unchangeable: By gifts understand not all things that God gives unto man; for
some he takes away, Take from him that one talent, Matthew. 25. But those which
flow from the grace of election, as remission of sins, faith, fanctification,
perseverance, salvation. By calling, understand not external and outward
calling, but the internal, which is always effectual, which is his calling
according to purpose, proper only to those who were from eternity elected,
and shall eternally be saved, as Romans 8.

But it is said, Genesis The Lord repented that he bad made man. And Ierem. 18.10.
If they sin, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

I answer out of Th. Aquinas; Answ. Sicut Dominus irasci dicitur, non quia in
Deo est passio irae, sed quia ad modum irati se habet, quantum ad punitionis
effectu^: Ita p^nitere dicitur, non quia est in Deo commutotio poenitentiae,
sed quia ad modum p^nitentie se habet, dum mutat quod secerat. Tho. Aquin. in
Romans
As the Lord is said to be angry, not because the passion of anger is in God,
but because he behaves himself like one that is angry, so far as concerns
the effect of punishing: So is he said to repent, not because a change of
repentance is in God, but because he is like one that repents, whilst he
changes what he had done. So then it stands good: That God loves this Nation.
How does it appear? By his election; as concerning election they are beloved.
What if they be? Then they must be glorified. What then? Before glorification
they must be effectually called; therefore we are not to doubt of their
conversion. The first may be a conclusion of infinite comfort to the elect of
God.

That in regard of Gods immutabilitie in all his purposes, none of his elect
can wholly, or finally fall, or possibly be damned. A point that may be
enforced.

1. 2. 3.
First, The marks of election.
then labor to secke the certain marks of election. 1. Love to the means of
salvation. 2. The spirit of supplication and prayer. 3. Thy weaning and
estranging from the world, and minding of heavenly things. 4. Hungring and
thirsting after righteousness. 5. Love to God, to the brethren, to the
messengers of God. 6. A longing for the coming of Christ. And if thou find
these, I shall admire thy happiness: whatsoever sorrow, grief, want,
meannesse, thou endure here, thou shall be honored of God hereafter; though
thou be like Lazarus in Fulgentius, etc. To proceed in this Text a little
further, I observe in it: 1. The Author and Donor of all heavenly gifts, God.
2. The nature of it, and the property we have it in, it is a gift. 3. The
quality and condition of heavenly graces and gifts, they are (...), without
repentance. The first, that they are gifts, gives this observation; Man is not
beholding to himself for any thing that is good in him. In me dwells nothing
that is good, says the Apostle, Romans 7.18. It was the speech of S. Augustine;
Si quid adverteris quod recte displiceat in eo, ego ipse conspicior. Aug. ad
Paulin Epist. 32.
If thou considerest any thing which may truly displease in it, I my self am
beheld. No man is beholding to himself for himself; for he neither made, nor
does he maintain and keep himself: He is not beholding to himself for
skill in arts and trades; for, Nemo artifex nascitur, No man brought that into
the world with him: He is not beholding to himself for being a Christian; for,
Christianus fit non nascitur, A Christian is made not borne so. To use the
words of S. Hierome; Epist. ad Laetam.
He is not beholding to himself for his wealth and riches: Beware that thou
say not in thine heart, My power and arm has got me this abundance, Deuteronomy.
8.17. He is not beholding to himself for the value of one hair of his head;
for he cannot make an hair white or black, Matthew. 5.36. Thou art created,
healed, saved; what of these, O man, have thou of thy self? And therefore man
in Scripture is ever described by titles of frailty and weakness, Crearis,
sanaris, salvaris, quid horu^ tibi, O homo, ex te?
importing unabilitie to do any good for himself: But that which the Apostle
principally terms a gift and calling, is grace, faith, and eternal salvation
to all believers; but this I shall meet in the next place: for this time let
every man learn. 1. That whatsoever good he enjoyes for body or soul, be it
temporary or eternal, is a mere gift; so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have
thou that thou have not received. 2. Learn to know, and when thou know, be
thankful to him that gave it; and say in the Spouses phrase; Not unto my
self, O Lord, not unto my self, but to thy name give the praise. And so I
come to the Author of these gifts and callings, God. God is the giver of every
good thing that we have: Every good and perfect gift comes down from the
Father of lights, Iam. 1.17. Begin with things temporal; wealth is the gift of
God: Beware that thou say not in thine heart, my power and the strength of mine
hand has prepared me this abundance; But remember the Lord thy God, for it is
he that gives thee power to get substance, Deuteronomy. 8.16, 17. Health is the gift
of God: He has smitten us, and he will heal as; he has wounded, and he will
bind us up, Hos. 6.1. I make whole and none other, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Peace is the
gift of God: therefore is he called the God of peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. and God
is not the author (...), but of peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. Children are the gift of
God: For children and the fruit of the womb, are a gift and inheritance that
comes of the Lord, Psalm. 127.4. Learning is the gift of God; God gave to Isay
the tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4. Come to blessings spiritual. In
general; Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Ephesians.
1.3. In particular; He has chosen us, verse. 4. adopted us, verse. 5. made us
acceptable in his beloved, verse. 6. forgiven us our sins by the redemption of
Christ, verse. 7. given us wisdom and understanding, verse. 8. opened to us the
mystery of his will, verse. 9. If I could repeat unto you all the blessings
which Gods people enjoy, I should still find them derived from this fountain:
Should I speak of faith; It is the gift of God; ye are saved, not of your
selves, but by faith, which is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Should I speak of
our victory over sin and death, it is the gift of God; Thanks be to God,
who gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. Should I
speak of strength under affliction; Unto you it is given, that ye should
suffer affliction, it is the gift of God, Philip. 1.29. Should I speak of
understanding the secrets of the Gospel; To you it is given, to know the
secrets of the kingdom of God. This also is a gift, Matthew. 13.11. Should I
speak of the end and complement of all happiness, eternal life: this also is
merely a gift. The gift of God eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6.23.

From hence I may first approve of the conclusion of Fulgentius: Nos nec bona
posse nec velle, nisi Deus utrumq^elargiatur Ad Monim. lib. 1.
We neither can nor will do good, unless God gives us both.

Secondly, I may approve of the doctrine of S. Augustine on Psalm. 118. Solus
liberi arbitrii vires non suffi ere ad divina mandata implerda.
The powers of the will alone suffice not to the keeping of Gods commandments:
and therefore must we say without all pride, Thou have commanded, Lord, but I
would it might be done for me which thou have commanded. And therefore
Augustine; Give Lord what thou command, and command what thou will.

Thirdly, Praecepisti, Domine, sed utinam fiat mihi quod praecepisti. Da Domine
quod jubes, and jube quod vis. Aug. Confess lib. 10. cap. 29.
I cannot choose but challenge the doctrine of the Romish Church to be
blasphemous. Andradius says, The heavenly blessedness (which the Scripture
calls the reward of the just) is not given of God gratis and freely, but it is
due to their works, yea God has set heaven to sale for our works. Another
Papist of Lovaine says thus: Far be it from us to think, Explic. Artic.
Lovan. tom. 2. art. 9.
that a man should beg for heaven, as a poor man does for his alms; for it is
the garland which by his works he deserves. Suar. in Thom. tom. 1. did. 41.
Suarez says, That works proceeding from grace have in themselves, and of
their own nature, a condignitie and proportion with the reward, and a
sufficient value to be worth the same, and this without the merits of Christ.
Beggars that ask alms, show their wounds; but Papists would have us to show
our merits, and not beg heaven as alms due for Christ's sake, but challenge
it as our own, and due for our works sake. But what says Origin? I cannot
believe that there is any work which can require the reward of debt. What
says Augustine? We must understand, that God brings us to life eternal, not
for our merits, but for his own mercy. Neque enim talia sunt hominu^ morita,
ut propter ea vita aetern^ debeatur ex jure, aut Deus injuriam saceret nisi
donaret. Bern. de great. and lib. Arbit. Bern. in Annunt Marrae, Sermon. 1. page
123. Bern. sup. Cant Sermon. 61.
What says Bernard? Men's merits are not such, that eternal life is due to
them of right, or that God should do them injury if he did not therefore
bestow it. See many other places of Bernard against the merits of works. The
mercy of God is my merit. And when Bernard has long disputed the point of
grace and free will, the conclusion is this: Ea quae dicimus merita nostra,
spei quaedam sunt seminaria, charitatis incentiva, occultae praedestinationis
indicia, futurae foelicitatis praesagia, regni via, non regnandi causae: Nurces
of hope, provocations of love, signs of election, forerunners of future
happiness, the way to the kingdom, but not the cause why we come to the
kingdom of God. And I would have you to observe, that howsoever our
adversaries boast of their works, yet their most learned at their way gate have
renounced them. Anselmus five hundred years since taught the people to die in
this faith: Lord, I set the death of Christ between me and my bad merits, I
offer his merits for mine which I should have, but have not, between me and
thine anger I oppose the death of my Lord Jesus. So Waldensis: Waldens Sacr.
tit. 1. cap. 74 31. Propter in. ertitudinem pr^priae j ^stitiae, and timorem
in^u^ gloriae, tutissimum est in solo Christo omnein fiduciam reponere Bellar.
de Justice. lib. 5. cap. 7.
He is reputed the sounder Divine, the better Catholic, the more agreeable to
Scripture, that simply denies all merits, and holds that no man can merit the
kingdom of heaven, but obtaines it by the grace and free will of God that
gives it. Bellarmine says; For the uncertaintie of ones own righteousness,
and the fear of vain glory, it is safest to put all our trust in Christ
alone. Ferus says; The parable of him that hired laborers into his vineyard,
teaches, that whatsoever God gives, Comment. in Matthew. 20.
is of grace, not of debt: if therefore thou desire to hold the grace an favor
of God, make no mention of thy merits. But I insist no longer upon the point.
Let us look for life only by the merits and death of Jesus Christ, and
renounce our own righteousness, account all but dung to win Christ, that we
may be found in him, not having our own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is of God through faith, Phil. 3.9. I come to the last, viz. the
condition and quality of heavenly gifts.

Without repentance.] They import the certain fulfilling of Gods promises, and
words, though the time be long deferred; and that the Jews shall be converted,
though his promise be not yet accomplished. The thing aimed at is this;

That in regard of Gods immutabilitie, we must expect the certain fulfilling
of every part of Gods promise, seem they never so hard, be they never so long
delayed, as verse. 27.

VERSE. 30.
VERSE. 31.
THese verses contain a third argument to prove the last branch and clause of
the mystery, Exposition.
to wit, that God will call home the nation of the Jews; and a persuasion to
the Gentile not to despair and doubt of it. It is a topicall reason taken a
comparatis, from the greater to the less. If the infidelity of the Jews was
the occasion of showing mercy to the Gentiles, much more shall the mercy showed
to the Gentiles occasion the showing of mercy to the Jews; for will not God
take occasion to do good from good as soon as from evil? If infidelity in
the Jews make God show favor to the Gentile, much more shall his mercy showed
formerly to the Gentile, make him also now show mercy to the Jew. The things
compared are three: First, the infidelity of the Gentile with the infidelity
of the Jew; Secondly, the mercy which the Gentile received in time past, with
the mercy which the Jew shall receive hereafter; Thirdly, the occasion of both.
The occasion of mercy to the Gentile, infidelity in the Jew; the occasion of
mercy to the Jew, is mercy formerly extended to the Gentile. I begin with the
first branch of the comparison: Ye in time past have not believed: as if he
had said; Learn from your selves, that ye ought not to despair of the Jews.
They are now in the very same case wherein thou wast once; They in unbeleefe,
so wast thou; strangers from God, so wast thou: Therefore seeing thou art n^w
in favor, despair not of them; they may (...) favor as thou have, and be
received to mercy, as thou have been. There be two things that the Apostle
would have us learn.

The first: That the consideration of what the Gentiles once were, should
restrain them from being proud of the happiness wherein now they are; as
verse. 17.

The second: If a man would consider himself, he would not judge hardly, nor
despair utterly of his brethren. It is the rule of the Apostle; If a man be
fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one
with the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self: Gal. 6.1. Our Savior, in
Matthew. 7.5. bids us consider the beams that are in our own eyes, and then we
cannot doubt, but the moats may be taken out of our brothers eye: for as we
help up those that be fallen, we releeve the distressed, we pity the
afflicted, we bury the dead; because we consider our selves in them, and
their case may be ours: So are we to judge meekly of those that have fallen,
because we may fall and be overtaken as well as they: Who will doubt of
quenching the fire in his neighbors house, who has seen as great a flame
quenched in the thatch of his own house? or despair of the return of his
brother, who considers that he himself was once a prodigal, who had run away
from his father, and spent his portion in riotous living? The same gate of
mercy is open to thy brother, that was opened to thee; The same God stands
waiting to receive him, who formerly received thee: If a brother be not called
to holiness, yet he that considers that it was once his own case, will be
loath to judge him: If he be in a dangerous estate and course, yet he that
remembers that himself was once an heir and child of wrath, will be loath to
despair of him.

From whence we may see the ground and reason why some fall to such a rash
censuring of their brethren; because they consider not themselves, they
remember not what once they were themselves, they are like those Lamiae, or
Witches, who set their eyes into their heads when they go abroad, and put them
into a box when they return home. They censure David's adultery, because they
consider not, that they were once like Clodius themselves; they despair of
Absalom for his conspiracy, because they have forgotten that they were once as
bad as Cateline themselves. Let us cast eye upon our selves: we have been in
the snare, and now we are delivered, hope well of others: we have been sons
of wrath, but we are sanctified, hope the best of others: overtaken with many
sins, but now we have shaken them off, despair not of others: no man is worse
now than thou wast once, a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. dead in trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.5. without Christ, aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers
from Covenant of promise, had no hope without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.
Consider this in thy self, and despair not of others: And so I come to the
first point of the comparison, wherein we must consider: 1. The condition
wherein the Gentile once was; He believed not. 2. The estate wherein now he is;
he has obtained mercy. 3. The occasion of mercy to the Gentile, the
unbeleefe of the Jew; through their unbeleefe. For the first. When the Apostle
would show the miserable condition wherein the Gentiles were, he says no more
but this, they believed not.

The most miserable estate in the world, is the estate of infidelity and
unbeleefe. That unbeleefe cut off this Nation from God: Through unbeleefe they
were broken off. It is most true of all sin, Isa. 59.2. Your sin has made
a separation between you and your God; but most true of this: and therefore
the Apostle, Heb. 3.12. Take heed, brethren, that there be not in any of you
an heart of unbeleefe: as verse. 20. I come to the condition wherein now they
are.

Now ye have obtained mercy:] There is no people so far gone in sin, but
if they come home and return, the Lord will receive them, as verse. 23.
Thirdly, the occasion of mercy to the Gentile, the infidelity of the Jew. 1.
God works good out of the greatest evils that are. 2. He watches all occasions
and opportunities of showing mercy, as has been showed above. And so I come
to the other part of the comparison, to wit, the application of these
conditions in the Gentiles, to the people of the Jews; wherein are compared
three with three. 1. The contumacie of the Jews with the former contumacie of
the Gentiles; you were, they are. 2. Mercy given to the Gentiles, with the
mercy to be showed the Jews. 3. The cause of the cause, or the occasion of
the occasion.

You have obtained mercy by their unbeleefe.] shall by the mercy showed to
you, be provoked to an holy emulation of your good life, and so obtain
mercy: In them observe; 1. The present condition of the Jew (Even so now they
believe not.) 2. The future condition of them, (they also may obtain mercy.)
3. The occasion why God will in all likely hood show them mercy (the mercy
already showed to the Gentile.) I begin with the present estate and condition.

Now they have not beleeved] Who? Israel, the vine, the garden of the Lord, his
chosen people.

There is no Nation under heaven so dear, but sin will make God forsake
them, cast them off, give them over to infidelity and unbeleefe. I list not to
terrify you with the total ends and periods of kingdoms and people, which
some ascribe to Destiny and Fate, as the Stoicke; some to Fortune, as the
Epicure; some to Stars, as the Astrologians; some to an asymmetrie in the
body, as Aristotle; some to number, as Plato, Pythagoras, Polit. lib. 5.
Method. cap. 6.
and Bodin. But all these have but groped in the darkness, etc. But the maine
point that is aimed at in the paralleling and sampling of these two people, you
believed not, they believed not.

In the order of salvation and damnation, Jew and Gentile are alike and equal:
Both children of wrath, and both enemies to God: So the Apostle; We were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. The nature of them
both is alike sour with the leaven of original pollution: By the offense of
one, the fault came on all to condemnation, Romans 5.18. There was in both a
turning from God to the creature: They served the creature, and forsook the
Creator, God blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. If any man make that question, which
the Apostle proves, Romans 3.1. What is then the preferment of the Jew? Or what
is the profit of circumcision? I answer: That naturally, and without Christ,
the preferment of the Jew is none at all: Quisque nascitur ex Adamo, nascitur
dimnatus de damnato. Augan Psa 131.
Whosoever is borne of Adam, is borne condemned of him that is condemned: says
Augustine. Let the Jew say he has Abraham to his father, yet if he be not
borne of God, that he is descended from the Patriarchs, yet if he be not
within the Covenant of grace and mercy, not borne of water and the Holy Ghost,
he is no better than the Gentile that knows not God. My conclusion is that of
the Apostle, Romans 3.9. Is the Jew more excellent than the Gentile? no, in no
wise. For all, both Jews and Gentiles, are by nature servants of sin.

First learn, Abraham to his father, to be beautified with outward
privileges, if a man have not the faith of Abraham, and be marked and sealed
for a child of God: To say, We have Abraham to our father, Vend care
praerogativam religiosi nominis, superare Goths and Vandales haererica
pravitate Salvian. de provident. lib. 7.
Ioh. 8. to cry, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, Ierem. 7.4.
To challenge the prerogative of a religious name, to go beyond the the Goths
and Vandalls in heretical naughtiness: To use the words of Salvianus, are but
perizomata, fig leaves, not able to cover our nakedness.

Secondly, they both alike stand in need of Christ. They also may obtain
mercy.

And first from the very appellation and name of mercy: they may find mercy
to come out of their former blindness. I note:

That all the hope of any unconverted man to come from under the tyranny of
sin, depends upon the the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. Who shall deliver me
from this body of sin? I thank God through Jesus Christ, Romans 7.25. as verse.
26. To proceed; Some have disputed of the time, when this mercy shall be
revealed unto this people: All that I dare say of that, is but probability,
and may be comprised in those conclusions of which I have before spoken, verse.
26. Some have disputed of the number, whether all of this Nation, which shall
remain alive (at that time, when the fullness of the Gentiles) shall find
mercy, shall embrace Christ, and be turned unto God? Pererius, to prove it,
produces Chrysostom on verse. 12. of this Chapter, and verse. 26. I come to the
point, viz.

There be many in the state of sin and infidelity, Sunt filu Des, qui nondum
sunt nobis, and sunt nobis qui non sunt Deo. Aug. de correpi. and great. cap. 9.
who shall in the end find mercy with the Lord, and be saved. It is
Augustines conclusion; There are sons of God, who are not yet so to us; and
there are some so to us, who are not to God: Of the one is mention, 1 Ioh.
2.19. They went ou^ from us, because they were not of us. Of the other, in Ioh.
11.52. It was the prophecy of Caiaphas, It is expedient that Jesus should die,
not for the Nation only, but for the children that were scattered. What would
a man have thought of the Prodigal, of Paul, of Manasses, of Peter, of the
Gentiles? Many are asleep in sin that shall be awakened; many in a slumber
that shall be rowzed; many dead in sin, that shall be started by the voice
of God in the Gospel; Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour comes, and
now is, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: Ioh. 5.25.
Many sheep do now run astray, who shall be brought to the sheepe-fold, and
return to the Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, as the Apostle speaks, 1
Pet. 2.25. To this purpose says God to Israel; Though a man have oppressed by
violence, lift up his eyes to Idols, given to usurie, yet if that man turn
from his wickedness, he shall save his soul alive: Ezekiel. 18.27. The reason
of all is taken from the infinite dimension of Gods mercy: De natura Deorum,
lib. 1.
whereof I may say as Simonides in Tully, as before verse. 23. So I come to the
occasion.

The mercy showed unto you:] By the mercy showed to the Gentile, God will
provoke the Jew to seek mercy; and they that seek it shall find it. The
Conclusions are: 1. God would have us men to be at an holy emulation and
strife, which of us should be greatest in his favor, and dearest in his sight.
2. The good that we see in others, and the mercies showed unto others, should
be strong provocations for us to follow them, as verse. 11. So I come to an
inference that the Apostle makes upon this.

VERSE. 32.
IN the former verse he did equal the Jews and the Gentiles in misery, in
this verse he does equal them in mercy. In which words note: First, a
judgment upon man, unbeleefe. Secondly, the generality and extent of it, all
men. Thirdly, the end and event of it (contrary to that which Satan intends)
that he might show mercy. Lastly, the Author, God. These are the parts.

But I must invert them, and take them as they stand. And first of the Author,
God. Blindness and infidelity is most justly brought upon man by God: yet say
I not by God only; for there be three efficient causes of man's induration and
infidelity; Man, the Devil, God: First, the wicked brings hardness and
infidelity upon himself; so did Pharaoh, Exodus 7.13. as verse. 8. But of this
I have spoken before, verse. 8. And therefore I come to the generality, all. Hoc
est, incredulos esse ex Lege arguit, and demonstravit. Chrysostom. Non injiciendo
iis incedulitatem. Origin. Non vi, sed rationc. Hier.


He has shut up all, etc.] viz. He has convinced all by his Law and Word;
That is, he has proved and showed them to be unbeleevers out of the Law: so
Chrysostom. Not by casting into them unbeleefe: as Origin. Not by force, but
by reason: says Hierome.

God shuts men up in unbeleefe, as in a prison, punishing them as a just Judge
with the gyves and fetters of their own infidelity. that the pardon of their
sins, and the salvation of their souls, proceeds only from Gods mercy.

From whence we may learn; That all men are naturally guilty, like to
condemned persons, and can of themselves look for nothing but death. I cannot
answer one of a thousand, Job 9.3. If thou be extreme to mark what is amiss,
who can abide it? Psalm. 130.3. Enter not into judgment with thy servants, for
in thy sight shall no man living be justified; Psalm. 143.2. The Law convinces
Paul to be a blasphemer, the Law convinces Marie Magdalene to be an impure
and unclean liver, Peter to be an Apostata, David to be an adulterer: the
holiest man alive is condemned by the Law; the anchor whereto he must trust is
only mercy. There is not one so high commended by Scripture, but he is also
convicted and condemned by Scripture. David, a man after Gods own heart, yet
condemned in the matter of Vrias, 2 Samuel 11. Peter commended for his
resolution, Though all men should deny thee, yet would not I; is convicted and
condemned for his Apostasy, Matthew. 26. Iehoash commended for doing that which
was good in the sight of the Lord; yet condemned for not taking away the high
places, 2 King. 12.3. Adam may hide himself in the bushes, Sarah behind the
door, Thamar may muffle her face, the whore may wipe her mouth and say, she
has done nothing; but not one of them all, but they are convicted by the Law
written in their consciences, Romans 2.15. Young, old, rich, poor, noble, base,
Jew, Gentile, all have sinned, and by Law are condemned: and from hence we may
learn.

First, not to please our selves in nobility, he gives grace, Iam. 4.6. and
with them he dwells, Isa. 57.15. It is better to be a doore-keeper in the
house of God, Psalm. 84. Better to endure affliction with the children of God,
Heb. 11.

Secondly, here are they condemned, That he might show mercy. Thus good is
even the most happy product, that God brings out of the greatest evil, as
before has been showed. There is a second Conclusion, to note: How this
coming out of sin and infidelity to the life of grace and holiness,
depends merely upon Gods favor: but I have handled it heretofore. I proceed
to the general number that shall find this mercy, All.

That he might have mercy upon all:] In the former part of this sentence, the
word, All, may be taken distributively; for every particular man is convicted
to be in the state of infidelity: In the last part it is taken collectively,
Th. Aquinas in Rem.
pro generibus siagulorum, for all kinds of people. There is neither Jew nor
Gentile saved, Intelligitur de Iudaeis and Gentibus q^os Deus praedestinavit.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. c. 24. Quid est omntis (...)
but by mercy, It is understood of Jews and Gentiles, whom God has elected:
says Augustine. What is, all? he will condemn (not none of all men) but none
of those, whom he has elected, called, and justified. First then, all that
were elected, and are effectually called, and justified by says, shall find
mercy at the last, and be saved. In which point note: 1. A twofold calling.
2. A twofold election. 3. A manifold acception of faith. 4. A great similitude
between the elect and hypocrites. 5. The faith of the elect may be covered
and diminished; as above. But the maine Conclusion is this.

There is only a certain number of men elect before time, who shall at the
last day find mercy with the Lord, and be saved; and all the rest shall be
condemned, and cast away: I say not that the number is known to any, but to
the Lord, who can distinguish between the wheat and the chafe; nor do I say,
that it is any such small number, as one of a City, or two of a Tribe; for
Apocal. 7.4. there were sealed 144000. And of the Nations and Countries, an
infinite number, which no man could reckon, which stood before the Lamb,
clothed with long white robes, and palms in their hands, verse. 9. But my
meaning is, that of that great multitude of men which live, God has only a
part and certain portion; they are not all his, but some of them shall be cast
away at the last. The Lord knows who are his, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19.
When a curious demander proposed unto Christ this question; Are there few that
shall be saved? Our Savior made him this answer; Strive thou to be one; for
at that day many shall strive to enter, but shall not be able: Luke 13.24. The
Apostle is peremptory, Though Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet only a
remnant of them shall be saved: Romans 9.27. If you should divide the world into
three parts with I tolomee, into four with some others, Geograph (...) rat.
lib. 1. c
with Quade into seven, there is not one of seven that professes Christ
aright; and though in every one of these seven parts God may have some that
pertain to himself, yet there is not the least of them, wherein there are not
many brands prepared, and preordained to an everlasting burning. Many that have
nothing to plead for themselves; but bare outward privileges, as preaching,
prophesying, doing of miracles; to these Christ will say at last; Depart from
me, I know you not: Matthew. 7.23. Many that lay up their talents, and hide them
in a napkin, employ not these parts and gifts, which God has bestowed upon
them; to these Christ will say, Cast that unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Matthew 25.30.
Many that refuse to feed Christ when he is hungry, to cloth him when he is
naked, to visit him when he is in prison, to whom he shall say; Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire: Matthew. 25.41. Many are ashamed of
Christ, many ashamed of his truth, many think it a shame to be accounted such
as they ought to be; and to these he says, He shall be ashamed of such when he
comes in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels, Mark. 8.38. Many that
have kept house and dwelt together, shall then have an everlasting parting: if
two in a bed, the one shall be received, the other left: if two grinding at the
mill, the one shall be received, the other left. First then, if this, All,
comprehend not every man, but only the elect, and the elect in comparison of
those that are reprobated be but few, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 20.16.
The called are many, the chosen few, they that find mercy but few.

Then the harder must we labor, Paul presses egerly, Phil. 3. David runs
swiftly, Gloria habitat in rupibus. Strom. lib. 4.
Psalm. 119.32. It was the speech of Clemens Alexandrinus; Glory dwells in the
rocks.

Secondly, Alexander in Plutarch, with his Homers Iliads; Lib. 6. cap. 2.
like Origin in Eusebius, who in his young years devoted himself wholly to
Gods service.

Thirdly, cast off that luggage, whereby men are so much let and hindered in
the way.

Fourthly,

Secondly, Of universal grace.
here I have fit occasion to dispute a little about universal grace. I find
concerning this point four several opinions: Some have thought Gods saving
grace to be so general, that it reached unto all, both men and Devils, which
error is ascribed unto Origin, and is confuted at large by S. Augustine. De
Civit. Dei. 10.21. cap. 17. ad 24.
Some have holden, that God ordained grace and mercy for all, and was not in
any sense the cause of man's reprobation; this was the old heresy of the
Pelagians, and is not without her well-willers at this day. The third is of the
Papists, who deny not that reprobation does proceed in some sense from the
decree and will of God: But that it is Gods act so formally and so properly as
election is. The fourth only is according to godliness; That predestination is
both of the elect to salvation, and all reprobates to damnation. I will not
waken the first, which is the dead error of Origin, I will deal only with the
Papist and the Pelagian, who are Iebusites yet alive in the Canaan of the
Church.

The Rhemists position on Romans 9. Annot. 5. on verse. 17. is this, God intends
no man's damnation directly, and absolutely, but in respect of their demerits,
and it is their marginall note upon verse. 22. That God is not the cause of any
man's damnation, or reprobation, otherwise than for the punishment of his
sins: of the same opinion is Bellarmine, who makes God the Author of
reprobation far otherwise than of election, and excludes it out of the
definition of predestination. De great. and lib. arbit. lib. 2. c. 9.
Their arguments are taken from 1 Timothy 2.4. God would have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. The 2 Pet. 3.9. God would have
no man to perish; but would have all come to repentance. The 18. Ezekiel. 23. God
will not the death of a sinner. Therefore the death and condemnation of man
stands not properly with the will of God. To which it may briefly be answered
thus: First, God is said not to will the death of a sinner, not because in his
secret will he has not decreed it; but because God in man's condemnation has
respect to his own glory: that is it which principally he wills, both in his
election and reprobation: that which God chiefly and principally wills, is his
glory, and this glory is gotten by electing of some out of the mass of
corruption, and leaving of others. Secondly, God will have all saved, that is,
de generibus fingulorum, all kinds of people: Euchir. cap. 103.
it is Augustines exposition. Thirdly, Gods will is, that all the elect shall
be saved: as we say, all go in at the door of the house, not because all men
go into that house, but because all that go into the house, go that way.
Fourthly, All, in regard of sufficiency, not in respect of efficiencie; in
regard of the worthiness of the price, not in regard of the property of
redemption, God wills with the will of his sign, not of his decree, that is, of
his commandment, not of his good pleasure. Fifthly, in regard of his revealed
will, who offers unto all the outward means of salvation, not with the will
of his good pleasure and decree. The Conclusions in brief are these: 1. God as
he has made all men, so he has freely disposed of their end, according to
the counsel of his own will, ordaining some to be vessels of honor, some
vessels of wrath. And this is most just, to save some and reject others,
whereas he might condemn all: Nemo injustitia Deum arguat, si uni indebitum
donaverit gratiam, alteri debitam reddiderit poenam. A. g. de praedest. Sanct.
lib. 1. cap 4.
Let no man accuse God of injustice, if he shall give to one undeserved grace,
shall render to another deserved punishment: says Augustine. 2. Nothing must
make us think, that God condemns any without their own fault; he ordaines
none to condemnation, which they have not justly deserved by their sin, and
that God only has decreed and willed their punishment, but not the sin that
brings them to it: If now you demand whether this reprobation depend only upon
Gods absolute will, or there were in it a respect and view of man's sin; I have
discussed this before, when I handled the second verse of this Chapter. And so
I come from the Papist to his brother the Pelagian, and others begotten of them
both. It was the tenent of Pelagius: That the grace of God was not only in
respect of the outward means generally offered to all; but in Gods eternal
decree and purpose ordained for all, if they would receive it: and Th. Aquinas
and Bellarmine seem to confute the opinion, yet in other words they affirm as
much. If the blood of Christ were to be given to all for whom it was shed, then
it were to be given to all men, to the Turks, Sisanguis Christi omnibus
danduus effct pro quibus susus est, cum dandus esset omnibus omnino hominibus,
etiam Turcis, Iudaeis, Ethuicis: sauguis etenim ille pro omnibus si^^us est. De
Eucharist. lib 4. cap. 25.
Jews, Heathens, for that blood was shed for all: in his answer to the
argument of Luther. I have observed three several opinions: The first, that
Christ without difference died for the sins of all men, without any respect
of faith, or infidelity; yet all are not saved, because some despise this
grace offered, and so are deprived of the reconciliation purchased by Christ.
The second, that all are saved by grace, and have faith in Christ. The third,
that it is the purpose of God to save all, but the condition being kept, if
they believe. The first applying Christ's death to all, as well believers as
unbeleevers, impugnes that Scripture, God so loved the world, etc. Ioh. 3.16.
The second, making faith a natural gift, is contrary to the word; for that
which is natural is common to all; But all men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
The third, ascribing power to man's will, to receive and apprehend grace when it
is offered, gain says that Scripture which says, Without me ye can do
nothing, Ioh. 15.5. My purpose is to dispute against all these in that point
wherein they all agree, concerning universalitie of grace, the condition being
kept. For order, I shall first lay down my proposition. Secondly, the
confirmation from Scripture. Thirdly, show the absurd consequents of the
adverse opinion. My proposition is this: Whereas all men were by nature
children of wrath, and in themselves lost; God, according to his good pleasure,
out of the whole mass elected some, to whom he appointed Jesus Christ to be
their Mediator and Redeemer: to prove this the Scriptures are frequent. The
10. of Ioh. 15. Christ lays down his life for his sheep: But all are not
Christ's sheep, for some be goats, Matthew. 25. some be wolves, some follow the
voice of strangers. Secondly, Christ died only for his friends, Ioh. 15.13.
But the elect only, and such as shall be saved are his friend. Thirdly, the
Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 5.26. That Christ gave himself for his Church, that
he might sanctify it: and that he is the Savior of his body, verse. 23. But
the elect only univocally, and they only are members of his body: unto these
places add these reasons founded upon the Scriptures.

First, Ioh. 3.16. But it is not given unto all to believe; for you believe not
because you are not of my sheep, Ioh. 10.26. To believe is a gift proper to
the Elect alone, As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts 13.48.

Secondly, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me out
of the world, Ioh. 17.6. Now it cannot be that the world should be given him
out of the world; and therefore although we in charity pray for the conversion
of Turks, Jews, Infidels, out of the world, yet it follows not that Christ
did pray for the whole world; for he knew who they were that should be saved,
and so do not we, and therefore hope the best of them that are without, and
yet of the world: Est mandus damnandorum, de q^o scriptu^^, (...) cum mundo
pereat, pro^sto non orat; est m^^^^s sa^vandora (de quo Apostolus) Deu^ erat in
Christo mundam sibi reconcil^u^s, pro ^sto orat. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 110.
There is a world of those that shall be damned, (of which it is written) lest
ye perish with the world; for that he prays not: there is a world of those
that shall be saved (of whom the Apostle) God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself; for that he prays: says Augustine.

Thirdly, Christ died only for those that are appointed to salvation; for the
death of Christ is the subordinate means, which God uses to save those whom
he would have saved: But all men in the world are nor appointed to salvation.
It will be answered: That it is Gods will that all should be saved upon this
condition, if they believe: So then if it can be evicted, that Gods election
unto life is not conditional, but absolute, in setting apart a certain number,
to whom only he will give power and grace to believe, and to none other; then
will the Conclusion be good; That for the number only Christ has died.

The first place shall be, Matthew. 20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen.
Therefore though the outward means be offered unto many, yet only some are
elected and chosen unto life. To this some have answered: That there is a
twofold election; General, of all who are called to the outward profession of
obedience; Special, of those who obey their calling, and persevere in faith to
the end: So they make the meaning this: That few are elected, not in respect of
any election and separation in the decree of God: But because among many, some
only persevere unto the end. To this I answer: 1. There can be no such
general election; for what election, where all are received? 2. To say many
are chosen, where Christ says but few are chosen, what is this? 3. To the
point: If that special election depend upon man's perseverance, and not man's
perseverance upon election: If men be elect, because they persevere; and not
rather persevere, because they are elect; then are men causes of their own
election, and choose God first, contrary to that rule of Christ; You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, Ioh. 15.16. Contrary to the Apostle; We
loved not God, but God loved us first, 1 Ioh. 4.10. Contrary to that of S.
Paul, Who has separated thee? but God who separates and distinguishes one from
another, 1 Cor. 4.7. Secondly, Matthew. 20.23. The Kingdom of God shall be given
unto them, for whom it is prepared of my Father. Therefore it is not prepared
for all: and to strengthen this Conclusion, the Apostle says, that some be
vessels of wrath prepared to destruction: Romans 9.22. To this they answer: That
these places prove not any particular exception of some from glory, but that
the kingdom is indifferently prepared for all that shall believe; and they
that believe not, are by their incredulity prepared to destruction; whereunto
this is my reply: We grant that none but believers are ordained to glory; but
we make faith and believing an effect and consequent of election, and
preparation unto glory: So that the number of believers is as certain as the
number of the elect: For I ask, whence is it that we have faith? It is not of
our selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2.9. If faith be Gods gift, how is
it that all have not faith? There is no reason, but because God gives it not to
all. And why does not God give it unto all? But only because God has chosen
some, whom be purposes to save in Christ; and to these only is faith given.
If it be said, that God gives it to all, but all receive it not; then is Gods
will resisted, and man's will frustrates the purpose of God; contrary to that
rule of the Apostle, Rom 9.19. Who has resisted his will? I come to the
absurdities that follow upon this.

First, Absurdities that would follow universal grace.
to affirm that Christ died universally for all that should believe, and not
for any special number, takes away Gods predestination, makes it a confused
and conditional purpose; whereas the Scripture reaches, that Gods election is
certain and definite; that he has decreed, and knows the number of the
elect. 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows who are his? Ioh. 10.3. Christ calls his
sheep by name.

Secondly, it would follow, that election should be from the foresight of
faith, contrary to the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.5. who says, That he has
predestinate them through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. Non quia sancti cramus futuri, aut quia fu^^us, sed ut
essimus. Aug. depraedest. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Not because we would be, or were holy, but that we might be holy: says
Augustine. Secondly, Christ, or our faith in Christ foreseen, cannot be the
cause of our predestination, seeing Christ himself, in respect of his office
of redemption and mediation, was predestinate and preordained of God. And the
same thing cannot be both the cause and the object of predestination. Christ
Ieus, as he is the head with his body, which is the whole company of the
elect, are the object of predestination; therefore not the cause: add unto
this. Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And if
they first believed, they chose him, he chose not them; and the Lord pronounced
it himself of the children before they were borne: I have loved Jacob, and
hated Esau. Romans 7.


Thirdly, to affirm that God conditionally has appointed all men, if they will
believe; and that it is his will that all should believe, and if all believe
not, it is not for defect of grace, but through their own fault, for God gives
man free will and power of himself to believe, or not to believe, which is
first against the rule, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God: against the rule; It is not in him that wills, etc.
Romans 9.16. against the rule; It is God that works both the will and the deed,
Phil. 2.13. against the rule; Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.

Fourthly, as it is in man's power to believe (if he will) so is it to resist
Gods will and grace; against the Apostle, Romans 9.19. who has resisted his
will? against the rule of the Prophet, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that he
did in heaven and in earth: against the rule, Ioh. 6.37. All that my Father
gives me, comes unto me: Sed ex nolentibus fuit volentes.
not that God saves any man against his will, But of being unwilling makes them
willing: says Augustine. Excellent is his speech to this purpose, Non potest
essectus miseritordae esse in hominis pot state, ut homo nolit; quta si vell^tr
luctantium ^seteri, possit ules vocare, quoinodo ill^ aptom effet; etc. Aug. ad
St ^plicianun, lib. 1. quaest. 2.
The effect of mercy cannot be in man's power, that man may not will it;
because if God would have mercy on those that resist, he is able to call them
so as should be agreeable to them: they therefore are elect, who are so called,
that they may not deny him that calls; the rest are not elect, because they
follow not, although they be called. Volenti salvun facere nullam hominis
arbitrili resistit. Aug. de gratia and corrept. cap. 14.
No man's will resists God willing to save him. And, Non est dutitandum
voluntati Dei voluntates kominum resistere non posse. Ibid.
It is not to be doubted, that the wills of men cannot resist Gods will. Well
agreeing with that of Ambrose, Nihil potest obsistere divinae gratiae, quo
minus quod volnerit impleatur. Ambros de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Nothing can hinder the grace of God, by how much less it might be fulfilled
which he willed. There are many absurdities yet behind: As first, that men are
no otherwise elected, but if they believe, and so long elected, as they
continue in faith, and therefore may lose their election and their faith, and
of vessels of honor become vessels of wrath. This I have confuted at large
already; only remember those distinctions of election, vocation, and faith;
and unto them join those reasons: Begin with that in Hos. 2.19. And so I come
to the last part, which is the Apostles conclusion of the whole Chapter.

VERSE. 33.
THe occasion of these words, Exposition. Orig in Romans 11.
says Origin, was this; Because he turns the malice of the one, to the
salvation of the other. Chrysostom says, Because he has cured contraries
with contraries; Quia contraria contrarus curaveris. Chrysostom.
brought so much good to the Gentile from the infideritie of the Jew. Some
apply it to the whole mystery of the Gospel, whereof much is yet secret, and
which the Angels desire to behold, 1 Pet. 1.12. O profunditas, O profunditas in
arconum Evangelii!
in bringing good out of evil. But as the former restrained it too much, so
this is somewhat too general. Augustine restraines it to this particular
mystery, of calling the Jews and rejecting the Gentiles, as if it were thus;
O the deepnesse of his wisdom in this! who can search the causes of his
judgments upon the one, or find out the ways of his mercy to the other?
Calvin and Peter Martyr apply these words to the mystery of Gods
predestination. O the depth! in casting away some, in saving others; in paying
to some due punishment, to others undeserved grace: as Augustine. De praedest.
Sanct. lib. 1. c. 4.
The whole occasion, or the matter of his admiration, I take to be referred
unto those deep and mystical conclusions which went before, concerning both
the calling of the Jew, and the rejection of the Gentile; concerning the saving
of some, and refusing of others; concerning election and reprobation. At these
he is amazed, and cries, O the deepnesse! As if he should thus have said, I
have expounded what I could, I am now at a stand, I am swallowed up of the
deepnesse of Gods wisdom; I must give over searching them, I must give over
preaching them, they are (...), unspeakable, and (...), unsearchable; not to be
searched, but to be adored. The words are an explanation; in which the Apostle
goes about to silence two sorts of men. The former is, he that curiously
searches into Gods hidden and secret counsels. The other, that storms and
murmures at Gods proceedings and judgments: The curious searcher and disputer
in these words; O the deepnesse of the riches! His counsels are so deep, as he
that wades into them may drown himself, but shall find no bottom: He is so
rich in wisdom and knowledge, that created and finite understandings of men
and Angels do dazzle at the beholding of them. The repiner and murmurer in the
two next verses, wherein he shows; 1. That God in his greatest works needed
none. 2. That he is a debtor unto none: And therefore none can complain of
injustice, though he be lost. I begin with the former; I must take only some
plain observations; for it were an (...), a confusion, or against method, to
go about too precisely to open that, whereat Paul was amazed. The first I
comprehend in this Conclusion.

It is proper to the godly, and their office and duty, to think, speak, and
consider; to admire the works and counsels of God; to burst forth into holy
exclamations; to stir and incite others unto it. Thus does the Prophet, Psalm.
8. O Lord our God, how excellent is thy name in all the world? He sets down
his glory, in ordaining strength out of the mouths of babes, verse. 2. In
creating the Heavens decked with Sun, Moon, and Stars, verse. 3. In the making
of man little inferior to Angels, giving him dominion over all other works
of his hands; yet after all this, he is feign to admire. O Lord, how excellent
is thy name in all the world? In another Psalm; O Lord, how glorious are thy
works, and thy thoughts are very deep? Psalm, 92.5. When David has
considered, how the Lord redeemed his people from the hand of the oppressor,
gathered them out of the lands, when they wandered in the wilderness, and had
no City to dwell in; hungry and thirsty, that their soul fainted in them;
he breaks into this passion: O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 107.8. Again, considering how often God has satified the thirsty, and
filled the hungry soul with gladness; how he humbled their hearts with
heaviness, and yet when they cried, delivered them out of their distress,
brought them out of darkness, and brake their bands in sunder. He breaks out
again into that holy exclamation; O that men would therefore praise the Lord,
verse. 15. Again, considering how he had broken for them the gates of brass,
and smitten the bars of iron in sunder; how he sent his word and healed
them, and delivered them from the grave, when their soul abhorred all manner
of meat, and they were hard at deaths door. He breaks out into that holy
exclamation: verse. 21. Again, considering how they that go to sea, etc. how
they are mounted up to heaven, and down to the deep again; how they reele
and stagger, and their skill fails; yet the Lord turns their storm into a
calm, and brings them to the haven: He breaks out into that holy
exclamation, verse. 31. We cannot remember how God has called us Gentiles
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. but it will cause an holy exclamation; O
the riches of the mercy and goodness of God: how he has cast off the Jew,
whom he so much honored, but it should cause an holy exclamation: O the
unsearchable depth of the judgments of God! we cannot look upon the heaven
beautified with stars, upon the earth clothed with flowers; but it should
cause an holy exclamation, O the depth of his love and bounty unto us in
Christ Jesus! From whence we may learn a threefold duty.

First, David, Psalm. 48.4. Sing unto God, sing praises unto his name, exalt him
that rides upon the heavens in his name Iah: According to thy name, so thy
praise shall be to the worlds end, Psalm. 48.10. And if we do remember his
works, we must needs admire his works. Who can remember his work of
election, and not wonder that he should love Jacob and hate Esau? His
creation, and not wonder how he could frame so many goodly creatures in heaven
and in earth of nothing, by nothing but a word? His works of redemption, and
not wonder at his goodness, in sending his Son into the world to die for
sinners? His work of vocation, and not wonder how by the voice of his Gospel
preached by weak men, he could subdue and convert Nations and Kingdoms? Who
can remember his framing in the womb, and not wonder? I will praise thee, for
I am fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.14. Who can remember how God
has kept him from the womb, fed him with the lives of his creatures,
preserved him from dangers, From the arrow that has flowen abroad by night,
from the sickness that has destroyed at noone day: yea, When thousands have
fallen beside him, and ten thousands at his right hand; and not admire the
loving kindness of the Lord? Let our tongues stick to the roof of our
mouths, our right hands forget to play: Let fathers forget their sons, nurses
their sucking babes, mothers the fruit of the womb: But let us never cease to
magnify and admire the ways and proceedings of God, whose works are
unsearchable, and ways past finding out.

The second Use is: D^spatare vis mecum? mirare mecum, and clama, O altituao
a^bo consen^iamus in pavore, ne in crrore pere^mus Aug de ^^rbis Apost. Sermon.
11.
because the word has revealed it; but when by reason we cannot apprehend the
manner and the cause, let us fall down and worship the Lord, whose wisdom is
deeper than the Ocean, whose ways are unsearchable, and judgments past
finding out. It was the modesty of S. Augustine; Will thou dispute with me?
wonder with me, and cry, O deepnesse! let us both hoth agree in fear, lest we
perish in error. Let us learn the lesson of our Savior; I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise
and learned, and have revealed them unto babes: Is it so (O Father) because thy
good pleasure was such: Matthew. 11.26.

Thirdly,

We must in the hidden mysteries and secrecies of Almighty God, not be
curious to know impossibilities, much less object and except against the
manner of Gods proceedings; but contain our selves within the precincts and
limits of his word, adore and admire his counsels, without all vain and rash
attempting to search and find them out. It is David's speech, Psalm. 36.6. His
mercy reaches unto the heavens, his faithfulness unto the clouds; his
righteousness is like the mighty mountains, his judgments like the great
deep. And therefore can we neither find the reason of them, nor except
against them.

First, it makes much for Gods glory, Acts 1.6. God does not as Ezechias did,
2 Chronicles. 32. show all his riches and treasures to the Babylonish Ambassadors.

Secondly, viz. contrary ends under contrary means, life under death, riches
under poverty; glory under shame, as the Apostle speaks, He being rich
became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. and
by dying destroyed him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14. And therefore if
we trouble our brains in these, we shall be oppressed by the brightness of
Gods Majesty, confounded in our own imaginations.

The Poets report of Prometheus the Father of Doucalion, Horat. lib. 1. Od. 3.
Ovid. M^^am. lib. 1. Natal. Comes Mytholog. li. 4. cap. 6.
that for prying too far into the secrets of Jupiter, the God rewarded him
thus, sent him a box by Pandora, the wife of Epimetheus, which so soon as ever
he opened, a thousand evils and diseases brake forth: Mill morborum and
malorum geuera cruperunt.
by which they intimated the danger of prying into Gods secrets.

Thirdly,

Which serves first to answer all curious and unnecessarie questions, more, than
at another? Is not God unjust and cruel to predestinate men to condemnation
before they have done any evil? I will not say to these, as once Augustine
answered him that made the question, what God did, ante mundum conditum, before
the world was made? Aug. Confess. lib. 11. cap. 12.
That God was making hell for such idle and curious Questionists. But I say
with Chrysostom; Ista ignorantia ipsas^imtia sap^en^^or est. Chrysostom. in Ephesians.
5. Hom. 19. Bern. de pugna spirituals, sermon. 2. Cave inquirere quae non debes
scire, curiositas peric^losa praesumptio est, damnosa p^ritia, in obscuris an
daces, in peri^^losis praecipites facit. De modo banc vivendi, sermon. 44
That ignorance is wiser than knowledge it self. And I say with Bernard, that
it is contraria omni pietati, contrary to all godliness. Take heed thou
inquirest not after those things which thou ought not to know, curiosity is
dangerous presumption, damned skill, it makes men wex bold in hidden points, to
run headlong in dangerous points. Let us pass by curious questions, bid adue
to all vain speculations; Let us exercise our selves in searching the
Scripture.

First, to know, and practice such things as concern our faith, the
sanctification of our life, and the salvation of our soul, Solomon, and could
live as long as Methusalem did. And so I come to examine what particular
conclusions will come from the word.

And first from this, that it is called (...), The riches of wisdom and
knowledge. True riches consists in true wisdom, and in knowing of God. There
is one dives sibi, rich to himself, another dives Deo, rich unto God, Luke
12.21. He that has only outward treasures is rich to himself, but he that
has the treasures of wisdom and knowledge is rich in God. But where is this
rich mineral of wisdom and knowledge to be found? I answer out of the
Apostle, Coloss. 2.3. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in
Christ. How then may we come to have our part in them? I answer: By searching
and knowing the Gospel; that is the field spoken of Matthew. 13.44. Disce, home,
ubi sunt verae divitiae; regnum caelorum vere divitem facit, praestat Deum
ipsum, quo praesente quid deosse potest.
Learn, O man, where are the true riches; the kingdom of heaven makes man
truly rich, it gives God himself; who being present, nothing can be wanting:
says Ferus. A man may be like unto Lazarus without bread, like Peter without
money, like Job without friend, yet if he have a costly jewel in a box, he
is rich and wealthy; so is he that has that precious jewel of wisdom and
knowledge: If you desire to be informed what riches it is to have wisdom and
knowledge. See Prove. 8.10.

Secondly, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

VERSE. 34.
1. HIs ways and judgments, viz. the course and order which God observes in
managing and disposing universal and particular things:

The course and order which God observes in managing and effecting his works
and purposes are not to be sought into farther than they are manifested in the
word. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Things secret belong unto God, but things revealed
to us and to our children. When the Disciples moved that question; Master, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom? Our Savior answers, that it is not fit
for them to know the times and seasons, Acts 1.6. Where the Spirit of God has
had no mouth to speak, we must have no cares to hear, and where he cease
to direct, we must cease to enquire: They are too malapart and saucie
scholars, who will needs know more than Gods Spirit is willing to impart: He
has written enough to convert their souls, to give wisdom unto the simple,
to rejoice the heart, and to give light unto the eyes, Psalm. 19.7, 8. He has
revealed enough to make them wise unto salvation, to teach, to reprove, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness, to make them perfect and absolute, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. They that will not be content with this, may seek for
farther knowledge, but shall never be satisfied; and perhaps they may be
struck by the hand of God, as Vzzah for staying the Arc with his hand, 2 Samuel
6.7. In Matthew. 12.22. when our Savior cured the possessed with a dumb spirit,
so that he both heard and saw, The people were amazed, but enquired not how
he did it: So should we. Wicked therefore is the practice of those that by
Astrology and such indirect means, seek to know the day of men's death, and
calculate issues of particular intendments; The vanity of which is
sufficiently declared by S. Augustine. De civit. Dei, lib. 1, ca. 1. ad 10.
But this point is somewhat what near to the other: I therefore proceed to
another, Who was his counselor?

Who was his counselor?] With a threefold bridle does he restrain man's
presumption. 1. In that he is most wise, who has been his counselor? 2. He
is debtor to none; therefore none can complain of any injury done him. 3.
Because for him were all things made; as Iunius. God in the decreeing and
disposing of all things, in procuring man's salvation needs no counsel, uses
no man's advice, but does all things according to his own good pleasure, and
after the counsel of his own will. Our God which is in heaven, does
whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. He predestinates according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5. He gives means of salvation where he will,
Matthew. 11.25. Who did advise him in the creation of the world? None: He
created all things for his own will, Revel. 4.11. Who did advise him in the
redemption of man? Surely none: For he gave himself for our sins, because
this was his Fathers will, Galat. 1.4. In brief, He works all things
according to the pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.

To blame therefore are all such, Bellisacri, lib. 5. cap. 1. S^^lle a
principio creationis intersursset Dei consilio, non nulla melius and ordmatiue
dispoluisset. Magd. Cent. 6. cap 7.
as find fault with many things, and think that they might have been done a
great deal better than they are; as one Alphonsus mentioned by Herolt: As the
Magdeburgenses relate; If he from the beginning of the creation had been Gods
counselor, he had disposed some things better and more orderly.

To blame are they that murmr at Gods work of reprobation, and think hardly
of him for casting them off before they were borne, for ordaining them to
destruction before they had done any evil, for appointing them to damnation
before their mother conceived them in the womb; whereas God is most wise in
all his counsels, and most wonderful in all his works: If God seem to have
done any thing but meanly, I answer with the Apostle; The foolishuesse of God
is wiser than men: 1 Cor. 1.25. So far as the Potter is wiser than the clay,
the Carpenter wiser than the timber, the most curious Carver wiser than a piece
of stone; so far is the wisdom of God beyond the strain and reach of
created and finite understanding. Let us then learn not to find fault with
any of Gods doings, but admire them; not to except against his proceedings, but
think reverently of them. Let us leave it to Lombard, Lib. 1. did. 44.
and other idle Schoolmen to dispute, whether God can do any thing better
than he has done it; but let us remember all his doings with admiration, and
ever echo that passion of holy David; O that men would praise the Lord, and
magnify all his doings among the children of men. And so I come to the second
argument, whereby he represseth man's repining and murmuring.

VERSE. 35.
THis is the second argument, Exposition.
whereby the Apostle acquits God from the false accusations of the wicked, as
if God were unjust in refusing one rather than another. His reason goes thus:
God owes nothing to any man; no man had done any thing, for which God was bound
to elect and choose him; he received nothing at any man's hand: If God give any
thing to this man, he is most gracious in giving; for he owes him nothing: If
he give not to that man, he is not injurious, because he owes him nothing. The
first thing that the Apostle aims at, is to show, that election is of the
mere grace of God: and therefore it is not amiss to expound what is to be
understood by grace in this assertion: amongst men he is said to have grace,
whom the people favors, as before on the fifth verse. Secondly, that God in
man's election, had no respect unto man's good works: I need not stand to show
how Bellarmine strongly confirms the point, De gratia and lib. arbit. lib. 2.
c. 10.
as verse. 6. So much for the first part of the proposition, who has given unto
him first: There is somewhat in the sequel or inference.

He shall be recompensed:] Though God did neither elect, nor save men for
their works, yet does he never fail to recompense, and reward our good
works, for enduring persecution, Matt. 5.12. The loving of our enemies, Matthew.
5.46. Mercy to the poor, Luke 14.14. It was the speech of Paul, 1 Timothy 4.7.
Godliness is profitable to all things, and has the promises of this life, and
that which is to come. When Peter asked the question, What shall we have? Our
Savior answers, Matthew. 19.28. etc. So I come to the last argument, to repress
man's repining and murmuring, in the last verse.

VERSE. 36. For of him, and through him,
THe Arrians (as Theodoret says) understand all this of God the Father,
Exposition.
to confirm the heresy of making the Son inferior to the Father, and only
to be the instrument, but not the efficient cause of creation; contrary to the
Apostle, who says it of Christ; By whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor.
8.9. Basil and Ambrose mean it only of God the Son, Deside, lib. 4. cap 6.
as it were thus: Who has known the mind of the Lord? and the answer were
this: The Son of God has known it, of whom and by whom are all things. Some
distinguish these three, and appropriate them to the three persons in Trinity.
Of him, that is, of the Father; through him, that is, through the Son; in
him, that is, in the Holy Ghost. So amongst the Fathers, Greg. super E^gch.
com. 16. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 8.
Gregory and Hilarie. Of the modern Expositors, Gho^ran, Lyranus, and Tolet.
Others more truly reserre them to the whole Trinity; as Augustine and
Chrysostom: All things are of God, as of the first efficient cause; by God, as
the conserving cause; in God, as in the end: as Thom. Aquinas. Or as Calvin,
All things are a seipso nullo alio movente, of him, no other moving; per
seipsum nullo adjuvante, through him, none helping; propter seipsum nullo
communicante, for him, none other partaking of glory with him. The words do
contain two lessons. The one determines whence we have our being and well
being, whence come mercies and judgments, whence come life and death, of him,
brough him, for him. The other, to whom we must return the sacrifice of
thanks, praise, and glory; to him be glory: we have our being from him, we
are blessed and preserved by and through him, made created for him, we must
return the praise and glory to him. I begin with the first clause.

Of him, Rerum Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 1. Depraeparat. Evaagel. lib. 1. Lib. 1. de
coelo.
] Diodorus Siculus and Eusebius recite the opinions of many Philosophers, as
Aristotle and many others, who thought the world to be eternal. Others, that
it was made, yet not of God; but of concourse of small indivisible bodies. This
was the fancy of Democritus and Lucippus, confuted by Tully, De naetu^a
Deorum, lib. 2. Phys. lib. 1.
and by Aristotle. Others have thought, that the world was made by Angels, as
Simon Magus, Capocrates, and Cerinthus, confuted by Augustine. De hares. cap.
1, 7, 8.
Others, that it was made by two Gods, the one good, the other evil. So the
Gnostickes, the Marcionites, and the Manichees, as the same Angustine
remembers; Cap. 6, 22, and 46.
All consuted in the words of my Text: Of him are all things. Which is not to
be limited to the first person in Trinity: for, Opera Trinitatis ad extra
suntindivisa. Lomb. lib. 1. distinct. 15
The external works of the Trinity are undivided, says Lombard. It was an
old Cabalisticall note, that every letter in the word Bara should signify one
person in Trinity, (...) for ben, silius, signifies the Son; (...) for
ruach, spiritus, signifies the Holy Ghost; and (...) for Abba, pater, signifies
the Father: But I need not insist upon that; consider but the time when, and
the means how; it will bring you suddenly into a wonderful admiration of Gods
power and greatness, and minister this point of learning, to wit:

That God can bring to pass great matters in short time, by small means. He
speaks but the word and they are made, he commands and they are created,
Psalm. 33.9. Nebuchadnezzar as Monarch of the world walks in his palace, boasts
of his tower, Is not this great Babel, etc. Dan. 4.27. But how quickly is he
stripped of all, deprived of his Kingdom, driven from among men, has not a
cottage to hide his head in, nor a rag to cover his nakedness; he^ is cast in
a moment from the height of prosperity to the depth of misery. Thus is he
punished for his contempt of heaven; and yet when he looks to heaven, he is as
quickly restored again, his beauty and fashion renewed, his Kingdom
restored; here is a wonderful change in short time, and small means. So did
God deliver Israel out of Egypt and Babylon. I come a little nearer to the
Apostles argument.

His purpose is to prove that God cannot be beholding to us, for we are his
workmanship, have our being from him, are made by him, and if we have any
thing that he loves, we have it of him; if we do any thing that he accepts
and likes, we do it by his hand and power, all things are of him: God is in
nothing beholding to any creature; but all creatures in heaven and in earth are
beholding to him for whatsoever they have, whatsoever they are: He is not
beholding to us for our holiness and righteousness: If thou be righteous,
what give thou to him? or what receives he at thine hand? Thy righteousness
may profit a man, but not God: Job 35.7, 8. We cannot hurt him by our sin,
nor help him by our holiness; in all that we do, the Lord is not better,
but all the benefit comes upon us that do the service. In prayer the dew of
heaven lights upon us, in hearing the blessing falls upon us; if we give to his
poor, he is not beholding, for he pays us double. Prove. 19.17. If we comfort
his Prophets, he is not beholding; for he rewards us with a Prophets reward,
Matthew. 10.41. If we keep his Sabbaths, he is not beholding to us, the reward
is greater than the obedience, Isa. 58.14. But all creatures are beholding unto
him for their being; For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts
17.28. For their breeding; For when father and mother forsake us, the Lord
takes us up, Psalm. 27. It is he that feeds and clothes us, Matthew. 6. If we
have wealth, we are beholding to him for it; Creari^, sanaris, salvaris, quid
horum tibi, O home, ex te?
Beware that thou say not in thine heart, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.16, 17. as verse. 29. I
end with the words of Bernard; Thou art created, healed, and saved; what of
these have thou (O man) of thyselfe?

Learn here first how glorious is the Lord our God, Hannah, give our goods to
the poor with Dorcas, make restitution with Zacheus, build a Temple with the
Centurion, give our bodies to be burned for his sake, yet we do but our
duty, and God is not beholding to us for it. I come to the second.

Per seipsum, Through him are all things, God is sufficient to preserve and
keep his people, and to do whatsoever he will without any help. This the
Prophet intimates, Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self, that every knee
shall bow unto me, noting both a soveraigntie to keep the wicked in awe, and a
sufficiency to maintain and uphold all that be his. This David intimates,
Psalm. 99.1. The Lord is King, though the whole earth be moved; the Lord is
King, be the people never so unquiet: noting first the security wherein Gods
children are, who are defended by his Scepter; and the vanity of all wicked
attempts against those that are preserved by his power: This is a point plainly
delivered: Let Kings band therefore their forces against the Lord and his
Anointed, he that dwells in heaven will but laugh them to scorn, Psalm. 2 4.
This is plainly confessed and proved; Behold, the God whom we serve is able to
deliver us out of thy hands, and he will deliver us, Dan. 3.17. Therefore is
he called God all-sufficient, Genes. 17.1. A God to whom nothing is hard,
Genes. 18.14. A God Almighty, Genes. 43.14. Instance in the planting of his
Church; He will and can plant it where he will, in despite of opposition, as
at Thessalonica; see the story, Act. 17. At Ephesus, see the story, Act. 19.
In the house of Nero; see their salutation, Phil. 4.22. The more it is opposed,
the more God makes it to thrive and prosper. Post Martyrs flores^^t Ecclesia.
Chrysostom. de patient. Job, Homil 4. Cruciate, damnate, torquete, at ^^^ite nos,
exquisitior quaeque crudelitas vestra, est sectae illecebra, quoties a vobis
metimur, totics plures essicimur; nam sanguis Christiano um sem^n Ecclesiae
est. Tertull. Apologet. ad Calcem.
Hence is that of Chrysostom, After the Martyrs the Church flourishes. And
Tertullian, Afflict, condemn, torment, but waste us; every one of your more
exquisite cruelty, is an allurement of our Sect; as often as we are mowed of
you, so often are we made the more; for the blood of Christians is the seed of
the Church. Only Gods hand and power is seen in the planting of it; when it
is planted, only his hand is seen in the preserving and delivering of it. It
is the Prophets speech, Isa. 59.16. The Lord saw that there was none to help;
therefore his arm did save it, and his hand brought salvation unto it. In the
days of Elias, when they brake down the Altars, killed the Prophets, and
Elias only was left; then did the Lord alone preserve it. In the time of the
Arrian heresy, when there was but Athanasius against the whole world; so
Constantius the Emperor, and Liberius the Pope. Theod. Eccles. hist. lib. 2
ca. 16.
He kept Joseph in Egypt, Jonah in the belly of the whale, Israel in the
deep sea, and when there was none to save, then the arm of the Lord brought
salvation unto them.

Which may serve: First, Daniel. I come to the third.

For him are all things: God in all his works, of election, reprobation,
creation, preservation, had a respect to himself, and proposed his glory as
the end of them all. God made all things for himself, even the wicked for the
day of wrath. Thus the four and twenty Elders, Apoc. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory and honor; for thou have created all things for thy
wills sake. When God chooses a people, he respects his own glory. The Lord
set them up to be a precious people unto himself, and made them higher than
all the Nations, whom he made in praise, in name, and in glory, Deuteronomy. 26.18,
19. In the discomfiting of enemies, he proposes his own glory: For this
cause have I appointed thee, that I might show my power in thee, and declare my
name thorowout all the world, Exodus 9.16. If he raise Lazarus, the end is his
glory, Said not I unto thee, that if thou did believe, thou should see
the glory of God, Ioh. 11.40. He did intend his glory in every thing that
he did, and has glory from every thing that he made, even by that which is
evil; for he turns evil to good, and brings good out of it; as out of the
evil of sin a five-fold good; out of the evil of punishment a manifold
good: So that both in good and evil he intends, and from both good and evil
he gets honor and glory to himself. I shall make the use when I come to the
duty of returning thanks, and to the person to whom glory is due.

To him be glory for evermore, Amen.] This is the Doxologie describing to whom
the glory of creation, preservation, election does belong. It contains first
the Quid, what is to be returned. Secondly, the Cui, to whom it must be
returned, to him. Thirdly, the Quamdiu, for evermore. Fourthly, the seal set
to this acknowledgement and recognition, Amen. I begin with the Quid, what is
to be returned, glory; my purpose is not to speak of an acknowledgement of
the glorious nature, and attributes in God; but of man's study to get glory
unto God here among men; only this Conclusion I cannot pass.

That God looks to receive glory from every thing that he has made. Isa.
43.7. Every one of them shall be called by name; for I created them for my
glory. And he has chosen his elect, to the praise of his glory, Ephesians.
1.12. The heavens must declare his glory, Psalm. 19.1. The creation of the
world must set out his glory, Romans 1.20. All the creatures must set forth his
glory, because he made them, Genesis 1. Preserves their being, Act. 17.28. Feeds
them, Psalm. 147.9. But man especially is bound to this duty of glorifying God,
because he not only made him, preserves, seeds him; but being dead quickened
him, being lost sought him, being Satan's prisoner ransomed him, not with blood
of bulls and and goats, but of Christ. And what use makes the Apostle? Therefore
glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls, 1 Cor. 6.20. I come to a
second, viz.

Man should never do any thing, whereby he may not gain some glory unto
God. Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31. Amongst many, he is principally to aim
at Gods glory in these three. 1. His actions. 2. His speeches. 3. His calling.
His actions are of three kinds; natural, civil, religious. The natural are
such as are common to men with beast, as eating, drinking, sleeping,
recreation; yet in man all these must be moderated by reason, that we err not
in excess, or defect, or manner of using them. The Apostle has mentioned two,
whereof we should be most careful that we dishonor not God; to wit, eating
and drinking. Here I must quarrel with two sorts of people who dishonor God
so much in these two. First, they dishonor him in eating; so did the people of
Israel, when they required meat for their lust, Psalm. 78.19. And therefore
while the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was chewed, Gods wrath
was kindled against them, as Numb. 11.33. Secondly, they dishonor him in
drinking, as those Isa. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till the wine
inflame them. I come to the third, which is our calling.

We must make choice of such callings, whereby we may gain glory unto God.
Cor. 7.17. As God has called every man, so let him walk. The end of every
lawful calling is the common good; as members for the common good of the body,
be it politic, or natural: Therefore many persuade themselves that they have
lawful callings when they have none; such as live by usurie, carding, dicing,
playing; these have neither the Author God, nor the end, the common good. Now
in the right use of a calling consider four things. First, that they make
choice of a calling which is lawful and honest. Secondly, that they make
choice of a calling which is fit for them, and they for it. Epist. Endoxio
Rh^tori.
Nazianzene reports of the Athenians, That when their youth came to be of age
fit for employment, they permitted them to make choice of such callings, in
which they saw them take most delight, because those things best succeed, which
we undertake by natures guidance. Thirdly, he that is fitted for many, must
make choice of the best; Art thou called being a servant, care not for it: that
is, Though thy calling be mean and hard; yet shake it not off, but bear it
patiently, 1 Cor. 7.21. Fourthly, leave it not without good warrant; but I
hasten to my conclusion. Let every man examine his calling at the Apostles
rule, 1 Cor. 7.24. Let every man wherein he as called walk with God: No
calling is lawful, when the action pleases not God, as 1 Cor. 10.31. By this
(I hope) some will learn at last to give over their calling, whereby they
bring not honor, but dishonor unto God: Those that live upon usurie, by
dicing houses, by penning and acting of plays, let them all remember this,
mine heart trembles to think, what calling these men have, my soul wonders
how they glorify God in them, I marvel how these make for a public good; how
God is honored, a kingdom bettered, the common good promoted by them; I know
not, I believe not. And so I come to the Cui, who must have all this honor.

Him] It was the proud speech of Sennacherib; Have any of their Gods delivered
the Nations out of mine hand, Isa. 36.18. taking the glory of all victories
unto himself. None may challenge the glory of any thing that he does, or
has, unto himself. The glory must not rest upon him that has any good, but
must be returned to him that gave it: Now it is God that gives every good
thing that we enjoy; for, Every good and perfect gift comes down from the
Father of lights, Iam. 1.17.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
PArents greatness cannot p^ocure acceptance for their children. page 41 Account
must be given by Ministers for their peoples souls. page 253 Works of God
admired by the godly. p. 454. Christ an Advocate to all he died for. p. 447
Wicked men think the godly out of favor because afflicted. p. 10 Men are ready
to afflict the afflicted. p. 302 No outward privilege can exempt from Gods
anger. p. 12 God answers his peoples prayers. p. 104 Why God does not answer
sometimes. p. 105 Apostles of four kinds. p. 244 Apostles excelled in six
things. p. 245 Spirit of application a sign of election, p. 26 Faithful
Preachers make application to their people. p. 241 Application of Stories of
others to our selves. p. 242 Assurance of salvation may be had here. p. 22, 75
Assurance of salvation set down, Romans 8. p. 24 Assurance, Papists error
concerning it. p. 38 Assurance, believers happiness by it. p. 39 Attention
great to weighty points. p. 365 God takes sin quite away in forgiveness. p.
409 God takes sin away three ways. ibid.
B.
BAal, what it signifies. p. 115 Baal, the original of it. p. 116 Children
may be saved that dye unbaptized. p. 276 Every wicked man base. p. 44 All
riches without grace is beggerie. p. 236 God beholding to none. p. 470 Christ
died only for believers. p. 447 Why Paul says he was of Benjamin. p. 19 How
to know we benefit by the ordinances. p. 243 Best. See Punishment. Holiness
makes blessed. p. 13 What is due to God of his blessings. p. 271 We should
register Gods blessings. p. 346 Blindness a punishment of unbeleevers. p. 187
Blindness spiritual and bodily compared. p. 188 Blindness spiritual,
freedom from it requires thankfulness. p. 189 Boldness of sin. p. 297
Spiritual judgments set forth in borrowed terms, and why. p. 185 Bowing, a
token of subjection. p. 115 Bowing before an Idol, idolatrte. p. 117 Bowing
the back, what. p. 191 Bounty to Saints, a sign of love to God. p. 34
Bounty of God should keep us from sin. p. 343
C.
NO sinner so desperate but may be called. p. 264 What Calling we should
choose. p. 476 Why men are so prone to censure others. p. 431 Certainty. See
Faith. Promises to godly parents belong to their children. p. 272 What
holiness is traduced from parents to children. p. 274 All the elect committed
to Christ. p. 14 Elect desire the coming of Christ. p. 37 We are predestinate
in Christ. p. 52 No means to glory, but Christ. p. 71 The Jews conversion a
little before the coming of Christ. p. 381 All our deliverance by Christ. p.
390 Evils of countries imputed to Christians. p. 234 Four signs that there
are few members of the true Church. p. 113 In greatest revolts God preserves
his Church. p. 372 Gods promises to keep his Church. p. 373 Combat between
flesh and Spirit a sign of election. p. 30 Comforts must (...) be concealed
from the wicked. p. 5 Comfort for Christians in all estates. p. 87 Comfort to
the elect, that they have a God to go to. p. 106 See Fall, Place. Wicked might
have much good by the company of good men. p. 224 Motive to confess sin. p.
408 The Gospel, though opposed, shall convert the Elect. p. 378 Pope made
Judge of controversies, and why. p. 81 The word written, the Judge of
controversies. p. 144 God, when he pardons sin, removes the guilt and
corruption. p. 406 Covenant of God that the Saints cannot fall away. p. 16 All that are called Christians not in Covenant. p. 17 The Jews, within the
Covenant, shall not be lost. p. 384 Two acts in the counsel of ^o^. p. 54
Sin cries for judgment. p. 369 R probation no act of cruelty. p. 56 Curse,
how we are freed from it. p. 394
D.
LIving in sin a state of death. p. 261 Pelagians error touching death in
sin. p. 262 Gospel raises men from death. p. 266 We are reconciled by
Christ's death. p. 399 God defends his Church. p. 90, 118 Deliverance by
Christ. p. 390 Despair, the evil of it. p. 353 M^anes of grace abused turn
to destruction. p. 168 Destruction from the best things of wicked men. p. 177
Destruction to seek life in the Law. p. 181 Destruction not aimed at in Gods
decree. p. 200 Man the cause of his own destruction. p. 312 Donatists error.
p. 353 Drowsinesse in the best Christians. p. 350
E.
Ear, how needful a member. p. 169 Election not proved by outward privileges.
p. 12 Election, nine signs of it. p. 25 Election, three things concerning it.
p. 56 Election, the causes of it. p. 57 Election, a double act in it. p. 58
Election described. p. 122 Election, nine fruits of it. p. 124 Election, six
marks of it. p. 422 Emulation double. p. 219 Emulation, how God provokes to
it. p. 221 End of God good in evil things. p. 156 Enemies of the Church, how
to withstand them. p. 90 Man before grace is an enemy to God. p. 415 Three
things proving natural men enemies to God. p. 418 Not to be familiar with Gods
enemies. p. 419 Gods esteem of sinners after conversion. p. 285 Our esteem of
men after conversion. p. 286 Why God punishes sin eternally. p. 183 Some
thought the world eternal. p. 468 Wicked men requite Gods Prophets evil. p.
102 God does not evil that good may come of it. p. 199 God works good out of
evil. p. 208 Example of Gods judgments should warn us. p. 335 What to learn
from others examples. p. 337 Execution of the decree of election. p. 59
Experience should encourage us. p. 358 Expostulation with God double. p. 84
Eye, three things that hinder it. p. 164
F.
FAith, the certainty of it. p. 23 Faith, the properties of it. p. 24 Faith
forseene no cause of eliction. p. 60 Faith a fruit of election. ib. Faith,
exhortation to labor for it. p. 311 Faith distinguishes men. p. 315 Faith,
five benefits from it. p. 316 Faith, no privilege without it will do good. p.
434 The elect cannot finally fall away. p. 14, 76, 319, 320, 360 Comfort to the
Saints, that they cannot fall. p. 16, 77 Falls of Gods children. p. 17 How to be
armed against the doctrine of falling away. p. 77 Reprobates fall finally. p.
206 Saints to be humbled by their falls. p. 207 Scriptures cleared that seem to
allow Saints falling away. p. 329 See Prophet. Familiarity between God and
his children. p. 85 Familiarity with God, how attained. p. 86 Fear to offend
God. p. 317 Fear filial and servile distinguished. p. 318 Three things hinder
from finding God. p. 139 What should provoke us to follow others. p. 223 To
labor to be such, that others may follow us. p. 226 Readiness to forgive a
sign of love to God. p. 34 God only can forgive sins. p. 405 Four reasons
why God only can forgive. p. 406 Foreknowledge taken four ways in Scripture.
p. 48 Foreknowledge different from election. p. 49 Christians have God for
their friend. p. 416 Outward privileges without fruit nothing. p. 11 Men after
they are called are fruitful. p 282 Three qualifications of our fruit. p. 284
G.
GEntiles, the fullness of them when. p. 379 Faith the gift of God. p. 60
Heaven the gift of God. p. 62 Gifts of Ministers should be great. p. 257 Gifts,
not to be proud of any. p. 290 Gifts apt to pusse up. p. 304 All the good we
have is of gift. p. 424 Glory of God the end of election. p. 56 Glory to God
from all things. p. 474 Glory, how men should aim at it. p. 475 Manichees
hold two Gods. p. 92 Comfort to Saints they have a God. p. 106 God how he
hardens men. p. 146 Sin only against God. p. 406 How all things are of God.
p. 467 To give God the glory of his goodness. p. 202 God works out of sin
a threefold good. p. 209 God gives not way to ill, but he works good out of
it. p. 420 Gospel, to apply it to our selves p. 267 Gospel, we should live
answerable to it. p. 269 Gospel not spread over the world the second time. p.
377 Gospel taken away fearful. p. 378 See Death, Convert. Grace, how taken.
p. 124 Grace, why God withdrawes it. p. 149 Grace, how God withholds it. p. 159
Grace only pleases God. p. 282 Greatness inferior to grace in two respects.
p. 43 Great favors should assure us of less. p. 359 See Acceptance. All men
naturally guilty. p. 438
H.
Happiness of believers, wherein. p. 410 Happiness wrong placed by
Philosophers. p. 411 See Assurance. Hardness, what meant by it. p. 140
Hardness, a complaint of it. p. 142 Hardness, three efficient causes of it.
p. 146 Hardness, three things in it. p. 151 Hardness of heart, the parts of
it. p. 153 See God. Two things notable in an Heart. p. 30 Who are hated of God.
p. 417 Difference between good and bad in hearing. p. 165 To take heed to our
hearing. p. 169 Of care in hearing the word. p. 256 See Profit. God can
preserve his people without help. p. 471 Holiness above greatness. p. 43
Holiness a fruit of predestination. p. 73 See Blessed. Signs of a vessel of
honor. p. 61 Ministers should honor their calling. p. 251 Danger of those
that seek their own honor in preaching. p. 254 Hope, what it is on. p. 435.
Former sins should humble us. p. 279 Hungring after righteousness, a sign
of election. p. 29 Hungring after righteousness, five things in it. ib.
Hunger, a definition of it. ibid.
I.
A Mercy in evil times to be kept from idolatry. p. 108 They that fall to
idolatry, God acknowledges not. p. 110 See Bowing. Jehovah, what it
signifies. p. 91 Three conclusions from the word Jehovah. p. 92 Jews
conversion hopeful. p. 264, 407 Five privileges of the Jews p. 294 Jews
conversion proved. p. 376 Jews conversion not yet past. p. 380 Jews coming
in what hinders it. p. 381 Jews, the number that shall be called. p. 383
Imputation. See Righteousness. Election immutable. p. 56 God immutable,
therefore the elect shall not fall away. p. 422 God hates and punishes
infidelity. p. 193 Infidelity separates between God and man. p. 309 The
foulness of infidelity in six things. ibid. Infidelity makes God angry. p.
348 Infidelity, the misery of it. p. 432 Minister Gods instrument. p. 256
Intercession of Christ reconciles us. p. 398 Judgments only must not be
preached. p. 7 Judgments, how to be freed from them. p. 340 None can have
glory that are not justified. p 73 What it is that justifies us. p. 134
K.
GOd repayes wrongs in t e same kind. p. 182 Kingdoms, their raines
attributed to false causes. p. 46 A great judgment to neglect the means of
the knowledge of God. p. 163
L.
THree things in Christ that cannot be found in the Law. p. 181 Transgression
of humane Laws when it is sin. p. 406 Two things argue life in the soul. p.
262 Upon what ground we should live to God. p. 396 Love to God a sign of
election. p. 34 Signs of love to God. ibid. Motives to love Christians. p. 88
Love of God should keep us from sin. p. 345 Men are willing to learn of
those they love. p. 362 How Ministers should gain love of people. ibid.
Mutual love between Ministers and people in three things. p. 364
M.
MAlice. See Vain. Manichees. See God Care in using the means a sign of
salvation. p. 53 We are predestined to the means as well as to the end. p.
25 God works good for his by unlikely means. p. 213 Ministers must neglect no
means to save the souls of their people. p. 258 Not to fear, though means
seem contrary. p. 358 Show our love to Christ to his members. p. 53 Election
is of mercy. p. 62 God saves man of free mercy. p. 126 Mercy of God
s^staining men even when they sin. p. 160 All our good is of Gods mercy. p.
314 Against the abuse of Gods mercy. p. 3^9 The greatness of Gods mercy. p.
352 Where Gods mercy most abounds he punishes sin. p ^69 Many now in
state of sin shall find mercy. p. 435 The elect only shall have mercy. p.
440 We should disclaim our works in respect of merit. p. 52 Man ready to
ascribe the good things he has to his merit. p. 306 Eternal life not by
merit. p. 426 Love to Ministers a sign of election. p. 35 Few love Ministers
as they ought. p. ^6 Ministers, their duty. p. 91 Reverence and love to
Ministers. p. 97 Of the labor of Ministers. p. 248, 258 Complaint of the ill
carriage of Ministers. p. 252 Duty of people to Ministers. p. 259 Multitude no
ro^e of the Church. p. 101 The depth of Gods counsels should keep in from
murmuring. p. 458 Reproof of those that murmur against Gods works. p. 464
Every point of godliness a mystery. p. 366 Not to search too far into hid
mysteries. p. 458
N.
PApists brag only of the name of a Church. p. 11 Nineveh, the strength of it.
p. 12 We should most tender the salvation of those that are near us. p. 259
God will alter the course of nature for his childrens good. p. 357 Jews and
Gentiles alike by nature. p. 433
O.
NEw obedience a sign of election. p. 32 New obedience, three conditions of
it. ibid. Assurance of glory by obeying Gods call. p. 73 Objections against
the doctrine of election. p. ^3 Oppose. See Gospel. God takes all
opportunities to do his children good. p. 214 To imitate God in taking
opportunities to do good. p. 215 Ordinances of God, how to account of them. p.
186 We should beware of those sins, that we see punishes in others. p. 342
How to keep from censuring others. p. 430 Ministers should chiefly intend the
good of their own people. p. 247 Wicked men judge of their estate by outward
things. p. 9 Wicked men excel others in outward things. p. 10 Not to judge our
selves by outward things. p. 13 Outward profession not to be rested in. p. 113
Outward privileges exempt not from punishment. p. 332 See Election.
P.
PArentage neither furthereth nor hinders salvation. p. 40, 439 Meannesse of
Parentage no prejudice. p. 42 Paul his description of himself. p. 18 Promises
of God how made to men in particular. p. 23 Good men defend Gods people from
persecution. p. 87 Who the wicked persecute most. p. 93 New obedience
perpetual. p. 32 Comfort to those that live in evil places. p. 20 Every
sin has its plea. p. 296 Gods pleasure the impulsive cause of election. p.
56 Power abused God takes away. p. 194 Power of God absolute. p. 407 Possess.
See Satan. Predestination, what. p. 49 Predestination and providence
distinguished. p. 50 Predestination defined. ib. Predestination abused to
sin. p. 53 Predestination, the order of it. p. 54 Predestination, the parts
of it. p. 55 Predestination, three effects of it. p. 71 Predestination, the
impulsive cause of it. p. 130 Prayer an effect of the Spirit. p. 27 Example of
Saints often in prayer. ibid. Three things make God not to hear prayer. p. 106
See Weapons. Forgetfulness the cause of pride. p. 280 Pride, how to abate it.
p. 281 Three things to keep men from pride of gifts. p. 291 Three reasons to
keep from pride. p. 305 None should be proud of that he enjoyes. p. 366
Wicked men presume upon outward privileges. p. 9 Not to be ^ortent with outward
privileges. p. 11 Sin will ruin a people, notwithstanding all privileges. p ^6
Privileges spiritual all by Christ. p. 52 The Gentiles have the Jews
privileges. p. 287 Sin will bring down these that have the greatest
privileges. p. 301 See Anger, Outward. Profession. See Outward. A misery to
hear and not profit. p. 170 Means contemned profit not. p. 175 What makes men
so little profit. p. 263 Promises of God assure us of salvation. p. 22 Promises
to the Jews belong to us. p. 275 What over God has promised shall come to
pass. p. 401 See Particular. When the Prophets are made away, people fall from
God. p. 95 Good people fear the loss of their Prophets. p. 243 Prudence in
Ministers in denouncing judgments. p. 200 Punishment, three things in it. p.
152 God punishes men in their best things. p. 184 Four good effects God
brings out of punishment. p. 210 Like sin brings like punishments. p. 33
Punishments accompany sin. p. 388 See Sin, Outward, Mercy.
Q. QVestions, curious unnecessarie. p. 466
R.
MYsteries of salvation above reason. p. 457 God receives great sinners. p. 351
Christ reconciles man to God. p. 398 The manner of Christ's reconciling in five
things. ibid. Rejection of God twofold. p. 47 Rejoicing of wicked men vain. p.
^9 Rejoicing in Gods promises. p. 403 What causes God to remove the Gospel.
216 In great revolts God preserves some. p. 372 The reward of holiness. 43
Reprobation, what. p. 56 Reprobation, the causes of it. p 64, 67 Reprobation
double, p. 68 Reprobation, two acts in it. p. 69 Reprobation, three questions
concerning it. ibid. The knowledge of God true riches. p. 231, 461 Motives to
labor for the riches of the word. p. 235 No man can attain life by his own
righteousness. p. 135 Three things in Christ's righteousness. ibid.
Bellarmines objections against imputation of Christ's righteousness. p. 136
Imputation of Christ's righteousness reconciles us. p. 99 God rules all. p. 92
S.
THose in Christ's keeping are safe. p. 15 Those of all Nations that repent
shall be saved. p. 19 Those that do good works shall be saved. p. 74 Three
things in those that shall be saved. p. 121 All men shall not be saved. p. 134
Salvation offered by the Gospel. p. 218 Ministers should aim at the salvation
of their people. p. 252 Salvation, of whom to seek it. p. 400 None can
satisfy for his sins. p. 392 Popish satisfaction vain. ibid. Satan's
stratagems cannot cut off the elect. p. 15 Satan, how he holds wicked men. p 45
Satan hardens the heart. p. 147, 186 Exhortation to read Scriptures. p. 82 See
Wise. A judgment to have eyes and not see. p. 167 Seeking, two things in it.
p. 137 Seeking God, five things in it. p. 138 We must not search into secrets.
p. 459 Servitude under sin. p. 386 A man should find the cause of judgments in
himself. p. 313 God made all things for himself. p. 473 Sin cannot cut off
the elect. p. 15 Sin, not the impulsive cause of reprobation. p. 64 Reasons why
God reprobates not for sin. p. 65 The best works of wicked men sin. p. 74 Sin,
how God works in it. p. 152 Three things God does concerning sin. p. 158 God
punishes one sin with another. p. 162, 367 Four good effects God brings out
of sin. p. 210 Sin the cause of peoples ruin. p. 334 Sin, how displeasing to
God. p. 337 Sin, how God sits punishments to it. p. 341 Sin, the nature of it.
p. 395 Sin, Christ weakneth it i^ us. p. 399 Sin, two things in it. p. 406 Sin,
what ever a carnal man does. p. 416 Sin makes good things snares. p. 180
Subjection. See Bowing.
T.
TO labor for tender hearts. p. 143 Thank God for preservation from idolatry.
p. 109, 112 When Ministers must preach threatenings. 349 Threatenings of God
true. p. 404 New obedience total. p. 32 Troubles to be expected. p. 95 Truth,
how the wicked dispute against it. p. 99 God receives all that turn to him. p.
173 God does great things in short time p. 469
V.
MAlice of wicked men against the Church, vain. p. 119 Gods Church scarce
visible sometimes. p. 100 God has always a Church, though not visible. p 113
Heaven must be gotten by violence. p. 397 Vocation, an effect of election. p.
72 God unchangeable. p. 14 Comfort from Gods unchangeablenesse. p. 93 To take
heed of unthankfulness. p. 160 How to be ashamed of unthankfulness. p. 225
Unbeleefe. See Infidelity. Universal grace confuted. p. 443 Universal grace
an absurd doctrine. p. 450
W.
MInisters must give warnings of judgment. p. 350 Weapons of the Church is
prayer. p. 89 Wicked men weary of good things. p. 28 Scriptures able to make
wise. p. 79 God most wise. p. 464 The Jews at their conversion shall be
endowed with wisdom. p. 239 Religion should have no winter. p. 33 Will of God
the impulsive cause of reprobation. p. 69 Works a fruit of election. p. ^^, 74
Motives to good works. p. 7^ God in election had no respect to good works. p.
129. 307 Good works justify not. p. 130, 4^9 Works of God, how to be
affected with them 456 Obedience must be grounded on the Word. p. 34 Word
abused to maintain sin. p. 205 Counsel, of God must not be searched beyond
the Word. p. 462 To be weaned from the world, a sign of election. p. 27 Jews
called toward the end of the world. p. 218 Wicked m n overthrow the means of
Gods worship. p. 98 God will avenge the wrongs of his. p. 195
FINIS.

