THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE ARRIAN. His Beginning. Height. Fall.
In a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, June 4. 1624. Being the first Sunday in
Trinity Term.

BY Humphry Sydenham Mr. of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN PARKER. 1626.

TO MY APPROVED WORTHY FRIEND Mr. Francis Crossing; This.
SIR;
I Was never yet so preposterous in my respects, as to value the worth of him I
serve, by the title, but the disposition; He is noble to me, that is so in his
actions, not his descent; those high-swolne privileges of blood and fortune
are (for the most part) tympanies in greatness, prick them, and they prove
winds of honor, not substances. Had I been ambitious of a high Patronage,
this weak piece I send you might have worn an honorable inscription, but I
have that within me which chides those insolences, and tells me that the name
of friend sounds better than of Lord, and he is less mine that does only
countenance me, than he that feeds me; He only deserves to be a protector of
my Labors which has been a cherisher of my fortunes; to you then this at
once flies for Patronage, and acceptance, desiring you to receive it as a
monument of his thankfulness, who ever deuotes himself

Your most-most respective HVM: SYDENHAM.

THE ARAIGNMENT OF THE ARRIAN.
JOHN 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.


Never age afforded a perfection of that eminency which was not exposed to
envy, or opposition, or both. Truth is the child of virtue; and, as the
inheritresse of all her glories; so, her sufferings. Now, virtue grows by
unjust wounds, and so does truth too; and like steel that is bent, springs
the other way. She shows her best luster upon encounter, and like the Sun
shines brightest betwixt two clouds, malice, error; both (here) conspire to
ouercast and darken the glory of those beams which enlighten every man that
comes into the world, the suns of righteousness. It has ever been the
stratagem and project of that Arch-enemy of man, for the advancement and
strengthening of his great title -- The Father of lies --, either to strangle
truth in the conception, or smother it in the birth. If he miscarry in his own
particular undertakings, he will suborne his Factors, Scrives and Pharisees;
and these not only to question, but to oppose a deity, fit agents put upon
such a damned design, for it is theirs no less by debt, than parentage; -- Ye
are of your Father the Devil, v. 44. He has bequeathed you a prodigious lie,
and you would feign practice it on the Savior of the world, laboring to
nullify his acts, blemish his descent, imposture all his miracles. Where were
they ever seconded, but by the finger of a God? or, where contradicted, but by
the malice of a Jew? could the powers of the grave, and the shackles and bands
of death be dissolved, and broken by the mere hand of Beelzebub? or a dead and
stinking carcass, enliued and quickened by a Samaritan and his devil? could
the kingdom of darkness, and all those legions below, fetch a soul out of
the bosom of your Abraham, and re-inthrone it in a body four days entombed?
no, that -- Magnus hiatus interte, and nos --, returns the lie upon all
hellish power, and the prince thereof. -- Between: you, and us, there is a
great gulf fixed, Luke 16.26. Why then exclaim you on the injustice and
falsehood of his testimonies? Opera quae ego facio --, the works which I do
bear witness of me. Look on them, and if they vnscale not your wilful
blindness, the axioms and principles of your own law will convince you. It is
written in your Thalmud, -- That the testimony of two men is true --. Behold
then out of your own blood, and Nation, two strong evidences against you, Jews
both, and both speak him a true God, -- A virgin shall conceive and bring
forth a Son, and his name shall be called Emmanuell, God with us, Isa. 7.14.
This is our God, and there shall be none in comparison of him, Baruch 3.36. Why
then are ye so startled at his naming Abraham? or why does your indignation
swell, that he says he is before him? Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and saw
it, and was glad, verse. 56. (My day of eternity, and my day of incarnation,
with the eye of faith.) Why enquire you into the number of his years? a whole
age to him is as an hour, two thousand years but as a minute, and all the
wheels and degrees of time within his span, and as a nunc or instant; before
Abraham was, before the world, before all time I am. Jew, take his word, it is
orthodox, or if not, his asseueration: and if that be too slight and single,
lo, he doubles it, Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am.

And now thou that sit in the chair of Moses, hear what S. Augustine
tells thee, -- Appende verba, and cognosce mysterium --, the words (indeed) are
of a narrow circuit, yet they shrine and inuolue a mystery, and carry with them
both majesty and depth, like rich stones set in Ebonie, where though the ground
be dark, yet it gives their luster and beauty clearer; learn here then both
propriety, and weight of language, and how to critic between a God, and thy
own frailty. -- Intellige, fieret, ad humanam facturam, sum vero, ad diuinam
pertinere substantiam? -- Was, points only to a humane constitution, -- I am,
to a divine substance, and therefore the original has a -- (...) -- for
Abraham, and an -- (...) -- for Christ. Divinity is not cloistered or confined
to time, either past, or future, but commands all as present; and therefore not
-- I was, but -- I am. Neither do the Latins give Abraham an -- esset, but a
-- fieret, nor Christ a -- fui, but a -- sum. Hereupon the full tide of
Expositors, besides Ego latius extendo, Call. in 8. lo.
M. Calvin, and his Marlorate, (who though they a while divide the stream,
yet at length they meet in the same channel, and so make the current a little
fuller) wave this way, and send us to that -- I am, of Exodus, in the 3. chap.
14. verse. where we find the root with an -- Ehich, Asher Ehich, which though
the Chaldee renders, -- Ero qui ero, I will be that I will be -- (which indeed
is the genuine signification of the original) yet the vulgar Edition gives it
in the present, -- I am that I am -- and the Septuagint -- (...), -- I am he
that is -- (it being both frequent and necessary with the Hebrews to place the
future for the present) and by this they imply -- Gods eternal and
unchangeable being in himself. The Thalmudists also (whose authority must
pass for current, where there is no power to contradict, or scanne) allow
this, -- Ehich -- as much as -- Sam -- Fisi -- ero -- the comprehension of
three times, past, present, and to come --. So the Rabbis in Elleshemoth Rabbi
upon this Text, read, -- I that have been, and I the same now, and I the same
for time to come. Howeuer the Chaldee Paraphrast labors an indifferency, and
has charity enough to afford both interpretations, -- He that was, and
hereafter will be. -- Ad denotandam aeternitatem eius (says Jonathan) to show
the eternal being of him who alone can say -- Sam, ero -- I am, and I will be;
for he is the very source and fountain of all life and essence, In whom we
live, and move, and have our being --, and by reason of this triplicity of
time, and power, Vatablus would derive Ihehouah from this word -- Ehich (though
some of the Hebrew Doctors fetch the pedigree a little higher) from -- Hauah,
-- He was, and tells us that by the first letter is signified, he will be, and by
the second -- Ho, -- He is; and to this Rabbi Bechai seems to assent, in his
65. page upon Exodus. But howeuer they war a little in the deriuation, they do
not in the substance, proportioning both this triple priuiledg, and where there
is such an immensity, we cannot but make a God, and where such a God,
eternity. All things besides him once were not, and being, are limited in
their natures, neither could possibly persist, unless God preserved them; many
also have lost or shall loose their proper essence, and whilst they remain are
obnoxious to daily fluctuarions; only God eternally -- Is -- without beginning,
limitation, dependence, mutation, end, consisting only of himself, and all
other creatures of him, and therefore this -- Ehich -- I am -- is a peculiar
attribute of omnipotency, not determining any other, but indeterminatlie
signifying all manners of being, for so it imports -- The very immensitie of
Gods substance, -- and to this with an unanimous consent all interpreters
subscribe, and the whole quire of Fathers. I have now brought -- Ehich -- close
up with Jehovah, this -- I am -- with him that is -- First -- and Last, so that
we may here rather challenge than borrow that of the Apostle; Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Where S. Chrysostom will put
Christ upon that triple prerogative to make him a complete God, too. -- A
yesterday, for time past, -- to day -- present -- for ever, to come, though I
meet here (as I shall in every cranny and passage of my discourse) a violent
opposer, Eniedinus Samosatenianus, who limits the Apostles -- Heri -- and Hodie
-- ad Rem nuperam, and recentem --, so in Job (he says) men are called --
Hesterni -- by the Greeks, (...) -- yesterday -- and to day -- for their
brevity of life; but this interpretation is no less bold than desperate, and
that (...) -- which follows in the original, will cut off all comment and
gloss of transitorinesse -- The same for ever -- and therefore we find him
clothed with peculiar titles of the Almighty, and by Saint John four several
times fronted with an (...), -- from him that was, and is, and is to come; --
so that if any murmuring unbeliever should recoile in the acknowledgement of
Christ's divinity, he beats on again, a third and a fourth time, that if he
can not pierce the stony heart by a single persuasion, he will batter it by
inculcation. Howeuer the malice or perverseness of most ages have brought this
truth not only upon terms of scruple, but opposition, so that now it is
grown disputable, whether Christ suffered more in his body by the fury and
violence of the hand, or in his divinity by the scourge and sting of venomous
and deprauing tongues? one would have him, no God, another no man; this again
would have him a mere man, and that denies him a true body; one strips him
quite of flesh, another clothes him with it, but makes it sinful; this would
have him an Angel, that little better than a devil, or at least that he used
one. One, no body, another (I believe) nothing -- Est illud mirabile (says
Athanasius) Cum omnes haereses inuicem pugnent; in falsitate omnes consentire
--.

Every head is frantike with a strange opinion, and that with some wild
fancy, which all meet in the same improbabilitie and (which it ever breeds)
falsehood. Error and infidelity may blow on divine truth, and shake it too,
but not overthrow it; it is founded on such a Basis and sure groundwork as is
subject neither to battery nor undermining. The Rock, Christ. The Jew and the
Arrian lay on fiercely here, not only to deface this goodly structure, but to
demolish it, and ruin (if possible) his divinity; but lend me a while your
noble attention, I Will show you with what weakness they come off, what
dishonor. In the traversing of which give me leave to make use of that
Apology which in the same subject Saint Ambrose did to Gratian, -- Nolo
argumento credas (sancte Imperator^) and nostrae disputationi; scripturas
interrogemus, interrogemus Apostolos, Prophetas, Christum. Lean not so much to
my strength of Argument and disputation, as to a sacred authority and proof,
Let us ask the Scriptures, Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles,
Christ; let me add (for so both my task and industry require) Fathers,
Councels, Rabbis, Schoolmen, Histories sacred and profane, let us give
antiquity her due, and not in a lazy thirst drink of the stream, (which is
either troubled or corrupt) when we may have our fill at a clear fountain;
to traffic here at home with a few modern Systeames, is no small sin of
the age only, but our profession too, if we can fleyle down the
transgressions of the time in some few stolen Postellismus, and piece a sacred
line with a worme-eaten Apophthegme, so it be done in a frequent and hasty
zeal, we are the Sages and the Patriots of the time, and the lights no doubt
of this under firmament; but our discourse grouels not so low; we are here to
tread a maze, and thread a Labyrinth, sometimes on hills of ice, where, if we
slip in the least punctum, we tumble into haeresio; sometimes with Peter in the
deep, that if the hand of Christ did not a little succor us, we should sink
into infidelity. I will ball ass my discourse with as much cautelousnesse as I
may, and where I meet with difficulties which are stony and untrodden, if I
cannot fairly master them, I will oppose them with my best strength, and if
not find a way smooth to satisfaction, dig on; I may perchance awaken
haeresies, but I will lull them again in their own slumber, I will only pull
aside the veil and show you their ugliness, and shut them up in their own
deformities. I know I am to speak to an Auchtorie, as well seasoned with
faith, as understanding, and yet (perchance) not without some mixture and touch
of weakness. Here are shallowes then for Lambs to wade, and deepes for
Elephants to swim, passages which he level with humble capacities; others
which will venture to stand up with riper judgments, if they stoop sometimes and
seem too low for these, and mount again and prove too high for others, it was
ever my desire to keep a correspondence with the best, and so to make use of
that of Augustine, -- Non fraudabo eos qui possunt capere, dum timeo superfluus
esse auribus little qui non possunt capere --. Yet come I not to fill those
ears which are picked and dressed for accuratenesse I am so far from laboring
to please such, that I intend to vex them; if any charitable care be prone to
a sour discourse, pitch that attention here one hour, and I shall make good
my promise out of the words of the Text. Before Abraham was, I am.

And here we are first to enter lifts with that capital and Arch-enemy of
Christ, the vexation of the Fathers, and the incendiary and firebrand of the
Eastern Church, the Arrian, who out of an envious pride is at once bountiful
and injurious, willing to inuest Christ with the title (...), but disrobes him
of that glorious, and his own (...), granting him a like essence with the
Father not the same: equal to him in power, not eternity; but give me leave
to strip one heriticke to cloth another, and put on ours what Tertullian did
on Marcion -- Quid di^idias mendacio Christum? why do thou thus peecemeale
and mince a deity, and half god (as it were) the Son of the Almighty? -- Totus
veritas, he is the spirit of truth, and oracle of his Father, the brightness
of his glory, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom, knowledge, by whom
God made the world.

It were too bold a solecisme to rank transitorinesse with what is sacred, or
that which is fleeting with euerlastingnesse, what below eternal dare we make
compatible with omnipotency?

An eternal Intellect, most perfect, and such is God, requires an object
equally perfect, and eternal, which from God, holding a relation to God, can
be nothing but God it self; and seeing that no Intellect can conceive without
the image of that object which it conceiues, it will follow of necessity that
God, since from all eternity he knew himself most perfect, should conceive
and bring forth in himself a most perfect image of himself, his Son. There
is no act of understanding without imagination, which naturally presents an
image, by so much the more perfect, by how much the object, whose image it is,
is more divinely excellent. And this is that the Apostle glanc't at, when he
styled Christ, -- Characterem hypostasis patris -- the express image of his
Fathers person, a son so begotten of and in the substance of the Father, that
there can be nothing from it, diverse, or repugning. Seeing then, in God to
understand and to be are not so much parallels, as equals. Intelligi autem sit
ipsum filij esse -- as the School speaks -- Keck. Syst. Theol. l. 1. ca. 2.
strength of consequence will induce, that the substance of Father and Son,
sound one both in power and euerlastingnesse; in fine, for as much as the
understanding of God is from eternity, active, nay, the very act eternal, and
that understanding cannot be without an Image, It follows that this Image
which was conceived, the Son, was equal to that which did conceive, the
Father, so that the eternity of God the Son, and his equality with God the
Father does arise from that essential Identitie of both, for where two persons
shall agree in the same essence, if the one be infinite, the other must rival
in the same eternity.

Here is the Rock then on which we build our Church, and the sure Basis where
we foot and fasten our belief. -- The Son is begotten of the essence of the
Father, and always begotten, -- Non quod quotidie renouetur illa generatio,
sed quia semper est, -- says Origin, Tom. 2. hom. 6. in Ierem.
not because it is daily renouated, but because it ever -- Is -- or rather --
Was. For Saint Gregory in the 29 of his Morals, the first Chapter, plays as
well the Critic, as the Divine, and is no less nice, than solid, -- Dominus
nester Jesus Christ us in eo quod virtus and sapientia Dei est, de patre ante
tempora natus est, vel potius quia nec coepit nasci, nec desift dicam verius,
semper natus, non possumus, semper nascitur, ne imperfectus esse videatur --
Our Lord Jesus Christ in that he is the power and wisdom of God is said to be
borne of the Father before all times, or rather because there was no beginning
or end of his generation, we may speak more congruously, he was always borne,
not -- Is --, for that presupposes some imperfection, and as the same Father
prosecutes. Vt (...) designari (...), and perfectus, and semper (...) and
natus, quatenus, and natus ad perf^ctionem pert^, and semper ad aeter^atem.
That we may declare him both perfect and eternal, we allow him as well a --
semper -- as a -- Natus -- for as much as -- Natus -- has reference to
perfection, -- semper --, to eternity. Howeuer S. Augustine in his exposition
of that of the Psalmist, -- Ego hodie genui te -- Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2. says that -- Hodie -- praesentiam significat
and in eternity, neither is the time past any thing, as if it should cease to
be, nor time to come, as if it were not yet, but only the time present,
Because whatsoever is eternal always -- Is -- yet at length he understands
that place -- de sempiterna generatione sapientiae D^i -- And Lombard descants
on it in his first book ninth distinction, who would have the Prophet to say
-- Genui -- (...) putaretur, -- hodie -- ne praeterita generatio videretur: I
have begotten thee, lest it should be thought new, to day, past, and thence out
of the authority of the Text or the interpretation concludes a perpetual
generation of the Son from the essence of the Father.

But here the Heretic interposes, and thus subtly beats at the gates of
reason. A thing that is borre, cannot be said that it was over, for in this
respect it is said to be borne, that it might be. S. Hillarie, Lib. 12. de
Trin.
by a modest answer or confutation rather, limits his proposition to things
merely secular, which borne here in the course of nature, must necessarily
call on time, and tell us they sometimes were not, it is one thing then to be
borne of that which always is not, another of that which always was, for that
is temporary, this eternal.

If then it be proper to God the Father, always to be Father, it must be to
God the Son, always to be Son, so the Evangelist. Ioh. 1. v. 1.
-- In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God, and the same was from the beginning; erat, erat, erat, erat, en quater
erat, vbi impius inuenit quod non erat? Saint Ambrose in his first to Gratian
5. c. and indeed it was not without a mystery when in that glorious
transfiguration on Mount Tabor, Peter saw Christ with Moses, and Elias ( when
his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as Snow) what did
that vision portend? Ambros. vt supra.
Nisi vt appareret nobis quod lex and Prophetae cum Euangelio congruentes
sempiternum dei filium quem annunciauerant, reuelarent. But that it should
appear unto us that the Law and the Gospel going hand in hand with
Evangelical truth (for under Christ and Moses and Elias, Saint Augustine also
shrines those three) Aug. in orat. ad Catech. cap. 6.
should reveal unto us the everlasting Son of God, whom they had both
foretold and shown. And lo yet, as if these were not Oracles loud enough for
the promulgation of such a Majesty, the voice of the Almighty fills it up with
a -- Hic est meus Dilectissimus -- This is my beloved Son, My Son of
eternity, -- Ego ex vtero ante Luciferum genui te --. Psalm. 34. And a son of
mine own substance, -- Ex ore Altissimi prodiui -- Wis. 7. -- primogenitus --
before the day was, I am he, Esaias 43.13. -- Vnigenitus -- A just God, and a
Savior, There is none beside me, Esaias 45.21. A Son begotten, not created,
not of grace, but nature, before, not in time.

Hereupon Christ taking his farewell of his Disciples, John 20. shows them
this Interuallum and distance of generation and adoption: I go to my Father,
and your Father, and to my God and your, not to our Father, but to mine and
yours. This separation implies a diversity, and shows that God is his Father
indeed, but our Creator; and therefore he adds. My God and your God; Mine by a
privilege of nature, yours of grace; Mine out of the womb (as it were) of
euerlastingnesse; yours out of the jaws of time. Yet the Heretic would feign
sell us to unbelief and error, by cheating Christ of an eternal birthright,
tossing it on the tides of time, and so make him a creature, and no God.

Here to dissent merely were both perfunctory and dull, such a falsehood
merits rather defiance, than denial, Amb. vt supra.
-- Negamus? potius horremus vacem --. Errors that are so insolent are to be
explos't, not disputed, and spit at rather than contrould. Confutation swayes
not here, but violence, and therefore the Apostle drives this blasphemy to the
head, Coloss. 1.15. Where we find Christ styled primogenitus vniuersae
Creaturae. The firstborn of every creature; not the first created, -- Vt
genitus pro Natura, and primus pro perpetuitate credatur --. says Ambrose;
borne presupposes divine nature -- First, perpetuity, and therefore when the
pen of the Holy Ghost sets him out in his full glory, he gives him this title
Col. 1.
-- haeredem omnium --, -- The heir of all things, by whom God made the world
--, To make the world, and to be made in it, how contradictory? Amb. 1. de si.
ad Great. cap. 2.
Quis Authorem inter opera sua deputet vt videatur esse quod fecit? says the
Father. Was there ever malice so shod with ignorance, which could not divide
the Artificer from his work, the Potter from his clay, the Creator from the
thing created? hear him speak in whose mouth there was no guile. -- Ego and
pater vnum sumus, Ioh. 10. I and the Father are one. Vnum -- to show a consent
both of power and eternity. -- Sumus -- a perfection of nature without
confusion. Again, -- Vnum sumus -- not -- vnus sum -- (so Augustine descants)
Orat. ad Catech. cap. 5.
-- Vnum -- to confute the Arrian, -- Sumus -- the Sabellian, the one
disiointing and seuering the times of Son and Father, the other confounding
their persons. -- Vnum -- than, to show their essence one, -- Sumus -- the
persons diverse.

I could wish that we were now at truce, but with these there is neither peace
nor safety, but in victory; we are still in the Front and violence of our
Adversary, who puts on here as Philip did to Christ, with a -- Domine ostende
nobis -- Lord show us the Father, and it suffices us, but observe how the Lord
replies, and in his reply controules, and in his controulement cure's? Have I
been so long time with thee, and have thou not known me Philip? I came to
reconcile thee to the Father, and will thou separate me? Why seek thou
another? he that has seen me, has seen my Father also -- Audi Arriane quid
Dominus? (says Augustine) si errasti cum Apostolo, redi cum Apostolo* Hark
Arrius how the Lord rebukes him, and if thou have digrest with an Apostle,
return with an Apostle, so his check shall be thy conversion. But whilst we
thus shoulder with the Arrian, the Sabellian lies in ambush, who now comes on
like lightning and thunder, but goes off like smoke; for looking back to
those words of our Savior, he runs on boldly to his own paradox, and by
this harmony of Son and Father would persuade us to a confusion of their
persons; but the Text bears it not, and one little particle shall redeem it
from such a preposterous interpretation; for it runs not with a -- Qui me
videt, videt patrem, -- He that sees me, sees my father, as if I were both
father and son, but with a -- Qui me videt, videt -- and -- patrem, -- He
that sees me, sees my father also. Vbi interpositio vnius sillabae, and, patrem
descernit, and filium, teque demonstrat, neque patrem habere, neque filium,
August. in his contra 5. host. genera cap. 6. It is a rare opinion that has
not something to hearten it either in truth or probability, otherwise it were
no less erroneous, than desperate. But here there can be no color or pretense
for either, where both Divinity and Arts breathe their defiance; that two
natures should dissolve into one person, religion contradicts; two persons into
one nature, reason; but two persons into one person, both reason and religion.
-- Dixit Dominus Domino meo -- says the Psalmist, The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit at my right hand. Hark Sabellius, here is a Lord and a Lord two then, not
one; where is now thy confusion of persons? Ego Deus solus, and non alius extra
me, Deuteronomy. 32.12. I am God, and there is none beside me --. Arrius where is thy
God of eternity, and thy God of power, thy God of time, and operation, and thy
God from the beginning? Audi Israel, Dominus noster Deus vnus --, The Lord our
God is God only, no rival, no sharer in his omnipotency, for if temporary,
how a God? if a God, how not eternal? if eternal, how not one? Thou allowest
him the power of God, but not the eternity, the operation, not the time; what
prodigy of error? what dearth of reason? what war of contradiction? what is
this but to be God, and no God? temporary, and yet everlasting? Opinion once
seeded in error, shoots-out into heresy, and after some growth of time,
blasphemy. Who (besides an Arrian) could have thus molded two Gods out of one?
except a Tritheite, or a Maniche? Who (scarce so grossly neither) deny them
not an equality of time, but condition, coeternall, but this good, and that
evil. Thus men ouer-borne with the strength of a self-conceit, are so
precipitated and drawn on with the swindge of an unruly fancy, that leaving
the road and usual ways of truth, they run into bypath of error, and so at
length loose both their judgment, and their faith. Some have been so busy
with stars, that they have forgotten him that gives them influence; and like
curious Lapidaries, dally so long with sparkling objects, that they loose the
light of that organ which gives life unto their Art. Learning (indeed) in many
is a disease, not a perfection, a mere surfeit, rather vomited, than emptied,
nothing passes but what is forced, and as sometimes with a fit of weakness,
so of pity. A greedy knowledge feeds not our understanding, but oppresses it,
and like a ravenous appetite chewes more to poison, than to nourishment. Were I
to drink freely of what is sacred, I should desire that which flows, not that
which is pumped for, waters that are troubled yield mud, and are oftentimes
as well the bane of the receiver, as the comfort. A Pioner or bold myner which
digs on too far for his rich vein of Ore, meets with a dampe which choakes
him; and we may find some dispositions rather desperate than venturous, known
more by a heady resolution, than a wise cautelousnesse, whom we may resemble to
that silly and storme-tost Seaman, who diued so long for a piece of his
shipwrackt treasure, that either want of air, or ponderousness of water
deprived him at once of life and fortune. Arrius has been so long conversant
in the school of Philosophy, that he forgets he is a Priest, and now makes
that the Mistress of Divinity, which was before the handmaid. S. Augustine
therefore in his Oration ad Catechum. expostulates with the heretic, and by
way of Prosopopeta does catechize him thus, -- Credis in Deum patrem
omnipotentem? Do thou believe in God the father Almighty, and in his son
Jesus Christ our Lord? I believe, thou say: here, then thou art mine against
the Pagan, and the Mohammedan. Do thou believe that the God and man Christ
Jesus was conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary? I believe;
thou art yet with me against Photinus, and the Jew. Do thou believe the
father to be one person, and the son another, yet father and son but one
God? and this also; here thou art mine too against the Sabellian. -- Age si
mecum es in omnibus, quare litigamus? says the Father, if we are one in all
these, why contend we? Let there be no strife between thee and me, for we are
brethren. But it will fall out here anon as between Lot and Abraham, by reason
of our substance we cannot dwell together, we must part anon. Tell me then how
is the son equal to the father, in operation or beginning, in power or
eternity, or both? In operation and power, the heretic allows, but not
eternity; for how can that which was begotten be equal to that which was not
begotten? Yes, eternity, and greatness, and power in God sound one, for he is
not great in one thing, and God in another, but in this great, that he is God,
be cause his greatness is the same with his power, and his essence with his
greatness. Seeing then the son is coequall in respect of power, he must be
coeternall too in respect of euerlastingnesse. Here the Arrian is on fire, and
nothing can allay or quench these flames but that which gives them an untimely
foment, Reason. To prove a principle in nature is both troublesome and
difficult, but in religion without the assent of faith, impossible: In matters
of reason, it is first discourse, then resolve, but in these of religion, first
believe, and the effect will follow, whether for confession of the truth, or
conviction of error, or both. The greatest miracles our Savior did in way of
cure or restoration was with a -- si credas --, and that to the living, and
the dead, and between those, the sick. To the Centurion for his servant with
a -- sicut credis --, As thou beleeuest, so be it unto thee, Matthew. 8.5. To the
Ruler of the Synagogue for his daughter, with a -- Creed -- too, -- Fear not,
but believe, Mar. 5.36. To all that are dumb, or blind, or lame in mysteries
of Divinity, as to those dumb, or blind, or lame in body, with a -- Vtrum
creditis? Do you believe these things? then your faith has made you whole,
Matthew. 9.28. but if we meet with unweildy dispositions, such as are not only
intractable, but opposite to the ways of faith, we shall rather drag than
inuit them to belief; howeuer the Father labors here by a powerful
persuasion, and where he fails in the strength of proof, he makes it out by
way of allusion, which he illustrates by a similitude of fire and light, which
are distinct things, one proceeds from another, neither can the one be possibly
without the other, the father he resembles to the fire, the son to the light,
and endeauours to derive it (though obliquely somewhat) from sacred story in
Deuteronomy. 4.24. God is called a fire, -- Thy God is a consuming fire; in Psalm. 8.
Christ the light, Thy word is a light unto my steps: With this double stone he
batters the forehead both of the Sabellian, and the Arrian; first of the
Sabellian, for here are two in one, fire and light, yet two still not one, why
not so with Son, and Father? The Arrian next, for here also is one borne of
another, yet the one not possibly to be borne without the other, neither of
them first and last; fire and light coequall, Father and Son, so too. The
similitude iarres only in this, those are temporary, and these eternal, --
pater ergo and filius vnum sunt (says the Father) -- Sunt -- dico, quia pater
and filius, -- vnum -- quia Deus; dualitas in prole, vnitas in deitate, cum
dico filius, alter est, cum dico Deus, vnus est. cont. 5. host. genera cap. 7.
What more obuious and trodden to the thinnest knowledge, than that there is
here -- alius and -- alias, but not -- aliud --, as in bells of equal magnitude,
and dimension (pardon the lowness of the similitude) which though framed out
of the same mass, and Art, where the substance and workmanship are one, yet
the sound is diverse; for though of Son and Father the substance be one as
God, yet the appellation and sound is diverse, as Son and Father.

The Heretic either impatient of this truth, or ignorant, once more makes
reason his vmpire, but how sinisterly, how injuriously? that which should be
the mistress of our sense, and the Stern and arbitresse of all our actions,
must now be a promotresse and baud to error. It is bold expostulation that
runs us on these shelues of danger, and has been the often wrack of many a
blooming and hopeful truth. There are errors besides these desperate, of
will, of understanding, which sometimes are rather voluntary, than
deliberatiue, and ballaced more by the suggestions of a weak fancy, than any
strength of judgment; If our thoughts still lie at Hull in those shallowes of
nature, where we coast daily about sense and reason, how can we but dash
against untimely errors? but if we keep aloof in principles of Religion,
where those winds of doubt and distrust swell and bluster not, faith will be at
last our wafter unto truth. Let Us not then any longer root our meditations in
valleys under us, but look up to those hills from whence our salvation
comes. Let Us converse a little with Prophets and Evangelists, and those other
Registers and Secretaries of the Almighty. -- In te est Deus, and non est Deus
praeter te, Esaias 45.5. Infidel, either deny a divinity of Father, or Son, or
confess an unity of both; for one thou must do; of the Son thou can not,
for there is a God in him, the Father, Pater qui in me manet ipse loquitur, the
Father that is in me he speaks, and the works which I do be does Ioh. 10. of
the Father thou dare not, there is a God in him the Son, -- I am in the
Father, and the Father in me, Ioh. 14. Here then is both a propriety of
nature, and unity of consent. God in God, yet not two, but one, fullness of
divinity in the Father, fullness in the Son, yet the Godhead not diverse, but
the same, so that now there is no less a singleness of name than operation.
And therefore those words of the Apostle, though in the first encounter and
suruay, they offer a show of contradiction, yet searched to the quick and
kernel, are not without a mysterious weight, Romans 8.32. It is said of the
Father, -- Filio proprio non pepercit, sed pro nobis tradidit --. He spared not
his own Son but gave him for us all to death; yet Ephesians. 5. It is said of
the Son, -- Tradidit semetcipsum pro nobis --, -- He gave himself for us --,
Here is a double -- Tradidit -- an a -- pronobis --, and a -- sepronobis --,
if he was given of the Father, and yet gave himself, how can it follow, but
that there must be both a simpathy of nature and operation? And indeed it were
a mere sacrilege and robbery of their honor, to deprive them of this so
sacred a correspondence. We allow to all believers but one soul and one heart,
Acts 4 to all those that cleave to God one spirit. 1 Cor. 16. to husband and
wife one flesh, to all men in respect of nature, but one substance; If in
sublunary matters (where there is no alliance or reference with those more
sacred) Scriptures approve many to be one, shall we riffle the Father and the
Son of the like Jurisdiction, and deny them to be eternally one, where there
is no jar of will, or substance? Hear how the Apostle does chalk out a way
to our belief, by the rules of divine truth, 1 Cor. 8.6. There is one God
which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we of him, and one Lord Jesus
Christ by whom are all things, and we by him. Here is -- Deus -- and --
Dominus --, a God and a Lord, and yet no plurality of Godhead, and an -- ex
quo -- and a -- per quem, -- of whom and by whom, yet a unity of power, for as
in that he says one Lord Jesus Christ, he denied not the Father to be Lord, so
by saying one God the Father, he denied not the Son to be God. -- In te
igitur est Deus per vnitatem naturae, and non est Deus praeter te propter
proprietatem substantiae. Ambros. lib. 1. de fide ad Gratian 2. cap. With what
sacred inscriptions do we find him blazoned, the engraven form of his Father,
the image of his goodness, the brightness of his glory? and with these three
of an Apostle, Esaias 9.6.
a Prophet ranks other three not subordinate in majesty, or truth; as if the
same inspiration had dictated both matter and form. Counselor, the Almighty
God, the everlasting Father, the everlasting Father in a double sense, either
as he is author of it, as Iuball was said to be the Father of Music when he
was but the Author or inuentor, or in respect of his affection, because he
loves with an everlasting love; yet some leaning on the word of the Greek
Interpreter (...), which the vulgar renders, -- Pater futuri seculi -- would
restrain it only to the life to come, but Calvin extends it to a perpetuity
of time and continued Series of all ages; In cap. 9. Esaias.
And the Chaldee translation (which with the Hebrew is most authentic) seems
not only to assent to it, but applaud it too. -- Nomen eius ab ante mirabilis
consilio, Deus fortis, permanens in saecula saculorum --. Howeuer the
Septuagint (terrified with the majesty of so great a name) give it us by --
Magni confilij Angelus --; which words though they have no footing in the
original, yet both Augustire and Tertullian approve the sense, taking --
Angelus -- for -- Nancius --, so that Christ took not upon him the nature of
an Angel (as some would injuriously foize upon Origens opinion) but the
office, by which as a Legate or mediator, rather he appeared to those
Patriarchs of old, Abraham and the rest, Genesis 18.3.

I have once more brought Christ as far as Jacob and Abraham, but the Text
tells me a little farther, and so does my adversary too, till I have verified
in Christ the strength of that voice, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Jacob. We may not leave him here with the bare title of an Angel, we must go
higher, to that of the Son of God, where we shall meet our implacable Arrian
in his violent opposition. If there be a Son, he must be borne, if borne,
there was a time when there was no Son, for to be borne, presupposes a
beginning, and that time. Saint Augustine divided (as it seems) between pity
and indignation, answers. Qui hoc dicit non intelligit etiam natum esse, deo
sempiternum esse --. To be borne with God, is to be eternal with God, and he
opens himself by his old similitude, Sicut splendour qui gignitur ab igni, as
light which is begotten of fire, and diffused, is coequall with the fire, and
would be coeternall too if fire were eternal, so the Son with the Father,
this being before all time, the other must kiss in the same euerlastingnesse.
The Father thinking his reason built too slenderly does buttresse (as it were)
and back it with the authority of an Apostle, 1 Cor. ^
such an Apostle as was sometimes a persecutor, and therefore his authority
most potent against a persecutor, where he styles Christ, the power and
wisdom of God. If the Son of God be the power and wisdom of God, and that
God was never without power and wisdom, how can we scant the Son of a
coeternitie with the Father? For either we must grant that there was always a
Son, or that God had sometimes no wisdom, and impudence or madness were
never at such a growth of blasphemy as to belch the latter. If the reverend
allegation of a learned Prelate, or those more sacred of an Apostle, cannot
bung up the mouth of a malicious Heretic, hear the voice of a Prophet, and a
Father warbling upon that too. Before me there was no other God, and after me
there shall be none, Esaias. 43.10. Quis hoc dicit, pater, an filius? (says
Ambrose) who is here the speaker, the Father or the Son (he comes over him
with a subtle Dilemma:) if the Son, thus he says, -- before me there was
no other God, if the Father, -- After me (says he) there shall be none, for
both the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father must be known, when
thou namest a Father, thou have also designed a Son, because no man is a
Father to himself; when thou namest a Son, thou confessest also a Father,
for no man is son to himself, the Son therefore can neither subsist
without the Father, nor the Father without the Son, the one being from
everlasting, we may not depose the other from the like omnipotency. If truth
thus twisted in a triple authority of Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, cannot
allay the turbulency of a contagious heretic, hear the voice of him who
spoke as never man spoke; never Father, Apostle, Prophet, (if at length such an
authority be passable with an Arrian) the Lamb of God; O Father glorify me
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was, Ioh. 17.5. Hear thou Infidel? a Son, and glorified, with the Father
before the world? what chinke now, what by-path for evasion where thou art
compassed with such a cloud of witnesses?

Tell me devil (for heretic is to cheap and low an attribute, when thou art
grown to such a maturity and height of profanation) was there a time when
omnipotent God the Father was not, and yet was there a God? Gird now up thy
loins, and answer if thou can, for if he began to be a Father, then he was
first a God, and after made a Father, how is God then immutable, how the same
one, when by access of generation he shall suffer change? Grant me then a God
eternal, and thou must a Father, and if a Father, a son too, they are
relatiues, and cannot digest a separation either in respect of time, or power.
And this thou did once subscribe to (and I know not what deuillish suggestion
wrought thy revolt) in an Epistle to Eusebius, if the authority of Brentius
will pass for classical, where thou could afford him the style of (...),
plenus Deus, vnigenitus -- and a little before that he had his beginning, (...)
-- ante tempora, ante saecula, why should thou now then rip up the womb of
Deity, and enquire how he was begotten? how borne? and when? as if thou
labouredst to bastard his descent, and make it ^emporary. Do not, do not out
of the custom of humane generation tie eternity to time, or manner, and so at
once vomit error and blasphemy. Hear the voice of the Lord thundering unto
thee, Cui me similem existimas? who is like unto me, or to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? Me ante montes generauit Dominus, before the mountains were
settled, or the hills raised, I was brought forth. Ambros. 1. de fide, cap. 5.
Habeat ergo generationis inusitatae gloriam, qui habet potestatis inusitatae
gratiam. He that has an unwonted Jurisdiction in respect of power, it were a
derogation too capital to lessen his prerogative in way of birth; observe what
pomp he carries of antiquity, what descent, how derived? by Heralds of no
mean rank, a King, and a Prophet, and a Prophet that is a King, I was set up
of old, from everlasting, Prou. 8.24. His goings forth have been from
everlasting, Mich. 5.2. Thy throne is established of old, thou art from
everlasting, Psalm. 93.2. Hark, from everlasting, from everlasting, from
everlasting, one ecchoing to another, as if the some pen had been as well the
directrix of the languages, as the truth. If thou shall then hereafter ball an
eternity with a -- quande, or a -- quomodo natus? Amb. vt supra.
I go one with the Father still, Quid te ista quaestionum tormenta delectant?
Audis Dei filium, aut dele nomen, aut agnosce natural? -- Quaeres that are to
nice rather torment the understanding, than inform it, and are more apt to
puzzle our Judgment, than to rectify it. Subtilty of questions (I know not
whether) it has more convinced, or begotten error, or improued us in our
knowledge, or staggered us. And hence I suppose was the substance of the
Apostles advice to the Romans, He that is weak in faith receive you; but not
to doubtful disputations, Cap. 14.1. Curiosities of question have ever been
the engines and stales to heresy, and therefore some of the Fathers have
nicke-named Philosophers with an -- Haereticorum Patriarchae -- Tertull.
It is no less a policy than right in sadder learning to give Divinity the
chair, for if Arts with their subtle retinue once invade it, sense and reason
will hiss faith out of doors. And therefore we find the same Apostle
vehement in his -- Cauete ne vos seducat, Beware lest any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, Coloss. 2.4. In matters of faith
he that plays either the Philosopher, or the critic displaies neither his
Judgment, nor his Religion, for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power, 1 Cor. 4.20. Considera (says Augustine) quod voceris fidelis non
rationalis, Faith, not reason, is our anchor in this depth, and belief, not
scruple is our steersman to our port. Wisdom, I mean that which is worldly
and feathered (as it were) with transtorinesse, must now stoop to simplicity,
strength to weakness. How does the Apostle iumpe with us? He has chosen the
foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak things the
mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27. Hence it is that the kingdom of heaven belongs unto
children, Matthew. 19.13. And God has hid it from the prudent, and revealed it
to babes, Matthew. 11.25. And therefore S. Augustine makes a proud knowledge
strike sail to a modest ignorance in his 188. Sermon. de Temp. -- Meum est pie
ignorantiam confiteri, quam temere mihi scientiam vendicare. In sacred matters
your nimble Cryticismes are as obnoxious to desperatnesse, as danger; to be
curious (here) is to be quaintly mad, and thus to thrust into the bedchamber
of the Almighty is a frantic sauciness. Who can unlock those Coffers of
omnipotency, Esaias 45.2.
but he that breaks in pieces the gates of Brass, and cuts in sunder the
bars of Iron? Who those Cabinets of abstruser knowledge? Jdem, ibid.
but he that gives thee the treasure of darkness, and hidden riches of secret
places? How can our low built apprehensions but flag in the expression of such
a birth, when we find a Prophet so transported with contemplation of it, that
he dares the world with an Interrogation, -- Generationem eius quis enarrabit?
Who shall declare his generation, Esaias 53. Yet we have met with some
supercilious and daring wits, which venture here to untwist this mystery of
generation, as if they would calculate an eternal birthright, leaning upon the
authority of S. Hierom in his Commentaries upon Eccl. 1. where he asseuers,
that in sacred Scriptures -- Quis oftentimes is not put for an impossibility,
but a difficulty. And he instances in this -- Quis -- of Esaias, Generationem
eius quis enarrabit? Lib 1. did. 19.
But Lumbard does both vindicate and interpret the Father, thus, -- Non dicit
quod generatio filij aeterna. -- He says not that this eternal generation of
the son of God can descend to any mortal capacity in an absolute and full
knowledge; but in some measure and degree, for so the Apostle does peece-out
our perfection here, We are happy in part, and know only in part, not a hair,
not a feather as we should. Dic mihi (says Augustine) Orat. contra Arrianos.
altitudinem Coeli, profundum Abyssi, etc. Show me the height of Heaven, and
the depth of Hell, number (if thou can) the sands of the Sea, the drops of
rain, or the hairs of thine own head. Plane me out by some perfect
demonstration the truth of those things which grouell here below, and I will
believe thy knowledge may aspire to those which are above; but thou have no
power of compassing the one, nor possibility in the atchieuement of the other.
For when all thy faculties of understanding, will, have fluttered so high as
the wings of nature can eleuate and mount them to, yet thou will at last make
up the story of Icarus, and find that these are but waxen plumes, and will
melt at the presence of those glorious beams, and so thy fall will be as
dishonorable as thy attempt was peremptory; for if the great Doctor of the
Gentiles (rapt up into the third Heaven) said that he heard words
inexpressible, which no tongue dated to utter, how can thou dissolve and
untie -- Paternae generationis Arcana -- (as Ambrose styles them) those knots
and Riddles of eternal generation, which can never bore a humane intellect,
nor lie within the verge of mortal apprehension? Mihi enim impossible est
generationis scire secretum (says the Father) men's deficit, vox silet, non
meae tantum, sed and Angelorum, supra potestates, and sepra Cherubin, and supra
Seraphin, and supra omnem sensum, in his 1. de fide ad Gratian. c. 4. It is not
then so much ambition in our desire, as madness, to attempt the knowledge of
that where there is an impossibility of revelation. Those enterprises are
temerarious and ouer-headstrong, which put on where there is not only danger,
but a despair of conquest. How can reasonable man but lie buried under the
weight of such a mystery, at which those grand pillars of the Church have not
only shook but shrunk? How must we be struck dumb when the tongues of
Saints and Angels stutter? How our minds entranced, when the glorious host of
Heaven, and all those feathered Hierarchies shall clap their ^ings? All reasons
tongue-tied, all apprehension non plust, all understanding darkened; so that I
may now speak of this metaphorical depth, as Job did of that other natural,
-- Thou have made a cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling
band.

Mysteries carry with them such an awe and Majesty, as if they would be
obeyed, not disputed, and assented to, not controuerst. In secrets without
bottom (such as carry the stamp of sacred) except faith holds us up like
children we swim without bladders, and must either dabble to the shore, or
sink, reason has not an hand to lend us. Faith and reason in respect of
mystery, are as a wheel and a bucket at a deep well; faith has both the
power and safety of descent, and nimbly fathoms it, whilst reason wheele's,
and rounds it, and is strangely giddied in a distracted Gyre. And indeed who
durst laue such an Ocean, Esaias 44 7.
but he that says to the deepes be dry? Job 38.8.
or can shut up the seas with doors, that they break not out, and say, hither
shall thou come, no farther, there shall thy proud waves stay? What eye that
looks on the Sun, and dazels not, Ecclus 10.19.
but he that sees from everlasting to everlasting? and sends out lightning that
they may come and go, and say, here we are? The star-gazer and bold figure
flinger are at a stand here, why look thou up thou proud Astrologer? you men
of Galilee, why gaze you into heaven? Thus says the Lord of hoasts, he that
formed thee from the womb: Esaias 44.24,25.
I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches out the heavens alone,
that frustrateth the tokens of liars, and makes diuiners mad, that turns
wisemen backwards, and makes their knowledge foolishness. Thou, O Lord, shall
have them in derision, thou shall laugh the heathen to scorn, for the sin of
their mouth, and the words of their lips they shall be taken in their pride, as
the dust (O Lord) shall thou drive and scatter them, and in thy wrath thou
shall consume them, that they may know, that it is God that rules in Iaacob,
and to the end of the world.

Arrius is now in his pomp and height of glory, and flourishes like a green
bay tree, anon look after him, and he is no where to be found. He is up
yet, but it is with the proud man in the Psalms, in slippery places, and
(anon) with him, how suddenly destroyed, perished, and brought to a fearful
end? The whole Eastern Church is now in a strange combustion, and he must
kindle it, by and by those flames shall light him to his own ruin. Heresy
may root and bud, and branch, and grow to a goodly height, but the hand of
vengeance houers over it, and when it strikes, it fels it at a blow, and it
comes down like a pine from a steep mountain, which in the fall shatters
both the branch, and body. It is here, as with mists and fogges which we see
first rise as in a thin smoke from a low Fen or Valley, but gathering strength
climb the mountain, and at last so thicken in one body of vapors that they
seem to dare the Earth with a second night, till the Sun (recovering height
and power) by the virtue and subtlety of his beams does dissipate and open
them, and they are seen no more.

Will you have a president? we find Arrius at first a mean Priest of
Alexandria in Egypt, a man keen and subtle, as well in wit as learning,
Specie, and forma magis, quam virtute religiosus, sed gloria, and nouitatis
improbe cupidus, (says Ruffinus) Lib. 1.
In virtue not so much refined as in the deportment of the outward man, which
promised a set gravity, though no truth of Religion, in a thirst and pursuit of
honor and novelty, strangely violent, -- Dulcis erat incollequio, persuadens
animas, and blandiens. In his discourse no less sweet, than powerful, and
where he gains no conquest by persuasion, he mines by flattery; Thus by the
sorceries and enchantments of a voluble tongue, simplicity is betrayed, and under
a pretext of truth, silly women (who are ever most affected with leuity and
change) are first led captive; and these for the enhancement and propagation of
their new doctrine, commerce with their allies, and these tickled with new
fancies, applaud the design, entertain the novelty, conuenticles are both
consulted on, and summoned, and in a short time, -- Septingentas virginitate^
professas in vnam contraxit -- So Epiphanius --. Aduers. Haeres.
Their Religion is yet in the blade, and green only in a few she disciples,
anon it grows by their league with others, Amb. 1. de fide cap 4.
Eudoxius, Eunomius, Aetius and Demophilus, plura nomina, sed vna perfidia --;
Coheires though not to the same title, the same villainy; so that those
dangerous tumults in the body of the Church could not but now startle the head
and governor. Constantine is informed of those pernicious and desperate
proceedings, who calls a Council of 318 Bishops for the condemnation of the
heretic. Some conversant in subtlety of question (as there was never opinion
so deformed, but found a Champion to propugne it) favored Arrius; but at
length most of them decreed with one mouth Christ to be (...), 17 a while
stick fast to the opinion of the Heretic, 11 whereof by the menacing of the
Emperor subscribed, Manu solum, non mente, and the other 6 are now with Arrius
upon terms of exile; they betake themselves to Palestina, where partly by
strength of Argument, partly by the insinuations of a smooth tongue, they gain
other Bishops to their opinion; Anon, Constantius, and Valens Emperors; some
they seduce by subtilty, some by gifts, some by power, some by cruelty; those
that affied constantly to the profession of Christ's divinity, they invade by
persecution, and all the witty tortures that malice or tyranny could devise,
are now put in practice, for the torment of those professors; insomuch that the
hearts of their very enemies, could nor but thaw into pity to hear the cries,
but constancy of little children under the barbarous hands of their merciless
tormentors. Christianus sum. Christum verum Deum, credo, and adoro, as the
author in his historia tripartita de persequutione. Vandalorum.

This heresy now is full blown, and at the growth; one Act more makes it
ripe, and ready for the sickle. Alexandria is yet infected, and foul dregs of
Arrianisme reign not only here, but in the neighbor Provinces; Insomuch that
Alexander (then Bishop) daily pestered with those damned innouations, on a
Sunday, (for so my Antiquary tells me) Epiphanius.
earnestly prayed that God would either take him away lest he should be defiled
with the like contagion, or that he would show some miracle, either for the
conversion or confusion of the Heretic. Not long after the desires of the
holy man were accomplished, and in such a way of judgment, that the relation
would suit better with a ring of Scauengers than a noble throng, his bowels
burst, as sometimes Judas did, Et sic finem adeptus est, in loco immundo and
graueolenti, -- his death was equally odious with his life, and that with the
place he died in, no sad retinue or pomp of exequy to embalme him, no hearse
or winding sheet, but his own intrailes, and grau'd up with excrements,
instead of earth, an end as odious, as untimely, as if it proceeded from the
hand of vengeance, and not Fate.

And so Saint Ambrose dilates on it 1 de fide cap. 5.
-- Non est fortuita mors vbi in sacrilegio pari, poenae parile pregessit
exemplum, vt idem subirent suppliciu^, qui eundem Dominum negauerunt and eundem
Dominum prodiderunt --. It is no casual, but a destinated end, that in a like
sactiledge, there should be a like example of punishment, and so both meet in
one way of ruin which had denied and betrayed their Master.

I have now brought this heresy to her grave, but the funeral of this is the
resurrection of another, and the re-intertainment of that of a third. No part
of Christ (either in respect of his divinity, or manhood) but is the mint of a
new heresy, which (if I should endeavor (here) either to confute or open)
would prove an undertaking fitter for a volume, than a discourse, and for a
Library, than a volume. It cost the hours of an entire age, and the sweat and
elaboratenesse of all the Fathers. Those few sands which are now in their
constant course will be run out in the very nomination of Marcionites,
Valentinians, Hebionites, Apollinarians, and the residue of that cursed rabble,
and so I shall be cast upon your censures, if not as I have been weak, yet as
I have been tedious. I will then open the mouths of very heathens, and they
shall both speak, and confirm this truth, and no less appose our
adversaries, than convince them, an authority I know not how unsavory or
unseasonable to a divided Auditory, where a profane quotation sounds sometimes
as heathenish as a tradition, which in the very name is cri'de down as
apocryphal, and Romanish; but I must put that upon the hazard, not esteeming
the froth either of popular censure or approbation.

Heathens indeed are little above the condition of beasts, if that only
actuate a man which animates a Christian, the soul of faith; yet if God please
to cast his pearls before these swine, wherefore has he made us Lords over
them, but to vindicate those hallowed and precious things from the hands of
unjust possessors? Praeclara Ethnicorum dicta Theologica ab ijs, tanquam
iniustis possessoribus, in vsum nostrum transferenda. It is Augustines in his
second book De doctrina Christiana 4. chap. Divine truth in Heathen mouths is
like the Jewels in Egyptian hands, their wants no Alchimist to refine the
mettle, only some discreeter Israelite to transfer the use; he that was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel preaching to the ignorant Idolaters of
Athens, concludes against them from the mouth of their own Poets, -- (...), as
some of your own Poets have said, Acts 17.28. Text enough to gain, I say, not
authority, but applause to his discourse, and to convince the Heathens shame,
if not their faith. Diue with me a little farther into their secrets, and we
shall find amongst much Hay and Stubble, some Gold and Precious stones,
doctrines which want no truth to make them sound, only divine authority to
make them authentic. It was not impossible that the true light which shines
on every man that comes into the world, should glimpse into those that sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of death; For old Simplicianus in S. Augustines
Confessions 8. Book 2. Chapter, gives encouragement to a particular enquiry,
and concludes in certain books of the Platonists -- Deum insinuari, and cius
verbum --. And of this God, and the Word, the very Philosophers were not
ignorant, for we meet with a Hermes, and a -- Zenon, stiling the maker and
orderer of the Universe -- (...) -- The Word -- which they enlarge with other
attributes of -- Fate, necessity, God -- and what savors a little of a
heathenish relic -- Animu^ Iouis -- taking -- Jupiter -- in the sense that
they do God, as Lactantius in his 4. book de vera Sapient. cap. 9.

But why do we rob them of their maiden honor, and take their sayings upon
Tradition merely? let them speak themselves in their peculiar and
mother tongue. Numenius, a famous Pythagorian (one, who twixt Plato and Moses,
put no difference but of Language, calling Plato -- Mosen, Attica Lingua
Loquentem, -- Moses speaking the Atticke Dialect) Deus primus (says he) in
scipso quidem existens, est simplex, propterea quod secum semper est, nunquam
diuisus; Secundus, and tertius est vnus: The first God is always existent in
himself, simple, indivisible, the second and third one; and a little after, he
calls this first God -- Creautis Dei patrem, -- The father of the creating God.
Had they all adored what he here acknowledged, a Trinity in unity (so to be
worshipped) I should then propose their precept not only to be embraced, but
their practice to be imitated. Search on, and lo that rich mine of Truth is
not yet at her dross, or bottom, for Heraclitus next, one who was wont to
call S. John, Barbarian, that Evangelist to whom belonged the Eagle, as well
for sublimity of Style, as Contemplation; he -- censet verbum Dei in ordine
Principij, atque dignitate constitutum, apud Deum esse, and Deum esse, in quo
quicquid factum sit, fuerit viuens, and vita, and ens, tum in corpora Lapsum,
carnemque indutum, hominem apparuisse, ostendens etiam tunc naturae suae
magnitudinem: Hark how the Frog chaunts like the Nightingale, (It is
Maximilians, Ethnici audiendi, non tanquam Philomelae, sed Ranae) and curiously
counterfeits her in every strain? How closely this obscure Heathen follows
not only the Gospels truth, but the phrase too? In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and was God, all things were made by him, every
living Creature, life, and thing, then this Word was made flesh, and appeared
man, and even then showed the glory of his nature. How sweetly he warbles with
his Barbarian, as if by an easy labor of Translation he had bereft him both
of Truth and Eloquence? I marvel not now at that Testimony of Basil the
Great, upon those words, In principio erat verbum -- Hoc ego noui, multos etiam
extra veritatis rationem positos -- I have known many (says he) and those put
without the pale and list of divine Truth, men merely secular, advancing and
magnifying this piece of Scripture, and at length bold to mix it with their
own decrees and writings. And S. Augustine seconds it with an instance, --
Quidam Platonicus, -- A certain Platonist was wont to say that the beginning
of S. John's Gospel was worthy to be written in letters of gold, and preached
in the most eminent Churches and Congregations, in his 10 book de Ciuitate Dei,
c. 29. O the divine raptures and infusions, that God does sometimes betroth to
his very enemies* who can but conceive that as the very worst of men have
knowledge enough to make them inexcusable; so the best of Heathen had enough to
make them Saints, were their faith that he should be their Savior, as great as
their knowledge, that he was the Son of God. With what rich Epithites they
bedecke and crown him. -- Mentis Germen, Verbum Lucens, Dei Filius, (it is his
saying, who (I know not by what search) found out almost all Truth, Mercurius
Trismegistus) the minds blossom, the word that gave light, the son of God.
What else did S. John add, but that the word was light? And S. Augustine gives
this farther testimony of that heathen, that he spoke many things of Christ in
a propheticke manner -- eadem veritate, licet non eodem Animi affectu -- with
the same truth the Prophets did, but not with the same affection --
pronunciabat illa Hermes. Dolendo, pronunciabat hac Propheta, Gaudendo -- in
his 8. book de Ciuitate Dei, 23. chapter. And why should we batre some of
their Philosophers of a propheticke knowledge, when a Poet shall fill his
cheeks with a -- Chara Deum Soboles, Magnum Iouis incrementum --? And if we
look back to those Oracles of old, the Sybills sacred Raptures, we shall
find them more like a Christians Comment, than a Heathens Prediction. Tunc ad
mortales veniet, mortalibus ipsis
In terris similis, natus Patris omnipotentis
Corpore vestitus --


Whereof if we enquire a little into the original, Saint Augustine In oration.
contra Arrian.
will tell us that the Greek coppies give us (...) -- Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, the Savior; and it is not only probable, but evident, that the
Gentiles had a knowledge of Christ as he was the Word, (...), etc.
as it appears by that of Serapis unto Thulis, King of Egypt. And it is
strangely remarkable: what wonderful Titles, and inscriptions, the Platonists
dedicate to his name and memory, with which as (with a wreath and Laurel) they
girt and beautify his Temples, -- Dei verbum, Mundi Opifex, Idaea boni, Mundi
Archetypum, moderat or Distributor, Imago primi entis, rationalis Creaturae
exemplar, Pastor, Sacerdos, vlna humens, Lux, Sol, coelumque candens, mentis
germen Diuinae, verbum Lucidum, filius primogenitus, primi dei semper viuentis
vmbra, vita, splendour, virtus, candor lucis, character substantiae cius, and
the like, which could not but flow from a heart divinely touched, and a tongue
swollen with inspiration, as Rosselus tells us in his Trismegisti Pimandrum, 1
book, 107 page. For these and the like sayings, some of the ancient Fathers
have coniectured that Plato either read part of divine story, or whilst he
traveled in Egypt, had a taste of sacred truth, out of the sayings of the
Hebrews by an Amanuensis, or interpreter; For then many of the Hebrews (the
Persians reigning) wandered in Egypt.

Moreover, Aristobulus the Jew who flourished in the time of the Machabees,
writing to Ptolomy Philometora, King of Egypt, reports that the Pentateuch
before the Empire of Alexander the Great, and the Persian Monarchy was
Translated out of Hebrew, into Greek, part whereof came to the hands of Plato
and Pythagoras; and he is after peremptory, that the Peripateticks out of the
books of Moses, and the writings of the Prophets drew the greatest part of
their Philosophy, and it may seem strange what the Jewish Antiquary traditions
of Clearchus (the most noble of that Sect) who in his first -- De somno --
brings in his Master Aristotle relating that he met with a certain Jew, a
reverent and a wise man, with whom he had much conference concerning matters
both natural and divine, and received from him such a hint and specialty of
choicer learning which did much improve him in his after knowledge, especially in
that of God, as Josephus lib. 1. contra Appionem, and Eusebius in his 11 de
praeparat, Euangelica c. 6. Clement Alexandrin, 5. Stromaton --.

And thus I have at length (though with some blood and difficulty) trauersed
the opinions of the ancient, and showed you the errors of primitive Times in
their foulest shapes. I have opened the wiles and stratagems of the adversary,
and how defeated by the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; what
Bulwarks and Rampires the Fathers raised for propugning of Christ's divinity,
and how besieged by cursed herefies, with what success, what ruin.

Let us now return where we began, and place Christ where we found him, before
Abraham, before the world, where (me thinks) he now stands like a well rooted
tree in rough storm, where though winds blow on him so furiously, that he is
sometimes forced to the earth (as if he were merely humane) yet he bends
again, and nods toward heaven (to show that he is divine, and but a plant
taken thence grafted in our Eden here) where though tossed up and down with
blasts of Infidelity, yet when the envy of their breath is spent (as we see a
goodly Cedar after a tempest) he stands strait, vn-rent, as if he scorned the
shocke of his late churlish encounter, and dared his blustering Adversary to a
second opposition.

Gloria in excelfis Deo.
FINIS.

