A BRIEF TREATISE DECLARING THE TRVE NOBLEMAN, AND The base Worldling.

1. SAM. 2.30. They that honor me, I will honor: and they that despise me,
shall be despised.

By Walter Sweeper Minister of Strowd.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse sstreete. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROCK, and Philip Earl of
Mountgomerie, Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father through Christ. (*)
MY good Lords, I had intended to have presented to your honorable
Ladie-mother, now at rest with God, the first fruits of my labors in this
kind, containing a just defense of Gods truth and the credit of Dorts Synod
against some of Arminius his scholars here at home, who will not be reclaimed
by the grave sentence of that late Council, nor affrighted with the strange
death of their master: but as Arrius his followers, after his fearful death
did labor to scatter his errors far and near, so do these with us. But your
Honors may object to me, (...). To which I answer, that partly (...), and
partly the importunity of some enemies did draw me forth both by preaching and
printing to assay to stop the mouths of gainsayers. Now I humbly offer to your
Lordships view the true Chhristian Nobleman, who by the Spirit of Adoption
calls God Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. and which Job styles Christ, Job 19.25.
Goeli, My redeeming kinsman; and with Isay, Isa. 5.1. Dodi, My near kinsman.
Your Honors may best challenge this little Treatise as your own right,
because that I gained the greatest part of my little learning through my
acquaintance with your honorable fathers house and family, where you had a most
religious and truly noble breeding and education, by the zealous care of your
pious and truly religious father, and Lady Bathshebah neglected not to teach
her young Lemuels humane and divine knowledge, Prou. 31.1, 2. Your truly noble
fathers house for state and government somewhat resembled Salomons Court, 2.
Chron. 9.4. where Shebaes Queen observed the meat of his table, the sitting
of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers. And your famous Wilton
house, like a little University was a more excellent nurcerie for learning and
piety, then ever it was in former times, when King Edgars daughter Editha had
her residence and regencie there: so that Popish S.F.E. had no need to seek the
restoring of it to its former uses. Wilton house had in it that godly learned
Physician and skillful Mathematician M. Doctor Moffet my most worthy and kind
friend; it had in it great Hugh Sanford learned in all arts, sciences,
knowledge, humane and divine, vsque ad miraculum, whom I ever observed as
Horace did his Maerenas ever before him, singultim pauca locutus, from whom I
never departed without some profit. To pass over Gerard the Herballist, M.
Massinger and other Gentlemen scholars. Never noble house had successively
deeper Divines, namely Bishop Babington, B. Parry, M. Conna^, M. Walford, M.
Parker, M. Bigs. In this noble House Babingtons rules of piety and honesty
swayed, swearing was banished; yea the housekeepers and inferour servants well
knew and practiced the grounds of Religion, as Jerome commends the ploughmen
of Palestina for their Halleluiahs. These were the Trophies of your fathers
house; he honored God, and God honored him, and you his seed enjoy the
blessing: whereas the seed of the wicked, lo ijqqare le holam, shall not be
famous for ever, Isa. 14.20. The seed of the righteous shall be great or strong
in the earth, Dor iesharim ieuorach, the generation of the upright shall be
blessed, Psalm 112.1, 2. Wisdom with an inheritance is good, says Solomon,
Eccles. 7.12. God has blessed your Honors with a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6.
The price of wisdom is in your hands, Oh let your hearts be to it, Prou.
17.16. To whom much is given, of them much is required, Luke 12.48. You cannot
say with the Poet, (...).
(...).
Nor with Ulysses in Homer, (...),
(...).


Serve the Lord with joy of heart for the abundance that he has given you,
Deuteronomy. 28.47. Let your houses not be like Eugenius Tertius Bernards scholar his
house, and recipiant and faciant bouos. Oh let the unfeigned faith, as Paul
speaks to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.5. that dwelt in your good father, dwell in you.

The Lord bless your Honors, and increase in you all the graces of his holy
Spirit, for his Christ's sake, in whom I rest,

Your Lordships most humble servant, Walter Sweeper.

THE TRVE NOBLEMAN.
The Text, Prou. 12.16. The Righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: but
the way of the wicked seduceth them.


THE three books of Solomon are by some compared to the three parts of the
Temple; the Proverbs to the large Court, made for the assembly of all the
people, wherein Christ walked, Ioh. 10.23. Ecclesiastes to the holy place where
the Priests served the Lord, Luke 1.9. and the Canticles to the most holy
place, whereinto the High priest only went once a year, Leuit. 16.12. Though
this b granted, yet the authority and credit of this book is no whit
disparaged, but may well answer the beautiful gate of the Temple, Acts 3.2.
being given by divine inspiration as all other Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.16. And
Solomon wrote not this book by any private motion, but as he was moved by the
Spirit of God, 2. Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. And the title Mishle in the Hebrew, much
commen death to us the excellency of this book, coming of Mashal, to rule,
excel, or speak grave sentences, or dark parables, Ezekiel 20.49. Memashal
Meshalim hu, Does he not speak parables? and it is as much as Kurieuein,
princely to rule, Romans 6.4. or, authentein, to exercise authenticke authority,
1. Tim. 2.12. because these sentences, both in regard of their divine matter
and form, do far excel other writings of this kind. The Ethics, O
Economickes and Politickes of all Heathen Philosophers, must give place to
these. A great part of these Proverbs, were copied out by Hezekiahs servants,
Prou. 25.1. A good pattern for religious Courtiers. Now whereas Solomon wrote
3000 parables and 1005 songs, 1. King. 4.32. God in his gracious providence
has reserved to the use and edification of his Church, only these few holy
Proverbs, with Ecclesiastes and the Canticles, suffering the other books of
humane wisdom, whereof we read 1. King. 2.41. to perish, and not willing to
clog the Church with many books. And therefore many things done by Christ, are
omitted, Ioh. 20.30. because otherwise the world would not contain the books
that should be written, Ioh. 21.25. And as we read Eccles. 12.12. There is no
end of writing books; and much reading is a weariness to the flesh.

If you will know the sum and scope of this book, it is to teach man the
holy knowledge of God, divine duty and moral precepts of civility, Prou.
1.1, 2, 3, 4. For piety does not overthrow the duties of civility: as we
learn from Christ, Luke 14.7. both teaching inward humility and outward
courtesy, in not seeking the highest place at feasts, thereby to preserve our
credit.

Now in the persuading to true holiness and righteousness, the holy Ghost
uses these two chief motives: First he shows the excellency of the
knowledge and fear of God, in it own nature. Secondly, the good effect of it,
making the godly and righteous truly happy, as in this my text, the righteous.

Zadick, righteousness is either attributed to God, as he is in himself simply
just and infinitely good, Math. 19.17; so in the Angels song, Isay 6.3. he is
proclaimed thrice Holy, rather to prove his infinite holiness, then the
trinity of the persons.

Secondly, righteousness is applied to God, because he does impute unto us
Christ's righteousness, Romans 10.3.26. 2. Cor. 5.21. Secondly, Christ our Mediator
is called Gods righteous servant, Isay 53.2. and Zach 9.9. Sions righteous
King; and Acts 4.27. Gods righteous Child, the immaculate Lamb of God, 1. Pet.
1.19.

Thirdly, the Angels and souls in heaven are called holy and just, Math 25.31.
Heb. 12.23. But my text speaks not of these, but of a righteous man in this
life excelling his wicked neighbor. And the truly converted Christian is
called righteous: First in regard of Christ's righteousness imputed to him,
Isay 50.8. He is near that does justify me: He does justify the wicked, Romans
3.26. who being just by faith lives, Romans 1.17. Secondly, we are just in
regard of infused graces and renewed obedience. And the word righteousness
joined with holiness, is strictly taken for the duties of the second Table,
Luke 1.74. Serving God in holiness and righteousness. Sometimes it signifies
both piety and charity, yea all the duties of the first and second Table; so
Noah is called righteous, Genes. 6.9. Of both these righteousnesses, first,
Christ's imputed, and ours wrought by Gods Spirit and word, faith is an
instrument: for, Romans 1.18. The just by faith lives: and Acts 15.9. The
Gentiles heart was purified by faith: and Acts 26.18. They are also sanctified
by faith in Christ. ^ather comes of a verb sometime signifying to abound; so
the French has it, A plus de resie: and the note is, more liberal in gifts;
but the clause following overthrows this sense. Sometime it signifies to
remain, Eccles. 1.13. Mahijthron, What remains. Iunius has it, What profit
is there of all the labors. But in my text it signifies to excel; as Genesis
49.3. iether sees veiethur gnazi, Excellency of dignity and my strength:
altogether thou shall not be excellent. The last word reugth, signifies a
friend, a companion, but here a neighbor.

A man justified by faith, sanctified by Gods Spirit, is more excellent then
his wicked neighbor. You shall have the sense of the other clause hereafter.

My text contains in it two propositions: first, The righteous man is more
excellent then his wicked neighbor. The second: The prosperous way of the
wicked, makes him to err both in judgment and in course of life. The first
proposition teaches, An holy and religious man truly fearing God, by the
sentence of God and judgment of the Church is more excellent then his
irreligious neighbor, though never so great in the eye of the world. More
briefly these two Doctrines: First, The godly man is truly honorable. Secondly,
The wicked man is truly base.


That this may not seem like some of Tullies paradoxes, affirming, that the
wise man is only free, and the wise man is only rich; let us first hear what
God says to the commendation of the righteous, what in the second place he
speaks to the disgrace of wicked men: and note here with me, that here is the
figure Meiosis less spoken then is meant. For the Scripture here intends,
that the child of God is truly honorable, and the child of the devil truly
base; like to that phrase, Eccles. 13. Wisdom excels, folly, as light
excels darkness. Light is good, darkness naught; so wicked men are base,
godly men are honorable. In Isay 4.5. the Lord promises a covering defense to
all the glory, that is, emphatically, to all the glorious people of God.
Honorable things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Psa. 87.3. The
believers and true worshippers of God are called Gods secret ones, Psalm. 83.3.
Gods people are termed Se gullah, Gods choice and chief treasure, Exo. 19.5.
and Laos periousios, A peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. The Bereans gladly
entertaining the Gospel, are styled Eugenesteroi, more honorable then others
that did not so readily receive the word, Acts 17.2. There are threescore
Queens and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number. My Dove, my
undefiled is but one, the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her
that bare her: the daughters saw her and blessed her, yea the Queens and
concubines praised her, Cant. 6.8. Now this that is spoken of the whole Church
and Spouse of Christ, must be understood of the glorious estate of every holy
believer, who excels in virtue, and is a true Saint here on earth, Psalm.
16.2. And for this cause glorification signifies both present holiness and
future glory, Romans 8.39. This causes the Spirit of God to prefer a poor
child walking in uprightness, before an old unwise King, Eccles. 4.13. But
when he that rules over men is just, and rules in the fear of God, as David
did, 2. Sam. 23.3. then he is in honor another Solomon, 1. King. 3.13. who had
not his peer for true honor all his days, of whose royalty Christ speaks,
Mat. 6.33. When a King reigns in righteousness, and Princes rule in
judgment, Isay 32.1. when the King is the son of Nobles, and Princes eat in
due time, for strength and not for drunkenness, Eccles. 10.17. then the land
is not only blessed, but these great men may truly be styled as Abraham was by
the Hittite, mighty Princes, yea the Princes of God, after the Scripture
phrase, Genesis 23.6. Now the great Magor, the great Turk, the Cham of Tartarie,
with the rich Chinaes, living in Heathenisme, disgracefully thinking and
speaking of our truly noble Christian Princes, under the name of petty Princes
of Christendom, are like Nabal, who according to his name was a foolish base
creature, and yet could speak basely of David, Who is the son of Ishai? 1.
Sam. 25.10. The vassals also of Antichrist can write and speak disgracefully
of Gods anointed ones who have shaken off the Popes yoke; like Shimei, who to
our David's, are but dead dogs, 2. Sam. 16.7, 8, 9. As righteous Lot was more
worthy then all Sodom, 2. Pet. 3.7. as Lazarus his estate was better then rich
Dives, Luke 16.22, 23. yea John Baptist in prison more happy then incestuous
Herod, Mark. 6.20. so still are Gods children more honorable then the devils.
To conclude therefore the first kind of proof, drawn from the consent of the
Scripture, and to hasten to variable arguments drawn out of the Scripture, let
all men know, that the true knowledge and fear of God brings credit and
honor to all states and conditions; it aduanceth the credit and esteem of
poor men, and to honorable men by birth and calling; it is like a diamond in a
ring, making them that were gold before, to become the most fine gold, yea
Michtam the purest gold of Ophir.

The first argument is drawn from the God of the righteous; Our Father which
art in heaven. All believers have this prerogative to be called the sons of
God, which are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, Ioh. 1.12. Christ says, Ioh 20.17. I go to my Father
and your Father. We have the Spirit of adoption, crying, Abba, Father, Romans
8.15. We are predestined to the adoption of children, Ephesians. 1.5. God is the
father of our spirits, Heb. 12.9. He is our heavenly Father, able and willing
to give us all things in Christ's name, Luke 11.13. We are commanded so to do,
and have a promise to be heard, Ioh. 16.23. 1. Ioh. 5.14.

The second argument is drawn from Christ our elder brother, makes us Kings
and Priests to his Father, Revel. 1.6. The sanctifier and the sanctified are
all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2.11.
Who is the first borne amongst many brethren, Romans 8.29.

For the further clearing of this point, let us first see what Christ is in
himself. Secondly, what he is to us. And thirdly, what he has done to make us
honorable.

1. Christ in regard of his own naure, is Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty
God, the Father of eternity, Isay 9.6. though at the time of his manifestation
he says, Psalm. 2.7. This day have I begotten thee; yet after an unspeakable
manner he was begotten from eternity, Pro. 8.22. Ganin, He has possessed me
in the beginning of his days, before his works of old. In the beginning was
the Word, and this Word was with God, and that Word was God, Ioh. 1.1, 2. which
the Greek Poet Nonnus, John's expositor, renders thus, en arreto logos arche,
In the beginning, which by words cannot be expressed; therefore without robbery
he was the Fathers equal, Philip. 2.6. yea his fellow, Zach. 13.7. God ever
all, to be blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. Secondly, in regard of his humane nature
he is most pure, holy, the immaculate Lamb of God, 1. Pet. 1.19. conceived in
the womb of the virgin Marie by the holy Ghost, Luke 1.35. he fulfilled the
whole law, the will of his Father to the utmost, Psalm. 40.7, 8. he became
obedient to the death of the cross, Phil. 2.18. so he became the Lord our
righteousness, Ier. 23.6. our wisdom, righteousness, redemption
sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30. This ( Word (I say) became flesh, and Eskenosen,
dwelt in our nature, as in a tabernacle, Ioh. 1.14. Great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up
into glory, 1. Tim. 3.16. At his Name every knee in heaven and earth, and
under the earth does bow, Phil. 2.10. He is set at Gods right hand in heavenly
places, far above all principalities and powers, and might and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but that which is to come,
Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Now secondly let us consider what he is to the Church in
regard of his offices, God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all, Ep. 1.22.23. He is the head of the body the Church,
who is the beginning, the first borne from the dead, that in all things he
might have the pre-eminence, Coloss. 1.18. Sit on my right hand (says the
Father to him) Psalm. 110.1. till I make thine enemies thy footstool. And so as
King and Prophet he sends the rod of his power out of Sion, whereby he mildly
rules the willing people of good devotions, Psalm. 110.2, 3. And as with a mace
of iron breaks the rebels in pieces as potters vessels, Psalm. 2.9. And in the
4. verse of the CX. psalm, by an oath he is made a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedek. Heb. 7.1, 2. Christ is the Priest of our profession, more
excellent then Moses: he built the house, Moses was but a servant of the house,
Heb. 3.1, 2, 3. The Legal priests were sinful, offered sacrifices for
themselves, and died; he holy and pure, and blameless, lives for ever, Heb.
7.23, 24, 26, 27. There many sacrifices could not take away sins, but Christ's
one oblation did, Heb. 9.13, 24, 26. once for all, Heb. 10.10. As our Priest
also he appears for us in heaven, Heb. 9.24. and makes intercession for us,
Romans 8.34.

Thirdly, in the execution of these offices, what has he done for us: first,
as our Prophet he teaches us his Fathers will, and gives us holy Sacraments.
Peter (Acts 3.22.) tells the Jews out of Deuteronomy. 18.15. A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise unto you, out of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you
hear in all things. God lastly spoke to us by his Son, Heb. 1.2. who taught
Noah and all the other Prophets, 1. Pet. 3.19. of whom the Father says, This
is my beloved Son, hear him, Math. 17.5. Secondly, this righteous King of
Sion, Zach. 9.9. does sit as King on mount Sion, psalm. 2.6. He our King
destroyed all our enemies, sin, Romans 8.3. the law, Gal. 4.5. the devil, Heb.
2.15. Col. 2.15. death, Hos. 13.14. 1. Cor. 15.53. so delivers us from the
hands of all our enemies, Luke 1.71. Thus he shall beat down all our enemies,
1. Cor. 15.25, 26, 27. destroying the last enemy, Death, shall give up the
kingdom to God the Father, bring all his subjects to him, shall cease to
reign then as Mediator, but shall retain the glory of the kingdom for ever,
as the Angel tells Marie, Of his kingdom shall be none end, Luke 1.33. As
our Priest he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Romans
4.25. by his blood he has redeemed us, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.20. his blood has
washed us from all our sins, Reu. 1.5. Thus Christ becomes to us our
redeeming kinsman, Job 19.25. and our righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30. especially
when he performs to us the second part of his priesthood, by being our
Intercessor and Advocate, still making intercession for us at the right hand of
his Father, Romans 8.34. and appearing for us in heaven, Heb. 9.24. Thus in the
days of his flesh he offered up prayers for us, Heb. 5.7. Ioh. 17.9. From his
hand much incense mixed with the prayers of the Saints is offered to God,
Revel. 8.3. He therefore that has this Christ, has life, 1. Ioh 5.12. On him
that believes not, his wrath abides, Ioh. 3.36. Our life is with God in
Christ; when Christ our glory shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory, Col. 3.3, 4. By him we are heirs of heaven, Romans 8.17. and are made
meet to be inheriters with the Saints in glory, Col. 1.12. so that we may say
with the Church in the Canticles, 5. chap. 16. verse, This is my beloved, and
this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, that has redeemed us unto God
by his blood, out of every kingdom, tongue, people and nation; and has made
us Kings and Priests to our God, and we shall reign on the earth, Revel. 5.9,
10.

Come we now to the third argument, If any one has not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Hence it is that Christ dwells in our hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and after our effectual calling, Christ is in us, except
we be reprobates, 2. Cor. 13.5. The works and effects of the holy Ghost in us
are four. This holy Spirit first sanctifies and regenerateth us, being borne
again of water and of the Spirit, Ioh. 5.7. and borne from above. The word of
truth, Iam. 1.18. and the immortal seed of the word is the instrument hereof,
1. Pet. 1.23. by which we are made clean, Ioh. 15.3. The Lord does wash away
the filth of the daughters of Jerusalem, by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning, Isay 4.4. by afflictions opening the ear, Job 33.16. and by
fire purging the sons of Leui, Mal. 3.3. This free Spirit affranchiseth them
and sets them at liberty, Psalm 51.12. from the bondage of sin, 2. Cor.
3.17. By this Spirit they crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts; in
this Spirit they live, and in this Spirit they walk, Gal. 5.24, 25.

Secondly, this Spirit bears witness to our spirits that we are the sons
of God, Romans 8.16. The Lord does seal us and give us the earnest of this
Spirit, 2. Cor. 1.22. by this Spirit of promise, the earnest of our inheritance
he seals us, till we fully enjoy the same, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and by this
Spirit that dwells in us, we know that God abides in us, 1. Ioh. 3.24.

Thirdly, the elect after their calling can boldly go to the throne of grace,
there finding grace and obtaining mercy in the time of need, Heb. 4.16. yea by
faith in Christ have boldness and access with confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. Gods
children receiving the Spirit of Adoption, cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. For
this end God sends them the Spirit of his Son, that they may call God,
Father, Galat. 4.6. Gods Spirit helping our infirmities; teaching us to pray,
Romans 8.26. The Lord powers on his Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and
supplication, prayers for the forgiveness of sin, Zac 12.10.

Lastly, this Spirit comfort his in all distresses, when our spirits fail,
God does quicken us by his good Spirit, Psalm. 143.7. He will not have our
spirits fail before him, Isay 57.16. Therefore Gods Spirit is called the
Comforter, Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.7.

The fourth reason is drawn from two honorable titles which are bestowed on
the faithful, Mount Sion, the City of the living God, Heb 12.22. Segullah,
Gods choice treasure, Exodus 19.5. A peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. The visible
congregations, for the elects sake are called the assembly of Saints, 1. Cor.
14.33. And God is called the King of Saints, Reu. 15.3. These tabernacles are
beautiful, Psalm. 84.1. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles,
O Israel, Number. 24.5. The Church is fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun,
terrible as an army with banners, Cant. 6.9, 12. My heart did set me on the
chariots of my noble people, Ammi nadis, of whom I think nobly, people of good
devotions and noble resolutions, Psalm 110.3. They are renewed in the spirit
of their minds, and have put on the new man, which is created in knowledge,
holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Col. 3.10.

The second honorable title is, that the Church is called the Spouse of Christ;
At the Kings hand stands the Queen in a garment of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9. She is
all glorious within, verse 13. The bridegroom Christ in the fourth of the
Canticles displayeth at large the honor and beauty of the Church; and in
Cant. 6.8, 9. affirms, that all the Queens, concubines and damsels did
praise her, being the only undefiled of her mother. Salomons mother sits at
his right hand, 1. King. 2.19. so does Christ's Church, being clothed with the
Sun of righteousness, the light of the Moon at her feet, and a crown of
twelve stars at her head, Reuelat. 12.1. Mal. 4.2. In this world Christ
calls her Chephsibah, My delight is in her, Isay 62.4. Here she is Lady
Sarah with her bondwoman Hagar attending on her, Gal. 4.22. Genesis 2.19. How
honorable shall she be in heaven, when she shall be presented to God without
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.

The fifth argument is thus framed: Noblemen have usually great inheritances,
David, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup, thou shall
maintain my lot; the lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have a
goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.5, 6. By Christ we are interested in an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, but is reserved for us in
heaven, 1. Pet. 1.4. This better then the blessings of Iudahs wine, Asers
fatness, or Ephraims dewes, Genesis 49.^, ^0, 25. Whether things present, or
things to come, all are ours in Christ, 1. Cor. 3.22, 23. by him we are joint
heirs, Rom 17. by him we attain to an inheritance with the Saints in life,
Coloss. 1.2.

The sixth reason proving the exccellent state of Gods children, The Name of the
Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it, and are safe, Pro.
18.10. As the mountains compass Israel, so the Lord is round about his people
for ever, Psalm. 125.2. God is in the midst of the Church, therefore it shall not
fall, Psalm. 46.5. Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him,
and such as trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and keep
them alive in famine, Psalm. 33.18, 19. yea his ears are open to their cry,
and so he delivers them out of many afflictions, Psalm. 34.15, 19. He
delivers his out of six troubles, and the seventh shall not hurt them, Job
5.19. He is a wall of fire about his; and he that touches them, touches the
apple of his eye, Zac. 3.5. Notable is Ierusalems deliverance from Zenacheribs
rage, 2. King. 19.34. and notable was Constantinoples deliverance from the
barbarous Gohists Arian Gaynes in Chrysostomes time, as the Church story
tells us: also by our like miraculous deliverance from the gunpowder
treason, it appears that he that dwells in the secret place of the Highest,
abides under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. God the Father
especially commits the safe keeping of his Church to our Captain Christ
Jesus, Ios. 5.14. Thus Christ looked out of the pillar of fire, and troubled
the Egyptian host, Exodus 14.24. This Angel of Gods presence, Isay 63.9. of
the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. conducted Israel through the wilderness into Canaan,
Exodus 33.1, 2. This our Michael and great Prince shall stand up for his people,
either in Antiochus his time, as Iunius, or in Antichrist and the Turks time,
as Graserius and others think, Dan. 12.1. He always walks in the midst of
the golden candlesticks, Reu. 2.1. Christ's vineyard, which is his own, is ever
before him, Cant. 8.12. He waters it every moment, and keeps it day and
night, Isay 27.2, 3.

Next to Christ consider the Angels under God and Christ, our protectors: The
Angel of the Lord incampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them, Psalm. 34.7. He gives his Angels charge to carry us in their hands, in
all our ways, Psalm. 91.11. Our Angels do always behold the face of our
heavenly Father, at his beck to come to our succor, Mat. 18.10. All these are
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1.14. Not now visibly appearing to teach, as before Christ's
time; nor visibly to assist us, as when they met Jacob, Genesis 32.1, 2. to
encourage him against his brother Esaw; for which their service, the place was
rightly called Mahanaim, camps, that the Archangell Christ for a time taking up
the body of a man, wrestled with Jacob, Genes. 32.24. when the place was
called Peniel, the face of the strong God. These Angels seeing our conversion,
do rejoice, Luke 15.10. wondering at the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. do
with bended knee pry into the mystery of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 1.12. As they
comforted Christ after his temptations; and an Angel did strengthen Christ in
his agony, Luke 22.43. so Angels may assist us in our corporal and spiritual
combats, Ephesians. 6.12. Solomon's nightguard of threescore the most valiant men in
Israel, not like these, Cant. 3.7. One prayer of Christ drew more then twelve
Legions of these heavenly soldiers presently at once, every Legion did amount
to about 7000. of horse and foot, Math. 26.53. When one Angel could destroy
in one night one hundred, four score and five thousand, 2. King. 19.35. When
Elisha had prayed, his man could see mountains full of horses and chariots of
fire, 2. Kin. 6.17. Lastly, God gives to his Church, children, Princes in all
lands, Psalm. 45.16. who by their laws and swords defend the Church, and
therefore are called nursing fathers, Isay 49.23. who by Gods appointment are a
terror to the wicked, not to the godly, Romans 13.3. Though sometimes Nimrod be a
mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10.9. and some by the spoil of nations,
get them wealth and honor, Isay 10.7. Four great beasts, Dan. 7.3, 4. out of
the last beast arose the double furious beast Antichrist, rising from the salt
Clergy to his spiritual power, and earthly temporaltie to his temporal
estate, Reu. 13.1.13. This was only to punish the sins of the Church. The
end of true magistracy from God is, that the Church under them may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1. Tim. 2.2.

The seventh argument to prove the godlies dignity, Jacob, in the midst of
many people, become as the dewes from the Lord, as the rain on the grass, Mica
5.7. These men sometime subdue kingdoms, wax valiant in fight, and turn to
flight the armies of the alients, Heb. 11.33, 34. Thus Abraham with his trained
or catechized soldiers, destroyed four Kings, and delivered Lot, Genes.
14.14. Thus Joshua discomfiteth Amalek with the edge of the sword, Ios. 17.9.
What shall I speak of Barak and Debora, of Zebulum and Nepthalim, that
ieoparded their lives in the high places of the field, Judge. 5.18. What shall I
speak of Gedeon destroying the Kings of Midian, Judge. 7. and 8. of Sampson,
Judge. 14.15.16. of David, 2. Sam. 8. Iehosaphat, 2. Chron. 20.24. What shall we
say of the poor wise man which by his wisdom delivers a city, Eccles.
9.15. What shall we say of Constantine Christ's General in the Churches war,
who destroyed Dioclesian, Maximianus, Maxentius and Licinnius, making them by
his sword to fly from the fear of the Lamb, Revel. 6.15.16. whom Brightman
supposes to be that child (Revel. 12.5.) who did bind the Dragonish pagan
Emperors, Revel. 20.1, 2. What shall I say of Theodosius who slew the two
tyrants Maximius and Eugenius, who had before killed Valentinians two sons,
to whom the Poet Claudian sings, O nimium dilecte Deo, Oh greatly beloved of
God, whom the winds did serve in his wars. Let Belizarius, Virig^s, Zisca the
Bohemian scourge of the Pope, Johannes Huniades, Scanderbeg be remembered; our
martial Elizabeth the hammer of the Pope and Papists; and ancient Effleda
Merciorum Domina, the whipper of the Heathenish Danes. Sed omnes non possumus
esse Scipiones aut Maximi, All cannot be Scipioes or Maximesses, but yet they
can by prayer with Moses prevail against Amalek, Exodus 17.12. and with the
same Moses stand in the gap, to turn away wrath from Israel, psalm. 106.23. The
good man in a general corruption of manners, makes up the hedge by his
prayers, Ezekiel. 22.30. Also this righteous man's lips by wholesome exhortations
feeds many, Pro. 13.21. For this cause Elisha calls Elias, The charets and
horsemen of Israel, 2. Ki. 2.13. and King Ioash weeping on Elishas face a dying,
calls him his Father, calling him also the charets and horsemen of Israel, 2.
Kin. 13.14. These men fight against the devil and the world, Ephesians. 6.12, 13.
by faith obtain victory, 1. Ioh. 5.3. they by Christ conquer Satan, Ioh.
16.23. treading him under their feet, Romans 16.20. by whom they are more then
conquerours, Romans 8.38. These noble Christians do crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. And thus they get a good report, God and the
Church witnessing their works, Heb. 11.4, 5. as it is spoken of Abel and Enoch.
Thus their good name is better then ointment, Eccles 7.1. Thus Christ's Name is
like an ointment powered out, Cant. 1.3. Christ and his Churches name shall be
remembered for ever, Psalm. 45.17. Pilates wife calls Christ that righteous
man, Math. 27.19. and Herod himself reverenced John for his holiness and
righteousness, Mark 6.20. These noble generous spirits manage noble exploits:
David has slain his thousands, 1. Sam. 20.17. Many daughters have done well,
thou excellest them all, Pro. 31.29.

The eight reason is drawn from those especial graces which are only proper
to the elect. hope that makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3. by which they are saved,
Romans 8.25. by which they sit in heaven, Ephesians. 2.6. being an anker-hold of the
soul, firm and steadfast, by which they enter within the veil, Heb. 6.9. They
have love, both toward God begetting, and his children begotten of him, 1.
Ioh. 5.1. by which they know they are translated from death to life, 1. Ioh.
3.14. They have peace of conscience, being justified by faith, Romans 5.1. which
Christ gives to his only, Ioh. 14.27. which peace passes all understanding,
Phil. 4.7. A white stone, that none knows but he that has it, Reu. 2.17.
They have joy most glorious and unspeakable, 1. Pet. 1.8. They are escaped from
the corruption that is in the world through lusts, and are partakers of the
divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. are sanctified wholly in spirit, soul and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. They are clothed with humility and patience, 1. Pet. 3.6. Iam.
5.8. Lastly, they have the Spirit of grace and deprecation, Zac. 12.10.

The ninth reason is, that God blesses to them every estate of life, and death
it self. All things work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. A
little that the righteous has, is better then great possessions of the wicked,
Psalm. 37.16. Prou. 16.8. Prosperity is blessed unto them: Riches increasing,
their hearts are not set on them, Psalm. 62.10. By grace a brother in high
degree can be humble, Iam. 1.9. Wisdom with an inheritance together, makes
him excellent, Eccles. 7.11. Solomon's wisdom remained with him in
prosperity, Eccles. 2.9. The adversity of the righteous is blessed to him,
who after the enduring of tentations, receives a crown of glory, Iam. 2.12.
Their sufferings are blessed, Mat. 5.10. Blessed are the persecuted for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Thus Gods children
made partakers of Christ's sufferings, rejoice, 1. Pet. 4.13. For light and
momentanie afflictions, they reap an excellent and eternal weight of glory,
2. Cor. 4.17. They are not worthy the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18.
Yea the death of the Saints is precious in Gods sight, Psalm. 116.15. To them
Death is destroyed, Hos. 13.14. and the sting of death taken away, 1. Cor.
15.55, 56. Blessed are these dead that die in the Lord, for henceforth, so
says the Spirit, they rest from their labors, and their works follow them,
Reu. 14.13.

The last argument proves the posterity of the righteous to be blesseed,
David's sake Solomon's posterity are blessed, 1. King. 11.35. Psalm. 112.2.

First, this serves to teach the righteous man thankfully to acknowledge his
happy state here, Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, and has not sat in the seat of
the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. Blessed are all that fear the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, and walk in the law of the Lord, Psalm.
119.1. What though mad men esteem thy life folly, and thy end ignominious,
when thou art reckoned amongst the sons of God, and thy lot is among his
Saints. What though the sons of base men make thee their song, Job 30.8, 9.
yea count thee the of-scouring of the world, 1. Corin. 4.13. was not Christ so
esteemed amongst the wicked? Mar. 15.28. Let it suffice thee that thou with
Christ, through Christ art glorious in the eyes of God, Isay 49.5. What though
thou art an abomination to the wicked? so let him be to thee, Pro. 29.27.

Secondly, Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord, psalm. 34.11. And which is the true way to honor and happiness the Lord
himself to man shows what is good, Mica 6.8. If by patient continuing in
well doing, thou shall seek for glory, and honor and immortality, thou
shall find eternal life, Romans 2.7. Let him that is righteous, be righteous
still, Reu. 22.11. The path of the righteous is like the shining light, that
shines more and more to the perfect day, prou. 4.18. Can thou abase thy
self for thy God, be still more humble, he will advance thee, and thou shall
be had in honor in the eyes of Gods servants, 2. Sam. 6.22. For those that
honor God, he will honor; and they that despise God, shall be like esteemed,
1. Sam. 2.30. Consider the examples of Haman and Mordecay; Thus shall it he
done to the man whom the King delights to honor, Hest. 6.9.

Eccles. 7.16. Be not over righteous, neither make thy self over wise; why
should thou destroy thy self? He that refraineth from evil, makes himslfe
a prey, Isay 59.15. If thou be too zealous, thy friends will think thee mad,
Mark 3.21.

I answer, Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; and Iam. 3.1. Be not many
masters. Others think, that men are not to stand too stiff to the
maintenance of their own right, as Nabaoth did to the loss of his life, 1.
King. 21.13. It may be thought he did well in denying the sale of the
inheritance of his fathers, when by Gods law the land was not to be alienated
from the proper Tribes and owners till Christ's coming, as may appear in the
case of Zelophehads daughters, Numb. 27.1. and in the case of raising seed to
the deceased brother without issue, Deuteronomy. 25.5. Ruth 4.4. They all held their
land of God in Capite, and could not sell it for ever, but till the year of
Iubile, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. Leu. 25.23, 24. od was their Lord Paramount. Thirdly,
some interpret it thus: Be not pharisaically and hypocritically righteous
before men, when God knows your hearts that they are abominable, Luke 16.15.
But I think it is taken for superstitious righteousness, a sin on the right
hand, when men go beyond the commandment of God, keeping men's traditions, Mat.
15.3. Mar. 7.3. Col. 2.22.23. To Gods law nothing must be added nor taken away,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. That we may be truly righteous, let us consider these motives.

First, if we be holy and righteous, we are like our heavenly Father, 1. Pet.
1.16. We are secondly like unto Christ, Acts 4.27. Acts 3.4. he was just and
holy. Thirdly, if we be holy, the Spirit of glory and God rests on us, 1.
Pet. 4.16. his sanctifying Spirit reigns in us, Romans 8.9. Fourthly, if we be
holy and just, we are the redeemed of the Lord, Luke 1.75 Gal. 1.4. Fifthly, if
not holy, not enter into Gods kingdom, Heb. 12.14. Revel. 21.27. Sixthly, if
holy and righteous, we shall be blessed in our outward estate. The wicked are
overthrown, are not, but the house of the righteous shall stand, Prou. 12.7.
The righteous may fall seven times a day, and be raised up again, but the
wicked fall into mischief, Prou. 24.16. When the righteous fall, the Lord
puts under his hand, psalm. 37.24. as the standers by are wont to do, to save
a great man's son from a fall in wrestling.

Outward things happen alike, to him that swears, and to him that fears an
oath, Eccles, 9.12.

Go thou into Gods sanctuary, the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the
kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43.

Secondly, consider we the means of stirring us up to godliness. First, look
on the holiness and righteousness of God, which made the Angels to sing,
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, Isay 6.3. the earth is full of his glory.
Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place, Ezekiel. 3.12. He has no
pleasure in wickedness, he hates all the workers of iniquity, psalm. 5.4, 5.
His eyes are purer then to behold iniquity without displeasure, Hab. 1.13.
Secondly, observe the purity and perfection of Gods law, it is perfect and
gives light to the simple, psalm. 19.7. it is a lamp to our feet, and a light
to our paths, psalm. 119.105. Ye are clean (says Christ, Ioh. 15.3.) by my
word. Thirdly, propound to thy self the example of good men, Heb. 11. from
verse 2. to the end. Take, my brethren, the Prophets for examples. Behold the
patience of Job, Iam. 5.10.11. Look on David's zeal, psalm. 132.12. Let women
look on old holy Matrons, who trusted in God; look on Sarah, calling her
Husband Lord, whose daughters ye are, 1. Pet. 3.5, 6.

Thirdly, remove the impediments that cleave to thy corrupt nature, and press
thee down, Heb. 12.1. First, suspect that traitor in thine own bosom: The
heart of man is deceitful above measure, and desperately wicked, Ier. 17.10.
Beware of an evil heart of unbelief, lest your heart be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. Secondly, beware of Satan's temptations,
being subtle ginnes and crafty devices, 2. Cor. 2.11. and in Ephesians. 6.11.
cunning tricks, and the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians. 6.16. which are
sudden iniections to blasphemy or desperation.

In the second place, the first outward impediment is the world, wholly lying in
sin, 1. Ioh. 5.19. In the world we may find the lusts of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1. Ioh. 2.16. The second outward let, is
the prosperity of the wicked, and the often afflictions of Gods children. This
trouble (Job 21.7) offended David, Psalm. 73.2, 3. Ier. 12.1, 2. Hab. 1.12, 13.
Hence the Atheist collecteth that it is in vain to serve God, seeing proud men
and contemners of God advanced; against which temptation the godly confer
together, and are strengthened by God. A book is written of them that fear him
and fear him not. etc. Mal. 3.15.16.17. The wicked shall be burnt as in an
Oven, when the Sun of Righteounesse shall arise on the godly. Mal. 41.2.

Fourthly, what be the signs that we are truly righteous; first in our selves
the Spirit of Adoption, calling God Father, Romans 8.15.16. His spirit certifiyng
our spirits, that we are his children. Secondly, the fruits of the Spirit,
love, joy, peace, etc. Golat. 5.22. the practice of true piety and charity,
whereby we make our vocation and election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. Election is first
in natures order, but Gos vocation is first known to us. Mark lastly these
two especial tokens of true sincerity: the first, love to good men and such
as excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.2. By which we know that we are translated from
death to life, 1. Ioh. 3.14. The second is a delight in Gods ordinances, Psalm.
19.10. the word of God is sweeter then honey, better then gold. Isa. 58.13.14
the Sabbath is the good man's delight. Gods precepts are not greiuous to him. 1.
Ioh. 5.3.

Lastly, they are glorious in Gods eyes, Esa. 49.5. they are his chief
treasure, Exodus 19.5. a peculiar people, honorable Kings and priests, that
shall reign with Christ for ever. Reu. 5.10. This made Moses to despise Aegipts
glory and riches, esteeming the reproach of Christ much better, Heb. 11.25.26.
having respect to the recompense of reward. This crown of righteousness
comforted Paul, 2. Tim. 5.7.8.

You have heard before in the opening of the sense, that by the figure meiosis,
more was meant then spoken, That there is no excellency to the unrighteous and
unregenerate; Jacob to Reuben, Genesis 49.4. Thou shall not be excellent; and as
it was spoken in another sense, 1. Sam. 4.21. Ichabod, there is no glory to
them that continue in the baseness of unregenerate nature, which comes short
of the glory of God, that glorious Image that Adam lost, Rom, 3.23. Genesis 1.26,
27. These seek not the recovery of their lost estate, for glory, honor and
true immortality, Romans 2.7. They may be for their race as noble as Cain, but
for sin cursed out of Gods presence, carry a mark of baseness seen to God,
Genesis 4.12.19, 20. God does thrash away all the ungodly of the earth like
dross, Psalm. 119.119. They are called, witches children, the seed of the
adulterer and whore, Isay 57.3. John calls them a generation of vipers, Mat.
3.7. and Christ, Mat. 23.33. a generation of serpents, for whom Hell is
prepared. Ier. 6.28.30. brass, iron, lead, reprobate silver. Psalm. 12.8.
Zuloth, the wicked are termed a vile thing; and Psalm. 15.4. he is called a vile
person. Psalm. 49.12. Adam Balialiu, did not rest one night in his honor, or
continued not long: and verse 20. A man in honor, and understands not, is
like the beasts that perish.

Now let us see the reasons that may further prove the baseness of the wicked.

First, they are of their father the devil, whose works they do: and Saint
Paul, Ephesians. 2.3. calls such the children of wrath.

The wicked unbelievers cannot call Christ their redeeming Kinsman, make them
free, Ioh. 83.6. neither does he pray for the world, Ioh. 17.9. They are none
of that glorious Church that shall be one day without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians.
5.27.

The third reason to prove their baseness, ruled by the spirit of the air,
working in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. the devil holds them in his
snares, 2. Tim. 2.26. yea they are the bondmen of errruption, 2. Pet. 2.19. on
these Cains mark is set, Genesis 4.15. and either they have a tormenting
conscience, as Saul, 1. Sam. 16.14. or Judas, Math. 5.27. or a seared
conscience, 1. Tim. 4.12. These, like condemned Haman, see not the Kings face,
Hest. 7.8. These cry not to God when he binds them, Job. 36.13. as the
Roman custom was; and ours is to bind the hands of the condemned, i. Lictor,
ligamans, go Sergeant bind his hands. Abner was not so bound, 2. Sam. 23.4.
These men forsaking God, are justly of him forsaken in their miseries, Proverbs
1.26. He will no way answer Saul, 1. Sam. 28.6. Thus they fly when no man
pursues them, Prou. 28.1. fearing where is no fear, Psalm 53.5. Dying either
desperately like Judas, Math. 27.5. or lumpishly and sullenly like Nabal, 1.
Sam. 25.37, 38. like a man closely murdered, and secretly thrown into Tems in
a cloak-bag.

Lastly these men live and dye in the bond of iniquity, and gall of bitterness.
Act. 8.23.

Fourthly, but as the black Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. Tents of ungodliness,
Psalm. 84.10. The Synagogues of Satan, Reu. 2.9. Oh my soul come not thou into
their secret, unto their assemblies let not my glory be united, Genesis 49.6.

The reprobates have no right to any of the creatures, Heb. 2.2. and by him all
things are ours. 1. Cor. 3.22.23. They are usurpers, their Table is a snare to
them, Psalm, 69.22. Some of them are the sons of villaynes, and eat Mallows
and Juniper roots, Job, 20.4.5.6.7. Yea the Lions are sometimes hunger-bitten,
Psalm. 34.10. Lastly, they have no portion, no right, no memorial in Jerusalem,
Neh. 2.20. nor inheritance in heaven, Revel. 22.15. these dogs are without.

The sixth reason, who works in them, Ephesians. 2.2. Heb. 2.15. who is their
god, 2. Cor. 4.4. who like excommunicate persons are delivered to Satan, 1.
Cor. 5.5. are in Satan's bands, 2. Tim. 2.26. in worse state then Turkey gally
slaves.

But are not good Angels guardians of wicked States and Monarchies?

I answer, Cyrus for the future service of the Church, may be in a special
manner preserved before he know God, Isay 45.1.4. The iaylors and tormenters of
the damned are the devils, Heb. 2.24, 25. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. who yet
themselves are kept in chains of darkness to the great judgment day. I
confess that sometimes for an Abraham's sake an Ishmael may thrive, Genes.
17.20. and may be preserved strangely by Gods Angel, Genesis 21.7. But usually I
think that the Angels attendance on bad men, is like the guarding of
Ambassadors and strangers in Musconia and China, who are chiefly waited on for
fear of hurting the State; or like the Shiriffes men guarding the malefactors
to the gallows.

Though wicked-men may do some service for the Common weal, as Saul did,
Alexander and Caesar may be famous for bloodshed, may be great hunters like
Nimrod, Genesis 10.9. yet the end of these men's exploits is not to serve God and
the Church herein, but they serve their own lusts of covetousness and
vainglorie. These men could take cities and kingdoms, but could not rule their
spirit, which is greater, Pro. 16.22. Therefore the memory of the just is
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prou. 10.7.

The reprobate has no saving grace: All have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Faith
is only Gods elect, Tit 1.1. The hope of the hypocrite is nothing, Job 27.8
like a bulrush, Job 8.13. They are not freed from any sin: Pride does compass
them as a chain, Psalm. 73.6. There is no peace to them, Isay 48 22. and 57.21.

Ninthly, they put their hands unto, Deuteronomy. 28.16.17. accursed in their lives
and deaths: which caused Balaam to wish to die the death of the righteous.
Numb. 23.10. Yea this curse does pursue their posterity, in the destruction of
Ieroboams and Achabs house, 1. King. 14.20. 2. Kin. 10.10.

The first use of this Doctrine is to discover a double error in these men; a
wicked seed, Isay 1.4. light as water, Genesis 49.3, like the beast that perish,
Psalm. 49.20. they think their state and houses shall continue for ever, Psalm.
49.18. and all this is because oftentimes they have no changes, Psalm. 55.29.
Again, these Ishmaels mock Isack that has the promise, Genesis 21.9. they
despise David's honor, Psalm. 4.2. they will abase him whom God will advance,
Psalm. 62.4. These mad fools mock the counsel of the poor, trusting in God,
Psalm. 14, 16. but God makes them like a fiery oven, suddenly shoots at their
faces, Psalm 21.9.12.

Secondly, because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed,
fully set their hearts to do evil; Though a sinner does evil an hundred
times, and God prolong his days, yet surely know that it shall go well to them
that fear God, which fear before him, but it shall not be well to the wicked,
Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. these God scatters as the wind does the chafe; they
cannot stand in judgment with the righteous, Psalm. 1.4, 5. they are tares
bound up for the fire, Mat. 13.30. these cursed must go to everlasting fire,
Math. 25.41. They shall leave their names a curse to Gods children, Esa. 65.15.
When they shall see Abraham, Isack and Jacob in heaven, Luke 13.28.

Be you exhorted not to set your horns on high, nor to speak with a stiff
neck, Psalm. 75.5.

THe second clause of the verse, the other branch of my Text, shows the
reason why men forsake true honor and follow base courses, because their
prosperous way does deceive them. The way of the wicked, generally signifies
their train and course of life: The ways of man are before the eyes of the
Lord, and he pondereth their path, Prou. 5.21. God rendereth man according to
his ways, Ier. 17.10. God knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the
ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 1.6. Secondly, it signifies the prosperity of
their ways: Jeremy 12.1, 2. acknowledges Gods righteousness, yet wuld plead
with him concerning his judgments, Why does the way of the wicked prosper? why
are they happy that deal very trecherously? The ungodly prosper in the world,
and increase in riches, Psalm. 37.12. Tatzen ghem, does deceive them, and
causes them to err in their ways. Rabbi Elias thinks that Tanguah written
with the letter Teth, signifies only their error of the mind; and written
with Tau, as in this place, is only to be referred to the errors of ways and
actions. This error is confuted by comparing these two places together, Isay
21.4. My mind erred; and Psalm. 119.110. I have not erred from thy precepts;
both are written with the letter Tau, and not Teth; yet the first speaks of
the error of the mind, and the second of the errors of ways. Iunius
translateth this place thus, seducet eos, seduceth them, gives this sense:
They err in their false opinions, preferring themselves before the just, and
most false by thinking themselves more excellent then they. The French
translation thus, Les fera four^ vo^er, will make them go astray. Let us then
understand this place of both these errors, thus: the prosperous way of wicked
men, draws their blind mind into a false conceit of themselves and the
righteous, and so causes them to follow lewd courses. Now the error in action
is more evident to us; but because the error of the mind is for most in
nature, and is the cause of the other, we will there begin.

Now out of the coherence with the former clause, observe that here is a secret
objection answered; Why, if the righteous be so excellent, and the wicked so
base, seeing all men hate baseness and love honor, do not the wicked men
become righteous, that they may also be excellent? The holy Ghost renders a
strong reason why they continue wicked still: Their outward pompous estate
blinds their judgment and leads them astray. Hence gather with me these
two Doctrines:

The prosperity of the wicked makes him a fool, in falsle judging of his
own and the righteous man's estate. The second is, that The wickeas prosperous
estate canseth them to err from the paths of righteousness.

But before we enter into the several handling of these points, let us remove
a scruple and doubt hence arising: That many forlorn wretches serve the devil
for nothing, and as they are base by reason of their sin before God, so are
they miserable in the sight of the world, whom want and famine does hunt to
desolate places, who feed on mallows and juniper roots, dwelling in the
clifts of the valleys, and are the sons of villains, Job 30.3, 9. when on
the contrary, the candle of the Lord shines on Jobs head, yea when Job washed
his steps with butter, and rivers of oil out of the rock flowed to him, when
young men and old Princes honor Job, Job 29.3.12. these men have no prosperous
ways to seduce them. For the clearing of which doubt, observe with me that all
the disputation of Job with his three friends, from the fourth to the 32,
handles these points: first, whether all wicked men are in this world
overtaken with Gods judgments: secondly, whether the godly do always here
continue in their prosperity: thirdly, whether Job now falling into misery, to
be an hypocrite. Jobs false friends hold the affirmative part; and Job by
divine arguments and experience holds the negative, strongly proving that by
these outward things no man knows love or hatred, as Solomon also teaches,
Eccles 9.1. and if our hope were only of this present life, many of Gods
children were of all men most miserable, 1. Cor. 15.19. as Saint Paul teaches.
Herein Gods judgments being most unsearchable, like the great depth, Psalm.
36.6. which are secret, but always just, as Augustine observes. Out of these
things to the former objection, I frame this answer, That although all the
wicked enjoy not an heaven of ioys here, and all Gods children are not poor
and of low degree, but some are honorable in the sight of God and man, and do
increase in favor with God and man, as it is spoken of Jesus our Lord, Luke
2.52. yet I affirm that not only the rich Nabals and proud Hamans despise
Gods children, but the very sons of fools and base men, whose fathers were
not worthy to sit with the dogs of Jobs flock, do yet make Job their song and
byword, Job 30.1, 8, 9. yea Christ himself was accounted a worm and no man,
a reproach of men, and despised of the people, Psalm. 22.6. How were the Heathen
wont to cry out against the Christians in time of persecution, Hair atheous,
Destroy these Atheists? How basely did the poor landiner cast off the love and
kindness of his rich neighbor, as soon as he perceived he did smell of the
Gospel; as our worthy in his Acts and Monuments shows. The unconverted thief
in the time of Christ's passion, was as busy in reuiling Christ as the Scribes
and Pharisees, Luke 22.29. Yea, many thieues and murderers think better of
their lewd courses then of the ways of the Lord, because they see Religion
every where spoken against, Acts 28.22. If the matter were put, not only to
rich wicked men, but also to beggars, whether Barabbas or Christ were rather to
be chosen in their hearts, they would rather choose a rebel and a robber then
Christ, Ioh. 18.40. Acts 3.14. Mat. 27.16. Yea the basest beggars do so
distaste Religion, that they esteem their estate better then the estate of the
earnest professors. This objection then notwithstanding, it is plain, that The
prosperity of wicked rich men seduceth them, condemn the generation of the
righteous. There is a way that seems right to a man, but the end thereof are
the ways of death, Prou. 14.2. The same parable for the excellency thereof
repeated in the same words, Pro. 16.25. The prosperous way of these ungodly
seems at the first entrance fair unto them, but the end thereof is
destruction. Like the broad way and wide gate that Christ spoke of, Mat. 7.13.
Like a fair green land, leading a traveler out of his way, and casting him
to the hands of thieves. Because they have no changes, they fear not God,
Psalm. 73.20. This caused Christ, Mat. 13.22. to give this epithete to riches,
deceitfulness of riches, because they do deceive men, falsely persuading them
that they make them happy; when Solomon tells, Pro. 1.33. that the
prosperity of fools destroys them.

The first reason proouing that prosperity does deceive the wicked, shall be
this: feet be almost gone, and their steps do well neereslide in seeing the
prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.1, 2. and if the people do turn in hither,
because waters of a full cup are wrung out to these wicked; and if the godly in
their weakness do hereat say, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocence; and if the righteous are only at this, for fear of
condemning the generation of the righteous, and cannot be fully strengthened
against this temptation till they go into the Sanctuary of God, to see how
these wicked are set in slipperie places, and thence come to sudden and
fearful ruin, Psalm. 73.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. how can it be but that the
wicked themselves not armed against these temptations, do bless themselves in
their outward estate, having their portion only in this world, Psalm. 17.14.

The second reason stands thus: a teacher of lies, Hab. 2.18. Now the rich
man's wealth is is strong city, and is an high wall in his conceit, Prou.
18.11. But in the verse immediately aforegoing, Solomon tells, that the name
of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs to it and are safe; where
the Antithesis does teach us, that as the righteous trust in God and are safe;
so wicked men trust in their god Mammon, and perish, when their riches becomes
a broken reed in their hands, Isay 31.3. Though he snuffeth at men, and say in
his heart, I shall never be moved, Psa. 10.5, 6. yet by the miserable events
they find themselves deceived; and as other idolaters have fed on ashes, and a
seduced heart has turned them aside, I say 44.20. that they cannot deliver
their own souls, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? All idolaters
are like the distempered stomach of a woman with child, or young children, who
will eat chalk and coals, and lime out of the wall. Whoredom, women and new
wine take away men's hearts, when they ask counsel of their stocks, and their
staff teaches them, the spirit of fornication causes men to err, Hos. 4.11,
12. So the god Mammon, in whom these men trust in stead of God, Mat. 6.24.
deceives them of all spiritual sense and understanding. Some do to this
purpose interpret that of Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.5. Men destitute of
truth, do take gain to be godliness; or with Simon Magus would make gain of
a show of godliness, Acts 8.19, 20. If covetousness be the root of all
evil, 1. Tim. 6.19. then if this blind error which possesses many Nabals with
us, who have neither the knowledge nor power of godliness, yet do think
themselves godly because they are rich; and other good men to be irreligious,
because they be poor; like the Pharisees, Ioh. 7.49. these beggars know not
the law, and are cursed.

The third reason is this, Pharaoh they say in their hearts, who is the Lord
that I should obey him? I know not the Lord, Exodus 5.2. They bid God depart
from them, they will learn none of his ways, Job 21.14. and with Nabal to
puff at Gods poor children, 1. Sam. 25.10. Who is David? who is the son of
Ishai? we have too many of these runnagate beggars; but yet after, ver. 37, 38.
when God smote him, his heart was dead as a stone, and so he went fullenly to
his grave, as a hog drinking in his blood, or as a slain man secretly in a
cloakbag cast into Thames.

Lastly, besides this dotage, making them think that their houses shall
continue for ever, Psalm. 49.11.18. the flatteries of (...) people does much
confirm their folly. As long as thou do good to thy self, men will speak
well of thee. Live thou, and speak like the Epicure soul, Thou have enough
laid up in store for many years, cate, drink, and be merry; like Sardinapalus
or Eligabalus, as I ate, so much I had; saying, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die, Esaias 22.13. Wear silk, fare deliciously every day, like
an ox fatting thy self to the day of slaughter, go speedily to hell, Luke
16.19. yet flatterers will say, Your Worship is wise; what should you do but
iocundare cum amicis, and spend your time in pleasures. How easily will these
vain flatteries work on foolish rich men, who with Adam follow vain
inventions, Eccles 7.31. who become vain in their imaginations, and whose
foolish heart is darkness, Romans 1.21 that walk in the vanity of their
minds, having their cogitations darkened, Ephesians. 4.17, 18. who labor to
extinguish the remainder of the light of nature, withholding the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Hence, the idolatry of riches, the snare of
riches, the flattery of wretches increase in worldly rich men this their
frenzy, the deceitfulness of men's hearts, Ier. 17.9. the deceitfulness of
riches, Mat. 13.22. the whole world lying in sin, 1. Ioh. 5.19. where is to
be found nothing but these lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, the pride
of life, 1. Ioh. 2.15. drawing men to folly and sin, and when the devil the
god of this world, does hoodwinke these men's eyes, that they cannot see,
believe, and be saved, 2. Corinthians. 4.3, 4.

First, till their abominations to be hated are found out, Psalm. 36.2. Thus
their ways show their folly, yet their posterity approve their saying, Psalm.
49.13. These men's wealth foolisheth them, as blind zeal does a Papist, Acts
13.50. who think to serve God in persecuting his Church, Ioh. 16.2.

Secondly, trust not in robbery; if riches increase, set not your hearts on
them, Psalm. 62.10. Let not your hearts be overcome with the care of this life,
Luke 21.34.

Thirdly, Sirens songs will cast you on more dangerous gulfes then Scilla and
Charibdis. Use the world, as not abusing, for the fashion thereof leads men
astray. Let our Purchase tell you of Atoadines fools paradise, page 317. a
Persian Mohammedan, who enclosed a goodly valley between two hills, filled with
all pleasure that nature or art could afford them, he gave at the first
entrance to his youths a sleepie drink, carried them asleep into his place of
pleasure, where they saw and enjoyed many rarities; after, gave them another
sleepie potion, and then carried them out again; and so these fools thought
they had been in paradise; and in hope of this they were fleshed for the
committing of any villainy; therefore Vtan the Turk after destroyed it.

Lastly, world aright; as fish are fresh in the salt Ocean, as Abraham, David
and Solomon, who in abundance of riches served God; and Salomons wisdom in
his prosperity remained with him, Eccles 2.19. to him wisdom with an
inheritance was good, Eccles 2.11.

The second Doctrine out of the second clause of my Text, that snuffeth in the
air at her pleasure, at her occasion who can turn her, all that seek her will
be wearied, in her month you shall find her when she is pained in bringing
forth her young, Ier. 2.24. It is prosperity that slays the fool, Prou.
1.32. If ever he will seek the Lord, in affliction he will seek him
diligently, Hos. 5.15. The erring wanderings of wicked rich men, is like Joseph's
losing himself in the field, Genesis 37.15. Prosperity is like a false guide
that sets a man out of his way at the first entering into his travel, and so
they walk through bypath, Judge. 5.6. Before I was afflicted I went astray,
Psalm. 119.67. To wicked men their table is made a snare, and their prosperity
their ruin, Psalm. 69.21.

The first reason to prove this, Ieshurun that should have been upright, when
he waxed far kicked with his heel, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Wealth without grace, makes
provision for the lusts of the flesh, Romans 13.14. Riches are consumed on lusts,
Iam. 4.3. Let us examine some particulars: First, wealth makes the fat
adulterers like fed horses to neigh after their neighbors wives, Ier. 5.8. We
have a fearful example in David, 2. Sam. 11.2. Secondly, here men grow into
idolatry, as we see in Salomons time, 1. King. 11.23. when men do richly
endow and deck their idols, Psalm. 16.3. Thirdly, hence pride does compass
them as a chain, Psalm. 73.6. Fourthly, hence comes blasphemy, when they
stretch out their tongues against heaven, that is, God in heaven, Psalm. 73.9.
They say, Who is the Lord? Exodus 5.2. and they bid God depart from them, Job
21.14. Wealth makes men reject the poor, reject justice; For money (say they)
answers all things, Eccles 10.19. Bring (say they) that we may drink, Amos
4.1. To maintain their pomp and state, they have both their hands open, Mica
7.3.

Secondly, Adullam was to Judah, Genesis 38.20. Thirdly, within themselves, their
own falfe unbelieving hearts deceive them, Heb. 2.13. Here the way of wicked
men is in darkness, they know not at what they stumble, Prou. 4.19. And thus
also because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully set to do evil, Eccles
8.11. and so with Dives go suddenly to hell, Luke 16.19, 20, 21.

This Doctrine serves first to terrify the ungodly Nabals of the world, Woe be
unto you that are rich now, for you have received your consolation. Woe unto you
that are full, for you shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now, for you shall
mourn and weep. Luke 6.24, 25. To whom James says, Iam. 5.1, 2, 3. Go to now
ye rich men, weep and houle for the miseries that shall come on you; your
riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten; your gold and silver is
cankerd, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as fire; you have heaped treasures against the last days. Walk in
the ways of your own heart, and in the sight of your eyes, know that for this
you shall come to judgment, Eccles 11.9. Oh consider this ye that forget God,
lest he come and tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm
50.22.

Secondly, stand in awe, and sin not; commune with your own hearts on your
beds, and be still, Psalm. 4.4. Be not like bankrupts, who for fear of their
great debts, dare not look into their reckoning books. Oh break off your
sins with righteousness, and your iniquities with showing mercy to the
poor, Dan. 4.27. Be not high minded, ye rich men, trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy, 1.
Tim. 6.17. But it may be that in vain I speak to most of these men; therefore
in the third place I will direct my speech to the holy and righteous man:
First, envy not rich men in the riches they spend on their lusts, Iam. 4.3.
Psalm. 37.1. When many say, who will show us any good? do thou say, Lord lift up
the light of thy countenance upon me; and, Thou have put more gladness in my
heart, then they that had their corn and wine increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7. A
little that the righteous has, is better then great possessions of the wicked,
Psalm. 37.16. If God shall bring thee to houses which thou buildest not, filled
with all manner of store, and thou eating art full, then take heed lest thou
forget the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.12, 13, 14. Lastly, pray we with Agur, Prou.
30.8, 9. not for riches, lest thou being too full, should deny thy God; desire
only bread of competencie, arton epiousion, sit both for quantite and quality
to support nature. Mat. 6.11. Let your conuer sation be without covetousness,
for God will not forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. We brought nothing into this world,
we shall carry naught hence. If we have food and raiment, let us learn to be
content. Rich men fall into temptations, snares, notsome lusts, drowning men in
perdition, 1. Tim. 6.7, 8, 9. Math. 6.25. To this end remember these reasons of
Christ: first, he gives thy body life; secondly, he feeds ravens; thirdly,
he clotheth lillies; fourthly, the Gentiles seek after these things; fifthly,
none can add one cubite to his stature; sixthly, are arguments of want of
faith; seventhly, sufficient to the day is the travel; eighthly, first seek
Gods kingdom and his righteousness, and all other things shall be cast upon
you. When Solomon sought of God true wisdom before all thing, God gave him
that and all other necessary blessings too, 2. Chron. 1.10, 11. So if we set
our hearts on heaven, Col. 3.1. he will give us that, and for a surplussage all
things necessary for the maintenance of this present life, 2. Pet. 1.3. Yea
when thou shall see seduced sinners turned into hell, thou shall find to thy
comfort that God which has here guided thee from these errors by his counsel,
will in the end receive thee to glory through Christ Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.

