A REPLY TO A PRETENDED CHRISTIAN PLEA FOR THE ANTICHISTIAN CHVRCH OF ROME:
published by Mr. Francis Johnson ao. 1617.

Wherein the weakness of the said Plea is manifested, and arguments alleged for
the Church of Rome, and Baptism therein, are refuted; By Henry Ainsworth. Anno
1618.

We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us
go every one into his own country: for her judgment reaches unto heaven,
and is lifted up even to the skies; Ier. 51. 9. Printed in the year 1620.

The Preface.
TWo things (good Reader) have been heretofore controverted between Mr. Johnson
and me, the one concerning the Power of the Christian church, which he would
have installed in the Ministry thereof: the other concerning the
Antichristian church of Rome, with the ministry and baptism thereof, which
he has pleaded to be true, though corrupted; I have proved to be false and
deceytfull. These things have passed publikly (through mine Opposites occasion)
in Mr Richard Cliftons Advertisement, and my Animadversion thereto. The former
of these two points, Mr. Johnson has left unanswered; so the prudent may judge
of the strife, by that which we both have said: the latter, he has sought to
mainteyne by a colorable Plea for the Roman church, chiefly underpropped by
two reasons, 1. because Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God; 2. and
because Apostate Israel (the figure of this Antichristian church,) was the
church of God; as he pretends. These, with his other like reasons, I have
labored to refell, in this treatise following. His order of handling them, I
have altered; beginning with the Church of Rome; then with the Baptism of that
church: for so I judge the truth of the controversy will soonest appear. His
often longsome repetitions, I seek to abridge; as being fruitless, and
wearisome to the Readers: his bold and bitter taunts, I pass over; being not
willing to answer any man (and least of all the dead,) to such things. As also
his marching us among the Anabaptists, for our more disgrace: his dissembling
of his own former judgment and accord with us, in the things now controverted;
imputing them to us and others, when himself has formerly spoken and written
for the things which he now would pull down; but has not taken away his own
grounds. Only whereas in his preface he intimates sundry manifest untruthes
published in the Animadversion, but names none: I signify in a good
conscience, that to my knowledge ^ published not any one untrueth, but rather
spared him, then pressed things in extremity. That which I suppose he aims
at, I set down from the report of honest faithful witnesses, (of whom some
are now at rest in the Lord,) who would not (as I am persuaded) willingly have
related any thing but the truth. Finally, as in all other my labors, so in
these controversies following, I endeavor to find out and manifest the way and
will of God, by the light of his word; to the glory of his name, and comfort of
those that love the truth in sincerity.

A REPLY TO A PRETENDED Christian Plea, for the Antichristian Church of Rome.
We are taught of God, that Prove. 28. ^
they which forsake the Law, praise the wicked; but such as keep the Law will
contend with them. Wherefore, though my desire has been to leave off contention
with all men, and to labor to build up Sion in peace: yet being provoked by
name, and my writings against the 2 These. 2. 3*
Man of syn, that Son of perdition being publicly traduced; I held it my duty
to mainteyne the war which I began to wage against the Beast, whom v. ^.
The Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth, and will abolish with the
brightness of his coming.

The state of this controversy is; whether notwithstanding the infinite
idolatries and other abominations now of a long time with strong hand practiced
by the church of Rome; it be to be reputed the true church of Christ; and the
Sacraments (especially Baptism) to be esteemed the true signs and seals of
the covenant of grace, from God to them, in their present estate. I deny it:
mine opposite has colourably pleaded for it, and inveighed much against me, in
his last book called A Christian Plea; ao. 1617. Wherein, though in many things
he deserved sharp blame; yet having ended his life with his work, and not being
now to answer for himself, or make use of that which is written: I will omit
the just reproofs, which might through Gods mercy have been Psalm. 141.
a benefit unto him: and will address my self, to remove the stumbling blocks
out of others way, and to clear the truth which is darkened with the cloud of
error. The Lord which has taken this counsel against Babylon, that Ier. 50. 4^*
the least of the flock shall draw them out; and that he will surely make their
habitation desolate with them: enable me with his grace to ^ight the good fight
of ^aith, and to declare in Sion v. 28.
the vengeance of the LORD our God, the vengeance of his Temple.

Of the church of ^ome.
BEcause the true Church is that people to whom perteyneth Romans ^. ^.
the adoption of sonns, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the service (of God,) and the promises: it is requisite that we
first handle the state of Antichrists church, so shall we the better discern
of the ministry; seals of the covenant, and other ordinances of God which
the man of syn abuses, whether they be true or false unto them, in that their
sinful abuse.

In my former answer, I laid down these grounds; Animad^^rs: p. 76.
The Antichristian synagogue is by the Holy Ghost called a Beast, Rev. 13. 11.
which signifies a Kingdom, Dan. 7. 23. it is named also a great City, Rev.
11. 8. which notes the largenes of tha tpolitie and kingdom. It comes up out
of the earth, Rev. 13. 11. as being of this world, (which Christ's kingdom that
comes down from heaven Rev. 21. 2. is not:) and therefore is called a man of
syn, 2 These. 2. 3. and a great whore, Rev. 17. 1. whose head is Abaddon or
Apollyon, Revel 9. 11. the Destroyer of others, and himself the son of
perdition, 2 These. 2. 3. and they that follow him are the children of
damnation, 2 These. 2. 12. This wicked generation warreth against the Lamb
Christ, and against the Saints,, Rev. 17. 14. 6. and 13. 7. blasphemeth Gods
name and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, Rev. 13. 6. that is the true
church, whose conversation is heavenly, Phil. 3. 20. Yet do they all this
mischief, under show of Christian religion: and therefore this Beast, has
horns like the Lamb Christ, Rev. 13. 11. this whore is arrayed with purple and
scarlet, gilded with gold, precious stones and pearls, Rev. 17. 4. as if she
were the Queen and spouse of Christ, Psalm. 45. 9. 13. Ezekiel. 16. ^0. -- 13.
Song. 7. 5. she has Peace-offrings and Vows, Prove. 7. 14. (as if she were
devout in Gods service, Psalm. 66. 13.) bread and waters, Prove. 9. 16. 17. (as
ready to refresh the weary souls.) Her doctrines, sweet and amiable, lies
spoken in hypocrisy, Prove. 5. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 2. but yet confirmed with signs
and miracles, as if they came from heaven, 2 These. 2. 9. Rev. 13. 13. 14. her
power and efficacy great, prevailing over the many and the mighty, the Kings
and Princes of the world, deceiving all nations with her enchantments, Prove. 7.
21. 26. Rev. 17. 2 and 18. 23. and if it were possible, Gods very elect, Math.
24. 24. Her continuance and outward prosperity is long, Rev. 13. 5. and 18. 7.
and 20. 2. 4. her end, miserable, Rev. 18. 19. 21. and 19. 20. 21. consumed
with the spirit of the Lords mouth, and abolished with the brightness of his
coming, 2 These. 2. 8. And for her destruction, the heavens shall rejoice, and
sing praises to God, Rev. 18. 20. and 19. 1. 2.

The accomplishment of these prophesies, I Animad* page 77.
there showed to be in the Church of Rome at this day; confirmed by her own
canons and doctors, that set forth her profession and practice. These grounds
remain yet unanswered by mine opposite; being such as I assure my self neither
could he, neither can any soundly refute. Now let us see how far he yeildeth,
and how he opposes. First Christian Plea p. 12^
he prays all to take knowledge, that his mind and desire in himself is to
plead against the present estate of that church, and not for it: acknowledging
it to be fallen, into most synful and deep defection and apostasy, and so to
be a notorious harlot and idolatress: which all the people of God ought to
forsake, and to witness the truth there against, even unto death.

How well this his acknowledgement agrees with his plea in the residue of his
book; shall appear in the discussing of the reasons after following. But what
says he to the description of Antichrists church, which I before showed from
the scriptures? He Chr. pl^^ p. 141.
says, I speak of the church and Synagogue of Antichrist, of the Beast, of the
great City, of the man of Syn, of the great whore, of Abaddon or Apollyon, the
son of perdition etc. whereas I should treat of the Temple of God, whereof Paul
speaks. 2 These. 2. Hereupon he charge me, p. 242.
to keep what I could from the point of the question in hand, and therefore
also to confound things that differ.

I answer, that the the question was by this mine opposites former Adverti^* p.
58. 59.
grant, about the church of Rome, whether it were the church of God or no. Now
when at first I show from the scriptures, what manner of Church that Roman
church is, in Gods account: how could he charge me to keep from the point of
the question? 2ly. the place of The Apostle being alleged Advertis* p. 5^ 59
by mine opposite for a proof that the church wherein Antichrist sits, is
the Church of God; I come immediately after Animad* p. 77. 78. etc.
to scan that scripture: and yet he challenges me for keeping from the point;
whereas all men of judgment may see it was needful to know what God foretold of
that church throughout the scriptures, that so we might understand in what
sense Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2. For seeing the
Temple of God, is a figurative phrase, taken from the shadows of the Law: it
is not wisdom in us, to expound a parabolical speech contrary to the plain
scriptures and grounds of Christian religion; but we must understand it
according to them. Wherefore, there being no other answer made to the
description aforesaid: it stands in force to prove that the church of Rome,
is not the true Church of Christ.

So for the accomplishment of the prophesies, whereas I ^nimad.
showed from the Papists own writings of their church, how fitly it agrees
with Antichrists synagogue foretold of by God: mine opposite answers ^^s.
ple^ (...).
I tell them of a Church, such as Bellarmine and others describe, one part
whereof lives on earth, an other under the earth, and a third part in heaven
etc. Whereas our question is of the Temple of God, whereof Paul speaks, 2.
These. 2. 4. and of the court and holy city whereof John speaks Rev. 11. 2.
Thus neither the Prophesies of God, nor the complement of them showed by the
men themselves whom the prophesies concern, may be brought to clear the
controversy: but mine opposite will insist upon dark and figurative speeches;
that men may be the more easily deluded. For how shall we prove against
Papists, that the Pope is Antichrist; if we may not allege the Popes own
doctrines and practices, which are contrary to Christ? Yea how shall we judge
of any church, but by their own Confessions published, and comparing them with
the scripures? Wherefore the profession of Papists concerning their church, is
a strong argument whereby they may be discovered to be none of Christ's: and even
the Cretian liars testimony against themselves, is true, as the Apostle
notes, Tit. 1. 12. 13.

An Answer to the arguments brought for the church of Rome.
MIne opposite pleads thus; 1. First, J take an argument from the baptism
had in the churches aforesaid, [the Apostate churches of Christians*] thus. The
Baptism had in the church of Rome, is the Lords baptism, the sign and seal
of his covenant, the ordinance of God had in that church from the Apostles
times (before Antichrist there arose) Romans 6. 2. 3. and so is true baptism,
which is from heaven and not of men: that one baptism which perteyneth to the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. which the Lord has given to his church, and not
man etc. Therefore the church of Rome, is the church of God, and under his
covenant etc.

Answ. Here, let it first be observed, whether mine opposite pleads against
the present estate of that church, as before he pretended. For if they be under
Gods covenant, and have it sealed unto them from heaven, by that one true
baptism, then are they in the state of grace and of salvation: which is the
very thing that all Papists at this day do plead for. Concerning his Argument,
I deny, that the baptism had in all Apostate churches of Christians and
particularly in the church of Rome, is the Lords true baptism, or the sign
and seal of his covenant of grace unto them. Here mine opposite refers me
to an other place of his book, for proof of the truth of their Baptism:
whereto I will make answer anon, in their place. And now that my denial may not
be so bare as is his assertion here: I will insist upon the two scriptures
which he cites* and disprove their baptism.

In Romans 6. 2. 3. 4. the Apostle says; How shall we that are dead to syn, live
any longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized into Christ
Jesus, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk ^n n^wnes of life. Here first
the Apostle speaks of such as are dead to syn; that is mortified Christians,
which live not in syn, neither verse. 12.
reigns it in them, but they are v. 7.
freed (or justified) from syn; and are v. 11.
alive unto God. But Antichristians (such as are the professant members of the
church of Rome,) are not dead unto, or freed from syn: for they are the
subjects of the 2 These. 2. 3.
Man of syn, the worshipers of the Beast, for whom is prepared the wine of the
wrath of God, Revel. 14. 9. 10. They are of that church, which by my opposites
confession a little before) is fallen into most sinful and deep apostasy, and
is a notorious ^arlot and idolatress, which all the people of God ought to
forsake: Wherefore they are rather to be counted dead in synns (as The Apostle
speaks of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 1.) and that they are in deed dead, and not
partakers of the first resurrection; is evident by Revel. 20. 4. 5. 6. in that
they are the worshipers of the Beast, and murderers of the witnesses of Jesus.
Wherefore, the doctrine of Baptism in Romans 6. is far from proving the
Antichristians or other heretical and apostate churches, to have the true
baptism of Christ, or seal of his covenant: but his servants they are to whom
they obey, even of syn unto death, Romans 6. 16.

The other scripture is Ephe. 4. 4. 5. There is one body and one spirit, even
as ye are called unto one hope of your calling: one Lord, one faith, one
baptism. By which words it appears, that such as have the One baptism, have
also one and the same faith, Lord, hope, spirit, and body: which to affirm of
the Antichristian church of Rome, and of all other heretical and Apostate
churches that profess Christ, is very impious. And most firm arguments there
are from the Apostles words to the contrary of that which this man pleads
for. As, The Romish and other heretical churches have not the one and same
faith with the true Churches of Christ; witness, their blasphemous doctrines
published by the Council of Trent, and in other books; and the Apostles
prophecy, that they are departed from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. etc. therefore
they have not the one Baptism. They have not one and the same Lord Jesus
Christ; but have Antichrist the Man of syn, for their Lord: therefore they have
not the one baptism. They have not that one hope, nor that one Spirit, neither
are they one body with the true Christian churches: therefore they have not
that one baptism. These things are partly prooved before in the description
which I set down of Antichrists church: they are also acknowledged of all
Christian churches, which disclaim the unity with the Antichristians in their
faith, spirit, and body. And the scriptures most abundantly disclaim this
feighned unity: as 2 Cor. 6. 12. what concord has Christ with Belial?
meaning, none at all. And Belial is there put for Antichrist and his retinue,
as in 2 Samuel 23. 6. and 22. 5. The Apostle shows, that the Antichristians
have from God, strong delusions, to believe lies unto their damnation, 2 These.
2. 11. 12. That they are departed from the faith, do give heed to ^educing
spirits, and doctrines of Divils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, etc. ^ Tim. 4.
1. 2. That the false teachers (among Christians) privily bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1. That the Beast (which is the Dan. 7. 23.
kingdom of Antichrist,) and the false prophet (his ministers) and all that
worship him, or take his mark; shall be tormented in fire and brimstone for ever
and ever, Rev. 20. 10. etc. and 14. 9. 10. And shall we now say, that these
miserable creatures, have one Spirit, hope, Lord, faith and baptism with the
saints and true Churches of Christ? My soul, come not thou into their secret,
that so affirm.

The second argument for such churches, is; Chr. plea ^. 121.
If they be not under II.
the covenant of God, but divorced from the Lord etc: then is there no
salvation for any in those churches.

Answ. I deny the consequence. For then, after Israel was divorced from the
Lord, (as is testified in in Ier. 3. 8.) there was no salvation for any among
them: which I know mine opposite himself would not say.

Objection. Why, Ibidem.
out of the covenant of God, there is no salvation.

Answ. I grant it. But though the church be not under the covenant of God, but
without it, or divorced from him, yet some parlicular persons in that church,
may through Gods grace be in his covenant. For as every true church is in the
covenant of God, yet some hypocrites and reprobates are in the same, which
perish for ever: so every false church is out of the covenant; yet some truly
faithful and elect may be therein, which by the covenant of grace may be saved.
Example in Rahab the Canaanitess, the church whereof she was, had not the
covenant of grace in Christ: yet she having heard of Gods works toward Israel,
believed in God, and was saved; and before she joined her self to the church of
Israel, she showed the fruits of true and living faith, whereby she was
justified, and is put in the catalogue of the Saints, Jos. 2. 1. 9. 10. etc.
Heb. 11. 31. 39. Jam. 2. 25. 26. The like is to be thought of the other
nations, far off from God, who by some means hearing of his name and truth,
might embrace the faith unto salvation, though the churches whereof they stood
members were false and idolatrous, 1 King. 8. 41. 42. 43. So where mine
opposite^ Ibid. p. 128
brings scriptures to prove, that they which are not in the covenant of God
and Christ, cannot be saved: he proves that which is not denied: but this he
should have proved, if he could; that if a church be false, and not under the
covenant; none in that church can by any means come unto the faith and
covenant of Christ; for this I deny. And his argument if it had been sound,
should have been this. If Antichristian churches be not under the covenant of
God, but divorced from the Lord; then is there no salvation for any that are
under the covenant of that church, and in no other covenant: and so I would
have granted his argument; as confirmed by the Holy ghost, that all such are in
the state of damnation, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. Rev. 14. 9. 10.

Here to help the church of Antichrist into the covenant of Christ, he Chr.
plea p. 122.
brings in the profession of the Jesuits of Rhemes, which (as he says) ^old
Rhemes ^nno^. on 1 Timothy 2. ^.
Christ by nature to be truly both God and man, to be the one eternal Priest
and Redeemer, which by his sacrifice and death upon the cross, has reconciled
in to God, and paid his blood, as a f^ll and sufficient ransom for all our
synns, etc. again to be the singular advocate and patron of mankind, that by
himself alone, and by his own merit^ procures all grace and mercy to
mankind. etc.

I answer, First for the persons that set down this profession they are by the
testimony of God that false prophet, which with the Beast shall be tormented for
ever and ever, Rev. 20. 10. or at least, they are those unclean spirits which
come out of the mouth of the Beast and of the False prophet, for they are the
spirits of Divils, working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day
of God almighty, Rev. 16. 13. 14. And this is apparent by that corrupt
Testament and blasphemous notes and interpretations upon it, which they there
set forth to the world, in sted of the true Christian and catholic faith.
Moreover they are a part of the popish hierarchy which mine opposite after
makes to be the Man of syn, the son of perdition, and the Beast, which he
will not endure to hear that they should be accounted the church, or married to
Christ: yet here he makes them the preachers of the doctrine of salvation.
Secondly for the Profession which they there make, if it were sound and good,
yet denying it again in their works, it nothing avails them: for of such it
is written, They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate; Tit. 1. 16. But
what shall we say, if they deny the truth of the doctrine of Christ, not in
work only, but even in word and profession? First then, (to omit their
railing against Calvin about the Godhead of Christ being of himself, in their
Annot. on John 1. sect. 3.) concerning Christ's manhood, and the truth of his
humane nature, how ever they acknowledge him to have taken flesh of the virgin;
yet believe they, (and burn to ashes such as will not believe it,) that the
bread in the sacrament is transsubstantiated into the very body of Christ; so
they have a Christ made of a wafer cake; a Christ whose whole body is in an
hundred thousand places and more at once, even in all places of the world,
whersoever Mass is said by a Priest: so he must have a fanatical body, which
can neither be seen, felt, tasted or by any sense of man perceived as an humane
body: and this breaden Christ they worship in that their idolatrous sacrament,
and do eat him really and properly with their mouths. And do these now
believe Christ's humane nature aright; when as by the plain scripture we are
taught, that the heaven must receive him, until the times of restitution of all
things, Act. 3. 21.

As for his office of Mediatorship; whereas they profess him to be the singular
Advocate and patron of mankind; by singular they mean not the only Advocate
or mediator, as the scripture teaches, ^ Tim. 2. 5. 1 John 2. 1. but a
special or chief mediator: for they have innumerable other advocates and
mediators, as the heathe^s of old, had one chief God, and many inferior gods.
So the same Rhemists gloss on 1 Timothy 2. tells us, that though Christ be the
only singular Advocate and patron etc. yet this lets not but there may be
other inferior mediators, though not in that singular sense: And how they
believe in their Queen of heaven, let this one song (amongst many other) to the
virgin Marie witness, when they sing O regina poli, matter gratissima prosi:
Spernere me noli, me commendo tibi soli. i. O queen of heaven etc. J commend me
to thee only.

As for the redemption, the full and sufficient ransom for all our synns,
paid by his blood, which they would seem to hold: it is with fraud and injury
to Christ's blood, which by their distinction) satisfied for the syn, but not
for the punishment; and therefore they have feighned a purgatory fire, wherein
men's souls do bear the punishment of their own venial synns: Council.
Trid-sess. 6. can. 30. Bellarm. de Parg. c. 1. From which also they can redeem
themselves by money, given to Antichrists priests that sacrifice for the synns
of the living and the dead. And whereas God teaches us, that we are justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; Romans 3.
24. and that we are not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Jesus Christ, Gal. 2. 16. the Antichristians teach us a justification by faith
and works together; by Christ's merits, Saints and Popes merits, and their own;
and these works by which they believe to be saved in part, are very many of
them wicked works of their own devisings, as going on pilgrimage, giving of
their goods to mainteyne Antichrists clergy, and idolatry, and other like
works of the Divil. And of their own idols, as of an Agnus Dei made of wax,
they believe and profess, Ceremon. Romans l. 1. (...). 7. c. De consecrat. agn.
Dei.
Omne malignum peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis, et angit. It breaks all
wicked syn, as the blood of Christ does. Thus blasphemously they tread Christ's
blood under their feet.

Finally, the faith which they profess to have in Christ, what is it? Any trust
or confidence such as the faithful have in Christ to be their savior, as the
Apostle teaches, in Romans 8. 33. ^. 39. and Gal. 2. 20. Hebr. 3 6. Ephe. 3. 12.
Nay, this confidence they reject as a presumption; and their faith, (which is
without confidence) being but an assent to the truth of Gods promises; and not
a confidence of their justification in particular: is such a faith as the
Divils Iam. 2. 19.
have, who know and assent to the truth of Gods promises unto mankind. See
Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 1. c. 5. 6. etc. Now if this painted face of the
Romish Iezebel, be so foul and uglie, being compared with the beawtie of
Christ's true spouse: what may we think is the faith of that ignorant seduced
multitude of Antichristians, who professing Christ in name, look for salvation
by the wicked works which the Pope has learned them, and by the works of the
Law of God, and belief in Christ, and their own sufferings, confusedly
together; and yet neither know Christ, nor what true saving faith in him does
mean.

Object. Who dare say but that God by this faith in Christ, saves some of
them, who do thus believe in simplicity etc.

Answ. And who dare say, but that God, notwithstanding this faith professed by
the Jesuits as before, may justly damn them, though they thus believe in
simplicitie' Seeing even in these things which they profess, they corrupt
themselves with horrible idolatries, having many false Gods, and false Christ's
in whom they also trust, and daily pray unto them, as did the heathens. And,
seeing this their faith, considered in the best, is no true saving faith; but as
themselves say, The faith which truly justifies, is not that whereby they
believe that God is merciful unto them; but that whereby they believe with the
whole heart without any doubting, that Jesus is the Christ, and the son of God.
Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 1. c. 8. Such a faith appears to have been in the
Divils, as it is written And Divils also came out of many, crying out and
saying, Thou art Christ, the son of God, Luke 4. 41. But that God gives some
in that church a sounder faith, and saves them of the riches of his grace; I
never denied or doubted of.

Object. 2. Of this mind concerning them, J have been a long time; see Answ.
to Mr. Jak. p. 13. 47. etc.

Answ. But then and there, this distinction was rightly put, of, some
particular men, considered a part from their constitution; that is, from their
church estate: now, that church and all other Apostate churches professing
Christ's name, are generally pleaded for, to be in the state of grace, having
the one true baptism etc. which is to justify the open wicked, and count
Christ's enemies blessed.

Object. 3. Some of them dye Martyrs in defense of the Christian faith,
(acknowledging Jesus to be the Christ the son of God.) against Turks, etc.

Answ. If it be in defense of the Christian faith, it is well: but if
acknowledging Jesus to be the Christ, they dye also in defense of the
Antichristian faith professed by that church, and for the idolatry of the
same, (which is hateful to the very Turks:) then I say with The Apostle, they
may 1 Cor. 13. 3.
give their body to be burned, and it profit them nothing. Neither doubt I, but
some of the Jews, have dyed and will dye in defense of the God of Israel as
they now profess him from Moses and the Prophets; rather then yield to the
heathens. But the extraordinary mercy of God to some in Antichrists church,
justifies no more the estate of that Synagogue of Satan, then his like
extraordinary mercy to some of the heathens (of whom we shall speak anon) will
justify the heathens synagogues to be Gods true churches. As for Martyrs, our
own English acts and monuments and other, do show that many have given their
lives for this, that the church of Rome is not the true church of Christ. Now
by mine opposites plea they died not herein for the truth but for error: what
Martyrs them were they?

Obj. 4. Many Jndians, Pagans, Jews are by them converted, and brought to the
profession of Christian religion, among whom I doubt not, but the Lord has and
saves his, even by that knowledge and faith of Christ, which by their
preaching among them they are brought unto, etc.

Answ. That many of all nations are converted or perverted unto
Antichristianitie by the Papists, there is no doubt, for experience shows it,
and so it is prophesied, that by Babylons sorceries, all nations should be
deceived, Reve. 18. 23. So the heathens of Babylon, Cuth, Hamath etc. were
converted by a Samaritan Priest, and taught to fear the Lord the God of
Israel: that they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods; and also, they
feared not the Lord, neither did they after their statutes or after their
ordinances, 2 King. 17. 28. 29. 30. 33. 34. If that misceline rabble were Gods
true church, so are these popish proselytes: if they were not (as I never heard
any affirm they were,) neither are these. And what have our learned men of
England answered to this old popish argument? J deny (says Dr. Fulk) that ever
the popish church converted any to the true faith. Answer to a counterf.
Catholic art. 1. Yea what say the Papists themselves, of this point? Hierom
Benzo (in Histor. Indiarum) says, that all the religion the Indians have, is
to make the sign of the cross, and to hear a Latin mass, and to perform such
like ceremonies. Joseph a Costa, a Jesuit, in his book De procuranda Judaorum
salute, tells us, Lib. 6. c. 3.
that the Spaniards have baptized many against their wills. He says, Lib. 1.
chapter 14.
they are like the Samaritans, that worshipped God and idols both together: they
make (says he) a feighned show of Christianity, they serve not God in deed,
neither believe they unto righteousness. And are not these converts now, a
goodly plea for mine opposite to allege, for proof of a true Christian church?
But he proceeds,

Christian* plea p. 122.
Yea and who can say, but that whersoever the name of Christ is preached and
called upon, the Lord saves some etc. seeing that Christ is the way, the
truth, and the life, and whosoever believes in him shall not perish, Ioh. 3.
16. 17. etc.

Answ. Where Christ is truly preached, and believed, no Christian will say, but
the Lord saves some: but where Christ is falsely preached and believed in,
after Antichrists idolatrous manner, none can truly say, that they are a true
Christian Church. As for Gods saving some by the doctrine there preached; it is
a thing not for us to dispute of: we are commanded to leave secret things unto
God, and to hold us unto things revealed, Deuteronomy. 29. 2^. God who brought light
out of darkness, can cause the truth to shine into the hearts of his elect, by
the corrupt preaching of the Papists* and so I doubt not but he does. yet is
this no justification of the popish church; any more then the true preaching of
the gospel, which is unto the reprobates the savor 2 Cor. 2. 16.
of death unto death, is a condemnation of the Christian Church, and true
doctrine of the same.

Object. 5. But, Chr. plea. page 122.
Out of the Church there is no salvation, which J suppose themselves will not
deny. And (that which is more) the Lords constitutions cease not to be his holy
ordinances, though the people that enjoy them, should have no benefit thereof to
salvation.

Answ. Here we have suppositions in sted of proof. His assertion I deny, though
he supposed the contrary: for out of the true visible Church (whereof we
dispute) there may be salvation. Many that are not of any true Church, yea are
persecutors of it, and excommunicates out of it, may repent and believe in
Christ, even at their last hour, and at their death; and so be saved; though
they neither have time, place, or means to be joined to any true visible church
on earth. If he speak not of a particular visible church, but of the Universal
church which is invisible, and comprehends all Gods elect: he swerveth from
the question, and deceives by aequivocation; for we treat of the visible
church of Rome, whether it be Christ's true church or no. As for the Universal
church, which is all over the earth, and from the beginning of the world to the
end thereof, and conteyneth Gods elect only: out of it in deed there is no
salvation. But what is this to the purpose? For so a man might reason thus. In
the church there are no reprobates, there is no damnation; for Christ gives
all his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, Ioh. 10. 28. But the
Popish synagogue, is (by mine oposites plea) the church, even the true church
of Christ. Therefore in it there are no reprobates, there is no damnation. Here
(I doubt not) mine opposite would distinguish between the Catholic or
universal church in the first proposition, and the particular church of Rome,
in the second; and so deny the argument: and why would he then himself obtrude
upon us, such a deceitful reason?

The latter part of his speech I grant: but it helps him nothing. For the
synagogue of Antichrist, is none of Gods constitutions, though every true
Christian church is: neither has he annexed promise of grace, to his
ordinances abused by the man of syn, and his subjects, in that malignant
church, but has threatened the destruction of the deceivers and deceived, 2
These. 2. 8. 10. 11. 12.

3. The third Chr. plea p. 122. 12^*
reason for the church of Rome consists of a division of the world into
Christians, Jews, Turks and Pagans; and of a question, if it be asked, which
of these is the Church of God at this day? should we not answer, the
Christians: and among the Christians, comprise the churches aforesaid, for the
reasons before specified?

Answ. The first part of his answer, I yield unto, that Christians now are Gods
church. The second I deny, namely that Antichristians (such as the Papists be,)
and other heretical and apostate churches, are to be comprised in the number;
save in name only, for in deed and truth they are not. His reasons before
specified, I have particularly refuted: and so might here end. But further to
explain the truth, I answer; that after this general division, we must make
an other subdivision, or else we may be deceived. The subdivision is of
Christians again, into true and false, or into Christians and Antichristians
which profess Christ in name and deny him in deed. And this I learn of the
holy Ghost, who in the Apostles times divided the Jews into outward, and
inward, Romans 2. 28. 29. and counted these latter only Jews: and such as said
they were Jews and were not, but did lie, he calls them the Synagogue of
Satan: Revel. 3. 9. Even so, he prophesied of a Beast (or kingdom) which should
have two horns like the Lamb (Christ, and so be called Christians) but should
speak as the Dragon, work wonders, and deceive men that dwell on the earth,
etc, Revel. 13. 11. 13. 14. He also foretold of false teachers among
Christians, who privily should bring in damnable heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them etc. 2 Pet. 2. 1. If thus we distinguish not between the
true Christ and M^t. 24. 24.
false Christ's, between true prophets and false prophets, and so between true
churches and false: we may reteyn the name of Christ and Christian churches,
and be in deed nothing less. And according to mine opposites manner of plea, an
other might reason thus, Of sinners in the world, some are 2 Pet. 2. 4. 5.
Angels, and some are men. If then the question be asked, seeing Christ came to
save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. which of these are redeemed and saved by Christ, and
are the church of God? should we not answer men; and among men also comprise
all peoples upon earth, Jews, Turks Pagans etc. This is the mould of mine
Opposers argument; and as colourably as he pleads for Antichrists synagogue
to be Christ's Church, so others do plead for universal redemption of all
peoples and persons borne into the world; from Ioh. 1. 9. Romans 5. 18. and other
like scriptures.

4 The Chr. plea, p. 123,
fourth reason is from baptism, a visible sign of Gods visible Church among
Christians, as circumcision was among the Jews etc.

I answer, the baptism among Antichristians is in deed like their church;
Christ's in name, but not in deed and truth. As for that which he annexeth, of
our defending and reteyning that visible baptism received in the church of
Rome; it follows after to be discussed, when we come to treat of their
baptism. In the mean while, let it be observed, that as Circumcision was a
sign of the Church of old; so was sacrificing, both then, and before
Circumcision was instituted: and all nations reteyning sacrifice then, as well
as Antichrist reteyneth baptism and the Lords supper now; it will also follow by
like reason, that all nations were then Gods churches; which argument shall be
prosecuted hereafter. Again, as the foolish woman calls passengers to her
sweet stolen waters, and pleasant bread of secresies, Prove. 9. 13. 17. so this
foolish Rev. 17. 18.
woman (the church of Antichrist) by like stales, allureth the simple unto her:
which are no sounder proof that she is Christ's true spouse, then the true man's
purse in the theefs hand, will prove the thief to be a true and honest man.

5 The 5* reason Ibidem
is from the defection of Judah and Israel, remaining still Gods people
notwithstanding: therefore also the church of Rome, in like manner.

Answ. Of the first part of this reason, touching the state of the Israelites,
we are after to speak in particular: but were it granted, I deny the
consequence, it follows not, the Antichristian synagogue is so also.

Inst. Ibid. page 123. 124.
The consequence (says he) is prooved, because these were types of the like
state of the Christian churches, recorded for our instruction. 1 Cor. 10. 6. --
11. with Romans 154. and 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Jude v. 5. 11. Rev. 2.
14. 20. and 11. 2. etc.

Answ. I grant that he says, for the Christian churches: but for the
Antichristian, it is true in part only. The synns of Judah and Israel, are
found in Rome: so are the synns of Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, and heathen Rome;
which by warrant from God, were types also of this Antichristian Babylon, Rev.
11. 8. and 17. 5. From which I may as truly conclude; Sodom, Egypt and
Babylon of old, were so far fallen from God, as they were not his churches or
peoples: and they were types of this church of Antichrist, and the things
written of them, are for our instruction, Romans 15. 4. Jude v. 7. 2. Pet. 2. 5.
6. Therefore this Antichristian synagogue, is not Christ's true church.

Further I answer, that the types which were in Israel, prove not that the
things typed are in the same degree of good or evil, neither more nor less; as
mine opposite would infer that Antichristians are not now more deep in
apostasy then were the Israelites. For types and figures agree in some things,
but not in all. Moses, Aaron, David and all other types of Christ were sinners:
but it were wicked thereupon to conclude, that Christ himself was a sinner.
Moreover Christ's Preisthood was figured in Aaron and his so^ns: yet did not
that Levitical Preisthood fully type out his office, but in part: and a more
complete figure of him was in Melchisedek, as The Apostle shows in Heb. 5. and
7. chapters. Accordingly, it will follow, that Antichrist is answerable to
Isreal's apostasy in part: and yet a more complete figure of him is to be found
in the Gentiles. And as Christ excels in holiness all that were types of him:
so Antichrist exceeds in wickedness all the types of him; and therefore has
many sorts of wicked men, to resemble his impiety. Rev. 11. 8. And that his
consequence follows not from the type to the thing typed, that they are both
in an equal estate, appears further by his own grant (in page 126.), where he
makes Antiochus and his captains etc. a type of the Papacy. Now it is
confessed of all, that Antiochus and his company were Pagans in religion: so
by the like reason, the Pope with his captains and souldjers, must be Pagans
also.

6. The 6 reason page 124.
alleged for them is, that it should be syn for Papists and Apostate
Christians, to marie with Pagans, to neglect baptism, not to sanctify the
Lords day; as it was in Judah and Israel to marie with the heathen, to neglect
circumcision, to profane the Lords day etc. Dan. 11. 32. with 1. Maccab. 1. 16.
45. 51. 55. and with Mal. 2. 11. Ezr. 9. 1. 2. and 10. 10. Neh. 13. 3. 23. --
27. Hos. 5. 7. and 7. 8. and 8. 12. Amos 8. 5. with 2 Cor. 6: 14. etc. which
should not so be, if they were not the church and people of God, under his
covenant, and bound to the observation of his ordinances. For Pagans, and such
as perteyn not to the Lords covenant, being not his church and people, are not
in their estate bound to these and the like ordinances of the Lord, which he
has given to his church and people. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. with Deuteronomy. 7. 1. -- 11.

Answ. This reason is sundry ways faulty. 1. Of Pagans he says, they are not
in their estate bound etc: but Papists and apostate Israelites, he would have
them bound, yet mentions not their estate: whereas if he speak not of them
also in their estate, his argument is false and fraudulent.

2. The scriptures alleged Psalm. 147. and Deuteronomy. 7. are by him abused, whiles
he restreyneth them to these and the like ordinances, namely, marriage,
circumcision, baptism, and the Sabbath; understanding by the like ordinances,
(as I suppose) the Passover and other sacrifices, the Lords supper, etc:
whereas the Psalmist speaks generally of Gods Words, Statutes (or Ordinances)
and Judgments, Psalm. 147. 19. 20. which three, do comprehend the moral Law,
called the Exodus 34. 28.
Ten Words, the Ordinances of worship and service, and the Judicials for
punishment of malefactors: all these the Prophet says, were showed unto
Jsrael, and God dealt not so with any nation. Now to conclude from these words,
therefore the nations were not bound to observe the ordinances, because God had
not showed them unto them, as he had done unto Israel (namely by his written
Law given at Mount Sinai,) has no more weight then this, Therefore the nations
were not bound to the moral Law, or to the Judicials; and so sinned not in
committing idolatry, murder, whordome, or the like. But this is impious to
say, and a false conclusion: therefore his conclusion also touching the
ordinances is false, and can not rightly be gathered from this text. The evil
of it further appears in one of his instances, the Sabbath day: which is one
of the ten commandments, and instituted from the beginning of the world, Genesis
2. If then the nations were free from syn when they kept not the Sabbath,
because they had it not written in the book of the Law or Tables of stone as
had Israel: were they not also by the same reason free from syn in not keeping
the other commanments?

So for the Lords day now, he makes the church of Christ only (and so the
Papists and other like whom he accounts true churches) sinners if they keep
it not: all others he freeth from syn, as not bound to keep it. Whereupon this
paradox follows, that the further men fall away from Christ, the more free
they are from syn. For the church of Rome being fallen to Antichrist the Pope,
they are sinners in his account, if they keep not the Lords day: but the
churches of Corinth, Ephesus and other like which are fallen to Mahomet, they
are no sinners in his account, though they observe not the Lords day: and why?
Only because they are fallen so far, as they are no church of God, nor in his
covenant of grace. Thus, the further from Christ the freer from syn; if this
doctrine be true.

But I suppose the contrary to be true: and that all peoples how far soever
fallen from Christ, are now bound to keep the Lords day, and other ordinances
of Christ; and it is their great syn that they do not. For Christ sent his
Apostles to teach all nations, and to baptize them, and to teach them to
observe all things whatsoever he commanded his Apostles, even to the worlds
end, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And they went into all the world, preaching and
admonishing all men every where to repent, and believe the Gospel, and to be
baptized, and observe all the ordinances of Christ: and all that obeyed not, or
that have since fallen from their obedience, are guilty before God, and shall be
condemned, because they believe not in Christ, and keep not his commandments.
Mark. 16. 15. 16.

If it be said that a Turk or Pagan in that their estate of unbeleef may not
lawfully be baptized or admitted to the Lords supper, til they repent: this is
true; yet can we not therefore say, they are not bound to be baptized, or are
free from synin neglecting baptism: for they are bound to all the doctrines
and ordinances of the gospel in order, first to repent and believe, then to be
baptized, then to receive the Lords supper, and so all the rest. If further it
be said, that the Papists in their estate of misbeleef and idolatry; may
without repentance and without returning to the true faith, be partakers of
baptism and the Lords supper etc: it is denied. For if the Jews (which were
the true church though corrupted) might not be received to baptism without
repentance, as the scriptures show, Mat. 3. 6. 7. -- 10. Luk 7. 29. 30. Act. 2.
38. then the Antichristians, the members of that church which (by Mr. ^ohnsons
own acknowledgment ^hr. plea, ^ag. 120.
) is fallen into most sinful and deep defection and apostasy, and is a
notorious harlot and idolatresse; may much less be baptized, or admitted to the
Lords supper unless they repent. And whereas mine opposite pleads for their
right in the sacraments and other ordinances which they should syn to neglect:
it would be known where they are bound to receive them, whether in their own
church, or in some Christian reformed church. If in their own; then they are
bound to hear Mass, and syn if they be not partakers of it; for that is their
idolatrous supper: then do not the Magistrates well to forbidd them their
Masses, and other ecclesiastical exercises, which they are bound by God to
frequent, and should syn if they used them not. If they have right unto them in
other reformed churches: then is there to be a communion between true
Christians and those Antichristians, in one body, at one Table: for (as the
Apostle says) we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. But this were to build a new
Babylon, and to make a confused mixture of the members of Christ and of
Antichrist, contrary to all the scriptures. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17 Rev. 21.
27.

The other scripture which he cites, Deuteronomy 7. 1 - 11. helps him no more then
the former: for there in the 11. verse, the Commandments, Statutes and
Judgments (which imply all Moses law) are expressed: if other nations were
freed from all these, then were they freed from all law, and so from all syn;
for where there is no Law, there is no transgression, seeing Syn is the
transgression of the Law: 1. Ioh. 3. 4. And where he instanceth marriage with
Pagans, which is there forbidden Deuteronomy. 7. 3. and applies it to Papists now,
that they should syn to mary with such, I grant it. But his inference thereupon,
that therefore they are the true church and in the covenant of grace, I deny.
For the Jews at this day, which profess (after their false manner) the God of
Israel, and all things written in the Law and Prophets, should syn if now they
married with such, doing contrary to their express Law, Mal. 2. 11, Yet are not
the Jews now in the covenant of grace, or the church of God.

Again in Deuteronomy. 7. 5. there is commandment to destroy images and like
monuments of idolatry: if this was peculiar to Israel, then other nations
sinned not, in suffering idols among them undestroyed: whereas the Apostle
plainly shows their grievous syn in making and using such idols, Romans 1. 23.
and consequently it must needs also be their syn, that they did not forsake,
destroy and abolish them.

If any now ask, whether the other nations were then bound to all the
ordinances of Israel? I answer, no: for some things were never before
commanded, nor unto other then the church of Israel, as the strangers might eat
some meats, which the Israelites might not, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Such things having
never been forbidden them of God, they might eat without syn, as we may at this
day. But this I say of the nations, that all the Laws, Statutes and judgments
which were once commanded them of God; they were bound for ever to keep, til
God again repealed them. As for example all the ten commandments; and such
Statutes (or ceremonies) as were taught them of God, as sacrificing, Gen 4. 3.
4. and 8. 20. not to eat flesh with the blood, Genesis 9. 4. and all other the
like. And for judgments, to kill murderers, Genesis 9. 6. and so to punish other
malefactors. And no Apostasy could ever free them from syn, in neglecting any
of Gods laws once given them. So no Apostasy could free the Israelites from
any law of Moses; or the world now, from the Law of Christ. The Jews that
under Antiochus turned, to Paganism, 1 Maccab. 1. 43. were guilty they and
their seed, for neglecting circumcision, the Passover and all other ordinances
of Moses; and their apostasy (whereby they went out from the covenant of God
and his church,) freed them not from syn at all. So the Christians in like
manner that have Apostate to Mahometisme, are nevertheless in their synns for
neglect of Christ's truth and ordinances; though they be no Christian church,
as all of us grant.

Only there is this difference to be put; that such as know the will of God,
(as did the Jews, and many Papists now may, by the scriptures,) and do it
not; shall be beaten with many stripes; whereas the ignorant peoples, and Popish
multitude, shall be beaten with few, Luke. 12. 47. 48. But to excuse them from
syn wholly, is to plead for iniquity. And for this cause, both David in Ps.
147. and Moses in Deuteronomy. 7. urges Israel to thankfullnes and obedience above
other peoples, in that the Lord had now written his laws and ordinances unto
them, and made them an holy people, when he left other peoples, only to that
doctrine which by word of mouth was delivered them from Noe and his sonns;
which if they did forsake (as they had in a great mesure,) they should perish
for ever.

7. His seventh and last Chr. plea, 124. etc.
reason for the church of Rome is taken from 2. These. 2. 3. 4. Where it is
prophesied that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God. This argument he
handles at large. But first let it be observed, how all his reasons, hitherto,
are showed to be insufficient* and built upon weak grounds, the first being
taken from their baptism, which is adulterate as the church it self: The
second, from an inconvenience falsely presupposed, that none in that church can
else be saved: The third, from a question, whether Christians, Jews, Turks or
Pagans, be the church. The 4. is again from their baptism. The 5. is from the
types of Judah and Israel in apostasy. The 6. is from a supposed freedom that
such as are apostate from the covenant of God, should have from syn, if they
neglect the ordinances of the gospel. None of these arguments are taken from
the essential things whereof the true church consists; none from the matter,
to prove them saints; or form, to prove them united unto Christ and one to an
other, according to the order of his testament; none from the faith, to show it
to be true; or from the worship and service of God; or from the ministry, to
manifest either of these to be according to Christ. And now, the last of his
reasons is from a figurative phrase the Temple of God, which may be diversely
understood and applied, as himself cannot deny. Let the prudent reader judge,
whether these his seven arguments be any thing like those seven pillars, which
Wisdom hewed out, when she builded her house, Prove. 9. 1.

Now let us weigh, his seventh reason. The Apostle (says he) speaking of
Antichrist, in 2 These 2. 3. 4. describes him thus; There shall come an
Apostasy ( defection or falling away) and the man of syn shall be revealed, the
son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God, suteth in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God etc. Here the Apostle describing Antichrist*
speaks of the Temple of God, where he suteth etc. Now that by the Temple of
God in Jsrael, was figured the church of God among Christians, appears by
these scriptures, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ephe. ^. 21. Rev. 11. 1. 2.
19. and 14. 15. 17. and 15. 5. 6. 8. and 16. 1. 17. compared with Zach. 6. 12.
13* and is acknowledged by the best writers of all ages etc. So then from this
scripture J reason as follows.

Jf the Pope of Rome with his hierarchy be the man of syn (here spoken of) and
the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped: then is the church of Rome the Temple of God
here spoken of; wherein he suteth as God, showing himself that he is God.

But the Pope of Rome with his hierarchy, is (by Animadv p. 76,-106*
their own grant) the man of syn of whom the Apostle here speaks etc.
Therefore the church of Rome, is the Temple of God also, that here is spoken of.

I answer. This argument I might wholly grant, and not hurt the cause I plead
for. For though the church of Rome be the Temple of God, which Paul speaks
of: yet follows it not, that it is Gods true Temple, or true Church, (which
is the point that should be concluded;) seeing the scriptures often speak of
things as once they were* though so they continue not still: as also, they
speak of things according to the outward pretense and show that is made of
them; though in deed and truth they be nothing less. The first is manifest by
these and other like instances: Abigail is called the wife of Nabal, 1 Samuel 30.
5. though Nabal was then dead, and his wife married to David. Simon is still
called the Leper, Mat. 26. 6. though he was then cleansed of his leprosy. The
king of Tyrus an heathen man that lived in Ezekiels days, is said to have been
in Eden the garden of God, to have been upon the holy mountain of God, and to
have walked in the midst of the stones of fire, Ezekiel. 28. 13. 14. meaning
that he had been in Gods church, on mount Sion, among the people of God:
although not he himself, but Huram his predecessor (many years before, in the
days of David and Solomon) was the man that became a proselyte in Israel, and
helped to build the Temple; 2 Chronicles. 2. 3. -- 16. even as if a man should speak
to the Bishop of Rome at this day, and tell him what he was for a Bishop in
The Apostles days, and how now he is degenerate and become the man of syn. The
mountains of Horeb and Tabor, where God once gave his Law and Christ was
transfigured; are after still called the mount of God, and the Holy mount, 1
King. 19. ^. 2 Pet. 1. 18. because they had been for the time Exodus 3. 5.
sanctified by the presence of God. And so the Temple in Jerusalem, after the
Jews had crucified Christ, refused the gospel, and were Ro^. 11. 20.
broken off, because of unbeleef; and the sacrificing and Ioh. 4. 21.
worshipping in that place was ended; yet is it until the utter ruin of it by
the Romans, called the holy place, Mat. 24. 15. Thus also the City become an
harlot, is called the faithful City* Esai. 1. 21. the wicked that has
forsaken his righteousness is named arighteous man. Ezekiel. 18. 26. according to
their former and not their present estate. And when these titles are given
them, it is not to justify them at all, but to aggravate their syn. So for the
second, that things are called according to the outward appearance and pretext
set upon them, though they be in deed false; is evident by these and the like
examples; false Gods, which are but idols, are called gods, usually: so one
Prophet calls those the Philistians gods, 1 Chronicles. 14. 12. which an other
calls their images. 2 Samuel 5. 21. False prophets are called Prophets, 1 King.
22. 6. 22: and Balaam a Soothsayer among the heathens, Jos. 13. 22. is called a
Prophet. 2 Pet. 2. 16. The evil spirit whom the witch of End or raised up for
Saul, is called in the scripture Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. 11. 12* 15. 16. 20. by
reason whereof, the Papists Bellarm. ^e Chr. any(...)a, l. ^. c. 11.
contend that it was Samuel in deed, and not the Divil; urging the letter, as
mine opposite does urge against me this phrase of the Temple of God. The
idolatrous Temple which Jeroboam made in Israel, in honor of the God which had
brought them out of Egypt, is called the house of their God, Am^s 2. 8. yet
that it was his true house or temple, I never heard of any that would affirm:
though it was the true God whom they worshipped therein; for Baal with his house,
was then destroyed out of Israel, 2 King, 1^. 27. 28.

Now mine opposite has given us a good rule in this his last book, when
answering the Anabaptists he says, Christi plea page
The word of God is not the bare letter or outward syllables, but the
intendement and meaning of the holy Ghost by whom it was given. Which should
carefully be observed by the due consideration of the scriptures, with the
circumstances thereof, and by the conference of other places of scripture, and
the proportion of faith laid together. Which whiles the Anabaptists neglict,
they look on the scripture partially, and press the letter extremely, without
consideration of the true and right meaning thereof. These words of his are
true; the more it is to be lamented that he himself would so press the letter
against me, and not weigh the meaning of the same, by it self, and other
scriptures, and the proportion of faith laid together.

In alleging this text, he lays down the words thus, There shall come an
apostasy (or falling away): whereas the Apostle says, except there come an
apostasy (or falling-away) first: which word first, may intimate that the
church should fall away from the love of the truth, before the man of syn
should be revealed: and this is apparent by the 10. verse, where the people
whom Antichrist seduceth, are said to be them that perish; because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Or, if the word
first (which mine opposite leaves out,) be understood before Christ's coming,
then is it meant of the apostasy (or the falling. away,) so called by an
excellency, as exceeding all other. And is not to be referred to Antichrist
the head only, but to Antichristians the body also; who after other synns,
should fall away with Antichrist, and be damned with him; as in the 11. verse
it is said, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie; shat they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousnes. So that by the whole scope of this scripture it is evident,
the Apostle divides not the people of the church of Rome, from the Bishop and
ministers of the same; as if the people should be Gods true Temple, Christ's
true Church, under his covenant, and so in the state of grace; when the Bishops
and ministers are the Divils Temple, Antichrist, the man of syn, and so in the
state of damnation: but makes both bishops and people, deceivers and deceived,
all of them under wrath and condemnation; otherweise then my opposite would
persuade. For he pleading thus, The Apostle speaking of Antichrist, describes
him thus. There shall come an apostasy etc: would have men think, that the
Bishop and ministers of the church of Rome are the apostasy, and the people
not: contrary to all the scope of this scripture, contrary also to Paul, in 1 Timothy 4 1. where he foretells of some that should apostate (or depart) from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Divils; meaning it
of the people deceived by false teachers: yea it is contrary also to mine
opposites own grant, who said (a little before) that the church of Rome is
fallen into most sinful and deep defection and apostasy, and so is a
notorious harlot and idolatr^ss. Wherefore his distinction here between the
apostasy and the church of Rome, making the one Antichrist, the other Gods
temple, under his covenant of grace: neither accords with the scriptures, nor
with his own assertion.

Next this, where he says, that by the Temple of God in Israel, was figured
the church of God among Christians: it is granted. But withal, let it be
noted, that himself can not deney, Chr. plea, p. 58.
but the Temple and tabernacle in Israel, was not the church and congregation
of Gods people properly, but a sacramental sign of Gods dwelling with them;
which I before Animadv. ^ag. 79
confirmed by these scriptures, Exodus: 25. 8. 2. Chron. 6. 2. Ezekiel. 37. 26. 27.
Rev. 21. 3. Secondly, he himself affirms, that Chr. plea. ^ag. 149.
the temple at Jerusalem, did primarily figure out Christ, and secondarily the
church, both the catholic or universal, and particular churches likeweise; and
particular Christians, and (in several respects) both their bodies, and their
souls and consciences. Upon which graunts of his, it follows, that there is
no necessary consequence of this his proposition, Jf the Pope of Rome with his
hierarchy be the man of syn spoken of in 2. These. 2. then is the church of
Rome, the Temple of God there spoken of: for he understanding by the church,
the people, (as in 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17. 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 2 21.) and yet
granting that the Temple in Israel, was not the people; all may see the weakness
and insufficiency of this inference, that because the Pope of Rome sits as
God in the Temple of God; therefore the people of the church of Rome, are that
Temple of God there spoken of; and consequently Gods true church. For why now
may Animad. ^ag. 79. Ephesians. 3. 17. ^2. 22. 1. ^or. 3* 16. Rev. 13. 4. ^. and. 16.
^ 1. Tim. 4. ^ 2. These. 2. ^. 11. 12. ^. These. 2. 4.
we not as well (if not much better) say that by the Temple of God, is
understood the doctrine and profession of Christ the true Temple; or as in my
former book I showed, thus. As the Temple was an outward sign of Gods presence
with his people, and of his inward dwelling in their hearts * by says and by
his spirit* unto their salvation: so Antichrists temple is an outward show of
his presence with that seduced people, in whose hearts he dwells by Popish
faith, and by his spirit of error carrying them to damnation. But as Antichrist
shall not professedly deny the true God or Christ, though in deed he falsely *
shows himself that he is* God: so shall h^ not professedly deny the Temple or
church of God, but falsely vaunt his adulterous synagogue to be the same. Unto
this exposition, mine opposite has given no answer: and it being according to
the scriptures, and truth of the thing in controversy; I leave it to the
prudent reader, whether the outward show and profession of Christ and Christian
religion, be not the first thing here intended of The Apostle by the Temple of
God. And this is further confirmed by Rev. 11. 1. Where the Temple, Altar, and
Worshipers, are three distinct things; and the people are the worshipers there
spoken of, and neither the Temple, nor the Altar; of which place we shall treat
anon.

Then whereas he grants that the Temple in Jerusalem did primarily figure out
Christ: how is it, that he wholly neglects the primarie thing figured, and
insisteth upon the secondary, the church or people of Rome? Seeing it is known,
how the Pope pretends him self to be Christ's vicar and deputy on earth, and
to be the servant and worshiper of Christ in heaven: and may we think that
The Apostle in warning them of the 2 These. 2* 7.
mystery of iniquity, would not imply the chief point of the mystery, that
Antichrist should in pretense sit for Christ and in his sted, as his vicar
general on earth? Thus to sit in the Temple (or for the Temple) of God, may
well be understood, that Antichrist should sit for Christ, a pretended friend,
but in deed an adverse foe.

Now for that which the Temple secondarily figured, namely the church catholic,
and also particular, and so men's consciences: he wavereth in his application.
He says Chr. plea p. 150. 15^.
this term [ the church of Rome] is taken either particularly (which he
applies to the Laterane church in Rome, the Popes parish church:) or more
generally, for all other such Christian churches; as are come under the Popes
jurisdiction etc. This later I hold to be most proper here: for what needed
there such warning to the Thessalonians and other christian churches through
the world, if a Bishop of the Lateran parish (a corner in Rome) had exalted
himself above God therein only; and had not usurped also a pretended Christian
power over all? And the complement of the prophecy, is an evident exposition
of it: for who knows not, that the Pope scorneth to be Bishop of the Lateran
parish only* it is a jurisdiction over the catholic church throughout the
earth, which he chalengeth. And now what proof brings mine opposite, that the
church of Rome as God constituted it, is taken generally for other Christian
churches under the Popes jurisdiction? None at all: neither can he bring any
jote of Gods word for the same* Again what proof makes he, that the catholic
Roman church wherein the Pope sits, is the true church of God? None but
this, page 152.
J suppose these men themselves being better advised, will not deny them to be
the churches and Temple of God. But he should have showed (if it had been
possible for him) that the Roman church is by divine institution the catholic
or universal church: which because I assure my self it can never be done, I
conclude that this Roman catholic church is a fiction of the Popes brain, and
a mere idol like himself: and is no otherweise the Temple of God, then the
Pope is Christ's universal vicar; namely in lying words and vain ostentation.
And so the maine ground for the Temple of God wherein Antichrist sits, to be
the true church of Christ, is overthrown.

As for the Popes Laterane parish, I both deny it to be Christ's true church;
and that it only is the Temple of God wherein Antichrist should sit. His proof
of the former is this. page 150.
Jf we understand it of a particular church, (as the Apostle wrote his epistle
to the church of the Romans) how shall we soundly deny it either to be the
Temple of God, or Antichrist to be set therein? Thus have we suppositions and
questions, in sted of proofs. To his demand I answer: it is the Temple of God
in pretense, not in truth; even as the Pope is a bishop of Christ in pretense,
but in deed is Antichrist the man of syn, as mine opposite grants. The church
that was in Rome in Paul's time, will no more justify the Popes synagogue there
now; then the Christian ministers which were then in that church, Romans 12. will
justify the Antichristian prelates that there reign at this day. Secondly,
the Laterane parish at Rome, is of the Popes faith, religion and worship: there
are like priests like people. Now if the Bishop of that parish be Antichrist,
the son of perdition, as The Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2. 3. then his
parishoners which have no other faith or religion then he, are also the
children of damnation, 2 These. 2. 12. and so can not be judged to be Christ's
true church, and in the state of grace* sealed of God with his covenant unto
salvation. In the Lateran Church of Rome, where Antichrist is parish priest;
the people are gross idolaters, heretics, worshipers Rev. 9. 20.
of Divils, and of him that sits as God in the Temple of God; ascribing unto
him that Holiness, divine power and jurisdiction, which he does blasphemously
challenge; and mine opposite could not show one man of that parish that
differs at all from the religion of their priest: how is it then possible
that he should be Antichrist, and they true Christians; he under wrath, they
under the covenant of grace; he the very Temple of the Divil, and they the true
Temple of God? For shall not the same religion and faith which justifies them,
justifies him also; when it is found in him as well as in them? Wherefore
either the man of syn himself must be a saint among those saints: or they
together with him must be (as the holy Ghost calls them) an habitation of
Divils, Revel. 18. 2. To conclude then, seeing there is no true visible church
of Gods institution, but a particular congregation; (any other general or
catholic visible church of Rome, being but the Popes own wicked fiction;) and
seeing Antichrists parish church can no more be Christ's then Antichrist himself:
it can not without injury to the Apostle, and to the proportion of faith, and
to other scriptures, and to reason it self, be gathered that the church of Rome
is at this day Gods true Temple or Christ's true Church. Albeit, for that there
was once a true Chrrstian church Romans 1.
in Rome, and these Antichristians now profess to be the successors of the
same, and pretend one faith, religion and worship, and retain some doctrines
and ordinances of Christ still, which they synfully profane: they are therefore
said to be the Temple of God; as before I have showed.

Moreover there can no church be called the true Temple of God, but in respect
of Christ the chief corner stone and foundation of the building: for he is
called the living Stone, and his people are living stones, built up a spiritual
house in him, and so grow up to an holy Temple in the Lord, 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5 Ephesians.
2. 20. 21. If therefore Antichrist sits in the true Temple of God, he sits
first in Christ the head, and secondarily in his body and people: but
Antichrist is no otherweise in Christ then in a feighned profession of him,
whom in deed he denies, 1 John 2. 22. therefore he is not in the Temple of God,
but in respect of his profession of Christianity and of the Christian society
in his people, both which are false and deceitful, after the working of Satan,
and in all deceivablenes of unrighteousnes, 2 These. 2. 9. 10. Now it follows,
that I defend my former writings against which he excepteth; as for the
reproaches which he lays upon my self, and his trifling exceptions against
words and phrases, I will omit as fruitless.

Whereas in scanning the Apostles words, I noted mine opposites omission of
Antichrists sitting as God in the Temple of God; which words as God, do give
light to the true meaning: he excepteth Chr. plea ^^g. 142.
how he could allege that one Greek copy wants those words* so does the
Syriakas Mr. Beza observes, also the Latin. I answer, if one copy want them,
and many, or all other have them; it is no wisdom to leave the many and follow
one without apparent reason. For the Syriak he was deceived, for it has those
words plainly, though the copy which Tremellius used wanted them, through the
copiers default, as Mr. Iunius shows in his notes upon the Syriak version on
2. These. 2. 4. As for the Latin, it omitteth sundry other good things in other
places, and is no warrant for us to follow.

Obj. The question was not about the manner of Antichrists sitting in the
Temple of God, whether he should sit as God therein or no. Therefore I needed not
allege these words.

Answ. But the question was about The Apostles meaning in that place; and
therefore his words which help to manifest his meaning, should have been
alleged.

Obj. It is known to be usual in all writers sometimes not to mention,
sometimes not to insist at* all upon such words as perte^ne not to the matter in
hand etc.

Answ. Yet I, though I first used the whole phrase of the Temple of God, am
Chr. plea ^^g. 146.
taxed for that I do not after always repeat all the words: But to let pass
such things, this speech sits as God, perteyneth much to the matter in hand:
for if the people (which he will have to be the Temple of God,) do so
acknowledge and honor the Man of syn for God, as he there sits showing
himself that he is God: then may we as well doubt whether they be the people of
the true God, as whether the man of syn be the true God. But whatsoever honor
and divine power the man of syn challenges to himself, the ^ame do the people
of Rome (the Temple of God) give unto him, in word and deed. So the words are
needful, and perteine to the matter in hand. For by the worshipping of that
Beast, the false church is distinguished from the true church, which refuses
to worship him, Rev. 13. 8. 16. 17. and 14. 1. 4. 9. 10. 11. 12. and 20. 4. 2
These. 2. 10. 11. 12.

Obj. page 143.
Of Antichrists sitting, the Apostle says, that he sits as God: but of the
seat where he sits, he says expressly, in the Temple of God; and says not
as in the Temple of God, as the answer here would import; which therefore is
merely shifting, and full of deceyt.

Answ. So the Prophet says expressly, in the house of their God, Amos. 2. 8.
and says not as in the house of their God; though he speaks of an idolatrous
temple, which Jeroboam pretended to be Gods: and the Apostle says expressly,
there be gods many and lords many, 1. Cor. 8. 5. and says not as gods, or as
lords, when yet he means the false gods and idols of the heathen. And the
scripture expressly says, the woman saw Samuel; and Saul perceived that it was
Samuel, and, then said Samuel, and, because of the words of Samuel; 1. Sam. 28.
12. 14. 16. 20. and says not, one as or like to Samuel, though it was but the
divil in the likeness of Samuel. Paul says expressly that Satan is transfigured
into an Angel of light 2. Cor. 11. 14. and says not a^ into an Angel; though
in the very next words he says, that his ministers are transfigured as the
ministers of righteousness, v. 15. Which term of transfiguring, is sometime
used for a true change, as in Phil. 3. 21. he says Christ shall transfigure our
vile body, that it may be conformed to his glorious body: yet in the former
place he uses the word but for a counterfeyt change. And that the people which
worship Antichrist as God, are called the Temple of God, for name, show and
pretense; I have before manifested.

Obj. He does abuse the scripture etc. as if Paul's words were not plain to
such as will understand, that Antichrist exalts himself above all that is
called god, so that he as God sits in the Temple of God; and therefore is not
the true God, but the man of syn etc.

Answ. Some may think, by Paul's words, that Antichrist should openly profess
himself to be God, and above all Gods: yet the Pope (who is the head of
Antichrist) professes himself to be the servant of the servants of God, and to
be but the minister of Christ* and Paul teaches the same, when he calls his
working the mystery (or hidden*secret) of iniquity; 2 These. 2. 7. Even so some
may think, by the Temple of God, is meant the true church of God, the people
that in Christ are builded-togither for an habitation of God through the
Spirit, and that Christ dwells in their hearts by ^aith, Ephesians. 2. 21. 22. and
3. 17* yet the Papists (who are Antichristians) do believe that man of syn,
that exalts himself above all that is called God, to be a most holy man, and
Christian bishop, they are of his says, worship and religion, trusting in his
pardons for remission of their synns etc: and therefore are no better Christians
then he, but children of perdition with him, and are by Paul in the very same
place counted among them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved, therefore God has sent them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believe not
the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousnes, 2 These 2. 10. 11. 12. Who now,
(except they be blinded with affection) can think that Paul calls such people
the Temple of God otherweise then in respect of their profession of
Christianity, and boasting, that they are the only good Christians, when they
are in deed the sworn servants of Antichrist, and synagogue of Satan, as Rev.
3. 9.

Object. Difference is to be put, between the man of syn that sits, and
between the temple wherein he sits: he sits as God, yet the temple wherein
he sits, is the Temple of God.

Answ. There is in deed such a difference as is between the pastor and the
flock; (understanding by the Temple of God, the church of Rome at this day:)
such a difference as is between the seducer and the seduced, both adjudged to
destruction, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. Rev. 14. 9. 10. 11. Other differences if
men feign, that the pastors (or hierarchy) are the man of syn, sonns of
perdition; and the idolatrous people which be of one faith and religion with
them, are men of God, and in his covenant of grace; it is far from the truth.

Object. See the like in the cases that fell out at Jerusalem and the Temple
there: when Baals idol of indignation was set at the entry of the house of
God, Ezekiel. 8. 3. 5. and when Antiochus Epiphanes and his officers profaned the
sanctuary and city of Jerusalem, and set the image of Jupiter Olympius, in
the Temple and seat of God, Dan. 11. 31. 36. who would not now put difference
between the idols and persons aforesaid on the one hand, and between the Temple
and city of God wherein they were set, and which they polluted, on the other.

Answ. The examples are far unlike: first Rome, is not Jerusalem but Babylon,
Rev. 17. Secondly, the Temple and holy things in Jerusalem being made of
senseless stones and matter, they could not be polluted with syn in themselves
as the 1 Pet. 2. 5.
living stones of Christ's house the people now may soon be, and turned into a
synagogue of Satan; as the christian churches in the Apostles days, are now
long since turned to be Turks and Papists. Does not the Law plainly teach us
this; for in the yearly cleansing of the Sanctuary, it was because of the
uncleanness of the sonns of Jsrael, and because of their trespasses, in all
their synns, Levit. 16. 16. and for no uncleannes or syn in it self. Thirdly,
the example of Antiochus is fit, but wrong applied: for he speaks only of
Antiochus and his officers; whereas both he, his officers and his people (the
common souldjers) were they that defiled the sanctuary of God; as it is said
in the story, Antiochus went up against Jsrael and Jerusalem with a great
multitude, and entered proudly into the Sanctuary etc. 1 Maccab. 1. 20. 21. So
in applying this, he would have the Pope and his officers (the hierarchy) to
be the man of syn, as Antiochus and his officers: and the multitude of papists
at Rome, he will not have to be (as in deed they should be counted) answerable
to Antiochus soldjers; but they must be the Temple of God, answerable to the
Temple of Jerusalem, a most unjust resemblance. For the Temple then was a mere
patient, and suffered that abuse at Antiochus hands: so the thing answerable
hereto, should be (if he would have made a fit comparison,) the Christians
(Gods true Temple,) which suffer for the truths sake at the Antichristians
hands; such as are opposed to the worshipers of the beast, and those that
receive his mark, of whom it is written, Here is the patience of the saints;
here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus,
Revel. 14. 9. -- 12. and again, I saw the souls of them that were beheaded
for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped
the beast nor his image etc, Rev. 20. 4. And such I never doubted but they were
the true Temple of God: but I deny that the church of Rome at this day is such
a people or such a Temple: they are the marked soldjers of Antiochus the Pope,
and honor him as God in the temple of God (their pretended christian church)
with high impiety. Or at least, they are like the Apostate Jews, which turned
to Antiochus religion and became heathens, with worse impiety; 1 Maccab. 1.
13. 14. 15. 43. 52.

Of this sort is his next allegation, page 14
where to make his reader merry, he likeneth me to the old man of Athens, which
would compel the Jews to call their Temple by the name of Jupiter Olympius,
because Jupiters image was set up in it; 2 Mac. 6. 1. 2, so I would have the
church of Rome called Antichrists church etc. I answer: if the church, the
people of Rome were now mere patients, amongst whom Antichrist comes in by
violence, they not consenting unto him any more then Gods temple did to
Jupiters image; it should be foolishnes in me to call it Antichrists church.
Or, to put the example more fitly; if a Jew had been forced by Antiochus
violently to kyss or bow the knee to Jupiters image, when he resisted and
testified against it: none could justly call him an idolater, or one of
Jupiters people. But if an other Jew had revolted to Antiochus religion, and
believed in his Jupiter and honored him with heart, profession and action; he
now might justly be called the servant of Jupiter, or one of his people, (as
the Moabites are called the people of Chemosh, Numb. 21. 29.) So the church of
Rome now fallen from true Christianity, and believing, worshipping, obeying
Antichrist, the Popes holiness, are and may justly be called his church: or else
Antichrist has no temple, church or people in the world.

Object. Observe here and throughout his treatise, how still he calls that
the Temple, church and body of Antichrist, which Paul expressly and purposely
calls the Temple of God. And so therein note still his sh^f^s and his errors
etc.

Answ. Lo still an urging of the bare letter, as do the Papists This is my
body, to prove their transubstantiation, that there is no bread left but
Christ's very body, really and properly. I have (I trust) without shifting or
error proved the present church of Rome to be Antichrists temple church and
body, if the Pope be Antichrist. And seeing his 2 These. 2. 7.
mystery of iniquity, is contrary to Christ's 1 Timothy 3. 16.
mystery of godlynes; and Christ has a mystical temple which is his church
and body, Ephesians. 2. 21. and 5. 23. I would gladly know what temple church and
body Antichrist has, if the church of Rome be not the same. Again, he
speaks too largely, that J still so call it throughout my treatise; for I have
other weise written, though it liked him not, thus. Animadv. ag. 79. 80.
Gods true temple and tabernacle is in mount Sion* in heaven* (Rev. 14. 1. 17.)
where God sits on a throne, (Rev. 16. 17. and 7. 15.) and dwells among his
people; where is the Ark of his covenant (Rev. 11. 19.) and from thence,
lightnings, voices, thondrings, earthquake and h^yle come forth against the
Antichristians his enemies; and vials of his wrath powered out upon the throne
of the beast, (Rev. 16. 1. 2. 10.) and on men that have his mark. On the
contrary, the Beast, which is the kingdom of Antichrist, ascends from
beneath, out of the bottomless pit, (Rev. 17. 8.) and blasphemeth this heavenly
tabernacle (Rev. 13. 6.) and sits in Babylon (Rev. 16. 19.) upon the Dragons
throne (Rev. 13. 2.) and fights against the Lamb, and against the saints,
(Rev. 19. 19.) treading under foot the holy city (Rev. 11. 2.) and casting
down the place of Christ's sanctuary, (Dan. 8. 11.) When the Apostle therefore
tells us, that Antichrist sits as God in the Temple of God, it is to be
understood of their invading and destroying of Gods church, and people, as the
heathens of old deal^ with Jerusalem and dwellers therein, (Psalm. 79. Dan. 8,
11. 13. and 11. 36. Ier. 22. 12. 13. Law. 2. 7. 9.) Secondly of their own vain
ostentation, whiles they will have it called the Christian catholic church, and
the Pope the head of the same. Ezekiel. 28. 2. 6. Esa. 14. 13. 14. 2 These. 2. 9*
10* Rev. 13. 11. 14. and 17. 4. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15. Thus I grant, that the
Temple which Antichrist invadeth and destroys, is Gods true Temple: but that
wherein the Beast sits as God, which he trimmeth, upholdeth and boasts of;
(as he does the church of Rome at this day) is the synagogue of Satan. But he
proceeds.

Object. As for the ancient Doctor whom here he cites, let us hear Page 147.
himself speak. His words are these. That which is the Temple of any idolor
Divil, the Apostle would not call the Temple of God. Whereupon some will have in
this place, not the Prince himself, but after a manner his whole body, th^^ is
the multitude of men perteyning unto him, together with himself under the
Prince, understood to be Antichrist. And more rightly also they think it to be
said in Latin (...) in the Greek; that he sits not in the Temple of God,
but for the Temple of God which is the church. As we say he sits for a
friend, that is as a friend. Augustine de Civic. D^^, l. 20. c. 19. Where note
how far differing Augustine is from this man that cites him, etc.

Answ. There is not so great difference as mine opposite would pretend. First I
cited not Augustine for his own judgment, but for others whom he speaks of,
touching the translation of the Text, in the Temple of God, or, for the Temple.
Secondly, he sets down Augustines words maimed both at head and foot. For
Augustine begins thus: But in what temple of God he shall sit as God, is
uncertain: whether in that ruin of the Temple which was built by King
Solomon; or in the church. For that which is the temple of any idol or divil,
the Apostle would not call the temple of God: etc. Now the ruin of Solomon's
temple, cannot at this day be called Gods temple, otherweise then because it
was the Temple of God of old; and has now no more holiness in deed and truth,
the^ any other place in the world. And thus I have granted that the church of
Rome may be called the church of God, in respect that there was a church there
in Paul's time, whereas now it has no more true holiness, then the synagogue of
Satan. So we see how for advantage mine opposite baulked Augustines first
words. In the end, he breaks off in the midst of a period: for Augustine
says, sits for a friend, that is as a friend: or if any other thing is wont
to be understood by this kind of speech, So he defines not certainly of this
place, but leaves it doubtful: and presently after confesses his ignorance;
For what is this (says Augustine) For the mystery of iniquity does already
work, only he who now holds let him hold, till he be taken out of the way. J
confess my self to be utterly ignorant what he means. Thus we need not strive
about Augustines words here: and I grant, that the Apostle would not have
called it the Temple of God, unless either it were so in deed and truth, or
had been so in times past, or did pretend to be so still. And I think all will
likewise grant, that the holy Ghost would not have called the witches spirit at
endor 1 Samuel 28.
Samuel, unless either it had been Samuel in deed (as the Papists do contend;)
or some thing in pretense and show like Samuel. Neither would the prophet have
said to the King of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28. 13.
Thou have been in Eden the garden of God, (a proselyte in the church of
Israel;) unless either himself or some of his predecessors had been there in
times past. Neither would Amos have called the Israelites idol temple Amo. 2. 8.
the house of their God, unless either it were so in deed, or in pretense:
which phrase when the Greek translateth according to the letter, the house of
their God, and the Chaldee paraphrast (as ancient as the Apostles age)
expounds the house of their idols, they contradict not one another: seeing the
same thing may be Gods in show, and the divils in deed and truth: for even
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light; 2 Cor. 11. 14.

Obj. When the Apostle describes the mystery of Antichrists iniquity, would
he teach the church that the place of his sitting is the Temple of God, if he
meant that it were in deed the synagogue of Satan and the temple of Antichrist?
For that Antichrist should sit in the temple of Antichrist and synagogue of
Satan, what mystery is there in it? All the world would easily perceive, that
these agreed very well and most fitly together. But for Antichrist to sit in
Gods temple and Christ's church, this is in deed a mystery.

Answ. The mystery of iniquity began in the true church, but continued not
therein always: for when it was discerned, the church either cast it out, or
soon degenerated into a synagogue of Satan, if it accepted Antichrist for God,
as the Church of Rome does at this day. Which I further manifest thus, 1. The
Apostle says, As ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there
many Antichrists, etc. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but (they went
out) that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Who is a
liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is Antichrist, that
denies the Father and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not
the Father: 1. Joh. 2. 18. 19. 22. 23. This scripture teaches us first that
all heretics departing from the faith of Christ, are generally Antichrists,
though they reteyn the name of Christians still, as did the heretics in
The Apostles time. 2. That such are gone out from the church, and are in deed
none of it, though they pretend to be the true church, as all heretics have
done. 3. That both teachers and people departed from the faith and church of
Christ, are comprehended under the name of Antichrists, and not the Bishops
only. 4. That whosoever is Antichrist (especially the great Antichrist) he
denies the Son (Christ) and consequently God the Father. Now let us apply
these things to the Bishop and hierarchy of Rome, whom mine opposite grants
to be the great Antichrist. If the Pope and his hierarchy be Antichrist, then
are they none of the Apostolik church, but gone out of the same: but they are
Antichrist (by my opposites own confession:) Therefore they are none of
th'Apostolik church.

The Pope and his hierarchy are both in and of the church of Rome, the heads,
teachers and principal members of it, of the same faith, religion and worship:
but they are not in or of the Apostolik christian church, as before is proved:
therefore the church of Rome is not an apostolik Christian church.

If the church of Rome denies both the Father and the Son: then is it
Antichrist (as the Apostle says) and so no true Christian church. But the
church of Rome denies both the Father and the Son: therefore it is no true
Christian church.

If the Pope and his hierarchy deny both the Father and the Son, then the
church of Rome also denies them; for they believe as the Pope and hierarchy
believes, have one and the same religion with their priests. But the Pope and
his hierarchy deny both the Father and the Son, otherweise they are not the
Antichrist, (as mine opposite says they are:) therefore the Church of Rome
also denies both the Father and the Son. Now seeing it is thus, how is it
possible that it should continue the true Church of Christ, otherweise then by
lying pretext and ostentation? And this is the mystery of inquitie, if men
could comprehend it that the Bishops and people of Rome, being at first Christ's
true church, departed by degrees from the faith and worship of God; til they
came jointly to believe lies, and to worship creatures, idols and divils ( Rev.
^. 30.) and became a Beast (or Antichristian kingdom) yet with two horns like
the Lamb Christ ( Rev. 13.) and Rev. 13. 6.
blaspheming Gods Tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven, (that is the true
church,) they pretend themselves to be the only true church of Christ, and
that all other are heretics; they pretend succession even from th Apostles
days, without change of religion, and so they sit in the temple of God, or for
the Temple, as if they and none but they were the Temple and church of God; the
Pope being the head of this sinful corporation, of this Beast or kingdom; and
exalting himself above God and Christ, whiles yet he calls himself Christ's
vicar, and the Servant of the servants of God; and by strong delusion keeps
his people in belief of lies, that together with him they all might be damned,
who believe not the truth but have pleasure in unrighteousnes; as the Apostle
says, 2. These. 2. 12.

Now where he objecteth, what mystery is there in it, that Antichrist should
sit in the temple of Antichrist? I answer, it is a great mystery, in that it
is done by him and his, under the name and show of Christianity; and as the
Apostle says, after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders, and with all deceivablenes of unrighteousnes, 2. These. 9. 10. And
where he further says, but for Antichrist to sit in Christ's church, this is in
deed a mystery; I answer, it is in deed a contrariety and impossibility (not
a mystery:) for no man can serve two masters, Mat. 6. 24. of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage, 2. Pet. 2. 19. to whom men
yield themselves servants to obey, his servants they are to whom they obey,
Romans 6. 16. Now the church of Rome, yiedling unto and obeying Antichrist,
cannot be the servants of Christ, if the Apostles doctrine be true. And after
mine opposites manner of reasoning, an other* man might say, seeing
Christianity is the mystirie of godliness, 1. Tim. 3. 16. as Antichristianitie
is the mystery of iniquity, 2. These. 2. 7. Christ must sit in the Temple of
Satan, as Antichrist sits in the temple of God: for for Christ to sit in the
Temple and church of Christ, what mystery is there in it? but for Christ to
sit in Satan's temple, and Antichrists church, this is in deed a mystery. Were
not this (think we) good reasoning, to put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; Christ into Antichrists place, and Antichrist into Christ's; for to
find out a mystery? But they that have their eyes opened to read the mystery
that is not only in the Pope, but on Rev. 17. ^*
the forehead of the whore of Babylon his church, will soon epsy this fraud:
though others are bewitched with her painted face. For as Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light, and his ministers can be transformed as the
ministers of righteousness 2 Cor. 11. 14. 15. is it such a marvel, that he
should transform his temple and church, into the Temple of God, and church of
Christ: and yet as he is a Divil still, notwithstanding his transformation; so
his Temple continues still the Temple of the Divil, and church of Antichrist,
how ever they are disguised with other names and habits. And to help a little to
the discerning of both these opposite mysteries of piety and impiety: we are
to know, that Christ's Kingdom begins in the kingdom of Satan, and is
perfected in the Kingdom of God; and Antichrists kingdom begins in the
kingdom of God, and is perfected in the kingdom of Satan. For, the god of
this world having blinded the eyes of infidels, who are dead in synns, and walk
Ephesians. ^. 1. 2*
according to the prince of the power of the aier: Christ by his Ministers sent
into the world, and by his word of truth, the gospel, causes light to arise
unto them, opens their eyes, and turns them Act. 26. 18.
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgivenes of synns, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by
faith that is in him: and thus God delivers them from the power of darkness,
and translateth them Col. 1. 13.
into the kingdom of his beloved son. Then comes Satan by Antichrists, which
are his ministers, Gal. 2. 4.
privily crept into the church, and by the word of 2 These. 2. 11.
lying, (which is Antichrists gospel) he darkneth the minds of them that have
not received verse. 10.
the love of the truth, and turns them back again from God, and by 2 Pet.
2. ^*
damnable heresies privily brought in draws them even to deny the Lord that
bought them, and so bring upon themselves swift destruction. Then do 1 Job. 2.
19.
they go out from the church, and blaspheme 2 Pet 2. 2.
the way of truth, and together with the Beast, do Rev. 19. 19.
war against Christ: whom yet in name and pretense they would seem to honor
and serve, so accomplishing the mystery of their iniquity, unto assured
damnation, if they turn not again unto God.

This thing not being observed, how Christ begins in the world, and draws
men out of it into his church; and Antichrist begins in the church, and
draws men out of it into the world again, (as the Dragons tail, draws the
stars of heaven, and ^^fteth them to the earth, Rev. 12. 4.) mine opposite
thought it absurdity and contradiction in me, for writing thus; Animad. page
80.
When th Apostle therefore tells us, that Antichrist sits as God in the
Temple of God, it is to be understood first of their invading and destroying of
Gods church and people, as the heathens of old Psalm. 79. Dan. 8. 11. 13. and
11. ^6. Ier. 52. ^2. 13. Lam. ^. 7. 9.
dealt with Jerusalem and dwellers therein: secondly of their own vain
ostentation, whiles they will have it called the Christian catholic church, and
th: Pope the head of the same. Upon this, he thus inveigheth:

Chr. plea page 159.
What have we here? Does himself now by the Temple of God understand Gods
church and people: yea such as was answerable to Jerusalem, and the dwellers
therein of old? why then has he so eagerly oppugned us hereabout? etc.

Answ. I oppugn the present church of Rome, which Antichrist destroys not,
but builds and adorneth as an alluring harlot: the Christian church which was
in Rome of old, that has he invaded and destroyed long since; for they then
were Romans 1.
Saints, such as he hates: these now are worshipers of him and of idols and
Rev. 9. 20. and 18. 2.
Divils; and are an habitation of Divils. So there is as much difference
between the church of Rome now, and the church then: as between the Bishop of
Rome now, and the Bishops then: they were Christ's ministers, this now is
Antichrist, as mine opposite himself confesses. And what cause has he to
insult, as if he had got the victory? Let wise men judge. But he proceeds.

Obj. Where can he show in the scriptures, that sitting is put for invading or
destroying etc. Otherwhere still he teatheth that by sitting is meant abiding,
continuing, dwelling, etc.

What if I cannot prove that sitting is put for invading or destroying: Answ.
if I prove my assertion by other words of the text, shall it not suffice? The
words Eiston Naon, into the Temple, may imply by a M^talepsis
figure, his invading: and the person that invadeth being an enemy, a thief, a
wolf, implies his destroying; for our Savior says, The thief comes not but
for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. 1 John 10. 10. The scripture often
wants words, easy to be understood: so here Paul says of Antichrist, that he
(having entered) into the Temple of God, sits as God. And if they regard not
my exposition, they shall have his on whom they so much rely, Mr. Iunius I
mean, who so explaineth it, saying, The testimony of sign is this, that
Invading the temple of God, he shall sit as God. Jun. Animad verse. in Bellarm.
Controv. 3. l. 3. c. 14. not. 18. But what if I confirm it by the word
sitting, which he thought so unlikely? In Esai. 14. 13. the Prophet upbraideth
the king of Babylon thus, Thou have said in thine heart, J will ascend into
heaven etc. J will sit also in the mount of the congregation, in the sides of
the North; meaning, mount Sion where Gods temple was. But this is meant of
Nebuchadnezars invading of Jerusalem to spoil the same, as the history
shows, 2 King. 25. and in him, Antichrists tyranny against the church was
lively figured. As for sitting to mean continuing, though it does so often
times, yet not always; Christ sat upon the mount of Olives, Mat. 24. 3. the
disciples sat in the house, Act. 2. 2. yet dwelt they not, or continued long
there. And when the Babylonian invaded mount Sion to sit there, he continued
not there, but having spoiled the city, burned the Temple, and captived the
people, he returned into Babylon, 2 King. 25. so Antichrist spoiling Christian
churches returns to his Revel. 17
whore of Babylon, his proper habitation, which he wickedly boasts to be the
Sion, Temple and church of God.

Whereas mine opposite expounded the Temple of God to be the church, and showed
not whether he meant a church particular, or general and catholic; I said for a
particular church, it will not agree with the prophesies of Antichrist, whose
city or church is so great, as peoples, kinreds, tongues and nations, do
dwell in the streets thereof, Rev. 11. 8. 9. He gainsayeth me thus:

Chr. ple* p. 152.
First, Still he calls that Antichrists church, which the Apostle calls the
Temple of God.

Answ. It is his own interpretation, that the Temple means the church; and
that he that sits in it is Antichrist; and sitting he will have to be
continuing: and why may not I call that church wherein Antichrist sits
continually as God, Antichrists church; yea though it were indeed Gods church
as he supposes. Seeing the city wherein Christ did but dwell, was called his
own city, Mat. 9. 1. And that which God says, in my house, and in my
kingdom, 1 Chronicles. 17. 14. an other Prophet relates it, thine house and thy
kingdom, speaking to David the governor, 2 Samuel 7. 16. Or to show a fitter
similitude, as the holy Ghost calls the Moabites the people of Chemosh, Numb.
^1. 29. because they worshipped Chemosh for their God; so the church of Rome
which worshipeth Antichrist, is fitly called Antichrists church.

Object. How will he prove that the Beasts city Rev 11. 8. is the temple of
God, 2 These. 24.

Ans. It is himself that expounds the Templ* to be the church* and in special
the Lateran church in Rome, where the Pope is parish priest. I show by Rev. 11.
8. that the Popes parish is a larger city or church then either that Lateran
parish or Rome it self, even over many nations; and so can not be a particular
church such as Christ instituted; but a new catholic church which the Pope has
devised, and would have it accounted the Temple and church of God. Here mine
opposite, labors to find a difference between the Beasts city and his
church: but all in vain. For thus he reasons.

1. Chr. plea page 152.
This city in Rev. 11. 8. is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also
our Lord was crucified. But the church is here called the Temple of God, or the
Court without the Temple, or the holy City.

Answ. First then he grants that the same church may be called both a temple
and a city: so the diverse name helps him nothing. Secondly, it is true that
Antichrists church is called Sodom and Egypt which was an whole country: let
men now judge how fitly mine opposite has confined Antichrists church within
the Laterane parish, a corner in Rome. Shall we rather believe him, or the Holy
Ghost? Thirdly that is called the Holy city, Rev. 11. 2. which the Gentiles
(the church of Antichrist) tread under foot, as destroyed and wast: whereas the
church of Antichrist is a great city called Babylon, sumptuously builded,
garnished, and by him mainteyned, Rev. 17. and that is the church of Rome at
this day, as all know: and of the present church of Rome is now our
controversy.

Obj. 2. This great city is that where our Lord was crucified, Rev. 11. 8. Now
all know that he was crucified in and under the jurisdiction of the city, not
of the church of Rome. For he was condemned by Pontius Pilate etc.

Answ. The thing he aims at, is that the city mentioned in Rev, 11. 8. is a
civil polity, as when Rome killed Christ; and not an ecclesiastical polity or
church. But he labors in the wind: for the city is such as is the Beast or
kingdom: the Beast is a spiritual polity most synful, for it comes out of
the bottomless pit, Rev. 11. 7. that is from the Divil; whereas all Civil
polities are from God, though they be heathens, Romans 13. 1. 2. Secondly he
should have known, that the same City which was a civil polity in Christ's
time, and killed him: is now subordinate to an ecclesiastical polity, church,
or Papacy; and still crucifieth Christ in his members.

Obj. 3. This city is that which was the Dragons throne, and by him given to
the Beast, Revel. 13. 2. But this was the city, not the church of Rome.
Neither J think will these men themselves say, that the church was the Dragons
throne, or was by the Dragon given to the beast.

Answ. The city or polity which the Dragon gave to the Beast, was civil, but
is now subjected to, or become ecclesiastical: for the city of Rome is now by
profession Christen, which of old was heathen: and by professed Christians
(namely the Pope and his church) are those witnesses of God killed, Rev. 11. 7.
8. so their corpses lie unburied in the streets of the beasts city, that is of
Antichrists church or polity, which reaches over many nations.

Obj. 4. This city also is the throne of the Beast, and Babylon the great
city spoken of Rev. 16. 10. 19. and 17. and 18. chapt. which is to be
understood of the city of Rome and dominion thereof.

Answ. It is granted that this city is Babylon, and Rome, and the dominion
thereof: but it is a spiritual polity or church: for who has dominion now of
Rome, but the Pope or Bishop there, the pretended vicar of Christ; and who but
he has killed those Martyrs, within his Diocese or Bishopric, which reaches
over many kingdoms?

Obj. 5. This city is the woman that sits on seven-mountains, Reve. 17. 9.
18. And the city, not the church of Rome, is built on 7. mountains.

Answ. Yes, the same heathen city which was first set on seven hills; is now a
pretended Christian city, sitting still on her 7 hills: and being a Christian
in name, has killed Christ in his members, by her Popes power ecclesiastical,
who has his seat in her, but his Dragons paws reach into far countries. This
city, the woman on 7. hills, is she that has made the inhabiters of the
earth drunk with the wine of her ^ornication, Rev. 17. 1. 2. etc. and who but
the church of Rome has done this?

Obj. 6. This city has 7. kings or kinds of government etc. by Kings,
Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs and Tribunes (ceased before John's time)
Emperors* (when John lived) and Popes (not then come:) But how should this be
found in the church of Rome, which was not before John's time; and therefore
could not have 5. Kings or kinds of government then fallen.

Answ. Ill do they thrive, that kick against the pricks. Here himself
confesses the Popes government to be one of the seven: now the Popes government
or papacy, is an ecclesiastical monarchy; by it were the witnesses of Christ
slain, as before I showed. As for seven goverments to be found in the church of
Rome, that is in the papacy, is absurd; for it is to seek 7. kinds of
government in one. But six are gone and the seventh remains by the Pope. That
city or polity which once was heathen, now Christian in name (Antichristian
in deed;) which the Pope menageth: is the malignant church that kills Gods
witnesses, amongst peoples, kinreds, tongues and nations, Rev. 11. 8. 9.
Therefore it can not be restreyned to one particular congregation.

Obj. 7. This city is that which reigned over the kings of the earth in John's
time, Rev. 17. 8. And that not the church but the city of Rome so reigned when
John wrote, all do acknowledge.

Answ. But, that the city the church of Rome now reigns by the Pope the head
of that church, all do acknowledge. And the killing of those witnesses Rev.
11. was not in John's time, but after, when the city or polity of Rome was
become Christian in name and title. To say, it was not so in John's time,
therefore it is not so now; is dallying, rather then sound reasoning.

Obj. 8. Finally, the Lord himself puts difference between this city
Babylon, and his people therein, Rev. 18. 4. as of old, in Babylon of Chalde^.
Ier. 50. etc.

Answ. This is true; but what can he infer thereupon? It was not Gods people
in Babylon, that killed those witnesses, Rev. 11. but it was Babylon that
killed those witnesses, Gods people therein. Because Gods people killed not
those witnesses, but the Beast in his catholic city or church: therefore
(thinks he) that city of the beast, is not his church; a fair conclusion.

Obj. Chr. plea ag. 154.
Note here, that by the great city, is meant not only the city it self, but
the whole jurisdiction, authority and dominion thereof, how far soever extended.

Answ. It is a good note, and worth the marking: for the great city being the
church of Rome, as before is proved; it follows, that the extents of that
church, reach further then the material walls of Rome, even to all nations
that are of the Popes religion: and therefore to bound it within the Lateran
parish of Rome, is to restreyn that which God shows to be more large. It were
a happy day, if the Popes unruly power, were limited within the Lateran parish,
and his jurisdiction reached no further. But he must have a larger scope to
range in yet a while: and weak warriers are they against him, that plead for
his whorish church of Rome, that it is the true church of Christ, and under his
covenant of grace. It is the thing that the Pope would most gladly have proved:
and I am well assured, Babylon will not fall, til it be otherweise battered.

Obj. Chr. plea page 154.
Where yet observe further, that the church of Rome, being fallen into deep
apostasy, and having the man of syn sitting there in as God, who has that
city for his throne: the things that are spoken of this city, are also
applied to the apostate estate of that church of Rome, and the other churches
that are under the jurisdiction of the prelacie of that Sea, whersoever, and of
whatsoever people, kindred, tongue or nation they be: etc. But shall we
therefore conclude, that by the Temple of God, 2 These. 2. 4. may not be
understood the church of God?

Answ. How glorious is the truth, that forces those to yield, that fight
against it. His former reasons (that by the City in Rev. ^1. 8. the church was
not meant,) he now frustrateth himself. But still he cleaves to his first
plea, The temple of God 1 These. 2. is the church of God. I may answer hereto,
as God by Jeremy did to the Jews, Trust not in lying words, saying, The temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these: Ier. 7.
4. Our dispute is, in what sense Paul calls it the Temple of God; whether as
the true temple builded by Solomon, or as the false temple builded in Samaria
by the Apostate Israelites, which the Prophet calls the house of their God,
Amos 2. 8. as the Apostle calls this the Temple of God. Now feign he would
have this Romish temple of apostate Papists, to be the true temple of God; and
that they notwithstanding their deep apostasy, are Gods true church, under his
covenant: which I deny, and have before disproved; and Paul in the very same
place, counts them among those that perish, for believing lies, and which
shall be damned for not believing the truth, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. and Christ
teaches, that being worshipers of the beast, their names are not written in
the book of l^fe. Rev. 13. 8. and 17. 8. but they shall be tormented in fire and
brimstone for ever, Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. and that the whorish church Babylon
the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, which is
drunken with the blood of the Saints and of the martyrs of Jesus shall be
destroyed for ever, Rev. 17. 5. 6. and 18. 21. And who now, that have not their
right eye blinded, will not rather say, it is the Samaritans Temple, then
Solomon's; though in pretense and color, the Temple of God. And seeing every
true church now, is a particular congregation in one place; but the church of
Rome is a new found catholic church, spread over many nations under one head and
Bishop the Pope: it can not possibly be Christ's true church, having neither the
constitution, faith, worship, ministry, order or ordinances of Christ; but of
his enemy Antichrist.

Whereas I formerly wrote, Animadv. ^g. 78.
Neither is that (if they mean a particular church) answerable to the Temple
in Israel, which was not for one synagogue, but for Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
the whole nation of the Jews, and for the 1 King. 8. ^. 4^. Ioh. ^. 20. Act.
8. 27.
Gentiles that came to the faith, through the world. To this he says;

Chr. plea ^g. 155.
How greatly forgets he himself, and how presently, seeing but a line before he
said, the Temple figured not only the catholic or universal church, Ephe. 2.
21. but also every particular church by proportion, 1 Corint. 3. 16. 17. And
may we not then apply it to that whereof it was a figure? etc.

Answ. No: for mine opposite grants that the Temple was primarily a figure
Christ: but so to apply it in this place, 2 These. 2. himself thinks not fit.
I deny not, but some where it may and ought to be so applied: but considering
that the Temple of God wherein Antichrist now sits is a catholic church spread
over many nations, (as was prophesied Rev. 11. 8. 9.) I think the applying of
Paul's words in 2 These. 2. to a particular church, is neither fitting to the
type, nor to the prophecy, nor to the accomplishment of it which we see at
this day. The priests in Israel figured Christ chiefly, secondarily Christians,
Rev. 1. 6. But to apply those things which Paul speaks of the Priests in Heb.
10. 11. 12. to us Christians, were not only unfitting, but heretical.

Obj. Page 156.
The Candlesticks and Lamps were set in the Temple of God: and the church of
Rome was a golden Candlestick, as well as the rest of the primitive churches;
and this man himself says definitely Animadv. page 103.
the true churches were many of them apostate when John wrote; whom yet
notwithstanding Christ acknowledges to be Rev. 1. 11. 2. 20. and ^. 1.
golden candlesticks. In any of which, of Antichrist had sit, as in the church
of Rome, I suppose this man would not deny, but his sitting then should have
been in the Temple of God: whether it were considered as a particular
candlestick it self, or a branch of the great and general candlestick etc.

Answ. 1. If the Candlesticks were churches in the Temple the church: then the
Temple in such respect is the catholic church, for one particular church is
not in an other. 2. I grant that the church of Rome was a golden candlestick in
The Apostles time: and I think mine opposite would not deny but then also the
Bishop of Rome, was a Rev. 1. 20.
starr in Christ's right hand. But now the Bishop is a starr fallen from heaven,
and acknowledged to be Antichrist: why then may not the church be fallen with
him, (as Paul forewarned, Romans 11. 22.) and the candlestick removed from it, as
well as from Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. except Rome have a privilege above all other
cities, because it crucified Christ. 3. I grant also that the true churches
apostate in Rev. 2. and 3. were still golden candlesticks, though some of them
rustie: but I would have it likewise granted me, that there were other
churches but copper candlesticks, though they pretended to be golden; namely
such Antichristian haeretical synagogues, as of whom it might be said, They
went out from us, but they were not of us, 1. Joh. 2. 18. 19. And if those
petty Antichrists were no golden candlesticks; much less can the great
Antichrist with his synagogue, be a golden candlestick; for he far exceeds
them in idolatry, heresy and impiety. That Antichrist could sit in any true
church then, as he sits now in the church of Rome, namely as God, and so to
be believed with his lies, worshipped, and obeyed; I utterly deny: for that
church that so does, departs from Christ the foundation, and denies both
the Father and the Son, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. 23. and whether it be a particular
church, or a more general, it skilleth not: universalitie in worshipping the
Beast, causes but universalitie of damnation, Rev. 13. 16. 17. and 14* 9. 10.
11.

Obj. Whereas he would be taught how that whorish company that worship the Beast
and Dragon, can be the true catholic church and spouse of Christ: though that
which J noted before be sufficient for the point in hand; yet let him first
remember, how but a little before he told us, the catholic church of the now
Romish religion, as themselves describe it, has one part thereof on earth, an
other under the earth, and a third part in heaven: and now here he speaks
only of such as are on earth, and those also such as worship the Dragon and
beast, Rev. 13. 4. whereas the catholic church in deed conteyneth all churches
and people of God from the beginning of the world etc.

Answ. By this then it appears, that the church of Rome lies apparently,
when she calls her self the catholic church: and therefore is not the true
church or Temple of God. But I would be taught in deed, how that whorish
company here on earth which worship the Beast, can be the true church either
universal or particular.

Here first he asks whither I think there was no other churches of Christians
catholic or particular wherein Antichrist sat since th'apostasie of the man of
syn, but such as worshipped the Dragon and the beast? And who then were the
Tabernacle and those that dwelt in heaven, whom the beast blasphemed, and the
saints with whom he made war 42. months, Rev. 13. 5. 6. 7. and of what
church they were etc.

Answ. He seems to use the word sit in two senses; 1. for oppressing,
blaspheming, killing the Saints that resisted Antichrist; and 2. for quiet
governing and having in subjection the wicked that believe and obey him: with
such aequivocations his writings are too full. Such churches or persons as
resisted the beast, and whom he blasphemed and killed: they were of God; and of
them there is no question. But the other sort given over of God to believe
lies, and to worship the man of syn as God, like as he shows him self that he
is God; they are not the true church of God, catholic or particular: and of
such is the present church of Rome, now i^ question. As for the Saints that
dwell in heaven, whom Antichrist blasphemeth: they are where he is no^* in the
true church out of which he is gone, both he and his; and therefore does he
persecute them. The scripture by him cite^, Rev. 13. 6. yields a strong
argument against his purpose, thus. The true Tabernacle, church and heavenly
people, are blasphemed and warred against by Antichrist. The church of Rome
now, is not blasphemed and warred against by Antichrist, but blessed commended
and mainteyned. Therefore the church of Rome now, is not the true tabernacle,
church or heavenly people.

Obj. Jerusalem came to be a Ezekiel. 16. 2. 35. etc. and 23. 2.-43. etc.
h^^l^t, old in adulteries, and the Jews to be a Esa. 1. 4. 5. etc.
sinful nation laden with iniquity etc. Esa. 57. 3. 4. 5.
sonns of the sorceress, the seed of ^he adulterer and the wh^re; a Esa. 65. 2.
3. etc.
rebellious people etc 2 Chronicles. 36. 14. etc.
transgressing after all the abominations of the heathens and polluting the
house of the Lord, etc. yet they were still notwithstanding the city, people
and temple of the Lord. Esai. 1. 3. and 3. 12. with Ier. 50. 28. and 51. 11 35.
36. 45. 50. 51.

Answ. One finds a dead and stinking carkess of a man; and to prove it a
living man he says, Such an one was so and so diseased, he had the burn^ng
ague, the palsy, dropsy, the gangrene and the plague: yet was he a living
man, therefore this is likewise. Such is the mould of mine opposites argument.
For the Papists the worshipers of the Beast are said of God to be dead men,
Rev. 20. 4. ^. not partakers of the first resurrection; that is, Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in syn, not revived by Christ: now to prove them alive, examples of other
persons and peoples of Israel are alleged; who because they were great
sinners, but not dead in syn, therefore these dead men under Antichrist, must be
living also. He has been answered, that the Jews whiles they continued Gods
Church though greatly corrupted, are not fit resemblances of Antichrists church
which the holy Ghost calls no where Judea, but Babylon, Rev. 17.

Whereas I said, Animadv page 79.
The very word Temple (speaking of that wherein Antichrist sits as God,)
leads us to understand Antichrists church to be but a counterfeit: showing
this reason, that the Temple in Israel was not the church or people properly,
but a sacramental sign of Gods dwelling with his people, 2 Chronicles. 6. 2. and
of his inward dwelling in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and 2. 22. so
Antichrists temple is an outward show of his presence with that seduced people,
in whose hearts he dwells by popish faith, and by his spirit of error carrying
them to damnation: etc. Rev. 13. 4. 14. and 16. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 These. 2. 10.
11. He answers,

Chr. plea page 158.
Then when The Apostle says to the church of Corinth, ye are the Temple of God,
1 Cor. 3 16. his meaning should be according to this gloss, ye are a
counterfeit church. And when Christ said, Destroy this Temple, Joh. ^. 19.
speaking of his body; the word Temple should lead us to understand Christ's
body to be but a counterfeyt.

Would any man of good understanding and affection have made such inferences
upon my words? Does not the very word God, when it is spoken of Baal, and of
images made with men's hands, lead us to understand them to be but counterfeyt
gods: or would any adversary, if I had so spoken of Baal and the word God which
is applied unto him by the Prophet, 1 King. 18. 27. have wrested my reason
against the true God? But sundry such abuses I bear, and forbear to reply
unto; because my opposite cannot now hear his reproof: and to other men it
would be fruitless.

Hitherto of The Apostles phrase, the Temple of God. Now touching the Man of syn
there also spoken of, mine opposer in the second proposition of his argument
fore-set down, says. But the Pope of Rome with his hierarchy, is ( by
Animadv p. 76.-106*
their own grant) the man of syn, of whom the Apostle here speaks. Other
proof of this position he gives none, but says I grant it; which in his
understanding I have not granted. For he so divides the Pope and hierarchy,
(which are Con^ll* Trident. sess* 23. can. 6.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,) from the church of Rome, as he makes the one,
Antichrist and Man of syn: the other Christians, and men of grace; which how it
can be, when both parties are of one and the same faith, worship, religion etc;
it passes my slender capacity. For if the Bishops priests and deacons have
one faith and religion with the people, as it is known they have; and the
people have the true Christian faith and religion, though corrupted, yet so as
they are still under the covenant of grace, and sealed of God therein by
baptism: how should not the same faith give life to the priests or hierarchy,
as it does to the people? And then, though the hierarchy be Antichrist, the
Man of syn, the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 3. yet they shall also be
true Christians, men of God, and children of salvation.

Now to prove it to be my grant, he sends his reader to 30. pages of my book
at once; that if he myss it in one, he may suppose it is in an other, for not
one man of many, will read over so many leaves, for such a purpose only. Well,
howsoever I will not make nice to call the Pope and his hierarchy, the Man of
syn; yea or the Pope alone, the man of syn, because he is the head of that
sinful corporation, and the highest exalted for almightynes and holiness: yet
do I not exclude the people from this body, and give it to the Pope and
hierarchy only, as mine opposite would intimate. Nay the reader shall find
there the contrary, most expressly: for in page 76. I wrote thus. The
Antichristian synagogue, is by the holy Ghost called a Beast, Rev. 13. 11.
which signifies a kingdom, Dan. 7. 23. it is named also a great city, Rev.
11. 8. which notes the largenes of that polity and kingdom. It comes up out
of the earth, Rev. 13. 11. as being of this world, (which Christ's kingdom, that
comes down from heaven Rev. 21. 2. is not:) and therefore it is called a Man of
syn, 2 These. 2. 3. and a great whore, Rev. 17. 1. whose head is Abaddon or a
Apollyon, Rev. 9. 11. the destroyer of others, and himself the son of
perdition, 2 These. 2. 3. and they that follow him, are the children of
damnation, 2 These. 2. 12. Again in page 83. I do not only show mine, but
mine opposers own judgment heretofore saying; She (speaking of the church of
Rome) being in this forlorn estate, she is but a lump of syn, a man of syn, 2
These 2. 3. a child of perdition. The Beast is not one person, but a kingdom,
Rev. 13. 11. Dan. 7. 23. and Mr. Johnson himself has acknowledged more then
once, that the man of syn, is the false church (and religion) of Antichrist,
compared to the body of a man, and consisting of all the parts together.
Treat* of the Minist. against Mr. Hilders. p. 7. Apolog. p. 109.

How faithfully now mine opposite has dealt with me, to make it seem my grant
that the Pope and hierarchy apart from the church of Rome, is the Man of syn,
all may see. As for his own former confession, he passes it over, without
approving or disproving what himself has written.

This point is of weight, to give light to our controversy, for if the whole
church, Pope, priests and people, be altogether a man of syn, and son of
perdition; then can not any of sound judgment, think they are a true Christian
church, or under the covenant of Gods grace.

To show this therefore; first, the scriptures sundry times speaks of a whole
state or company, both governors and people, as of one person, man, woman, or
child: as in Hos 1. 4. 6. 9. the three children Iezreel, Lo-ruhamah, and
Lo-ammi, signified the three estates of the congregation of Israel, then
shortly to follow. So in Rev. 12. 1. a woman signifies the church of Christ;
in Rev. 17. an other woman signifies, the church of Antichrist; even as in
Prove. 9. 1. 13. the same churches are set forth like two women, Wisdom, and the
Foolish woman. In Rev. 12. 5. the Man child which the woman brought forth,
means a company of valiant Christians; as further appears by comparing
Esai. 66. 7. 8. where the Woman that travelleth, is called Sion; and the man
child in verse. 7. are called Sions children in verse. 8. Secondly, as Christ and
Antichrist have their several churches, so these each of them are called a man:
as in Ephesians. 2. 15. Christ is there said to make in himself, of twain (that
is, of two peoples, Jews and Gentiles) one new man: where the whole church
together with Christ their head, is called a new man. Accordingly, Antichrist
the Pope, together with his whole church, is called the man of syn. And as in
the new man the true Christian church, Christ the head has in all things the
pre-eminence: so in the man of syn, the Antichristian church, the Pope (Christ's
pretended vicar) has in all things the preeminence, exalted for power and
pretended holiness. As the new man the Christian church, is to be esteemed in
the state of salvation, though some secret hypocrites and reprobates closely
creep in among them here on earth: so the man of syn the Antichristian church,
is to be esteemed in the state of 2 These. 2. 10. 12.
damnation, though some of Gods elect and hidden ones are in the same, Rev. 18.
4. And this man of syn the Pope and his church, sits in the Temple of God,
the profession of Christ (whom the Temple chiefly figured) and of Christian
religion and worship, (even as this beast or kingdom has two horns like the
Lamb Christ, Rev. 13. 11.) that so under the show of Christianity, after the
effectual working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders (2
These. 2. 9. Rev. 13. 13. 14.) he may deceive them that dwell on the earth, and
draw them into the lake of fire. Thus much of the Man of syn sitting in the
Temple of God. 2 These. 2.

Other scriptures he Chr. plea 125. 126.
alleges to confirm his cause, as Manasses defiling Gods house, 2 King. 21.
the Chaldeans defiling the Temple, Psalm. 79. the king of Babylons sitting on
the mount of the congregation, Esai. 14. The prophets visions of the Temple
polluted, Ezekiel 8. And the prophecy of Antiochus, Dan. 11. In all which places,
I acknowledge the true Temple of God, to be understood. But his error in
applying this to his purpose, I have before manifested. For that Temple was not
the people, but an outward ordinance of God set among his people: whereas in his
understanding the Temple of God, wherein Antichrist sits is the people. 2.
That Temple was not infected with syn, but the syn rested in the persons that
worshipped in it, or came into it; as I showed before, from Levit. 16. 16.
Whereas the church of Rome is so infected with Antichrists syn, as mine opposite
confesses it to be Chr. plea ^ag. 120.
in most sinful and deep apostasy, and so to be a notorious harlot and
idolatress which all the people of God ought to forsake. 3. That temple merely
suffered that misusage at the hands of sinners, Jews and Gentiles: even as
Christ, the true Temple in his humanity, and true Christians his members have
suffered, at the hands of the Romans, of old heathens and now Antichristians.
But to make that temple a type of this malignant church, which together with
her head the Pope, persecuteth Christ and his saints, and worshipeth
creatures, idols and Rev. 9. 20.
Divils; is altogether amyss. For so we might conclude thus: As the Temple of
God though it were defiled with the apostasy and idolatry of the Jews and of
the Gentiles, with how great abomination soever; yet continued Gods holy Temple
still; and could not by any impiety become the Temple of Antichrist or of
Satan: so the church of Rome, though it should be defiled with apostasy
idolatry profaneness atheism either of Antichrist or of Jews Turks or
Pagans; if it should believe and receive the religion of Maomet or of Julian
the Apostata; yet should it continue the true church and people of God, and
under his covenant of grace. Behold what favor the church of Rome has found
above all churches under heaven: that if she receive Iudaisme or Paganism, if
she worship the Beast; the Dragon, or Divil himself by open profession, yet the
abides the church of God: for if Antiochus who set up Jupiter Olympius image
in the Temple, had set up also the professed worship of the Divil; yet the
Temple should have been Gods holy temple notwithstanding; and so by proportion
the church of Rome must be, if this comparison of mine opposites be true. By
such doctrine, the whole gospel of Christ is overthrown. For faith and
sanctimonie of life, are the sum of all the gospel: and both of them are
destroyed. For though Rome be apostate and departed from the faith, as Paul
foretold, 1 Timothy 4. 1. though she believe in a wafer cake, and worship it for
her God and maker: though she believe to have forgivenes of synns, by the
abominable massing sacrifice of her priests, by the pardons and indulgences of
her popes, and to merit salvation in heaven, by wicked works which she does,
being taught by the Man of syn: though she have many thousands of new Gods and
new Christ's, even so many as there be Angels and saints in heaven, and more
too: though she be as filthy in life as Sodom, as idolatrous and malignant
against Gods people as were Egypt and Babylon, (unto which the holy Ghost has
compared her, Rev 11. 8. and 14. 8.) yet so long as she will say to Christ, but
as the Divil said, Thou art Christ the son of God, Luke 4. 41. that is, so long
as she reteyneth the profession of Christianity; she is the Temple of God, the
church of Christ, and under the covenant of salvation.

But he that justifies the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16. 15.
and woe unto them that say concerning evil, it is good, Esa. 5. 20. Can not men
put difference between Gods ordinances given unto a people, and the people:
themselves that enjoy, use or abuse those ordinances? The Temple was an
ordinance given unto Israel, as were the altars and sacrifices therein: so God
gave unto all the world by Noe, commandments for altars and sacrifices, Genesis
8. 20. unto Abraham he commanded circumcision, unto Christians baptism, the
Supper of Christ etc. All Gods ordinances continue in themselves holy, (till
God do abrogate them,) though men that abuse them, fall to be most unholy, and
without God in the world. So the sacrifices of sheep and Oxen were in
themselves Gods holy ordinances, howsoever abused by the Jews in Jerusalem, by
the Israelites in Samaria, and by the heathens in their several lands: so
circumcision, though profaned by the Sichemites Genesis 34. so baptism and the
Lords supper, though turned by Antichrist into abominable idols; remained and
do remain in themselves Gods holy ordinances, though men have abused them to
their damnation: so the Sun moon and stars continued Gods good creatures,
though men made idols of them to themselves. To reason therefore from the
creatures and ordinances, unto men which abuse them; and to gather because the
creature or ordinance abides good in it self, therefore the person that abuses
it, abides good also: or to wrest a type, as mine opposite does, from a
creature or ordinance of old, to a most sinful people now, and make them alike
holy; is an high abuse of Gods ordinances, and a taking of his name in vain.

Of the Temple in Rev. 11.
MIne opposite Chr. plea ^27. etc.
proceeds to speak of the Temple and court in Rev. 11. 1. 2. and to apply it
to his present cause. That which he first speaks of the word Temple diversely
used, and meaning not only the house but the Court yard, or Courts: I grant
unto him. How to apply it, he ^ag. 128.
shows himself uncertain, whether more generally to the Christian church, or
more specially to the church of Rome. Yet every way (says he) it will follow
that the state of the said church (of Rome) and Christians, is to be esteemed
according to the estate of the Temple at Jerusalem, and particularly with
reference to the court and holy city given to the gentiles: and therefore is to
be accounted the church and city of God, as the other were his court and
city, though polluted etc. This I deny: the church or people of Rome at this
day, is not answerable to the Temple or court, or city of Jerusalem in holiness:
but to the gentiles, in profanenes. And I have before manifested his great
abuse of that proportion, from the Temple polluted, yet continuing the Lords,
and holy in it self; to the people apostate and fallen from the Lord, from his
faith and worship, to the faith and worship of Antichrist.

In sted of proofs, he offreth things to be considered: The first whereof I
leave, as not perteyning to our controversy: though it may seem not agreeable,
that the most holy place should be omitted as figuring heaven; seeing in the
19. verse, when the Temple was opened, the Ark of Gods testament was seen in
it: and the Ark, was set in the most holy place, 2 Chronicles. 5. 7. It is true that
that place figured heaven, Heb. 9. 24. but it might also figure other things on
earth, as the Temple it self, figured both Christ, and the Church, as we have
formerly heard.

His second consideration is, whether by the temple of God here, may not be
understood the holy place, and figuratively faithful Christians, and more
inward church of God, invisible to men, but seen and preserved of God, etc. And
by the Altar and worshipers, be figuratively noted the spiritual worship and
mediation of Christ, with faithful Christians and worshipers (made Priests
unto God) who wholly and only rely upon Christ etc.

Answ. Seeing here are three distinct things, the Temple, the Altar, and the
worshipers: it seems unfit to confound the first with the last; the
worshipers here are the faithful Christians, which serve God in his Temple, (as
Rev 7. 15.) and upon his Altar. To make the Temple to signify faithful
Christians here, when the worshipers are the faithful Christians here
themselves: it ^itteth not the vision. Rather, as the Temple figured Christ in
his humanity, Joh. 2. 19. 21. God manifested in the flesh, in whom God dwelt,
and in whom all do serve the Lord; and as the golden altar of incense figured
his mediation, the brazen altar for sacrifice, figured his oblation of himself
for his Church: so here the measuring of the Temple, Altar, and worshipers,
signifies the restoration of Christian religion from the Apostasy of
Antichrist; the Temple of God signifies Christ truly professed for his
person, or doctrine of true Christianity, and constitution of the Church
therein: the Altar is the true doctrine of his oblation and mediation for us;
and the worshipers are the faithful Christians, that worship God in the true
profession of Christ and of his mediation and sacrifice, as in the true Temple
and altar of God, contrary to the heresies and abominations of Antichrist.

His third and fourth considerations are, by the Court without the Temple, to
be noted in figure the visible church and Christians. By the holy city
(Jerusalem) to be noted in figure oyther the visible church and outward state
of Christians more generally, or such as are truly godly and Gods holy church
more particularly. By the Gentiles to understand hethens and rebellious Jews,
that is profane and wicked Christians, the Antichristian hierarchi^ and Locusts
Rev, 9. etc.

Answ. This is faulty three ways, first in confounding persons and other
things, as one: secondly in shuffling true Christians and Antichristians as one
body: thirdly in restreyning the gentiles or heathens (spoken of in Revel. 11.
2.) to the Pope and his hierarchy only. 1. The thing here showed in vision,
was after the manner of Jerusalem and the Temple of old: there, the Temple was
not the people, neither were the courts, the people, neither the city, when it
was distinct from the citizens: but they were holy places and signs appointed
of God for the people to worship him in and by them. 2. True visible Christians
(which he says are the court and city) and Antichristians (or as he would
have it the Pope and his hierarchy,) whom the Lord calls Gentiles or
heathen; he would have mixed together as one body and church, the Antichristian
heathens to be the Bishops and pastors, and the visible Christians to be the
flock; and this for the space of 1260. years, as himself numbreth the 42.
months, a day for a year. Which is contrary to the whole scope of this book of
the Revelation; which shows the true Christians to be such as are marked and
sealed of God, Revel 7. 3. etc. having his name in their foreheads, virgins,
and folowers of the Lamb, Rev. 14. 1. 4. such as worship not the Beast, or his
image, neither receive his mark on forehead or hand, Rev. 20 4. whereas by his
exposition, the true visible Christians are those that worship the beast, as
the church of Rome does and have done these many years. 3. That the gentiles
should be only the Pope and hierarchy, agrees neither with truth nor type:
for whether he respect the rebellious Jews or faithless Gentiles; it can never
be showed at any time, that they were only Priests and Levices, or Kings
captains and officers, that trod down Jerusalem, or dwelt in the court
without the Temple: but people with priests, and soldjers with captains; that
strange it is from whence he should gather this interpretation. And though many
of all sorts have expounded this book; yet never read I of any one, neither
does he cite any one man that ever was of his mind, so to interpret these
things; but it was his own singular conceyt.

As for the key which should open the door to the understanding of this vision,
namely, the commandment to measure the Temple etc. with the reed, verse. 1.
this he omitteth. But with that will I begin.

After that God, for the idolatries and other synns, of the Jews, had
delivered the holy city Jerusalem and the Temple therein, into the hands of the
Gentiles the Babylonians, who first 2 King. 24 13. 14. 15. 16.
robbed the temple, and carried away all the chief men into captivity from
Jerusalem to Babylon; and afterward, for further synns, broke up the City, 2
King. 25 4. 9. 10. 11.
burnt the Lords house, and the Kings house, and all the houses of Jerusalem,
and brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about, and carried away the rest of
the people that were left in the city: the Lord pit^ying the desolation of his
church, began to restore and reedisie the same; calling his people Zach. 1. 3.
4.
to repentance; and unto Zachary his Prophet, by visions signified that he
would Zach. 1* 8. 16.
return to Jerusalem with mercies, and his house should be built in it: and
showed him Zach. 2. 1. 2.
a man with a measuring line in his hand, to measure the breadth and length of
Jerusalem, signifying the reedifying of the same; and thereupon called his
people verse. 6. 7.
out of Babylon. He foretold him also of Zach. 6. 12.
the Branch Christ, that should build the Temple of the Lord. And unto Ezekiel,
then in captivity, he likeweise showed in a vision, a Ezekiel. 40. 2. 3. 5.
man like brass, with a line and a measuring reed, wherewith he measured the
breadth and height of the building which Christ should erect; and this in all
the parts thereof, as verse. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. etc.
gates, chambers, windows, posts, courts, tables etc; and also the Ezeh. 41.
1. 2. etc.
temple, posts, doors, walls etc; likewise the Ezekiel. 42. 1. etc.
utter court, with all things concerning the same. The end of which vision, was
to signify, that in that place he would Ezekiel. 43. 7.
dwell in the midst of the sonns of Israel (as before he had by the sign of 2 Chronicles. 6. 2. and 7. 12. 16.
Solomon's Temple;) and he willed the Prophet, that if the house of Israel were
ashamed of all (the evils) that they had done, Ezekiel. 43. 11.
he should show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof etc. and
all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof;
verse. 10.
and let them measure the pattern.

Accordingly, when God had set his Temple or Tabernacle among Christians, (as
is described in Rev. 4. by the similitude of Moses Tabernacle;) and for the
synns of the people, who began to revolt from the faith and to embrace
Antichrist even whiles the 2 These. 2. 7. 1 John 2. 18. 19. and 4. 1. ^^2. 3.
Apostles lived, and after their decease, fell more and more from Christ, as by
the opening of the seals Rev 6. and by the sounding of the Trompets, Rev 8. is
clearly signified: so that the Sun (wherewith the church had been Rev. 12. 1*
clothed) was become Rev. 6. 12. 13. 14.
black* the Moon, bloody; the stars (the ministers) fallen from heaven to
earth; and the heaven it self departed as a scroll tolled together; and God for
the synns of Christians (as of the Jews of old) had delivered this rebellious
people into the hands of the spiritual Rev. 17.
Babylon; ^^e synagogue of Antichrist, a Revel. 13
Beast (or kingdom) blasphemous, idolatrous, filthy in life, and hating the
Saints, as Rev. 11. 8.
Sodom, Egypt and Rome when it was heathenish: then God in wrath remembering
mercy to a remnant, the election of his grace: began again to reedify his
church. And to signify this, John had in vision a measuring Rev. 11. 1.
reed given him, to measure the Temple, Altar, and worshipers; but not the
Court, or City as yet, because he would renew his church by degrees. Afterward
he saw Revel. 21. ^. etc.
the City, gates, and wall thereof measured also, when the church should fully
be restored.

This reed, which was of Rev. 21. 15.
gold, signifies the word of God, or scriptures; whereby all doctrines,
ordinances, churches and peoples are to be measured tried and discerned,
whether they be the building of God or no. For God by his word directed Moses
to make the Tabernacle and all the appurtenances, according to the pattern
showed him in the mount, Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8. 5. and so they were made, Exodus
39. 42. 43. Solomon likeweise had the pattern of the Temple, and of the
Courts, chambers, treasures etc, the weight of gold for the Candlesticks,
tables, bowls, cups etc, as the Lord had made David understand in writing, by
his hand upon him, even all the works of that pattern, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11. -- 19.

So then the commandment to measure with the reed, the Temple, Altar and
worshipers, Rev. 11. 1. signified such a renewing of Christianity and
professors of it, as should be according to Gods word, when they are measured
and tried thereby, of such as have the Apostle John's spirit. But the Court,
City and Gentiles treading down the same, were to be cast out, and not
measured: to signify that the holy doctrines and ordinances of the gospel,
abused and trodden down by the Antichristian gentiles, can endure no measure or
trial of Gods word, but are to be rejected as profane, in their sinful abuse
of them. Because as the Gentiles of old, changed the truth of God into a lie,
Rev. 1. (...). and when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but
became vain in their imaginations, and changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, into images, Romans 1. 21. 23. therefore though they retained after their
profane manner, many of Gods divine ordinances, taught them from Noe; yet no
Prophet or man of God, ever measured their Temples, altars, sacrifices, Priests
or people, but cast them out as wicked: so the Gentiles (the Antichristians)
now, having likeweise changed the truth of God into a 2 These. 2. 1^.
lie, and whiles they profess Christ in word, do in deed 1 Ioh. 2. 22
deny him; albeit they tread down and sacrilegiously profane the holy things of
God, his doctrines and ordinances of faith, worship, church etc* yet are they
to be cast out, and left unmeasured, being such as will endure no trial by the
word of God. How then does mine opposite seek in vain to measure the church
of Rome, and to prove her Gods true church though corrupted, and to be under
his covenant of grace: when God here expressly bids them to be left
unmeasured? How is it, that he pleads Chr. pl^^ page 137.
for a reformation only, and will have no new building or plantation; when
Sodom and Babylon, must be reformed with fire, that is utterly destroyed; as in
the Genesis 19 24. 25. Ie^ 51. 58. 6^
types of old; so in the thing typed at this day? as it is written, she shall be
utterly burnt with sire; for strong is the Lord God, who judges her. Rev. 18.
8. We find in the type, how after the Babylonians had burned the Temple, when
the Jews returned out of captivity, they laid again the foundation of the
Temple of the Lord, and then builded it: Ezr. 3. 6. 10. 11. We find also in the
Gospel, that Antichrist should destroy the Temple, even to the foundation,
which is Christ, 1 Ioh. 2. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 11. And in Rev. 11. there is
measuring, as for a new building: yet now we shall have (by these pleaders)
Babylon reformed, and no new Temple built, or Jerusalem reedified. If any like
to apply this foresaid measuring of the Temple Revel 11. to the defection of
the church, rather then to the reedifying of it; I will not strive here about:
neither will it (if so it be understood) any thing help the present state of the
church of Rome, about which our controversy here is.

By this which has been said, I leave it to the judgment of men of
understanding, whether it be more fit to apply these Gentiles to the wicked
Jews, which whiles the true Temple, courts and city stood; did in hypocrisy
abuse Gods holy ordinances Esa. 1. as mine opposite does apply them: or to the
Gentiles of whom the Psalmist complains Psalm. 75 verse. 1.
that they had come into Gods inheritance, defiled the Temple, laid Jerusalem
verse. 2.
on heaps (that is ruinous, as Mica 3. 12.) killed Gods servants, and left
them verse. 3.
unburied, (as here in Rev. 11. 8. 9. the dead bodies of Gods witnesses, are
not suffered to be put in graves:) that had devoured Iakob, and verse. 7. 8
laid wast his dwelling place, for the former iniquities of Israel. Seeing that
in Esaias days, there was no measuring for the new building of the Temple, as
was after the captivity of Babylon then, and in this place: nor casting out of
the court, and giving of the city to be trodden down of the Gentiles for many
years, as Judah was Jer. 20. 4.
given into the hand of the King of Babylon, when God Ier. 12. 7. (...).
forsook his house, and left his heritage, to be destroyed, and trodden under
foot, seventie years. But as of the destruction of the earthly Jerusalem by the
heathen Romans, Christ said: Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
(that is, ruined, and not suffered to be built again), until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke. 21. 24. so of the ruin and wast of this
spiritual Jerusalem, by the Antichristian Romans, he says, it is given to the
Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread down 42. months: after which
time John sees the heavenly Jerusalem measured, that is builded again, Rev.
21. 15. 17.

But whether we understand it to have reference to former wicked Jews (called
hethens for their hethenish manners,) or to the Babylonian Gentiles: yet has
mine opposite no reason, or color of reason, to restreyn it to the governors
only, as he does to the Pope and his hierarchy. For they that trod in the
Lords courts. Esai. 1. were the people, as well as the Priests and princes: the
people of Gomorrha, as well as the princes of Sodom, Esai. 1. 10. and they that
ruined Jerusalem, were the Babylonian soldjers, as well as the King and
captains, 2. King. 25. And he should so have applied these Gentiles (that
tread down Gods holy ordinances touching his church and worship,) to the
papists (the Popes marked soldjers, that have the Revel. 13. ^. 18.
number of his name,) and not to the Bishops and Priests only. For in the
beasts army, there are not only Kings and captains which fight against
Christ and Christians, but all sorts of men, both free and bond both small and
great, which shall be slain with the sword of Christ which proceeds out of his
mouth, and all the fowls shall be filled with their fleshes; Rev. 19. 17. 18.
21. So not the popish hierarchy alone, but all other of their idolatrous
religion, are the Gentiles, in Rev. 11. whom the holy Ghost measures not
amongst his people, but casts out as profane treaders down of his holy
things: though mine opposite measures them as Gods true church and in his
covenant, yet counts their pastors, (which are as faithful and holy as they)
to be wicked Gentiles.

So the Beast which kills Gods witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. he expounds Chr. plea
^^g. 131.
the Antichristian hierarchy and Locusts: which are but the heads, horns, and
chief members of the Beast. For as in Dan. 7. the verse. 4.
Lion, is the kingdom of Babel, both princes and subjects; and the verse. 5.
Bear the kingdom of the Persians, and so all the rest; as is there expounded
in v. 23. the fourth Beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, and the ten
horns out of that (Beast or) kingdom, are said to be ten kings, v. 24. so the
Beast in Rev. 13. is meant of a whole kingdom, and not of governors only. And
the scripture plainly enough cl^areth this, saying, And they of the people, and
kinreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies etc, and shall not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves: and they that dwell upon the
earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry etc. Rev. 11. 9. 10. So not the
hierarchy only, but popish multitudes also, do belong to this beast and
kingdom, that murdereth the witnesses of Christ. And here note, how mine
Opposite himself is driven to confess that Chr. ple page 159
the Church of God, and the Beast, do in deed differ much the one from the
other: but the Church of Rome, both hierarchy and people, are the Beast, as
before is prooved: therefore the Church of God, and the church of Rome, do in
deed differ much the one from other; and mine adversary grants that which
overthrows his own plea.

This will yet further appear by this that follows. Whiles the holy city
lies ruinous trodden under foot by the Antichristian Gentiles, which keep it
from being reedified and measured so long a time, 1260. years: there is an
other great city which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified, Rev. 11. 8. even Babylon the great, the mother of
fornications and abominations of the earth, Rev. 17. 5. which lies not
ruinous, but is stately built, Rev. 17. ^
dekt and garnished, Rev. 18. ^
glorifying her self and living diliciously, which says in her h^rt, I sit
(...) Queen, and a^no widow, and shall see no sorrow: and this is the great
City (Rome) which in The Apostle John's time reigned over the kings of the
earth, Rev. 17. 18. but after that became a Christian city or polity, but
soon forsook Christ, and were Christians in name (being in deed Gentiles,) and
a Catholic church, sitting and reigning over peoples and multitudes and nations
and tongues, Rev. 17. 1^. Which albeit mine opposite before labored to make it
differ from the Church of Rome, yet I also p. 40 and.
before took away his reasons. And here himself yeildeth so much, as will
overthrow him. For* Note here (says he) that by the great City, is meant not
only the " Chr. ple page 154.
city it self etc. for ( as Mr. Bagh man on R^^ 16. 19.
one well writes) the city is not only the Town or piece of ground, contained
within the comp^sse of the walls thereof, together with the Citizens and
inhabitants, having order and government etc. but also the whole jurisdiction
and government of the cite in all places perteyning thereto. So the streets of
this city reach far, even to all places, under the jurisdiction thereof, and
comprehend sundry peoples, and kinreds, and tongues and nations, as here is
said. Whereupon it is fitly compared to the great city Babylon etc. Where yet
observe further, that the church of Rome, being fallen into deep Apostasy, and
having the man of syn sitting therein as God, who has the city for his throne:
the things that are spoken of this city, are also applied to the apostatle
estate of that church of Rome, and the other churches that are under the
jurisdiction of the prelacie of that Sea, whersoever, and of whatsoever people,
kindred, tongue on nation they be. Which application thereof J do also
acknowledge, as it is observed by and according to the word of God, Rev. 11. 8.
with Esai. 1. 10. Ier. 23. 14. Ezekiel. 16. 2.-46. Rev. 14. 8. and 17. and 18.
etc. with Esai. 21. 9. and 48. 20. Jer. 50. and 51. 1.-45. Ezekiel. 16. 2.-35. and
c. 23. Ziaoh. 2. 6. 7.

Thus far he yeildeth: Whereupon it is evident to all that will see, how this
great city, the glorious church of Rome, that kills Gods witnesses in it, is
a far different thing from the holy City, which that church treads down,
and keeps from being reedified, as the Babylonians having ruinated Jerusalem,
kept it from being built again, during their reign. So then his comparing of
Rev. 11. 8. with Esai. 1. 10. and Ier. 23. 14. seems to be an unequal match,
by which he would make the church of Rome, as truly Gods, as Jerusalem and the
Temple were Gods in Esaias time and Ieremies, when wicked Jews likened to
Sodomites and Gomorrheans, worshipped in them. For 1. Jerusalem then was
standing, here it is tuined and lies unbuilt, unmeasured, cast out from all
measuring by the reed of Gods word. 2. Sodom, and Babylon, are never in
scripture called the holy city, as Mat. 4. 5. ^ith Luke ^. 9.
Jerusalem is: yet here he would have that which God names Sodom, Egypt,
Babylon; to be in deed Jerusalem. 3. Neither Esaie nor Jeremy do call the holy
City Sodom or Gomorrha, but the wicked people in that holy city. Which may
fall out in the truest church on earth, that there may as slagitious persons be
in it, as any in Sodom. So in the church of Christ and his Apostles, there was
Judas Ioh. 6 70. ^1.
a Divil. But Antichrists city has no other name, then Sodom, Egypt, Babylon,
and Rome, by whose power and polity Christ was crucified: and this name is
given it spiritually, that is in spirit and truth; as being no way inferior,
but beyond them rather in all impiety, cloked with hypocrisy. In deed
Bellarmine pleading for the Pope, De Romans ^ont. l. 3. ^. 13.
contendeth against Hierom, that Jerusalem might be called Sodom, and cites
this very text Esai. 1. 10. ye Princes of Sodom: but Mr Iunius (on whom mine
opposite so much relyeth, as we shall see anon) answers him, Animadv in
Bellarm. Cont. 3. l. 3. c. 13. note 13*
It is false. The Prophet calls not the city Jerusalem, Sodom or Gomorrhe;
but the Princes and people figuratively, princes of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrhe. The comparison is made of men, not of places. Likeweise D. Whitakers
answering Bellarmine to the same objection, says, Cont. 4. An. Pap^. sit
Antich quest. 5.
Neither do we ever read Jerusalem to be called Sodom, or Egypt: this agrees
much more truly unto Rome etc. J confess that there (in Esa. 1.) the people of
the Jews are for their vices compared to Sodom and Gomorrhe, as also in Ezekiel.
16. but yet it was not called Sodom and Gomorrhe spiritually, but figuratively:
whereas this city is called Sodom and Egypt spiritually, that is in a spiritual
respect, for spiritual lust, luxury, blindness, all which are found in the
popish church.

But mine opposite putting no difference between the holy city Jerusalem
ruined; and the great city Babylon, Sodom, Egypt gloriously edified; compares
the phrase of treading the holy city by the Gentiles, Rev. 11. with treading
the Lords courts by hypocritical Jews Esai. 1. and says, it may signify,
besides a treading down, or underfoot, a frequent continual conversing in the
outward visit le church with their bodies. Which if it be granted, yet this
must be granted also, that it is here cast out and not to be measured as Gods
true church: which was not the case of Jerusalem and the Courts in Esaies time.
And as for the phrase, it is such as may mean no frequent continual conversing
at all, but a violent suppressing of the building thereof. For, (to omit that
he speaks here of treading down the city, and in Esaias, of treading down the
Courts) the Gentiles treading down the earthly Jerusalem, Luke 21. 24. means
not the frequenting of that place to worship God in. Neither does the
adversaries treading down of the Sanctuary, in Esai. 63. 18. or, of the
Sanctuary and host, (that is the temple and people of Jerusalem) Dan. 8. 13.
or the treading down of the Lords portion, Jere. 12. 10. or of his vinyard,
Esa. 5. 5. signify a frequenting to do good in appearance; as did the Jews in
Esai. 1. 11. 12. 13. who came with multitude of sacrifices to honor God and
that place of his dwelling. Finally, as he dutst not deny but the Gentiles in
Rev. 11. were also figured out by the heathens of old, for he says, Chr. plea
page 1^9.
not heathens alone, as Antiochus etc, but synful rebellious Jews: so he
should have observed, that figures agree not in all things. For if I would
prove the Antichristians now to be professed heathens, and no church; because
Antiochos, and the Babylonians were professed heathens and no church, in
comparison with the Jews; he would deny the consequence: even so his matching
them with the true church of God in Judea, because the wicked of that church
were figures of them, is a very weak conclusion.

His exposition of making the Temple, altar, and worshipers to signify the
invisible church of Gods elect; and the Gentiles with the Court and holy City
to be the visible church of hypocrites: aagreeth neither with this place, nor
with Esai. 1. For no men can know much less measure the invisible church of
Gods elect, as John here measured the Temple, altar, and worshipers: this
belongs to God alone, who knows who are his. Neither in Esai. 1. were there
two distinct churches or places in Jerusalem, one wherein the faithful and
elect worshipped; and another wherein Sodomites and hypocrites trod the Lords
courts. Besides if so it were as he supposes: what manner of people does he
make the church of Rome which he pleads for? a company of Sodomites and
hypocrites cast out and unmeasured of God, and of all good men. And how the^
are they Gods true church, sealed with his covenant of promise? He says, Chr.
plea. ^ag. 130.
the daughter of Sion, left as a cottage in a vinyard etc. Esai. 1. 8. was the
faithful church of the sealed and elect. Who ever heard of such an exposition
of those words? The daughter of Sion, usually signifies the Common wealth or
church of the Jews; as the daughter of Babel, Psalm. 137. 8. was the Common
wealth of Babylon. And as Esaie here complains of the calamities of the
church of Judea by former wars for their synns; v. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. so where the
Babylonians afterward utterly wasted it, Jeremy lamenteth, how Lam. 1. 6. etc.
from the daughter of Sion, all her bewty was departed; the Lord Lam. 2. 1.
had covered her with a clowd, in his anger etc. purposed verse. ^.
to destroy her wall; verse. 10.
her elders sat on the ground; verse. 13.
her breach was like the sea, none could heal her; verse. 14.
her prophets had not discovered her iniquity, to turn away her captivity
etc. all which do concern the general state overthrown by the Babylonian;
and not the state of the faithful and elect only.

He Chr. plea ^ag. 133.
sets down from my former writing against Mr Smyth, my judgment touching
this scripture Rev. 11. when I wrote (as he says) for the truth. He traduceth
me now as a quite other man: but how justly, the reader may see by the very
words of mine which he has set down. For there I said, the commandment to
measure the Temple, altar and worshipers, signified the restoring or repayring
of Gods church and people, after some destruction, and desolation; as the like
visions showed Ezekiel. 40. ^. Zach. 2. 2.
to Ezekiel and Zachary, after the destruction of Solomon's temple, do
manifest: etc. There I applied the Gentiles in Rev. 11. to the Babylonians and
other heathens, Jer. 12. 7. and 20. 4. Esa. 63. 18. Further I Defense Script.
p. 1*
showed, (but this he sets not down) that M. S. enought have seen a figure
of those Gentiles, Rev. 11. set forth by the Psalmist, Psalm. 7*
O God the gentiles are come into thine inheritance etc. where by Gentiles are
not meant the Jsraelites, but Babylonians or other heathen persecutors etc. and
that Antichrists church is called Revel. 1*
Babylon; and Christ's, Revel. 2*
Jerusalem etc. As M. Io. then well approved of my answer to M. S. so even now
he says still, Chr. pl* page 145.
I did soundly convince him. And who then will not see, that M. I. even by his
own grant, is likewise soundly convinced. For as M. S. fetched the type of
these Gentiles, from the Israelites: so does M I. fetch it from the Israelites
in Esai. 1. and contrary to that sound conviction, will not have it like the
restoring of the Temple after the Babylonians had burnt it; but like the
afflictions of the Jews, whiles their Temple Courts and City stood
undestroyed, Esa. 1. So whether of us two, be carried about of every wind, and
as reeds shaken hither and thither, (as he Chr. p^ page 134.
intwiteth me,) I leave it unto the prudent reader to judge. As then, so still
I hold the holy City, Rev. 11. to be meant of Jerusalem, not of Babylon: how
mine opposite now has expounded it, we have seen. As I did then, so still I
hold those Antichristian Gentiles Rev. 11. to be answerable to the Babylonians
and other heathens, Psalm. 79. Jer. 20. 4. Esai. 63. 18. he now will have them
answerable to the Jews. I then blamed and still do, that men should make Gods
holy courts, city and people, to be figures of Antichristians, of their church
and worship.

But mine opposite (to make his words seem to hang together) ibid. p. 1*
says, that now J teach, that the Temple of God spoken of 2 These. 2. 4. is
Antichrists Temple, church, body, etc. Be it so: yet of that scripture there
was no controversy between M. S. and me: and as the house of the Lord God of
Jsrael in Ezr. 1. 8. is meant of his true ten ple; but the house of their God
in Amos 2. 8. and in Hos. 9 8. is meant of an idolatrous Temple: so by the
Temple of God in Rev. 11. 1. may be understood his true Temple, and yet the
Temple of God in 2 These. 2. may be understood of the Temple of Antichrist. And
this I said upon mine opposites interpretation, which will have the Temple in 2
These. 2. to mean the people or church of Rome; which are in deed the Gentiles
in Rev. 11. the Sodomites Babylonians Egyptians that tread down the Lords holy
city, and have built a new Babel. For otherweise, if he did understand
Antichrists sitting in the Temple of God, to be his treading down of his
Temple, as here he treads down the holy City, having ruined and burnt it,
and keeps it from being reedified, as the Babylonians did during their reign,
I would not have contended with him about it. But then his applying of it to
the church of Rome, which the Pope has builded, honored, garnished as a most
gorgeous harlot: would be altogether unfit; and agree no better then Babylon
did with Sion. But of that place 2 These. 2. we have spoken at large before.

Whereas heretofore he pleaded, that Antichrist does not wholly take away the
church of God, and every truth and ordinance of the Lord: and I answered,
Neither did the Deviltake away every truth and ordinance of God from among the
heathens, but they retained many rites of Gods worship received from their
fathers etc. First Chr. plea page 165.
he blames me as shifting etc. for not saying, the Divil took not wholly away,
the church of God from among the heathens: I answer, if by church, he
understand the order and constitution of the church, the heathens strayed not
further from it, then Antichrist has by his counterfei catholic church: and
whosoever will bring them to the trial, it will soon appear. Or, if he
understand by Church, Gods people, (as he has now his people in this Romish
Babylon, Rev. 18.) I also say, that the Divil took not away the church wholly
from the heathens for God had many elect among them, whom by means he called
from heathenish idols, to the true faith: of whom there are many instances of
sundry persons in the scriptures; and I doubt not but there were many more,
whose names are written in the book of life. The dispersion of Israel among the
nations, might bring many heathens to the faith; as we have an instance in
Esth. 8. 17.

To that which I said, that the Divil did not take away wholly every truth and
ordinance of God from among the heathen: he answers, it is nothing to the
purpose, seeing they are not the church and people of God, under his covenant
neither do so enjoy any of them.

Answ. First, I spoke of the heathens of old, whiles sacrificing was Gods
ordinance, as the examples that I alleged show. He answers of the heathens
now, whose state is much worse, by refusing or falling from the Gospel.
Secondly, his answer is true also of the Antichristian heathens, Rev. ^1. 2. if
it be applied unto them: for they are not Gods church and people under his
covenant, neither do they so enjoy any of them: but they are in the bondage
and covenant of Antichrist, as before is proved. So my answer was to purpose,
and his reply is but the begging of the question.

Object. Take an instance ( says he) in one of the particulars which he
mentioned, where he said that the heathens reteyn baptismes or washings among
them: yet when any of them leave that estate, and come to the faith and church
of Christ, they are to be baptized into the Lords name etc. but so may not be
done with those that have received baptism in the church of Rome, or any other
apostate churches, when they leave such estate etc.

Answ. First, he wresteth my words, spoken of the heathens of old, which
retained baptismes or washings whiles they were Gods ordinances: and applies
them to their washings now, when they are none of Gods ordinances. I said,
Animadv page 76.
the ordinances of God retained in other nations (besides Israel) as Altars,
sacrifices etc, and alleged authors, before Christ's coming in the flesh: he
sets down these as my words, the heathens retain etc. Had I thus altered
the case, I should have been charged with shifting, and that justly. But I
acknowledge not tho legal washings, sacrifices, altars etc. of Gentiles or
Jews to be God's ordinances now, as they were before Christ's death. That which
he says of baptism not to be repeated, I grant: and so must he have done for
circumcision among the heathens, such as retained it for a divine ordinance, as
they did their sacrifices. I instanced Animadv page 75.
the Colchians, Egyptians, Ethiopians; and the Samaritans, which latter Mr.
Johnson acknowledged to have still used circumcision, and yet were not Gods
true Church. But this he passed over, and answers not. Now he would bring in
the heathenish washings at this day, which is a plain tergiversation. But of
Baptism, we shall speak more hereafter.

Of Revel. 18. 4.
TO prove the church of Rome at this day Gods true church, he alleged Rev.
18. 4, Go out of her my people etc. I answered, These very words are taken
from Jer. 51. 45. My people go out of the midst of her, where by My people,
the Church of Babylon is not meant, but the Israelites, Gods Jer. 50, 6.
lost sheep, scattred there upon the mountains and hills, whom Ier. 50. 17.
first the King of Ashshur had devoured, and lastly Nebuchadnerar King of Babel
had broken their bones, having Ier. 52. 13. ^4.
burned Jerusalem and the temple with fire, etc. These Israelites figuring Gods
Romans 11. ^. 5. 7.
elect, are called out of Babylon, which God would utterly Ier. 51. 25.
destroy etc. So from Antichrists church, which is Rev. 18. 2. and 11. 8.
Babylon, Sodom, Egypt, are Gods elect called out: an evident proof, that she
is none of Gods church, whatsoever she pretends etc.

His replies are, questions. Very well ( Chr. plea page 166.
says he:) But are not those words My people, the words of the covenant, as J
said?

Answ. They are; but not of any covenant with Babylon: and consequently not
with the church of Rome, which is Babylon at this day; Rev. 17. 5.

2. And were not that people now in Babylon, the church and people of God under
his covenant?

Answ. They were Gods people, and his Jer. 50. 6.
lost sheep there: but their Common wealth and church estate was dissolved,
their 2 King. 25. ^.
Temple and holy city burned, (when Babylon and Bells temple in it flourished,
and was garnished with the Dan. 1. 2.
holy vessels stolen out of Gods temple.) The Lord had Lam. 2. verse. 2.
swallowed up all the habitations of Jakob; verse. 5.
swallowed up Jsrael, and all her palaces; verse. 6.
destroyed his places of assembly, caused the solemn feasts and Sabbathes to
be forgotten in Sion; verse. 7.
cast off his Altar, abhorred his sanctuary. Lam. 5. 18.
Mount Sion was desolate, and the foxes walked upon it. But was Babylon, (which
thus abused Gods people, and burned his Temple,) Gods church? If not, how
should the Church of Rome, which now is Babylon Revel. 17. ^. 6.
the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, which is drunken with the
blood of the Saints: how should she be Gods church, people or Temple?

3. Had not that people also polluted the Temple of the Lord, and fallen into
notorious idolatry etc. for which they were given by the Lord into the hands
of the Babylonians: and were they not still the Lords church and people, etc.

Answ. They were, some of them, as before is showed. And so Christians having
polluted Gods temple of Christianity, and fallen into idolatries and heresies,
were given over of the Lord, some into the hands of the Turk (as Israel into
the hands of Assure) some into the hands of the Pope (as Judah into Babel.) And
such Israelites as embraced the religion of the Assyrians and Babylonians
ceased to be Gods people actually, til they repented: others that resisted evil
and kept the truth, as Dan. 1. 8. and 3. 18.
Daniel and his brethren; were Gods holy people. So all in Rome and Turkey that
abide in the truth refusing their abominations, are Gods holy people: the rest
that have received Maometisme and Antichristianisme, are not Gods people
actually; albeit many of them are Gods elect, and shall so be manifested when
they come out from them. But mine opposite changes the state of the question,
turning it from Babylon it self, to Israel Gods people in Babylon; and so from
the Church of Rome now Babylon, to the faithful witnesses of Christ therein; of
whom none make doubt.

4. Js there not difference to be put between the people of God in Babylon, and
Babylon it self? etc.

Answ. Yes; which whiles it is not held unto, we are dallied with. The
controversy is about the church of Rome it self, which is Babylon: the reasons
given, are for Gods people (open or secret) in that Babylon. Who sees not the
deceyt? For God has had his people in Rome, not only when it was
Antichristian, but when it was heathen: and multitudes have been killed for
Christ therein, in both estates. This justifies not, but condemns Rome, the
murderer of the Saints.

Obj. To make this matter yet more plain, observe Zach. 2. 6. 7. Ho, ho, come
forth etc. Deliver thyself o Sion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon.
This plainly shows that Sion is in Babylon: not mount Sion it self etc. but
the people of God, that perteyned to Sion: among whom, when God set his Temple,
he said withal, 1 King. ^ 13. Psalm. 132. 13. 1^
I will dwell in the midst of you: showing that the Temple was a token of his
presence among them; a band of the holy and mutual conjunction that was between
God and them: whether they were bound to come for to worship God, and to bring
their sacrifices.

Answ. In deed this makes the matter more plain. For 1. here he gra^teth the
Temple to have been a token of Gods presence among his people; but when so I
applied it in expounding 2. These. 2. he resisted me, and would have it there to
be the people, the church. 2. This temple the token of Gods presence and band
of his communion with his people, God had forsaken. For his people synning in
it by their idols, Ezekiel. 8. God in wrath sent destroyers upon them; Ezekiel. 9 But
before destruction he Ezekiel. 9.
marked his people on the forehead, that cried out for all the abominations.
Which being done, he verse. 5.
slayed to destruction all others not marked, both old and young, and began at
his sanctuary. Then Ezekiel. 10.
scattred he coals of fire over the city; removed Ezekiel. 1^ 18. 19. 11. 22. 23.
his glory (the sign of his presence) out of his Temple, and from the midst
of the city; to signify his departure from amongst them. Then came the king
of Babylon Gods Ier. 25. 9.
servant (to execute his wrath) and performed the vision, in 2 King. 25. ^.
burning both Temple and city, and carrying the people thence into Babylon. So
Moses prophecy was fulfilled, Levit. 26. 31. -- 36. Then both such godly ones
as had not been polluted with the abominations in Jerusalem, and had been
marked of God for his; such sinners also as by their afflictions were brought
to repentance, and Levit. 26. p. 41. etc. King. 8. 46. ^. etc.
confessed their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers, and had their
uncircumcised hearts humbled, and turned unto him with all their heart, and with
all their soul; he mercifully respected them, and remembered his covenant
toward them. The rest perished in their synns, being given over in just
judgment, (whiles they were in that dispersion,) to Deuteronomy. 28.
serve other goods, wood and stone: though yet by his prophets, God warned them
not to do it, Ier. 10. So the Lord set the sign of his gracious presence in
the Christian church, Rev. 4. but they soon defiled it by their idolatries, and
heresies, for which they were chastised, Rev. 6. Wherefore God in justice ready
to bring further plagues, marketh and seals on the foreheads, such as were
his, Rev. 7. then his judgments came forth in greater measure Rev. 8. and by a
Rev. 13.
beast (or kingdom) whose chief seat should be in Rev. 17.
Babylon, that is Rome, he suffered the Rev. 13. 7.
Saints to be overcome, and gave him power over all kinreds and tongues and
nations: that such as had not verse. 8.
their names written in the book of life, should worship him; and be Rev. 14.
9. ^. 11.
damned for ever. In which Babylon or Popish church, the Lord has
notwithstanding his open Rev. 11, 3. 20, 4.
witnesses, that withstand their abominations unto the death: and many more of
his elect, whom he Rev: 18. 4.
calls out in his time from that whorish church; and these are the people of
God, that perteyn to mount Sion: and will no more justify the state of the
church of Rome at this day, then Gods lost sheep of Israel, justified Babylon
of old.

Obj. Note here, 1. That the people of God pollute his temple, become apostates
and idolaters, and are captived in Babylon.

Answ. But note withal, that they have their temple of God, and holy city,
consumed with fire; and are carried out of their holy land, into an other
sinful nation, as before is showed.

2. That thus now Sion is in Babylon, and consequently the Temple of God (so to
speak) the people of G. the church of G. is in Babylon.

Ans. So to speak! But the speech is unproper, and God no where speaks so.
The visible Temple was burnt; and they had none with them in Babylon, but Bells
temple, none of the Lords. The lost sheep, the people of God perteyning to
mount Sion, (as whileere he said) were in Babylon. And for his figurative
applying of the Temple here, to the people or church; it is amyss: it should be
applied to God himself. For so the Lord says by the Prophet, though I have
scattred them among the countries, yet will J be to them as a little Sanctuary,
in the countries where they shall come, Ezekiel. 11. 16. So the Lord, not the
people, was the Sanctuary or temple in Babylon.

3. Still they are acknowledged of God, to be Sion, his people etc, though in
Babylon.

Answ. So I always and still acknowledge God to have his people in Babylon the
church of Rome. But it should be proved (if it were possible) that Babylon is
Sion; or the church of Rome, to be the church of God.

4. The Lord calls them from thence by diverse prophets etc. 5. Being so
called, they did not all come together at once etc.

Answ. These things are true: and so for the Lords calling of his people out of
Babylon now. But it is not yet concluded, (not ever will be soundly) that the
Babylonians are Gods people; except the elect, which belong to mount Sion,
though-actually in Babylon.

Obj. There will be of Gods people yet called from thence, even then when this
Babylon (the city of Rome) shall be burnt with fire, and cast down, never to
rise any more. Rev. 18. 4. 8. etc.

Answ. This conclusion is partly true, and partly implies error. It is true,
that there shall be of Gods people called out of Babylon, til she be utterly cast
down. But the error implied is, that he makes Babylon the city (not the
church) of Rome: and seems also to restreyn it to the city properly, and to
the burning of the material city and houses thereof. Whereas this Babylon, is
the Rev. 17. 1. 5.
great Whore, who though her chief ^ear is in Rome, yet her ecclesta^^ical
jurisdiction reaches over Rev. 11. 8. 9.
peoples, and kinreds, and tongues, and nations. And when the Rev. 11. 13.
tenth part of that city fell; it is not meant of the tenth part of the houses
in Rome; but of people in that catholic church. And when God calls his Rev.
18.
people out of Babylon: it is not meant out of Rome only, or Italic* but
Spain also and all other places where Popery reigns. Neither is it meant in
regard of civil polity, as if the subjects in Italy, Spain and other lands,
might not remain in those common wealths still; but they are called out from
the heresies, idolatries and extravagant jurisdiction of the Romish church. So
the civil bondage of the Jews in the old Babylon, typed the spiritual bondage
of Gods people in this new Babylon, the church of Rome: and out of it are men
called, not out of the civil state, or material place. For who will deny, but
Christian churches may dwell in Spain, Italy, yea and Rome it self (if the
magistrates will suffer them,) and yet not disobey this precept Rev. 18.
Come out of her my people. It is a doctrine of grace, and necessary unto
salvation to come out of the church estate of this Romish Babylon, but to
understand it of the Common wealths estate, and to call men out of it, were a
doctrine of rebellion, contrary to Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14.

Whereas I concluded, Gods covenant of grace is not therefore with her at all,
for she is appointed to damnation, 2 These. 2. 8. 12. Rev. 18. 8. -- 21. but the
elect that obey Gods voice calling them out of her, them he will receive into
covenant, he will be a father unto them, and they shall be his sonns and
daughters, as he has promised. 2. Cor. 6. 17. 18. He replyeth: As if they were
not already under the covenant of God, being his people: or as if they could be
the Lords people and yet not be under his covenant. The Jews knew better when
they were in Babylon; and thereupon prayed, as in Esai. 63. 17. 18. 19. and 64.
7. 8. 9. Return to the tribes of thine inheritance etc, we are thine etc. O
Lord thou art our father etc.

Answ. The people of God in Rome, being his elect; are under his covenant in
regard of his election, which was Ephesians. 1. 4.
before the world began: but until they be called and come out; they appear not
unto men to be under the visible covenant of Gods church, whereof Paul speaks
in the place alleged, 2 Cor. 6. That the godly Jews in Babylon, figured Gods
elect, I before showed from Romans 11. 4. 5. 7. and mine opposite gainsayeth it
not. That God calls the elect his people, even before they know or obey his
voice, was showed him also heretofore, when God said to Paul of heathenish
Corinth, J have much people in this city, Act. 18. 10. yet Paul knew not who
they were, till after they believed by his preaching. So Christ said, Other
sheep J have which are not of this fold, Ioh. 10. 16. speaking of the elect
gentiles, whiles yet they were not sheep actually before men; but wild beasts
of the wood. His comparison from Esai. 63. if it be referred to the Martyrs
which the church of Rome has imprisoned, killed, banished for the truth: is
fit, and I acknowledge them visibly under Gods covenant. But referred to them
that are one with the church of Rome, in her faith and religion; it is very
unfitt. For those people of God in Babylon, were in civil bondage, but in
freedom of spirit, and not servants to syn: such were Dan. 1. and 3. 18
Daniel, Ananias, and other saints. But these of the Romish church and
religion, are in spiritual bondage to Antichrist, and so partakers of his
synns, Romans 6. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 19.
and in state of death, by man's judgment; till they obey their calling and
come forth; though God knows them before to be his people, by election of
grace. By this which has been said, the wise may discern, what weight there
is in Rev. 18. to prove Babylon (the present church of Rome,) to be the church
of God, because out of her, God calls his people. And let all men take notice
of the mayn ground of his error, that he would have Babylon now, to be the
civil state or material city; when in deed it is the ecclesiastical or church.
For God calls not peoples out of their civil states, (it is a doctrine of
rebellion so to interpret it, and contrary to Romans 13:) but from their sinful
ecclesiastical estate. All civil states, though governed by Popish yea or
heathenish magistrates, are sanctified to Gods people, Act. 25. 10. 11. Romans
13. 1. 2. etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 17. they may lawfully continue under them,
have the use and benefit of them: they are all of God, and none of them from
the bottomless pit or of the Divil, as is the Beast the Empire of Antichrist,
Rev. 17. 8. from which God calls all his people.

Of comparing the church of Rome with Israel.
MIne opposite labored to strengthen his former reason from Rev. 18. by
saying, And so Jsrael is often called the Lords people in the time of their
apostasy, 2 King. 9. 6. etc. I answered, the Question was not hereby prooved.
For 1. The Antichristian church is Babylon, Rev. 16. 19 and 18. 2. and out of
her, that is Babylon; are Gads people called, Rev 18. 4. Now to prove her Gods
church, they flee to Jsrael, whereas the Gentiles were her true types, Rev. 11.
2. 9, 18. though all the wickedness and hypocrisy of apostate Israel, is also
found in this Romish Babel.

His reply is, Chr. ple^ page 171.
Let the reader judge, whether the point in hand, touching that phrase of Gods
people to imply the covenant of God, be not proved by the example of Jsrael.

Ans. I leave it also to judgment, whether the Question touching the church of
Rome be proved hereby. As for the phrase of Gods people in that church; I never
denied it to imply the covenant of God: to some visibly, as the Martyrs of
Christ killed in that church; to other some according to the election of grace,
which shall appear when they obey their calling, and are come out of her: as
before I showed.

Moreover (he says) the question was about the Temple of God, 2. These. 2.
wherabout he alleged that term and estate of the people of God, Rev. 18. 4.
but J flee to Babylon etc.

Answ. A plain evasion. The question was about the church of Rome, as before I
showed from his own grant. To justify her to be Gods church, he alleged 2
These. 2. for one proof; Rev. 1^. for an other: Rev. 18. 4. for a third: and now
the state of Israel for a fourth. His other repetitions, I have answered
before. I always distinguished in Rev. 11. between the Gentiles (the
Antichristians) and the holy city and court, which they have destroyed and
trodden under foot, and still do. Neither have I denied but the idolaters in
Judah and Israel, were types of Antichristians in part: but this I said and
still say, that the more full and perfect type of them, is by the holy Ghost
showed us to be in the Sodomites, Egyptians and Babylonians, Rev. 11. and 17.
and 18. As the Priests of Aaron were types of Christ, but Melchisedek was a
more full and perfect type of him; as the Apostle proves in Heb. 7.

Again, if that which he striveth for, were granted him, namely that Israel in
apostasy typed out Antichristians; and that Israel was notwithstanding a true
church: yet will it not follow therefore the Antichristian church of Rome, is a
true church also. For the apostasy and idolatry of Rome, is far greater then
Isreal's, as I have Arrow. ag. lolat. chapter 3. and 5.
elsewhere showed; and can easily confirm against any that shall gainsay it. 2.
Mr. Io. himself makes 1 Macab. 1.
Antiochus and his captains, (which were of the worst sort of heathens,) to be
types and figures of the Pope and his hierarchy (which are the Bishops priests
and Deacons of the church of Rome,) as before we have seen. Yet would he not
admit of this conclusion; therefore the Bishops Priests and Deacons of the
church of Rome are heathens; as was Antiochus. So his reasoning for Israel,
though it were true; will be no sound proof for Rome. Types, figures and
similitudes hold in some things, not in all: and it is a very easy thing to
deceive men by figures, similies, allegories. But the plain doctrines in the
scripture, they are a sure ground: and if any do wrest a type or similitude
against them, it is to be rejected, what color soever it has. Now mine
opposite reasons not from these doctrines; which would soon end the strife.
For the scripture plainly says, that Antichrist, the man of syn, is the son
of perdition, and all that believe his lies and follow him are damned. 2 These.
2. 3. 10. 11. 12. That Antichrist is a liar, denying both the Father and the
Son, 1 Ioh, 2. 22. they that are of God, do overcome him: they that are of the
world, hear him. Hereby is known the spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error; 1 John 4. 3. -- 6. They that belong to the Lamb (Christ) on mount Sion,
have his Fathers name written on their foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. and worship not
the beast, nor receive his mark, Rev. 20. 4. but they that belong to
Antichrist, and have not their names written in the book of life, do worship
the beast, and receive his mark, and shall be tormented for ever, Rev. 13. 8. 16.
and 14. 9. 10. 11. But the church of Rome believes Antichrists lies,
worshipeth the Beast and his idols, receives his mark, and is partaker of all
his abominations. Who now without open injury, to the word of God, can make
this people the true church of Christ, and in the visible covenant of grace? On
the other hand, my Opposites reasons are drawn from that figurative phrase the
Temple of God, 2 These. 2. and the type of apostate Israel; and an objection
cast in the way to stumble at, that else we must be baptized again: (as if men
that can not tell how to avoid an inconvenience, must run into a mischief; to
justify those whom God condemns.) And upon these and the like grounds, are
his reasons framed; (as may be seen throughout his work;) with some few props
of humane authority, to undershore them.

Though this brief answer might serve unto all his discourse about the state of
Israel: yet for to help the weak reader, that might stumble at some things laid
in his way; I will annex a few more observations.

Under his wonted title of Chr. ple^* page 172.
Errors, evasions, contradictions etc, wherewith he charge me, this is 1.
That the Temple of God 2 These. 2. 4. is no more Gods temple, then Ieroboams
idol temples in Jsrael, and Bells temple in Babylon: yet also J said, it was to
be understood of Gods church and people invaded and destroyed by Antichrist etc.

Answ. This his tautologie, I have before answered; and cleared my self both of
error and contradiction. For that Antichrist should destroy Gods temple and
church, I proved by the example of the Babylonians burning the City and Temple
of God, and captiving his people: and by the measuring of the new building,
Rev. 11. That this being done, Antichrist should have an other Temple and
church of his own frame, which he should call Gods and Christ's; I showed by the
Beast arising from the sea, and from the earth, with horns like the Lamb
(Christ) Rev. 13. which beast is a kingdom spiritual or ecclesiastical polity,
a great whore, Rev. 17. by Antichrist adified, adorned, mainteyned: which still
he pretends to be the ancient catholic church, and temple of God.

Now further for Jeroboam that drew Israel into syn, he Chr. plea page 161.
confesses that he was a type of Antichrist: though he shows not wherein. But
Ieroboams syn was in making a new House (or Temple) and a new altar to
sacrifice in unto God, and new priests, with new signs, as Calves to worship
God by: 1 King. 12. In these things then he must be a type of Antichrist: who
accordingly (if he answers to his figure) must erect a new Temple, altar,
preisthood and signs, differing from Christ's, as in deed he has done. And
that idolatrous house erected for the worship of the true God, not only the
Israelites, but the Prophet Amos, calls the house (that is the Temple) of
their god, Am. 2. 8. as Paul calls the house wherein Antichrist sits, the
temple of God, 2 These. 2. yet this man blames me for comparing that Temple
with Ieroboams idol temples, which Israel builded when he forgot his Maker,
Hos. 8. 14. how justly, let men of judgment consider.

2. His 2. exception is about Babylon, and the Beast, that I make them one with
the Church of Rome, and distinguish not Babylon from Sion. This I have before
cleared: showing that the church of Rome is the whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. and
I distinguish it from Sion, which he confounds with Babylon, being himself in
that blame which he would impute unto me. And to teach that God calls us out
of any civil state or government, I have formerly proed to be erroneous and
seditious, contrary to the Apostles, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.

3. That Antichrists Apostasy and the church of Rome with him, is much worse
then Ieroboams and Isreal's with him; I constantly affirm: and let the synns of
them both be compared, and it will soon appear. Did Jeroboam pray unto
creatures, as the church of Rome does to innumerable, even all Saints and
Angels, and some mere fictions? Did Jeroboam hold any of those manifold
blasphemous heresies now holden in the church of Rome? Nay let the very
Babylonians of old be taken: and I will undertake to prove that the church of
Rome is not behind them, but in respect of the light of the Gospel revealed by
Christ, much worse.

4. I grant that in Paul's time the church of Rome was set in the way of God,
and soon after fell into apostasy: but where he charge me to say, that the
ordinances of God still retained in that church are stolen; he wrongeth me. For
I acknowledge not this church now, to be that which was in Paul's time, but a
counterfeit, arisen since: a theif, partner with Antichrist, in robbing the
church, (as the 2 King. 2^
Babylonians robbed the Temple,) and abusing the ordinances thereof to their
perdition. But then he objecteth.

Jf the church of Rome should repent etc. they should not reteyn the baptism
and other ordinances of God which she has, but must part with them seeing they
are stolen goods. And here he insulteth, asking the Anabaptists, how they can
ever be thankful enough to me, for thus pleading their cause etc.

Answ. If the Babylonians should have repented, and joined to the church of God
at Jerusalem: they there might have had an holy and lawful use of Gods vessels,
altars etc, which before they had stolen, and abused: so may these spiritual
Babylonians have at this day, if God give them grace to repent, and join unto
Sion. Here then the Anabaptists will conne mine opposite but little thank for
his gratulation.

5. He calls it my like error and iniquity, to match baptism and the other
ordinances of God in the church of Rome, with the feasts worship and sacrifices
of the heathen, who were Ephesians. 2. 1^ 12.
without Christ and without God etc. These assertions he says are miserable
and Anabaptistical.

Answ. But why then does he not refute them by the word of truth? I could as
easily call his assertions miserable and Papisticall: but he would take that
for no sound conviction. And had he but related mine own words (in that 85.
page of my book,) the reader might have seen how little cause he had to
exclaim* ^. I spoke not generally of the heathens feasts, worship and
sacrifices, as he would intimate to his reader: but distinctly of those which
had been ordained of God, differing from other of their own devisings. 2. I
said, the heathens kept Gods ordinance, as well as Rome with their sacrifice of
the Mass. He tells his reader, I match the baptism etc in Rome, with the
worship and sacrifices of the heathen. Is this good dealing so to change my
words? But sundry such injuries I must bear. And why may we think, does he in
sted of the Lords supper, (now turned into a Romish mass) put baptism? But
because he thinks that he has color to plead for one sacrament more then
for an other. In handling that point of their baptism, Animadv. ^g. 73. 74.
I instanced this other seal, our Lords supper; and an other ordinance of God,
Excommunication: both which he passes over: yea every where when it comes in
his way, he shunneth it throughout his book, as in this place. He knew well, it
was as a red hot iron that would burn his fingers. But of it, we shall speak
more, when we come to handle their baptism. 3. To his reason, I answer: the
heathens were in deed without Christ and without God, Ephesians. 2. and so are these
Romish Antichristians, or else the Apostle has not given us a true rule to
discern Antichrist by, that he denies both the Father and the Son: 1 John 2.
22. The hethens retained the knowledge of the true God in some mesure, as their
writings manifest; and worshipped ignorantly the true God whom The Apostles
preached, Act. 17. 23. so the Antichristians ignorantly worship the true God
whom we preach and believe; and as ignorantly (by stocks and stones, and
prayers in an unknowen tongue like Parrats) as did the heathens of old. The
hethens retained a knowledge of Christ the Redeemer, figured in the sacrifices
ordained of God: so, the Antichristians reteyn a knowledge of Christ in name,
and signified in the sacraments; but as impiously do they abuse them by
holding they conferr grace ex opere operato, by the work done, and other
iniquities mixed with them, as did the heathens; and by believing and
worshipping a Christ made of bread, they surpass the heathens in ignorance and
idolatry.

Finally, had mine opposite read Mr. Bezaes larger annotations on Ephesians. 2. as he
read him on 2 These. 2. he might have seen the Antichristians very little
inferior to the heathens without God, even in Mr. Bezaes judgment; which yet I
suppose he would not have called miserable and Anabaptisticall, as he does in
me.

Touching the state of Israel, in my discourse (as he calls it) he Chr. plea
^g. 174.
confesses I have many truths which he also holds: yet some sleightes,
errors etc also mixed: which he instanceth. Seeing he yeildeth the rest for
truths* I referr the reader to the things Animad page 87. and
there written; which being observed, he may the better judge of our
controversy. As first, that we both agree, The covenant between God and man,
was always conditional: by the Law, if they Romans 10.
did his commandments they should live by them; if they Gal. 3. 1^
continued not in all things written in the Law to do them, they were cursed.
By the Gospel, Ioh. 3. 3^
he that believes in the Son of God has everlasting life, and he that obeys
not the Son, shall not see life. And all the figurative covenants that Jsrael
had, were also conditional, Levit. 2^ Deuteronomy. 28.
blessings promised to the obedient, and curses to the transgressors. 2. That
man's breaking of the covenant, is always Lev. 26. 1*
by syn; and so God never breaks covenant. But by punishing and putting from
him the rebellious; we may say Zach. 1 10. Psalm. 8* 39.
God breaks or disanulleth the covenant. Whenever a people by syn forsake
God, and refuse his word calling them to repentance: they cannot have
themselves, neither can other men have concerning them any assurance of their
salvation, or that they abide in the covenant of his grace. For whosoever
abides in him, 1 Ioh. 3. ^
he synneth not: whosoever synneth has not seen him, neither known him. Be it
man or woman or family or tribe, which turn their heart from the Lord, to serve
other gods, though they bless themselves in their hearts etc. the Lord will not
be merciful unto them. Deuteronomy. 29. 18. 19. 20. These things being plain by the
scriptures, and by him yielded; with many other things, which I will not here
repeat: he though he could not contradict, yet intimates notable heresy
against me, Whether J do not in some things, speak so about the covenant, as
may establish the righteousness of works, in some respect. Always remembering
that the covenant of God, whereof we speak is this, to Abraham, J will be a God to
thee and to thy seed after thee; and J will be your God, and ye shall be my people,
Genesis 17. 7. and 22. 18. Hos. 2. 23. Zach. 13. 9. with Act. 2. 39. and 3. 25.
Romans 9. 25. 26.

Answ. As I from my heart abhor that heresy of righteousness by the works of
the Law, as that which makes Christ's death in vain, and abolisheth grace,
Gal. 2. 21. Romans 11. 6. so I trust no equal reader will gather any such doctrine
from my writings; though this man (without all proof) insinuates it more then
once against me. 2. In repeating the covenant, he uses not plainnes, I might
say, sincerity. For those words in Genesis 17. 7. are but one part of the
covenant, to weet, on Gods behalf: he should have expressed the stipulation
foregoing, in verse. 1. 2. walk before me, and be thou perfect, and J will make
my covenant between me and thee: and after in verse. 9. Thou shall keep my
covenant therefore etc. So the other scripture^ by him cited, do not so fully
express the covenant on both parts, as does Heb. 8. 10. 11. 12. Where both
forgivenes of synns, to justification, and writing of the Law in our hearts to
sanctification and obedience, are showed to be the covenant of Gods grace with
men.

He Chr. plea ^ag. 175.
taxes me as for error and contradiction, in seeking to persuade, that God
brake the covenant on his part with Jsrael, when all the tribes were together
(Animadvers. p. 88) and yet after (in the same page,) say, that whiles Jsrael
was one, they continued Gods church.

Answ. Herein he wrongeth me, (as he too often uses,) and keeps not my words
or meaning, neither takes away the reasons from the scripture which I there
set down. I spoke not of The covenant in general, as he would give his reader
to understand; but of a covenant, and a condition of the covenant. And what I
said, I proved, from Exodus 6. 4. 5. -- 8. J have stablished my covenant with
them, to give them the land of Canaan etc. Then God brought them to the borders
of the counttie, and said, Lo the land is before you, go up and possess it,
Deuteronomy. 1. 20. 21. but they v. 28. 26. ^2.
were afraid, and would not go up, through their unbeleef. Then the Lord was
presently v. 34. 35.
wroth, and swore that not one of those transgressors should see that good
land: neither did they, but dyed in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 2. 1. etc. Heb. 3. 17
-- 19. Again I instanced a condition of the Exodus 34. ^0. 11.
covenant on Gods part, that he would cast out the Canaanites etc, and on
Isreal's part, that v. 12. etc.
they should make no compact with the inhabitants. But when they brake
covenant, and agreed with them Judge. 1. ^7. - 33.
for tribute; the Lord also presently brake with them, saying, J said, J will
never break my covenant with you etc; but you have not obeyed my voice,
wherefore J say also, J will not cast them out before you etc. Judge. 2. 1. 2. 3.
20. 21* Now what says mine opposite to these things: are they not so? He
neither yeildeth to the truth, neither could stand before it: but shunning to
meddle with my reasons, turns upon me who showed them; as the reader has
seen: and in sted of a covenant, and a condition of the covenant, sets down
the covenant, meaning the covenant of grace and salvation: whereas
notwithstanding the breaking of these covenants and conditions and other the
like, the people by repentance, held fast through faith the covenant of grace.
For Moses Number. 20. ^2. Deuteronomy. 32. ^0. 51. 54.
and Aaron and many other, who for their synns could not come into the land of
Canaan, yet are in heaven through the covenant of grace. And so though some
conditions of the covenant were broken, both on their part and on Gods, yet
they being brought to repentance continued his church. That herein I neither
wrote error, nor contradicted my self, as he would persuade against me. And
these things that fell out in Israel on both parts, touching these figurative
promises: do teach us the like touching the spiritual promises of eternal
life, if men break concerning them; as in repentance, faith and holiness,
without which men perish, and shall never see God; Luke 13. 3. Act. 2. 38. Mar.
16. 16. Heb. 12. 14.

He next finds fault, Chr. pl^ page 175.
That J shuffle together the estates of Jsrael, when they were one body, and
when they were rent in two. Also whilst Israel was in the land and presence of
the Lord, and when they were cast out of his house and presence. Animadv. p.
88. 89. 90. 91.

Answ. The first is a wrong imputation, as the reader may see in the place of
my book by him cited. I there blame him for not distinguishing their estate,
when they were one, and when they were rent asunder. And though I pass from one
to an other, as I was led by answering him, yet confound I them not. But here
he deals as in the former point: answers not my reasons whereby I convinced
him of misapplying his diverse respects, contrary to the words and meaning of
the scriptures; and to avoid if he could his deserved blame, checketh me, but
disproveth not what I wrote. Let the reader compare what we both have said.

For the second, I confess I did not so distinctly handle the state of Israel
whiles they were in the land, and after when they were put out, as I should and
would have done, had I foreseen his pressing of every leight thing against me.
The reason hereof was, that it skilleth not for the point in controversy, (to
weet their Circumcision) whether we respect them before they were cast out or
after, for they were not circumcised the second time in either estate. And this
mine opposite himself shows even in this his last book, where he deals
against the Anabaptists. For in his Chr. plea p. 27. 28. he says, Circumcision
once received in the apostasy of Israel, was not repeated again at their
returning to the Lord, and leaving of their idolatrous ways etc: and quoteth
among other scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 30 chapter and Ezr. 6. 19. 20. 21. Of which, the
one speaks of them that returned in Ezekiahs days, whiles the Israelites
were in the land: the other of them that had been dispersed among the heathens,
and returned. So I, where I Animadv. ^ag. 70.
treat of Baptism, handle those estates indistinctly: which is made a great
matter against me, by him that does the same thing himself against others. But
now, I will speak of them a part.

The Israelites that rent themselves from Judah, I take to be a false church;
and so continued whiles they dwelt in the land. After they were dispersed, and
were no church.

The first, I show thus. The twelve tribes by Gods institution were all one
church, both in Moses time when they had the Tabernacle among them, and
encamped all round about it, in the order set of God, Number. 2. and after in the
land of Canaan, whiles the Tabernacle stood, and when the Temple was built by
Solomon: both which were signs of Gods presence and dwelling with his church.
And to keep them in this unity, he commanded all the men of Israel to come
jointly together from all parts of the land, three times every year, to worship
him and keep their solemn feasts, in that one place which he should choose:
and at all other times to offer their sacrifices there, and in no other place;
and thither only to bring their first fruits, their commanded and their
voluntary oblations; Exodus 23. 14. -- 17. 19. Deuteronomy. 12. 5. 6. 7. Who so did
otherweise, blood was imputed unto that man, and he should be cut off from
among his people; to keep the people from offering their sacrifices unto Divils,
Levit. 17. 3. 4. 7.

Now when the ten tribes revolted and made Jeroboam king, then Israel forgot
his maker and builded Temples, Hos. 8. 14. For Jeroboam took counsel and made
two calves of gold, and said unto them; It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem; Behold thy gods o Jsrael, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt; and he set the one in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan: and this
thing became a syn. And he made an house of hye places, and made priests of the
lowest of the people, which were not of the sonns of Levi. And he offered on the
Altar, which he had made in Bethel. 1 King. 12. 28. -- 33. And having cast off
the Lords Priests and Levites, Jeroboam ordained him priests for the hie
places, and for the Divils and for the calves which he had made: but such of
all the tribes of Israel, as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of Jsrael,
went to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the Lord God of their fathers: 2 Chronicles.
11. 14. 15. 16. Thus of one Psalm. 9. 14.
daughter of Sion, (one church) there became Ezekiel. 23. 2.
two women, or daughters: the one, to weet Jerusalem (the tribe of Judah) the
Lord named verse. 4.
Aholibah, that is, My Tabernacle in her; the other, Samaria (the ten tribes)
he named Aholah, that is her own tabernacle. So Israel was without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. and the
Lord was not with Jsrael: 2 Chronicles. 25. 7. but at their first falling away, he
threatened by his Prophets, that because Jeroboam had made himself other gods,
and molten images, and cast the Lord behind his back, Ieroboams house should be
cut off, and taken away a^ dung; and the Lord would smite Israel, and root them
up out of that good land which he gave to their fathers, and would s^arter them
beyond the river: 1 King. 14. 9. -- 15. Yet for to show his patience toward
his people, (whom he had chosen for his, above all peoples of the earth,) and
for to save his elect among them, and to make the rest the more inexcusable, he
forbear them many years: and by all the Prophets, and all the Seers said unto
them, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes:
yet they would not hear, but hardened their necks, and believed not in the Lord
their God; but rejected his statutes and his Covenant that he made with their
fathers; and followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the heathen that
were round about them; and left all the commandments of the Lord their God:
therefore the Lord was very angry with Jsrael, and removed them out of his
sight. 2 King. 17. 13. -- 18.

From these and other the like testimonies against this people, I gather, that
from the time they departed from the Lord, from his Temple, altars and holy
signs of his presence with his people in Christ; from his Priests and the
lawful sacrifices at Jerusalem, which were figures of Christ, and from the
communion of their brethren the Jews (which Hos. 11. 12.
remained the church of Christ;) and made a new Temple, altar, priesthood and
church of humane and sinful institution: that this their church, Temple,
preisthood and worship were false. For that is truth which agrees with the
will and Ioh. 17. (...)*
word of God: all humane devices in religion are lies and vanities.

If it be ^ayd, the Lord himself rent the kingdom from Solomon's son, and gave
it to Jeroboam, 1 King. 11. 29. 31. and therefore this second church, was also
of divine institution. I answer; though God divided the kingdom, yet he divided
not the church: there might have been twelve kings over the twelve tribes, (as
there were of old twelve princes, Numb. 1. 5. -- 16.) and* yet they should have
been one Church. The kingdom or Civil state, is an ordinance immediately under
God, Romans 13. the church or ecclesiastical state is an ordinance immediately
under Christ the mediator, and he is the head of the body the church, Colos.
1. 18. The civil state is above the ecclesiastical, as 1 Cor. 21. 3.
God is the head of Christ: therefore the Church is to be subject to the
Magistrate, the higher power, the minister of God, though he be an heathen,
Romans 13. 1. etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. for the civil state is not taken away by
difference of religion, error, heresy or any apostasy from Christ: but the
ecclesiastical state is by such things dissolved, the Candlestick (the church)
may be removed, and of a Church of Christ, become a Synagogue of Satan: 1 John
2. 18. 19. Rev. 2. 5. 9. In their civil state, the Israelites were to be
subject unto Nebuchadnezar an heathen, when he conquered them, Ier. 27. 6. 8.
12. but for their ecclesiastical estate they might never submitt to
Nebuchadnezars church, or priests, nor offer to God upon any of his altars. So
to Jeroboam as king they might be subject, without dissolving their communion
in the mysteries of Christ, set in the Temple, altars, priests etc at
Jerusalem. Thus this new church and ministry arising from Ieroboams syn, was
not of God; and therefore could not possibly be a true church, which always is
a divine ordinance in Christ the head of the same.

Touching their second estate, after that God had called them back unto him 2.
King. 17 3. 14.
by all his Prophets, but they would not hear; and chastised them Lev. 26. 8.
24. 28.
seven times, and seven (that is many) times for their sins; he v. 32. 33.
brought the land into desolation, and scattred them among the heathen; so Lev.
18. 8.
the land did spue them out, as it spued out the heathens that were before
them: the Lord did put her away, and gave her a bill of divorce, Jer 3. 8. and
they were Lo-ammi, not Gods people, neither was he their God, Hos. 1. 9. they
were not his wife, neither was he their husband, Hos. 2. 2. In which estate,
they abiding Hos. 3. 4.
without King, Prince, sacrifice, image, ephod, or Teraphim, were as Ier. 50. 17
scattred sheep, devoured by the King of Assyria: and therefore no Church, nor
Common wealth, but so broken, that they were not a people. Esai. 7. 8.

The next error he charge me with is; Chr. plea page 175.
that I say, If they cannot prove Babylon in Chaldea to be Gods Church, when
the Jews were there captived, they shall never prove the Temple of God spoken
of in 2. These. 2. 4. to be Gods true Church, etc.

Answ. He has falsified my words, and not answered my reason. Thus I wrote;
Animadv. 91. 92.
Their applying of these things to our times, is not in all points aright. For
though in this, Antichrists synagogue and Isreal's do agree, that neither be
Gods true Church: yet the perfect type of Rome, as God describes it, is
Babylon, Rev 17. 18. and we should not be wiser then God. And if they cannot
prove Babylon then to be Gods true Church, which was not more deep in sin then
now Antichrist is, and which city had Psalm. 87. 4.
promise and 1. Pet. 5. 13.
performance of mercy in Christ, at the end, they shall never prove this
synagogue of Satan to be Gods true Church, which has no promise of recovery or
mercy, but prophesies and threatenings of assured destruction; Numb. 24. 24.
Rev. 14. 9. 10. and 18. 8 21. and 19 20. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. 12.

Thus men may see what manner of replies he has made unto me; and when he has
no other thing to say, he flies to his wonted refuge The Temple of God, and
says our question and reasoning was about it; as if it were not about the
Church of Rome, but about a phrase, that we contended. But hereof I have spoken
at large.

For the word Church taken sometime largely, sometime strictly, he Chr. plea
page 176.
taxes me for omitting this.

Answ. Why should I not omit that whereabout is no controversy. That which
Keckerman (whom he cites) says of the Church largely taken, to comprehend
both the elect and hypocrites, and strictly taken, to comprehend the elect
only, I acknowledge for truth. But it is nothing to our controversy.

For his double regard of apostate Churches, and so of Israel, I yielded to him
that which was truth, and showed wherein he missed: whereto as he replieth not,
Chr. plea page 177.
but refers it to the readers judgment: so do I.

I showed Animadv page 93.
how the Jews at this day professing the God of Israel, and praying to him,
and reading his Law in their synagogues, may be called Gods people in
comparison of Pagans that know not God or his scriptures at all, but worship
the Sun and Moon, and some the Divil by open profession: yet the Jews now are
not actually in the covenant of grace. And the the Turks that profess one
Alcoran Azoar. 2. 3. 67. 31.
immutable living, true, most wise and high God; and Christ to be sent of God
with his Gospel and that he is the Breath or Spirit of God; may in comparison
of Julian the Apostata, and Atheists, be called the people of God and
Christians, though indeed they be far from being either. So the church of
Rome, in comparison with Turks and Paynims may be called Christians, but are
indeed false Christians, etc. To that of the Jews, he answers nothing. For
the Turks, he Chr. plea page 178.
makes it nothing to the purpose, seeing they profess not Christ to be the
Son of God, made Man, that died for our synns, as the Church of Rome
professes, etc.

Answ. It is to the purpose, that in diverse respects, and in comparison with
Atheists, and people that profess not God, or Christ at all: they that are not
indeed Gods people, or true Christians, may be called Gods people and
Christians: so his double respect^ help him nothing. And for the Church of
Rome, I showed them to be in comparison with Turks, nearer Christ; and so the
doctrine there, nearer to salvation then the Mahometans: and I doubt not but
God by it saves some chosen therein: which yet justifies not their estate to
be a true Christian Church; as the reprobates in the true Church, condemn not
the estate thereof.

I Animadv. page 94.
showed by many instances, the Church of Rome to be in some things more gross
idolaters then either Jews or Turks, or heathens. This he being not able to
deny, opposes, Chr. plea page 178.
how Jerusalem justified Samaria and Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. Jer. 3. That Tire, Sidon,
and Sodom, shall have easier judgment then Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum.
Mat. 11. yet these cities were the Churches and people of God.

Answ. For Jerusalem, the Prophets speak of it sometime as generally wicked;
when yet there were many godly, that partaked not with her synns, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
Such as were more openly wicked then Samaria and Sodom, I deny them to be
actually then in the covenant of grace to man's judgment; for the Lord
appointed them to destruction, Ezekiel. 9. The cities of Israel in Christ's time,
were a part of the true Church of the Jews: yet for refusing Christ, they
should have heavier judgment then the heathens: so shall hypocrites in every
true Church, have greater punishment then many heathens. But comparison should
be made of Church with Church, not of some in the true Church, with the estate
of a false church. And that the general state of the Church of Rome is
Antichristian, and so denies indeed 1. Ioh. 2. 22
both the Father and the Son; is before proved. And they generally these many
years, have been more gross idolaters then either Jews or Turks: therefore
their profession of Christ in name, will not prove them to be in the covenant
of grace. God testifies to the Churches of Galatia, Christ is become of no
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from
grace, Gal. 5. 4. If they that would be justified by the Law of God, and works
of the same, fell from grace: much more they that will be justified by the law
of Antichrist, and wicked works, are fallen from grace, and have no benefit by
Christ. But such is the general faith of the Church of Rome, believing to be
justified by the idolatrous works, which they walk in as they are taught by
the Man of Syn, that sits as God, in the Temple of God, carrying them to
destruction.

Whereas to prove the Temple of God 2. These. 2. which he expounds the Church
of Rome, to be the true Church, he alleged Zach. 6. 12. 13. Ephesians. 2. 11. etc.
2. Cor. 6. 16. Rev. 11. 19. I Animadv page 94.
showed how he misapplied the Scriptures: he repeateth his former answers,
which I have formerly resuted. And now he adds; But to put him from his
shifts, let him tell us plainly, when Paul says, The Temple of God has not
agreement with Idols, 2. Cor. 6. 16. if yet there be idols set in the Temple of
God, as was in the time of Manasseh and Antiochus, whether now it ceased to be
the Temple of God or not. The Scripture shows it is the Temple of God
notwithstanding. 2. King. 21. 7. Ier. 50. 28. Ezekiel. 8. 5. 10. 16. Dan. 11. 31.
38.

Answ. I tell them plainly, that that Temple of God which the prophets speak
of, had no agreement with idols; though the wicked set up idols in it by force.
But the Church of Rome (which these call the Temple of God) has agreement with
idols, if images of silver and gold, wood and stone, a wheaten god in the
Mass, and the man of syn which sits as God, be idols. For these idols the
Church of Rome worshipeth and serves most synfully: but the Temple of God
which the Prophets speak of, never worshipped the Idols set up in it, nor had
accord with them. But this is a shift of shifts, and a notorious sophisme in
mine opposite, to reason from the material Temple of God then, which only
suffered that abuse; to the spiritual Temple, the Church or people now, which
are voluntary agents, and worshipers of Idols. By which false argumentation he
might even as well conclude, that if the Papists should turn flat Pagans of
Antiochus religion, and serve his idols, and be of his faith: yet they should
continue the true Church and people of God notwithstanding: because the Temple
then, continued Gods true Temple, notwithstanding all that Antiochus did
thereto.

The Chr. plea page 179.
next point, touching their baptism, I will anon treat of in particular.

For his Ibid. p. 18
objection of salvation now had in the Church of Rome, etc. it was his page 121.
second main argument for that Church, which I have before answered: he after
his manner repeateth again and again the same things, so lengthening his
work. I referr the reader to that answer I gave (...). 6. 7. etc.
before.

Other things whereby I Animadv. (...). 96.
convinced his doctrine, to beat the path for all licentiousnes, contrary to
the plain Scriptures, which show, that he that commits sin is of the Divil;
and we know that whosoever is born of God, sins not, etc. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. and
5. 18. whereas (if that he plead for be true) men may be as profane as Esau,
filthy in life as Sodom, idolatrous and sinful as the Egyptians and
Babylonians, and yet if they will call themselves Christians, and be outwardly
baptized, etc. they shall be justified as Gods true Church, they and their seed
in his covenant of grace, etc. which is to strengthen the hands of the wicked,
that he should not return from his wickedness, by promising him life. Ezekiel 13.
22. These and other like things, he passes over, without word of answer. It is
enough for him to cry, the Temple of God, the Temple of God; and to insist upon
phrases which may diversely be understood. Whereas the sound plea should be from
the doctrines of faith and sanctification of life according; by which the
Apostles teach us to discern true Christians from false. And who, that seeks
after the truth, would not rather insist upon these main grounds taught by our
Savior and his Apostles? Verily, I judge this pleading for Rome, to be an
exceeding great sin; because it by consequence overthrows both faith and
holiness: seeing misbeleevers and most sinful idolaters as ever were on earth,
are justified to be Gods true Church notwithstanding, and in his covenant of
grace, contrary to the whole Testament of Christ. It is to make a wide gate and
broad way into heaven, and will make men secure in all syn: if they that serve
the Man of syn himself, worship his idols, believe in his heresies, and walk
in his wicked works, which hope to merit salvation by them in heaven: may be
said to be true Christians, and in the state of grace.

Of the state of the Heathen.
WHereas I said, Animadv. (...). 97.
J held it presumption for any to limit God, by how small means or measure of
faith and knowledge he will save a man. Who dares den* but God had many elect
among the heathens, after he had separated Jsrael from them? Yea God expressly
said, when he made Israel his peculiar people; that yet all the earth was his,
Exodus 19 5. which are the words of the covenant Ezekiel. 16
generally. Wherefore we leave Gods secret counsels to himself, as he wills
us. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and do consider only the visible state of Churches, by the
rules of Gods law and promises.

To this mine opposite says, Chr. plea page 181.
What is it that he means hereby? Jf by the covenant he mean the covenant of
grace for salvation, whereof we treat; and think that all people of the world,
in all ages and places of the earth are under it: what differs this from the
opinion of the Anabaptists and Armintans touching general redemption? Jf he
speak not of the covenant of grace which is for salvation; all may perceive he
speaks not to the point in hand.

Answ. My meaning is plain, that God had his elect among the heathens, as he
bath in the Church of Rome: and he could not but see what I intended. By the
covenant generally with all nations, I mean the same that himself alleged Chr.
plea page 178.
whileare from Ke^kerman, of the Church largely taken: which he explaineth, the
company of all those which profess Christian religion or the name of Christ in
what manner soever. And thus (says he) are all heretics, schismatikes, and
Arians, Papists, Anabaptists, and such like, referred to the Christian
Churches* So if he understood himself, he might understand me, when I spoke of
the covenant generally. For such large Churches as he describes, I hold all
nations to be, when God made his special covenant with Israel. Noe was a
Christian, and had the covenant of grace in Christ to him and to his seed, as
absolutely as any Christian Church in the Apostles days: though the mystery of
the Gospel was not then so clearly revealed * as it was afterward Romans 16. 25.
26.
by the Apostles. But for the substance of the covenant, namely Christ, and
faith in him, with obedience; it was given to Adam and his seed; to Noe and his
seed, Heb. 13. 8. and 11. 1. 2 3. 4. 7. etc. And this covenant of grace in
Christ, confirmed by sacrifices, as to us now by the sacraments. Which
sacrifices all nations kept the first thousand years after Noe, (which was till
after Moses death,) as well as the large Christian or false-Christian churches
kept the sacraments. Yea let any show, that any of the heathens (I except not
the very Canaanites,) turned the sacrifices into such abominable idolatry, as
the Church of Rome has turned the sacraments. And for other synns,
Antichristians are not behind them. How freely did Abraham, Isaac, and Jakob
live and publicly worship God by altars and sacrifices, in the midst of the
Caananites, Hittites, etc. Genesis 12. 7. and 26. 25. and 35. 6. ^. whereas if
they had so done (according to the true worship of the Gospel) in the Church of
Rome now these many hundred years; they had been burned for heretics, as
innumerable of Abraham's faith have been. How religiously did the King of Gerar
carry himself toward Abraham's wife, Genesis 20. in comparison of the outrageous
adulteries and fornications by the chief of the Church of Rome, as all
histories testify. Yea God himself appeared unto that King, and appointed
Abraham to pray for him, Genesis 20. 3. -- 7. How honorably did the Hittites
entreat Abraham, acknowledging him a Prince of God, and offered him all kindness,
Genesis 23. 5. 6. etc. yet other nations were better then they, Genesis 24. 3. 4. and
27. 46. Look upon Balaam the soothsayer of Mesopotamia, even in Moses time: and
see how he consulted with Jehovah his God, by altars and sacrifices of
Burnt-offrings, such as were used in Israel, Number. 22. 8. 9. 18. and 23. 1. 2.
3. etc. and it will plainly appear, the heathens had not more degenerated from
the religion and worship learned from Noe, then the Church of Rome, has from
that which Paul taught there. Yea there was a better Church in the land of Vz
(in all likelihood,) then the Church of Israel was in Egypt, when they
polluted themselves with the idols thereof, Ezekiel. 20. 6. 7. 8. For in Vz land,
Job was Job. 29. 7. ^.-25.
governor, a most godly man as was upon the earth, and a Priest unto the most
high God, Job. 1. 1. 5. 8. and 42. 8. 9. holding firm the faith of Christ his
redeemer, and of the resurrection to life, Job. 19. 25. 26. 27. and free from
idolatry, Job. 31. 26. 27. 28. And what knowledge and religion was then among
the Temanites, Shuhites, Naamathites, and Buzites; the friends of Job that came
to visit him, do show; Job. 2. 11. etc. and 32. 2. etc. and notwithstanding
their error in their disputation, they obtained pardon of God in Christ, Job.
42. 7. -- 9. And who can tell when the golden Candlestickes of Christian
churches were removed from those other peoples. Though soon, even too soon,
there was a general apostasy among the nations after Noe, as among the
nations after the Apostles times. But among which of them was there a such a
Man of Syn reigning at any time, as has now reigned in the Church of Rome,
these many hundred years? Wherefore they measure not things by the Rev. 21. 15
golden reed, which cast off those Churches of the nations, as wholly profane
and fallen from grace; and yet justify this notorious harlot the church of
Rome, to be still in the covenant of grace; whose impieties are not inferior
to any of those nations in Moses time, but rather above them; for her sins have
reached up to heaven, Rev. 18. 5. And whereas those nations had not the word of
God written, but as they learned it by voice of men, which might more easily be
corrupted and forgotten: the church of Rome having the written word, has
despised it; not suffered their children to read or hear it, lest (forsooth)
it should make them heretics: that for a man to have Gods book, it was as
much as his life was worth: so the miserable people, for contempt of Gods holy
Law, have been justly given over into Egyptian darkness, and into most
abominable idolatries and heresies, which have drowned men in perdition.

Now that which mine opposite objecteth of the opinion of the Anabaptists, etc.
as I reject it for a great error; so his supposition whereby he would feoff it
upon me, is injurious: If I think that all people of the world in all ages and
places of the earth, are under the covenant of grace, etc. whereas I spoke but
of the nations in Moses time, which were not so far fallen from God, as they
were afterward, and now much more. Again, himself pleads for the church of
Rome at this day, to be in the covenant of grace: yet I hope he would not say,
that all in that church are redeemed; otherwise then many reprobates are
redeemed, except he should think there are no reprobates. And if the Man of Syn
(which himself expounds the Pope and his Hierarchy) be redeemed; which are
the chief members of that Church: we must needs acknowledge a very general
redemption.

So where he Chr. plea page 181.
charge me with abuse of Ezekiel. 16. 8. thou be^amest mine: and asks me, Is
this now the case and estate of all the earth with the Lord? I answer, no: it
was not then, much less is it now. For I said, that then God made Israel his
peculiar people, Exodus 19. 5. though generally he said all the earth was his.
But because the earth corrupted their ways before him, as they did before the
^loud, Genesis 6. 11. 12. therefore God separated to himself a peculiar people to
be his inheritance. And so I think mine opposite himself would confess,
though all that profess Christianity be Gods Churches in his account, yet the
Christian reformed churches, are Christ's peculiar Churches, though all
Christendom be his in a large sense.

Yet he cease not to object, that the heavens are the Lords, Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
and every beast of the forest is his, etc. Psa. 50. 10. 11. 12. shall we
therefore think (says he;) that the beasts are the wife and Church of God* ^s
Ezekiel speaks of the Jews? etc.

Answ. None but beasts would so think. The comparison in Exodus 19. 5. is not
between men and beasts, but between men and men. And such men as had all within
less then a thousand years been Gods wife, and church, and in his covenant of
grace. But most of them on their parts fallen from it to idolatry, as Israel
also had Ezekiel. 20. 7. 8. and as the church of Rome, and other churches within a
thousand years after the Apostles, have done. The heathens then were not more
fallen from God, then the church of Rome is: mine opposite pleads for Rome,
because they were a church 15 hundred years before, and Antichrist still
sits in the Temple of God. I answer him, the heathens in Moses time were all
the church nine or ten hundred years before, and are still called Gods people,
Exodus 19. 5. He replieth, with the instance of Wild-beasts, etc. If I should so
have turned my back upon an argument, what outcries would he have made after me?

When David exhorts all the earth to sing unto the Lord, Psalm. 66. 1. and
100. 1. speaks he to the beasts? When Moses says, All the earth was of one
language, Gen 11. 1. does not he mean it of the men of the earth only, and not
of beasts? So in Exodus 19. 5. ye (Israelites) shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me, above all peoples: for all the earth (that is all peoples of the earth) are
mine. Where God calls all peoples his, not only by creation, as the beasts
were his; but by covenant made with them in Noes time, when he smelled the
sweet savor of his sacrifice, and promised no more to drown the world; and
blessed both Noe and his sonns, and established his covenani with them and with
their seed after them; and gave them a sight of his covenant, his bow in the
clowd, Gen 8. 20. 21. and 9. 1. 9. 12. 13. which covenant, though the natural
benefit of it, extended to the beasts, (as the beasts also had natural
refreshing by that water out of the Rock, which to the Israelites was a
sacrament of Christ, Numb. 20 8 1 (or. 10. 4.) yet unto men, (and to men
only,) it was a spiritual covenant of grace by Christ, as appears by Esa.
54. 8. 9. 10. Rev. 4. 3. and 10 1. 1 Pet. 3. 20. 21. Now the covenant of grace,
thus established with Noe, his sonns, and their seed after them; was respected
of God in Exodus 19. 5. when for the Apostasy of Noes seed, he of his love made
Israel his peculiar, above all other peoples: though some of the Nations were
(as in charity I judge from Jobs history,) Gods true churches still; and in
the worst of the nations (as the cursed Canaanites) he had many of his elect,
(as he has now in the church of Rome;) which the examples of Rahab the harlot,
the Gibeonites or Nethinims, Vriah the Hittite, Aravnath the Iebusite; and many
other throughout the scriptures, do confirm. All men (as The Apostle teaches
from the heathens confession) are Gods offspring (or generation,) Act. 17. 28.
29. The Gentile (as the parable shewerh in Luke 15) was brother to the Jew; and
God is the God not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, Romans 3. 29.
and if the uncircumcised Gentile kept the righteousness of the Law, his
uncircumcision was counted for circumcision, for there is no respect of persons
with God, Romans 2. 10. 11. 26. Act. 10. 34. 35. And as Paul reasons, Has God
cast away his people (Israel)? Far be it: for J also am an Israelite etc God
has not cast away his people which he foreknew: Romans 11. 1. 2. So I reason;
Did God cast away his peoples of the seed of Noes sonns? Far be it. For Rahab
was a Canaanite, Aravnah a Iebusite, Vriah an Hittite; Ebedmelech an Ethiopian,
Iether an Ismaelite; and thousands of these and the other nations, which were
Gods people whom he foreknew, and saved of his grace in Christ. They which can
not answer these things but by instancing beasts; do want the wisdom which men
of God should have.

With like success (in another Chr. plea page 94 95.
place of his book) he answers touching the Gentiles. For whereas I Animadv.
page 70.
wrote, The ordinanoes of God which they (the Apostate Israelites) in show
retained, could not be unto them the fig^es and seals of the forgivnes of
synns, and of life eternal; and therefore were in their use of them, false and
deceytfull, as were also the ordinances of God retained in other nations; as *
Altars, Sacrifices, Priests, tithes, first fruits, incense, meat-offrings,
drink-offrings, feasts, baptismes or washing* ^^byntings, excommunications,
prayers, vows, and many the like, whereof all histories do record, that the
Gentiles did reteyn them* (* Numb. 23. 1. Pompon. Laetus de Sacerd. T^bull. l.
1. eleg. 10. and l. 2. eleg. 1. 2. Homer. Odyss. 3. and Jliad. 1. Uirgil Aen.
2. Caesar bell. Gall. l. 6.

He replieth, All is to no purpose. For if it be to show that the Gentiles had
Altars, sacrifices, priests etc none does deny it. But if it be to show that
these were the Lords ordinances, given by him to these nations, as circumcision
was to Jsrael, for confirmation of his covenant unto them; or that circumcision
in Israel, was no more a sign and seal of Gods covenant, and consequently of
forgivenes of synns and life eternal, then those were among the heathens etc*
then all may see, that this scripture is also perverted, and that neither it
nor all the writers in the world, prove any such matter. etc.

Answ. It is easy to say, the scripture is perverted; and show no reason how. I
have before proved from the history of Noe, and God: covenant of grace with
his seed after him; and from the history of Job: that all nations had not
only Altars, sacrifices, Priests etc, but had them also as the Lords
ordinances given them for confirmation of his covenant, of forgivenes of synns
in Christ to come. Whence did Cain and Abel, Noe, Abram, Iakob and Job; learn
to offer first fruits, and beasts, build altars, pay tithes, make vows etc:
but from divine institution taught their fathers from God, and by the fathers
to the children? Otherweise they could not have done them in faith, as of some
of them The Apostle testifies they did, Heb. 11. which teaches us so to judge
of the rest. And if all other nations had kept the faith as did Job; their
sacrifices had been the seals of forgivenes of synns unto them, as they were
Job. 1. 5. ^ 42. 8. 9.
unto Job. When they lost their faith, their sacrifices were vain, and no
seal of grace unto them. Now compare Israel in their Apostasy: they made new
Temples, new Altars, new Priests, new feasts and signs, which were not only
1. King. 12 ^. -- 33.
none of Gods ordinances, but expressly forbidden them by his written Law, Exodus
20. 4. 5. so that they were so far from having their sacrifices, seals of
forgivenes of synns unto them, as they were reputed for blood unto them, and
they were by the doom of his Law, to be cut off for offering them, Levit. 17. 4.
Thus having no word of promise, they neither did nor could sacrifice of faith;
but their sacrifices were abominable, as the sacrifices of the heathens: and
they sacrificed to divils, not to God, as Moses and the prophets testify,
Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2. Chron. 11. 15.

Now for Circumcision; first it was not commanded to the Gentiles, neither was
it a seal of the covenant of grace to Noe and his seed; but was first
commanded to Abraham and his seed, and household, Gen 17. and so to Israel, and
such as would be of that Church, and partake of their passover, Levit. 12.
Exodus 12. 44. 48. Wherefore it being not commanded to Noes sonns, such of them
as were scatered far off, and heard not of the precept to Abraham: were
doubtless in the covenant of graceful, if they abode in Noes faith; and were
saved without circumcision as well as we at this day. Who doubts of the
salvation of the Patriarchs Sem and Heber, who both of them lived till after
the ordinance of circumcision: yet is there no record that they were
circumcised. Yea all the Israelites that were born for the space of 40. years
in the wilderness, were uncircumcised till Iosuahs reign, Jos. 5. 2. -- 6. yet
with them in that estate, Moses renewed the covenant, to be the Lords people,
and that he would be their God, as he had sworn to their fathers, Deuteronomy. 29.
10. -- 13. And whereas mine opposite boldly affirms, that all the writers in
the world prove no such matter, viz. touching Gods ordinances given to the
heathens the sonns of Noe, for signs of salvation: it will appear otherweise,
even by the greatest enemies of the heathe^s, the Jews themselves. Who though
they gloried in circumcision, and the Laws given by Moses; yet thus they
write, It is lawful for an heathen to offer burnt offerings unto God in every
place; and he himself may offer in an high place, which he has builded. But
it is not lawful ( for an Jsraelite) to help him, etc. for behold, we are
forbidden to offer without ( the Sanctuary, Levit. 17. And it is lawful to
teach them, and to learn them how they should offer to the name of the blessed
( God.) Maimony in Misn. treat. of Offering sacrifices, chap. 19. s. 16. Thus by
the Hebrews testimony, the Gentiles might lawfully use sacrificing in their
own lands, on their altars, etc. and the Jews might instruct them to do it
aright, though they themselves might not do it with them, being restreyned of
God. And as for the state of grace, and salvation with God, they also say,
Whosoever receives the seven commandments ( given to the sonns of Noe) [of
which I have spoken Annot. o^ Genesis 9.
elsewhere, and whereof circumcision was none;] and does them; he is of the
saints of the nations of the world; and he has a portion in the world to come
[that is, in eternal life] if he receive them and do them, because the holy
blessed ( God) has commanded them, etc. Maimony in Misn. treat. of Kings.
chapt. 8. s. 11. Thus mine opposite needed not to have made it so strange, what
I wrote of the state of the Gentiles, nor have called it an idle flourish; had
he duly weighed their estate, as Gods word and humane writers bear witness of it.

But this indeed is admirable (says he) that he should account the heathens *
Chr. ple^ page 9^.
superstitions to be Gods ordinances: and yet esteem the circumcision and
other ordinances of God had in Israel, to be lying and deceitful signs, etc.
Besides in all his bead-roule of Writers, there is no mention at all of
circumcision, whereabout our question is, etc.

Answ. 1. I called both the one and the other, the ordinances of God, in
respect of their divine institution. The other nations that fell from God: and
the Israelites that fell from God: I count them all abusers of Gods ordinances;
which were not in their use of them, true signs and seals of eternal life
unto them: but false and deceitful. Thus I match them alike, without respect
of persons, as I am taught by the Apostle, Romans 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. The heathens
superstitions (if he mean things of their own devising,) I never esteemed Gods
ordinances at all; no nor Romes superstitions at this day.

2 That circumcision is not in the bead-roule as he calls it: he need not
marvel, seeing it was not commanded the heathens, as before I have showed. It
seems he had a special fancy to circumcision above all other Gods
ordinances: otherwise, why might not he think that it might be profaned as
much as any other. There was no more holiness in it, then in the sacrifices. And
the Apostle says, Jf thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision, Romans 2. 25. what then will it avail, that Israel had
circumcision, when they broke the Law, yea were without the true God, and
without Law, 2. Chron. 15. 3. and sacrificed to Divils, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2. Chron.
11. 15. Finally, here he seeks for circumcision, where it was not to be
found: but within three le^es after in my Animadv. ^g. 75.
book, I instanced some among the nations circumcised, even by his own
confession; and there he has passed it over without answer, as if he had not
seen it. Such entreaty and worse I bear at his hand with patience. Let me here
add the testimony of a learned man. Mr. Calvin (in his Sermon against
idolatry, upon Psalm. 16. 4.) has these words, There are diverse which at this
day use another starting hole: for confessing that it is a detestable thing to
mingle themselves with the idolatries of the Paynims, they will not that this
extend it self to the superstitions of the papacy: as though all the impieties
of the Paynims had not been the corruptions of the true service of God. From
whence I pray you drew the Paynims all their ceremonies, but from the holy
Fathers? The mischief was, that they corrupted that which was well instituted of
God. And yet all the abominations that were in the world, had this goodly cloak
of the name of God, and of Religion: but this made them not therefore
justifiable, neither might the faithful communicate with them.

Of Mr. Iunius judgment for the church of Rome.
IN my brief answer to the things which mine opposite alleged from Mr. Iunius
(whose treatise they have printed the second time:) he Chr. pl^ p. 183. 1
taxes me for omitting many clauses in that work. But I then and still do
hold it enough to take away the mayn grounds; which being done, the other of
lesser moment will be also found insufficient.

I showed Anima^ page 68.
by the scriptures, the Church of Rome now, to be an other, and not that
church which was in Paul's time: therefore no just proportion to be between
them. In sted of disproving that which I showed, he (after his manner) Chr. pl^
page 188.
asks a question, Whether J think these (the Man of syn with his worshipers
come in the place of the ancient true Church) be the Temple of God, the people
of God, under the covenant of God, having the baptism of God, etc. or whether
there be no such there at all, though corrupted and abused?

Answ. I have often told him, and proved by Gods word, that this present church
of Rome, is not Gods true Temple or people, under his covenant, having his
baptism: but a false church arisen since, vainly pretending the church
covenant and baptism of Christ. Seeing Gods word moves them not, let it be
lawful for me to oppose man's authority to man's. D. Whitakers answering
Bellarmine, Contr. 4. An papa Antichr. quast. 5. ^.
says, This church succeeds the Apostles indeed, but as a den of thieves
(does) the house of God, and as an harlot (does) the faithful city. It
reteineth the chests and coffers wherein of old the tresure was (as Chrysostom
elsewhere writes) but has lost the treasure it self. It is no more Bethel
(the house of God) but Bethaven, that is, the house of vanity or lies. Yea Mr.
Iunius himself has thus well written of it, Iun. anno on Rev. 11.
The Church of Christ is said to fight against the Pseudo-christian (or falsely
called christian) church, over the which Antichrist rules. Also, when
Bellarmine cites Tertullian, marveilously praising Rome: Iunius answers,
Animad^ ad Appen^ de sum pon^ c. 6. not 7.
Not Rome, but the Church: and not this Church, but that which then was, nearer
the Apostles times, which cleaved to the truth and simplicity of Christ. The
disputer would deceive, ex elenchi ignoratione. Into the same fall acie does
mine opposite often run, in his dispute against me: and is therefore reproved
by Mr. Iunius himself.

To the objection of Gods calling in the Church of Rome; barely affirmed
without proof: I showed from 2. These. 2. that the man of syn sits there,
calling all to worship him, etc. and from Rev. 18. 4. that God calls out of
her, such as shall be saved And from Rev. 9. that their Bishops (the ordinary
means of calling) are fallen from heaven, and have the key of the bottomless
pit, etc. which Mr. Iunius himself has applied to the popish hierarchy. Mine
opposite replieth, Chr. plea page 188.
that I had not what to answer, but boldly deny that God is there calling as in
his Church, etc. In sted of disproving, he falls to his wonted questioning:
how then there can be salvation to any in that church, etc. Answ. It is a
wearines to answer his often demands. Salvation by sundry means comes to Gods
elect in all false churches, and in the world. How came Rahab to faith among
the Canaanites? Heb. 11. 31. Iam. 2. 25. and other Gods chosen among the
heathens. It is one thing for God to call by extraordinary means; another
thing for him to call as in his church, by his ordinary ministry, which is
the thing that I deny in Rome, and they prove it not there.

The distinction between the papacy and the church of Rome; that is, the
pastors and the flock of that church; is of no weight to prove the difference
pretended: unless they were of diverse faiths and religions. But when the
priests teach lies, idolatries and heresies; and the people believe, worship
and obey them, (as they do in Rome,) they both perish together, as the
scriptures witness 2 Thessalonians. 2. Rev. 14. 9. 10. 11.

Touching the order or rank of Apostates (to omit his trifling about his own
translation of the word) he Chr. plea page 190.
says Mr. Junius speaks this not of the whole Church, but only of the papal
hierarchy. Be it so: but what proof is brought for that he says. It is known
to all that have understanding of their estate, that the church and people of
Rome are apostate from the faith and service of Christ, as are their priests
and hierarchy. What shall I need to bring proofs? Mr. Johnson himself here
confesses, and Chr. plea page 120.
prays all to take knowledge of it, that the Church of Rome, is fallen into
most sinful and deep defection and Apostasy; and so is a notorious harlot and
idolatress. If Mr. Iunius say otherweise, and will have the Apostasy to be in
the Hierarchy only, not in the church: let them first agree between
themselves, before they trouble others with their contrary pleas. Or let a
third be umpier beeween them: Mr. Cartwright, who (in his second Reply to D.
Whitgift, page 245.) says; J would gladly learn where the Lord has willed us
so to cast away the use of our judgment, that when men make open profession,
that they are members of the Pope, which is Antichrist; yet we must account of
them as of members of Christ. Or how this is to judge wisely, Ioh. 7. 14.

Whereas Mr. Iunius made the papacy, or papal hierarchy to be an accident
growing to the Church, apoyson in the church, a pestilence, a dropsy, a
gangrene in the body. I showed these inconveniences upon their own grant, If
the hierarchy be no part of the body, but an accident, a poison, a gangrene,
etc. what shall we think of all the actions of that hierarchy, their ministration
of sacraments, making of ministers, and whole church administration? They
cannot possibly be the actions of the body, of the church, neither of Christ,
etc. And now what is become of their true baptism, and ordination of
ministers? And how does God call in that Church, as before they reasoned? etc.
Here mine opposite charge me Chr. plea page 191.
with trifling and cavilling, etc. as if similitudes should hold in all things.

Answ. A similitude must hold in some things, and in that for which it is
alleged; else it is vain: to prove the hierarchy none of the Church, this
instance is brought, the pestilence, dropsy, gangrene, is none of the body,
but an accident. To disprove this, I show that such accidents can do no
natural functions of the body: but the hierarchy do the natural functions of
the body of the church of Rome, in teaching, ministering the sacraments, etc.
therefore they are not accidents, but true members, yea the chief of that
Church.

Object. The Apostate Jews are compared to brass and iron, Jer. 6. 28. Ezekiel.
22. 18. Shall we now conclude against Judah, to make a nullity of all the
actions, ministration, and Churches estate?

Answ. It is a living body that does actions, and not metal: if a similie be
given of a living body, and of a gangrene or scab that consumes the life of
that body; all in reason will see, that the body does actions, the scab or
gangrene does none. But in a similitude from metal, there is no reason to
speak of actions. But thus, the whole company is compared to a lump of metal:
the godly are as pure silver, Psalm. 66. 10. the wicked are as dross. Psalm.
119. 119. the fire of Gods word, and tribulation, tries them, 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
The Finer reserveth the pure metal, but consumes or casts away the dross:
thus God threatens to do with the Jews, Ezekiel. 22. 18. -- 22. Here to bring
in actions of a living body, is quite from the purpose; but in the other
similie not. Here I would say, of dross can be no vessel for the Finer: or,
of brass, iron, and reprobate silver, the Lord makes no choice for vessels in
his sanctuary. Of like sort are his other wrested similitudes of trees, corn,
seed, etc. all which must be fitted to their proper natures.

But what answer gives he to the point it self? First, he breaks out into
his charitable terms, saying, Could any Anabaptist write more Anabaptistically
then thus, etc. And after sundry reproaches, he replieth in Mr. Iunius name, and
to my question, Can a scab or gangrene perform any action of a natural body or
member? he gives no answer, but asks again, Can a body that has a scab or
gangrene, perform no actions of a natural body? I answer; yes, it can. And
what now will it help his cause? For though the body can do the natural
actions of it: yet it is not possible for the scab or gangrene to do them.
Either therefore the Pope and his hierarchy must be other then accidents,
gangrenes, poison, dropsy, etc. in the church of Rome (as in deed they are the
chief members of that Whore) or else they can perform no ecclesiastical
action. As for his usual refuge (when all other fail) the baptism had in
Rome, we shall speak of it in due place. Only let it here be observed, that
this baptism is there administered by such as are not of the body or Church,
(by their own grant,) but by ulcers, gangrenes, etc. And Mr. Iunius himself
answering Bellarmine, so urges it; saying of the Man of Syn (the popish
Hierarchy) Animadv. ^n Bellar. de Antichr. l. 3. ^. 13. not. 3.
he is not properly of the Temple, for the ulcer (says he) is not of the body,
though it be in the body. So I strain not the similitude beyond the due
proportion, if Mr. Iunius his own reasoning be good.

Object. Of Himenaeus and Philetus it is said, their word did eat as a
gangrene, 2. Tim. 2. 17. 18. would he then conclude, that the baptism
ministered by them was not true baptism? etc.

Answ. First, it is not said of the men, but of their doctrine, that their word
fretted as a gangrene; but Mr. Iunius makes the very men, ulcers and
gangrenes, in the body, but not of it. If the officers or members of a church
teach heresy, that doctrine is as a gangrene; but the persons teaching them
are truly officers or members of that church, though sinful. But in Rome, the
officers are ulcers, not of the body, in his account: so his example is not
fit. Secondly, if they were by the Apostle delivered to Satan, as is probable
by 1 Timothy 1. 20. then they and their folowers were no true Christian church,
but a synagogue of Satan, to be reckned among the Antichrists, 1 John 2. 18.
19. and so could not administer true Christian baptism, to their disciples.

Obj. Where he again denies any calling to be in the church of Rome, and
asks, How God does call in that church, let him ask it of such of his
followers, as have heretofore been of the Priests and members of that church
etc.

Answ. He again wrongeth me (as too often,) saying that I deny any calling to
be in that church: it never entered into my heart. I hold there is some calling
in the churches of Turks and Jews, much more, in false Christian churches. I
denied that God is there calling as in his church, which they plead for: that
is, God has not there his ordinary true ministers, but Antichrists hierarchy
does call the people from God. How be it, by some whom God raises up of
ministers or people, his witnesses whom that church murdereth, Rev. 11. 3. 7.
and by reading the scriptures and other writings, God calls his people out of
that Babylon. Witness the late Archbishop Marcus Antonius de Dominis, who In
Consil. sue Profect.
testifies, that without persuasion counsel or advise of any man of what sort
so ever; he was, by reading the scriptures and Fathers, drawn to mislike and
forsake that Roman church. And thus among Turks, Jews, heathens, I doubt not
but God calls some from them by the light of his word and spirit. Yea not
only in the church of Rome, but by it and the ministry of it, God calls
his elect: for as the Apostles doctrine in the true church, was to the
reprobates the savor 2 Cor. 2. 1^.
of death unto death, which yet is no condemnation of the true church or
ministry thereof: so some grounds of Christianity, and doctrines in the
false church, (by the false ministry, erected to destroy men's souls with
heresies and idolatry;) God, of his wisdom and goodness, causes them to turn
unto the conversion and salvation of his chosen; which yet is no justification
either of that church or ministry. Let this answer once suffice, to all his
repetitions. And to Mr. Iunius (on whom he so relyeth) I could oppose Mr.
Calvin (man for man) who says, We see the horrible confusion that is in
Popery: but yet there is not any doctrine to pluck men back to God: nay rather
the doctrine which is there, does draw them quite and clean from him. And we
see that the Divil has gotten such sooting there, that all is full of
trumperie and illusions, and the loving God is quite forsaken. Sermon 31. on
Deuteronomy 5. 7.

Obj. Chr. plea p. 195.
What difference Mr. Junius observed between the ministry simply considered,
and the hierarchy grown in that church upon it, himself could best have
showed. This here is evident, that in one respect he acknowledges the
hierarchy to be an order or estate of apostasy in the church, an accident
etc. in an other respect, he esteems the ministry of Gods holy things to be
there, though exceedingly corrupted.

Ans. By such differences and distinctions mine opposite would carry us from the
truth, that I say not from common reason. For he grants the church it self,
the people, to be exceedingly corrupted, with most sinful and deep defection
and apostasy* yet in another respect to be the temple, the people of God. Now
we have the like for the Bishops and Priests, in one respect an order of
apostasy, in an other, Gods ministry. Wherefore then have we been led about
with distinctions, of the ministry or hierarchy, from the church, the one to
be the Man of syn, the son of perdition, the other to be the Temple of God? The
plain way should have been thus, The Ministers and people of Rome, are in one
respect an apostatical church, in an other a faithful church; in one respect
the synagogue of Satan; in an other, the Temple of God. But either my judgment
fails me, or Mr. Iunius drives at an other matter; let men of understanding
mind his writing.

Further I answer, by like distinction, we are to put difference between the
Angels that sinned, or sinful men, simply considered as Gods creatures, and
the poison of syn which as an accident is grown upon them: and this is true.
But shall that their being Gods creatures, free them from damnation which that
poison, that accident syn has brought upon them? No man of knowledge will so
say, Even so, the Man of syn, the Pope, hierarchy and people of the church of
Rome, which are all in apostasy from the faith of Christ, and service of God;
can not in that estate be judged heirs of salvation, (except God turn them
again to Christ,) for the scripture has given sentence of their damnation, 2
These. 2. 3. 10. 11. 12.

Against their bare affirmations to prove Rome on Gods behalf altogether a
church, a company called of God with his calling by the spirit, and the holy
Scripture, etc. And, that God calls her with his calling, by his spirit and
word, etc. I objected the Apostles testimony, God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. and this is verified
by the manifold heresies, idolatries, wherewith the whole body of that Church
is poisoned, And strong is the Lord God which will condemn her, Rev. 18. 8. and
with the spirit of his mouth he will consume that lawless one, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

Mine opposite replieth, Chr. plea page 195.
Might he not also thus conclude against Judah in Apostasy, that God did not
call that Church, nor any in it, or by any of them in that estate, alleging
Ier. 5. 30. 31. and 6. 28. 29. 30. Ezekiel. 13. and 14. chapter And again, As if
there were no difference to be put between the Temple of God, and that
lawless one, 2. These. 2. 4. 8. nor between the people of God, and Babylon,
Rev. 18. 4. 8. etc.

Answ. I deny not all calling of God in her, as he accuses me; to it I have
before answered. His comparison I deny. In Judah were the Lords prophets and
priests: in Rome, none but the hierarchy, which they say is the Man of syn, no
members but ulcers in the body. Let them show me a Jeremy or Zephanie now in
Rome, or a lawful ministry of God therein; as was in Judah, till the
captivity, reckned by the holy Ghost, 1. Chron. 6. 3. -- 15. Let them show me a
company that abstaineth from, and cries out against their abominations in
Rome, as was in Judah and Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. or a basket of good figgs,
which God acknowledged for his people, Ier. 24. 2. 5. 6. Finally, they still
plead for Rome, by the name of Jerusalem; when the holy Ghost calls it
Babylon; Rev. 17. and 18. chap. Such calling as was out of Babylon, I grant
unto them. As for the Temple of God, I have before answered their plea from the
same.

They pleaded the public record of holy marriage, the scripture, and the
ministry, etc. I answered, the scripture shows no such marriage, but does
defy her as an harlot, Rev. 17. 1. Where is the record that Christ was ever
married to the Beast that came up from the bottomless pit, Rev. 17. 8. If her
having the book of holy scripture in an unknown tongue, wickedly abused to
maintain her whoredoms and abominations, and subjected to the interpretation
of her So called, Extrav. in Joan. 22. c. cum inter in glossa.
Lord God the Pope, be a record of that holy marriage: the Jews, which have
Moses and the Prophets read and expounded in their mother tongue, have better
records, etc.

Mine opposite says, The Scripture shows record of the marriage of that
church, Romans 1. 7. 8. and 7. 4. and 16. 19.

Answ. It is denied: for this is not that church, but an other harlot arisen
since, falsely boasting to be the same. 2. That church consisted of officers and
people, all jointly married to Christ, Romans 12. if this record will serve now
for the people of Rome, it will serve also for the Bishop and ministry of
Rome, (the hierarchy) which they confess to be the Man of syn, 2. These. 2.
the great Antichrist* so then the Scripture shows belike, that Christ and
Antichrist have been married together. And seeing the marriage of Christ with his
Church, is by faith, Hos. 2. ^0* and the Pope has still the same faith that
the people has, his marriage stands as well as theirs. 3. The Scripture
shows like marriage with the churches of Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, and
many other; which have revolted to Mahomet, as Rome has to the Man of syn: so
then we must account those Churches still married unto Christ, by the same
record. But they will deny those churches to continue the marriage; so do I
this. Besides, if he had considered the scripture, Rev. 19 7. 8. he might have
seen a new marriage between Christ and his Church: which needed not have been,
if the former marriage had continued undissolved, as he supposes.

Object. Neither is it any thing that he says, God does defy her as an
harlot, Rev. 17. 1. For (besides that he puts no difference between Babylon
and the Church or Temple of God) what will he say to Jsrael, yea to Judah also
and Jerusalem: thinks he not that God defied them also as harlots? Ier. 3. 8.
11. with Esai. 1. 21. etc. yet the scripture shows record of show marriage with
God, Exodus 19. 4. 5. 6.. and Ezekiel. 16. 8. etc.

Answ. What difference he would make between the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17.
and the Church of Rome whom himself proclaims to be Chr. plea page 120.
a notorious harlot and idolatress, I cannot comprehend. Some that are dazeled,
may think one thing to be two or three: I find in Rev. 17. but one notorious
harlot Babylon; if they grant that she was never married to Christ, it is all
that I desire. That Israel (the twelve tribes) was married to Christ, and after
ten of them became an harlot, and Ier. 3. 8.
was divorced, I grant: and so her adulterous sister Judah* afterward. The same
I acknowledge for the churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. But since they
were divorced from Christ, and married to Mahomet, and Antichrist; there
remains no more record of their former marriage; ill they return again to the
Lord, out of Babylon unto Jerusalem the holy city, which is prepared as a
Bride, adorned for her husband, Rev. 21. 2.

Of my next words, mine opposite makes a wonderment. But it exceeds all
(says Chr. plea page 196
he) that he blusheth not to ask, where is the record that Christ was ever
married to the beast that came up from the bottomless pit? Rev. 17. 8. To the
beast! That Christ was ever married to the Beast! Did Mr. Junius ever say so? Or
thinks he that ever it entered into his thought? Did not Mr. Junius speak
expressly of the Church? Will this man never learn to put difference between the
Beast and the Church? between the Man of syn and the Temple of God? etc.

Answ. It seems that his wonder made him to forget himself. Said he not even
now, it was evident that Mr. Iunius in one respect acknowledged the Hierarchy
to be an order or estate of apostasy in the Church; and in another respect he
esteemed the ministry of Gods holy things to be there? So then, though the
Hierarchy only be the Beast (as mine opposite thinks) and though in respect
of the Apostasy it is not married to Christ, yet in respect as it is Gods
ministry, though corrupted, it is married to Christ. But behold how their
doctrines are admirable to themselves. The ministers of the Church of Rome, are
of the same religion, faith and holiness with the people: the people he will
have to be still married to Christ; but the ministers in no weise; he cannot
endure to hear of it; especially when it comes under the scripture names of
the Man of syn, or the Beast. And where he asks if I will never learn to put
difference between the Beast and the Church, etc. I do put difference, though
not so great as he would have me: for the Beast, and the whore that rides him,
Rev. 17. though they differ, yet are they so nearly conjoined, that if one be
married to Christ, the other is also. But why does he not teach from the
scriptures what the Beast signifies? I have learned from the Prophet Daniel,
that a Beast, means a Kingdom, Dan. 7. 23. and a kingdom by light of reason
consists of King and subjects, of governors and people; and Mr. Iunius
himself tells us so, saying, Animadv in Bellar. d^ eccles militante, l. 3 c.
13. not 7.
A kingdom is a multitude of men gathered under one King. As the Christian
kingdom therefore consists of Christ, his ministers, and people: so does the
Antichristian, of Antichrist, his ministers and people. This Beast has seven
heads and ten horns, Rev. 17. 3. the ten horns are said to be ten Kings, v.
^2. (as in Dan. 7. 24. the ten horns out of that kingdom, are ten kings:)
these kings are none of the hierarchy: wherefore the whole body of this beast
contains more then the Pope and his hierarchy. The Lamb against whom the
Beast with his horns fights, Rev. 17. 14. Mr. Iunius Annot. on Rev. 17. 14.
expounds to be Christ and his Church: why may not we by like reason expound
the Beast to be Antichrist and his Church? Finally, the Beast (says In.
annot. on Rev. 11. 7 and 17. ^.
Mr. Iunius * himself) is the Roman Empire, made long ago of civil*
Ecclesiastical, the chief head whereof he makes the Pope to be^* And the
Beast of Rome (says Annot. on Rev. 13. 12.
he) of a civil Empire, is made an ecclesiastical Hierarchy. The Whore he
expounds In Annot. ^n Rev. 17. 4*
to be the spiritual Babylon, which is Rome: so then, by mine opposites plea,
neither did Mr. Iunius say, neither ever entered into his thought, that the
ecclesiastical Roman Empire since the Pope was head of it, or the hierarchy,
was ever married unto Christ. As for the Whore, the Church which rides this
Beast, he calls it the ^n Annot. ^n Rev. 11. 1
False-Christian Church over which Antichrist rules, and Antichrists Church:
(which title mine opposite will not bear at my hand:) and that Antichristian
Church which the Angel bids cast out, and measure it not, in Rev. 11. 12.
Mr. Iunius explaineth thus, Annot. i-^idem.
As if he should say, it belongs nothing to thee to judge those which are
without, 1. Cor. 5. 12. which be innumerable; look unto those of the household
only, or unto the house of the living God. Notwithstanding all this, Mr.
Johnson would needs measure it for the true Church, House, and Temple of God:
so well do Mr. Iunius and he accord together.

To a testimony which I alleged out of D. Fulk, concerning the miserable
blindness of people in Popery, (of which mine opposite says, he might have
been better advised,) he to requi^e me, as he thinks, Chr. plea ^ag. 197.
alleges a speech of Mr. Broughtons, who says, Millions of millions of Romes
clients are saved: Brought. on Rev. 13. 18. p. 203.

Answ. Would he be content that Mr. Broughton should decide our controversy
touching the Church of Rome? Thus then says that author in the same book;
Brough. on Rev. 8. p. 79.
The Popes clients are the tail of the great Dragon. Ibid. p. 96. 97.
Thence (from Rome) was the Rebellion to arise, Man of syn, Apollyon, etc. to
set up, or depose states; and to have a people of his own frame; and to burn
the true Temple of God. page 159.
The Popes power, drives the Church, not to be seen for certain hundreds of
years. ( The Pope page 240.
) wresteth all that is spoken of the true Church, into protection for his
synagogue of Satan. page 254.
Rome passes all the enemies of the Church, in cruelty and idolatry. Pharaoh
and Nebuchadnezar were never so hardened. The profane Caesar's did not so
strictly hinder all use of Religion. Rome page 229.
has far passed the old Babel in idolatry. The Pope page 258.
follows al heathen superstition, in name, staff, apparel of Caesar's, and
Temples; setting but a face of Christianity upon them. page 247.
All their doctrine is such, that their Temples, Mass, and daily profession in all things, is from the unclean spirit: page 308.
and their whole policy is a lie. p. 3^. arg. on c. 11.
The Beast which is ascended out of Abyssos, that is, al his eorporations,
millions of millions, alpapists, go from their Abyssos of black ignorance,
unto Abyssos Luke 8. whither the Divils shall come in their time to be tormented
for ever and ever. These and sundry the like co^mendations does the author
alleged give of the church of Rome, which mine opposite pleads for: and
taking hold of a phrase, wresteth it for his purpose, from the man's meaning;
who seems not to speak of the popish church, but of the ancient Christian;
for these are Page 203*
there Mr. Broughtons words. And for Julius the captain, who was so careful
for S. Paul, that for his sake the li^e of the prisoners* were spared, Act. 27.
God would not record this, but to save millions of millions of Romes clients
for S. Paul: but for the unthankeful to S. Paul, and forgers that Peter was at
Rome, who never came near it; he still reserved Pilats holiness, that Popes
selfe-murder should be the reward. Was not here a testimony well alleged? So
in other places of his book, he quoteth Mr. Brightman, and others; whose
writings directly cross that which he pleads for in many things; as they that
read the authors may see; and anon I will set down their sayings. No marvel
then if he wrest my words; as where next he says, Chr. plea page 197.
that that which the Apostle speaks of the Man of sin, and of them that
perish, because they receive not the love of the truth, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. J
apply (for exclusion from pardon and certain condemnation) to the whole Church
of Rome, and so to all the members thereof, and that for all ages that either
have been, are, or shall be, ever since the Man of syn was seated there.

Answ. I said no more but thus. God (if it were granted that he is the husband
of this whore) has promised her no pardon, but delivered her to Satan, to be
seduced, deluded, damned, 2. These. 2. 9. 11. 12. I speak not here of those in
Rome that have withstood her whoordoms, which have been many; nor of those, to
whom at last God has given repentance unto life, which I hope are more; nor of
other his elect: but of the whore in general, whose damnation is showed in
Rev. 17. and 18. yea The Apostle speaks more particularly, 2. These. 2* 12.
That they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Behold how he says, they all: which some evil minded man
might urge against the Apostle, as mine opposite does against me. But wise men
know that the promises of life to the true Church pertain not to the reprobates
that are in it: so the threatenings of death to the false Church, take not hold
on Gods elect which are therein.

Object. Jf this harlot the Church of Rome, was never Christ's spouse, otherwise
then all the world was by our first parents Adam and Noe: how then has she
broken the covenant of wedlock if she never were in it? how can she be called a
whore in respect of Christ, any more then the heathens, that never knew God in
Christ? How can she be said to be in Apostasy? etc.

Answ. Of the state of the Gentiles I have spoken before; and proved them to
have been all in the covenant of grace in Christ: from Genesis 9. 9. etc. But they
generally fell from God to idolatry, (which is whoredom) and apostasy: and
were in time rejected of God: who renewed his covenant with one small nation of
the Jews, and yet saved his elect among the Gentiles also. So the Christian
Churches planted by the Apostles, soon fell from God, and in time were rejected
of God; some given over to Mohometisme, some to popery. Yet God has preserved
his little Church, fled into the wilderness, Rev. 12. and saved his elect also
in false Churches. I compare these not with the Gentiles at this day, but with
the Gentiles before Christ's coming, whiles sacrificing was lawful; as I am
taught of God, Rev. 11. and 17. and 18. with the old Babylonians and
Egyptians. In those times Tyrus was an harlot, Esa. 23. 16. Niniveh was an
harlot, Nahum. 3. 4. and so other nations then by like equity were harlots:
and Rome likewise at this day. Who knows not, that a woman which is divorced
from her husband, (as Israel was Ier. 3.
from God,) for whordome, and follows that trade still; may still be called a
harlot? I deny not, but in a large kind of speech, Rome at this day, may be
said to have been once married to Christ, in respect of the Christian church
that once was there: but so all the Gentiles were in respect of the covenant
with Noe. Neither doubt I to say, that the Jews even now do go a whoring from
their God; for Deuteronomy. 32.
Moses and the prophets so speak of them, yet actually there is now no
covenant between God and them. The outcries which he makes unto the
Anabaptists to hearken, and to the Reformed Churches to hang down their heads,
etc. I omit, as the gall of bitterness which ran too fast out of his pen.

To prove them the same Church which was in Paul's time, he Chr. plea ^^g. 198.
cites Moses prophesies of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. which were the same people and
their seed: whereas he should rather have looked on, 2. King. 17. 24. -- 34. and
compared these with the men of Babylon, Cuthah, etc. that came and possessed
the Lords land, and received some part of Isreal's religion with their own old
idolatry: for so I Anima^ p. 102. 103
showed the present estate of this Popish church. And the example of other
churches that were in Corinth, Ephesus etc; looked upon at this day, will
confirm it.

About my answer for the godly fathers of the Jews, and wicked fathers of
these Antichristians, which the holy Ghost makes to be Gentiles, Sodomites
Egyptians etc. Rev. 11. 2. 8. 18. he says Chr. plea page 199.
If J mean this of the city of Rome, J speak not to the point: if of the
church of Rome; then he objecteth Ezekiel. 16. 3. thy father was an Amorite etc.

Answ. His distinction between the city and church of Rome, serves him in no
sted. It was true in Paul's time, when the city was heathen, and a Christian
church in it. But now the city is Christian Rome, the Empire is an
ecclesiastical empire, as I showed before from Mr. Iunius own grant.

The Amorites were not those fathers for whose sake the Jews are loved: but
Abraham Isaak and lakob, out of whose loins the Jews naturally came. But this
church of Rome now, is not the child of that primitive church, either in nature
or in grace. In place she succedeth them, and so the Mahometists in place
succeed other Christian churches planted by th Apostles. And in pretense she is
the same Christian church; but as Satan in pretense is an Angel of light.

But the strangers (says he) that came to Jsrael, in times of sincerity or of
apostasy, were of the church of Jsrael as well as the Jews, though not of the
same natural posterity. 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. and 30. 25. 5. 6. 7. Lev. 16. 29. Number.
9. 14.

Answ. But the strangers that wasted Israel, and dwelt by force in their land,
though they were taught how they should fear the Lord, by a Priest, yet were
not that church, of whom Moses wrote: 2 King. 17. 24. 27. 28. So the Goths,
Vandals, Saracens, etc which overcame Italy Spain etc and dwelt there, though
the priest of Rome taught them his religion, are not the ancient church, of
whom Paul wrote. Besides, he has streyned things too far: for diverse
Christians are at this day apostate and become Jews: can we say of them, as
Paul does of the natural Jews, As touching the election, they are beloved for
the Fathers, Romans 11. 28. I understand that speech, of the Jewish nation in
general, not of particulars which perish through unbeleef; as also of the
natural Jews, (who refused the gospel for the time, and still do;) and not to
concern their proselytes, which they beget to their apostasy. For there is a
special regard to the Jews, because they were natural branches, though now
broken off; as The Apostle shows Romans 11. 21 24.

Obj. The many changes of the Roman state, and troubles by the Goths,
Uandals, etc: these specially concern the Roman state touching the city and
Empire etc: whereas our question is only of the church of Rome.

Answ. As the state of the Empire is changed, yet in some respect is the same,
for the Beast was, and is not, and yet is, Rev. 17. 18. so is the church, and
ministry thereof; it was, and is not, and yet is. A man may speak to the
Bishop of Rome now, as Ezekiel did to the heathen king of Tire, Thou have been
in Eden the garden of God, etc. Ezekiel. 28. 13. to weet in his predecessor Huram,
which had been a proselyte in the church of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 2. as the Hebrews
R. D. Kimchi and Sol. Iarchi upon Ezekiel. 28. and some Christian writers do
expound it. So I may say to the Pope, Thou have been a Christian Bishop, a
starr in Christ's right hand; because such was the Bishop of Rome in Paul's
time. But mine opposite himself holds the Pope and his hierarchy now to be
the Man of syn, the son of perdition, and thought it most strange in me, that I
should ask when ever Christ was married to that Beast. Now it is as strange,
that he pleads for the whore of Babylon, the Antichristian church. He would
exclude the hierarchy or ministry, because of their apostasy; I also for
the same do exclude the church; for the priests and people of Rome are of one
faith and religion; if the one be cut off from Christ, so is the other. It can
not be denied but they all have the mark of the Beast upon them; for to take
Mr. Iunius own exposition, The mark of the beast (says Annot. on Rev. 13. 16.
he) is their Chrisme, by which in their sacrament of Confirmation, they ^oke
servile unto themselves, the persons and doings of men etc. and as for the
sign left by Christ, ( of which Chap. 7. 3.) and the holy sacrament of
Baptism, they make void etc.

Obj. He cannot show that ever the church of Rome, ceased to be, since it was
first planted, but it has continued still either in sincerity or apostasy
even to this day. Nor can he show that the Lord has yet put them out of his
covenant, or given thm a bill of divorse, or that they have lest off to baptize
in his name.

Answ. Neither can he show that the Ministry ever ceased in that church, but
has still continued either in synceritie or apostasy: or that the Lord put the
ministers out of his covenant, or that they have left off to baptize in Christ's
name. Yet he now excludes the ministers from being Christ's, he makes them
Antichrist, the Beast, the Man of sin, the son of perdition, etc. and is
offended that I should speak of their marriage with Christ. And Mr. Iunius
makes them accidents, ulcers, and no members of the body; as we have seen. 2.
Neither can he show that the churches of the Gentiles ceased to be after their
first planting, Genesis 9. but continued still either in sincerity or apostasy,
even till the Apostles time; and sacrificed still unto God, and in his name.
Let him show when old Babylon was divorced from God: and it will as soon appear
that this new Babylon is divorced also.

Object. The Papists plead that Rome stands not where it did on the seven
hills: and the Pope sits on the other side the river, on the hill Uatic^ne, etc.
Jn like sort is the answer for the church of Rome, and the changes in religion
and state, etc.

Answ. Is this a fit comparison, the change of place, and the change of
religion? If it be, then as a man going from England to India, is the same man
still: so if he go from the religion in England, to the religion of the
Indians, which is Paganism, he is of the same religion that he was still. Or,
to keep nearer the point in hand, the Bishop of Rome at this day,
notwithstanding al changes of his faith and state since the Apostles time, is a
true Christian Bishop still: then he is not Antichrist, the Man of syn spoken
of in 2 Thessalonians. 2. as mine opposite says he is.

Object. Many of those people that made the invasions, became Christians
themselves, and so the Church was increased. Not to speak how the very
catalogue of the Bishops of the Church of Rome gives evidence against him. Or
will he say, that though there were Bishops of that Church, yet there was not a
church whereof they were Bishops?

Answ. So, many of the Babylonians, Cuthims, etc. that invaded Israel, were
taught the manner of the God of Israel, and feared the Lord, and had Priests of
Israel, which sacrificed for them, 2, King. 17. ^4. 25. 27. 32. 33. But what
says the Scripture? Every one that is joined (to Babylon) shall fall by the
sword: their children also shall be dashed to pieces, etc. Esa. 13. 15. 16. And
God will cut off from Babylon, name and remnant, son and nephew, Esa. 14. 22.
The catalogue of Bishops (if it will do him any pleasure) serves for the
Pope, the Man of syn, the great Antichrist, to prove him a true Christian
Bishop, successor of Peter, (whom they falsely put the first in their
catalogue;) Now he will not have the Hierarchy to be the church, no^ of the
Church, but accidents, ulcers, gangrenes, and I know not how vile: but the
people the church, that turned from paganism to the Pope, or fell with him
from Christianity to popery, they are the Temple of God, the Church of Christ,
in the covenant of grace. How great partiality is this in men, to magnify the
people for their faith and religion, and to despise the Bishops and ministers,
that are the chief teachers and maintainers of the same faith and religion,
making them accidents, hang-bies, scabs, ulcers, gangrenes, and all that bad
is. So his questions of the time when the Church ceased, are answered with the
like, when the ministry ceased? Let the year be named when the true Christian
ministry was abolished out of the church of Rome, and Antichrist the Man of
syn come in the place: and I will answer, in the same year, the people that
were fallen with him to the same idolatries, heresies, and to worship him as
God in the Temple of God; ceased to be the true Christian Church, and became a
synagogue of Antichrist.

Object. His esteeming of the state of the church of Rome in apostasy* to be
but as the state of the Is^^^elites, Edomites, and as Adonisedek with his
Amorites and Jebusites in Jerusalem, is disproved and contradicted by himself,
when he makes them like Jsrael and Judah in their apostasy, Animadv. p. 84.

Answ. It is not contradicted by my self, neither can it be disproved by any.
For my self, my words (in the place which he quoteth) are these. She (the
Church of Rome) fell into apostasy soon after Paul's time, for then the These.
2. 7*
mystery of iniquity did work, and Ioh. 2. 18*
many Antichrists were gone out whiles the Apostles lived. For which their
apostasy (like Jsraels) when they would not repent (as Christ Rev. 2. ^.
threatened some that were new fallen into such sins) the candlestick (the
Church) was removed; the Church of Rome, as Paul Romans 11. 21. 22.
forewarned, for unbelief was cut off among others; and for a punishment of
their apostasy, God* delivered the East Churches into the hands of Mahomet,
and the West Churches into the hands of that false horned Beast, Antichrist:
even as Israel and Judah of old for their like syns, were delivered into the
hands of the Assyrians and Babylonians.

By which I show, that as the Christians that fell to Mahometisme, ceased to be
Gods true Churches: so they likewise that fell to Antichristianisme. He could
not deny the first, nor disprove the latter: for Paul says of the
Antichristians, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie; that they all might be damned, etc. ^. Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12. For the
Ismaelites and Edomites, they were Abraham's natural seed: so can no man prove
the Church of Rome at this day, or any one in it, to be the natural seed of
the Christians of Rome in Paul's time. The Ismaelites and Edomites were fallen
from Abraham's faith: the Church of Rome at this day is much more fallen from
the Apostles faith taught to the church of Rome by him. Whosoever will bring
them both to the trial, it will soon appear; but this trial mine opposite
every where shunneth. Melchisedek was king of Jerusalem in Abraham's time, Genesis
14. and then none doubts* but there was a true church. Adonisedek was king of
Jerusalem in Iosuahs time, Ios. 10. both kings, both of the same city; by
name, the one King of justice, the other Lord of justice, as pretending to be
the successor of Melchisedek; and not more departed from his faith, then the
Pope is from Paul's.

Obj. Mr. Junius knew that there dwell Jews in Rome, who are not of the Church;
and that the natural posterity of the Saints, may become Jews, Turks, Pagans;
and says, the church may at length cease to be a church, when God cease to
call it back, and takes away the evidence of their holy marriage, that is, the
holy Scripture out of the hand of the adulteress.

Answ. So Mr. Iunius knew that there dwelt Gentiles in Israel, who were not of
the Church, Deuteronomy. 14. 2^. But it is well, that neither dwelling in the place,
nor being of the natural posterity, is any sure proof that a people
continues a church. We must then have some other proof, namely continuance in
the faith of Christ; which the church of Rome does not, but is revolted to
Antichrist and his infidelity. Where he makes Gods ceasing to call it back a
sign of the churches ceasing: first, it is barely said, without proof.
Secondly, it is obscure what calling back he means. For take the thousand
year after Christ, and see what calling back had Rome. Was it by her own
ministry or hierarchy? They were the Man of syn, the ulcers of the church,
they called her further from God, but not back from syn. Extraordinary prophets
at that time, I think there will scarce be found any: but grant that there were;
does not God so call back the Jews and Turks at this day? Do not some turn to
Christianity, and persuade others to turn? Do not some suffer death among the
Turks, for the truth? Do not some write books now to the Jews in their own
tongue, to call them back unto God? yet are not the Jews therefore the church.
God called back the Gentiles from their apostasy* by the Apostles preaching,
Mark. 16. 15. and before, he sent Jonah to the Ninivites, yea Judah and Israel
he scattered among the heathens, who called them back from idolatry, as Daniel
did Dan* 4. 27. ^* 5. 18. -- 4.
Nebuchadnezar, and Belshazzar. And the Gentiles seated near Canaan, had
always as much means to be called to the Lords Deuteronomy. 33. ^.
mountain, by the Israelites trading with them, as the church of Rome has at
this day. Besides the prophets that God raised up among the very Gentiles to
call them from Idols unto God: as Sibylla, whose prophesies were famous among
the heathen Greeks and Romans. But for taking the Scriptures out of the
adulteresses hand: if ever church had it, Rome has had it. For the Scriptures
were in a manner buried, kept in the closets of the hierarchy, the people might
not have them in their mother tongue, nor read them, on pain of death. Were the
Scriptures ever so taken out of the Jews hand? Nay they all have them, read
and study them more then many Christians. And now that Bibles are printed, and
so common: how is it possible the Scriptures should be taken out of any
heretics hands, otherwise then they have been from Rome? When God gave Israel
Ier. 3.
the bill of divorce, did he take the Scriptures out of her hand? If not, (as
in deed he did not) then is not this a true rule, that an adulterous church is
never divorced, nor cease to be Christ's church, till the Scriptures be taken
out of her hands. Mr. Iunius elsewhere has written better, when speaking of
some apostate churches of Christians, as Marcionists, Ualentinians, and others,
of whom Hierom says, They were not the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of
Antichrist: he readily Animadv. Bellarm.
grants it, because they denied the fundamental Articles of the doctrine of
faith. The like he grants to Irenaeus assertion, because (says Eccles. ^lit.
l. 3. c. 4* ^^ 9. Jbid. c. 5. ^^ 10.
he) he spoke of heretics and schismatikes which retained not the truth in the
foundation thereof. Now let us compare this with the former. Did God cease to
call back those heretics and schismatikes? Were there not many learned Doctors
that disputed and wrote against them: by whose means God still called them to
repentance? Or did God take the Scriptures out of those heretics hands: when
they from them and by them pleaded for their heresies? Thus the rule which Mr.
Iunius has given us for the church of Rome, agrees not with himself. And if
those heretical churches were not Christian, but Antichristian synagogues: then
is the church of Rome much more, which worshipeth the greatest Antichrist, the
man of syn, and denies the foundation of Christian religion, believing as the
Pope believes, who either denies the Father and the Son, or else he is not the
Antichrist, 1. Ioh. 2. 22. And that the Apostle means not only of open and
direct denial, but of indirect and denying in deed when by word he professes
Christ, Mr. Iunius himself, D. Whitakers, Mr. Brightman and others (that have
answered Bellarmines 14. chap. de Romans Pontif. l. 3.) do soundly prove. Now as
the Pope denies Christ, so does the Whore of Babylon, the Romish church,
holding the same heresies and idolatries: that if the Pope be Antichrist, then
is the church of Rome an Antichristian synagogue, and not the true church of
Christ.

By this also mine opposites insultation Chr. plea p. 202. 203.
against me, as if I wrote errors and contradictions unreconcileable touching
apostate churches, is taken away. For as I never denied, but some apostate
churches continued true churches, till the candlestick was removed for their
impenitencie; so neither could he, nor can any truly deny, but some apostate
churches are mere synagogues of Satan: as those Antichrists mentioned 1. Ioh.
2. 19. and those heretical churches who^ Mr. Iunius himself denies to be true
Christian churches, because they retained not the foundation. And such by
necessary consequence, is the church of Rome at this day. But it it is a
needless and wearisome labor to follow mine opposite in his tautologies and
repetitions of the same things again and again, to enlarge his work, besides
his manifold reproaches.

I said Animadv. page 103.
of this Roman church, It is not the woman fled into the wilderness* Rev. 12.
14. but another woman or city, reigning over the King's of the earth, Rev. 17.
1. 18. etc.

What then, (says Chr. plea page 203*
he) difference is to be put between the inward parts of the Temple, and the
outward; the parts measured, and the parts unmeasured, between Gods Temple,
Altar, and worshipers therein, Rev. 11. 1. and the court of the Temple given to
the Gentiles, and the holy city trod down by them 42. months, v. 2. If it
be not one of these, shall it therefore be none of them? Jf it be not the
inward part of the Temple, will it f^llow it is not the outward? etc.

Answ. He should have said, though she be not the company of worshipers of God,
whom he measures* yet may she be the company of Gentiles that tread down Gods
courts and city, whom he casts out as unmeasured. But he leaves the
comparison of persons, and runs to things, Gods ordinances which she
abuses. Of that Scripture, Rev. 11. we have spoken Page 52, etc.
before. Of these two women in Rev. 12. and 17. the Scriptures are so plain,
that none of good understanding can mistake the one for the other; or (as this
man does) make the one a part of the other, as if both put together, should
make one Temple, one woman, one Church. When the one persecuted, flies from
the Serpent or dragon, the other in the Dragons throne persecuteth, reigns,
triumphs; abusing and treading under foot Gods ordinances which belong to the
persecuted woman; as the Babylonians abused the vessels of Gods sanctuary, 2
King. 25. Psa 79. 1.
burned and trod down the holy city, the place of the woman's assembly.

His question, When was the time that the woman fled into the wilderness? is
nothing to the purpose. For whenever she fled, seeing this other woman is not
she; but the foolish waman which opposes her self and her doctrines unto
Wisdom, (as in Prove 9. 13. 14. 15. 1. 2. etc.) men should know, that the dead
are with her, and her verse. 18.
guests are in the depths of hell.

He again injurieth me, when he says Chr. plea page 205.
I here make the church of Rome (she that now is) to be also the court of Gods
Temple, and holy city. I make her to be the company of Gentiles (like the
Babylonians of old) that tread down the holy city: and it is he that speaks
M. Sm. language, whiles he makes the Jews (not the Babylonians) to be the
types of these Antichristians, as we have formerly heard. And it is his
continual fallacy in reasoning, when speech is of the persons, to fly to the
things and ordinances typed by those holy places: as if Jerusalem because it
was always the holy city, even when it was ruined; could give holiness to the
profane Gentiles, that burned and trod it down.

I savd, The heathens in their Altars, Temples, Sacrifices, had the divine
things of God among them, as well, if not better then has the Man of Syn and
his worshipers, in their sacrifice of the Mass, and other manifold id^luries.

He replieth: Why says he not, then has the church of Rome in her baptism,
and other divine things of God among them, though corrupted?

Answ. Behold here again a plain tergiversation. I compare the sacrifices of
the Gentiles with the sacrifice of the Antichristians: he shunneth this, and
would have me speak of their baptism. As if the Lords Supper were not as holy
as Baptism. But he is a frayd once to meddle with the Lords supper in Rome,
(as we have seen before,) and will have me write what he thinks good, when the
reason which I bring is too hard for him. And yet he knows, that elsewhere I
speak as much of their baptism. But thus he would here evade. So I speaking of
the Man of syn (which in his own understanding is the hierarchy,) and of his
worshipers, the popish multitude, he tells me Mr. Junius speaks of the church
of Rome, and distinguishes between it, and the Man of syn with his hierarchy.
As if I also did not speak of that church, when I mention the worshipers of the
man of syn: which whiles he (by Mr. Iunius help,) would prove to be Christ's
true church in his covenant of grace, contrary to The Apostle who shows them
to be in the state of damnation, 2 These. 2. he is forced to give ground,
answers not my reason touching the Gentiles; but presently flies to his
wonted shelter, of Judah and Jsrael Not regarding the instruction of the holy
Ghost, who throughout the book of Revelation, mentions not the Israelites,
but as the sealed of God, and kept from Antichrists abominations, Rev. 7. and
for the Popish multitude, they are called Gentiles, Sodom, Egypt, Babylon. Rev.
11. and 17. with which when mine opposite is pressed, he flies to Judah and
Israel for an answer; as we every where have seen.

For the Church of Rome to be the Mother of Christians, feighned to be like the
true Mother, sick, swollen with the dropsy etc. wherein he Chr. plea page 206.
charge me not to answer or confute Mr. Iunius; I have done both: showing by
evidence of the scripture, Rev. 17. with Rev. 12. that she is not the true
mother, Jerusalem; but the whore of Babylon, not sick only, but dead in her
synns Rev. 20. 5. with Ephesians. 2. 1. And Mr. Iunius himself In his annot. on
Rev. 11.
calls her, the Pseudo christian (or falsly-named Christian) church.

Mine opposite, (after that he has again according to his wont fled to Judah
and Israel,) Chr. plea page 207.
replieth to Rev. 20. And first, He refers us to his answer unto the like
spoken before of Israel.

Answ. There he labored to prove it not death in syn, but death civilly, by
overthrow of their estate. But that (say I) though it were true of Israel,
cannot be the meaning here: for this speaks of their estate, whiles
Antichrist the Beast and his kingdom lives reigns and triumphs, killing
the saints, Rev. 20. 4. 5. so that he and his church is not dead civilly, that
is, his kingdom (...), not overthrowen all this while. Secondly God speaks
here of such a death, as is opposed to the first resurrection, verse. 5. but the
first resurrection is from syn, Coloss. 2. 13. and 3. 1. and it is here said to
be such, as they that have part therein, the second death has no power on such,
Rev. 20 6. but if it be but a rising from civil death, or destruction of an
outward state, they should not by it be freed from the second death, which is
due to such only as rise not from death of syn. So this his answer is
impertinent. Besides, even Mr. Iunius himself Annot. on Rev. 20. 5.
expounds it of them that lie dead in syn.

2. Jf this death (says he) be, as some think, the apostasy spoken of 2.
These. 2. 3. we must then remember withal, that this apostasy is in the Temple
of God, verse. 4. like as there was apostasy in Judah and Jsrael heretofore:
and that difference is to be put between Gods Temple and the apostasy it self.
etc.

Answ. I have showed, that this death (Mr. Iunius also assenting) must needs
here be understood of death in syn, or in Apostasy, if so he will have it
named. Whereas after his manner he compares it with th'Apostasie of Judah and
Israel, the holy Ghost (as we have heard) compares it with Babylon, Rev. 17.
But if he grant the apostasy in Israel, was death in syn, it will help him
nothing: for what people soever is dead in syn, they are not actually Gods
visible church, til they be Romans 8. 8. - 11.
raised in Christ. I grant him a difference between Gods Temple and the
Apostasy: for if by the Temple he mean the people of God free from apostasy,
such in deed are not dead: but the people of Rome now are in apostasy, and
have been long; and by the sentence of God, are dead in syn and apostasy*
therefore they are not those 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5.
living stones, built up to a spiritual house (on Christ the living stone) an
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice: and Ephesians. 2. 21. 22.
for an habitation of God through the spirit: but they are dead stones built
upon Antichrist.

3. Moreover (says he) the dead here spoken of, live again, and reig^^ with
Christ after the finishing of 1000. years, Rev. 20. 5. whereas he speaks of
the Church of Rome, as being long since damned and dead for ever: so this
Scripture will be found to be against himself.

Answ. The words of the Scripture are these, But the rest of the dead lived not
again, until the thousand years were finished: this is the first
resurrection, Rev. 20. 5. How makes this against me? Does it not show they
were dead, the 1000. years of the Beasts reign? yet he would have them not
dead, but sick and diseased. And how notoriously does he wrong me, as if I made
the church of Rome damned and dead for ever, that is, as if there could be no
mercy showed to the papists, for repentance and turning to the Lord. They are
only the reprobate multitude which are damned and dead for ever. Many of that
church, yea even of the hierarchy, (whom my opposite holds to be the Man of
syn, the son of perdition) being dead in their sins, God has in mercy revived
and raised with Christ, as he did in the churches of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2, 1^
Coloss. 2. (...). But such as are not raised from the death of Antichrist, and
quickened by Christ, they perish for ever. And we speak of that Church now
remaining in her sinful death: unto which so continuing, no salvation is
promised, but assured destruction threatened, 2. These. 2. Rev. 14. 9. 10. 11.
Thus we see how notwithstanding all his turning and winding, and backing his
error with learned men's names, these Rev. 11. ^
Gentiles the church of Antichrist, and worshipers of the Man of syn, are by
the sentence of God dead in sins, as were the Ephesians. 2*
Gentiles before Christ gave them life. That such of them as the Lord shall in
mercy raise up out of the grave of popery* shall escape the second death: the
rest, do remain under Gods wrath, dead in syn, and shall die in torment.

In the end, to that which I showed of that whores death otherweise, and of her
burning with fire, Rev. 18. 7. 8, and of the joy which the heavenly multitude
shall have at her destruction, Rev. 18. 20. and 1^. 1. 2. 3. mine opposite
seems to assent* referring it to the City, resembled (as he says) by
Babylon, and Babylons destruction that was of old, Rev. 18. with Ier. 50. and
51. Thus the truth has wrung out at last an acknowledgement from him; as the
fear and light of his conscience made him acknowledge at the first. For he
began with the Church of Rome thus, Chr. plea page 120
acknowledging it to be fallen into most sinful and deep defection and
apostasy, and so to be a notorious harlot and idolatres. This notorious harlot
the holy Ghost calls Babylon the great, the mother of horlots, and
abominations of the earth, Rev. 17. 5. which is meant of the City Rome, v. 18.
but of an ecclesiastical state, such as is in that city at this day. And that
Babylon or church it is, whole destruction is threatened in Rev. 18. and for
which there shall be joy, and singing Alleluiah, for that God has judged the
great wh^re* which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and shed the
blood of his servants, Rev. 1^. 1. 2. 3. etc. For the destruction of this great
whore (which in deed is no other then the Church of Rome) mine opposite Page.
208.
says with me, they shall be so far from mourning at her funeral, as they shall
rejoice with the heavenly multitude, and sing Hallelujah, when the Lord has
given Sodoms judgment on her, and they see her smoke rise up for evermore,
Rev. 19. 1. 2. 3. Of his own mouth now let him be judged; with what truth,
equity, conscience, he has pleaded for the church of Rome to be the Temple of
God; the church of God, in his covenant of grace, and to have his baptism the
seal of his covenant, even in that adulterous and most sinful estate wherein
she stands at this day under her Pastor Antichrist, whom she honors and
worshipeth, believing his lies, serving his idols, and trusting to merit heaven
by the wicked works which that Man of syn has taught her. But (that God, for a
reward of his popish error in advancing the Ministers above the church, and
the pastor above his fellow ministers, gave him over to this second error) who
would have thought that a man of understanding would so bitterly have
inveighted against me, for denying her to be Christ's true Church; and that he
would for defense of such a notorius harlot, have forsaken and written against
his own former good testimony, which he witnessed against her? Gods counsels
are unsearchable* and let all that fear him, hear what the Spirit says unto
us; Hearken unto me now therefore oye children, and attend to the words of my
mouth. Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.
For she has east down many wounded: yea many strong men have been slain by
her. Her house is the way to hell; going down to the chambers of death. Prove.
7. 24 -- 27.

Of other Writers.
TO his citations of Polanus, Keckerman, etc. I answered, Animadv. ^. 105.
That diverse men were mistaken in judging of that rotten Church (of Rome)
which would help these our opposites nothing, who have seen and acknowledged
better, and now go back. And I instanced sundry others contrary minded, as Mr.
Carwright, Mr. Perkins, D. Fulk, D. Willet. Mr. Bale, all our country men, who
deny the church of Rome to be the true Church of Christ.

Mine opposite replieth, Chr. plea ^ag. 208.
that I say in particular of Polanus, that he was mistaken, and in this, for
that he said that Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, not Jewish or at
Jerusalem, but Christian, etc. wherein, as his manner is, he drepraveth both my
words and meaning. For I never dreamt that Antichrist should sit in the Jewish
Temple at Jerusalem; but in the Christian Church falsely so called, as Mr.
Iunius names it in Annot. on Rev. 11. But Polanus pleads otherwise for the
church of Rome, as mine opposite has set down his words, Chr. plea. p. 212.
And in that, I judge he was mistaken, and not I only, but many more with me,
men of greater learning, and before me; though mine opposite leaves it with
this reproach, Chr. plea p. 209.
That all (in my judgment) are mistaken hereabout, but my self and my
followers.

And presently after, to that which I alleged from Mr. Cartwright, Perkins,
etc. he wishes they had written more advisedly, and more soundly. And why?
even for his former often refuted reasons, of the Temple of God, and Baptism
in that church; wherein he does but beg the question, and answers not them.
For I named to him Mr. Perkins reasons, that the Papists doctrine does raze the
very foundation of Religion; and his 4. arguments in a treatise for that
purpose. Now to these he answers not one word. But the Temple of God, the
Temple of God, and Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God: and Martyrs out
of the Church of Rome; and where else, had they their baptism? these are his
common bucklers. To which I have answered before.

And now, that the Reader may further see, how not I only, but many before me,
even such as he names in his book for him, (as D. Whitakers, Mr. Broughton,
Mr. Brightman, and others) are direct against him, I will set down their
testimonies.

What Mr. Bale, Mr. Cartwright, D. Fulk, M. Perkins, and D. Willet have
written, I have showed heretofore: and them he regards not.

Whereas Bellarmine would conclude from the protestants grant, that the church
of Rome is Christ's true Church, because it is the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
D. Whitakers gives sundry * Whitak. controv. 4. An papa Antichr. ^. c. 3.
answers, the two first are these. 1. It may be called the church wherein
Antichrist sits, because it was the true church of Christ before, not
because now it is; etc. So Esaias says* the faithful city was become an
harlot, Esa. 1. 21. where he calls Jerusalem the faithful city, because it
had been faithful before: so we say, the Temple of God is the seat of
Antichrist, that is, that which of old was the Temple of God. 2. The Church of
Rome takes to it self the name and title of the true Church, and in the
opinion of our adversartes it is the true Church. (...) was a monstrous thing
of old (...) deny this neither was it denied but of a very few, who straight
way when they were known, were killed: notwithstanding it was not the true
Church, but the whore of Babylon etc. These answers when I gave, mine opposite
could by no means endure at my hand.

The same author says ^hitakeibid.
a little before. Now let us see whether the Bishop of Rome has departed from
Christ, and from the faith: so that the church of Rome now, reteyneth not the
form of the Apostles doctrine. Surely that is evident by all the heads of
doctrine, which are in controversy between us and them. That Church succeeds
the Apostles in deed, but so as a den of thieves do the house of God, and as
an harlot does the faithful city. etc. And after. ^bidens.
But the Pope, says Billarmine honoreth one true God, the Father, Son and holy
Ghost. J answer, he honors him not, but blasphemeth him. He does, I
confess, as Atheists are wont to do, which will not openly deny God, but in heart
and works they deny him: so the Pope figneth and preclaimeth that he honors
the trinity, but in deed he car^h not for him. For he that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father, of the holy Ghost: but the Pope honors not
the Son, for he corrupts his doctrine, etc. Again, touching that particular
Page 40. ^c.
before handled, whether by Babylon in Rev. 17. be meant the City or the
Church of Rome, Mr. Whitakers says, Cont. 4. q. c. 2. l. 1.
Whereas the adversary affirms, that it is not the Church of Rome whlo^^ is
called Babylon, but the city, such as it was under the Emperors, it is false.
For it is certain, that Rome is by John in the Revelation, called Babylon,
because of that Church which should be at Rome. For mention is made there of
the false Prophet, as also of the Whore, which by her allurements should
bewitch the whole world. These things cannot be understood but of the Church,
and are necessarily to be referred unto Antichrist.

Mr. Brightman in his book of the Revelation, expounds the Gentiles in Rev.
11. 2. to be the christians that are so in name only. On Rev. 13. 8. he says,
The holy Ghost does cry openly, that all they do wholly ^eopard and cast away
their salvation, that are subject to the Pope of Rome, if so be that they
depart out of this life without repentance. And again; This Beast is worshipped
of all Reprobates, with whom while thou conspirest in thy worship, who shall
separate thee from the state of reprobates? He does not therefore break off
unity, who departs from the synagogue of Rome: but he purchases unavoydable
destruction to himself, who cleaves unto it, without repentance.

These and the like things says Mr. Brightman, one whose name mine opposite
Chr. plea ^ag. 213.
uses to grace his erroneous cause by. Mr. Brovghtons testimony we have heard
before.

Mr. Dudly Fenner in his Theology, writes thus; Lib, 9. c. 1^.
Antichrist is the head of the universal apostasy that should come, 1. Ioh. 2.
18. Ioh. 4. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 5. 6. Whereupon his church is by a Synechdoche
called Antichrist, 1. Ioh. 4. 3. and 2. 18. as the true Church (is called
Christ) 1. Cor. 12. 12. The Antichristian church, compared to a Beast, is the
apostatical church, but counterfeyting the vizar of the true, which
represents the lively image of the Roman monarchy formerly done away, and of
the government, power, amplitude and seat thereof amongst all peoples; 2 These. 2.
4. 5. 6. 8. Revel. 11. 7. 8. and 13. 3. 11. 12. -- 18. Antichrist, or the False
prophet is the head of the Antichristian church, the mediator between it and
the Dragon; Rev. 16. 13. and 13. 4. 11. 12. This Antichrist is an Opposer, for
to defend the foresaid departing away from the truth of Christ, (2 These. 2. 4.
compared as touching the phrase with Dan. 8. 11.) and an Exalter of himself*
first that he may lift up himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; that is, against all powers and majesty's, both earthly and
heavenly. 2. These. 2. 9. Dan. 8. 11. 36. Secondly, that placing his seat in the
church in name called Gods, he may show himself as God, that is, arrogate to
himself the divine power, and absolute dominion of Christ: Esai. 31. 1. 2. 2
These. 2. 4. Dan. 8. 25.

Napier, (the Noble of Scotland) expounding the Revelation, says. Paraph. p^
Revel. 11. 2.
But as for the outward and visible face of the pretended church, it must be
rejected from God, and no care, measure nor account had by him thereof; because
it must be given over to Antichristian and idolatrous people, who shall subdue
his holy church and spiritual Jerusalem, and tread it under foot 1260. years.
Paraph. (...) Rev. 12. 5.
Gods true church and spouse, was chased away and remained invisible and
soliturie, among certain private persons, predestinate and elect of God.
Paraph. (...) Rev. 20. 5.
But the rest of the people that lay dead in Antichristian errors, arose not
therfrom to embrace the word of life, ill etc. Ibid. hist
But the rest, J mean the whole outward visible church, lay wholly as dead and
corrupt with papistocal errors.

Of the Baptism in the Church of Rome.
ALthough the former things against the Church of Rome, be enough to disprove
her baptism, which is ordained of God only for his Church, and those in his
covenant, out of which Rome is gone: yet because mine opposite urges some
special reasons against me, for the same; I will also briefly answer them.

About this point, he has nine reasons; in his Christian plea, page 27...30.

1. The first, which is against the repeating of Baptism again: I grant him:
neither do I hold it needful or lawful to repeat again the baptism
received in false churches.

2. The second, being for the same purpose, I likewise grant. As also, that
there is one baptism, as there was one circumcision: which plea of his, I
would have noted, because of his contrary reasoning afterward. Likewise his
example from Israel, whose circumcision was not repeated; I hold very fit. But
let the Reader observe, how the Scriptures by him brought to prove it, are 2.
Chron. 30. chap. and Ezr. 6. 19. 20. 21. of which the first was before the
captivity, the other after.

3. The third, that the covenant of grace is everlasting, is also true: but
should have this addition, taught of the holy Ghost, To such as keep his
covenant, and that remember his commandments to do them: Psalm. 103. 17. 18.
For, if we deny him, he also will deny us, 2. Tim. 2. 12. That God has regard
to his covenant in Apostaticall churches and estate, is also true: but barely
by him set down, without showing how. That Moses teaches us in Levit. 26.
namely, that the Israelites for their apostasy and forsaking of God, v. 16 --
28.
should be chastised; and if they would not amend, they should at last be v. 33.
scattred among the heathen, and v. 38.
perish among them: and they that are left, v. 39. 40.
if they confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers; and if
their v. 41.
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, etc. v. 42.
then God will remember his covenant with Iakob, and v. 44.
will not cast them away, nor abhor them, to destroy them utterly, to break
his covenant with them; but v. 45.
will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors.

4. The fourth, of Christ's dying once, and our being once baptized: I also
grant.

5. The fifth, that the Church of Rome was espoused to Christ, and had his
baptism in the Apostles days: is true. But where he adds, that she has
ever since retained it, with other grounds of Christian religion; there he
goes too far. For many grounds of Christian religion she has forsaken: as
all that are not Papists will acknowledge. Wherefore he adds a qualification,
either for faith, or order, or both, in whole or in part. This is so large as
will bring in, not only the heathens of old, but all the old condemned
heretics in the Apostles days and after, yea even the very Jews and Turks
at this day. For in part they retein the grounds of Christian religion. It is a
ground of Christian religion to believe that there is one God: and that the
very Divils (as the Apostle says) do believe, Iam. 2. 19. But not to go so
far, as I grant him that the Papists in baptism retein Christ's ordinance in
whole or in part; so he cannot deny, but also in the Lords Supper (now turned
to an abominable idolatrous Mass,) they reteyn Christ's ordinance in whole or
in part; and so in other their abominations. The Pope himself, the great
Antichrist, the son of perdition, reteyneth Christian religion in part. The
image of God wherein he made man at the first, Genesis 1. 26. remains in all men
still in part, as the Scriptures testify, Genesis 9. 6. Iam. 3. 9. Wherefore if
the reteyning of things in part, holds men still in the state of grace and
salvation: who then shall be damned? What a wide gate is here opened into the
kingdom of heaven, that if men reteyn Christian religion, either for faith or
order, or both; in whole or in part, they remain still in the church and
covenant of grace: which is quite contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and of
his Apostles, Math. 7. 13. 14. 22. 23. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Gal 5. 19. 20. 21.

6. His sixth reason, from the Jesuits profession made in their Rhemes
Testament etc, I have before answered; it being in his second argument made for
the church of Rome. And that which he adds of their baptising with water in
the name of the Father etc: is of no more weight to justify their baptism;
then the like elements of bread and wine, and the words of Christ's institution
This is my body etc, are to justify the Popish Mass to be the true supper of
our Lord. Of which Mass, (to omit that which many others have written of the
abomination of it) Mr. Calvin In his sermon against idolatry, on Psa. 16. 4.
says thus, The Mass ^n itself is a ronouncing of the death of Jesus Christ,
and a sacrilege forged by Satan, utterly to abolish the sacrament of the Supper.

7. His seventh reason, that Jews and Pagans are turned to the popish
Christian ^aith; was also refured in answer to his second reason brought for
the church of Rome. The conclusion, that there needs no repeating of
baptism, as there was none of circumcision: is granted, and by me never denied.

8. Likeweise his eight reason* that God has his people in the Romish Babylon,
Rev. 18. 4. under his covenant of grace; is before answered. But he should have
proved (if he could) that Babylon itself (which is the church of Rome) is under
the covenant of grace: that I deny, the holy Ghost showing in Rev. 17. and 18.
chapter that she is under wrath, and destruction. He says, the children of that
church should plead with their mother ( as the Prophets taught and dealt with
Jsrael of old, Hos 2. 2. and 3. 1. and 4. 1. 2. 12. etc) that she take away her
fornications out of her sight etc. It is true, so they should: but why does
this man diminish from the word of God? For the Prophets words are, Plead with
your mother, plead; for she is not my wife, neither am J her husband; let her
therefore ^ut away her whordomes etc, Hos. 2. 2. Thus do I plead against this
mother church of Rome; but my opposite blames me, and pleads for her, she is
the wife of Christ, and not divorced* as before we have heard. Baptism (says
he) is not of her adulteries, but of Christ's ordinances. True, so is the Lords
supper, so is excommunication, not of her adulteries; but of Christ's
ordinances; and we reteyn them from Christ. But that whorish church has
corrupted and adulterated all these and other ordinances of Christ, and turned
them to abominable idolatries and lies; for which we also plead against her:
and her sinful abuse of these divine ordinances, shall nor justify, but the
more condemn her.

9. To his ninth and last reason, if baptism be renounced, then also the
articles of ^aith, the Scriptures and translations: likewise marriages
dissolved, etc. I answer. Far be it, that we should renounce any good thing
whith the church of Rome abuses* any more then Paul renounced the true God,
whom the Athenians ignorantly worshipped: Ao^. 17. 23. Whatsoever is of divine*
institution among Papists* Jews, Turks or heathens, we renounce it not; but
their profanation and abuse of holy things, we do renounce. Neither can we
justify their estate, or any holy thing in their sinful abuse of it ^ though
we put difference between the things* which in their ow^^ nature are good, and
the persons which are evil, Thus men, man see how weak and without edge his
reasons are to justify the bap tisme in the church of Rome, to be in their use
of it the true seal of Gods covenant of grace in Christ unto them.

Next this, he sets himself to answer objections, Chr. plea page 30.
The first whereof he makes this. But The An^ baptists. ^ H. A. An^ madv. p.
68-72. 71-75.
the baptism had in the Church of Rome, i^ not true baptism: but an idol, and
lying sign; a detestable and cursed sacrament; a fiction and not true
Christian baptism; Mr. Cl.
no better then when we wash our own face with water daily. etc.

Answ. That it is not true baptism, I constantly affirm: so did Mr. Johnson
Apol. page* 110.
himself, whiles he stood in, and wrote for the truth. That the Papists have
turned baptism into an idol: I have also formerly Animad p. 68. 69. 7^* 73.
proved; and will maintain, against his answers. That therefore it is detestable
and cursed unto them, through their abuse of it, does necessarily follow: for
the sacrifice of the wicked is an abominatio^ to the Lord, Pro. 15. 8. That it
should be no better then the daily washing of our face; is wrongfully imputed
to us; and Mr. Cl. whom he cites in his margin, professes to hold no such
thing. For our daily washing, is no religious action, nor sacrament at all; but
baptism by heretics and apostates, is a religious action after their manner,
and a false sacrament, therefore neither true, neither yet none at all; as our
opposite with us once professed. Apolog. p. 110. Insted of proving it true
baptism, he brings reasons to show, that if it were an idol and lying
sign, it ought to be renounced, and an other received. This he knows the
Anabaptists do practice: so it is no conviction of, them all. But he bends
his force now against us, and leaves them. Let us try what he says.

1. Because (says he) idols and lying signs and fictions are not of God, but
of the Divil, who is a liar, and father thereof, Ioh. 8. 44. Romans 3. 4.

Answ. I grant that which he says: but he concludes not the question. Idols
so far as they are idols and lies; are wholly of the Divill, and so far forth
to be renounced. But some idols and lies, are made of Gods true ordinances, and
of his good creatures; as Paul says of the Gentiles, that they changed the
truth of God into a lie; and worshipped and served the creature, Romans 1. 25.
Here the Gentiles lie, is to be done away, and their idolatry renounced: but
the truth of God is to be retained, and a holy use of the good creature may be
had, which they abused. So we have renounced the popish idolatry and lies
which they have brought upon Gods sacraments; but the truth we reteyne.

2. An idol, or such a baptism as is no more then a daily washing of our
faces, cannot be the sign and seal of Gods true and everlasting covenant, etc.

Answ. I grant it: and from his own words conclude against him; Baptism in the
Church of Rome is formerly proved to be an idol: because they give to the
creature and work of man's hands, that honor which is due unto Christ only.
Therefore it cannot be a sign and seal of Gods everlasting covenant; by his
own grant. As for us, we reteyne no idol, but Gods truth only, as before I
showed.

3. The sign in a Sacrament is that which is outward and visible; which in
baptism is washing with water in the name of the Lord. Jf this be a fiction
and lying sign, in the churches aforesaid, then is it not the Lords: and they
there baptized have not then the outward visible sign, which the Lord ordained
to be had of his people, and therefore are bound to get it unto them, where it
may be had, Romans 4. 11. and 6. 3. 4. Act. 10. 47. 48. etc.

Answ. 1. The first part of his reason is unperfectly set down: for washing
with water is a sign of the washing away of sins, by and in Gods institution
only; by which institution it is to be ministered to none but the faithful
and their seed, Act. 8. 36. 37. and 2. 38. 39. If it be not ministered according
to this ordinance of God, it is not the sign of his grace in that abuse,
though it be the thing which God in the right use has appointed for a sign.
2. He would deceive his reader, as if we held washing should be with any other
creature then water, or in any other name then the Lords. These things we know
are in themselves the true ordinances of Christ; but by Antichrist turned to a
lie, whiles he falsely applies them to his adulterous synagogue, which Christ
has given to his Church only; and whiles he idolatrously gives that grace
to the work of his sacrilegious priests, which is peculiar to Christ and his
blood. It is the true sign of the covenant of Christ which is by Antichrist
turned to a lie: and if we should devise to our selves any other sign, we
should be liars like him: who has devised, cream, spittle, and other like
elements, synfully joined with his baptism.

4. That also is to be done without delay, seeing the neglect of baptism is
sin, and no unbaptised may eat of the Lords Supper, etc.

Answ. It is true: and so we, if we had not been baptized with water, etc.
would do it without delay. But he trifleth, insisting upon the outward
element, which he knows we had: and leaves the main thing, the relation to
the covenant of grace, which we had not in that Antichristian synagogue.

5. Jf any retain an idol baptism, etc. and presume to come to the Lords
table, they eat judgment to themselves.

Answ. We reteyne no idol baptism: but have put away the idol, and the lie:
and reteyne the truth only, as before is showed. The same we answer to his
sixth reason, which is but a repetition and enlargement of his former, as is his
manner.

7. Neither can it be thought that repentance (which still they speak of)
should ever make a lie to be a truth, and idol to be Gods ordinance, etc. For
though repentance finds mercy with God for a lie, yet a lie is a lie still,
and an idol-vanity. Zach. 10. 2. Ier. 10. 8. Ioh. 8. 44. and 14. 6. and 17. 17.
with 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16.

Answ. It is true, of such idols and lies as the Scriptures which he cites
speaks of; but there are other idols and lies, which by men are made of God
himself, and of his word and ordinances, which by Gods grace upon men's
repentance and faith, are restored to the first truth. As, the Gentiles changed
the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 25. and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an image, Romans 1. 23. and Israel changed God their
glory, into the similitude of an Ox, Psalm. 106. 20. When they repented of
their changing the truth into a lie, they retained the truth still, and kept
that God whom before they ignorantly worshipped, and of whom they had made an
idol to themselves, Act. 17. 23. So for Gods ordinances; as, if the Israelites
had made idols of Jachin and Boaz (the two sacramental pillars in the Temple)
2. Chron. 3. 17. and had burnt incense to them, as they did to the brazen
Serpent, 2. King. 18. 4. they should have repented of, and put away their
idolatry, but have retained those pillars still, for such signs as God had
ordained them. But such pillars and posts as Israel had invented of their own
heads, and set them by the Lords posts, Ezekiel. 43. 8. no repentance could make
them the Lords posts, but they must have been utterly taken away. So in Popish
baptism, water is the Lords ordinance, by them abused and turned to an idol:
salt, oil, etc. are Antichrists ordinances set up also for idols; these latter
we utterly reject, because they were never Gods ordinances in baptism; the
water we reteyne, having put away only the abuse and lie of Antichrist annexed
thereto. If this be not so, then the Jews should not only have repented of
and put away their lie, when they used those lying words, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. Ier. 7. 4. but they must have destroyed the
Temple it self also. And whereas the Papists and other heretics make lies of
the Scriptures, and of Christ's holy words This is my body, make their idol of
Transubstantiation, and the like; they thould not only repent of their lies,
and put away their idols; but also renounce Christ's words, and put away the
holy Scriptures; if this doctrine of our opposites be true.

8. Nor do they in deed repent, who still reteyne such baptism, as themselves
think to be an idol, etc. for true repentance binds us to cast away all
idols, etc.

Answ. This is already answered: neither do we reteyn such a baptism as we
think to be an idol; but that ordinance of God which was an idol by Antichrists
abuse, and is through the grace of God restored unto his former truth, that
only do we reteyne, repenting of our former abuse thereof amongst them. God
himself (as I have showed) was made an idol by the Gentiles; their repentance
bound them to cast away their idolatry, but to reteyn God still.

Whereas they say, Animadv. ^^g. 70.
We have gotten the Lords baptism by coming to the Lord in true faith and
repentance, who Mat. 3. 11 ^ Cor. 12. ^. Pet. 3. 21.
baptiseth us with the holy Ghost and with fire. As for the outward washing
which we had, it need not be repeated, [as before is showed: and we may as
lawfully eat the Lords Supper, without a new washing, as the idolatrous
Isralites turning to the Lord, might eat the Passover without a new cutting or
circumcising. 2. Chron. 30. 1. 5. 11. 18. -- 25. Ezr. 6. 21.] And afterward
say, Page 72.
We have renounced that Romish baptism, as an impure idol in their abuse,
[standing up in the place of Christ and his precious blood, which it is not;
pretending to give grace, and wash away sins, which it does not] etc. they do
but shift and contradict themselves, and deceive others, and still run into
errors, more and more.

Answ. Great words as if he would bear down all before him. But let us hear
his proofs.

For first (says he) speaking of the Lords baptism, they speak of that which
is inward: whereas our question, is of that which is outward.

Answ. A good beginning. The Apostle says, there is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism; Ephesians. 4. 5. Himself also a little before, Chr. plea ^ag. 27.
said against the Anabaptists, There is one baptism, as there was one
circumcision. Now against us, he would have two baptismes, one outward, an
other inward. Whereas, though there be two actions, one outward, done by men,
the other inward, done by Gods spirit: yet both are but one baptism, one
sacrament; as the outward body, and the inward soul, make not two men, but one
man. A sacrament is a sacred order between the outward visible thing, and the
spiritual invisible, which have a mutual proportion and likeness between
them. The Apostle says, That is not circumcision which is outward in the
flesh, but that which is of the heart, in the spirit, Romans 2. 28. 29. If they
have in Rome but the outward washing, without the inward: then have they not
true baptism, but a false deceitful sign. Secondly, it is not true, that I
spoke but of the inward work only, for I spoke also of the outward; which
being had in Rome, need not be repeated: as I showed by the example of the
Israelites. Now which of us two shifteth, contradicts, and deceives, I or
he: let indifferent men say.

2. They spoke (says he) of abuses in the ministration, and opinions of the
Ministers thereof: whereas our question is of the thing it self, not of the
abuse.

Answ. We speak of the thing it self (Baptism) abused by the ministers and
receivers; neither of which are in Gods covenant; and therefore can have no
true sign or seal of his covenant unto them in that estate. Secondly, if it
were not for abuses and opinions of men, God and his truth, and ordinances,
could never be changed into lies and idols, as the Apostle teaches us they
were, Romans 1. 23. 25. The Athenians were idolaters against the true God; whom
Paul preached, and whom they ignorantly worshipped, Act. 17. 23. If one would
take them in hand to excuse them, and say, Our question is of the thing it
self (the true God) and not of the Athenians abuses and opinions, were it not
a worthy plea? yet such we have, for Antichristians baptism.

3. Their assertion (says he) implies that they had not the Lords baptism,
till they got it themselves by coming to the Lord in true faith and
repentance, which is plain Anabaptistry, and covert Popery and Arminianisme:
whereby they debase Gods grace, and exalt man's works. For it must be understood
either of the inward or outward baptism: if of the inward, besides that it
touches not the question, it implies Popery: if of the outward, it conteyneth
Anabaptistry.

Answ. Deliver my soul, o Lord, from lying lips, from the deceitful tongue:
Psa. 120. 2. First he cites as my words, till they had got it themselves by
coming to the Lord: whereas the word themselves, is of his own addition.
Secondly, he wresteth them to such a meaning, as in his conscience he knew I
never intended; namely, to debase Gods grace, and exalt man's work, as do the
Papists and Arminians. As if I thought that we came or could come to the Lord
of our selves, without being Job. 6. 44.
drawn of the Father; or, as if our coming to him were a meritorious work:
which errors I abhor. 3. Neither do my words imply such a meaning; any more
then our Saviors, when he said, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. and J
will give you rest: take my yoke upon you, etc. and ye shall find rest to
your souls: Math. 11. 28. 29. To conclude of that speech, Therefore they could
come of themselves; or their coming should be a meritorious work, or the like:
were an openinjury to our Lords words. His two baptismes inward and outward, is
before showed to be but'an evasion: we acknowledge but one baptism, Ephesians. 4.
5. Neither if it be understood of the outward, does it (as he says) conteyn
Anabaptistrie; for the Anabaptists do not hold that they have the outward
baptism by faith and repentance, but do repeat the outward work, and baptize
again; which I deny. So herein he has done me double vvrong.

4. Jf they had died in infancy, they had not then had the Lords baptism, nor
had been baptized with the Holy Ghost: nor any other infants there baptized.

Answ. We and all, are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. and being
born in Antichrists church, we had not the visible covenant of promise, which
is given only to Christ's Church. Albeit God has his elect in false Churches,
as among the Gentiles of old, and in Israel after they were divorced from the
Lord. Jer. 3. whom he can save without baptism, as he did without
circumcision. The same is answered to his fifth objection, of the 5
same persons come to years. And is further cleared in the* answer to his
second argument for the Church of Rome; where he alleged the like things. And
where he says, Either we have no outward baptism at all, confirming the
covenant of God: or else we had it before we came under the Lords covenant, and
in a church divorced from the Lord. I answer; We had the outward washing
with water, as the Israelites had the outward cutting of the flesh, when
they were divorced from the Lord, Ier. 3. 8. which could not then confirm
Gods covenant to us or them in such sinful estate. But as after, when they
repented, and turned to the Lord, they had their outward cutting sanctified
unto them, for a sign of his covenant, and were admitted to eat of his
Passover, Ezr. 6. 21. (which no uncircumcised might eat of, Exodus 12. 48.) so
our washing has been by like grace sanctified unto us, for a sign of his
covenant; and we may lawfully eat of the Lords Supper.

His 6. reason is of like na ure, touching the members of the 6.
Antichristian church, that they have not the Lords baptism, being not come to
the Lord in true faith and repentance, etc. This also is before spoken of in
answering his reasons for that church. The Scripture shows them to be
departed from the faith of Christ, 2. These. 2. 1. Tim. 4. to bedead in syn,
Rev. 20. to be under the wrath of God, Rev. 14. 9. 10. 11. Our opposite
himself says of that church, She is a notorious harlot and idolatress: and of
the Hierarchy (the ministers of that church, which have the same baptism
with the people, and do administer baptism to that people) he says, they
are the Man of Syn, the son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. the Beast. Rev. 13.
concerning whom he could not endure that we should ask his proof that ever
they were married unto Christ. And are such a people and Hierarchy, remaining in
that estate, come to the Lord in true faith and repentance? If they have
brought themselves by their idolatries, heresies, and innumerable synns, into a
woeful estate: what are we, that we should justify those whom God
condemns. Let false prophets preach peace unto them, we must notwithstanding
declare the judgments of the Lord, whose wrath is revealed from heaven,
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who deteyn the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.

7. Finally (says he) Whereas they say, the outward washing need not to be
repeated, and yet say also, they have renounced the Romish Baptism as an
impure idol in their abuse; they use shifts, and contradict themselves. For if
the outward baptism be an Idol, why do they reteyn it? Jf not, why have they
renounced it?

Answ. I have formerly showed, the shift and contradiction to be in himself;
who pleaded against the Anabaptists, that there is but one baptism, and now
against us would have two. 2. I have also showed, that Gods ordinance turned
into an idol or lie; the lie, the idol, is to be renounced, the truth of the
ordinance retained: so do we.

That (says he) which they speak of their abuse, is a shift. Difference is to
be put between a thing abused, and the abuse thereof. The scriptures are* the
word of God, and not an impure idol to be renounced, though they be abused by
the Papists and themselves etc.

Answ. when he has naught else to answer, he casts reproaches, and calls my
reason a shift. Would he have me so impious, as to call Baptism, the Lords
supper, or other divine ordinances, idols: unless for the syn and abuse of men,
which turn them to idols, as the truth of God, was turned into a lie by the
Gentiles, Romans 1. 25. And do not I put that very difference which himself here
puts: how then is it a shift in me, more then in him. The scripture in it
self is always pure: yet popish heresies falsely gathered from the scriptures,
are most impure; these we reject, but hold fast the scripture. Water in popish
baptism is Gods good creature, Antichrist has turned it and the action with
it, into an abominable idol, as if it gave grace, and washed away syn by the
work done of a sacrilegious priest. This abomination we reject: the creature of
God, is of his grace sanctified unto us, and we reteyn it.

Now follow his Chr. plea page 34.
other reasons to prove it no idol, but true baptism.

1. Because an Idol, etc. is an invention of man in the worship of God. whereas
Baptism in those churches, is of the holy things of God, a true sign of his
covenant etc.

Answ. The first is granted him: the latter is denied: and he but beggeth the
question. For neither does the church continue in Rome which The Apostles
planted: neither does the true baptism there continue, any more then the true
Supper of our Lord, (turned by them into an abominable Mass,) or any more then
the true ministry, which is changed by his own grant into a man of syn, a
Beast, and the great Antichrist. Or, any more then the true Censure of
excommunication, which they profane against such as forsake their idolatrous
church.

2. Else those churches should not have a mixture of Gods ordinances with their
own inventions, etc but should be utterly deprived of all and every one of Gods
ordinances. But they have such a mixed estate: etc.

Answ. He concludes nothing: but should conclude, therefore it is no idol to
them in their abuse, but Christ's true baptism. This I deny. And first I
answer, that all the heathens had before Christ's coming a mixture of Gods
ordinances with their own inventions: yet were they not therefore in the
covenant of grace, neither had they the true signs and seals thereof. 2. as
men's inventions are idols, so Gods ordinances may by men be turned into idols,
as are the sacraments in Rome. For is not the wheaten God in their supper, an
Idol? what mouth will deny it? Mine opposite pressed with it, passes it over
always, as if he could not see it. That thing alone, would have convinced
this, and many other his reasons of like sort; if he durst have meddled with it.

3. Jf their baptism were an idol, then it should be syn in them to reteyn
that baptism still: etc.

Ans. How often shall we have repetitions of the same thing? He has been
answered: the idol ought to be put away, the ordinance of God, ought to be
retained? If the Jews had made an Idol of Iachin, 2 Chronicles. 3. 17. they should
have repented of their idolatry, but let the pillar stand. And it is the great
syn of the papists, that they keep their Mass, and their popish Christening,
and do not put them away as they are idols, and restore them to their ancient
truth, as they were Christ's ordinances.

Obj. When Israel fell into defiction, the Prophets that blamed their
idolatries, did then also reprove them for not observing religiously such of
the ordinances of God as were still remaining among them. Amos. 8. 5. with 2.
8. 11. 12. and 5. 4. 5. Ier. 17. 21. -- 27. with 2. 20. -- 28. and 7. c. Ezekiel.
20. 7. with v. 12. 13. So far were they from accounting Gods ordinances
retained in apostasy, to be idols, and detestable things, etc.

Answ. So we blame the papists, and all heretics, for not observing
religiously Gods ordinances, whether retained among them, or omitted by them.
Yet were not the prophets so far from counting Gods ordinances abused by them,
detestable things, as he would pretend. Jncense was Gods ordinance, yet in Esa.
1. 13. he says, Incense is an abomination unto me. Sacrifices were Gods
ordinances, yet in Esa. 66. 3. he says, He that kills an Ox, is as if he
slew a man: he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he
that offreth an oblation, as if he offered Swines blood: he that burns
incense, as if he blessed an Jdol. For these and the like reprehensions, the
prophets were counted blasphemers, and persecuted and killed by the Jews: yet
were there not half so many corruptions in their sacrifices, as are in
baptism and the Lords Supper now among the Antichristians: though mine
opposite counts me a blasphemer for speaking of them but as they are. And
what would he say to the Passover, and all the sacrifices that apostate Israel
offered; were they not detestable things through their abuse: When for offering
them as they did, they were by Gods law to be cut off as murderers, and
sacrificers to Devils, Lev. 17. 3. 4. -- 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 17. compared with 1.
King. 12. 28 -- 33. 2. Chron. 11. 15. and 13. 9. and 15. 3. And was that
Passover now a true sacrament and sign of Christ unto them, and seal of the
forgiveness of their syns? If not, then neither was their circumcision: for
Gods people have not one sacrament true and another false unto them in the same
sinful estate.

4. Baptism (says he) in the defection of Christian Churches, is as
circumcision was in the Apostasy of Jsrael. But circumcision in that estate
was not an idol or lying sign, etc. but the Lords ordinance, a true sign, had
before their defection, and still continuedin their apostasy; as has also
come to pass in the Christian Church, concerning baptism, Genesis 17. 7. -- 14.
and Lev. 12. 2. 3. with 2. King. 13. 23. 2. Chron. 30. Ier. 9. 26. Ezekiel. 23.
and 32. 24. 26. 29. 32. Also Mat. 28. 18. 19. Romans 6. 3. 4. with 2. These. 2. 4.
Rev. 11. 1. 2. 19.

Answ. As baptism is answerable to circumcision, so is the Lords Supper to the
Passover: all of them Gods ordinances in themselves but abused by the
idolarrous Israelites, and by the Antichristians to their further judgment.
Yet nothing so far abused in Israel, as in the church of Rome. Did ever the
Israelites believe the paschal lamb to be the very natural body of Christ, and
worship it for their maker? Or did they ever add so many abominations to
circumcision, as Antichristians do to baptism? or did they believe that the
circumcising by the work done, took away all their synns. If they had, then I
would prove against all men, that they had turned Gods sacraments into
abominable idols. If they did not, then he has made no equal comparison. But
take them as they were, I deny their facraments to have been true signs of
forgiveness of sins unto them in that their estate. And where is his proof
for this? He cites many Scriptures, but not one that confirms this point in
hand. It is true they had the outward cutting of their foreskin: and so had the
Canaanites of Sichem, Genesis 34. 24. but God instituted the sign of
circumcision, to be the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. Now
one of the Scriptures which he brings for proof, says, All the house of
Jsrael were uncircumcised in the heart, Ier. 9. 26. If they had true faith,
their hearts had been thereby purified, Act. 15. 9. and consequently
circumcised. But they were not circumcised in heart by faith in Christ;
therefore their circumcision could not seal up to them the righteousness of
faith; and so was to them a lying sign through their abuse of it. Paul says,
If thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision,
Romans 2. 25. They transgressed, and continued in transgression, though God
called them to repentance by all his prophets, yet they believed not in the
Lord their God; but rejected his statutes and his covenant that he made with
their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them; and
followed vanity and became vain, etc. and left all the commandments of the
Lord their God, and made them molten images, etc. that the Lord removed them
out of his sight, 2. King. 17. 13. -- 18. and he gave them a bill of divorce,
Jer. 3. 8. and yet they continued circumcision: which could not be to them in
their idolatrous and unrepentant estate, a seal of the righteousness of
says, or forgiveness of their synns, unless we will contradict all the
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. -- 21. Mat. 3. 7. -- 10. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Gal. 5.
16. -- 21. Romans 8. 1 -- 8. Rev. 22. 15.

5. The covenant of God (says he) is an everlasting covenant, which God
continues and respects even in the times of apostafie, yea and when he
chastises the transgression thereof, etc. Otherweise the ground and
continuance of Gods covenant and of the seal thereof, should depend on man's
work and merit, and not frecly and wholly on Gods grace and mercy.

Answ. The first is ambiguous and deceitful: Gods covenant is everlasting, and
continued in times of apostasy; but unto whom? Not to the unrepentant or
unbeleeving that are hardened in their sins, as were the Israelites; but to
them that repent, believe, and turn to the Lord; Levit. 26. 15. -- 40. 41. 42.
-- 45. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20. Prev. 1. 23. -- 33. Ezekiel. 3. 18. -- 21. and 18. 10. --
13. 21. 22. 23. 24. 26. 27. 28.

The second is untrue; for though God damneth unrepentant and unbeleeving
sinners (as in justice he needs must, because they are not in Christ,) yet does
not the covenant or seal depend on man's work or merit. For it is Gods work and
grace through Christ's merits only, that men do repent, believe, and return
unto him, Act. 11. 18. Ephesians. 2. 4. 5. -- 8. 9. And there is no covenant between
God and man, but conditional: for without faith and holiness no man shall see
the Lord, Mark. 16. 16. Heb. 12. 14. Romans 11. 20. 21. 22. 23. Though these
conditions even in men, are the work of God in them, Heb. 8. 10. 12. Whosoever
is born of God, overcommeth the world, synneth not; but keeps himself, and
the wicked one touches him not, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. 18. And they that teach
otherweise, destroy the Gospel, and open a gap to all profaneness and
licentiousness.

Jf God (says he) break the covenant on his part, when men break it on theirs,
then should there still be a new entering into the covenant again between God and
man: and a new baptism daily received again, as the sign and seal thereof.

Answ. God always breaks not the covenant on his part, when men break it on
theirs: but calls them often back unto repentance, Psa. 89. 31 -- 34. Exo.
32. and 33. chapters. But to some that are hardened, and will not repent, he
breaks his covenant visibly, casting them out of his church, cutting them
off, Romans 11. 20. 22. giving them a bil of divorce, Jer. 3. 8. removes the
candlestick, Rev. 2. 5. Otherweise if a man coming from Iudaisme or paganism
to the Christian faith and Church, do again revolt from Christ to Iudaisme or
paganism, and for obstinacy in his sin is cut off by the power of Christ from
his Church: he must still be reputed in the covenant of God visibly on Gods
part: which is most untrue, seeing God on his part has cut them off, and given
them a bill of divorce. If any such return, the covenant must be renewed, Hos.
2. 7. 19. 20. 2. Cor. 6. 17. 18. yet the seal of the covenant once given, is
not to be repeated; as a Christian revolted to paganism, and cut off from the
Church; is not when he returns, baptized again. Because though he was
visibly cut off even of God, for his syn: yet by his return, it appears that
he still belonged to his election of grace which was to man invisible, whiles
he continued cut off. Yea though he received the seal after a false manner,
when it was not due unto him: yet when he turns to the Lord it is not
repeated. As the Israelites which were circumcised after they were divorced
from God, Ier. 3. 8. had no new circumcision in the flesh, when they turned
unto God, Ezr. 6. 21.

6. If such were the baptism of the Church in Rome, etc. then should it be
likewise in the East Churches, and in all Churches of the world, when they fall
into sin, breaking the covenant. etc.

Answ. I deny the comparison. For Rome is revolted from Christ to Antichrist,
and fallen from grace, (by the Apostles rule, Gal. 5. 4.) and is become dead in
syn, Rev. 20. and is not the true Church of Christ, but a Man of syn, and whore
of Babylon, 2. These. 2. Rev. 17. which things are before proved. Such is not
the state of all Churches that syn and break the convenant: till for their
hardness and contempt of God, they be also cut off, as Rome is: which when they
be, then have they no true sacraments any longer among them.

7. If there, baptism were indeed a lying sign and fiction, then would it
follow that there should be no salvation for any members of those Churches,
reteining the baptism there received. For the sign has reference to the
covenant and thing signified, and so a lying sign must have respect to a lying
covenant. And by a lying covenant there is no salvation to any, etc.

Answ. The covenant which the Church of Rome has made with Antichrist, is a
lying covenant; and has lying signs to confirm it; and God has sent them
strong delusion to believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believe
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnes, 2. These. 2. 11. 12.
Therefore by the covenant and seals of that Antichristian synagogue, we
cannot say, that any one by the promise of God shall be saved. But by the
covenant of grace which God communicates with his elect in that and other
false churches, many are saved: but that is not the covenant of the church. Of
which point, I have spoken before, in answer to his 2. Argument for the church
of Rome. His reasons are the same, again and again repeated. Here further
note, how by his argument, the popish Mass may be justified, thus. If the
Lords Supper or Mass in Rome, be an idol, a lying sign and fiction; then is
there no salvation for the members of that Church, reteyning the Mass. For a
lying sign must have respect to a lying covenant, and by a lying covenant
there is no salvation to any. But the church of Rome (by mine opposites plea)
is in the covenant of salvation, which is the true covenant; therefore it also
has the true sign and seal of that covenant in their Mass or Babylonish
Supper. For our Lords Supper is the true sign and seal of the forgiveness of
synns, and covenant of grace, Mat. 26. 26. 28. Luke 22. 19. 20. If he yield
not this, then he must say, that they have two covenants, the one of life and
salvation sealed to them by baptism, the other of death and damnation, sealed
unto them by the Mass or Supper. So they shall go both to heaven and hell, by
their double covenant.

8. Finally (says he) the baptism of those Churches is from heaven, and not
of men: and is derived unto us from the Apostles of Christ, through the loins
of the church of Rome, etc. Therefore is no idollor lying sign, but the true
sacrament and ordinance of the Lord, Math. 21. 21. and 28. 18. 19. with Romans 6.
3. 4. Heb. 7. 9. 10. 2. Chron. 30. chapter

Answ. I deny this his conclusion, it being but a begging of the question which
he shoud have proved. It is not their baptism which is from heaven: they are
fallen from heaven, and become a Beast (or kingdom Ecclesiastical) arisen out
of the earth, Rev. 13. 11. they are gone out from the Apostolic Church, and
become Antichrists, 1. Joh. 2. 18. 19. Mine opposite himself has granted that
the Pope and his Hierarchy are Antichrist, the Man of syn, the Beast; never
married to Christ. Again he says (in this his Chr. plea p. 3.) Jn baptism the
action is wholly enjoined and laid upon the baptiser, and not upon the
baptized. The baptizers in Rome, are the Priests, which be a part of the beast,
and Man of syn: on them the whole action lies, as he says. Now is this
baptism from heaven? Did God ever bid Antichrist baptize? The whole action
then of popish baptism, lies upon them that are confessed by him, to be
Antichrist: and yet this baptism he will have to be from heaven. 2. They were
not in the loins of the primitive Christian Church, either by nature or by
grace; otherweise then all nations in Moses time, were in the loins of the
primitive Church in Noes time. 3. We have not our baptism from them, but from
God, who has delivered us from Antichrist, and given us to his son Christ; and
has so sanctified to us that baptising with water in his name, which they
idolatrously and synfully abused; as we need no other outward washing, but to
be baptized by his spirit; as his dealing with such as had been circumcised in
Israel, (after they were become a false church, and were divorced from him) and
returned again unto him, does assure us; 2. Chron. 30. chapter Ezr. 6. 21. His
reason may also as probably be framed thus. The Lords Supper or Mass in the
Church of Rome, is from heaven, not of men, Math. 26. Luke 22. and is derived
unto us from the Apostles of Christ, through the loins of that Church, which
have from that time retained and continued it to this day. Therefore it is not
an idol or lying sign; howsoever all protestants with one mouth call it
justly, an idol, an horrible idol, an abomination, and the like. The
Mininistery of the church of Rome, is from heaven, and not of men, Romans 12. and
is derived to us from the Apostles, through the loins of that church, which
have from that time continued it to this day. Therefore it is not the Man of
Syn, the Beast, the Antichrist, as all protestants say, and as Mr. Johnson
himself has pleaded in his last book, but the true ministry and ordinance of
the Lord. The like may be said for their Excommunications, and all other divine
ordinances which that church has synfully profaned. Yea the very same plea,
might all the heathens have made for their sactifices and divine ordinances,
which from Noe and his sonns, through the loins of their parents were derived
unto them; as before I have manifested.

Whereas I Animad^ p. 68. 69.
described the abominable manner of baptising in the Church of Rome, how
heathen-like they profane Christ's ordinance, mine opposite not being able to
justify their impiety, yet pleads his best, thus;

Chr. plea p. 37.
But will it therefore follow, that the baptism there had is not Gods
ordinance, but an idol, a false and lying sign, etc.

Answ. It follows that they in their Antichristian estate and abuse, have
changed Gods ordinance into an idol and lying sign, as the Gentiles of old,
changed the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 25. And have added also many lies
and lying signs of their own devising, as bad as did the heathens.

Or will it follow, because of their errors and corruptions, that the baptism
there had is to be renounced, and an other new one to be received?

Answ. Their lies and lying signs, and changing of the truth into a lie, are
all to be renounced: but the ordinance of God which he has restored to the
former truth unto those that repent and believe in him, is not to be renounced,
and a new received; and such is the outward washing with water in his name, 2 Chronicles. 30. Ezr. 6. 21.

Is every thing abused or misapplyed by men, straight way an idol?

Answ. Every thing so abused as they do baptism and the Lords Supper, is
straight way an idol: for divine honor is given to the creature, and work of
a wicked man's hand, Exodus 20. Yea let him be a witness against himself: for
afterward in page 246. he says touching book-prayer; that it is an image and
similitude of spiritual prayer, which yet it is not. And so these books and
stinted prayers prescribed by man in the worship of God, come in deed to be
idols, supplying the place of the word and spirit of God, which ought not to
be. Here the abuse of the book by his own grant, makes it in deed an idol:
for the book may lawfully be used and read of men for instruction, as well as
written Sermons, Homilies, etc.

Do they that are baptized, bow down to it and worship it?

Answ. Did the infants that were offered to Molech, (Levit. 20. ^.) bow down and
worship it? Or they that made their belly their God, Phil. 3. 19. did they bow
down to their belly and worship it? Or, do they that make the book an idol, as
himself says; bow down and worship the book? How strangely does he plead: as
if idols cannot be set up in, and worshipped with the heart. But they bow down
and worship the bread in the Supper: will he grant that to be an idol?

Jf that were done unto it (says he) as was unto the Sun among the Jews; why
might it not be still notwithstanding Gods ordinance in it self: as the Sun was
the true Sun, and Gods creature, even unto them, and in that their estate,
whiles they made it an idol to themselves.

Answ. O fraud and guile in pleading for idolaters! Every creature of God is
Genesis 1. 31.
good, every ordinance of God is holy in it self: who doubts of it? If this
distinction helps the popish sacraments, it helps the heathens idols of
silver and gold, which are Gods good creatures in themselves. But it is a mere
fallacy to reason as he does from the Sun to Baptism; from a creature which
is an absolute substance, to a sacrament which is a relation of the covenant
between God and men. No idolatry, unbeleef, or other wickedness can hinder the
Sun from being Gods creature unto men in that their sinful estate. If it be
likeweise in the sacrament, then no idolatry, unbeleef, or other wickedness, can
hinder baptism and the Lords supper from being true signs and seals of Gods
covenant of grace and forgiveness of synns, unto Turks or Pagans, in their
sinful estate, if they baptize with water in the name of the Lord, and eat the
bread and wine in the Supper of our Lord. But he should have known that common
received rule of all truly religious, that Nothing is in deed a sacrament,
without the use ordained of God: as we are taught of the Apostle, This is not
to eat the Lords Supper: 1. Cor. 11. 20. The water that flowed out of the rock,
was the same creature of God to men that drunk of it, and to the beasts that
drunk of it, Numb. 20. 11. but it was a sacrament to men only, using it for a
confirmation of their faith, by a divine institution, 1. Cor. 10. 4. Further,
by his reason, it is undeniable that the Pope himself (whom he acknowledges
to be Antichrist) and all that partake with him in his Mass, notwithstanding
all their idolatry and heresy thereabout, do eat the true sacrament, sign
and seal of the forgiveness of their synns. And why then should he deny the
Pope to be as good a Christian as himself: seeing all they are blessed whose
synns are forgiven them, Romans 4. 6. 7.

Let it be observed, that they baptize only in the name of the Lord: and with
acknowledgement of the Articles of the Christian says, as in their form of
baptism may be seen.

Answ. And let it also be observed, that they sacrifice their Mass (or
celebrate their idolatrous supper) only in the name of the Lord; and with
acknowledgement of the same Articles of Christian faith, even by the Pope
himself. Why then has he pleaded against the Pope and his Hierarchy, that
they, they only are the Man of syn, the son of perdition, the Beast, the
Antichrist; and why wondered he so at me, when I called for proof that Christ
was married to that Beast; seeing he has the same baptism, the same Lords
Supper, the same belief touching the Articles of faith, that the people of his
church have. But their counterfeit profession of Christ is before discovered.
And they that baptize (which are the Hierarchy) he confesses to be the Man of
syn, the Antichrist, they are none of the church (as we have heard) but ulcers,
gangrenes, etc. what now have such to do with the name of the Lord, or
administration of the seals of his covenant. And compare with this, that which
himself says in the 3. page of his book, that the action ( of baptism) is
wholly enjoined and laid upon the baptiser, and not upon the baptized. If this
be so, where has God laid the action of baptizing upon Antichrist, the Man of
syn: and if God has not laid it upon him, how can he truly do it in Gods
name?

How will they prove (says he) that it is a lying sign unto them in their
estate, seeing baptism ( as the other sacraments in Israel and under the
Gospel) has this in it to be a sign by the ordinance of God, not at the
pleasure of man. And God is the God of truth, and appoynteth no lying signs,
but true. Neither can man's iniquity make Gods signs to be lying signs. Synful
therefore and erroneous it is so to think, if not also blasphemous so to speak.

Answ. And was it sinful and erroneous (thinks he) in Paul, when he said,
They changed the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 25. For if man's iniquity
cannot change Gods signs into lying signs: how should it change the truth of
God into a lie? And how could Jeremy have proved unto the Jews (if mine
opposite had then lived to plead for them) that those were lying words, when
they said The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. Ier. 7. 4. for
had they not in deed the Temple of the Lord, his true ordinance and sign,
whereof they spoke? The word of God is truth, Ioh. 17. 17. How then should man's
iniquity, make Gods truth to be a lie unto themselves, though they pervert the
word unto all manner false-doctrine, error and heresy* Idols are lies, Esa.
44. 20. Ier. 16. 19. 20. How can the Pope make an idol of the bread in the
sacrament, though he fall down and worship it, and believe it is his maker:
seeing as it is bread, it is a true thing, and Gods good creature; as it is
sacramental bread, it is a true sign by the ordinance of God, who appoynteth
no lying signs. Is it not blasphemous now, and would he not rend his clothes
as did Math. 26. ^.
Caiaphas, if he should hear one call the Popes sacrament of the altar, an
idol, or a lying sign unto him in that estate? But to conclude, The sacraments
are in deed signs by the ordinance of God, not at man's will: Gods ordinance
makes them signs of grace to the faithful receivers only, 1. Cor. 11. 20.
29. Romans 2. 25 Act. 8. 36. 37. If infidels and Antichrists falsely challenge and
usurp Gods signs, and abuse them to open idolatry, and their own perdition;
they change the truth of Gods ordinance into a lie unto themselves; and whiles
they vainly think to have forgiveness of synns by them, they add syn unto syn,
and receive their own damnation.

Whereas I had Animadv. ag. 69.
set down two reasons to prove the Popish baptism false, and a lying sign
unto them: mine opposite passes them over, as too heavy for him; and comes to
Chr. plea ag. 38.
set down differences between Gods ordinances and men's corruptions; Gods
signs, and men's errors: Marriage, meats and drinks, and the abuses of these;
the scriptures, and the errors gathered from them; the Sun, Moon and Stars, as
they are creatures, and as they are made idols and worshipped of men, etc.
Wherein he labors to prove the thing which we hold; and does most
injuriously intimate against us, as if we thought the contrary. Should we be so
wicked as to imagine the ordinances of God, or his creatures to be evil in
themselves? Far be it from us. Nay we say, that the papists for abusing the
sacraments, and turning them to lies and idols, shall have the greater
judgment: not for abusing bread and wine and water as they are creatures
only, but for abusing them as they are sacramental signs ordained of Christ,
which makes their profanation more horrible, their damnation more just. But
this is a practice of many, that plead for error; to leave the arguments which
do convince them, and to propone new questions and reasons of their own: that
they may seem to say something, by multitude of words.

So when I showed Anima p. 69.
the example of the idolatrous Israelites, that 2. Chro. Ezr. 6. 21
repenting and forsaking their false Synagogues and lying signs in them
usurped, they needed not a new outward cutting or circumcising, as is showed at
large in our former writings. Discovery, p. 116. -- 120. Apolog. p. 110. --
113. He passes over the reasons manifested in those books, as if he had never
seen them: when as the one was most of it penned by himself. And now he
pleads:

Chr. p^e p. 39.
Whereas they say, that circumcision was also a lying sign, and false sacrament
to Jsrael in their defection, how do they prove it? where does the Scripture
teach it? will they have us take it on their bare word, and believe that their
saying are Oracles? etc.

Answ. He might have seen reasons in the books before cited, besides those that
I have set down. But thus in seeking to wound us, he has smitten through his
own sides, as if himself when he wrote those things in our Apology, would
have had men believe his bare word, and that his sayings were Oracles. Whereas,
if ever he wrote soundly in his life, he did it in that Apology, as all men
of good judgment may perceive. Further now to answer him, I say, that I spoke
of their lying signs, which employed their Passover and sacrifices, as well as
their circumcision. And those being so profaned, as for them they were by Gods
Law to be cut off as murderers, Levit. 17. as sacrificers to Divils, not to
God, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2. Chron. 11. 15. and 15. 3. were they then true signs unto
them of Gods grace and favor, and forgiveness of their synns in Christ? The
Scripture teaches, they could not be partakers of the Lords table, and of the
table of Divils, 1. Cor. 10 21. In particular, for their circumcision, I proved
it thus, Anima^ p. 68.
True circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of says, Romans 4. 11.
Jsrael in their apostasy were fallen from the faith Hos. 11. 12. they were
without the true God, without Priest to teach, and without Law, 2. Chron. 15.
3. and how then could they have the true circumcision the seal of the
righteousness of says, and forgivenes of their sins in that sinful estate.
Thus I showed Gods words (not mine own) for oracles.

He asks, if we will be wiser, and more righteous then God himself, who
accounted them still to be his people, under his covenant, and himself to be
their God, and upon this ground called them to repentance, etc.

Answ. All this notwithstanding, whiles they continued unrepent and
unbeleeving, and 2. King. 17 3. 14 15. 6.
hardened their necks against the Lord their God; etc. their circumcisim (by
Paul's doctrine) was made uncircumcision, Romans 2. 25. their sacrifices were an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. And he might have seen in the
Scriptures, that though Israel were divorced from the Lord, Ier. 3. 8. and not
his people; or wife, nor he her husband, Hos. 1. 9. and 2. 2. yet they are in
respect of their former state, their continual profession, and the future
mercy toward them, called Gods people still, even till Christ's time, Esai.
11. 11. 16. Amos. 9. 14. That he should not urge a phrase (as his manner is,)
against the plain doctrines of the Scripture.

Obj. What will they say to the circumcision of Judah in their apostasy, etc.
was it also among them none of Gods ordinance, but an idol? etc.

Answ. It was Gods ordinance, though abused by the unworthy receivers, as
before is showed. But he from a false church, and Babylon, fl^eth to Sion the
true Church corrupted; which is his perpetual fallacy. If Judah, or any
Church in the world had done with the sacraments as Rome has done, they had
changed them into idols, contrary to the 2. commandment. But Judah never did
so with circumcision and the Passover; he shows no word of God to prove it.

Obj. Have the gates of hell more prevailed against the Christian Church since
Christ's coming, then they did or could against the Church of the Jews before
his coming in the flesh? Mat. 16. 18.

Answ. This old popish reason, has been often answered by many Writers against
the Antichristians: and is of no more force for Rome turned to Antichrist, then
for Ephesus, Corinth, and other churches turned to Mahomet. For what privilege
(besides a popish dream) had Rome above Ephesus? Should it, (because it
crucified Christ, and is therefore cursed above all cities,) have prerogative
above Ephesus, wherein was a church (in Paul's time) which was the ground and
pillar of truth. 1. Tim. 1. 3. and 3. 15. yet is that church long since cut
off: but Romes church must continue, for her good service to Divils and idols,
Rev. 9. 20. and for worshipping the Beast, Rev. 13. He might have seen in Rev.
12. that the woman the Church perishes not, though she be fled into the
wilderness, from the presence of the Serpent, and synagogue of Antichrist. His
other repetitions again and again; are before answered.

Obj. The ordinances of God may in any churches become unprofitable to men by
their own sins, circumcision may be made uncircumcision to such as break the
Law, etc. Romans 2. 25. 26. so baptism now. But shall we therefore say, that
they are not in such churches, to such persons, the Lords ordinances, nor his
true signs and sacraments, but idols and lying signs, etc. Was the Lords
table in the Church of Corinth, a table of Divils; or the Lords Supper an idol
or lying sign, etc. to such as eat it unworthily? Was it not the Lords
ordinance, and true sacrament, though sinfully abused by them? etc.

Ans. The Lords ordinances abide always the same, and holy in themselves,
howsoever abused by Christians, by Antichristians, by Jews, Turks or Pagans,
to their perdition. Neither is there a like degree of abuse in all; neither
does every abuse make a thing an idol: but when the honor due to God alone,
is given to a creature, then it is made an idol: and so I have proved is done
in the church of Rome; to which proofs he answers not. I instanced Animadv*
p. 73. 74.
the Lords Supper in Rome, whereof they have made an abominable idol,
worshipping a piece of bread as their maker. Mine opposite will never mention or
meddle with this, but shunneth it as convinced in conscience. And from
Antichrists church, runs to the Christian Church in Corinth; and asks if
the Lords table there, were a table of Divils? I answer, No; not then in
Corinth, but now in Rome, they have made it by their idolatrous Mass, a table
of Divils: and as Moses said of Israel, they sacrificed to Divils, not to God.
Deuteronomy. 32. 17. so say I of these Antichristians, their sacrifice of the altar is
a sacrifice to Divils, not to God. This he should have disproved, if he could
have done it; and not to leave the persons and things whereof we dispute, and
run to others. So the Lords baptism, they have turned into an idol* ascribing
the gift of grace (which only is Gods) to water, words and works of men: that
as the Gentiles turned the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. these Rev. 11. 2.
Gentiles also have turned the truth of God, and of his sacraments into lies.
And as the Lords incense and sacrifices were an abomination to him, from the
hands of wicked sinners. Esai. 1. 13. Prove. 15. 8. so the Lords sacraments are
an abomination to him, from the hands of Antichristians. And as he does, so
ought all his people to esteem of them; and not to regard Ier. 7. 4. 8. 9. 10.
lying words of such as cry nothing but the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, the sacraments and ordinances of the Lord; to deceive Gods people,
and to harden the sinners in their wicked works.

Whereas I distinctly Animadv. p. 72. etc.
showed the idolatry committed in Antichrists baptising of his subjects, partly
by perverting the holy signs, as the Israelites did the brazen serpent, ^.
King. 1^. 4. partly by inventing signs of his own, as crosses, exorcismes,
etc. Mine opposite first censureth the things I wrote to be notable shifts,
errors, * Chr. plea page 42.
contradictions, abuse of scriptures, vain distinctions, and odious assertions.
Such grace has flowed from his tongue and pen.

1. Observe (says he) a needless distinction of idols, nothing helping for the
question in hand.

Answ. The distinction is true and needful to discern the truth of the
question, against his clamorous reproaches, as if I called Gods ordinance in it
self considered, an idol.

2. Jf they mean (says he) that baptism there had is an idol of both sorts,
they do the more increase their error.

Answ. I do so mean: yet is there no increase of error: I hear his bold
words, but no proof.

3. They speak of crosses, exorcismes, etc. whereas we speak of the baptism it
self.

Ans. So do I: but of popish baptism, mixed with Christ's ordinances and
Antichrists together. All parts of a thing put together, make the whole: and it
is deceitful dealing to dazel men's eyes with the whores golden cup, and to
pass by the abominable ingredients, the fornications that are in it, when both
are joined together, Rev. 17. 4.

4. They speak of the abuse, our question is of the thing it self,
notwithstanding their sinful abuse.

Ans. Our question is of popish baptism, which cannot be rightly handled
without looking to their abuses: for how should we judge of the heathens
worship and sacrifices, if we look not upon their abuses, as Paul does in
Romans 1. The same I answer to his 5. exception, of their opinions and errors.
Take away the errors of actions, and what fault can we find with any?

6. If the Romish baptism be a lie in the right hand of all that receive it:
then of infants; then also in their own right hand that were baptized there.
Not to speak of the Martyrs, etc.

Ans. There is no respect of persons with God. Be they old or young, better or
worse: syn is syn in all. Though Gods grace in Christ, purges syn from his
elect, which remains in the reprobates.

His 7. 8. and 9. exceptions, are vain; and repetitions of former things,
without conviction. If Bellarmine or any speak truth, we may speak it with
them: so Paul speaks with the heathen Poets, Tet. 1. 12. 13. Act. 17. 28.

10. Jf they mean the true sacraments in Christ's Church, seal not up to Gods
people, forgiveness of sins, it is an error: if they mean that they do not
themselves take away sins, and conferr grace, they use shifts, and keep not to
the point of the relation here spoken of, and as it is appointed to be by the
Lord himself.

Answ. The first I grant him; and he knew well it was not my meaning. The
latter I have proved, that they being under Gods wrath, 2 Thessalonians. 2. have no
seal from God of forgiveness of synns in that estate. And their doctrine of
conferring grace by the work done, is heretical and idolatrous: which he not
being able to gainsay, puts it away (as his manner is) with a shift.

11. From Gods sentence of condemnation touching Antichrist and his adhaerents,
they reason to Gods baptism never condemned by the Lord, but still continued
in the Church and Temple of God, where Antichrist sits.

Ans. Of his own mouth let him be judged. We reason only of Antichrist and
his adherents, the Whore of Babylon, or adulterous church, which he says are
condemned of God. How then does God give them the sign and seal of grace and
forgiveness of synns? Gods baptism we condemn not, neither our Lords
Supper: but Antichrists Christening and Mass, we deny to be Christ's baptism
and supper. He still beggeth the question which he should prove. And let him
take away Antichrist and his adhaerents; and the church of Rome, whereof we
reason, will be vanished as smoke, and come to nothing: as take away Christ and
his adhaerents, so there will be no Christian Church, nor sacraments to be
found.

12. From the brazen serpent, which was but a temporary and extraordinary
sign, the use whereof was ceased when it was thus perverted, etc. they reason
to baptism, which is an ordinary sign, whose use still continues, and may
never be taken away or destroyed, to the end of the world.

Ans. We reason not from the one to the other: but by the abuse of the one, we
show the abuse of the other. And what is this in him but a shift, to plead the
temporarinesse of that sign? For if they had burnt incense to it in the
wilderness; or if they had burnt incense to the 2. Chro. 3. 10. 17. and 4. 3.
4.
Cherubims, or brazen Bulls, or pillars which were continued signs, they had
made idols of them nevertheless. Otherweise the wheaten god in the Popish
supper is no idol: seeing the use of the Lords Supper continues to the worlds
end, as well as baptism. And hitherto of the shifts as he calls them;
wherein how he has shifted in sted of answering by the word of truth, the wise
reader may see. Like these are his Chr. plea page 44.
catalogue of Errors.

1. That the baptism had in the church of Rome is an idol, etc.

Ans. 1. This is proved by the 2. commandment, Exodus 20. whiles they ascribe
divine honor to the creature. 2. It is proved also by his own assertion, that
books of prayer, read for prayer, are idols; as before I showed from his words
in his last book. 3. He shows not one word to prove it an error in me: but
says, Of which more hereafter. Thus vain tantologies are his arguments to
oppose the truth which he calls Error.

2. That whereas idols are of two sorts, both the kinds are in Popish baptism.
Jf it be as the brazen serpent, that from an holy sign was perverted to an
idol, it should presently be destroyed, as 2. King. 18. 4.

Answ. I deny his inference. If they had burnt incense to the Temple, should it
have been destroyed. The brazen serpent was named but for an instance, to show
that holy signs may be made idols by wicked men. This doctrine he being not
able to convince; leaves it, and would evade by the destroying of it. As if
all idols must be destroyed. The heathens made idols of the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Beasts, Fishes, Mountains, Lakes, etc. Must all these therefore be destroyed?
If men make an idol of their King, as did the Babylonians, Dan. 6. 7. must the
King presently be destroyed? whoever heard of such divinity? That which he
adds of the Popes crossings, exorcismes, etc. is before answered: for he
says, Our question is of the baptism it self; as if those were not a part of
Popish baptism. He would have wicked men's actions separated from all their
synns, errors and wickedness in doing them. So in deed I could justify all
idolatry in the world: for take away the error and syn of an action, and that
which remains must needs be good.

3. They say not they have renounced the abuses and kept the baptism it self,
etc. but say they have renounced that Romish baptism, as an impure idol in
their abuse. If they have in deed so done, then here again is notable error
and Anabaptistry. And now then what outward baptism have they remaining to
themselves?

Ans. Neither does Solomon say, the abuse of the wickeds sacrifice is an
abomination, and except the sacrifice as holy: but he says expressly, The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. He was
answered before to his two baptismes outward and inward, that the Apostle (and
elsewhere himself) makes but one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. And the outward part
thereof we reteyne as now sanctified to us of God; as the outward cutting of
the idolatrous Israelites was to them that repented, 2. Chron. 30. Ezr. 6. 21.
which again he puts off till afterward.

4. Note also that the brazen Serpent was not in deed an idol: but an holy
ordinance of God, which in time came to be idolatrously abused, etc.

Ans. He says all things, but proves nothing. It was in deed an idol, and an
holy ordinance idolatrously abused also. These things stand well together. The
Sun was in deed an idol to them that worshipped it: and yet it was a good
creature of God also idolatrously abused. The bread in the sacrament is in deed
an idol to Papists that worship it as their maker: yet is it also in it self,
Gods ordinance idolatrously abused: so is popish baptism. He might even as
well say, that Reubens fact in lying with his fathers concubine, was not in deed
adultery; but an abuse of Gods ordinance of marriage, or a defiling of his
fathers bed, Genesis 35. 22. and 49. 4.

5. Moreover, the brazen Serpent was but a temporary ordinance, etc.

Ans. This was the twelft of his shifts before: now he repeateth and
multiplieth it among his Errors. I refer the reader to my former answer.

6 That the Romish baptism is an impure idol in their abuse, standing up in
the place of Christ, and his precious blood, which it is not, pretending to
give grace, etc. which it does not. But the baptism in the church of Rome is
Gods ordinance, had and planted there by the Apostles, etc. These are the
errors and abuses of men about it, not the nature of the baptism it self.
Otherweise all that have received it, ought to renounce it utterly, and to get
an other outward baptism, etc.

Answ. This also was before objected and answered: and it is a world to see how
he wearieth his reader with repeating worthless reasons. Sacrificing among the
heathens I have before proved was Gods ordinance. So was the Lords supper in
the church of Rome in the Apostles time: so was excommunication; so was the
Ministry of Bishops, etc. These have been continued in Rome with their
baptism: may we not say therefore the Mass is an idol, or that the Bishop
the Pope of Rome now is an idol and Antichrist? Of our getting an other
baptism (which is the usual foot and base of his arguments) we have before
spoken that which he could not take away.

Obj. Will these men say, that we can without sin retain any thing, and not
utterly reject it, that stands up in the place of Christ's precious blood? etc.

Ans. We cannot indeed without syn reteyne it, while so it stands: neither
do we so reteyn it; far be it from us. Neither might the Gentiles reteyn the
lie, which they had made of the truth of God, Romans 1. 25. But when the lie was
done away, and God restored to them his former truth, that they were to
reteyn. The idolatrous Israelites, if they had set up their own blood of
circumcision in place of Christ's blood; might not without syn have retained it
whiles so it stood. Yet repenting of their idolatry, they might keep the
outward sign without repeating it: even so we in this case.

Obj. Errors and abuses of men may hurt themselves: but cannot change the
nature of Gods ordinance in it self.

Answ. Not in it self I grant, considered without their abuse: but together
with their abuse, Gods ordinance of sacrifice, incense, etc. is an abomination
to him, Prove. 15. 8. Esa. 1. 13. So baptism and the Supper now in Rom, are
abominations to the Lord.

Obj. Man's unbeleefe cannot make the faith of God of none effect. God is true,
though every man be a liar, Romans 3. 3. 4.

Ans. What may we think would he conclude from this Scripture? To cite a place,
and leave it doubtful what he infers, is to deceive the reader. If he
intend (according to the question in hand) that the sacraments are seals of
grace and of salvation unto men, whether they believe or do not believe: it is
a notable error overthrowing the Gospel; and establishing the popish herefie
of grace ex opere operato, by the work done. The Scriptures teach, touching
Gods word and promise, that it profits not them that hear it, if it be not
mixed with faith in them, Heb. 4. 2. if men believe not, they shall not be
established, Esai. 7. 9. but shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16. they shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on them, Ioh. 3. 36. Neither is the faith of
God, by men's unbeleef, made without effect. For his truth and faithfulness is
confirmed as well in damning unrepentant and unbeleeving sinners, as in saving
those that repent and believe. When the righteous turns from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity; he shall dye in his iniquity; and yet
the way of the Lord is equal; as says the prophet; Ezekiel. 18. 24. 25. 26.
Again, as all men naturally are liars, and do fail and break covenant on
their part, by syn; which God never does: so if they continue in syn, and
turn not to the Lord by repentance and faith, they all perish, Luke 13. 3. 5.
Romans 8. 6. -- 10. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Jude v. 5. But let men repent, and turn
from their transgressions, so iniquity shall not be their ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30.
Otherweise it would follow, that after men are entered into covenant with God,
and are baptized: though they fall from Christ to Antichrist (as the church of
Rome has done) though they fall to Mahomet (as many East churches have done;)
though they turn to be Jews or pagans, and so dye, yet they shall be saved;
for their unbeleef cannot make the faith of God of none effect. But so to
expound this Scripture Romans 3. were to turn judgment into wormwood, unto the
destruction of men's souls. And if mine opposite would not gather some such
thing from it; what will it help his plea for the baptism of the church of
Rome, which is the whore of Babylon, whom God has devoted unto destruction,
except they repent. Rev. 17. and 18. chap.

Obj. The Jews in Christ's time and before, holding justification by
circumcision, and works of the Law; set these up in the place of Christ and
his precious blood, etc. Should we therefore say, that circumcision was then an
impure idol in their abuse? etc. Or should we not rather learn to put
difference between Gods ordinance in it self, and between man's abuse thereof,
etc.

Ans. Whenever Jew or Gentile, held justification by circumcision, sacrifice,
or works of the Law: they made their sacraments, sacrifices, and works idols,
impure idols to themselves in their abuse. And it is admirable, that men
teaching religion, should be ignorant, that whatsoever creature or work of man
is put in the place of God and Christ; it is thereby made an idol: though Gods
ordinances, and the works of his Law in themselves are always good; but
turned to idols, are always evil, and an abomination to the Lord, as is
before proved. What mouth can deny, but the Papists are idolaters in praying to
Saints and Angels? If idolaters, then they serve idols: if they serve idols in
so praying; then the Saints and Angels are idols to them in their sinful
abuse. Yet who knows not that the Saints and Angels in heaven, are blessed
and holy, and not Idols in themselves. But this is mine opposites continual
fallacy whereby he would deceive his reader; that because Baptism and the
Lords supper, are Gods holy ordinances in themselves; therefore the Papists that
worship them as Gods, have not made them idols to themselves. And under this
shelter of falsehood he shrowdeth himself when he has naught else to answer:
repeting it I know not how often.

7. That the Romish baptism is a lie "in the right hand of all that so ^sa.
44. 20.
receive it. Where the Prophet speaks of idols, that by nature are no Gods
etc. Jf the Romish baptism were in the nature of it no baptism etc, then
should it without question be renounced as a very idol in deed. etc.

Answ. Belike then, he would have us take it for no lie, but for a truth, that
popish baptism gives grace, and washes away syn by the work done. Neither is
it a lie, but truth, that bread in their Mass is very Christ really and
properly, as he died on the cross. To apply Esa. 44. 20. against these things,
is to hold an error. Well, let my error continue with me: for I trust I shall
always hold that they are lies in the right hand of all that so receive them.
And as the prophet speaks of the^ that by nature were no Gods: so do I. For
neither is water in Baptism, not wine in the Mass, Christ's blood naturally:
neither can they do that which only Christ's blood effects. And how ever
there is difference between the idols of false Gods, and the idols of the true
God; yet the scripture calls them all Divils, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15.
1 Cor. 10. 20. so I call them all lies. And where he says, if it were in the
nature of it no baptism; he might have known, that Gods true ordinance of
baptism, turned into a lie, makes it a lying baptism, and yet some baptism
it is, though not the true. Whereof the lie being put away, and the truth
restored of God unto us; there need no other renunciation, as before I have
proved. His other repetitions and questions of the same thing; need no further
answer.

Obj. How will he show, that baptism is so received as standing in the place of
Christ etc. seeing they are infants usually that receive it there etc.

Answ. Even as he will show against the Anabaptists, that baptism is truly and
rightly received in Christian churches: where they are infants usually that
receive it. For as the covenant of Christ is to parents and their seed: so the
covenant of Antichrist is to parents and their seed; even the covenant of
destruction; that their babes be dashed against the Rock, Psalm. 137. 9. Esa.
13. 16. The infants of Jews, are Jews; the infants of Turks are Turks; the
infants of Christians are Christians: so the infants of Antichristians are
Antichristians.

Obj. Considering also their profession of Christ, and baptising with water in
the name of the Father Son and holy Ghost; and that this alone is in deed the
baptism of that church; the other things being but erroneous opinions, and
sinful additions etc.

Answ. We have before considered that the profession of that church, is all one
with the profession of the Pope, who either is not Antichrist, or else he
denies both the Father and the Son, (as the Apostle says, 1 John 3. 22.) how
ever in word he confesses both. 2. As they baptize with water in the name of
the Father etc: so they consecrate their Supper or Mass with bread and wine,
and the words of Christ's institution, Mat. 26. why does he not also affirm,
that their Mass is no idol, no lie, in the hands and mouths of them that
receive it as their maker, and eat their God, more profanely then the heathens.
3. It is untrue that that alone (which he mentions) is in deed the baptism
of that church: in deed it ought to be, but so it is not. He might as well say,
their prayers to God, are the only prayers of that church; for by divine
institution so it should be; but it is known they pray also to innumerable
creatures. 4. I grant the other things, are but erroneous opinions, and sinful
additions: and he also must grant, that all the idolatry of the heathens,
condemned in Romans 1. were but erroneous opinions and sinful additions;
contrary to the covenant which God had made with them in Noes days, Genesis 9. 9.
10. 11. etc. Were it not for erroneous opinions, and sinful additions; all men
now should be in that perfect estate wherein at first we were created. Eccles.
7. 29.

8. That the Romish baptism is such, as the saying of the Apostle is verified
in it, an idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8. 4. etc. Jf so, then the
baptism of that church, has no relation to God, nor any divine institution,
representation, or signification in it, etc. Then it ought of necessity to be
rejected etc.

Answ. If The Apostles doctrine be true of idols, that they are nothing, 1 Cor.
8. 4. he ought not to kick against it, or me for alleging it. To his inference
I answer, it has no true relation unto Gods covenant (which is not with that
Antichristian church,) but a false pretended relation it has: as their other
sacrament of the Mass or supper; where also there is a lying relation to
Christ's sacrifice, which they blasphemously renew, crucifying daily the Lord of
glory. To his conclusion, he has often been answered: we reject the idol
wholly; and reteyn only the truth, so far as God by his word has sanctified
it unto us: without either gross Anabaptistry, or notorious blasphemy, which
with open mouth he charge us, and would fray the simple with.

9. That water ( the material thing) in popish baptism, is as the gold and
silver (that is the matter) of the idols spoken of, Psalm. 115. 4. where as the
use of water in baptism is appointed by the Lord and still to be retained, Ioh.
1. 33. etc. but the use of gold for idols, is forbidden, and utterly to be
abandoned, Exodus 20. 23. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. etc.

Answ. He corrupts my words. I Animadv. page 72.
said, An idol for the matter and workmanship is something ( Psalm. 115. 4.) but
for the relation unto God, it is nothing. So Popish baptism as touching the
material thing is somewhat, the salt, water, oil, are Gods creatures: the
outward action is the work of the hands of an idolatrous priest; and this work
remains, as did the work of the idolaters circumcising in Jsrael. etc. This
he makes an error in me* which all that have knowledge, will easily see to be
truth. But the use of water in baptism, (says he) is appointed by the Lord.
True, unto the Christian church it is so: but the use of water in popish idol
baptism, or of bread and wine in the Popish mass, was never appointed by the
Lord: this was the point he should have proved. As God said to the Jews, bring
no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me, Esa. 1. 13. so
says he to the Antichristians, make no more vain baptisings, the Mass is an
abomination to me. Mine opposite says, the use of gold and silver for idols is
forbidden: very well; and is not the use of water, bread and wine for idols
forbidden also? The use of gold to make the images of Cherubims was commanded,
Exodus 25. 18. but if the Gentiles had made themselves golden Cherubims, they
had been idols and syn to them, for God commanded them not. So water, bread and
wine, are commanded the Christian church, in her sacraments: but to the
Antichristian church God commands not these, til they repent and turn to
Christ; then and not before may they use them for holy signs. Psalm. 50. 16.
17. Prove. 21. 27. and 9. 13. 17. 18. In this, his tenth error or exception is
also answered; which is about the very same thing: but that he delyteth in
multiplication.

11 Touching the relation, (which is the mayn thing in a sacrament) that it
should seal up unto them the forgivenes of synns, and (as they blasphemously
say) quite take away synns, and conferr grace; so it is a vain idol, and
nothing. But the Sacraments in their relation are not only seals but signs
also: Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11. etc. Now (by their assertion) the baptism
aforesaid shows nothing at all to the mind, and so is a vain idol and
nothing: and that which it shows to the eye, is but as the gold and silver of
the heathens idols: which if it were true, then in deed there should be nothing
of Gods ordinance* nothing of a true sacrament, etc. And can they then blame
the Anabaptists? etc.

Answ. That there is no true relation in the popish baptism, is sufficiently
proved; the persons being Antichristians, out of the covenant, and without
promise in that estate. That they have the true material things, of washing
with water in the name of the Father etc, I have always granted; though these
materials are abused by them to idolatry, as the Jews abused their sheep and
bullocks to abominable sacrifices. That of the gentiles silver and gold, is
true also touching the matter, which is Gods good creature: further comparison
I made not, though he corrupted my words.

Object. Whether think they that the baptism received in the truest Churches,
do seal up to hypocrites the forgivenes of their synns? If they think not,
whether they will say, that the baptism of those churches has not the relation
which is the mayn thing in a Sacrament. It is generally held that Act. 8. 13.
Simon Magus who was baptized by Philip, was an hypocrite, and that his
baptism did not seal up unto him the forgivenes of his synns: will they
therefore say, that the baptism ministered by the Evangelists, had not the
relation etc? Besides that thus the relation of the sacraments should depend
wholly upon man, and not upon the Lord or his ordinance at all.

Answ. To pass over his form of writing, how he asks questions, when he
should prove or convince: I answer, his question is from the matter in hand,
and so is deceitful. We speak of the outward visible church of Christ and
ordinances belonging thereto; also of the visible Antichristian church and
ordinances there abused. He leaves this, and runs to hypocrites, which men
can not discern; and whom therefore we must leave unto God, among other
secrets, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. To reason from the one of th^se to the other, would
bring all confusion; for hypocrites are lawfully admitted into the Church; as
was Judas, Simon Magus and many other: if upon this ground, open
Antichristians, idolaters, unbeleevers, may be admitted also: then the church
and the world, shall be one confused Babel. To his question I answer; baptism
in true Churches administered as the Apostles and Evangelists did: ^ealeth up to
all, the forgivenes of their synns; unto the judgment of man; and they should
greatly syn, and profane Gods ordinance, to baptize any other. Simon Magus when
he was baptized, it is testified that he believed, Act. 8. 13. so by the
ordinance of Christ, he was to be baptized, Mat. 28. 19. neither knew they him
to be an hypocrite when he was baptized, til afterward. Thus are we bound by
the rule of love, to believe that all rightly baptized in the Christian church,
have the seal of forgivenes of synns, and are buried with Christ by baptism,
and that by one spirit, we are all baptized into one body, Romans 6. 3. 4. 1 Cor.
12. 13. And so mine opposite believing the church of Rome to be Christ's true
church, and to have his true baptism, was bound also to believe them all to be
of one body and one spirit with himself, til they manifest to him the contrary:
which seeing they have not done by all their idolatries, heresies and impieties;
it is not to be thought that ever people which will call themselves Christians,
could do it. As for us, we know the covenant of Christ is not with Antichrist,
or his whoreish church; though therein God has many elect: but we know that his
covenant is with the true Christian church, and all the members of it, although
therein be many hypocrites and reprobates; both which are manifested in time by
their fruits. We walk by the rules reveiled to us of God: secret things are not
for us to judge of, until they be manifested.

Where he concludes, that thus the relation of the sacraments should depend
wholly upon man, and not upon the Lord at all: it is a calumniation without all
color of proof. The relation is by mutual consent, the Lord offering his son
Christ for salvation to all repentant believing sinners: we by grace having
obtained faith, do thereby apprehend Christ for our savior, as in the word, so
in the sacraments.

His next demand about our selves and our baptism had in Rome; is a thing
again and again answered, without running into Anabaptistrie, whither he would
so sayn drive us.

12. These men, err not a little, when they say that ( popish) baptism has
not the relation of a sacrament to them, but is a vain idol and nothing,
because they say of it, that it quite takes away synns. Shall men's erroneous
sayings and opinions make a nullity of Gods ordinances, signs and seals? Can
not God be true, though they be liars? etc.

Answ. Here is an other repetition of that which he forealleged in his 6.
reason or error; which I there refuted. Men's erroneous sayings, opinions, and
doings, do disanull to themselves all Gods promises, signs and seals: which
are only conditional, if men repent, believe and obey; which grace God gives
to all that are Christ's. And if men believe not nor obey, and so be damned:
their damnation impeacheth not Gods truth at all, but confirms it; for he
has said of such, that they shall be damned. Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 3. 36.

Obj. Besides the relation in a sacrament, there is also to be regarded the
commandment of God, who has appointed it to be observed in the church. As
Christ who was without syn etc, yet in obedience to the Law, was circumcised
and baptized. etc. Therefore it should be syn in the church of Rome, if they
should reject baptism and not keep it. Which does plainly evince, that it is
not a vain idol and nothing, (for then it were not syn but their duty to cast
it away; and not to keep it at all) but that it is the Lords ordinance etc.

Answ. The first is true, for without the word and commandment of God, it could
be no seal of his covenant, or have any relation at all thereto. The second is
a deceytful reason, concluding from the holy commandment of God, to the unholy
keeping of it in Rome. It should be syn in them to reject baptism and the
Lords supper professedly: it is syn in them, to keep them as they do
profanely. It were better for a man never to be baptized or eat the Lords
supper all his life, then to communicate with the church of Rome in either of
these, as they profane them: for we may not do evil that good may come thereof,
Romans 3. 8. So his plain eviction that it is not a vain idol in their abuse of
it, is but a plain fallacy: let him apply it to the other Sacrament, and it
will appear. Antichrist has transformed the Lords supper, into an abominable
massing sacrifice, and therein worshipeth a wafer cake for his maker and
redemer: this he durst not deny to be a notorious idol. But his reason (if it
be good) will prove it no idol: thus. It should be syn in the church of Rome if
they should reject the Lords supper and not keep it. Which does plainly evince
that the Lords supper in Rome (though changed by them into a wicked Mass) is
not an idol, for then it were not syn, but their duty to reject it. The
refutation hereof is this; Rome and all nations syn, that do not believe aright
in Christ, and keep all his ordinances. The more that they openly renounce
Christ or any of his ordinances, the more they shall add unto their syn. Yet in
that they keep them not aright* but have changed the truth of God ^m. 1. 25.
^es. 2. 11.
into a lie, and his holy ordinances into idols; they are also great sinners,
for which if God give them not repentance, they are under wrath and damnation,
2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. Of this point, I have spoken 16. etc.
before, in answer to his 6. reason for the church of Rome.

His 13. and last error, is but a repetition of former matters, about the
brazen serpent, Gods ordinances and creatures considered in themselves etc, to
which I have before answered; showing that it helps the Papists no more to
clear them of idolatry herein, then the heathens of old, who made idols of
creatures and ordinances, which in their own nature and first institution, were
good and holy. And hitherto of his errors wrongfully imputed unto us.

To these, by his figure of repetition and multiplication, he has added from
the former grounds, Contradictions, Abuse of scriptures, Uaine distinctions and
Anabaptistical assertions: all which being but the same things turned and
repeated, and by me before cleared; I count it needless labor to make the same
answers again, to his empty calumniations.

Of Circumcision in Israel.
THe reason why we repeat not the outward work of baptising with water again,
such as have been baptized in false churches; is the example of the Israelites:
who after their falling from God and from the Church, and after the Lord had
given them the Jer. 3.
bill of divorce, when they repented and turned to the Lord, were admitted to
the Passover, without any new cutting or circumcising in the flesh: 2 Chronicles.
30. Ezr. 6. And because I denied them in such estate to have true circumcision
(which is the sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11.) mine
opposite as his manner is, charge me with very erroneous and ungodly
assertions, and makes a longsome discourse of the state of Israel, and of
words and phrases used concerning them. And unto ten lines of mine, (in
Animadv. page 70.) he gives an answer of above 30. pages (in his Christian
plea* page 65. to page 96.) to blind his reader with many words. I will briefly
show the insufficiency of his answers.

And first, that Israel after they departed from the Lord, his Temple, altars,
sacrificers, and church; and made new Temples, altars, sacrificers, signs and
a new church of their own divising; that Israel I say, from that time was not a
true church, I have before p. 71. ^
showed my reasons in handling the state of the church of Rome.

Mine opposites Chr. ^ page 58.
first colorable reason, is from such scriptures as still name them the Lords
people, and the Lord to be their God, and to remember the covenant of their
fathers Abraham etc, 2 King. 9. 6. etc. and 13. 22. 23.

Answ. I have heretofore Anim^ p. 81.
answered, that this Argument, They are called the Lords people, therefore they
are his true church; is not to be granted. For 1. Things are named in scripture
sometimes, as they have been before, though they be not so still: as Abigail is
called the wife of Nabal, though he were then dead, and she married to David, 1 Samuel 30. 5. Solomon was begotten of Uriahs wife, whereas she was then David's,
Mat. 1. 6. Jesus was in the house of Simon the Leper, Mat. 26. 6. so named,
because he had been a Leper etc. 2. They were so called in respect of their
profession, that they would be so esteemed and named: though in deed they were
without the true God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. as, O thou that art named the house of
Jakob etc. Mic. 2. 7. 8. Thirdly, in respect of their calling unto him, and his
covenant afterward, though for the present they were none of his: as, Jn that
day, J will marie thee (Jsrael) unto me for ever etc. Hos. 2. 18. 19. 20. 23.
Thus the Gentiles were called Christ's sheep, because they should after be
brought into his fold, Ioh. 10. 16. and God had much people in Corinth an
heathenish city, Act. 18. 10. 1 Cor. 12. 2. And the Jews to this day are Gods
people, and beloved, not for their present state which is cursed, but for the
promise that they shall hereafter be graffed again into Christ, Romans 11. 11.
20. 23. 25. 26. and 9. 4. with Esa. 59. 20. 21. Ezekiel. 34. 23. -- 30. Hos. 3. 5.
Fourthly, Animad page 93.
in comparison with the Philistines and other heathens, they were called the
people of the Lord; because they never renounced their God in name and
professedly, but pretended the contrary. Fifthly, Animad page 89.
that God did not presently cast them off, in respect of calling them to
repentance, and of their dwelling in the land, or as the scripture says ( in 2
King. 14. 27.) of putting out the name of Israel from under heaven. For his
covenant was to punish them by degrees (Levit. 26. 16. 18. 21. 24. 28. 33.) and
at last if they repented not, to scatter them among the heathens, til their
Lev. 2^ v. 41. 39. 4^
uncircumcised hearts should be humbled* and they rued their former syn* and
then he would (...) his first covenant, and so receive them again to grace in
Christ. Unto which I now add this sixth, that God called himself the God of
Jsrael, and them his people, because of many among them that were in deed his;
both such as yielded not to Ieroboams idolatry, but went to Jerusalem to
sacrifice, 2 Chronicles. 11. 16. and seven thousand in Jsrael, which bowed not the
knee to Baal, 1 King. 19. 18. and such also, as erring at first in simplicity,
were by the Prophets brought to repentance: though the general state of the
land never repented, but went on in their syn, til the Lord cast them out of
his sight, as is testified in 2 King. 17.

His Chr. plea ^g. 60.
next chief ground is the comparison of Judah, who likeweise for sook the Lord,
and sometime became more corrupt then Israel: so that if Israel were not in
truth Gods people and church, then Judah was not.

Answ. I have showed how Israel might be called Gods people still: and why I
judge them not to be Gods true Church. For Judah, they changed not the
constitution wherein they were set of God, made no new face of a Church, no new
Temples, priests etc as did Israel. Therefore they did wickedly in the true
Church, as often times greater impiety is committed in 1 Cor. 5. 1.
the Church, then among the heathens: yet the state of the church and of the
heathens may not be compared; though the punishment of such as transgress in
the Church, and repent not, shall be worse then the heathens, Mat. 11. 20. --
24. Secondly, the defection of Judah was not general like Isreal's, (though
sometime the scriptures speak generally, when many are corrupted,) but even
then when for their synns they were carried into Babylon, there was a godly
company, compared to a basket of good figgs, Ier. 24. 2. 5. 6. 7. which had
cried out for all the abominations, and were marked and reserved of God, Ezekiel.
9. 4. etc* Thirdly, the state of Judah was often times reformed by many good
Kings, as Josiah, Ezekiah, Iehosaphat and others; the people brought to
repentance, and the covenant renewed: but never so in Israel, by any king that
there reigned, from their first apostasy, to the captivity. 2 King. 17.
Fourthly, for the wicked troops in Judah, that refused admonition, persecuted
their brethren, killed the Prophets, mainteyned idolatry; for which the godly
left their sinful communion; I hold them not Gods true Church, or in his
covenant of grace. Because the covenant was always conditional, (if men repent
and believe) as I have before proved, and mine opposite himself has granted.
This may suffice, to his often repeated reasons, which are deduced and varied
from the grounds aforesaid.

Touching 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
IShewed from the Prophet Azariahs speech to Asa and all Judah; that Israel was
without the true God, without teaching Priest, and without Law, 2 Chronicles. 15. 1.
2. 3. and therefore could not in that estate be judged to be in the covenant of
grace.

Mine opposite Chr. pl^ page 65.
labors to bring Judah it self also within this estate: but that has no
color with it. The distinction of names, Judah and Israel; the state of Judah
under Solomon, Roboam, Abijah, and Asa, (though corruptions were come in,)
plainly shows it otherweise; and I leave it to the readers judgment. 2. he
grants, it may well be understood of the 10. tribes, and shows good reasons
for it: how then does he take away the weight of the reason, that Israel being
without the true God, without a teaching Priest, (Gods true ministry) and
without Law, could not in that estate be Gods true church, in his covenant of
grace* or have the true seals thereof unto them? He fayrly denies the
conclusion, It will not prove (says he) that circumcision or the other
ordinances of God had in Jsrael or in Judah, were false and deceytfull signs
etc. Jf it would, then it might be urged against Judah also; and where then was
circumcision? etc. I answer; If there were no circumcision but among them that
were without the true God, without his ministry, and without his Law: then
was there no true circumcision in the world. For if we consider the first
institution of circumcision, Genesis 17. and the Apostles doctrine of it, in Romans
2. 25. 28. 29. and 4. 11. and the doctrine of Christian baptism now,
answerable to circumcision of old: it is impossible that that people should
have the true seal of righteousness and salvation from God in Christ, that are
without God, and without Christ. No colorable excuses or distinctions will here
availe^ except men can prove an absolute promise of salvation whether men
repent and believe or no: whether they be in God and Christ or no: Which is
contrary to all the scriptures. Wherefore this one testimony is enough to
overthrow all his long plea for Israel; as if they in this sinful stare,
unrepentant, continued still actually in the covenant of grace and state of
salvation. And what color makes he, against this plain scripture? He first
speaks of forsaking God, what it means, and how it is spoken of the Jews
in the Prophets: namely of forsaking his Law, Temple, Worship, and service: and
not simply of so dealing with the Lord himself, as the bare words and letter it
self. might seem to imply.* For even in the defection of Israel, when Jeroboam
set up the calves, yet still they intended to worship the Lord that brought them
out of the land of Egypt etc. 1 King. 12. 28.

Answ. First observe, how here he would not have the bare words and letter* of
the scripture to be insisted upon: yet is it his continual practice, and only
colorable reasons. For the Temple of God, 2. These. 2. and the people of God,
are his mayn grounds for the church of Rome, and of apostate Israel. 2. He
omitteth the words which I cited, that Israel was without the true God etc: and
speaks of an other phrase, of their forsaking the Lord; to ease his burden,
which he found too heavy. 3. It is granted him, that by forsaking the Lord, is
meant the forsaking of his Law, Temple, Worship and service: and not that they
did professedly renounce God, but still pretended and intended to serve the true
God: what would he infer hereupon? This makes the more against his plea for
them. The scripture says, they were without the true God, without teaching
Priest, without Law: this was true, either in their own account, or in Gods;
not in their own account, for they thought they still retained the true God,
(even as the heathens of old, heretics, Antichristians and Jews at this day,
persuade themselves that they serve the true God;) therefore they were such in
Gods account. Now Gods judgment is always according to truth, when man's
judgment erreth, and deceives himself. Thus then, though Israel thought
themselves the true church, and to have the true God (as mine opposite also
thinks and pleads for them;) yet in the Lords account, which is truth,
they were without the true God, and without Law. So mine opposite has the
Israelites own erroneous judgment to help him; I have the Lords judgment and
his Prophets, against both him and them.

He then refers us to his former book, where he showed diverse respects, how
on their part they brake the covenant, but the Lord brake it not on his part,
but called them to repentance etc. To which book of his I gave answer, and have
in this also before showed, how he yields me the mayn ground; namely that the
covenant of grace is conditional only, if men repent and believe* Which seeing
the scripture witnesses that Israel did not, 2 King. 17. 13. 14. 15. 16. etc;
they remained still without the true God, without teaching Priest, and without
Law; til the Lord cast them out of the land, and scattred them among the
heathens, which were without God and without Law, before them. And now what
could their circumcision, Passover, sacrifices etc avail them; but seal up
their further judgment, who had rejected the true God, but falsely retained and
abused the signs of his favor, to their condemnatio.

Touching Ier. 3. 8.
GOD testifies of adulterous Israel, J put her away, and gave her ^ bill of
divorce, Ier. 3. 8. Then was she no longer his wife, nor he her husband: but
the covenant of her spiritual marriage was disanulled even on Gods part also.
Yet the Israelites kept circumcision the sign and seal of his covenant, but
by usurpation, not by right: so it was in their abuse of it, no true sign or
sacrament unto them.

To this he Chr. plea page 68.
answers, that the Prophet sp^k^ this in Josiahs days, at which time Jsrael
was carried captive into Assyria. So this place is not to the point of the
question, of their state from Ieroboams time, all the while they abode in the
land.

Answ. First he takes it for granted, that by the bill of divorce is meant
their putting out of the land: which though I should grant him (as I will not
deny it, but leave it to further consideration,) yet it is to the question in
hand touching their circumcision which they still retained, and were upon
repentance received to the Passover, without any new circumcising in the flesh,
Ezr. 6. 21. and he himself Chr. plea p. 27. 28.
urges this very place of Ezr. 6. against the Anabaptists, to prove they need
not baptize again: the same by as good right, do I urge against him. Yea and
suppose that I erred in judging of their estate while they were in the land:
yet this their estate after, is enough to prove my cause; namely that
Circumcision, and so baptism usurped by false churches, or by them that are no
church (as Israel now were Esai. 7. 8.
no people,) need not be repeated. Whereas he pleads if Rome be not the true
church, and have not the true baptism, we are to be baptized again. Now that
in Ezr. 6. was many years after Isreal's captivity, or divorce; for it was
after Iudahs captivity, and return after 70. years. When Ezr. 1. 1. 2. etc.
Gyrus, to whom the Lord God of heaven had given all the kingdoms of the
earth, proclaimed the peoples return throughout all his kingdom. At what
time, as those that had been carried to Babylon, returned, Ezr. 2. to the number
of 42. thousand and more: so after in Darius days Ezr. 6. when the children of
Israel which were come out of captivity, kept the Passover with joy, for that
the Lord had turned the heart of the (...). 6. v. 22.
King of Assyria unto them, all such as had separated themselves unto them,
from the filthynes of the heathen of the land, to seek the Lord God of Israel,
did eat with them: Ezr. 6. 21. So they of Israel that had been captived in
Assyria, and returned to the Lord, were received without any new circumcising,
as they were also before in Ezekias days, 2 Chronicles. 30. Which example being in
the days of Ezra and Ezr. 5. 1.
other prophets, and written in the scriptures for Romans 15. 4.
our instruction: is a sufficient ground for us now to do the like, whom the
Lord has brought out of the Antichristian Babylon and Assyria, that we may eat
the Lords supper, and enjoy other his ordinances, without any new baptising
with water.

The bill of divorce, he Chr. plea ^ag. 69.
expounds to be the putting of them out of the land of Canaan, as out of the
Lords house or presence; from Hos. 9. 3. 15. 17. 2 King. 13. 23. A woman
divorced, is termed (he says) one that is cast out, or thrust forth out of
her husbands house, Ezekiel. 44. 22. Thus some think excommunicats to have a bill
of divorce etc. and then also, they are not to be esteemed as put out of the
covenant of the Lord, but from his house and family, til they repent. So as
upon their repentance, they ought to be received again into the Lords house,
without any new baptising of them again, which yet should be, if they had been
put out of the covenant of the Lord. For baptism is the sign of our entrance
thereinto: etc.

Answ. By this it appears, he takes the bill of divorce, for no putting out
of the covenant; but out of the house, out of the land of Canaan only. Which
if it be so, then the marriage of Israel, was no taking into the covenant but
into the land of Canaan. And this agrees well with the Anabaptists, who hold
that Isreal's covenant, was not the covenant of grace, but a carnal covenant and
promise of the land of Canaan. It is known, that the bill of divorce,
disannulleth the covenant of marriage, as appears in the Law in Deuteronomy. 24.
First by the name C^rithuth that is Cutting-off, secondly by the lib^^ty
thereupon following, that she may marry another man; thirdly by the just cause
thereof which is whordome, Math. 19. 9. fourthly, by the consequent thereof, that
a man having so put away his wife for whordome, he also may without danger of
adultery marie an other woman; which cannot be unless the covenant of marriage
be disanulled; Mat. 19. 5. -- 9. Fifthly it is confirmed by the copy of the
bill of divorse used in the common wealth of Israel, as appears by their
ancient records, in these words; Thalmu^ in Gittin chapter 9.
Jn such a day of the week etc, J* N. the son of N. have voluntarily etc,
dismissed and left and put away thee, even thee N. the daughter of N. etc.
which have been my wife heretofore, but now J dismiss thee, and leave thee, and
put thee away, that thou may be free, and have power over thine own soul, to
go away, to be married to any man whom thou will etc. Sixthly, it is testified
by the Apostle writing to the Israelites, the strangers scattred throughout
Pontus, Galatia etc, 1 Pet. 1. 1. and saying to them. Which in time past were
not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but
now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Whereby it is evidently proved, that
their divorce was from the Lord, and from being his people, or partakers of his
mercy in Christ.

Now whereas he gathers from Ezekiel. 44. 22. that a divorced woman is called
Gerusha, that is Cast out, or thrust forth, which he expounds from her
husbands house: he might have seen better in the Law of Moses, (to which the
Prophet there has reference) where the like commandment is given, in Levit.
21. 14. which a little before, in verse. 7. is explained by God himself, Gerusha
meishshah, that is, cast out or put away from her husband; according to which
Law, and phrase, Israel was divorced and cast out, not only from the Lords
house and land, but from the Lord himself. Moreover he might have seen, in
Deuteronomy. 24. 1. the bill of divorce in the woman's hand, and her sending out of her
husbands house, to be distinct things, one following upon an other. Again, a
woman may of her self go out of her husbands house, and play the whore in an
other man's house, yet is she not thereby divorced: as for example Michal David's
wife, was by her father Saul, adulterously given to Phalti, 1 Samuel 25. 44. so
she was out of David's house, and had an other husband in whose house she
remained: yet David that had not given her a divorce, required her as his wife,
and she was taken by Abner from her second husband, 2 Samuel 3. 14. 15. 16.
Wherefore the bill of divorce or of cutting off is not from the house only, but
disanulleth quite the covenant of marriage; so as they cannot without a new
marriage be reunited. And the Lord, (as if he purposely would prevent all such
vain pleas for Israel) uses in Ier. 3. 8. both the word put how away, and the
word divorce, and this also in the form plural, thus, and I gave unto her, the
bill of her divorces (or, of her cuttings-off:) as if he would teach us, that
whatsoever divorce or cutting off belonged to such an adulterous wife, he had
given unto her; and so not from the land but from the Lord also she was
divorced. As yet further appears by Hos. 2. 2. plead with your Mother, plead;
for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband; but if he had only put her
out of the land, he was her husband still, contrary to that which the Prophet
teaches. And contrary to the Apostle, who writing to the dispersed of Israel,
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10. has
reference to that Prophet, who promised, I will have mercy on her that had not
obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my
people; and they shall say, thou art my God: Hos. 2. 23.

His applying this divorce to excommunication, is as strange. Excommunicates he
will have to be as put out of the house and church, but not out of the covenant.
Whereas excommunicates are (by our Saviors doctrine) as heathens and publicans,
Mat. 18. 17. and heathens are not in the covenant. Again by Paul's doctrine,
excommunication is the delivering to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. what
that means, we may learn by the contrary, in Act. 26. 17. 18. I send thee,
to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgivenes of synns etc. Where the
power of the Gospel is showed, in turning men from Satan to God, whereupon they
repenting and believing, receive forgivenes of synns: so on the contrary, when
men syn, and join obstinacy with it, and will not repent; they are by the power
of Christ delivered from God unto Satan again, that is, are of the world where
Satan is prince; and in that estate, deprived of the promise of the forgivenes
of their synns, til they turn again unto the Lord.

Where he says, upon their repentance they may and ought to be received, it is
true, so ought the Turks and heathens: for God as he never made absolute
covenant but conditional; so he never gave absolute bill of divorce, but
conditional; for who so repents and believes in Christ shall be saved. And
whereas he says, if they had been put out of the covenant of the Lord, they
should be baptized again: it is marvel how he could not see himself herein, to
be a very Anabaptist, or that which is worse. For if a man be baptized in the
true church, as was Simon Magus, and fall from the faith of Christ, to become a
Jew, or a Turk, or a paynim; and for his obstinacle and blasphemy be justly
excommunicated: this man he thinks, does continue still in the covenant of
grace; for he is but cast out of the church or house, not out of the covenant.
Who ever heard such doctrine, that the covenant of grace should be continued to
most wicked sinners, excommunicated for turning to Iudaisme or Paganism? Much
lesser syn it were to err with the Anabaptists and baptize again, then to hold
such an heresy. If he hold it not, but would grant that such are out of the
covenant: then he says, they should be baptized again, when they return; and
so he that has so busily set a snare to catch us in Anabaptistrie, is fallen
himself into it, or into a worse.

Now to deliver our souls from both these extremities, we are to observe the
difference between the reveiled covenant made with every particular visible
church, and the unreveiled estate which is in Gods secret counsel touching all
the members of the catholic church the company of those that are predestined
unto life: for many are out of the covenant reveiled, which yet are Gods elect.
As the Ephesians whiles they were heathens, dead in synns, were to all men's
judgment, without Christ, without God in the world, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2. 1. 12. who after they were called to repentance
and faith, were no more strangers and forreyners, but fellow-citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 13. -- 19. in which estate they
were in Gods counsel before, being chosen in Christ before the foundation of
the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. On the contrary many reprobates enter into the covenant
of the church visible, and as Simon Magus, do believe and are baptized, Act.
8. 13. they believe for a while, and in time of tentation, fall away, Luke 8.
13. Hereupon it comes to pass, that the church not knowing certainly who are
elect, and who not, but judging every tree by the fruits that appear;
receives into the covenant and baptiseth all that profess to repent and
believe in Christ unfeynedly: yet afterward seeing them to break the covenat and
forsake Christ and will not be reclaymed, casts them out, and delivers them
to Satan: in which estate, they cannot be said to continue in the covenant, or
in the state of salvation; though the election of some of them stands sure
with God. Who when he of his grace gives them repentance, they are restored
again to the church; and then it appears that they fell for a time, but are
raised again of God. And because when they were first baptized, they were not
baptized into that particular church only, but are counted baptized into the
catholic church, and into Christ, his death and burial, Romans 6. 3. 4. therefore
though they renew the covenant, yet their baptism is not renewed; for then it
is manifested to the judgment of man, that the seed of God (though for the time
it was not seen) remained in them, and therefore their syn was not unto death, 1 John 3. 9. And this the Apostle teaches us from God, saying. This is my
covenant unto them, when J shall take away their synns. As concerning the
Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but as touching the election, they are
beloved for the fathers. For the gifts and calling of God, are without
repentance, Romans 11. 27. 28. 29. Where we see, that while men's synns are not
(by promise of God) taken away, they are not in his covenant, (as is confirmed
also by Heb. 8. 10. 12.) And in that Gods gifts and calling (concerning his
elect) are without repentance; they are to be restored into the covenant, when
they turn unto the Lord, without any repeating of their outward baptism.

Where he adds this reason, For baptism is the sign of our entrance into
(the covenant) and the Lords seal of his so receiving and admitting of us: as
circumcision was unto the Jews; Though it may in some sense be admitted which
he says: yet not as he intends and urges it. For first, Abraham was in the
covenant of grace, and justified by faith in Christ, before he received
circumcision, Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3. And after that, he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being
uncircumcised, Genes. 17. Romans 4. 10. 11. Secondly the children of Abraham were
borne in the covenant, and holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Ezr. 9. 2. and borne unto the
Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 20. but were not circumcised til the eight day, Levit. 12. and
such infants as dyed before the eight day, died not out of the covenant: not to
speak of the women in Israel, which were in the covenant without circumcision
in the flesh. Thirdly, Moses said to men women and children, ye stand this day
all of you before the Lord your God, etc. that thou should enter (or pass)
into covenant with the Lord thy God; Dent. 29. 10. 11. 12. 13. Yet all which
had been borne within 40. years before, were uncircumcised, and so continued
till Moses was dead, Ios. 5. 2. -- 7. By all which it appears that men may
otherweise enter into the Lords covenant, then by Circumcision, or by baptism
now come in sted thereof. How much more then, if they have been baptized before,
and fallen from the covenant; may they enter into it again, without a new
baptising with water? His other tautologies, I omit: being before answered.

But he thinks to have help from Jer. 3. 12. 13. 14. where God calls Israel
to return unto him, and he will not cause his anger to fall upon them; and
says, Turn o backsliding children, for I am married unto you; and I will take
you one of a city, and two of a family and will bring you to Sion. Where
amongst many observations, these are the chief, 1. That God dealt otherweise
herein then a man does with his wife whom he puts away, and she become
another man's; as he showed in Jer. 3. 1. 2 That these words The Lord thy God,
are words of the covenant, Genes. 17. 7. 3ly. That he says, J am married unto
you; which the best Pseator Calvin and^
writers expound to be the covenant of grace. 4. That he would take them one of
a city, and two of a family, teaching that they should not stay one for an
other; and though the body of the people should remain obstinate, yet if a few
returned he would receive them: which shows the stability and eternity of
his covenant, as Genesis 17. 7. which he performs, if but a few be made
partakers of that grace, as Romans 11. 1. -- 5.

Answ. He erreth himself, and causes to err, in not observing the scope of
this scripture; nor the conditions propounded: and in not distinguishing the
times, past, present, and to come; nor the covenant of the Law, and the
covenant of grace.

The scope of this scripture Jer. 3. 6. etc. is to show 1. the transgressions
of Israel and Judah; under the covenant of the Law: 2. the punishments
inflicted for the same; 3. and a promise of another covenant of grace which God
would make with them in Christ. Israel played the harlot, Ier. 3. v. 6. God
called her to repent, but she repented not, v. 7. then God put her away, and
gave her a bill of divorces, v. 8. yet Judah her sister, feared not but played
the harlot also, and dissembled, so that Israel justified her self more then
Judah, v. 8. 9. 10. 11. Then God seeing them both to be covenant breakers,
promises of his grace, a new covenant to be made with them in Christ; which he
proclaims first to Israel, if they repent, acknowledge their synns, and turn
unto him, v. 12. 13. and so speaks of his marriage with them, to weet with the
remnant of them, one of a city and two of a family, whom he would bring to
Sion, v. 14. unto whom he would give faithful pastors. v. 15. not as under
the Law, and rudiments thereof, for the most excellent signs thereof, even the
Ark of the covenant of the Lord, should not be remembered or visited any more,
v. 16. But Jerusalem, the Lords throne (the Christian Hebr. 12. 2. Rev. 4 2.
etc.
Church) should be for the Gentiles of all nations, v. 17. and for the Jews,
and for the Israelites walking together, v. 18. Then shows he the signs and
fruits of his grace in them, manifested by their calling upon God, as their
Father in Christ, v. 19. their weeping and supplication for their former synns,
v. 20. 21. the Lords promise of mercy to them that return, and their
acceptance of his mercy offered, v. 22. showed by their humble confession of
their synns, and just punishments, v. 23. 24. 25.

The same argument is in Jer. 31. both touching Israel and Judah, where after
many promises, he speaks of a v. 31. 32.
new Covenant with Israel and Judah, not like the covenant made with their
fathers, when he brought them out of Egypt, which they brake, though the Lord
was an husband unto them: but a covenant, that he would v. 33. 34.
write his Law in their hearts, and forgive their iniquity; which Paul
expounds to be the new Covenant or Testament now confirmed by Christ, Heb. 8.
8. etc.

Now to apply these promises which concerned future times and graces in Christ,
to that present time when they were in their synns, unrepentant, unbeleeving,
unforgiven; under the bill of divorce, and put away from the Lord: is quite to
mysse of the mark which the prophet aymeth at. For though he speaks to Israel
as a body or corporation which continues through many ages: yet not those
persons then living, but their posterity are meant* for they perished in their
synns (save some few that turned to the Lord) but their after generations found
mercy. Neither can we deny (if we rightly observe The Apostles doctrine in Romans
11.) but those and the like promises made by the prophets, do belong to the
Jews even at this day (though for the present they are without the covenant in
their own persons:) for when the Romans 11. v. 25. 26. 27. 28
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, all Israel shall be saved (says he) as it
is written* There shall come out of Sion, the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodlynes from Iakob. And this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take
away their synns. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes,
but as touching the election, beloved for the fathers.

The conditions propounded he observes not, namely, Ier. 3. 12.
Return thou backsliding Israel, and J will not cause mine anger to fall upon
you: verse. 13.
Only acknowledge thine iniquity etc. But pleads as if they in that
rebellious estate, were still in their persons, in the covenant of grace
visibly; though God, because they returned not, verse. 7. 8.
had given them the bill of divorce. Contrary to the gospel, which says, If
we say that we have fellowship with (God), and walk in darkness; we lie, and do
not the truth. If we confess our synns, he is faithful and just to forgive
us etc. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is
not in us. 1. Ioh. 1. 6. 9. 10. Now this was Isreal's state, they walked in
darkness, and synns; and ^ King. 17. 16.
left all the Commandments of the Lord their God, they would not turn from
their evil ways, nor v. 13. 14.
hear the Lords prophets, nor believe in the Lord their God; but v. 22. 23*
walked in all the synns of Jeroboam, they departed not from them, until the
Lord removed Israel out of his sight. And if any of them after their
dispersion, returned to the Lord, they were then received: so also were the
Gentiles that turned to him, and so the Jews at this day, that come unto
Christ.

He distinguishes not the times. For their marriage with the Lord, which he
says the P^s^ator* Calvin.
best writers expound of the covenant of grace: if he referr it to the future
time of Christ; is true; but then it will nothing help those unrepentant
sinners divorced from the Lord: for by the bill of divorce, the marriage is
dissolved, as before is proved. If he referr it to former times, it agrees not
with the scope of the prophecy, as I showed: but if that be granted him, then
his best writers will hardly prove it to mean the covenant of grace; for better
then they, do show it to be the covenant of the Law, even Jeremy himself and
Paul his expositor. For Jeremy in chap. 31. v. 32. uses the same word Baalti,
J was married to them: when he speaks of the old covenant made when they came
out of Egypt, which was the covenant of works, not of grace; though they were
then also in the covenant of grace, as they were in the faith of Christ. And
Paul expounds that word Baalti, (according to the Greek version) J regarded
them not, Heb. 8. 9. which is quite contrary to mine opposites purpose. But it
is usual in the Prophets, to speak of things to come, as already done; as
Esaias prophesying of Christ says, Unto us a child is borne, Esai. 9. 6. who
was not borne til many years after. And so here the Greek version (so much
approved in the new Testament) expounds this word Ier. 3. 14.
Baalti, J am (or was) married; futurely thus; For J will rule over you; and will
take you one of a city and two of a family, and bring you into Sion: so it is
a prophecy of a future marriage with Christ: and accords to the Apostles
writing unto that people, saying, ye are an holy nation, a peculiar people,
etc: which in time pass^, were not a people, but are now the people of God:
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 10.
When was the time that Israel were no people, nor obtained mercy; unless when
Lo-ammi, and Lo-ruhamah were borne, Hos. 1. 6. 9. and Ephraim was so broken,
that it was not a people, Esai. 7. 8. Thus Peter testifying they were no
people, (by which name Moses calls the Gentiles when they were estranged from
God, Deuteronomy. 32. 21.) and Paul saying that God regarded them not, or cared not
for them, because of their breach of covenant, Heb. 8. 9. do overthrow all my
opposites plea for them, in their most sinful and unrepentant estate.

That which he says from Jer. 3. 1. that God dealt otherweise herein, then a
man does with his wife whom he puts away etc: helps him not. First, he
should say, then a man might do with his wife, for it was syn for such a man
to return to his wife, it polluted the land, Jer. 3. 1. the reason whereof was,
the man by unjust divorce, had caused his wife to be defiled, as the law
closely teaches, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. -- 4* which fault cannot be imputed to the Lord.
Secondly, the Lord deals likeweise with the Gentiles, when they turn from
their adulteries, he receives them according to his former covenant and
spiritual marriage with Noe and his seed, Genes. 9. 9. -- 16. Esai. 54. 1. 4. 5.
9. 10. So the promise being conditional, benefited not them that would not
return unto him.

The last point, of the stablenes of Gods promise, though but a few are made
partakers of it, Romans 11. 1. -- 5. is true: and concerns as well the Gentiles
as the Jews; for in all ages, God brought some of the Gentiles into his grace,
as the whole history of the scripture shows. Wherefore it is marvel how he
could so Chr. plea page 72.
insist upon the promise made to the Jews, and to their children in Act. 2.
39. whereas the promise of grace in Christ perteyned also to the Gentiles as is
testified by all the Prophets: Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Psalm. 117. Esa. 19. 24. 2^. and
49. 1. 6. Ezekiel. 4^. 22

And whereas next Chr. plea page 73.
he digresseth to speak of Judah, and from Esa. 54. 4. compared with Ier. 51.
5. would show how in one respect they were forsaken, and bare the reproach of
widowhood, (to weet by their captivity in Babylon) and in an other respect,
they were not forsaken as a widow of the Lord, who yet remembered his covenant
to show them mercy; he follows his own wisdom in expounding the scriptures,
and regards not the wisdom of God who elsewhere has opened that prophecy,
after a heavenly manner. The prophet Esaias in chapt. 53. foretold of Christ
and of his sufferings; and in chap. 54. he prophesies of the Christian church:
and begins, verse. 1.
Sing joyfully o barren (woman) thou that did not bear etc; for more are the
children of the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says the Lord.
This argument he goes on to enlarge, showing the former verse. 4.
shame and reproach, which this barren desolate woman had, for her widowhood;
and the contrary comforts that she should receive from her verse. 5.
maker her husband the Lord of hosts. Here are two women intimated, one that
has an husband and children, an other barren, desolate and in widowhood: whose
estates God would change, as Anna prophesied, The barren has borne seven, and
she that had many children is wexed feebl^* 1 Samuel 2. 5. This barren woman,
Paul interprets to be, Jerusalem which is above, the mother of all us
Christians; For it is written (says he) Rejoice thou barren etc. Gal. 4. 26.
27. the fruitful woman was the earthly Jerusalem, the church under the Law,
(answerable to Agar the bondwoman,) in bondage with her children, verse 25. For
the Jews church was (in their legal policy) under the Law, as an husband: til
being made dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, they were married to an
other, that they might bring forth fruit unto God, as the same Apostle
teaches, Romans 7. 1. - 4. Now this heavenly Jerusalem consists as well of
Ephesians. 2* Gal. 3. 28.
Gentiles as of Jews; and this woman brings forth children conceived by the
immortal seed of the word, the gospel: whereas before the church under the Law,
brought forth many Ismaels, children of Agar, servants, not free borne, to be
cast out with their mother, Gal. 4. 30. Whether now is it safer to take this
man's exposition of the earthly Jerusalem, the mother of the Jews; or to follow
the Apostle, expounding it of the high Jerusalem, the mother of us all? But it
would require a volume, to go through his many allegations out of the
Prophets: where he works upon advantage of words and phrases, neglecting yea
contrarying the mayn doctrines of the gospel, whiles he pleads for open
obstinate and unrepentant idolaters, yea and such as were divorced from the
Lord, that they continued notwithstanding in the covenant of grace in that
estate.

Touching Hos. 2. 2.
Whereas the Lord testifies of Israel, that she was not his wife, nor he her
husband: and wills her therefore to put away her whordomes, left he stripped her
naked etc. Hos. 2. 2. 3. Mine opposite labors by comparing the prophesies
before, in chapter 1. and after in chapter 3. etc, to prove that this was not meant til
Israel was put out of the land. And yet that putting out of the land, he makes
to be the stripping of her naked; which was an effect and reward of her former
estate. And mixing the several prophesies together, (whereas in the 23. verse of
the 2. chapter, the Lord speaks of the days under the Gospel,) he gives
this conclusion, Chr. plea ag. 78.
Thus now she is a wife, and not a wife: she is a wife, but a wife of whordoms,
Hos. 1. 2. she is not a wife, that does demean her self loyally as she should,
but has her adulteries between her breasts: Hos. 2. 2. And after a longer
discourse, he infers, page 84.
But what is this to the point of the question in hand, which is not touching
the condition afterward, but concerning their circumcision and estate, from the
time of Ieroboams apostasy, whiles they were yet in the land. etc.

Answ. He keeps his wont, to pretend the question otherweise then it is. The
point was indefinite about the circumcision of Israel in their Apostasy. These
were his own words, Advertis. page 54.
The baptism of the church of Rome, is true baptism, as the circumcision in
Isreal's apostasy was true circumcision, and not to be repeated again. And if
it be not a true baptism, it is a false baptism etc. He referred us not by
any scripture, to their apostasy before or after they were put out of the
land. I answered him in a few lines, and Animadv. page 69.
showed him from 2 Chronicles. 30. and Ezr. 6. 21. that there was no repeating of
circumcision, therefore not of baptism. Those two scriptures he himself Chr.
plea page 28.
also now urges against the Anabaptists: the latter whereof speaks of a time
long after their captivity. Then I briefly referred him to 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
Ier. 3. 8. Hos. 2. 2. and 13. 1. to show their sinful estate to be such, as
that Animad. p. 70.
the ordinances of God which they in show retained, could not be unto them the
signs and seals of forgivenes, and of life eternal; and therefore wire in
their use of them false and deceytfull. Thus neither he nor I, put any
difference of their estate; though now he pleads it for advantage. But it is
sufficient for to end our controversy, if the things I speak of, be after
their captivity: for then returning with repentance, they were not
recircumcised: so we, if we be baptized in false churches, need not be
rebaptised. So he has written many leaves to plead for the whore Israel; but
where shall we find this soundly concluded, which I denied, that when they were
not the Lords wife, nor he their husband; then in that estate (were it before
or after their captivity, let him take his choice,) their circumcision sealed
unto them forgivenes of synns, and life eternal. This not being proved, he has
led his reader into a wood, where it would weary any man to follow him in his
windings: and yet in the end, he shall not find that which his soul thirsts
after, touching their circumcision, when they were no longer the Lord wife.
Now to his distinction, she is a wife, and she is not a wife: take it at the
best, she is a wife of whordoms, a wife threatened to be stripped naked etc.
Where is the promise of forgivenes of her synns, unless she repented? And where
is the testimony of her repentance? No where, (til Christ made the remnants of
their posterity his wife, and his people, after they had been no people, 1 Pet.
2. 9. 10.) but whiles they were in the land, they grew more hard, unbeleeving
and unrepentant, 2 King. 17. 13. 14. 15. etc. But when she had the bil of
divorce, Ier. 3. and was indeed not his wife, nor he her husband, but he had
stripped her naked, and sent her among the heathens her companio^s: where now was
the seal of the forgivenes of her synns, she abiding unrepentant? This is the
thing that should be showed, which is not to be seen in all his large discourse.

And what help finds he at the hands of the Chaldee paraphrase which he Chr.
plea page 86.
cites thus, Rebuke the congregation of Israel, and say unto her, that she
submits not her self to my worship, therefore neither does my Christ.
Word accept of her prayers: until she shall remove her evil works etc. Will
this prove true circumcision among them? First it appears that the Paraphrast
understood this of them whiles they were in the land, otherweise then he, which
refers it to their after state. Secondly, in that sinful estate whiles they
worshipped or served not the Lord, but Idols (as after the Chaldee speaks,)
the Word of God, that is Christ (as himself expounds it) accepted not their
prayers. And could they then offer any true sacrifice or administer true
sacrament, when God testified that Christ was not their mediator, to accept
their prayers? Seeing it is certain, that no man comes to the Father but by
him, Joh. 14. 6. Thus men may be overseen sometimes, to cite authors on their
side, which either say nothing, or look quite an other way.

Touching Hos. 13. 1.
THe last place which here I cited was Hos. 13. 1. where Ephraim offended (or
sinned) in Baal, and dyed: whence I judged their estate to be dead in syn.

To this mine opposite Chr. plea page 88.
says, the same term and phrase is used by Christ, of the church of Sardis.
Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead, Rev. 3. 1. Should we now
infer hereupon, that therefore baptism and the other ordinances of God, in the
church of Sardis, were but in show retained therein, and could not be unto them
the signs and seals of the forgivenes of synns and of life eternal: and
therefore were in their use of them false and deceyefull, a^ were the ordinances
of God, retained among the Gentiles? Would any man of heart and understanding,
endure such blasphemy? Says not the Scripture, that the church of Sardis, was
one of the seven golden candlesticks? etc.

Answ. A man of understanding, will discern things that differ, and be carried
by judgment, not by affection. The syn of Sardis, was secret hypocrisy, the
syn of Ephraim was open idolatry: the death of Sardis was discerned of Christ,
(who searches Rev. 2. 23.
the heart and reins:) the death of Ephraim, was discerned of men, who can
judge but by the works. Sardis had a name among the churches, to be alive: when
for the most part they were dead before God; though some things remained which
are but ready to dye, verse. 2. and a few among them, were worthy ones, and
undefiled, verse. 4. Ephraim was openly known to be fallen from God to Baal, by
the Prophets, and by the church of Judah. Hypocrites in all true churches, are
dead before God, though alive before men. So Simon Magus was alive in the
judgment of the Apostolik church, and baptized therein, Act. 8. when before God
he was dead. His baptism was true baptism so far as men could judge: though
to himself before God, he received 1 Cor. 11. 9.
judgment thereby, not being a worthy partaker. But had he been an open
worshiper of Baal, and baptized or circumcised among the Baalists; it could not
by men have been judged a true sign and seal of the forgivenes of his synns,
he remaining unrepentant. They that should so affirm, should themselves not be
far from blasphemy, before men of understanding, that know upon what
conditions the covenant of grace is made between God and men. They in Sardis
that were dead, that is without true faith, (for by Romans 1. 17.
says, the just does live,) could not by the sacraments or by any ordinance in
the church be partakers of Christ, of his death or resurrection before God: so
their baptism was to them Romans 2.
no baptism. And had they been so discerned of men, their baptism should so
have been judged by men. As the Canaanites in Sichem, Genesis 3.
their circumcision was uncircumcision, before men; and not the sign and seal
of the Romans 4.
righteousness of faith, when they had no faith: for the unbeleever remains in
the state of damnation, Mar. 16. 16. and the baptism that saves, is not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, as The Apostle suyth; 1 Pet. 3. 21.

That which he further annexeth, that I say their reasons from Israel, might
well serve for the times wherein John lived, when the Rev. 2. 3. chapter
true churches were many of them apostate: whereupon he notes, my contradicting
of my self etc. was a mistaking, that I distinguished not the state of Judah,
which was a true church corrupted, from Israel a false church: and so the true
churches apostate in The Apostles time, Revel. 2. and 3. from the false churches
also in those times, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. Into which oversight I fell, by their
citing undistinctly, Jer. 3. and Esai 50. the one speaking of Israel, the other
of Judah; as is to be seen in their Advertisement page 107. whereto I gave
answer, in Animadvers. p. 103.

Secondly, he pleads, if Hose. 13. 1. be understood of death in syn, yet let
it be well considered, whither it will therefore follow, that Circumcision now
in Israel was not the Lords sign and seal of his forgivenes of syn, but a
false and deceitful sign in their use thereof, and no better then the
ordinances of the heathen. For Christ said, Let the dead bury their dead etc.
Luke 9. 60. was circumcision then among the Jews, a false and deceitful sign
in their life thereof etc.

Answ. He runs into his former error: the Jewish church in Christ's time was
a true church, and Christ communicated in their Temple and sacrifices: Israel
when they served Baal, was a false church: and no man might awfully communicate
with their Temple and sacrifices. Christ speaks not of the Church generally,
but of such as he knew to be hypocrites and dead, though seeming alive: we
speak of Ephraim generally, open offenders, serving Baal, and dead in the
judgment of the Saints. The same I answer to his next instance of the church
of Ephesus, which then when Paul wrote, was not the house of Baal, but of the
living God, the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Moreover he
cites not my words sincerely* I spoke of the seal of forgivenes of synns
(...) them: neither did I say, no better then the ordinances of the heathen,
which the reader may understand, the ordinances devised by the heathens
themselves; but I said, in their use of them false and deceitful; (...) were
also the ordinances of God, retained in other nations; as altars, sacrifices
etc. touching whose estate I have spoken of before.

Thirdly he excepteth, that Baals worship was first instituted by Achab, about
60. years after Jeroboam, and great difference was between Ieroboams calves,
and Baals idolatry etc.

Answ. It is not material to our question, who spoke of Isreal's circumcision in
their apostasy in general, before and after they were out of the land; as
before I have manifested. 2. I acknowledge Achabs syn was greater then
Ieroboams, and false churches may grow worse and worse: yet Ieroboams calves,
were also Divils, as the holy Ghost calls them, 2. Chron. 11. 15.

Fourthly he instanceth, the 7000 in Israel, that bowed not the knee to Baal:
1. King. 19. 18. asking, what we shall say to these? were they not circumcised?
or had they not the circumcision that was then in Jsrael? or was it not to them
the Lords seal of forgivenes of synns? etc.

Answ. The instance is good, to clear the controversy, by the help of other
scriptures. In Romans 11. Paul speaking of the rejection of the Jews, says,
Has God cast away his people? Far be it: For I also am an Israelite etc. God
has not cast away his people which he foreknew. Then speaking of Elias prayer
against Israel* and Gods answer, J have reserved to my self 7000. men, who have
not bowed the knee to (the image of) Baal. Even so then (says verse. 5.
he) at this present time also there is a remnant, according to the election of
grace: etc. By this we are taught, 1. That if a few, or any one of a people be
reserved of God, though the multitude be cast away; yet it cannot be said
absolutely, that God has cast away his people. And this may lead us to
understand, why God called Israel his people in their apostasy; because some
he kept from falling into it, some he brought out of it by repentance. 2. That
those are in deed Gods people, whom he foreknew: the rest are cast off. Now
those which are foreknowen of God, are described thus, that he also did
predestinate them to be conformed to the image of his sont* them he also
called; them he also justified* them he also glorified* Romans 8. 2^* (...)* Thus
are we led to judge who are Gods people, when we see their calling* justifying*
and gloryfying* that is their sanctification* ^* Cor. 3^* ^8. by which i^
charity we are to judge of their predestination, and estate in grace. 3. That
as the remnant of the Jews, which embraced the gospel, were the election of
grace, that is the people whom in charity we should judge to be elected of God
according to his grace; and the others are blinded, hardened, cast off, til God
give them repentance: so in Israel, they that kept themselves from the common
idolatry of Baal, inwardly and outwardly, and retained the true service of
God, were his election of grace, and to be judged his true people; the others
that sinned in Baal, were dead; til God gave them repentance unto life. Thus
the Apostles exposition and application of those 7000. in Israel; may help us
to judge of their estate aright. And not because circumcision was unto them the
seal of grace and of forgivenes of synns; to conclude, that therefore it was
likeweise to them that served Baal: for so we should prostitute Gods grace and
the seals thereof, to such as God condemns and rejects.

Fifthly he instanceth the worship of Baal by Judah, Ier. 7. Judge. 2. etc.
Whereto I answer (as before) that Judah in her constitution remained a true
church, though corrupted: Israel being a false church, as has been manifested.
Neither was the defection universal and open as in Israel. As for such in
Judah as so fell from God, and would not be brought to repentance, the Prophet
tells them they trusted in lying words, when they said, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord etc. Ier. 7. 4. 8. the Lord threatens to cast
them out of his sight, and forbad his Prophet to pray for them, Jer. 7. 15. 16.
So their circumcision became unto them uncircumcision, Romans 2. 25.

To this he objecteth, Though man's idolatry etc may make Gods sacraments
improfitable to himself; yet can they not make them lying and deceitful
signs, but that in the Lords ordinance they are unto all and therefore also
unto them, his true signs and faithful seals (on his part) of forgivenes of
synns and life eternal. For, shall the infidelity of man, turn the truth of
God into a lie? God forbid.

Answ. I have before answered, that all Gods ordinances are in them selves, and
on his part, holy faithful and true. They are true seals of forgivenes of
synns, but to such as are worthy partakers of them, in faith; otherweise they
seal judgment unto men: 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28 29. And it is not his ordinance,
that open and obstinate idolaters and wicked men, should administer or receive
them, Ezekiel. 44. 9. Numb. 15. 30. 31. Levit. 7. 20. Psalm. (...). 1^. 17. That
men may turn the truth of God into a lie. the Apostle plainly teaches, Romans
1. 25. so may they the truth of his ordinances, into lies. But the truth of
God, as it is in himself, or his faithfulness, is unchangeable: and if men
believe not, or sanctify him not, they perish by the judgment of God, which is
according to truth; and his faithfulness suffers him not to save such, unless
he make them first new creatures and believers; Joh. 3. 36. 1. Joh. 5. 10. 12.

Sixthly, he expounds Isreal's death in Hos. 13. 1. to be (by the exposition of
sundry writers) not death in syn, but slain for their synns; or their estate
overthrowen, or near utter destruction. etc.

Answ. Both may be true; that first they were dead in syn, and after destroyed
civilly for their syn. Gods judgme^ts are according to men's deserts; he
destroyed not the Amorites, Egyptians, and other nations, til their iniquity
was full. Genesis 15. 16. Wherefore to condemn the exposition which I gave,
because an other consequent followed upon it, as the ruin of Achabs house, or
the like; is no fitme argument. And to his many expositors whom he cites, I
oppose one greater then all, even The Apostle in Romans 11. before spoken of: who
shows the election of grace to be in the 7000 that worshipped not Baal: and
not in the multitude of the Baalists. And if they were not of the election of
grace, then were they dead in syn, though he and many say the contrary.

Finally he alleges the sayings of the Prophet before and after, The Lord
found Iakob in Bethel, and there he spoke with us, etc, Therefore turn thou to
thy God etc. Hos. 12. 4. 5. 6. 9. And, yet am J the Lord thy God, from the land
of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but me. I did know thee in the wilderness
etc. Hose. 13. 4. 5.

Answ. I have before showed, that the prophets speak to Israel, as a
corporation or body, which after a sort continues one and the same through
many generations; when yet, as touching their particular persons or
generations, they are different and contrary; as godly fathers in the state of
grace and life, may beget wicked children without grace, and in state of death.
Ezekiel. 18. 9. 10. 13. 14. 17. 18. etc. So the King of Tire had been in Eden the
garden of God, (a proselyte in the Church) Ezekiel. 28. 13. not that heathen king
then living, but his predecessor Huram, long before. 1. King. 5. So Paul
speaks of the Jews cast away of God, as the same people, till their last
calling, Romans 11. And I doubt not, but a man preaching to convert them at this
day, might apply unto them the like sayings, I am the Lord thy God from the
land of Egypt, thou shall know no God but me: J led thee in the wilderness etc.
But always in such general phrases, the promises of grace belong only to such
as believe and turn to the Lord: the others that remain hardened, shall perish.

And hitherto of his exceptions against the scriptures which I cited: although
(as I showed) if they had continued Gods true church in the land; yet when they
were for obstinacy in their synns cast out of it, had the bill of divorce,
were not the people or wife of the Lord: their circumcision could be no seal
from God unto them of forgivenes of synns, and eternal life, in that estate.

That which after he prosequuteth touching the heathens state, I have answered
before. And as for his other exceptions or repetitions touching Israel; they
are such as are before answered; and it is not a thing so necessary to be
insisted upon, touching their estate before they were cast out of the land;
seeing their circumcision in the ages following, (when The Apostle testifies they
were not a people, or partakers of Gods mercy, 1. Pet. 2. and when all do
acknowledge they had the bill of divorce, Ier. 3.) was not repeated when they
came again to the Lord, Ezr. 6. 21. Here therefore I will end; and leave the
things that have been controverted, to the discreet censure of the judicious
reader.

THat it may appear how it is no new thing that we teach touching the
Sacraments, and the falsehood of them in the church of Rome: I will here annex a
few things, out of the Theses of Zach. Ursinus Doctor of Theology in
Heidelberg: which are added at the end of his Catechism set forth by D.
Pareus; among the Miscellanea Catechetica.

Of the Sacraments, Theses publicly disputed at Heidelberg, the 23. of August,
anno 1567.
1. God from the beginning, has adjoined signs or rites unto the promise of
grace: which in the Church, are usually named Sacraments.

2. And Sacraments are signs of the eternal covenant between God and
believers; that is to say, they are rites commanded of God unto the church, and
added unto the promise of grace, that by them as by visible and sure
testimonies, God may signify and testify, that unto them that use these
symbols in true faith, he communicates Christ and all his benefits, according
to the promise of the gospel; and so may confirm in them, the confidence of
the promise; and that the church may by these visible notes, be discerned from
all other sects etc. Genesis 17. 11. Exodus 20. 10. and 31. 14. Ezekiel. 20. 12. Deuteronomy.
30* 6. Col. 2. 2. 11* 1 Cor. 5. 7. Ioh. ^. 19. Heb. 8. 9. 10. Mar. 16. 16. etc.

3. Rites which are not commanded of God, or not instituted to this end, for to
be signs of the promises; are no Sacraments.

8. The lawful use of the sacraments is, when they that are converted (to the
Lord) do keep those rites which God commanded, to those ends for which they
were instituted sacraments of God. Proof. That only is the lawful use, which
agrees with the divine institution. And the institution comprehends these
circumstances of persons, rites, and ends. If these therefore be violated, the
signs are abused, Esai. 1. Jer. 7. Psalm. 50.

9. In this use, the things signified, are always received together with the
signs: Mark. 16. 16.

10. But out of the use instituted of God, which is not without conversion
(unto him); the ceremonies have no respect of a sacrament, neither are Gods
benefits (signified by them,) received with the signs. Proof. The signs of
the covenant, confirm nothing to them which keep not the covenant, or which
substitute other things in their place; or which referr them to another end.
But Sacraments are signs of the covenant, whereby God binds himself to give
us forgivenes of synns and life eternal freely for Christ's sake: and binds us
to show forth faith and new obedience. Therefore they confirm not Gods grace to
those which use them without faith and repentance, or that use other rites, or
to an other end then God has instituted. Moreover it is superstitious and
idolatrous, to attribute the testimony of Gods grace, either to the outward
work without the promise, or to a work divised of men. Therefore this abuse of
the Sacraments, has not* Gods grace joined with it, neither confirms it to
any* as it is said, in Romans 2. 25. Circumcision profits if thou keep the Law:
but if thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision.

11. The godly, do receive the signs unto salvation; the wicked, unto
condemnation: but the things signified, can only the godly receive unto
salvation. 1 Pet. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 10. 16. Esa. 66. 3. 1 Cor. 11. 17.

12. Yet in the elect, though they have received the sacrament unworthily, the
fruit follows at length after they are converted. Proof. The promise, and the
signs of the promise which has the condition of faith added to it, are
confirmed, whenever the condition is performed. And such is the promise,
which is signified and confirmed by the sacraments. Therefore whether faith
(which believes the promise and signs) comes either in the use, or after the
use; the promise and things signified are received. Ezekiel. 16. 69.

Objections against the Theses of the Sacraments and the solutions of them, by
D. Zach. Vrsinus: in publik disputation Anno. 1567.
Object. 4. against part of the tenth position. The papists sacraments are done
without regeneration. And yet they are Sacraments. Therefore they may be without
(men's) conversion (to God.)

Answ. The second proposition may be denied, touching them that are not
converted. For to such, the sacraments are no sacraments, that is, signs of
grace; especially seeing they turn them into mere idols. But they are made
sacraments unto them, that is, signs of grace, when (the Papists) are
converted. And if they never be converted, they never become sacraments unto
them.

Instance to an absurdity. They that deprave the words and the form of the
institution, they overthrow the substance of baptism. The Papists do the
first, therefore also the latter. Whereupon their baptism is no baptism; and we
which were baptized in the papacy, must be baptized again.

Answ. For the first, they do overthrow the substance of baptism, namely to
themselves, and to those which (...) unto (...) and are not converted but not
unto those, which acknovvledging their errors are converted, and do join
themselves unto the Church of Christ.

Object. 6. against the twelft position. That which brings condemnation* brings
no fruit* The unworthy* usurpation of the sacrament brings condemnation* by the
11* position. Therefore it brings no fruit.

Answ. I grant all, before conversion: but after it, the unworthy usurpation,
becomes worthy.

Jnstance. Condemnation follows not conversion. The fruit of the sacrament
received unworthily, is condemnation, by position 11. Therefore the fruit
follows not those that are converted.

Answ. We grant it, touching condemnation. But we speak here of the fruit of
the sacrament unworthily received, which before conversion was condemnation,
because of the unworthy receiving: but after conversion, it is changed into a
good and saving fruit.

Hitherto Ursinus. Whereunto I will add this saying of Mr. Calvin, in his 111.
Sermon upon Deuteronomie, (on Deuteronomy. 18. 22.) And what (says he) is to be said
of their sacraments? It is evident that they be mere witcheries in the
Popedom, so as Jesus Christ is driven a great way off by them: and men make
idols of the visible signs and liveless creatures, and Sa^a^ has so imbrued
the wretched world with his illusions, that men* are become stark beasts.

FINIS.
In page 125. line 25. for of t^em all read, of them at all.


