THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER.

The first part. WHEREIN, OVT OF THE TRVEST And choysest Informations, are the
famous Actions of that warlike Prince Historically led along: from his
Majesty's first entering into the EMPIRE, until his great Victory over the
General TILLY, at the Battle of Leipsich.

The times and places of every Action being so sufficiently observed and
described; that the Reader may find both Truth and Reason in it.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Contents and Method of the whole.
I. A Discourse upon the Diet of Ratisbone: which Diet, bred the Discontents of
the Protestants; and enforced them to the Conclusions of Leipsich. II. The Diet
of the Protestant Princes of Leipsich: and their Resolutions and Actions upon
it: Historically led along, unto the day of their joining with the King of
Sweden. III. A brief Chronicle of the King of Swedens, Actions, from his first
landing in Germany, until his great Victory over Tilly. IIII. The Proceedings
of Monsieur Tilly, General of the Catholic League, by himself; from his
first coming against the King, until his great defeat before Leipsich.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IVdicious and favorable Reader. Out of our high respect unto that Caesar and
Alexander of our times, that admirably victorious King of Sweden: we have here
(and for thy pleasure too) adventured upon an Essay of his Story; which if
liked, may encourage us to continue it. Not out of any confidence, that ours is
a Chronicle worthy enough, for such heroic performances (a Polibius, or a
Tacitus were little enough for that) but our intention chiefly is, to provoke
some abler Pen, some better instructed Intelligencer, to do it: and if such a
one control or mend us, we will not be angry. If you here demand, out of
what Instructions we have furnished our Intelligencer; be pleased to know; that
nothing is willingly feigned, or wilfully falsified. The errors that be in it,
are errors of ignorance, all. Some part of it was received from the papers of
an honorable personage; a Commander of prime credit and activitie, with that
victorious King. We have been made to understand much of these Actions, by
discourse with another gallant Gentleman: and he also a great Commander in the
Army. Some printed High Dutch books we have had. For some things we have had
private writing, and from good hands too. In other things we have made use of
Gallobelgicus: especially where he deals upon public Record, and where we
thought the poor man durst speak freely: Some times, sure, he writes but by
Commission; and is every where sparing in reporting the Emperors losses. And
yet in this, to take away all exception, we have followed him too;
notwithstanding we by others found greater numbers and defeates, specified.
Very good use have we made of the Weekly Currantoes too: which if a man of
judgment reads, he shall for the most part find (especially of latter times)
very true, and very punctual. Whosoever will be cunning in the Topography of
Germany, and would understand these wars, let him not despise Currantoes. All
this, lastly has passed the allowance of a Gentleman (of the best judgment
and intelligence for these matters) in the Kingdom.

We have every where dealt candidely, not magnifying the King, nor derogating
from his enemies: not left out, or put in, for favor or advantage. Our method
is this: to handle every Story by it self, and then to bring all together at
the day of Battle. Careful have we been, (yea no small pains have we
taken;) to note the times and to describe the places of the most famous
actions. We have examined the dates with diligence; and still had five Maps
before us of the same place. The Imperial Diet of Ratisbone, which was well
hoped would have mended all, leaving things far more desperate on the
Protestants party; necessitated a Resolution in the Princes of that
Confession; rather to dye free, then to live slaves. Hence their Diet of
Leipsich. And because these Leaguers were at first of an Union by themselves;
we have briefly therefore, and upon the Bye, first handled their warlike
preparations; until the day of their joining with the King. The same have we
done with the Kings Story: gone along with it from his Majesty's first landing.
The Kings having of many Armies in the field at once, troubled us not a little
at the first, to find with which of all these Armies the King in person should
be: but we after a while perceived, that this most industrious Chieftaine, was
able to serve more Cures at once then one: and that he was so vigilant upon
every occasion, that there were few great Actions which himself was not at one
end of. Many a brave General he has; The Lord Oxensterne, a Sweden borne, and
Lord Chancellor of that Kingdom; General all this while of a particular Army
in Prussia, to wait upon the Po^e, and his motions: The Lord Falkenburg, a
Germane borne, and Lord Chamberlayn of his Majesty's household; unfortunately
slain in Magdenburg. The Lord Gustavus Horn a Finlander: and still General
of a particular Army by himself: with whom the Lord Marquess Hamilton is
associated, The Lord Otho Todt, for brevities sake called Otty-todt, or Todt, a
Swede, General of his Majesty's Horse; Sir John Bannier, a Germane, and a
brave Soldier, General of the Foot or Infantery: all these you find
frequent and honorable mention of; and yet has the King himself been at the
most of the business. All particular actions it had been impossible for us to
have touched upon; therefore have we endeavored to relate the famousest: whether
Sieges, Battles, Marches, Encampings, or Removings: orderly leading all along
unto the great day of battle. It would have perplexed our method to have
mentioned every particular supply that the King has had: those therefore we
desire the Readers to imagine. For example: he landed but 11. Regiments or
thousands of Foot at first: yet within a month was his Army full 20000.
strong: which daily increased also.

His numbers, indeed, were never great: he had but 5000. men, for the most
part, and never above 7000. in all his late wars of Prussia against the Pole:
and yet with them has he fought several Battles, beaten out, or wearied out,
two Imperial Armies; taken in the great and strong City of Elbing, with
others: and obtained his purpose finally, upon his enemy; who was able at once
to have come down with such a power of Horse upon him, as had been sufficient
to have carried away himself and five such Armies. That which has made his
Majesty so victorious, (next to the assistance of Almighty God,) is his most
exact observing of military Discipline; wherein with an admirable temper, he is
both strict and sweet: the Majesty of a King in him, commanding more willing
obedience from his Army, then the awful directions of a bare General alone,
possibly could. Add to his strict Discipline, his many points of new invented
Discipline, peculiar unto himself, too long here to describe. His justice,
finally, and his mercy; his exemplary and his indefatigable industry: his
affability, and his easiness of access: the goodness of his cause, and the
common Liberty which his victories bring with them: have conquered more then
his sword. What now shall hinder this brave and princely Warrior, to arrive
unto that height of reputation which Gonsalvo did in the wars of Naples; whom
the Historians of that age, worthily style, the great Captain? yea so great a
Conqueror has the King hitherto been, that I dare challenge the skilfullest
Historian, to set (for all particulars) such another by him. God bless the
King of Swedens Majesty: and thoroughly enable him, to be the glorious
Assertor of the Germane Liberty. Vale.

If the Readers desire the continuance of our Relations: our Intelligencer
shall be much the better furnished to give Content, if they please to send us
in their own Intelligence.

For that it seems impossible for us English to avoyde that observation of
Philip de Commines, That in all great actions, we are still harkning after
Prophecies; which the taking of some things in this kind, has even now
verified: we will therefore feed the humor of the times a little, with a
Prediction of a great Astronomer of our own Nation, upon that great
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, July 18* 1623. And the second a Prophecy of
the famous Paulus Grebnerus his Book, now in Trinity College in Cambridge.

The Astronomers judgment is this. That the effect of that Conjunction would
be felt in the North and Northeast parts of Europe in particular: and in
general over all. That it would produce Famines, Plagues, Wars, etc. Places
subject to this, he names Italy, France, Bohemia, Silesia, and Germany. Of
Provinces he names Prussia, Brandenburg, Stiria, Hassia, and Saxony. Yea he
descends to Cities: naming Rome, Prague, Magdenburg, Coblents betwixt Mentz and
Cullen, Vlmes, Brunswick, Ausburg, etc. He says it is likely to go hard with
the Roman Empire, Clergy, and Jesuits. He speaks of a King of a true
Religion that should do all this: and of much happiness that should succeed
it. The whole Discourse will perchance shortly be imprinted.

PROPHETIA IN LEONEM DOMVS SAXONIAE.
DIV aspectavi and connivi ego huic actui, and fidem Domui Austriacae and
Philippo synceram praestiti, ne in victissimum Regis Philippi Belgium jamdudum
ad extraneos de veniret, quod mihi Hispania acceptum refer habet. I am vero
diutius sopitum quiescere, and quasi micare in tenebris, mihi and filio meo
Christiano intoleranda and irrecuperabilis jactura et damnum videtur. Ideo
arcum intendo meum and jacula mitto, and sagittae meae ac tela fortunae filij
mei Christiani etiam direct collimant metam and invadentes feriunt, ac
disijciunt Burgundicum illum, ac Austriacum Leonem, vnde meum, ac filij mei
regnum ac dominatio, ample dilatatur. Quod ego Haeresque meus faeliciter
consummavimus.

A Prophecy of Paulus Grebnerus, upon the Lion of the House of Saxony.
I Have long looked on and winked at the business: and still have I kept my
faith untainted unto the house of Austria and to Philip: that so the
unconquered The Low Countries, and the Wallon Countries.
Belgium might not long ago have fallen into the hands of Strangers: and thus
much Spain owes me. But for me to lie still asleep, and to be hoodwinkt as it
were any longer: seems an intolerable and an irrecoverable loss and
detriment unto my self and my son Christianus. Now therefore bend I my bow,
and shoot abroad my darts: whereupon the arrows and darts of mine own fortune
and Christianus my Son, do directly hitte the mark, and smite those that
invade me: yea they cast down that Burgundian and Austrian Lion: whereupon is
the Kingdom and Dominion of my self and Son, very amply enlarged. Thus much
have I and mine heir, most happily achieved.

OF THE MEETING Given by the Emperor, unto cercertaine Electors of the Empire,
at the Diet of Ratisbone, 1630.
Acurately and truly described in a Letter, by one that very well understood
how matters were there carried. Faithfully translated out of the Latin Printed
Copy; with some Marginall Notes added, for clearing of the Story.
The Letter.
COncerning the passages of the Electorall Diet, truly my noble friend N: N: I
had according to my promise, dispatched a more early advice unto you, but that
upon my return to Ratisbone, there were more days spent in mutual visits and
Entertainments of friends, then indeed I was willing withal: But having now
gotten loose of this troublesome kind of Courtesy, and that the dispatch of
my business, together with the retyrednesse of the place where I now reside,
had afforded me some leisure, I would no longer delay the discharge of that
obligation, in which I stood engaged unto you.

Now after twelve years of most bloody wars, and almost utter desolation
brought upon a goodly Country; very probable surely it was, that a peace would
be desired on all hands, and that for the full concluding thereof, this very
Diet had principally been Convoked. As for the Protestants, they verily had
even unto this day undergone the hardest of all hardship, being still overlaid
with most heavy impositions, and with the billettings of the Soldiers of the
Catholic The Catholic Princes of the Empire, who have entered into a League
for the recovery of the Church lands, and for the rooting out of the Protestant
Religion.
Leaguers: Yea the Catholics themselves, having had often trial of the
insolences of the Imperial Soldiers, and of the chargeablenesse of the
war; began now also mightily to distaste the Covetousness of their own
partner, the Duke of Bavaria. Upon this coffeehouse was the Palatine of The
Duke of Newburgh, a younger house of the Palsgrave, and who put in for the
Electorate: lately before, turned Papist.
Newburg reported, to have fallen off from the League: as for the Archbishop of
Saltsburg, he (as having no share among the other Princes in what should be
conquered or recovered by the war,) had for many years past withdrawn his
Contribution. The Bishop Elector of Triers also very earnestly complained of
the damages received by the Spanish: namely, of the pillaging of his Country,
and the plundering of his Subjects houses: yea, and the Bishop Brother to the
Duke of Bavaria.
Elector of Colein also gave off among the rest. In this one point
notwithstanding, did the counsels and desires of the Protestant party differ
from the Catholics; for that They out of a well meaning simplicity desired
an utter forgetfulness of things passed, and a right down peace: whereas
These, it is true, seemed to be contented to lay down Arms; but not except the
Church goods withheld by the Protestants, might first be restored. Furthermore,
that the Emperor was for his part heartily desirous both of the Peace, and
this Diet; we are in courtesy bound to believe it. For when it was talked on in
every man's mouth at Vienna, how that both the Peace and Agreement were but
given out for a mere show, the Diet not really intended, and that the
Emperor never meant to go to Ratisbone; He gave the Count of Schwarzenburg
(Marshall of his house) a shrewd check, for that he had not already given
order to the household, gotten the carriages together, made provision of Wagons
and For both Vienna and Ratisbone are situated upon the Danubie.
Shipping, and for that by his slacknesse and negligence, matter was ministered
for the people diversely to descant upon: and credible it was, that Himself
being a Prince of mild disposition, used to live in peace heretofore; did now
begin to consider upon the variable changes of fortune, and after so many
years of prosperously achieved wars, was at length desirous of ease and
quietness. To be feared besides it was, lest that these continued wars,
these immortal Impositions, these violences, injuries, and Ravages; would be
believed to be commanded, for that they were not forbidden: and that when
people saw no other help for it, they would seek a remedy even out of
despair it self.

But as for those whose minds were fully taken up with the opinion of Caesar's
affecting to Rule all (people being very apt to imagine the worst) they mainly
suspected His design in summoning this Diet, Peoples suspicions of Caesar^
intentions.
not to proceed out of any care of the public, or his desire of an equal
peace; but that He was partly constrained unto it by some pressing necessity
of his own, and that he might lay such a groundwork for the house of
Austria, as he might build upon hereafter. Their Arguments for their suspicion
taken, from the opinion of the Courtiers.
And that because every thing now helped forward his business as he could
desire. That whatsoever had any strength (to resist him) in the whole Empire,
what through wars, tributes, and accusations, lay now a drawing on, upon an
easy death as it were. That it was the part of a wiseman to follow his
fortune, which had hitherto been always favorable unto Caesar. That a man
must make his best use of what ever befalls him. That many things were to be
brought about by putting to the venture, which were accounted difficult in the
beginning. That by the aid of the Catholic Leaguers, the Protestant Princes
first; and those being made a hand with, even the Catholics themselves, might
very possibly be brought under the Dominion of the house of Austria. That the
Conde D'Ognate of the house of Guevaras, the late Spanish Ambassador with the
Emperor, (a man not ignorant of the designs then on foot) was wont to cast
out a word now and then amongst his friends, How that the Gowns of the Germane
Bishops were with the longest, and that their traynes must therefore be clipped.

Furthermore, suppose the Peace did never so much please, (the Emperor) yet
the Diet, by which it was to be concluded, ought by all means to be avoided.
For by this course, should Caesar's both words and actions come under censure;
and the authority of Majesty be by that means much weakened: that this is the
Condition of Ruling, that the Account be allowed upon no other Terms, then as
given up to one man only.

But whereas there was an Army already now on foot; the war not only begun,
but far advanced; Contributions imposed, diverse Princes deposed, and They
mean Walsteyn, who^ the Emperor made Duk^ of Meckleburg.
new men set up by the Court; every thing (to conclude) passed quite contrary
to the Laws; the States of the Empire; yea the Electors themselves either
unwitting of them, or unwilling with them; how could all these things be
defended; yea which way could they possibly be excused? Furthermore, how ever
Caesar might be earnestly inclined to a peace, yet must his power be
necessarily kept up by force and strong hand. That both the Nobility and the
Commons had been too highly exasperated, with a show of variety of injuries;
yea, and that they would take Courage to revenge themselves, so soon as ever
they should see Caesar disarme.

These reasons, no doubt, had been thoroughly canvassed at Court, Reasons to
persuade to the Diet.
and had a long time exercised both Caesar and his Courtiers with suspense;
against all which, the necessity of going forward with the Diet prevayled
notwithstanding: for, as for such spirits as having been thoroughly chafed,
were eager upon the wars; they were to be pacified with the hopes of Peace,
and the mending of the times: and against so many enemies, the French, the
Sweden, and the Hollanders, coming all like a tempest at once upon them; the
Princes of the Empire were to be brought about: and to be persuaded, That these
being not the private enemies of the house of Austria alone, but the public
adversaries of the Empire; were to be beaten off at the common charges, and
with their united forces. Nor was Caesar ignorant, that very many there were,
so far forth Masters of themselves as fayrely to obey, though not slavishly
to serve, that argued among themselves upon the miseries of servitude; raked up
the injuries received; and that aggravated all, by construing things to the
worst sense: and, as for the defeating of the Imperialists By the King of
Sweden: against whom, Holsteyn first, and Arnheim next, had bin sent.
in Prussia; the cutting them off in Holland; their incountrings with so much
hardship in Italy; the taking in of St. Hertoghenbusck, and of Wesel; the
falling of the King of Sweden into the That is, into Prussia.
Empire; many, he well knew, did openly talk of all these things, as not much
amiss. But another reason for this Diet there was, (nor was there any other
cause that so nearly concerned Caesar's going to it) to settle (namely) the
Empire in his own family, to show his Son unto the Princes, and to win the
Electors unto him. Thus the Catholics, the Protestants, and the Emperor, for
diverse respects, and with equal desires, all sought the Peace. The
Protestants desired such a one, as might promise a forgetfulness of matters
passed, and security for all sides: the Catholics, they were earnest to have
the Lands first of all restored unto the Churches, and the Churches unto the
old Religion: as for Caesar, that He called a Peace, to have his Rebels curbed,
and all submitted to his disposing: which Peace notwithstanding did no way
persuade the disbanding the Armies, nor the easing of the Impositions. And this
was the state of the Empire, thus stood men's minds disposed, when as Caesar
and the Electors met at the Diet of Ratisbone.

Now were the heads of the Consultation proposed: The sum of the Emperors
Oration, in six Articles.
in the beginning whereof, Caesar in a long Oration pleaded for himself, That
He might not be thought to be either the Causer of so cruel a war, or the
hinderer of the Peace: imputing all the mischiefs that fell out upon the
war, unto the Palsgraue, and his associates, Mansfeild, Brunswicke, and the
King of Denmark: That himself being the forwardest, there had been diverse
Conferences concerning an Agreement; but through the stubbornness of the
adverse party, all the Treaties had come to nothing; now at length therefore
high time it was, seriously to bethink themselves of a good Peace; or if that
could not at the best hand be obtained, then to devise upon the way of a joint
league, both between themselves and with the Emperor, against the disturbers
of this so necessary a Peace; be they natives of the Empire, or be they
foreigners; and in as much as the Palsgraue Frederick, (the Causerboth of
these wars and miseries) after those most equal Conditions propounded to him
by the Elestors in their Diet at Mulhausen, is not to this day come in; nor
has ever since desisted from such Courses, as have been troublesome both unto
his Country and common peace; but has stirred up others heretofore, and the
Hollanders of latter times, unto the destruction of his own Country: The
Emperors request therefore was, that the Electors would be pleased to pass an
Act of Counsel, whereby the Palsgrane should continue a banished man without
all hopes of returning, and that they would never vouchsafe to entertain
either peace or amity with him. He furthermore declared, how that the
Hollanders having long since shaken off all due reverence unto the Empire, had
with a sacrilegious boldness of late, both besieged and taken in, certain of
his good Cities and Dominions: now therefore it must be looked unto, that the
Empire suffer no damage: and the remedies must now be consulted upon, how the
boldness of these robbers might best be restrained; and how that which
unjustly they had taken away, might be recovered. The fourth point to be
considered upon, was the wars of Italy, and the French King: who now invaded
the rights of the Empire, and made himself an Vmpire of such matters, as
belonged not unto his Cognizance; which is not to be endured, But the King of
Sweden said otherwise in his Defense, which see af^erwards.
says the Emperor. As for the King of Sweden, there be no causes of enmity
betwixt us: but if he will not condescend unto the Imperial Ambassador the
Burgraue of Dhona, and the King of Denmark the Mediator of the Peace; then
verily he is to be threatened with the power of the Roman Empire; and if he
gave not over, then was his bold attempt to be chastised by force of Arms.
Last of all, were the Princes advised to consult upon the means, of
maintaining a standing Army, and of the restoring of Martial Discipline; and
of the manner of laying, and of levying the Impositions.

So soon as ever these Propositions were noysed abroad, The Peoples
construction of the Emperors Oration.
they were variously descanted upon by diverse: most men admiring, that whereas
the first Proposition took care how to establish a good Peace; the five other
Articles breathed out nothing but menaces of wars and Armies. That the
Soveraigntie of the house of Austria, and the base enduring of servitude by the
other side, was the thing (forsooth) that must be called Peace. That all was
now excused, by the rebellion of the Bohemians, the oversight of the Palsgraue,
and the stubborn spirits of Mansfeild, and the rest. That those Arms which
were at first taken up against enemies, were now turned against the
Commonwealth: For, after the differences were compounded with the King of
Denmark, there remained no enemy in the whole Empire; and yet the Army and the
Impositions, were nevertheless commanded to be kept on foot. But now plainly
was this driven at, that the private quarrels of the house of Austria, might be
maintained by the power of the Roman Empire: which must thereby make another
man's quarrel, her own interest. But as for The King of Bohemia.
Frederick, the Hollanders, the Now Duke of Mantua, whose Ancestors being of
a yo^ger house of Mantua, settled themselves in France; to whom for want of
Issue, Ma^tua is now fallen: the Investiture whereof being denied him by the
Emperor, and the King of Spain set on; the French King appeared with an Army
in favor of him.
Duke de Nivers, and for his sake the French King, and the King of Sweden; to
conclude, they all profess themselves injuried by the Austrians, and to keep
firm amity with the Empire. And suppose that Frederick had invaded the Crown
of Bohemia unjustly, and had merited punishment in that regard; yet had his
Electorall dignity been taken from him, and conferred upon the Duke of
Bavaria; before ever the consent of the Princes of the Empire had been asked;
the Electors gainesaying it: yea, the King of Spain himself, being utterly
against it. People, moreover, were bold to Prophecy, That never should Peace
return into the Empire, unless the Prince Palatine were first restored into
all, or into a good part of his lost dignity and Dominions. For not he in his
own person alone, and his so many Children, and their posterity, (which
soever of them were so minded,) would sometime or other become the subject of
more troubles; but the Austrians and Spaniard, with the Hollander; and the
Protestants (who by putting the Prince Palatine out of the College of
Electors, should always hereafter be too weak in number of voices) with the
Catholics; would ever jarre with a perpetuated heart-burning. But were that
Prince re-estated in his ancient place; then should that too great power of the
Duke of Bavaria, the heart-burning against the house of Austria, and the fears
which the Protestants now stood in, be all taken away.

And now that the Duke of Bavaria might neither be afraid, nor ashamed, to lay
aside the Electorship, obtained by his valor and Deserts to the Emperor,
understand; and not to his Cousin the Prince Palatine.
deserts; they interposed this Counsel: to leave (namely) a part of the
Palatinate, unto him and his heirs for ever; and, (which is said not to be
without example) to have the Electorship go by turns between them, from one
unto another; either by term of years, or lives. Moreover, as for the
Hollanders, notwithstanding they had renounced their allegiance to the King of
Spain; yet they fayrely conserved the Majesty of the Empire; yea and that
with their neighboring Princes, (though Catholics) they did religiously
maintain the Articles and Quarter of Neutralitie. True it is, that by the
right of War they had made themselves Masters of certain places, which
either the Spaniard before held; or they feared he would take in: whereas the
Emperor on the contrary; not by them provoked by any injury, had without any
Decree of the Empire to that purpose, all out of a private desire of his own
for the assisting of the King his Cousin; sent the Count de Monte-Cuculi, even
into the very heart of While the Prince of Orange lay before St. Hertoghenbosch.
Holland it self, with an Army. This was the cause of the revenge which they
took afterward: nor did they more then enough in so doing, or committed any
thing contrary to the Law of Arms. That for the Wars About the Dukedom of
Mantua; which the Spaniard perchance could ha^ bin willing to have seized for
himself in the Emperors name; who pretended the Dukedom to be a Fee or
Forfeiture of the Empire.
of Italy, the Rights of the Empire, it is true, were pretended; but yet were
they with the blood, and at the charges of the Germane Nation, maintained in
behalf of the King of Spain. For as for the Duke de Nivers, he was ever ready
to have sworn fealty, and done his homage to the Emperor: but indeed it no
way stood with the Spaniards designs, to have a Prince so near a neighbor
unto his Duchy of Millaine, that were infected with a French spirit. Against
the King of Sweden they affirmed, how that the Emperor in aid of his Cousin
the King of Poland had sent a strong Army: and therefore ought not to take it
ill, if by the same Law of Arms, that King should now assist his own Cosins
the Dukes of Mecklenburg condemned, By the Emperor, to leese their Estates:
Whereupon, Walsteyn with his Army fell upon the Duchy of Mecklenburg, whom the
Emperor having Created Duke of Freidlandt before, now made him Duke of
Mecklenburg.
before they were heard: revenging withal, the private injuries offered unto
himself. These and the like Discourses passed up and down.

The sum of the Princes Answer unto the Emperors Propositions.
But the Electors in a grave and a solemn Answer, insisted upon the miseries
of the present times, the outrages committed in the Wars, and the
excessiveness of the Impositions; laying all the fault upon the author of all
these, the new Duke of Mecklenburg, General of the Emperors great Army;
through his sides, thus girding even at the Emperor himself; seeing, that
unto him He had given so large a Commission (and that without the consent of
the Princes of the Empire) as never before him any had: That there had an
infinite Army been gathered; to no use, unless to the destruction of their
Country: that war had been commenced against such, as it had never been
denounced: That the Impositions, which by the Law of the Empire it had been
fit to have assessed by the joint consent of the Princes; had at the pleasure
of the said Duke been imposed, and most rigorously exacted. They at the same
time also affirmed, how that the Elector of Brandenburg alone in these few
years past, (besides those inestimable damages, which usually accompany the
Wars, and the unruly Soldiers,) had been feign to contribute (and that
under the name of a Tribute) to the value of twenty Millions of A Florens, is
about two shillings English.
Florens.

At which time these several complaints were also given up: The Duke of
Pomerland complained himself for ten Millions drawn out of his Principality
of Stetin alone; and that in one only year, besides an unnecessary rabble of
Hang-byes, Drablers, and the Skullery of the Army; there had been one and
thirty thousand foot, and seven thousand five hundred and forty horse,
billetted up n Pomerland. William, Landtgrave of Hessen, for his tribute of
some certain years, seven Millions; the Duke of Wirtemberg, monthly
contributed an hundred and twenty thousand Florens. The City and State of
Norimberg, twenty thousand a month: others likewise complained, of some more,
some less, that had been raked from them. They highly accused thereupon the
prodigal luxury of the said Duke, his Collonells and Captains, for their
flanting of it in such rich Clothes and household-stuffe, of gold and silver;
and the incredible high keeping and trappings of their horses.

At the same time there was a little Book showed up and down, wherein the
ordinary provisions of Walsteyns.
his house, the offices of his Court, and the names of those that had
principal charge about him, were contained; and all these with larger
allowance (as it was said) then those of the Emperors own palace. Then was
his so much envied house, built at Prage out of the spoils of the Empire, and
upon the ruins of an hundred houses, purposely plucked down for him, every
wherespoken of.

Nor could any of these things be denied. But those times (as the Emperor
excused it) and the power the enemy was then grown unto, and, the victory,
depending upon speedy pursuit alone (nothing being safer in Civil Wars,
then expedition) could not away with that scrupulous order of the ancient
Customs. Many a Dispute in writing hereupon passed too and again, on both
sides: in all which, the Emperor pressed no new Proposition or request: but
the Electors mainly urged the casheering of the new Walsteyn.
Duke and his Army; to have a Peace made with the French King, and the Princes
of Italy; yea with the King of Sweden also; whose Fleet was not as yet arrived
upon the Coasts of Pomerland. The Mr. Russdorff by name.
Ambassador of Frederick the Palatine, they were very earnest to have admitted
to Audience, unto whom now coming to the Diet in company of the King of great
Britains Sir Robert Austruther.
Ambassador, they gave assurance for his safe coming and returning. With the
Hollanders last of all, they all, (but especially the Bishop Elector of Colein,
who lies nearest to the danger) desired peace upon any terms: a buisinesse of
which moment, they all affirmed worthy to be referred unto a Diet of the whole
Empire. Many things therefore the Electors by voices at length carried, which
fell heavy upon the Emperor and his Courtiers.

Unto Walensteyn therefore first of all, were there sent John Baptista
Verdenberg, and Gerard Questenberg; Barons both of them, and both of them
enriched by him with many a mighty gift; and both of them always believed to
be at Court the great advancers of his Projects. But even therefore were they
made choice of before any others, as the fittest men to persuade with him. The
task which they undertook, seemed to be the difficultest of all the rest; it
being believed that Walenstein being a man of a most haughty spirit,
accustomed to a military command, one that had been Courted by the greatest
Princes, and vpheld by infinite riches; would never dully endure such an
affront, nor by his good will ever stoop again unto a private life. Cause to
fear moreover he had, lest they who never durst do it when he was a General,
would yet require their own of him when he should become a private man. And the
Duchy of Mecklenburg They feared left he would use it, as the Devil did the
Possessed; all to tear it, when he knew he wat to leave it.
(they beleevd) likely hereby to be exposed to most certain danger. All men's
minds now full of expectation what would be the event of that message; all men
now afraid of new hurly-burlies; behold now (what every Peoples guesses at the
reason, of Walensteins so easy quitting of his Army.
body much admired at) Walenstein immediately obeyes the commandment of the
Emperor. Some indeed surmised, that he being a fast servant to the Emperor,
though a gallantly magnificent spirited person; yet being now become inexorable
by the many faults committed by his Soldiers, he would never be wrought to it,
either by gifts or threatenings; or by any other devises, such as vulgar spirits
use to be troubled withal, did therefore in his own judgment account it his
better course, to give way unto envy; being in possibility one day to see
both times and men favorably disposed toward him, who turning with the times,
might be changed to repentance. Others suspected him to be weighed down with
great promises, and to have that way fallen off from the Emperor. There were
some that said, that even by the skill of some in the Stars (wherein besides
others he made use of Kepler, a great Master) and by the Chaldeans art, was
foresignified, his times and fates to be come, and that they gave him this
Counsel. Others, to conclude, believed him to be forced unto it by necessity;
and that by the cunning even of Caesar himself, he was fetched over, and quit
that way of his great forces: and that his vain heart, out of a hope and
desire of wars with France, and the glory of a new prey; was thus suddenly
taken off from his mighty Army: and that he now remaind at Memmingen a
prisoner as it were. But what ever the matter was, a very great thing it is,
and near unto a prodigy; first, that Caesar condescended unto the Electors;
and secondly, that Walenstein so soon yielded unto the Emperor.

Another thing there is which the Electors now obtained; namely, that those
innumerable numbers should be lessened, and the greatest part of the Soldiers
disbanded. Then, Caesar promised also, that there should be no wars made upon
any, without the consent of the Princes. And that no Impositions should
hereafter be laid, at the pleasure of the General of the Army, but in the
Land-dayes of the several The whole Empire is divided into ten Circles or
Provinces: each of which (besides their ^^verall Princes,) has a President and
(...) Coun^^ll^rs to assist (...) who call (...) or Land-dayes to (...) for the
public. All the Princes of the same Cir^le, be of one League.
Circles, as they call them. Beyond all this, the desires both of Caesar, the
Electors, and of the French Ambassador conspired in one consort, to make up a
Peace so unwelcome and hated of the Spaniard: seeing that by it sure order was
taken, first, for re-estating of the Duke de Nivers in the possession of Mantua
and Montferat: secondly, that the (Germane) Troops should be recalled out of
Italy: and lastly, that the passages of the mountains in the Grisons The
Valte^^^.
Country, should be laid open as before. None of which Laws verily are of
that nature, that for the obteining of them, there was any need to disturb
the quiet of so many Nations, to expend such vast treasures, and to shed the
blood of so many thousands.

The Treaty with the English Ambassador, and the Prince Palatines Procurator,
although it came to no head; yet thereby way was obtained for Prince Frederike
to find Grace: and that those parts of his Dominions which are in the
Spaniards hands, are now to be quitted unto him: and he has the liberty yet
left him, to fulfill the Conditions offered him at Mulhausen. And thus, (which
God turn to a good end,) do we owe unto Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden,
Goths, and Vandalls, that we are not utterly despoyled of our Arms, nor too
straightly curbed by the Electors; nor, finally, made the tenants of the
Clergy.

For when as in the heat of these contentions yet continuing, news was
brought, both that the Baron of Dhona was come away from Dantzik without any
hope of a Peace: and that the King of Sweden had already landed an Army in
Pomerlandt; made himself Master of Stetin, and at the same time put the
Imperialists to flight; Caesar, supposing that to be an occasion to be made use
of; affirmed, that his despising of the Majesty of the Germane Empire ought to
be revenged upon him; and that, that error was to be rectified by virtue, which
they had run into In the time spent in the Treaty of Peace; which had better
bin employed in sending an Army, to withstand his so near approaching.
by delaying. These Propositions of Casars were not a little helped forward by
a private fear of the Catholics: which was, least that not Gustavus alone, (a
Prince but of small power) did thus stir up the massy weight of so great a
war; but that there were more of the Protestants, who out of a hatred to the
present estate of things, and a desire of innovation; and those, perchance,
foreign Princes too, should be deeply in the plot with him. These (Catholic
Princes) therefore, thus drawn unto it, not so much out of their love unto the
Emperor, as out of their own fears, agreed to the wars, and aids against
him.

In the mean time (which thing was cunningly and closely conveyed, and
whereof there had been no mention made, among any of the heads of the
Consultation) was the design for the Election and Crowning of the King of the
Romans mainly intended; and that by most cunning solicitations, and the
earnestest of their devises. Egenberg, The Emperors Counselor.
a man continually troubled with the Gowt, for which he seldom used to come
out of his bed; gave particular Visites unto the four Electors present, and
unto the Ambassadors of the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh,
at their several lodgings: finely insinuating unto them, how that the Emperor
now well in years, was even weary of pains taking, and was a man subject to
many diseases besides: that his affection was very good toward the
Commonwealth, which he was now able to do no greater service for, then to
settle in it a good Successor. He put them in mind now and then, of the
miseries of an Inter-regnum: intimated unto them, the high deservings of the
house of Austria; wonderfully setting out the towardly hopefulnesse of King The
Emperors Son, King of Hungarta; whom the Emperor would feign now have
procured to have been chosen King of the Romans: which is as much as Heir
apparent to the Empire.
Ferdinand.

To the same purpose, (for that the Ambassadors of the two absent Electors
excused themselves, as having no instructions or Commission to treat upon that
point) were there Letters dispatched unto the Electors themselves; yea, the
Electors good will was so little doubted of, that a certain Physician of the
Emperors Court, (and he none of the obscurest, as having a special vein in
Poetry) in a set Poem which was printed at Norimberg, congratulated the
Father, for the Crown set upon his son Ferdinand the third his head, none
almost contradicting it. Unto which intimation (of Egenbergs) they all returned
answer, magnificent enough for words, but empty for realitie: highly thanking
the Emperor for his Care of the Commonwealth; but that the Laws of the
Empire forbad them, to condescend at this time unto his desires: Non nisi causa
cognita.
seeing that by that Law, the Electors without particular knowledge of the
Cause, could not appoint a Diet for the Creating of the King of the Romans:
and that the full knowledge of the Cause contained many particulars, which
require both time and serious consultation. Then, that Franckford was by the
same Law, the place appointed for the Election. That it were wisely done to
take away all matter of rumors; that people might have no cause to say, how all
things in that Diet, were in the middle now of Caesar's Armies frighting them on
every side, not passed by the free voices of the Electors, but by force and
fear rather. Thus by a wise dilatory answer, were those requests turned off,
which in right-downe terms, the Electors would not willingly have denied. But
whither it were their Care of the public good, and to keep their own
liberties; or that the ambitious counsel of the Duke of Bavaria stepped in
between, I know not: but very certain it is, that great offense was taken at
it, that King Ferdinand in his Caroach, in all meetings, and wheresoever; still
ambitiously affected the upper hand; which was denied to belong unto him,
whilst his Father was living. And the report was, that the Bishop Elector of
Mentz, gave Stralendorff Vice Chancellor of the Empire, a privy Item to that
purpose.

The Law of Soveraigntie eagerly raged in the mean time; and diverse of the
Gentry of Franckenlandt, Schwabenland, and the Palatinate, were there accused
to have borne Arms, under Mansfeild, The Marquess of Baden; Lieutenant of the
Army of the Princes of the Union, for the keeping of the Palatinate, and the
Protestant Countries. After the dissolving of the Union, in the year 1621. he
the next year fought with his own forces about Sinsin, betwixt the Palatinate
and Wirtemberg: where the good old man was defeated by Tilly and Don Cordova.
Durlack, and Brunswick, against the Emperor. Some affirmed them to be
guilty: themselves said they only found themselves guilty, by suffering
their punishment. The execution of this business, did the Emperor now commit
unto Wolfgang Rudolph Ossa: (a man accounted rather great, then good; taken
to'ther day out of the service of the Counts of Hanaw, into the number of the
Court Flies or Instruments:) Commanding the goods of the condemned persons to
be confiscated into his own Exchequer: the Electors and other Princes,
earnestly protesting against the proceedings; claiming, those Gentlemen to be
within their Dominions: and that these Fees which Caesar now Confiscated into
his own Coffers, the Gentlemen did hold of them, and of their Ancestors; and
that all such Forfeitures and Atteinders were by the favor of former
Emperors, and long Custom, due unto them. Caesar continued resolute
notwithstanding; and dispatched away Ossa with a most ample Commission: then
which action of Caesar's, none was generally taken in worse part. Because even
bad Princes, though sometimes they punished such as were actually proov'd
traitors, yet they always too narrowly searched not into every man, that was to
himself guilty: that they hushed up many a foul thing, by a wise
dissimulation, rather then by bringing it to open punishments. That he that
takes away one enemy, makes way for many. That he especially who has any
thoughts of Peacemaking in him, is not to take notice of every thing: for
fear lest the whirlewindes after much ado being now scarce laid, should
bluster out again into a vehementer tempest. That bodies weakened by a
sickness, are not presently again to be tampered withal by Physic; but to
be recovered with quiet. That scarcely can the actions of the best Princes be
defended, much less theirs, which are always suspected of avarice: That upon
these grounds, Cosimo de Medicis, (a most wise Duke of Flo^^nce in Italy.
Prince,) always left the Estates of such as were attaynted, unto their
Children and next kindred. Finally, the business which of its own nature was
grievous enough, would be made much heavier by the sharking of the Officers.

But these Court-Harpyes forsooth, now after that under the pretense of
treasons against the Emperor, and exercise of forbidden Religions; they had
with their uncleanly talons, foully gryped Bohemia, Moravia, and both the
Austria's, and wrung the Nobility and Gentry (whose case was rather to be
pitied) out of their inheritances: their insatiable mawes being not yet full
cramb'd, they now whetted their Claws and infamous beakes again, to devour
the wealth of the Empire. That their yawning gullets, were yet set wider upon
the tenterhookes, by the easiness of the Emperor; in whose service (he being
a Prince too much governed by his Officers) men might offend with less fear,
and greater reward. One thing there was that added more matter to these
speeches; a word (namely) that scaping from Werdenberg, was presently taken up
by the people: how that the goods of the Gentry of Franckenlandt, were already
granted away unto the Lords of the Emperors privy Council; both for the
payment of their Pensions now many years behind, and also for the reward of
their pains and faithfulness, yet for all this, the names of the I believe
that these 3. having thus gotten estates, had also new titles given them by the
Emperor; for the first of which they were hated, and for the last, scorned by
the Germane Nation, that stand much upon their ancient Nobility. This Abbot of
Cremsmunster, was preferred to the Bishopric of Vienna in August following.
Counts of Meggau and Trautmanstorff, and of the Abbot of Cremsmunster (which
three personages, by what title I know not, had out of the Exchequer received
some of the escheated goods) they much scorned and despised, as new and strange
preferments: for a disposition there is bred in the bone of us mortals; with
ill eyes to look asquint at other men's newly acquired happiness; and with an
equal repining to measure other men's good, and our own injuries. But Caesar,
shall I say, or these that bear all the sway at Court, remained resolute and
peremptory in the matter: all loath to loose so plentiful a Fishing.

You have long expected, my noble Friend, to hear what has been moved,
argued, and decreed in this Diet, concerning the restitution of the Church
goods. That shall I briefly tell you of. It stood not with the Emperors honor,
again to submit a case already decided by himself, and wherein he had by his
Proclamation declared his pleasure, unto the Censure of others. Nor any whit of
favor was there all this while showed unto the Duke of Wirtemberg, the
Marquess of Brandenburg, the Counts of Hohenloe and Waldeck, the Cities of
Strasburg, and Norimberg: who by sentences every day passed against them, were
commanded to quit the goods of the Church. And thus may it hereby sufficiently
appear, how that that distinction of time agreed upon, and the Transaction of
Passaw, has not hitherto been observed, no not by Caesar himself; but that
of the following time has been observed: seeing, that the Credit of all
proofs, though never so clear, has been overthrown by cavills and by
subtleties. Certain it is, that the Count of Furstemberg, President Iudicij
Prases.
of the Judgment, returned no other answer unto Caspar Urban a Feiltsch,
Chancellor to the Marquess of Brandenburg, complaining of the unjust sentence
decreed against the Counts of Hohenlo, than this vulgar Verse.

Front capillata est, posthac occasio calva. That, Occasion is to be taken by
the foretop, because she is bald behind. Which same man in a familiar manner
thus answered unto George Muller (whom you well know) and to my self: that
seeing our Counts The Masters of George Muller, and of the Author.
had confessed themselves, for the space of fourscore years and upwards, to
have kept the possession of the Church Goods; it followed necessarily that they
must with a good will leave them for as long time unto the Catholics: and that
after that term, they might possibly return unto the Protestants again.
These mocks were added, unto Justice denied us.

And yet about the latter end of the Diet, the Ambassadors of Franckenlandt,
Schwaben, of the Saxon Princes also, and the Duke of Brunswick, and of certain
Cities besides; delivered in writing the Form and the Decrees of that Of
Passaw as before: where ( Anno 1553.) there had been a former Diet held;
wherein the Protestant Princes had received some confirmation or consent from
the Emperor, for their Appropriated church goods. Against which Transaction
the Emperor had since taken them away, by sentences and Commissions against
them.
Transaction, unto the Chancellor of the Bishop Elector of Mentz: and he on the
other side, in another writing declared unto them, the Conditions unto which
the Catholic Princes seemed to have consented. And to this pass the matter at
last came, That for the further Compounding of all Differences, the time was
appointed to be in February, and the place Franckford.

The Catholic party treated That the orders of Passaw might be kept, and the
Protestants not be too suddenly cast out of the Church Lands.
the business in good earnest: but whether the reason of it were, for that
intelligence being even now given them by their Spies of certain secret levies
of Soldiers, at that instant made by the Elector of Saxony and some others in
Franckenlandt; and that they standing in fear thereupon of further troubles,
were desirous to maintain the hope of a good agreement in the Protestants; I
cannot easily determine: time will discover all. Of all which; as also how
things now stand betwixt the Princes of the Catholic League: and of the Orders
taken (for show rather, than for continuance) about the manner of paying the
Soldiery; we shall at my coming into -- land, more commodiously speak
together. Farewell my noble Friend, N: N: and love me still.

Your Observant, N. N.

THE PROTESTANTS DIET OF LEIPSICH, February 8. 1631. And what followed upon it,
until their joining with the King of Sweden.
THe Imperial Diet thus ending November 3/23. left matters in far worse
estate than it found them: for that men perceived now their very hopes to be
taken away, as their liberties and goods had been before. And the Protestant
Princes finding themselves startled by four things especially, perceived it
high time now for them to take the Alarm. The first of the four was this:
that whereas the Duke of Saxony had in the time of the Diet written advice unto
the Emperor, of the King of Swedens approaching; the Emperor tells him
again, how he hoped that himself (Saxony) and Brandenburg would well aid
him, with money, munition, and other necessaries. By which answer, Saxony
perceived a new bill of Charges coming upon the Protestants next those parts,
where the King of Sweden was landed. The second was this: the round course
taken by the Emperor for the recovering of the Church Lands: which neither the
Elector of Saxony was able to stay by his Letters unto the Emperor; nor the
Elector of Brandenburg and other Princes, with their presence at the Diet: but
that even before their own faces, daily Commissions were sent out against
them. A third was this: that rigide course (taken by advise of the Jesuits)
for Reformation of the Protestant Churches and Schools, and the forbidding of
the liberty of the Augustane Confession. The fourth was, that Decree of the
Emperors (published four days before the breaking up of the Diet, though
hammered upon long before:) for the continuance of the Wars against the King
of Sweden: whereas the way had been propounded and advised upon before, how to
compound the matter, rather then how to continue the troubles. And that which
aggravated the Decree for the wars being; not only that the Princes were to
be at the charges of it, but that the levies were to be laid and collected, not
by the consent of those who should pay them, but at the pleasure of the
Imperial Commissaries: for the moderating of whose power, and repressing the
numbers and insolences of the Soldiers, notwithstanding some slight promises
were now made; yet how far they would be kept, was in their own pleasures. The
Protestants by these arguments being not only made suspicious, but sensible
too; that there were not too many good intentions in the Emperor toward them,
their Estates or Religions: begin to enter into a Consultation for their own
safety. The plot for it was laid thus. That whereas there had been a
Conference betwixt them and the Catholics at the former Diet, concerning the
Church Lands; the further treaty thereupon, was referred unto a Diet (procured
by the Catholics) to be held at Franckford upon Mayn, in August following; the
Duke of Saxony should write his Letters unto the Emperor, (which was seconded
by the mediation of the Electors of Mentz and Bavaria, The Emperor graunts the
Diet.
) entreating liberty for the Protestants to hold a Diet by themselves, in some
convenient place; that so by their united Counsels they might be provided, for
an answer at the future Diet of Franckford.

The Imperial assent being thus obtained; the Protestant Princes by their
Letters and Ambassadors agree upon the Diet: the place to be Leipsich, and the
time the 8.th of February. That the several Princes and States therefore might
know beforehand, what Instructions to give unto the Ambassadors they were to
send; (...)
the Duke of Saxony in his Invitatory Letters to each of them, lays open the
purpose of the intended Diet; fayrely communicating the main propositions,
both unto them, and to the Emperor. The contents whereof were; First, To
consult how the Church might with a good Conscience be maintained in her
ancient liberties and happy estate. Secondly, How to keep their due obedience
to the Emperor, and yet preserve the ancient Constitutions and Peace of the
Empire. Thirdly; How to maintain correspo^dency with the Catholic Princes.
And fourthly, What to answer for themselves both in general and particular, as
well concerning the maintenance of the reformed Religion, as to the Emperors
Edict concerning the Church Lands, when they should come to meet at the Diet
of Franckford.

The Princes thus invited, and the time now come; upon the fourth of February
1631. the Elector of Saxony enters Lypsich in great state: and the Elector of
Brandenburg a little after him. The Protestant party in the Empire.
Thither in person came these Protestant Princes also. Christianus (another)
Marquess of Brandenburg. John William, and Bernard, Dukes of Saxon Weymar.
William, Landtgrave of Hessen, Frederick Marquess of Baden. Augustus Prince of
Anhalt. Frederick Count of Solmes. John George, and Ernest Lodowike, Counts of
Mansfeilt, and the (deposed) Dukes of Mecklenburg. These Princes sent their
Ambassadors. The Duke of Deuxponts. John Ernestus another Duke of Saxony.
Frederick Vlrick, Duke of Brunswicke. The Duke of Lunenburg. The several
Princes of the Circles of Schwaben and Franckenlandt. The Lady of the Abbey of
Quedlinburg. The Bishops Administrators of Mecklenburg and of Bremen. The
Counts of Stolberg. The Barons of Reussen and Schonberg. These Towns and
States send their Agents also. Norimberg, Strasburg, Franckford, Lubeck,
Bremen, Brunswick, Hildesheim, Mullhuisen and Northhuisen. Duke Lodowick
Frederick, Administrator of the Dukedom of Wirtenberg was newly dead; and Duke
Julius not yet settled: and therefore being not able to come himself, he sent
the Vice-Chancelor of the Dukedom called Doctor Loester, and some other
Counselors, as Deputies for that Duchy. And these be the Protestant party in
the Empire: some whereof being Lutherans, and some Calvinists; they first of
all agree to have that distinction of names (which had caused so much schism
and hatred heretofore) to be utterly taken away: making a general Decree, that
both Professions should from thence forth be called by one name of
Evangeliacalls. That is, Professors of the Gospel.


No man was suffered to stay within the Town, whose business was not known:
the streets ends were chained up and barricadoed; guards set at the several
ports; and the keys of the gates every night brought into the Dukes chamber.
And all this, was, to prevent Spies and surprisalls. The Duke Elector of Saxony
(on whose greatness and countenance, the Party and Action very much depended)
makes a speech first of all, Saxonyes Oration.
which had reference unto his former Letters of Invitation unto them:
protesting withal, his own firmness and forwardness for the peace of the
Empire, and the maintenance of the Religion; and that he would be ready to
adventure, both life and goods in the Cause: so desiring every man freely to
give his Counsel in such manner, as they might be able to render a fair
account of it unto the Emperor. Unto this meeting, the King of Sweden also
sends his Ambassador Doctor Chemnitius; who in his Masters name delivers them
this assurance. That his Majesty's intentions were no other, then to restore
the Empire to her ancient peace, the Princes to their liberties, and to defend
the Church in her Religion: telling them moreover, how that the French King was
newly entered into a League with him for five years to come. The Ambassador had
both speedy Audience, and honorable entertainment. The Diet (to be brief)
brake up upon Palme-Sunday the third of April following. The Conclusions
agreed upon, themselves express in their Letters, in humble and complaining
manner, enlarged in many sheets of Paper, sent by an express Curryer unto the
Emperor: in which their joint desires were thus signified.

Their humble Remonstrance unto the Emperor.
Their Complaint and Remonstrance, I reduce into these Propositions.

That the Golden Bull and Constitutions of the Empire, had of late been all
abused. That the Emperors late Edict for restitution of the Church Lands; and
his endeavors to root out the Protestant Religion, were the maine Causes of
these late troubles. The first of these, breeding jealousies and discontents
betwixt the Protestants and the Papists: and the second, tending to the utter
ruin of the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg. Then they complain of
injustice done unto particular Princes and Cities: some of which, were injuried
by the violent taking away of their Church Lands: as the Dukes of Wirtenberg,
and Brunswick, the Prince of Anhalt; the Counts Hohenloe, Stolberg, Lip,
Valdecht, Verthimb, Erpach, etc. the Town of Ausburg, and others. Some
hindered in the exercise of their Religion: as Augustus and Frederike, Princes
Palatines, and younger brethren unto Wolfgang William, Palatine of Newburg now
turned Papist. Others had their Estates confiscated: as the Lady The mother and
brother of the King of Bohemia: Lewis being Duke of Simmern.
Electresse Palatine, and her Son Lewis, Prince Palatine; the Dukes of
Mecklenburg, etc. for whom the whole College of Electors had interceded in the
late Diet, but not prevayled. Others complain of the violent altering of their
Feods and Tenures of their Lands and Lordships; as the last before named
Princes, and John Casimire Elector of Saxony; into whose Lands the Imperial
Commissaries have with force and Arms intruded; changing the tenures of the
tenants, and altering the Religion. Ernestus Marquess and Elector of
Brandenburg complains of the same wrongs offered unto his Pupils, the young
Marquesses Which are of the house of Brandenburg: their Lands lying by
Nurenberg.
of Onspach. Vlme Duke of Brunswick complains, first of the ravages of his
Lands done by Tilly: upon pretense of moneys owing to the King of Denmark;
and made over by the said King unto the Emperor: who employed Tilly thus to
streyne for them: Secondly, of the seizure of his Bishopric of Hildesheim:
and thirdly, that the chief Town of his own residence Wolffenbuttle, had
been forced to take an Imperial Garrison.

Others complain, how they might not have the benefit of the Law; but were
driven away by threatenings and discourtesies. The Electors and Princes
complain of contempts and indignities offered unto their persons: some of them
having been threatened the Bastonado by some of the Emperors Soldiers. The
Cities and Circles of the Empire complain, that undue and excessive
Impositions and Taxes have been laid upon them: not by the consent of
themselves, (as the Imperial Laws command) but at the pleasure of any of the
Emperors Commissaries. That under color of protecting them, they have been
forced to afford Quarter and maintenance, unto the Imperial Armies: who when
they should indeed have defended them, most cowardly ran away. That when they
would not endure the Soldiers insolences, they have been declared enemies of
the Empire, and forbidden to defend themselves. That their Lands have been
given to Soldiers, as if they had been Conquered. That they have been forced
to contribute to imaginary companies of Soldiers, (perchance to four or five)
as if they had been a complete band. That the Commissaries have assigned
Quarters and passages unto the Soldiers, without ever asking leave of the
Princes or Countries. That people have been tortured for their money, had
their Cattle driven away, their houses fired, and all Commerce driven out of
their Country. That the Soldiers neither observed martial discipline, nor
moral honesty: neither keeping the Laws, nor fearing God. That virgins and
women have been ravished, upon the high Altars. That if the weekly
Contributions were not paid at the Commissaries absolute pleasure, the
soldiers then spoiled the Country. The Marquess of Brandenburg complains,
that notwithstanding the King of Sweden had two parts of his Country (the old
and the new Mark) yet was he forced to pay a full Contribution, for the whole
Marquisate. That himself, by the Soldiers so long lying in his Country, was
left so poor, that he was not able to entertain a Garrison for the defense of
his own Palace: and was feign to abridge even the necessary provisions of his
own Table and family. That the Soldiers enterteyn'd by the Protestants for
their own defense, have been turned against them, to take away the Church
Lands. That treble more Contributions have been raised against no enemy, then
ever were when the Turk was in Germany. That when the Princes of the house of
Saxony, as namely, Altemberg, Weymar, and Colburg, had excused themselves of
disabilitie to pay each of them 1454. Dollars a month, which the Commissary
Ossa had required of them; then Tilly threatened to fetch 10000. Dollars a
month out of them. That considering all this, they could perceive nothing
else, but that the Emperor had intended their utter ruin: whereas he had
dealt more gently with those of his own hereditary Dominions. That all this is
most contrary unto the Oath of the Emperor, and unto the Laws of the Empire:
and for such, has been complained upon, by the several Electors and Princes;
and by them protested against in the late Diet of Ratisbone. Wherefore they now
humbly petition to be relieved; protesting otherwise, that they are no longer
able to endure it: but shall be enforced to defend their persons, their
Consciences, their Estates and Subjects. Resolving notwithstanding to continue
their due loyalty and obedience unto the Emperor: humbly now desiring a fair
and a gracious Answer from him. Lypsich, March 18. 1631.

Their Conclusions published.
Their Conclusions were answerable unto their Propositions.

1. That considering it was their sins which deserved these punishments; they
command public prayers to be made unto Almighty God for the averting of these
miseries.

2. That means might be thought upon, and a friendly Treaty appointed with
the Catholic Princes; for removing of all jealousies, and restoring of good
terms and concord betwixt them, as for seaventie years before it had been.

3. That when the time and place for this Treaty were once appointed; the
Protestants should there appear a little before, to prepare themselves what to
say in it.

4. And the fayrelier to dispose both Caesar and the Catholics unto their
intentions; that their grievances should in humble manner be beforehand by
Letter presented, both unto the Emperor, and the three Catholic Electors.

5. That these grievances should in those Letters be pressed; to be contrary
unto the Emperors Oath, the Imperial Laws, the privileges of the Princes,
the honor and safety of the Empire. That the wars would undo all, the
insolences of Commissaries and Soldiers were so insufferable, as that it
stood neither with their Consciences, their safeties, nor their honors, to
suffer themselves and Subjects, to be any longer thus abused: and that they
would hereupon desire the benefit of the Emperors so often promised protection.

6. That seeing these greater and fuller Assemblies were both chargeable and
tedious; they agreed that certain Deputies should as necessity required be in
the names of all the rest appointed, both to treat and determine of what
should seem convenient for the Common cause.

7. They decree of levies of Soldiers (both of horse and foot) to be made in
their several Dominions and Divisions: without crossing the Constitutions of
the Empire, or offense of any; and only in their own defense.

8. That whereas in a Diet of the Empire held 1555. it had been Decreed; how
that neighboring Princes should live neighbourly, and if any oppressed others,
the rest should relieve them: this relief they now promise one another;
desiring that if in these troublesome times, the levies and other carriages
could not possibly be every way agreeable to the Constitutions of the Empire,
that it might not be interpreted to be done of purpose.

9. They decree the continuance of their loyalty and obedience unto his
Imperial Majesty.

10. They agree also upon the proportion of the Levies.

Thus the Elector of Saxony engages himself to raise six. Regiments.
Brandenburg three. The several Circles of Swaben, the Rhine, and
Franckenlandt, three Regiments a piece: and the Circle of the Lower Saxony
agreed to furnish moneys for the raising and paying of one Regiment. Each
Regiment of foot was to be 3000. strong: and of horse 1000. And thus the Diet
being ended upon Palm Sunday with a Sermon; Saxony displayes his Defensive
Banner, beats up his Drums, begins his Levies: and so at their coming home,
do the rest of the Princes.

These Conclusions and Resolutions of the Protestants, were not a little
boggled at, at Court; did not slightly displease the Emperor; and startle the
Catholic Leaguers, with their Adherents. The Protestants hear of it on both
ears: For this, are they both by words and writings, both threatened, and
reviled: yea their new League and strength were by some Confidents, not a
little scoffed and scorned at. But they that had been used to hard deeds
before, were sufficiently hardened against foul words now; they were not to be
discouraged this way: they did their business, and let the others talk their
talks. Things going thus on; it was by the middle of May every where
perceived, How that these Leaguers of Leipsich, were now in very good earnest.
For now upon the taking of Magdenburg, the Protestants strongly suspecting by
the inhumane cruelty there used by the Imperialists; that it was not a heat
of war alone, but that there was a Coare of malice discovered in it: not an
Imperial, but a Popish spite, unto that City above others; for having been
one of the first that harbored Luther and his Religion: they begin to make
it their own case, and that for their Religions sake, all they were likely not
to be much better used. Some therefore of the neighbor Princes (those namely
of Saxony and Swaben) demand of the Cities of Vlmes and Memmingen, etc.
Situate in Swaben by the River of Danubius, (which were of the Protestant
League with them) to enterteyne for Garrisons some of these new levied Forces.
Memmingen consents: but Vlme being a greater City, relyes upon her own
strength. These things being done, Command is given by the Emperor unto Eggon
Count of Furstenberg, (appointed General for the Circle of Swaben) to employ
those 8000. (lately come out of Italy, after that the wars of Mantua were
ended) together with some 8. or 10000. more, against those Towns aforesaid.
Furstenberg presses so hard upon Memmingen; that about the beginning of June,
he enforces it to renounce the new League, and to purchase the Emperors
pardon, at the rate of 50000. Florens ready pay, and 25000. monthly
Contribution. The Protestants League being now noysed abroad, and another
meeting at the latter end of May, at the same Leipsich intended; thither come
the Ambassadors of England, Sweden, Saxony, and Brandenburg: There is the
uniting of their forces with the King of Sweden propounded, but not concluded:
only the passage of Wittemberg heretofore denied him by Saxony, is now yielded
unto, to be open for his Army. Mr. Tilly about the same time, dispeedes a
message unto Saxony with overtures of a peace; promising shortly to come
himself with sufficient Commission to conclude it. This being suspected to be
a plot, either to divert or stagger the resolution of the Duke, or a trick to
gain time; and that Tillyes Commission might perchance be in his scabbard; the
message was not accepted: notwithstanding that Tilly did in mid June following,
come in person indeed, and at Oldsleben had treaty with the Dukes Ambassadors.

When this would not do, The Emperors Proclamation against them.
and the Emperor by the Dukes second Letters (dated the day after the end of
the late Diet) understanding the resolution of the Leaguers, which by their
general levies he perceived them ready to maintain: And hearing withal, the
King of Sweden to be victoriously already advanced, quite through Pomerland and
Mecklenburg, into some places of Brandenburg: out-thunders He his Imperial
Bann against the Leipsich Leaguers, dated at Vienna, May 14. peremptorily
forbidding any place of the Empire, to grant either relief, passage, or place
of quarter, muster, or rendezvous, unto any of their forces: commanding every
man, to destroy, kill, and persecute them as enemies: and the easier to dehort
the Leaguers, his Majesty offers to release them of their Oaths, taken in
prejudice of him at Leipsich; and to grant pardon to as many as should come in:
upon pain of death forbidding all their Subjects, either to contribute to
their levies, or to serve under their Ensigns; but to turn both their moneys
and persons toward the advancement of his Imperial service; promising the
freedom of Conscience and Estates to all that should thus obey him.

Diverse people are naturally afraid of thunder: some of the Leaguers
therefore, (and especially the grave-headed Burgers in the richer Cities) began
now to quake at the noise of this so hideous a Proclamation. Which fear of
theirs, much coold their bloods, made them the less zealous and warm in the
resolution. But he that has not courage enough to fight, has wit enough
commonly to excuse his cowardice: So fell it out here; diverse of the
backwardest palliating their own remissness, with the news they pretended
to have heard, of the mammering of the chief man in the action, the Duke of
Saxony. And this had like to have arrested the whole Design. Saxony hearing of
all this, notwithstanding he was at the instant hard laid at by Hagen Muller
the Emperors Ambassador, to come over to his Master; yet (to prevent
jealousy) would he not so much as once speak with him then at Torgau, but
referred him for Audience over unto his privy Council.

Hagen Mullers Prepositions were these four:

1. To consult how the business about the Church Lands might best be
compounded.

2. How the inconveniences occasioned by the Wars, might be eased.

3. That the agreement of Leipsich for standing upon their own defense, might
be Cancelled.

4. That he would advise how a peace might honorably be concluded with the
Swede; and that the Duke would mediate it. The answer of the Dukes Council is
too long to insert: and to be brief, the Ambassador returns not well
satisfied. Immediately hereupon, the Duke dispatches his Letters unto the
several Leaguers: assuring them of his own Constancy; and inviting them with
all speed, to hasten their preparations.

These Letters of Saxony brought about the matter again; and he, to show that
he meant to do more then write Letters; lays sure guardes upon his own
Frontiers, some eight or ten thousand men: proceeding warily hitherto, and all
upon the defensive. The Protestant Princes of Swaben, (which lie along the
Danubie, between the Dukes of Wirtenburg and Bavaria) do hereupon assemble at
Essingen; resolving to stick close to the Articles of Leipsich: reenforcing
their levies thereupon. And now the fair City of Norenberg in the upper
Palatinate, returns to her former resolution; notwithstanding the particular
threatenings of the Emperor, to give the spoil of it unto their great
neighbor, the Duke of Bavaria. The City of Strasburg arms also: and the
City of Vlme, encouraged by the new Administrator of Wirtenburg, Duke Julius;
refuses to give passage to the late troops, coming that way out of Italy: and
send three hundred Musketeers to aid their neighbors of Memmingen against
them.

The Landgraue of Hessen (against whose Country, it was generally reported that
Tilly would forthwith come; and that he was already for that purpose upon his
March as far as Saxony) bestirres himself all this while; levies men, and
fortifies his Frontiers. Tilly sends, before he comes to him: and that these
four Demands.

1. Tillyes quarrel to Hessen.
To pay the arrier of the contribution due unto the Emperor. 2. To give
sufficiently hostages or security for the future. Directly professing him
either a friend or a foe, to the Emperor. 3. Immediately to cashiere his Army.
4. To lay open his passages for the Emperors forces: to receive Imperial
Garrisons into Cassell and Sichenheim; and to give quarter to five other
Regiments.
Hard terms all. Unto which the Landgrave returns though a Negative, yet a
modest answer. This way not speeding; it seems the way of practice and of
treachery was attempted: for the Landgraue presently upon this, discovers some
correspondency enterteind by two or three of his own chief Lords with Tilly,
for the delivering up his two chief Towns of Cassell and Sichenheim; for
which they are executed. Tilly after this in a rage sends three several
troops into his Country: his own intended expedition against him being
diverted by news of the King of Sweden.

All this while (namely until the latter end of June) was there no assurance
of the Protestant Princes purpose to unite with the King of Sweden: but they
all stood upon terms of neutralitie; kept their obedience unto the Emperor,
standing only upon the Defensive; without once offering any Act of hostility,
where they were not first provoked. Saxony had now 17000. foot, and 3000.
horse, all in a readiness. Upon the same terms stands the Marquess Elector
of Brandenburg: who notwithstanding the near alliance betwixt the King of
Sweden and himself, (the King having married the Sister of the said
Marquess:) yet that he seemed far enough from uniting with him, appears by
an action of his, which had like to have cost him dearly. The Elector denies a
request of the Kings for provision for his Army, (now in the Brandenburghers
Country) and especially for that the Marquess now desired his Town of Spandau
again, which upon some terms had at the first bin lent unto the King. Which
the King taking very unkindly, (diverse Circumstances perchance occurring) all
of a sudden besieges the Electors Town of Berlin, Unkindness betwixt Sweden
and Brandenburg. Of which see more in the Actions of the King of Sweden.
bending his Canon upon the very Palace; threatening to pillage it. The
difference is at length appeased by the Electresse; together with the promise
of 30000. Ryx Dollars a month, and to have the Town of Spandau (Custrine he
also now again desired as before he had done, as some say) again consigned
over unto him as before, as a Depositum of assurance, for preventing of such
like unkindness in time to come. This done, the King about the middle of
June, returns from his Camp unto Stetin; there to give Audience unto the
Russian Ambassador, who brought him an offer from his Emperor, of a great
power of money toward the maintenance of his Wars: requesting on the other
side, some Commanders of the King to guide his Army against the Pole; for which
Army he also desired passage through the Kings Country.

About the beginning of July, the Crabats, it seems, being the forerunners of
those 18000. that had some while layn about Vlme and Memmingen; pass over the
Danuby into the Duke of Wirtenburgs Country; where they plunder and spoil 11.
Towns and Villages: whom, Duke Julius, (newly chosen Administrator) meeting
withal; what with his own forces, and what with three Companies of foot and
two Cornets of horse now sent unto him from Vlm, utterly defeates three troops
of their horse. Thus far this new Administrator did bravely. But the rest of
the Emperors Army under Furstenberg, (having now brought Memmingen under
Contribution) passing the Danuby after their Crabats; first take in Reitling,
an Imperial Town, Duke Julius looking on: who no sooner perceiues them to
make toward his Army, now lying at Tubing; The Protestant party weakened, by
the revolt of Wirtenburg.
but his heart presently fayles him; and upon the second day of July being
Friday, shamefully yields to the signing of these Articles, which Furstenberg
presents unto him.

1. To disclaim the Diet of Leipsich; to yield obedience unto the Emperor:
and as Hostages thereof, to resign up his brothers widow and Children, into
the Emperors protection.

2. To dismiss his Army: giving leave to those that would to serve the
Emperor: the rest to swear, never to bear Arms against the Emperor.

3. To give Billet and Provisions unto the Imperial Army.

Tubing is hereupon yielded unto the Emperor: the fortune and example whereof,
is followed by other Cities, both in that Dukedom, and throughout Swaben; and
by Vlme among the rest. The terror strikes one way, as far as Heilbr^^ in the
same Duchy; within half a days journey of the lower Palatinate; who
thereupon dismiss their forces: and on the other side, the City of Norimberg
quakes, in the upper Palatinate. In so much, as (in a manner) all Swaben and
Franckenland, fall off from the League, and come under the Emperors devotion.

Hessen stands firm.
The Landtgraue of Hessen remains firm for all this: and Duke Bernard of
Saxon-Weymar now peicing in with him; Hessen reyses a new Fort here Isenach:
and some of Tillyes Vant-curriers having now pressed upon him as far as the
River Warra, yea and assaulted his new Fort (though with some loss:) he
withdrawes his troops dispersed before upon his Frontiers; and forms a
standing Camp betwixt Cassell and Eschwegen. We are by this time come into
the middle of July. About which season the Duke of Saxony (now much moved with
the revolt of Wirtenburg and Schwaben; Saxony calls a Parliament.
) calls his Parliament together to Dresden: and propounds these seven Articles
unto them.

1. Whether he were best to send any body to appear for him, at the
approaching Diet of Franckford? 2. What to answer the Emperor, now pressing
him to renounce the Conclusions of Leipsich? 3. How to behave himself toward
Tilly, who now began to use hostility toward those in Duringen? 4. How to
answer the Duke of Bavaria, demanding him to lay down Arms? 5. How to pay,
and where to quarter their own Soldiers. 6. Whether they were best to join
with a certain great Prince, They mean the King of Swede^, though they think
not good to name him.
or not. 7. What were best to be done, for the relieving of the Bishopric of
Magdenburg?
What their resolution was, appears by the success: for within ten days
after this, (that is, upon August the second) the Duke with his Feild-Marshall
Arnheym, Musters 13000. foot, and 5000. horse; provides his Pioners and
Carriages; Commands all to be ready to March at an hours warning; fortifies
Leipsich; goes to visit his Frontiers; and to the Town of Torgaw especially:
which being a frontier town, next unto the Emperors Country of Lusatia; and
situate also upon the River Elve; lay very fit therefore both to clear that
Stream, and to hinder Tillyes further intrusions that way; who lay all along
upon it, betwixt Magdenburg and Saxony. The Landtgrave of Hessen (again) about
mid- August, Of Hessen again.
flies out upon his unfriendly neighbors, in the Bishopric of Hiersfelt:
brings that under contribution; but meddles not with the Clergy, Tilly now
writes unto the Landtgraves people; complaining of their Masters purposes to
join with the enemy. The Landtgrave goes on for all this; and Marches up into
the Bishopric of Fulda. To oppose him, is Fugger first sent up with an Army,
Fuggar and Altringer sent against him.
said to be some 16. or 18000. men: which for the service of the Catholic
Leaguers, had been before times raised in the lower Saxony and the Palatinate.
Within a while after whom, Altringer follows; with some two Regiments more:
which had heretofore layn about Strasburg and Hagenaw. Some of Tillyes also lie
upon him about the River Werra: and thus has Hessen his hands full. Privately
therefore goes he over unto the King of Swedens Camp at Werben; Some overtures
of uniting are (perchance) there made: and he returns home from the King, with
three Regiments of horse, and one of foot; with an able Commander over them:
all lent unto him for his assistance. Brandenburg, about August 22. sends
Ambassadors unto Saxony: and Saxony about the same time, sends privately unto
the King of Sweden. And now (perchance) were the overtures to the future union
first agreed unto on the Dukes part: in which until then he not declared
himself. And thus appears by a word of his, spoken about this time at Torgau,
namely; That if he thought his own shirt knew his intention, he would tear
it. Which reservednesse of his notwithstanding, there appeared (ever since the
late Parliament of Dresden) a good inclination and confidence in the Duke
toward the King. So that notwithstanding his shirt knew nothing, yet this may
we guess to have been the great secret: That if so be the Emperor would not
come off, or did so fiercely press upon him to take in his Country: that then,
if the King of Sweden by his joining with him were likely to prevail; he would
rather side in with him, then suffer himself to be overrun by the Emperor.
And that he carried a more private good affection unto the King, then he
thought it convenient as yet to discover; appears by his desiring of some
expert Commanders of the King, (and Colonel Teuffell by name) to lead his
Army: But this did not the King at this present yield unto; because that had
rather engaged the King unto him, then him unto the King. Surely it is, that
Teuffell was not sent unto the Duke; he being one of those that were on the
Kings side, slain afterward in the great Battle.

Where the Battle was after fought.
About the twentieth of August, Saxony Musters his forces upon that fair plain
or heath by Leipsich: namely, sixty Companies of foot; (ten Companies to
every Regiment) and 1000. Musketeers for his own guards. Horse 4300. (of
which 1000. to a Regiment) and 400. for his own guards: over and above all
which, were 1400. Curiassers or men at Arms. These be the names of his chief
Commanders. On Foot, Swalbach, General of the Artillery. Arnheim,
Feild-Marshall. Hans-George of Solms, Glitzwick, Looser, Star-Schedel,
Colonels. Of the Cavallery these. The Duke of Saxon Altenberg, General
Bindtorp, Sergeant Major. Hoftkerk, Steinau, Colonels. Dove, Lieutenant
General. All these troops being thus Mustered; they were presently furnished
with 400. Wagons of Provision and Ammunition, and six pieces of Ordnance, out
of the Dukes Magazine. While the Army stays thereabouts, there is first a
Trumpet sent from Tillyes Host, to demand passage of the Duke. He returning
with no satisfying answer; Tilly sends these four Propositions unto him; to
which he must have a sudden and a Categoricall Answer.

1. Whether he would, like other Princes, yield up his forces to the Emperor;
to beat Sweden out of the Country?

2. And as a Subject furnish the Imperial Army with provisions?

3. And renounce the Conclusions of Leipsich?

4. And restore the Church Lands?

To all which, the Duke about the beginning of September, returns not only a
negative resolution; but aggravated it also with some Circumstances of
unkindness offered him by the Emperor, in requital of his so many good
services; bemoaning himself, of the untrustiness of the Catholic Princes:
yea even before the Emperors Ambassador then with him, he protests; that they
should not find a Duke of Wirtenberg of him, he would not suffer himself to
be led by the nose: but bade the Ambassador tell his Lord and spare not, that
he would live and dye in defense of the Conclusions of Leipsich. This
resolution in the Duke, was quickened (perchance) by the French Ambassador, then
with him; so that having discovered himself thus far against the Emperor, he
sees no way but either to be undone by Tilly, or to join with Sweden. And now
while the terms of uniting might be concluded with that King (to meet with
whom, and the Marquess of Brandenburg, himself the Tuesday following goes
unto Wittemberg) the Duke thinks of keeping out of Tilly. Having gotten
intelligence therefore, that the Count of Furstenberg (now joined with Tilly)
was by him sent as a Vantcurryer unto Hall; and that he made provisions of
Bridges: the Duke fearing, that his meaning was to pass over the Rivers of
Sala and Mulda, and so to make for the City Torgau upon the Elve; which Town
lying betwixt Leipsich and Wittemberg, had he once made himself Master of; he
had quite cut off the King of Sweden, from ever coming into Saxony; and had
gotten all the command of the Elve besides, Saxony therefore suspecting
Furstenbergs intention; rises with his whole Army from about Leipsich, and
makes with all speed toward Torgau: both to secure that, and there to meet
with the King of Sweden also. By this time was the said Kings Army drawn down
as far as Wirtemberg; himself is now at the Consultation of Torgau:
Brandenburg was already joined with him: and nothing hindered Saxonyes uniting
too; but some terms partly of caution, and partly of honor; whether he were
to yield the whole Command of his own Army unto the King, or not? Which the
King absolutely desiring, and the Duke making some Objections against, the
Union was the longer a concluding.

Well! if Saxony will not join, Tillyes have (for he longs to be beaten) shall
quicken his slownesse. For no sooner does Furstenberg perceive his design for
Torgau defeated; but thitherward marches he. Tilly was now come up to him. With
3000. foot, and 1500. horse therefore, first he takes in Mursenburg, Tilly
going toward Welsenfels, and other places about Leipsich: blocking up by this
means, even the Town it self. And now there was no remedy; Saxony must
join, or be lost: upon the 14. of September therefore he thoroughly
condescends unto the King of Swedens Propositions. And thus have we brought
Saxony and Brandenburg into the King of Swedens Army. Turn we back again
unto that King, to show by what degrees and approaches, he gained thus far
into the Empire.

The SVVEDISH Intelligencer.
RELATING THE PROCEEDINGS Of that PRINCE, from his first Landing in GERMANY
1630. until his great Victory over TILLY. HISTORICALLY DIGESTED. For the
Readers better understanding of the King of Sweden, we have here given you his
Majesty's Pedigree: which may serve in stead of an Introduction. THE PEDIGREE
Of the High and Mighty Prince Gustavus Adolphus, by the Grace of God, King of
Swedens, Goths, and Vandals, great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia and
Carelia, Lord of Ingria. Gustavus Ericus. Ericus, Johannes. Sigismundus.
Ladislaus.

Carolus. Gustavus Adolphus.




GVSTAVVS ERICVS, Brief notes upon this Pedigree.
first of that name and Christiern King of Denmark, Anno 1518. Which Hostages
he having gotten into his power, most perfidiously retained as his prisoners;
carrying them away with him into Denmark. But Gustavus having found both
favor and liberty one day to go a hunting; disguises himself, and escapes:
after many dangers arriving in his own Country, Anno 1520. About which time
the said King Christiern contrary unto his promise made unto the Swedes upon
their submission, upon which he promised to remit all offenses: beyond all
examples of Christianity within four days after his Coronation, causes all
the Nobility, Gentry, Bishops, Counselors, and prime Citizens of the Kingdom
of Sweden, to be either hanged or beheaded: the streets of Stockholme, where
he was Crowned, to run with blood; the carcasses to lie three days unburied,
and then to be burned, etc. Amongst the number of the massacred, the Father of
Gustavus was one. When Gustavus had once heard of this hideous news; he,
having that winter time gathered some small company together, exciteth the
Swedes to vindicate their Countries liberty. In the valourous success
whereof, himself having been a chief Author, is in the year 1523. by
consent of all the States of the Country, chosen King. He thus elected,
refuses to be Crowned: contenting himself only with the title of Governor.
By authority of which dignity, Anno 1527. he summons a Parliament; where he
propounds the Reformation of Religion: in which finding much opposition, and
little hope; he surrenders the Kingdom unto the States again. The Land thus
brought into a straight, humbly beseech Gustavus, once again to accept of the
Kingdom. Thus was he Crowned Anno 1527. becoming the first Protestant King
that ever was in the world. This same year was Rome taken by Charles Duke of
Burbon. This Gustavus from the time of his Coronation reigned 33. years.

Ericus, the eldest son of Gustavus succeeded his Father. Anno 1560. who
reigning eight years, dies without Issue.

John, the second son of Gustavus succeeded his Brother, Anno 1568. Reigned
24. years. His only Issue was Sigismund; chosen in his Fathers life time (
viz. 1587.) King of Poland, and is yet living.

Sigismund, King of Poland succeeded his Father John in Sweden, Anno 1594. He
took an Oath to maintain the privileges of the Kingdom, to admit no other
Religion then that of the Augustane Confession; and to bring in no Strangers.
Which Oath he palpably now violating; first, by going about to alter the
Religion; then by endeavoring to enslaue Sweden, by making it to be a Province
of the Kingdom of Poland, Anno 1599. he was in a full assembly of the States
of Sweden, rejected and deposed: and his Son Ladislaus (then an Infant)
chosen in his place: But with this Condition, If within six months he were
sent into Sweden, there to be brought up in the Protestant Religion.

Ladislaus, Son of Sigismund, not being sent into Sweden

Charles Duke of Suderman, the third and youngest Son Gustavus, and the
deliverer of his Country from the oppression of the Polacks, was chosen King,
in the year 1601.

Gustavus Adolphus, the Son of Charles, succeeded his Father Anno 1612. being
the present, and hitherto the successe-full Assertor of the Germane liberty.

Here may it fayrely be observed. 1. That all the posterity Gustavus (which
with himself are seven in number) were either Kings, or elected to a
Kingdom, unto the third and fourth generation. The last whereof, and the
seventh in order, is the present Gustavus. 2. Observe. That Gustavus Ericus,
the Grandfather of this Gustavus Adolphus, obtained a Kingdom by delivering
his Country from the Tyranny of the Danes: Charles his Father, for delivering
it from the Pole. In which heroical disposition of his Ancestors, Gustavus
Adolphus now succeeds his Father and Grandfather, in undertaking this present
war, for the asserting of Germany, from the pressures of the present
Emperor. 3. Besides that this Prince is descended of a Family of Deliverers;
there seems to be another Omen in his Style, as well as in his Pedigree: he
writes himself King of the Goths and Vandals; which Nations have once
heretofore been fatal unto the Empire.

This brave Prince having in the year 16^9. had first a war with the Pole,
and then a Peace; was by the complaints and invitations of the Germane Princes,
the next year brought over into the Empire. You have before heard of the
miseries of Germany: and yet had the Protestant Princes in their Diet of
Leipsich been modest in their Remonstrance: they had not told you all.
Stralesundt and Stetin, Mecklenburg and Pomerland, were so heavily oppressed,
so sorely over-layd, that they had not breath enough left, to be heard sigh so
far as the Emperors Court. A sound (we know) is usually conveyed further
along the water, then over-land: which may (perchance) be one of the reasons,
why their complaints are sooner listened unto in Sweden, then at Vienna. These
Maritime people therefore finding no relief ashoare; are forced to fetch their
succors, whence they usually did their Merchandise, out of the Baltic Sea.
The King of Sweden is allied with Bogislaus Duke of Stetin; and with John
Albert and his brother, Dukes of Mecklenburg: is confederate with Stralesundt
and Pomerland, and therefore likeliest to be their Friend. His safety much
depended upon theirs: had the Emperor been Master of those Ports and
Seacoasts; he would neither have been so fair a Merchant to him; and might
withal have proved a more dangerous and over-maisterly a neighbor. Again,
this King now having a good Peace, had therefore the better leisure. His Army
being not yet cashiered, the relief would not altogether be so chargeable. His
experience in the wars being great, his fame (now after the beating of the
Pole, and two Imperial Armies in Prussia,) more; he was also thought to be the
ablest to deliver them. His Majesty therefore being by the pitiful and
redoubled complaints of his Allies, his Confederates, his Neighbors,
solicited over and over again to come in unto their rescue; that this bare
invitation of his Friends might not be censured for a plot betwixt them, or not
to be cause enough for his coming: lo, he is even pulled over by his enemies
provocations. But for the greater Authority with the Reader, we will give you
the just Apology of that Prince: the pressing reasons for his moving with an
Army into Germany, himself having caused to be Printed: the Arguments whereof,
we here abbreviate into Propositions.

His Majesty first protests; That he had not stirred at all; The King of
Swedens Apology and complaints.
no not though he had often been warned to look unto himself: nor would he
take any notice of it, until some affront or maine occasion of quarrel, had
been actually offered by the Emperor. That having been by his oppressed
neighbors and Confederates invited unto their relief, he for a long time
rather expected the Emperors goodness toward the Subjects of Germany, then
desired to interesse himself against him, with whom he so much desired the
continuation of Amity. That the quarrel was first begun by the Emperor;
who in the late wars of Prussia betwixt Sweden and Poland, had prohibited the
King of Sweden to make any Levies of men, or provision of victuals or
Ammunition in Germany, apparently granting the same liberty unto his enemy the
King of Poland. That the Emperor himself had heretofore sent two several
Armies under his own Ensigns into Prussia, in aid of the Pole his enemy: the
first in the year 1627. under the Command of the Duke of Holsteyn; Walstein
was said to have given Arnheim his Commission in these words: Arnheim, go
take 10000 men; you must beat the King of Sweden out of Prussia: and if you
cannot do it, tell him that Walstein will come.
and the second, sent 1630. was conducted by Arnheim, Marshall of the Field
unto Walstein. That his Curryer ryding Post with his packetts, has been
stayed; his Letters unto Bethlem Gabor opened, and false Copies published of
them. That his Ambassadors have been slighted; not admitted to Audience; not
vouchsafed answer; forbidden to stay in Germany. That upon his seeking of
peace, by mediation of the King of Denmark, he obtained nothing but affronts
and delays: and that writing to the College of Electors, then assembled at
Lubeck, 1629. he found in their answers by their Letters, the maine point of
the business not once touched upon: and so no remedy that way neither. That the
poor Town of Stralesundt (notwithstanding it had no way wronged the Emperor,
and had received Assecurations and promises of protection from him) yet had it
been blockt up by the Duke of Walstein.
Freidlandt; and the Island of Rugen lying in the Sea right against it, taken
by the said Freidlandt. That the Town and Island aforesaid, his Confederates,
had often complained unto him of this injustice, and desired his peaceful
mediation first, and his Armed assistance afterward. That considering how
things stood betwixt the Emperor and himself, it much concerned him not to
suffer that Island and Town, to be possessed by his enemies: seeing they lie
so commodiously for the command of the Balticke Sea; and so dangerously for
infesting of the Coasts of Sweden, which be right against it. That the Emperor
had actually molested those Coasts with shipping; which he had newly gotten
from Dantzick and other Hanse Towns thereabouts: had hindered the Swedish
trade, and merchandising upon the Coasts of Germany: taken his Ships by
reprisall at Sea; laid imbargoes upon them to arrest them in the Ports and
Havens: and had purposed to make the Sound and Sea thereabouts, to be the seat
of their pyracies; to the utter undoing of the Swedish trade that way, and the
great molestation of all Nations that traffic in those Seas. That in ayding
of Stralesundt, he had done no more then the King of Denmark had done before
him: who had lent them a garrison; which upon the agreement of Denmark with
the Emperor, the Town had been enforced to discharge (the King upon some
occasions being now become their enemy) and that not till then, had he taken
the Town under his protection. That his own coming with an Army into the
bounds of the Empire, was under public protestation of no hostility meant
unto the Empire, or person of the Emperor. That his coming was principally to
relieve that distressed Prince his Cousin and Confederate, the Duke of Stetin
and Pomeren, miserably at that time, and so for three years had been,
injuriously oppressed by the Emperor. That he was not only engaged by ancient
Allyances and Confederacies, to aid the state of Pomerland thus distressed,
spoiled, taken, and disarmed; but it concerned him also in point of State and
good policy, not to suffer his enemy to be Master of those Coasts of the
Baltic Sea; whence he might at pleasure infest Sweden, and at leisure and
opportunity invade it. That his League with the said Duke, was Defensive
only: and not for any offensive war against the Emperor. That in recovering
of the I Will of Rugen, he had rather fayrely turned out, then beaten out, the
Imperialists. That the end of his coming, was no more then the relief of
Stralesundt and Pomerlandt; and the securing of his own Dominions of Sweden:
too near unto which he perceived the Emperor to be now encroaching, with no
good intention. That if peace and safety might on those parts be assured, he
would no further enter into the Empire.

These Complaints, Aggrievances, and Provocations of the King of Sweden, were
in fair and respectfull manner, by Letters first presented unto the Emperor:
and when that course brought no redress, then for justification of his
proceedings, and by way of Apology, were the Circumstances enlarged, and the
whole Printed, for the world to judge upon: and that all indifferent Readers
might there receive an Account of the Causes, which at length constrained him
to move with an Army into Germany.

These Reasons much satisfied the world, made the pretense of his coming
fair. And that the enterprise of this great Champion of the Germane Liberty,
might bring Credit with it, as well as Strength; both rumored and feared every
where in the Empire it was, that diverse other potent Princes were with him
interessed in the Action: and that there was a private Union made betwixt
England, France, Russia, Sweden, Venice, and Holland, (all then at difference
with the Princes of the house of Austria) and that He was the Head of the
Union. The presumption for this suspicion was, that the Ambassadors of these
Princes were observed lately to have been together in his Camp; and believed
to have communicated both Counsels and Intelligence with him. How much
redoubted his coming was, appears by the preparations made against him, in
the places nearest unto his Landing. The Emperors preparations against him.
The Towns of Pomerland and its neighbor Brandenburg, were full of Imperial
Garrisons. In Mecklenburg was the new intruded Duke Walstein, and his forces.
In Silesia were all those Bridges and passages upon the River Oder next unto
Brandenburg, stopped up, mannd and fortified, about the beginning of June 1630.
To make good the Bridge of Dessaw upon the Elve, (which was the passage toward
Magdenburg:) are fourscore Companies of Horse and Foot sent down from
Swartzenburg, Coburg, and other places. Into Pomerland are there more Forces
sent out of Magdenburg. Torquato Conti was now appointed General of the
Imperial Forces in Pomerland. He and Colonel Hatzfelt are very pressing with
the Duke of Stetin, absolutely to deliver them up the passages of Gartz and
Grippenhagen upon the Oder: which it seems that they wrung out of him. The
King of Sweden, finally has no Town to friend but the distressed Stralesundt
only, where he might safely Land his Forces. Much for the Kings advantage
perchance it made, and the less resistance he found; The Kings advantages.
that Walstein, who had heretofore domineerd in those parts, and who had left
those troops there which the King now found engarrisoned; was now out of the
way; and that Torquato Conti, a man not beloved, then commanded in those
parts. Walstein was about the time of the Kings first coming either busied
about his new Duchy of Mecklenburg, or else waiting at Memmengen by
Regenspurg, to receive a new Commission to go General against the French: and
upon the Princes of the Empires sore complaining against him, he was by the
Emperor (as you have heard) quite discharged of his Army. Tilly was not yet
come so high up, since the wars with Denmark. Of Pappenheim we hear not
thereabouts, till October following. Plainly, the King of Swedens great
advantage it was, that he was too much slighted by the Emperor: who though he
fortified places, yet did he not time enough employ any of his great Captains
against him. And that the Emperor abused himself too much, in too much
slighting the King; appears by his Answer unto the Duke of Saxonyes Letters,
in August giving him intelligence how far the King was already advanced in
Pomerland, Which was; how that himself was so well provided for him, that he
was confident to scatter any power of the enemy. A despised enemy we have by
experience seen to have made foul work: and God mostly works by such
despised means, that himself may therein be observed to be the Lord of Hosts.
Further then this, we will neither Comment nor Devine.

Before the Kings setting foot within the Empire, he in April sends forth his
gracious Declaration of his intent to maintain Stralesundt, etc. Which the
Emperor might well take for a Herald at Arms to proclaim his coming, and so
prevent it; and not complain afterward (as he did) that he stoale in upon
him. His Majesty having thus declared himself for Stralesundt, makes his
first war for the freeing of that. A small Island there is in the Baltic Sea
within some half league off Stralesundt, called Rugen. A ragged square plot it
is, some seven Dutch leagues over. This I Will being a Principality of the Duke
of Pomerlands; was (like other of his Lands) rather infested now, then guarded,
by the Imperialists. That the King therefore might clear that I Will, and his
own way both at once; and leave no enemy to trouble his Landing, or to come
upon his back; he gives order before his own setting forth of Stockholme (the
chief City of Sweden) to have that Island begun withal. The I Will of Rugen
taken.
About mid- April therefore, did the people of Stralesundt, assisted with some
18. ships of Sweden (which had wintered in the Pilau, and other Ports
thereby) prepare to fall upon that, and Hiddenzee another little Ilet hard-by
on the North-west: both which being open places, were by the end of May well
cleared of the Imperialists. One indifferent strong Sconce by Brandishagen upon
Rugen there is, into which the Imperialists betook themselves; not so easy to
be taken as the rest. These of Stralesundt therefore now newly strengthened from
Sweden; upon the 17.th of June following, with 3000. foot and four troop of
horse, resolve to set upon the Fort. Marching up therefore from the old Ferry
into the I Will, they in Battle array show themselves before the Fort: twelve
great Shallops and two Gallyes, well mand and furnished with shot, in the mean
time besieging them by water. The Fort perceiving this, by a resolute Sally
labor to hinder their Landing: but the Swedish discharging eight pieces of
Ordnance from their Boats amongst them, quickly make them to retire. Landing
being thus gained, and their batteries raised; they readily dismount the
enemies Canon, and put him from his Ordnance. The 18. day, the Swedish General
demands up the Fort: their answer was, to defend it to the last drop of
blood. The next morning, there was from Brandishagen (which lies over against
the Fort) a boat of fresh water sent unto their relief. The Swedish Shallops
give fire apace upon the Boat; in rescue of it, does the Garrison sally out: a
great smoke arising from their shooting in the skirmish, is by the wind
carried full into the Fort; the Swedish apprehending the advantage, fall pell
mell upon it, getting among the sallyers into the Fort, ere ever they were
aware of it. The Fort of Brandishagen taken.
Thus was it taken without the loss of one man. The Swedish being Masters of
the piece, put all to the sword whom the next day they found in Arms. Two
hundred prisoners they took; six pieces of Ordnance; sixty barrels of Biscuit;
much Beer and provisions.

Whilst these things were there a doing, his Majesty is in his own Country
busy about imbarking his men. Some 12000. brought he out of Sweden with him,
for so many were seen march: His Fleet was about some hundred and thirty
Ships of all sorts. With these having been five weeks at Sea, (whereof a
whole month in one place) he came to an Anchor near the Island of Rugen, which
lies a mile distant from one of the mouths of the River Oder called
Pennemundt. The King of Sweden lands.
Immediately hereupon, his Majesty gave order for the Landing of the Foot or
Infantery: which was done in great Sloopes or flat bottomd Boats, provided for
that purpose; whereof each one would well carry an hundred Soldiers, with two
Feild-peices. His Majesty himself in person landed first, at that Dorp or
Village in the I Will of Vsedome, called Pennemundt; being at that present waited
upon by two Swedish Earls, that were brethren, Grave Neeles and Grave Ioachim
by name. Next him were landed Colonel Lilly, Colonel Cag, and Colonel Hansson,
all Swedish, with their Regiments. Next to them Landed the Lord Reay Colonel;
together with Colonel Spence and Colonel Magdongall, with their three Scottish
Regiments. Last of all landed the Lord Falkenberg, Lord Marshall of his
Majesty's household; together with Colonel Hall, and Colonel Derickson, with
their three Regiments of High-Dutch-men. All these eleven foresaid Regiments,
were landed and entrenched before daylight. Upon the second of July, after the
Soldiers had a little reposed and refreshed themselves; his Majesty
commanded the Canon, baggage, and victuals to be landed; and because the Army
had been so long at Sea, he thought it expedient to rest them there for two
days; in which space he landed his Cavalry or Horse also.

This I Will of Vsedome where the King was new landed, The I Will of Vsedome taken.
is situate not far from Stralesundt, and to the South-east of it, toward
Stetin: betwixt the Baltic Sea on the North, the mouth of the Oder (which from
the River Pene disemboguing into it, is called Penemundt,) on the West; the
great fresh Lake called the Frischhaff on the South, and the I Will of Wollin on
the East. Upon the fourth of July, twelve troops of the Kings Horse, together
with three thousand Musketeers, went out upon a party; the King himself
commanding them. They marched upwards three miles into the I Will of Vsedome;
where they saw diverse troops of the enemies, but all of them ran away. The
5.th and 6.th days were spent in hearing of Ambassadors, from the Dukes of
Mecklenburg, Pomeren, and the Town of Stralesundt. On the 7.th day, his
Majesty leaving Colonel Knip-howsen, then Sergegeant Major General, with two
Regiments of foot to defend the works at Penemundt; with the rest of the Army
passing over the water on the West side of the I Will; marches up to the Town of
Wolgast. Here had the enemy a strong Sconce on the waterside, directly against
the Castle upon the I Will of Vsedome: which Sconce, his Majesty thought fittest
to be first assaulted. As he marched toward this Castle, the Crabats falling
out, begun the Skirmish with the Kings Horse: who being presently seconded by
the foot, constrained the Crabats to give ground with great loss. Those of
them which were not killed in the fight, making great have unto the River, by
which they thought to swim over unto the Castle; were all miserably drowned.
Those within the Sconce, thus perceiving their fellows misfortune; in great
have retired into their boats: where being hardly charged by the Kings men,
the most of them were also drowned. Their confusion was so great; that three
hundred of them then perished by the sword, or in the water. The whole night
following, the Canon from the Castle played very hard upon the Kings folk, but
with little or no loss unto his Majesty. Upon the 8.th of July, his Majesty
leaving Sir John Bannier to keep the Sconce that was taken; marched from
thence unto a Cloister called Pudegla; which was a strong passage upon the I Will
of Vsedome. But the enemy, before the Kings coming, had spoiled and pillaged
all that there was, and then ran away. Here the King lodged all night.

The I Will of ^ellin taken.
Upon the 9.th of July, the King marched to the Swing, on the East Side of the
Island; where the other mouth of the Oder, disemboketh into the Baltic Sea.
There found he a Sconce, strongly builded indeed, yet but weakly defended: the
Garrison upon the first sight of the Kings troops, abandoning the place, and
shifting themselves over the River into the neighbor I Will of Wollin. This
place, which the Oder, the Frischhaff, the Sea, and a little Fret of water,
make into an Island; lies on the East Side of Vsedome: and here the King having
found Boats, immediately follows the Imperialists. Here had the Duke of
Saxonyes Sister a Castle; which the enemy fleeing out of, miserably deface with
fire. And now those that lately fled into the I Will, as also the rest that were
there in several Garrisons before; did not only abandon their strong Sconces
and Fortifications; but left, not their Canon only for have, but their very
Horses also; together with a great deal of their baggage; with two Leopards in
a Cage; left there by the Duke of Freidlandt, who had thought to have presented
them unto the Emperor.

In these two Islands of Vsedome and Wollin, the King remained some twelve
days; until he had made sufficient provision of Gallyes and other Vessels,
for the transporting of his Army through that great Frisch haff, and from
thence up the River of Oder, unto Stetin: which was done the 26. of July. This
Town of Stetin, is the Seat and Title of the Duke of Pomeren and Stetin:
Situate within Land it is, Stetin taken.
South of the Frisch haff, being the chief Town of the Country, and the
only good Town of the Country in sole possession of the Duke, that was free
from Imperial Garrisons. And now the King landing his men at a Castle within
an English mile of the Town, about ten a clock in the forenoone, presently
puts them into Battalia. Grave Neeles and the Lord of Reay commanding four
hundred Musketeers, that day had the Vantguard; and were both commanded to
march toward the North Port of the City, called the Mill-doore: the King in
the mean time with three hundred Musketeers, making toward a Horn-worke,
that was then a building, within a Musket Shot of the Dukes Palace. While this
was a doing, all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, were in the windows, and upon the
Leads, looking upon the King and his folks. All this while there appeared not
any one man out of the Town, to make any defense: which the King now
observing, at last sends a Trumpet toward the Ports, to demand entrance. This
message made known unto the Duke, a Colonel, who had the Command of some
1200. Musketeers within the Town, is sent to parlie with the King. His
message was, an Assurance from the Duke his Master, that he had resolved to
stand Neuter. His Majesty nothing contented with this message; sends the
Colonel back again unto the Duke: commanding him to tell his Master from
him; That he was not come into Germany for any private ends of his own: but
sent for, by him especially, and other distressed Princes; that by the force of
his Arms, they might be free from the yoke, which lay so heavy upon their
necks: and therefore, great reason had the Duke to open his Ports, and to
receive him into his Town. And this if the Duke refused to do; he bad the
Messenger assure him, that he would enter it, by a breach made through his
Castle: giving present order thereupon to have the Canon mounted. The Duke upon
the receipt of this round message, advises with his Counsel a while: who
having concluded what was on the sudden to be done, the Port is opened, and the
draw bridge let down, and the Duke in his Coach issues out, waited upon by
some Gentlemen on Horseback: addressing himself directly toward the King.
Upon the meeting, much conference passes about surrendering of the Town; the
King pressing; and the Duke excusing, altogether desirous to stand Neuter. Of
this would not the King hear at any hand: making use of that (which in Dutch
is a Proverbiall saying,) They that are not with me, are against me. And now
the King taking notice of the Ladies and Gentlewomen on the Leads and
Windows; Cousin (says he to the Duke) if you mean to keep me out of the
Town, you must set other manner of people to guard it, then these Ladies; for
I Will assure you, they will never be able to hold out against any one company of
my Soldiers. The Duke perceiving his Majesty, though pleasant, yet earnest;
desires leave to go again into the Town. The King consents unto the motion:
but sent order withal unto the Lord Reay, to guard the Dukes person
thitherward: and that when the drawbridge was let down, and the Ports set
open for the Dukes Coach; to enter the Town together with it; and if it were
possible, to make good the Port. The Lord Rcay having enough of his
instructions, so disposes his Musketeers (which were Scottish) that two
hundred of them marched before the Coach; and must needs therefore enter before
the Dukes Coach could: so that this piece of service was done, even as the King
would have it. Thus the Lord Reay being entered within the outter Port, the
Town Garrison retired from thence within the inner Port: and the Scots entering
pell-mell with them, that Port was also taken. By this did the King presently
enter the Town, with his whole Army. The Duke seeing this, dismisses his own
forces, which he had till then, there kept in Garrison: who thereupon took
present oath and pay, for the Kings service.

The next morning, the King commands Sir John Bannier General of his
Infantery, to take with him 600. Swedish Musketeers, under the command of
Grave Ioachim, and 600. Scottish Musketeers, under the command of the Lord
Reay; to make an assault upon the Town of Damme, lying a mile to the
South-East of Stetin. The Town had on that side but one approach unto it; and
that was a narrow causey leading thorough the marish, upon which the Town
stood. Those 12000. men now advanced almost as far as a Sconce, which guarded
the end of the Town; a Country-boore coming up to the Commanders, proffers
them his service to lead them a secret way thorough the marish: by which
means, they might more easily fall on, upon the other side of the Town. But
the Burgers of the Town, (who it seems had intelligence with the Kings
forces) now sending unto them; desired them to have the patience but to stay
until night, and then they promised to give them entrance by a private
posterne gate. This delay was cunningly projected by the Townsmen; and served
them to very good purpose: for had the Kings forces taken the Town by assault,
then, by the Law of Arms, had the pillage of the whole Town been their own.
Thus, (upon what reasons or fears I know not) the enemies Garrison consisting
of some two hundred and fifty Musketeers, and forty horse, forsook the
Town that very evening; taking their way Eastward, toward the next Town of
Stargard. With the Burgers of this Town of Stargard, the King having also
intelligence; instantly sends thither also. But whether it was, that he thought
not fit too far to give trust unto those Burgers, and to adventure his own
men upon their honesties; especially since the Garrison was thus lately
reenforced: sure it is, that he employed none of his own men, but committed
the charge unto that Colonel and his men, who had layn in Garrison in Stetin,
before his Majesty's coming thither. This Colonel knowing the Country
perfectly, came by night upon the Town: and having given advertisement unto
these Burgers within, with whom he had correspondency; they secretly opening a
Port unto him, give him present entrance. He thus got in, presently cuts in
pieces the Corpse du guard, which had the Watch upon the Marketplace. This
done, he without stay goes toward another Port, which had two strong Sconces
before it; these he presently assaulted, killing three hundred and fifty
Soldiers which he found within them. This act, had like to have lost him the
town: for the rest of the town Garrison, (which were asleep in their beds
when he at first entered,) now hearing the noise, start up, and betake
themselves unto their Arms; shutting withal, the Port behind the Kings
Colonel, who was now busily employed, upon the execution within the Sconces.
Very hard had it been for him to have entered the Town again, but that the
Burgers at the same time taking Arms; by force opened another Port for him.
The Garrison by this time having gathered into a head upon the Marketplace,
now finding themselves too weak to resist so great forces; retire themselves
into the Church-steeple: but now the Swedish turning the Canon which they had
gotten in the two Sconces, against the steeple; the Garrison forthwith yield
themselves, conditioning to go off with their lives and Arms saved.

There were found in this Town of Stargard, 500. barrels of meal; much powder
and shot, and some Ordnance. The King after fortifies the place, with five new
Bulwarks, three half Moons, and such other Outworkes. Whilst this was a
doing, The I Will of Cammin taken.
Cammin another Ilet and Bishops See, butting upon Wollin, is also taken. The
rough method of war should have fallen upon the Town of Colbergen next: but
this being too tough a piece, is let alone till afterward.

The City of Stetin being thus taken, and the King using the people royally,
they begin to bethink themselves of the good alteration they began to feel,
holding themselves happy, were but the King made their Protector. The overture
of a League first, and the Articles afterward, were therefore now treated upon,
concluded, and published, about the tenth of August. This League conquered him
the whole Country. The King, in a Preface prefixed to the Articles, A League
betwixt the King and Begislaus Duke of Stetin and Pomeren.
excuses the Duke; professing to have taken the Town against his will. The
Duke also subjoynes his own Apology; That he had been forced to this League.
1. For that having no aid from others. 2. He was too weak to have resisted the
King. 3. And that his Subjects having been disarmed by their pretended
Defenders the Imperialists. 4. Yea so impoverished, that they had not means
sufficient left, barely to live upon; were thereby disabled to defend
themselves. 5. So that having for three years together endured the hardest of
oppressions; they were desirous rather to be freed, then further engaged, in a
new war and dangers. 6. Especially having been so much discouraged to serve
the Emperor, who never kept promise with them. 7. As for the Kings
proceedings, his courses taken to ease them, were just and Christian. 8. And
seeing that very chary he was, to oppose the Emperor. 9. As purposing only to
restrain the insolency of these new oppressors. 10. Therefore he thought this
League to be his best course, both to recover his own estate, and to secure
Swedens. Seeing therefore the King had past his royal word, to be a friend and
not a foe, unto all places which he should recover: he professes himself
willinger to entrust his Country in the Kings hands, then hazard the loss of
all. Fourteen Articles the King and Duke then agree upon: of all which, these
two chiefly concern our Story. 1. That this war was only for Defense of the
wronged, and not to injure the Emperor. 2. That all places recovered by the
King, should be restored unto the Duke. An Excuse besides these ten former
Reasons, is by the Duke sent unto the Emperor: which with the rest of the
Articles we leave to be read in the English Printed Book of them.

Stetin being thus agreed with the King, willingly gives him 50000. Rixe
Dollars, and the Country as many: The Merchants also granting him a Subsidy
of Tonnage and Poundage, of three and a half per Centum. The King takes care
first, for the guarding of the City: to which end it is not only fortified
with new and strange works, but with a standing Leaguer or Camp-royall also; A
Camp formed by Stetin.
formed at the Towne-bridge, on the East bank of the Oder; over which the
noble Gustavus Horn, Feild-Marshall to his Majesty, in his absence commands
in chief. And here the Army being mustered and paid, is sent abroad upon the
errand they came for: and that one place might not help another, he with
several troops falls at once upon several pieces. To show what every troop
every day did, were to write a Diary, not a Story; and to take away the
pleasure of the reading. In a continued narration therefore, will we prosecute
the Story of every City, and Action by it self, from the beginning to the end
of it; and then go back again to another: The method of the Story.
taking each in his order of place, and time; that the Kings proceedings may
the more clearly be discerned.

By this time are we come to the middle of August: and the King by the taking
of Stargard, advanced as far into the Country as right against Gartz and
Grippenhagen; is desired by these of Stetin to besiege these two Towns;
because the Garrisons that lay in them, used to ramble over all the Country,
to spoil, and plunder, and fetch in Contribution. But the King perceiving
those strong places would take up too much time, and he having a design to
clear the Duchy of Mecklenburg, as well as Pomeren; turns his Army back
again to these quarters: with a purpose in time to take the chief passages
thither, before the enemy should prevent him, and put him thereby to more
trouble; Passing therefore beyond Stetin and toward Stralesundt again, he
sets him down before Wolgast; whose Port (as you heard) he had before taken.
Wolgast besieged.
This is the chief City of the little Duchy of Wolgast in Pomeren: The Town
he by fine force took in, wherein he found good store of provision, both of
Corn and Ammunition. In the heat of the assault, the Garrison and chief
Citizens retire themselves into the Citadel or Castle: This now the King
asseiges. Torquati Conti the Emperors General in those parts, lay with his
Army at that time at Ancklam, a Town hard by Wolgast: he hoping to rescue the
piece, comes with three Regiments toward the relief of it: but is well beaten
for his labor; said to loose 12. Ensigns and 3. Cornets in the Skirmish. The
Castle thus defeated of her succors, parlies: the conditions desired by the
Garrison, were, To march out like Soldiers with full Arms, Colors flying,
matches lighted, and their swords by their sides. The King will let them go
out with no more then white staves in their hands. Those terms refused, the
King falls to mining: and with two boats well manned and furnished with
Ordnance, he comes to the Oder-bridge, there landing and enquartering his men.
Sends for the Duke of Stetin; he come, they make their approaches toward the
walls; which he round besets from the Oder-bridge unto the mill-gate, raising
Sconces and Batteries every where, where the ground was highest. Eight thousand
Canon-shot are bestowed upon the walls. They parlie again; and the King
condescends: six hundred Soldiers thereupon in five Companies, all under the
command of Colonel Sclecter, come forth: The Castle taken.
Three Companies of these five, presently take Oath and pay for the Kings
service: the rest march away. This was done in the end of August: about which
time the Queen of Sweden being newly come over, the Castle is repaired and
furnished for her Majesty's residence. In this Siege, the King lost an hundred
and twenty men.

Whilst the King besieges this Castle; Aucklam taken.
Torquati perceiving no good to be done upon him; and that the Queen of Sweden
had newly brought over 8000. fresh men (as it was reported) with her, which
might make the place too hot for him; rises with his Army from his Quarter at
Ancklam, marching directly toward Gartz: about which the Imperialists by the
King turned out of other places, and others newly sent into Pomerland, began now
to assemble. There he forms a Camp; which continued till the Town was taken.
He thus departing from Ancklam, leaves Eystat Governor in it: before which, so
soon as the King presented his forces; the Citizens rise up for the King
against the Garrison; and let the Swedens into the Town. This was done while
the King was yet at the siege of Wolgast.

Ancklam thus obtained, the King purposing a design for a voyage into
Mecklenburg, Stolp taken.
first causes the passage of Stolp to be taken. This Town is near unto
Ancklam, some five Leagues to the West of Stetin, and toward the Sea: by which
he had a full passage into Mecklenburg. After which he at several times also
takes Trebbeses, Gripnitz, and Treptow, three other chief passages, as we
shall tell when we speak of the Kings expedition into Mecklenburg.

A Fast.
We are now come to September: upon the first Friday whereof the King commands
a solemn Fast to be kept throughout his Army and Leaguer at Stetin. Upon that
day the Imperialists being led by one This Quint was set on, to have killd the
King.
Quint, who had before run away from the King, fall upon the outter Guards of
the Kings Camp, and cuts them off; putting the whole Army into danger. But they
taking the Alarm, fall out upon Quint, and beat him off with loss and shame
enough. The next day also making a bravadoe again, some thirty more of them
are taken prisoners by the Swedens. The King a little after this, Musters and
pays his Forces newly arrived to him out of Prussia, for which he a while
stayed, without doing much: and now abroad are they again going, his Army
being very much increased by these, and thirtie-six troops of horse newly
entertained.

Toward the middle of this September he sends abroad 3000. horse and 12000.
foot to be doing, and to take in passages: sends also to view the strong
places of Gartz and Grippenhagen: of which more when we come to those Seiges.
But here let me insert an unheard of Cruelty of the Imperialists upon the
Towns of Pasewalk and Vckermund, some few leagues West of Stetin: about mid-
September, old style, the Imperial Garrison under the Command of the cruel
Colonel G^^ze, having plundered and forsaken the Town, and carried the chief
men away; on the 4.th of September 2. troops of Swedish horse being 140.
strong, enter the forsaken Town: fall with the Citizens to repair and
fortify: 3000. Imperialists of the Army by Gartz hearing of this, The cruelty
of the Imperialists at Pasewalk,
take it again from them Sept. 7th. and after most valiant resistance, beat,
kill, and drive out the Swedish; fall to torturing of the Townsmen for their
money, crying give us money or blood; ravish women and girls, even in the open
streets, and Churchyards; yea women in Childbed: kill and abuse the men, fire
the houses and the people in them: thrust straw into Cellars where Children
are hidden, and then set fire to it: burn the Churches; massacre the
Ministers, and then mask up and down the streets in their Coapes and
Surplisses; and at length burn down the whole Town, laughing at it, how
finely does Pasewalk burn? Thus their rapes and ravages continue till the
11.th or 12.th of September: and at Vekermundt.
After which they go to Vckermundt, a Town hard by (from whence these 140.
Swedish were thought to have come) this they fall upon and take: use as before;
keep the gates shut, and so burn the people in the Town.

To return to the King. About this time it seems had his Majesty taken the
oppressions and complaints of the people of Magdenburg into his royal
consideration; and therefore sends some forces by Sea thither, to join with
the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg; which Swedish aids, Sept. 25. land at Dossou
three leagues from Lubeck: of which more when we handle the whole Story of
Magdenburg Namely, where we speak of Tilly.
together. And about that time himself in person goes to Ribbenitz in
Mecklenburg: where his Camp is pitched Sept. 28. of which more when we speak
of Mecklenburg.

About the same time of September, is the brave Lieutenant General Bauditzen
sent to the siege of Colbergen; and the noble Feild-Marshall Gustavus Horn
commands the standing Army at Stetin. Thus has the King four Armies at once:
and thus are they all employed. October 5th. certain Crabats making a brave
before the trenches at Stetin, drive away the Cattle thereby feeding. In
rescue of them, out sally 1000. Swedens: the Crabats feign a slight; the Swedes
too rashly pursuing, The Swedes beaten by the Imperialists.
fall into an Ambush: there begins a fierce skirmish; in which the Swedes
overlayd by numbers, loose some 300. brave men, two Captains of horse, and one
Sergeant Major; the rest being glad to get off with their lives. The Swedes
meditating revenge, fall out a while after upon the Imperialists Cattle by
Grippenhagen and Gartz, driving away some 300. from both places, and come
fayrely with them to their quarter. Many the like feats of Arms were daily
practiced betwixt them.

And now leaving the other Armies to their business in other places, Colbergen
besieged.
we will turn to the siege of Colbergen: not because it was first taken, but
first besieged: and because it is a piece of Story by it self, upon which no
other depends; no other Town being in those quarters. This Town is situate
on the Seacoast, further from Stralesundt, and nearer unto Prussia, then the
King had yet conquered. So strong a place, that Torquati and the rest, had made
choice of it, there to lay up their pillage, and what treasure they had gotten
in the wars. About the 4th. of September, was Colonel Kniphowsen sent by the
King to try what he could do upon it. His troops being too weak, Bauditzen
is sent with 4000. men, and 18. pieces of Ordnance. Upon him the Crabats and
other Imperialists set amain: a hot skirmish there is, and much loss on both
sides. Bauditzen thereupon receives two more Regiments from the King: so that
now he is 5. Regiments of foot, and certain horse strong before the Town;
The Gentlemen of the Country are also drawn into the action. The Garrison
within is 11. Companies of foot but very weak ones.

The famous Onslaught of Colbergen.
Torquati Conti not ignorant of this, has a design about the beginning of
November, for the relieving of the Town, and his own treasure in it; hoping
either utterly to defeat Bauditzen and Kniphowsen, that now blockt it up, or
at least to beat up a Quarter, and so to thrust some succors into it.
Gustavus Horn, then in the Camp at Stetin, having notice of it, immediately
calls a Council of War. The resolution is, first to send Bauditzen and
Kniphowsen word of it: wishing them to stand upon their guard a while, assuring
them by such a time to be with them. This done, they draw out half of every
Regiment, to go along; every Colonel to command his own: all being Commanded
men, such as had no Colors with them: and for defense of the Camp leaving the
other half, with all the Lieutenant-Colonells, and Sir Arthur Leslye to
command all. Word also is sent unto the Swedish Garrisons of Griffenberg and
Golnaw, (just in the way) to come and meet them. So that with these, and their
fellows before Colbergen, they might make some 8000. foot and 4000. horse.
The enemy was also some 9. or 10000. men; and those upon their march, at least
a day or two before Gustavus Horn had notice of it: but they going the further
way about, through the Marck, and so along behind Schiffelbien, (as far from
the Swedish Garrisons as they could, for fear of being discovered,) the
Swedish were at Colbergen before them. There found they their own men in
battle array, and no news of any Imperialists yet. Consulting what to do,
they there resolved to stay in sight of the Town, to amaze and affray the
enemy all that day; and then to take as many out of the Leaguer as might well
be spared, and so to march away by night, to meet with the enemy. Gustavus
Horn commanded the Foot, the Lord Reay led the valiant Scottish-men of his
own Nation, and Bauditzen the horse. About midnight comes a Countrey-Boore
unto them, with assurance that the enemy had then taken up their Quarter in two
or three little Dorps, that were hard before them: else might they have marched
by them, and so the enemy might have gone on, and defeated those before
Colbergen first, and perchance those at Stetin afterward. Here the Colonells
consult what to do. All, but Kniphowsen, resolve to surprise them as they now
lay scattered and divided in these Villages: but Kniphowsens advise was to stay
till morning. His reasons were, first they knew not the strength and lodging of
the enemy: so that if by any error they should be defeated, Colberg, and
Stetin, and all were lost. Again, it was a very good piece of service, to have
prevented the enemy in his design; and if they could not beat him, it were
enough to turn him back again. And these reasons prevailed: so that the Army
being hardmarcht, sat there down to refresh themselves. Whilst here they
were, either the same Boore, or some other, goes and tells the Imperialists,
that the Swedish were hard by them: so that by three a clock in the morning
they might perceive the enemies Dorps, all on a flame: for they rising to be
gone homewards, had now set fire upon their Quarters. The Swedish perceiving
this, fall generally to blame Kniphowsen; resolving instantly to pursue them.
Coming to the forsaken Dorps, there knock they down some sixty men, that
the enemy had left behind, and so follow on the rest. At break of day, they
had sight of the retyring enemy, upon a fair Heath: whereupon the Swedish
horse making more speed, by eight a clock were upon the necks of them. The
enemy making Alt, turns faces about to them: whereupon the Swedish horse
forbear to charge, till their own Foot should be come up to them: who now
doubling their march, were hard at hand with them. Thus when the enemy makes a
stand, so do the Swedish too; and when the enemy marches, the other lies
beating upon their Reere. The Crabats (or Imperial horse) perceiving
themselves likely to be overmatcht with numbers, play the Pultrons, and run
away. The Foot go on in this fashion, till they came to a Dorpe, or Village,
called Faldinbruch, there was a passage at a water-mill; over whose bridge they
were to go: and there one of the carriages of their Ordnance breaking, fowlly
stopped up their passage. Here being crowded and disordered, the foremost began
also to flee. And now fell there so sudden and so strange a mist, that a man
could hardly discern two Pikes length before him. The enemies Foot that could
not get over the bridge, betook themselves into the marish by the Rivers side:
standing there upon their own defense, with matches Cockt, and Muskets upon
their Rests. The Swedish coming up to them, they demand Quarter: proffering
to serve the King of Sweden, upon condition every Officer to be under the King,
the same they were under the Emperor: otherwise, they would dye like brave
men, and sell their lives as dear as they could. Quarter and Conditions are
both granted them: so that there still a while they stood. But to see the luck
of it; just in the mean time, returns Bauditzen: who having been pursuing
the enemies horse that fled, and now so utterly rowted them, that scarce ten of
them remained in a Company: and lost them in the mist withal: he seeing the
enemy stand whole in a body together, and not knowing of the agreement; falls
to charge them with his horse. They perceiving this, began to suspect treachery
in it; that the Swedish horse should fall upon their Reere, and the Foot upon
their Van; and so they should perish betwixt both. To prevent which, they
putting themselves into two divisions, turn back to back; those next to
Bauditzen, all at once giving fair fire upon him. That volley made a Fell of
many a brave man. Bauditzen charges again, charges home, and thorough them:
utterly breaks and defeats them. The other Swedish body of horse hearing the
fight, and the mist not suffering them to discern the matter, imagined verily,
that the enemy had been come back again: yea messenger comes upon messenger
with the news, A strange cofusion and mistake among the Swedish.
Our men are utterly defeated. And when as some of the horse that had the Van
of the Swedens Foot, came toward them; they certainly believed them to be
enemies, and their own men to be defeated: and thereupon give fire upon them.
The other, think the Devil to be in it; and that their Foot had been
defeated, and these to be enemies: and therefore fly back again to their
fellows. Others also coming upon our Van, they fall to charge them: the other
as fast letting fly at them again. Thus having no Colors with us, we knew
not friends from foes, our enemies, from our fellows. In this miserable error,
and mystical meddly we continue, until 4. a clock at night: when by finding
some of our own to be slain, (whom we well knew) we began to find our
mistake. The Emperors whole forces, both foot and horse, were defeated: their
Canon, all their baggage and four Cornets, taken from them. All our own
horse, except Bauditzens own Regiment, ran away: as also the body of our Foot
did, which were led by the young Grave of Thurne, and Colonel Wallenstein:
only the Van of the Swedish Foot stood firm; Commanded by Baron Teuffell,
the Lord Reay, and Sir John Haibron. So that both the Armies had run away in
the mist; except Bauditzen and his Regiment of horse, and the Van of Foot
aforesaid. These stayed after the fight, to bury their slain fellows. This
pretty kind of battle happened upon the 11.th of November, 1630. In which,
what with those that were slain by the enemy, and what they had killed
themselves; were 500. men lost. The rest, partly laughing at their own
mistake, partly sorry for their fellows and Comrades; and partly glad to have
defeated the enemy; they return homewards again: Bauditzen and Kniphowsen
unto their siege; and the other unto their Leaguer.

Presently after this, in the middle of the same November, were there 182.
houses burnt within the City: the fault was laid upon the negligence of a
servant: though others suspected it to be a villainy of the besieged: Sure it
is, that there were Letters intercepted by the Swedish, which should have
persuaded the Garrison, that seeing they could not be relieved, the best way
were to fire the Town, and by a resolute sally to break through the enemy.
This is like unto the Imperialists practices in other places: who at Gartz and
Grippenhagen about the same time, made stay of all the Boats that came up the
Oder, having a design to fire Stargard with them; by that means to have
delivered Colbergen. The same they threatened unto Stetin also: which made those
Towns stand upon their guard the surer. Toward the end of November, the
Swedes cut off the fresh water that served the City. In the beginning of
December, the besieged upon an advantage sallying out, surprise a Lieutenant,
with some thirty of their enemies; and the Swedish within a while after, cut
off a Convoy of 180 Wagons laden with Corn and other provisions, which was
going into the City: an hundred of which they bring away; the rest which they
had not time nor means to do, they set fire on. In February when the King was
gone toward Mecklenburg, the Garrison making abroad, fetch in 500. head of
Cattle one with another. Thus past there encounters too and again betwixt
them, till the end of February. the 26. whereof, they now finding their
provisions to fail within, and their hopes without; send to parlie with the
Swedish General, who acquaints the King with it. His Majesty condescends,
Colbergen yielded up.
to let them come out with Colors flying, matches light, full Arms, bag and
baggage, and two pieces of Ordnance. They were in all 1500. men; whereof 9.
Companies of foot, and two of horse: all which were by the Swedish conveyed to
Schiffelben: whence they were to march unto Landtsbergen. Thus that strong
Town which had been three years in fortifying, (the Country People for ten or
twelve miles compass, having been enforced to labor at it,) is now after
five months siege upon the second of March (old style) taken in by the King:
who found in it, 51. pieces of Ordnance of a greater bore, and 19. smaller
Feild-peices: 224. barrells of powder, with proportionable Ammunition. The day
after the yielding, a ship coming with men and victuals for their relief,
not knowing of it, falls into the hands of the Swedens.

A report was also spread abroad in the Country, that before their giving up of
the Town, they had digd mines, and laid gunpowder and burning matches by it;
which after two or three days should take fire, and blow up the Town; which
the Swedes in good time discovering, sent after them in all have, to call them
back to an account for their base treachery. But this we cannot affirm. True
it is, that they were sent for back, and stayed at Friberg in the New-Marke:
but this was by reason of Tillyes cruelty, at his taking of New Brandenburg at
this very time, where he put all to the sword.

The day before Colberg was taken; A new league betwixt the Kings of France and
Sweden.
was there a League concluded betwixt the Kings of France and Sweden: in these
terms.

1. That it be for the defense of either of their Friends respectively, for the
securing of the Ocean and Baltic Seas, and the freedom of Commerce in them:
as also for the restoring of the oppressed States and Princes of the Roman
Empire: and that the Forts newly erected upon the Ports or Coasts of either
Sea, or in The Grisins Country.
Rhetia; be demolished; and all reduced to the estate they were in, before the
Germane war.

2. That because the Adverse party has had no mind hitherto, to repair
offered injuries; and has rejected all intercessions; therefore is there no
remedy, but to vindicate their safety by strong hand: for effecting whereof,
the King of Sweden is at his own charges to maintain 30000. foot and 6000.
horse in Germany. And the King of France to pay his yearly share in Rixe
Dollars: whereof the one half, May 15 and the other, November 15. either at
Paris or Amsterdam, as the King of Sweden shall think fit, who is to appoint
his own Receivers.

3. The levying of Soldiers or Mariners, the passages of shipping and
ammunition, shall be in either of their Dominions free for either party, and
be denied to the enemy. Offenders against military discipline, and such as
run away from their Colors, to be left to their own Princes to be punished.

4. If it pleases God to give the King of Sweden good success, he shall not
deal otherwise in point of Religion to those places that he shall conquer, or
have yielded up to him; then the Laws and Constitutions of the Empire appoint:
and the Roman religion shall still be left free, where it is now practiced.

5. Into this League, may any other States or Princes, either within Germany or
without, be admitted, that desire it: but let due care be had, that whosoever
be so admitted, may neither privily nor openly, favor the adverse party,
under their own name, or pretense of others; or offer wrong unto the foresaid
Kings, or the common cause: but let each of them rather contribute unto this
war so much as they are able, or concerns their interest: Which is to be
determined upon by a particular Treaty.

6. With the Duke of Bavaria and the Catholic Leaguers, in the Roman Empire,
let terms of amity, or neutralitie at least, be observed: if so be, they do
the like again.

7. And if by Gods grace any occasion of Treaty offers it self; let it be by
the common Counsels of the Leaguers: nor let any of these conclude a peace
without the other.

8. This League to endure for five years to come: that is, from the day of the
date hereof, unto the first of March, old style, in the year 1636. to come.
Within which term unless a secure peace may be obtained; upon a general
Treaty of the Confederates, let this League be further again prorogued.

It is moreover agreed; that because the last year this League had been begun
to be treated upon, to continue for six years; and that the King of Sweden had
in the mean time been at the sole charges of the war: therefore in regard
of the year passed, the King of France upon the day of Signing these Articles,
is to give him Bills of Exchange for 300000. pounds Turon, which amount unto
120000 Rixe Dollars; which sum is not to be reckoned in, unto the payments to
be made in the next five years.

Of this League the King of Sweden gives present notice unto the Protestant
Princes now at the Diet of Leipsich; assuring them that his intentions were no
other, but to defend and restore, the Germane Princes, and their Liberties, etc.

All the back of Pomeren being thus cleared by the taking of Colberg, turn we
back now again, to what was in the mean time done in other places. The King
(who would see to the doing of all) leaving his Army in Mecklenburg, was now
come back into Pomeren; The siege of Grippenhagen.
and now casts his eye upon Grippenhagen. This Town situate upon the North
bank of the Oder some three Leagues from Stetin, is naturally a very strong
place. A piece of much importance withal, by reason of the bridge which it
has over the Oder, by which there is easy passage either to offend or
relieve, the Land of Marck on the East side, and Pomeren and Brandenburg on the
West. In it lay an Imperial Garrison of some 3000. men: and Don Capua a
Spaniard their Governor. In July 1630. therefore, the King taking some five
Regiments of foot, and one of horse along with him, and sending his Ammunition
up the Oder, goes to look upon the place, as those of Stetin had requested
him. Being desirous one day to satisfy himself in viewing of a passage, with
24 horse only in his attendance; he falls into an Ambush of 60. horse: where
valiantly defending himself a while; The King in danger.
he is very timely fetched off by four troops of his own horse, which came in
upon the spur, so soon as they heard the Pistols go off. The place he
finds not only hot, but heavy: not so easy to be carried: and especially
for that the Imperial Army then lay at Gartz, some few miles above it on the
other side of the Oder. Therefore gives he it over for that time. After his
coming from Mecklenburg now, his Majesty December 23. (old style) with 12.
Regiments of foot and 85. troops of horse, in person draws down toward the
Town, about the Evening showing himself in battle array before it. The
advantage of the ensuing night, he takes for the planting of his Ordnance;
whereof he had brought 80. pieces along with him: of which, 32. being
Demy-Canons, he mounts 10. of them upon the place of execution; The Towns of
Germany have usually near without their walls a goodly pair of stone
Gallows, upon a little hill, which is for a heading place; which is often
tim^s low walled or fenced in.
Having given order the day before for prayers and Sermons throughout the Camp;
on Christmas Eve by five a clock in the morning, he begins a most furious
battery: 10. 15. or 20. pieces of Canon continually going off together. A fair
and large breach being made, the Swedens twice attempt to enter, and are twice
most valiantly repulsed. But 2500. men (for no more are now left) being unable
to hold out against 20000. the Town is at the third assault taken. The
Governor received a shot in his thigh, whereof in prison at Stetin he
afterward dyed. With him is the Sergeant Major Antonio also taken: many chief
Commanders, and 100. common Soldiers. 200. were flame; some fled; the rest
flinging away their Arms, craved Quarter, and had it. The King had but six men
slain out right, though many wounded: for which he took eight pieces of
Ordnance in the Town.

The siege of Gartz.
At Gartz (before described) another strong Town, with a bridge also over the
Oder, had the Imperial Army ever since their removing from Ancklam, layne. To
dare Torquati Conti their General into the field; the King with some ten
thousand foot and twenty-foure troops of horse, presents himself before his
Trenches about mid- August 1630. He not disposed to come out, nor the King to
assault him in his Quarters, returns home again. In his return he lights
upon Walensteyns Son, (the Emperors great General) drawn in a Coach and
six horses; guarded with an indifferent Convoy. Whom the Kings horse forthwith
charging, take 120. prisoners, and some 35. horses. The young Gentleman quitting
his Coach, escapes away on horseback. The plague much raging in Su^mer time
about the Army at Gartz, Torquats sends the diseased into other Quarters,
enterteyning 2000. Crabats in their places. About mid- September there fell out
a most bloody fight: The Imperialists beaten.
wherein those of Gartz were said to loose more then 1000. men; and yet I
report but the third part. They about the same time, The Sweden beaten.
beat a Convoy of the Swedes also; and bring away 100. horses into their
Camp. In the beginning of December, some are sent thence into Mecklenburg: at
other times some others are sent to lie in Garrison in the Towns of the Land
of Marck, beyond Grippenhagen. Others had been sent to the relief of
Colbergen: some slain; and very many dyed of the plague. And thus had this
Army been impaired. Grippenhagen therefore being now taken, and settled: within
a day or two after Christmas day, the King sends his whole Army to the strong
Sconce of Morewitz, which served for the guard of the bridge: fully believing,
that rather then the Imperialists would loose so important a piece, they would
bid him battle. But the Count of Schamberg (who now commanded the Army in
stead of Torquato, that had lately given up his Charge) notwithstanding he were
some 15000. strong; perceiving his Army to be ill discip^in'd, used rather to
plunder, then fight; durst not hazard the encounter: but calling the Garrison
out of the Town, he sets fire to the Ammunition, drownes such powder and
Ordnance, as he could not draw away; Gartz forsa^^^^ (...) the Imperialists.
and so without one shot making, very confusedly marches ^ff; leaving the
empty Town unto the King; himself with all speed hasting, to get through
Custrine, into Landtsbergen, a very strong place in the way toward Silesia.
The King follows him with as much speed, as the other fled, still beating upon
his Reere. The Saxonish, Gotish, and Swertzenhallish Regiments he so utterly
dispersed, that they were feign to leave their baggage behind them: They that
name least, tell us of 300. Wagons with their burdens; besides 14. Ensigns.
Colonel Sparre with some few Wagons of his own baggage, saved himself in
Custrine: Some others gat through into Landtsberg, and others recovered
Franckford upon Oder: about which last place, they after rallied their forces
together again. This was certainly a notable defeat; yea so notable, that had
the King then had Custrine in his hands (which he had before desired of the
Elector of Brandenburg) the enemy had gotten no passage over the Oder at all;
either into Franckford or Landtsbergen: yea he had gotten them in fair
Campagnia among his own garrisons, had still followed beating upon their
Reere; yea being once in rowt, either they could never have made head again,
or if they had, he had instantly been upon the powles of them; and so have
utterly defeated the Imperial Army. Then had Pomeren been quite cleared,
Franckford and Landtsbergen taken at one blow. Silesia also had been left
naked: yea and Tilly being not yet come up, Magdenburg had been saved, and all
Mecklenburg besieged by the Kings Armies. But all this failed, for want of
Custrine.

The King returning from the Chase, even while the fear and dread of his
Arms, and the love of his justice, were upon all the Country: Coninxberg
taken.
goes in person toward Coninxberg, a Town on the East Side of the Oder, not
far from Custrine. Here had he not much to do; for that the Townsmen
voluntarily brought their keys, and laid them down at his Majesty's feet.
Thence in person goes he toward Lubus, a Fort within a Dutch mile of
Franckford, almost betwixt it and Custrine: and there he pitches his Camp
about the 8.th of January, Lockonitz, taken.
old style. About the same time goes Colonel Leslye toward Lockonitz, a
Castle in the very Frontiers of Pomeren, belonging unto Schulenburg, and kept
by an hundred Imperialists: upon which place Sir Arthur Leslye coming by
night, so thunders with his Ordnance upon them, that having beaten down the
gates, he falls to enter: killing some twenty of those that made resistance,
and taking some 80. prisoners. The Castle was by the King freely given unto the
Colonel, that thus took it in. At the self same time, falls Bauditzen upon
the Garrison of Piritz, Piritz taken.
a Town betwixt Grippenhagen and Coninxberg: in which were some 1400. men:
these he defeates, and so is that Town taken.

But the chief design, was at the strongest place, A design upon Landtsberg
defeated.
Landtsberg by name; whither Gustavus Horn was sent; the King hoping at this
same one voyage, to have taken in that also. But this design was for that time
put by, as we shall hereafter show, when we come to speak of that siege. Yet
does not Gustavus Horn loose all his labor: for hearing in his return, of
five troops of Crabats, which used with strong parties to make sallies and
cavalcadoes, and plundering voyages out upon the Country, from out of
Himmelstadt (a town some League or two to the Northward:) some of these he
cuts short; and others of their Nation in other places, about this Landtsberg.

Thus having in eight days space (which is admirable) taken in so many Cities,
defeated so many enemies; gotten many a great prisoner, and now cleared Pomeren
and Marckland, even from Prussia side, all between the Rivers of Warta and
Oder (except Landtsberg:) he calls his Army together again, sitting down with
it at Coninxberg aforesaid, (whither he brought 70. pieces of Ordnance) where
he stayed until he had increased it with some new levies, made for him in the
New Marck; and had begun to raise some Sconces for the securing of the
Country. Of these Sconces, one was hard by Custrine, and another nearer unto
Silesia: for the guarding of which works, and the blocking up of Himmelstadt
and Landtsberg withal, he at his going away, leaves 9000. men in
Brandenburg-land. Whilst this is a doing, the King in person goes toward
Custrine (the chief Town, and the strongest of all Brandenburg:) demanding
to have that Town consigned over into his protection, that he might put a
Garrison into it, and so keep the enemy from returning over the Oder. This
request, notwithstanding it were by the Elector denied, (not daring to do it
as yet, the Imperialists being not only in that Town, but in his whole
Country beside, and the Governor Krachten dissuading it mainly) yet thus much
courage the Elector after that took unto himself; that he presently set out a
Proclamation against the sharking and stroy-good Imperialists: commanding his
Subjects, by strong hand to restrain their insolences; and to let none ramble
up and down the Country, but such as had lawful Passes. Now had the King an
Army of some 18. Regiments of Foot, and 86. Cornets of Horse: and now by mid-
January was General Tilly come up to Franckford, Tillyes coming.
there to succor and take on those troops, which the King had before
scattered: which (as we said) began now to gather head again about this
Franckford. Of his coming the King now hearing, sends Gustavus Horn with a
reasonable Army toward the Frontiers of Silesia to staue off Tilly from
coming down that way, unto any of the new conquered places: himself
instantly marching into the Land of Mecklenburg. The whole story of which, and
his Majesty's proceedings in that Country; we will now present you with
altogether; beginning with his former expedition thither.

This Country of Mecklenburg lies Westward of Pomerland, along the coast
betwixt Brandenburg and the Sea. Two Dukedomes it has, Schwerin and Gustrow;
lately possessed by two brothers, John Albert the elder brother, and Adolph
Frederike the younger: both the right heirs, and both styled Dukes of
Mecklenburg. These Princes had the Emperor of late, very injuriously divested
of their Estates, and given them unto Walensteyn his great General, with the
Title of Duke of Mecklenburg. The disseized Dukes, complain unto their Cousin
the King of Sweden; their relief was another main cause of his coming in
Germany. His Majesty therefore having made so victorious an entrance into
Pomeren, and cleared all those parts upon the confines of Pomerland, (except
Gripswald) next unto Mecklenburg: resolves upon an expedition thither in
person. About August 6. 1630. he prepares his own way by taking the passage of
Stolp, near Ancklam, some five leagues below Stetin toward the Sea, whereby
he has a full passage into Mecklenburg. The Kings first expedition into
Mecklenburg.
Toward the end of September, his Majesty makes stay of all great boats and
ships upon the Oder, and the mouth of it: wherein having shipped some 12000 men
and their Ammunition; he sails by Wolgast (taken some month before) and
Stralesundt; He takes Bart, Damgarden, and Rubenitz.
passing unto Bart, a Town in Mecklenburg, standing upon an arm of the Sea, a
little within the shore. That takes he in first. Then hasts he to Damgarden
the next Town on the East side of that arm of the Sea: which Town and the
Sconce to it, he presently takes in by assault: many of the Soldiers being
flung out at the windows, and some others by mischance burnt. Three days
after this, to Rubenitz he comes: a Town in the very bottom of that Indraught
or arm of the Sea: and that he by force takes also. Mescord the Governor is
taken prisoner, and his Lieutenant Iers, slain with a Musket shot. Here
pitches he his Camp; giving order for the fortifying of this, and Damgarden and
Trubbesees, another late taken passage toward Pomeren. Being here settled; He
summons the Country.
he first of all by a Proclamation dated from Rubenitz Sept. 28. summons the
Gentry and people of the Country, to remember their oath once taken to their
natural Princes: to forsake Walensteyns title and service: to come armed into
his Camp, or other his troops; to prosecute and kill all the Walsteyners: and
to fight with him for the liberty of their Country. Those which do not, he
threatens to pursue as traitors and enemies: those which did, to afford his
royal protection unto. A second mandate he then sends to the Town of Rostock:
of which more, when we come to speak of that City. Sir John Bannier, (his
Majesty's Lieutenant for those parts) being about that time also upon the
frontiers of Mecklenburg toward Pomeren; directs his Letters unto these
borderers, to this purpose. That seeing the Imperialists thereabouts did
nothing but pillage and plunder them of their Cattle and goods; and that the
King his Masters intention was, only to defend them: therefore they should
send their Corn and Cattle toward Rubenitz or Stralesundt. Which if they
refused, the King would think those pillages wilfully endured by them to
relieve his enemies, and that they meant to fall away from their own Princes:
and must therefore take their goods where ever he found them, persecuting them
as traitors and enemies.

Whilst here at Rubenitz the King lies encamped, and his forces in the mean
time busy about the Country: there arriues an Imperial Curryer in his Camp.
The Emperors Letters unto him.
His Letters contained an admiration of the Emperors, why the King should come
armed into the Empire: offering him a treaty of peace, if so be he would first
lay down Arms. These seem written from Ratisbone. The Kings answer.
To this he answers; That his Imperial Majesty would cease to wonder, if he
pleased to remember the two Armies sent against him into Prussia; the wronging
of his Friends; and the endangering of his own Sweden. As for the offer of
peace, he desires pardon if he thinks it not sincerely meant; seeing it had
been before scorned: and that now the Emperor while he spoke of peace, did
still continue his Levies. As for laying down of Arms, he utterly refuses
that; or to trust any more unto verbal promises: and for treaty of peace, he
would be most glad to entertain it: which upon these terms he will agree
unto; namely, That all Germany be so settled and re-estated, as it was before
the beginning of these wars. This was written after the Kings return to
Stralesundt, the same month of October, in which it was received. The Emperor
perceiving that words and papers would not beat Swedens sword out of his hand,
at the breaking up of the Diet of Ratisbone, in the beginning of November, sets
out his Imperial mandate, for the continuing of the wars; and against the
King of Sweden by name; procuring the Electors also to decree the same: and to
agree to aid him in it. And by this time was the King come from Stralesundt
again, unto his Army at Rubenitz; where he for a while held the head quarter
of his Camp: the rest of the Army, being partly nearer advanced unto Rostock,
and part employed with Bannier in other places. And now (it seems) some of
his, These, I suppose, were some of those forces, which the King had sent
toward Magdenburg: and which had landed at Dassow, within a lea^ue or two of
Lubeck, about Sept. 25.
having been as far as Lubeck (one of the Hanse Towns upon the Frontiers of
Mecklenburg and Holsatia) and there imprisoned and discourteously used: the King
writes his Letters unto the Town, to this purpose: That seeing such
discourtesie had been offered, he could not but admonish them to forbear: as
they would look for the like usage, where he had to do. And now had not the
King an Army alone hereabouts, but a navy too upon those coasts; to confront
the Imperial Navy gathered amongst the Hanse Towns thereabouts. For in the
beginning of December, I find a Sea Fight betwixt Gabriel de Roy, the Emperous
Admiral with 15. ships, and 9. Swedish men of war, near unto Wismar
(another Hanse Town betwixt Rost^ck and Lubeck: A Sea Fight.
) in which the said Imperial Admiral ship was four times shot through,
forced to save himself in Wismar, and to leave three of his Ships unto the
Swedish.

Turn we now unto Rostock This Hanse Town, The siege of Rostock.
situate in Mecklenburg vgon the River Warnow. West of Rubenitz; and some few
miles from the Sea; had till now been freed from Imperial Garrisons: but upon
the Kings coming to Bart, was surprised by this devise following. 1000
Imperial horse get into it.
A thousand Imperial Horse send some before them to demand passage through
the Town; pretending to go against the King of Sweden: being believed and
admitted, they keep possession of the gates, let in their follows; break the
locks off the posts, which fastened the chains drawn cross the streets: and
so finally possess themselves of the Market place. This done, they compel the
Citizens to bring all their Arms into the Statehouse, making them swear they
had no more: then they billet themselves upon the Citizens, and keep such a
racket, that the Townsmen dare hardly open their doors, for fear of being
pillaged. The King at his coming to Rubenitz hearing of this Garrison, The
Kings Letters to those of Rostock.
writes thus unto the Townsmen. That seeing by his coming into the Country,
there had been a door opened for their freedom; they should now remember the
Oath sometimes taken to their Duke, cast out the Garrison, and restore their
City to her ancient freedom. Which if they did, he would take it for an
argument of their innocence; become their friend, and enlarge their Cities
privileges. If they neglected it, he must like enemies pursue them, both by
Sea and Land.

The Town either not willing, or perchance not able to do this, the King
begins to make some approaches unto it; He blocks up the Town.
to block up the passages, to build Sconces and Redoubts: yea and causes his
Fleet to hover up and down their coasts. This was in the beginning of October.
These proceedings the Walsteyners in other Garrisons hearing of, send out a
strong Convoy of 4000. men, to open the passages again, and to thrust some men
and victuals into the City. ^000. Imperialists defea^ed.
These the Swedish grapling withal, shrewdly defeated, and kill the most of
them; utterly frustrating their design. In the beginning of November, he
approaches within two English miles, or less, of the very City; still raising
Sconces and Retrenchments against them. About the beginning of December, some
seven Cornets of Imperial horse issue out of the Town on the cleerer side, to
go a boote-haling: these the Swedish having by their espyalls notice of, and
7. Cornets of horse.
pursue. In the Skirmish, are 200. Imperialists slain upon the place: 280.
taken prisoners; and some 400. horse brought away: scarcely 20. soundmen,
recovering into the Town again: a pitiful boothaling for them. In this
fight, a certain Swedish Colonel of Finland, for trial of his valor, did
twice charge quite through the Imperial troops; in his return the second
time, by maine strength taking a Captain out of his saddle, and bringing him
away under his arm. About the middle of January, is Hatzfeldt, Governor of
the Town, in his own lodging murdered by one Warmier, a Lawyer. And in this
state we leave the City still besieged by the King, though not with a great,
yet with a well ordered Army: himself being (as we before told you) in person
long before gone back, to see to other things in Pomeren.

Thus continues Rostock blockt up both by Sea and Land, rather then besieged;
until after the Reinstallment of their Lords the Dukes of Mecklenburg again,
and the taking of Gripswald in Pomeren in mid- June following. After which
time, the Swedish General Toodt being at good leisure, is commanded by the
King to conjoyne 10000. foot and horse, of those forces which had taken
Gripswald, with 5000. of the two Dukes of Mecklenburg; and more strongly to
pursue the siege of Rostock: and to begin to block up Wismar also. Again;
the Queen of Sweden a little after this arriving with 8000. new men at
Wolgast; 5000. more are sent into Mecklenburg; as speedily as might be, to rid
out all the Imperialists. The Imperial Garrisons in Butzon and Gustrow hearing
of the coming of these last 5000. conjoyne their faces in one body, resolving
to try their fortunes upon them, and to give them their welcome into the
Country. But Doodt and Mecklenburg provided better for them: commanding all
the horse they could spare, to convoy in their 5000. friends; and then
together, to set upon their enemies. They did so; surprised, defeated, and slew
the most of them: having the chase of them, even unto their own Frontiers: and
had the Swedish had but 1000. Musketeers more with them, they had (as it is
verily thought) at the same instant taken Rostock also. The Swedish Army being
thus re-enforced, and the enemies weakened; they become bold to divide their
Armies upon it: Duke John of Mecklenburg with 8000. men continuing the siege of
Rostock; and Doodt with Duke Adolph of Mecklenburg going to besiege Wismar,
with the rest of the Army; which might be as many more. And thus I find them
still both lying August 25. About the end of which month, Duke John so well
plied his business, that he took the strong Fort or Blockhouse of Warnemund; so
called of the River Warnow, which is the Haven to the Town of Rostock; the
Fort standing on the West side, and near unto the neck of that River, which
next unto the Sea is so narrow, that this Fort has the command of all the
Ships that come into it. This Fort taken, the Garrison presently took pay
under the Duke. By mid- September, had the Duke made his approaches, ^ermund
causes all the mils to be burnt, the Shallops to be sunk in the Warnow, to
keep out the Swedish Ships; makes his Crabats ride up and down the streets,
to prevent the prac^^ses of the ^^wnesmen.
even under the very walls and Canon of the Town of Rostock: Tilly in vain
attempting the relief of the City, either with men or victuals. Now was the
Garrison in the Town wasted away to 1500. men: and the Citizens weary of a
siege, and fearing to loose all, if the Town should be taken by assault:
begin not only to wish well, but to speak well, in favor of the King, and
their Lord the Duke. Thus much the new Governourm Fermund observing in them;
begins to take notice of their carriages: and to put both the Duke and them,
out of all hope of fair compounding upon treaty, or any yielding; he causes a
fair Streamer to be hanged out upon the turrets of the Town: to show, that he
would hold out as long as he had any thing that was red in him.

Wismar besieged.
This Wismar is another of the Hanse Towns; and in the same Duchy of
Mecklenburg also. Distant some seven or eight leagues to the West of Rostock:
and almost so situate, but the haven much larger. Here did Duke Adolph and the
General Toodt entrench themselves by land; the Swedish fleet waiting upon it
by Sea, as it did upon Rostock also. Of this siege I can add, but this unto
the former Sea Fight, That about the beginning of August the Swedish Shallops
boldly going into the haven, brought away the Admiral and another Ship,
bravely towing them both away with them.

The Kings ^econd expe^^^ion into Mecklenburg.
Tilly about the 24. of January being now advanced as near the King as
Franckford on the Oder: his Majesty fearing if he marched up into Mecklenburg,
he might there make foul work; leaves Gustavus Honne with the Army about
Coninxberg; and writes his Letters unto those of the New Marcke, on the East
side of the Oder; to this purpose: That seeing he haddow cleared their whole
Country from their oppressors the Imperialists; every man should a Gods name
return to his own house, His Letters to (...) of the ^^w Marcke.
trade, and husbandry: he professing to be their friend, and promising to be
their protector. That which he desired of them was; such provisions for his
Army left amongst them, as they could well spare, and the other wanted. Those
that did not, he would take for his, and their Countries enemies. Upon which
gracious Monitory, diverse returned again, without molestation falling unto
their business. This done, the King calls off the most of his Army from the
siege of Landtsberg, and his troops from other places; appoynting their
Rendezvous to be at Dam, the 28. of January, Stilo novo: and so Feb. 4. he
again passes Stetin toward Mecklenburg: where with an Army of 16000. horse
and foot, he unlooked for arrived. There he first of all takes in New
Brandenburg, within 8. leagues of Stetin: Takes New Brandenburg.
Cononel Marezan the Governor taking composition, and marching with six
Companies of foot, and three of horse, of Monte-Cuculi his Regiment; and 120.
of Colonel Putlars Regiment. There did the King leave Colonel Kniphowsen for
his Governor. To this Town Feb. 6. he summons the people of the Country of
Stargard: with whom he treates, concerning the maintayning of the forces left
for their guard. The news of this being brought, to those of Treptow, Treptow
the same day.
another good Town and a passage thereby; away run the Imperial Garrison: of
which his Majesty having speedy notice, he the same day sends some troops
thither, and takes it. Those of Dammin (a very strong Town) fearing to be
taken unfurnished, with all speed send to Gripswald, nere Stralesundt, for
more Ordnance: but neither this, nor their so strong fortifications will serve
their turn. For Feb. 14. The strong Town of Dammin assaulted.
the King sets down to the siege; after a hideous battery, is the Castle first
of all taken by assault, and the Garrison put to the sword; of whom there were
seven Companies, as it is said; besides 150. others, that had newly joined with
them. Finding the City too strong to take by assault; the 15.th day, he
thunders upon that again, beats down the works, and makes so vast a breach
in the very hard walls; that the Governor, the Duke de Savelli, an Italian,
finding the place not to be tenable against such thunder and resolutions; Taken.
parlyes and yields. Upon the surrender, he receives the King under the gate;
and the King carries him back toward the Marketplace: Here the King sitting
armed upon his horse, makes a speech unto the Townsmen; assuring them of all
favor: and turning to the Duke, wills him to depart the Town, to salute the
Emperor from him; and to tell him, That he was no enemy unto his person: and
that his endeavor should only be, to restore the liberty of Religion, and of
the Princes. Thus with six Ensigns flying, bag and baggage, and two pieces of
Ordnance, the Duke marches out of the Town; leaving 36. pieces of brass
Ordnance behind him; 60. barrells of powder, with victuals and Ammunition
proportionable. The King lost about 200. men; himself (as some say) receiving
a light shot. Letters were intercepted from the Generally Tilly, desiring the
Governor to hold out but four days longer; at which time he should
undoubtedly be relieved. Some say, that Savelli was afterward questioned upon
his life; for that being over-confident of his own strength, he had refused to
take in some more forces that came to offer their service. This Town, much
stronger then Rostock, is now by new fortifications doubly strengthened.

Whilst the King himself is here busied; his Lieutenant Banier goes to Loczin
(hard by Dammin) and takes in that. And Malchin another good Town is by a
stratagem surprised also. Freidlandt is likewise so served; and all the other
strong places, upon the Frontiers of Pomerland: and so is Westrow by the
Seaside. Yea all the strongest places, to conclude, in that Duchy, except the
four strong great Towns of Wismar, Rostock, Butrow, and Dammitz: which last,
is an exceeding strong Town upon the River Elve. Thus betwixt July the first,
and February the last, (that is in eight months space) has he (which is
scarce credible to report) taken full 80. Cities, Castles, and Sconces in
Pomerland and in Mecklenburg.

Tilly marches ^^to Mecklenburg.
By the end of February, has Tilly heard of the Kings proceedings in
Mecklenburg: and from Franckford on the Oder, begins to set forward into that
Duchy against him. The King now after the taking of Dammin, sets down with
his Army betwixt it and Treptow: himself in person one of the last days of
February, going through Pomerland, unto Berwalt near Coninxberg: where the
first of March he concludes the League with France, as is aforesaid. Within a
day or two, that is, March the third, was Colbergen taken, as has been said.
The next day, the King goes from Stetin toward New Angermund, on the same side
of the Oder with Mecklenburg. By this time are some forces come to him out of
Scotland: and there being no more need of any Garrisons in the I Will of Rugen,
those he calls out. Thus draws he all that might well be spared out of all his
other Garrisons of Pomerland, taking to him the 9000. which before were in
Brandenburg, and those that lately besieged Colbergen: the States and Gentry of
Pomerland, he now commands, at their own charge, to levy 10000. men for
their own defense: which forces, should take oath to himself, the Duke, and
States of Pomeren. And now has he 13. Regiments newly come to him out of
Prussia also. Thus makes he himself as strong against Tilly as possible may
be; bringing his Army from Coninxbergen, over the Oder, and forming an Army of
some 15000. men, betwixt this New Angermund and Frejenwald, at a little Dorpe
called Swedt. Hither he brings some 60. pieces of Ordnance: The Leaguer of
Swedt.
hither also brings he his Ship-bridge from Stetin; which here he lays over
the Oder; over which he has a free passage, both toward Franckford,
Landtsbergen, and Mecklenburg; and a Retreat too, if need were. This Leaguer
he fortifies with all art and strength possible: that if General Tilly should
adventure to fall on, he should come upon the pikes. Another Army he at the
same time has, (and that very strongly fortified also) betwixt Treptow and
Demmin aforesaid: and some forces at the same time likewise, at the siege of
Gripswald, a Town hard by: which might, upon occasion, easily conjoyne
themselves with the standing Army.

At this present is Monsieur Tilly upon his march thitherward, with an Army of
some 22000. men, and 26. pieces of Ordnance. From Franckford, comes he first to
Rapin, passing in his march, not far from the Kings Leaguer: leaving it not
above a league or two, upon his right hand. If some make doubt, why being so
near he set not upon the King; the question is easily answered; for that the
Kings Camp was so strong, that he durst not. Secondly, Tillyes design was,
rather to have drawn the King out into the field, to a pitched battle (for so
was it given out) then with so much hazard to assault him in his trenches. The
more therefore to provoke the King, he falls upon some of his Garrisons, even
midway betwixt the Kings two Armies. Tilly therefore having some few days
expected the King at Rapin; rises and marches forwards. And to tempt out the
Kings forces by the way, is Colonel Bernsteyn (a forward Gentleman and a
valiant, but unfortunate, who was afterward met withal) sent out with 500.
horse, to make a Cavalcado upon Templin, (a town hard by) thinking there on
the sudden to have surprised the Swedish Garrison. But their spies having given
them timely notice of it, they in fair order expect these hot-spurr'd
Imperialists. So that hard to it they fall; and many on both sides fall in the
Encounter. But the worst plainly fell unto the Imperialists, who carried not
home so many as they brought out; and yet they returned full as fast as ever
they came.

Tilly perceiving the King not to be tempted out, proceeds forwards: Tilly
takes Feldsberg.
setting himself down at the siege of Feldsberg; a Castle near unto New
Brandenburg, now kept by the Swedish: and
which by assault he took in, putting all to the sword in it. Thence he goes
to New Brandenburg, which he forthwith straightly besieges, (...) Brandenberg.
and most fiercely assaults. There are his men soundly knocked many a time, by
the Swedens sallyes out of the Town, and by others from the Army by Dammin.
Tilly thus enraged with the loss of his men, after a large breach in the
walls made with his Ordnance; he March 9. resolves upon a general assault; by
fine force breaking into the Town, he takes it; kills all that he finds in
Arms: except the Governor, Colonel Kniphusen, his wife and daughter; four
Captains, some Lieutenants, and Ancients, with about sixty common Soldiers:
all which he sends prisoners into Stargard. News of this being brought into
Friedland some four Leagues off, which was kept by one Regiment of foot and
17. troops of horse; away pack the Swedens, late in the night toward
Ancklam. The King also hearing of Tillyes hard dealing with his men, sends back
to have those Imperialists sent after and stayed, which had newly yielded up
Colbergen: and these he causes to be kept in durance at Friedberg.

Tilly after this sends his Army toward Demmin: Tilly turns back again
toward Magdenburg.
but finding no good to be done, either upon the Army or Town, and now
perceiving that the King was not disposed to fight with him; and that his two
Armies kept him from going further that way; bethinkes himself, and turns
back again toward Rapin: loosing his Ordnance in the fennes, as the report
was. Hearing of the Kings Ship-bridge in his return, he sends Coleredo with
twenty troops of horse through Botsaw toward the Oder, to hinder the work
if it might be: but they finding the bridge not only finished, but with a
strong Sconce fortified also; are feign to turn back again. In the tail of
them, follow 600. Swedish horse, pursuing them even unto Botsaw: where other of
their fellows joining with them, they pass beyond Bernau unto Munchenberg:
falling there on the sudden upon seven hundred Crabats; of which many they
kill; an hundred they take, their Colonel hardly escaping into Franckford, was
feign to leave all he had behind him. Tilly having thus left the Country; the
King resolves upon the taking of Franckford: in his going whither, his
Vantcurryers surprise Zednick; kill three hundred Crabats; obtain three
Cornets, and 460. horses, with a great booty besides.

The King resolving now upon the siege of Franckford, The siege of Franckford
upon the Oder.
upon our Lady day in March, begins to pass his Army over the Oder: upon the
27. he advances forwards in good order, with some 18000. men in his whole Army,
besides those of Gustavus Horn, who were to go for Landtsbergen. Count
Schomburg (who commanded in chief within the town) now suspecting the Kings
purpose; takes in 7000. more into the Garrison: whereof twelve troops of
horse: and rayses outworkes in the destroyed Vineyards. The first of April,
comes Or Dupenbach.
Teuffenbach newly made Marshall, of the Imperial Army. He burns down one of
the Suburbs of Lubus, to disappoint the enemy from lodging in it. The very same
day, arrives the King at Lubus within a league of the Town. The next day, he
entrenches in the Vineyards aforesaid; whereupon the view of the Town being
taken, the batteries are raised. That evening, the Imperialists make a brave
sallye through the Gubens-gate: and with the loss of a Lieutenant and many
men, are beaten into the Churchyard, by the gate aforesaid; and glad to get in
at it. In this Skirmish were many lost on the Kings side too, and Colonel
Teuffell among the rest wounded in the arm. The next day being Palm Sunday,
April the third, old style: the King keeps the solemnity of the day, with
prayers and Sermons in his Camp. All this while had there not been one shot
made against the City. Whereupon those of the Town thinking the King had not
as yet brought many pieces with him, begin to revile the Swedes that had the
guard next their works: What you Bacon-eaters, have you eaten up all your
Leather-gunnes for hunger? Out of a Bulwark at the same time upon a pike, hung
they a Goose; calling the King a wild Goose, lately come over the Sea. The King
regards none of this, till both Sermon and dinner too was done. About two a
clock, the Swedens fall to work upon their Trench, raised the night before,
close unto the Gubens-gate: and while the pioners work, the Soldiers with
pike and sword, beat the Imperialists out of an Outworke they thereby had,
into the Town. That work being perfected; the King himself (then who there
is scarce a better Gunner in the world) bends twelve pieces of Ordnance upon
that gate: under favor of those pieces, clapping two Petards also unto it.
Through the gate, partly thus beaten open, and partly blown up, do the Swedes
toward Evening enter; others getting in by scaladoe: others enter pell mell
with the Imperialists, that now forsook their stations: the King himself
getting over the wall also by the old College, was every where encouraging his
Soldiers. Now began a most bloody fight: the Swedes running into the danger,
like flies into the Candle, as if they had been blind, and not seen it, when
as there was nothing else to be seen. From a Turret near the place where the
King entered, the Iwperialists shot amayne: the Swedes threatened to cut all
their throats if they gave not over: unto which, they now perceiving how the
game went, quickly hearkened. By this time, were all the Swedes entered by the
Gubens-gate. Schawenberg, with valor enough, encourages his men to hinder it.
Upon him, now comes Bauditzen with fresh troops of horse and foot, and beats
him quite out of the place. Franckford taken.
Now was the Town won: now they begin to flee. Some of the chief officers
of the Army, that had heretofore gotten great spoils (for in this Town were
most of the old Servitors of the Emperors side) being now afraid to loose,
what they had so hardly before gotten; were careful in the heat of the medly,
to send their Wagons toward Silesia, over the Oder bridge. Thus while the
bridge was clustered with carriages, the fleeing people so thronged and wedged
in one another, that many were stifled, and many thrust into the Oder: The
Swedes also now in the backs of them, could not bestow either blow or shot,
which did not some mischief. Schawenberg, Teuffenbach, and Monte Cuculi, with
diverse horsemen, escaped into Great Glogow in Silesia. Lieutenant General
Hiberstein was slain: so were Heidu, Walstein, and Iour; all Colonells; with
fifty other Captains and Officers: and 1703. Soldiers at the least, dead
upon the place: besides those that were drowned; and others found in Cellars,
Chambers, and elsewhere, as many more perchance. Colonel Sparre a Sweden
borne, (who had once before escaped the King (as you have heard) had the honor
to be pulld by the hair of the head from off his horse, by the Kings own
hand; being with seven other Lieutenant Colonells, and some seven hundred
common Soldiers, sent prisoners into Stetin. Ensigns were there 23. (some say
41. and sure there could be little less) with 8. Cornets, presented unto the
King. There were 300. Swedes slain, and 100. more hurt: whereof some mortally.
The rest were so fierce upon the slaughter and pillage, that the King and
Bauditzen had much ado with entreaties, threats and blows, to staue them off.
To increase the misery of the Citizens, there fell a fire that night, which
burnt down 17. houses. Thus was the Imperialists Goose sawced, and thus
roasted. Here found he very much riches, 100000. pound of powder, 18. great
pieces of Ordnance, besides many lesser ones, and a very great quantity of
Arms and Ammunition. Solemn thanks being given to GOD for this Victory; the
King immediately dispatches 4000. horse toward Landtsbergen, The passages and
siege of Landtsbergen.
whither Gustavus Horn (as you heard) was before gone: himself the 5.th of
April with more forces following after. This strong Town of Landtsbergen in
the New Marck, situate upon the East side of the Oder, near unto Poland and
Silesia too: lies upon the River Warta; which running out of Poland, falls into
the Oder about Custrine. This Town lying so near the Pole, with whom he had
his late wars; makes it of the more consequence unto the King. Feign
therefore would he have surprised it at his first coming into Pomerland.
Immediately after which, August 15. he sends 2000. horse to try their fortunes
upon it. But they could do no good. In the beginning of December were some
strong parties of horse looking that way: so that some Swedish over-confident
of their valor and fortune, would needs set upon certain troops of
Imperialists, which they heard were then abroad, betwixt that Town and
Schiffelbein. The Swedes beaten.
Of which the other (2000. in number) having also notice; provide in very good
order and resolution to entertain them. The Swedes are well beaten; 300. of
them lost, and three Cornets: the rest glad to run away. In the beginning of
January, when upon the taking of Gartz, the King had the pursuit of the
fleeing Imperial Army; he thought at the same time to have surprised this
Town also. Thither is Gustavus Horn then sent: and from thence by the valor
of Count Cratz, Governor in the Town, is he for that time put. Horn
returning hereupon, has notice by the Country Boores, of some five troops of
Crabats, which out of Himmelstadt, a Town some league or two to the Northward;
used much to infest those places. To hinder them, and to block up the Town of
Landtsbergen withal, Landtsbergen blockt up.
he leaves some 9000. men thereabouts. The King also himself more strongly
blocks it up, when he sat down with his Army at Coninxbergen; and perchance
had not Tilly then been about to come; he might then have had a purpose to
have besieged it: but a sudden and a great frost happening withal in the end of
January, the King rises, and passes into Mecklenburg. Yet still was the Town
blockt up; and (to pass by other encounters) in the beginning of March, the
Imperialists sallying out, are beaten in again all but two hundred; which were
left behind, as prisoners. In mid- March, the King passes over the River
Warta, nere unto it. Toward the end of March, he laying a bridge over the Oder
at Swedt (where he held his strong Leaguer) he had from thence a fair passage
both to that Town, and unto Franckford: unto which siege when as himself in
person went; then was Gustavus Horn again sent toward this Landtsbergen,
with twenty Cornets of horse, and foot proportionable: Banier then going as
Lieutenant General, convoyes the Ordnance and Ammunition. No sooner was
Franckford taken; but the King the very next day, dispatches 4000. horse
thitherward: himself the 5.th of April likewise following. And now go they
to it in good earnest: the King on one side of the River Warta, and Horn on
the other. On the Kings side was the Town naturally guarded, by a certain
morasse or marish: over which, the King by the guidance of a Boore so suddenly
passes, that he was before the Town, before the amazed Garrison looked for it.
Within a while after, young Colonel Cratz, (son to the Governor) would needs
sally out: but a musket-bullet stopped his retreat, for ever going to tell his
Father. Upon the 15.th of April (the King having fully finished his works) by
three a clock in the morning, falls strongly upon their outworkes, and takes
them: and three hundred Soldiers in them, which were willing to serve under
the Kings Colors. The rest seeing all hope of relief to be cut off, Taken.
by the taking of Franckford: demand Conditions and have them. The next day
therefore being Satterday by eight a clock in the morning, out they march with
bag and baggage, and 4. field pieces; and as much powder, as would discharge
them four times over. The Garrison was some 4500. in all; of which 25.
companies of foot, and 12. troops of horse; whom the Swedes convoyed unto
Great Glogow in Silesia. And that you may not wonder, why so strong a Garrison
would so soon give up so strong a place; know this, that they had no more
provisions but for one day more: which had the King but gotten intelligence of,
he had had the glory by holding out that other day, to have had them all at his
mercy: and to have given them their lives, which now they had upon bargain.
About this siege first and last, the King of Sweden lost 600. men. Thus are all
those parts of Pomeren and Marckland quite cleared; and all passages open into
Silesia.

At the same time therefore that he sent one Army against Landtsbergen; he
dispatches the Rhynegrave and Bauditzen with other forces into Silesia; which
is hard by Franckford. They fall upon Crossen; Crossen in Silesia taken.
the next great Town upon the Oder: which they presently take upon agreement:
after which they fetch in Contribution out of the Country as far as Sagan
and Great Glogow also. This put the Imperialists in such fear, that with all
speed (namely, about the end of April) the Emperor sends his Ambassadors to
the States of Silesia: unto whom (now met at Breslaw, the chief City of
Silesia) are these grating Propositions offered.

The Emperor demands a terrible Excise of Silesia.
1. That for every Ox pastured betwixt the Rivers Oder and Baber, the Country
people should pay the Emperor three Cretzers a week, and for those beyond,
two Cretzers. And for every 25. sheep, as much.

two Pfennings make 1. Creitzer 4 Creitzers 1 Baizen 5 Raizen are about an
English shilling. 21. Grosh make a Ryxe Dollar.
2. For every bushel of Corn grownd in Silesia, a Toll to be paid to the
Emperor.

3. Out of every hundred Rixe Dollars lent upon Usury, the Emperor to have one
Florence.

4. Out of every pound of flesh two Pfennings.

5. Out of every tun of Beer, twelve Grosh to be paid. And this Excise to
continue for two years.

The Emperor is now enforced to lay Contributions upon his own native
Subjects and Tenants of Gratz and thereabouts: whom (as the Princes of Leipsich
said) he had hitherto spared. And now he victuals and new fortifies Vienna
also. Thus begins the Eagle to look to her own nest.

And now is the Diet of Leipsich concluded: which brake upon the same Palm
Sunday, that the King took Franckford upon. And now are Don Balthazar and the
Baron Dhona, sent with more forces into Silesia; which Diepenbach General for
those parts, complains unto the Emperor that he much wanted. By this time is
the most of April spent; Franckford, Crossen, and Landtsbergen, Garrisond and
fortified by the King: and his Armies from several parts, now come together
and refreshed. Upon May Day therefore 1631. (himself the next day being to
come into Franckford) he sends some ten Regiments of foot from Furstenwald,
(which is about a league from Franckford) toward Kopenick back again into
the Land of Brandenburg: after whom, are 80. troops of horse presently
dispatched. Upon which May Day, is Count Ortenburg sent in embassage from the
King unto the Marquess Elector of Brandenburg; the Propositions were, to
desire Spandan and Custrine to be consigned over into his hands during the time
of these wars, because they lay so convenient for him: both for the passage
of his forces out of Mecklenburg and Pomerland unto him; and for his own
retreat back again unto them, if he should be put to it. A months pay was
further required for the Army; or else will the King leave all. Ortenburg
returning without a satisfying answer, Gustavus Horn is sent: and he failing,
the King himself goes to the Elector; taking five troop of horse, 1000.
Musketeers and four field pieces along with him. May 3. the Elector meets him
in a little wood upon the Copenicker-heath, some English mile from Berlin: here
the King receiving no contentment, offers to return to his Leaguer again; but
the Electresse and the Court Ladies prevail so far with their feminine
irresistibilitie, that his Majesty takes his lodging in Berlin for that night,
with a thousand Musketeers for his guard. May 5. the treaty begins again:
and by this time was the Kings whole Army come up to Berlin; the sight of an
Army, is a very fierce argument, it is a very prevailing Logike. The Elector is
with much ado brought to yield Spandau unto the King for one month: whereupon
the next day, the Governor Buckersdorp with a Garrison of six hundred men,
goes out of the Town; and the Kings forces come in. Custrine (the strongest
Fort of all the Country, over whose bridge the Imperialists fleeing from See
page 70.
Gartz, had escaped into Franckford:) he could not obtain from the Elector:
Crachten the Governor mainly resisting the Kings desires in it. That which
made the King, now all on the sudden, to desire these passages and Retreates of
the Elector, was; that now despayring both of the holding out of the Town of
Magdenburg, and of his own relieving of it: he feared General Tillyes coming
back upon him over the Dessau bridge, (after the taking of the Town) which
was now at the last cast. Cause withal had he to suspect, that if Tilly should
indeed come back, the fear of his fame and Arms, would so prevail with his
brother of Brandenburg, that he might (perchance) be enforced to the cooping of
him up at these Towns, whereby he should be hindered of his retreat back
into Pomerland. Hearing by this time that the Town of Magdenburg, The King
encamps at Potstayn.
was actually now taken, May 10.th, his Majesty with all speed encamps at
Potstayn, a Town in the Old Marck of Brandenburg, betwixt Berlin and the Town
of Old Brandenburg; whither a little before he had caused his Army to retire.
At this Leaguer the mayn of his Army stays, from about the 8th or 10th of May
until June following. Here having formed a Camp, he first of all sends a
Trumpet to summon the Imperialists in old Brandenburg and Rattenaw, two good
Towns upon the River Havel: laying his passage this way toward the River of
Elve; so to block out Tilly, Old Brandenburg and Rattenaw taken.
from breaking in that way upon him. Brandenburg and Rattenaw thus summoned,
and Tilly yet so busied at Magdenburg, that he could not help them; and the
King presenting his Canon before their towns, granting them no respite to
consider upon it, and laying hold of all the boats upon the river Havel, from
thence even to Havelberg town, they are forced to yield, and to be packing.
Some actions in Silesia.
In this time the Imperialists attempted the recovery of Crossen in Silesia:
but the Garrison being assisted by their fellows out of Franckford and
Landtsbergen; kill some 150. or 200. of them upon the place, driving the rest
into Great Glogaw. And the Imperialists a little after that, lighting upon a
party of 100. Swedish horse, take 25 ^f them, and drive the rest to take the
Oder.

To return to the King. Rattenaw thus taken: and the Country of Brandenburg
now quite cleared of the Imperialists: the King ships 100. pieces of Ordnance,
and other necessaries for the building of a Sconce, in those new gotten boats
aforesaid; to be ready for a new design. The main of his foot forces, he
still keeps in the Camp at Potstayn, and about Brandenburg, Nawen, Spandaw,
etc: and his horse in their Quarters betwixt that, and the Dessau bridge. Upon
the first of June, he commands four Regiments toward Gutterbogen, a Town
toward the 2 passages over the Elve; at Dessau bridge namely, and at
Wittenberg. A little after this, Bauditzen in the night time passing a foord of
the river Elve, surprises the Imperialists at Werben. About which design we
must for a while leave him, to speak of three other actions of the Kings, done
on this side the Country: for the doing of which, now after Tillyes going
toward Saxony, he had the better leisure.

The first of which was, The Dukes of Mecklenburg again Installed.
his r'impatriating and installing of the two Dukes of Mecklenburg, into their
ancient and paternall inheritance, which the Emperor had before deprived them
of, and given unto his General Wallensteyn. This Country being by the Kings
Arms now almost cleared (excepting Rostock, Wismar, Dammitz, and another Town
or two;) he on the 5th of June, causes the people to be new sworn again unto
their natural Lords; and Wallensteyn to be abjured. Which triumph himself
honored, with his royal and victorious presence.

The second Action was done in that part of Pomerland next unto Mecklenburg;
namely the taking in of the strong town of Gripswald; done by his Lieutenant
The Lord Otho Toedt, or Otly-todt.
Colonel Toodt. This strong town of Gripswald (which is also honored with an
University) is situated in the little Dukedom of Wolgast, in the mouth of the
Oder, not far from Stralesundt, whereabouts the King first landed. Why it was
not taken in till now, I know not. Gripswald besieged.
I find it to have been besieged, (or blockt up rather) with 5. Regiments of
foot, and one of horse, about the 20th of July 1630. I find some about it
August 8. also: Mention is made of it in mid- January likewise: about which
time the Imperialists fearing that Dammin would be besieged, fetch some pieces
of Canon out of Gripswald into that Town. This Da^min being taken; Gripswald
is left naked; and now in March, in good earnest set upon: 10000. men being
laid at a distance to block it up. Of any assaults or attempts upon the Town,
I read not: nor of any sallyes made by the besieged; but that fatal one, made
by Perusie, then Governor there: in which skirmish, himself and his Ritmaister
were both slain. The occasion of it was thus: June 10th very early in the
morning a party of Swedish horse adventure to drive away some Cattle, feeding
close by one of the Ports: which one of the Sentinels descrying, discharges his
Musket, the Town taking the Alarm upon it. The Swedish suspecting some such
matter, dress a fine Ambuscado for them. Out sallyes 4. companies; and amongst
them Perusie, his Sergeant major or Ritmaister, and a Knight of the Dutch
order. These sallyers being in a desperate case within, become the more
adventurous without. Well! the Governors courage carrying him too far in the
pursuit of those, that did but feign to fly; the ambush starts up, and cuts
between the Town and him. The Crabats perceiving the danger, avoyde it by
forsaking of their Master. The Dutch Knight is slain first; and the Governor
not long after. By this time are there more forces of the King come in; which
had marched hard all night for that purpose; the plot being laid, that the game
should thus be begun, before they were discovered. Now do the Swedens make
their approaches to the walls: and after an hours space, the Town is most
straightly besieged. First the besiegers show the Town that they have Canon,
and then send to summon them by a Trumpet: Their answer was, that they would
fight it out. Now are the Ordnance set to work (which some call playing:) a
fair saultable breach is made. The Garrison is as good as their words, for by
that breach which the Swedens thought to enter, the other sally: yea so hard
they lay upon the Swedish foot, that had not the horse struck in, they had made
foul work: but being by this means beaten into the Town, they presently
sound a parlie. The assault is given over; Conditions of yielding agreed upon;
which came to thus much: Taken.
That upon June 16. they should depart with flying ensigns, bag and baggage,
and be convoyed unto Loitz first, and to march into Rostock afterward. The
Swedish convoy being something too weak for them, they would not keep
conditions and go to Rostock; but into Havelberg would they go, that they
would. This had crossed the Kings design, which he was now about for this
Havelberg. The Swedish General Banier having notice of the way they took;
sends Captain Hall to meet with them: who falling foul upon them; kills a
many, and takes the rest prisoners. Thus paid they for breach of Conditions.
The King not knowing of the taking of the Town, was now coming from Stetin
with a great power to do it: but is by the news of it turned back again.

The third Action on this side, Brandenburg demands Spandaw again.
was a passage betwixt the King, and the Elector of Brandenburg; thus. The King
having in the beginning of May before, obtained the town of Spandaw, but for
one month, and that month now out; the Elector demands his town again. The
proposition very much displeased the King, because it very much crossed him: yet
for his promise sake, he delivers it, June 8. The next day he sends word into
Berlin (the town where the Elector held his Court) of a Visit he meant to give
it: and a Protestation withal, that if any thing fell out foul upon it, the
blood should not be laid to his charge. The same day, he straightly beleaguers
Berlin; bending his Canon directly upon the Electors palace. Out sends the
Elector to treat; 3 days are spent about it; and all to no purpose.

Thus at last when the men could not agree, the women draw down the King to
milder resolutions. Two Regiments are received into the Town for that night:
and the conclusion is, that upon June 12. the Kings Garrison is again admitted
into Spandau: Spandaw, redelivered unto the King.
and Brandenburg is to give 30000. Rixe Dollars a month, toward the payment
of the Kings foot; the Dutchies of Pomerland and Mecklenburg, being at the
charges of maintaining most of the horse. Some may imagine, that this was but a
colorable denial in Brandenburg; and rather Art then force, in the King.
Their reason is; because the King of Sweden, is brother in Law to the Elector
of Brandenburg; as having married his sister; and therefore not likely to do
him violence: he besides, being one of those oppressed Princes, whom the King
came to relieve. So that this they judge to have been such a practice, as that
(as they say) before of the Duke of Pomerlands was; and that Brandenburg seemed
to be unwilling, with what he was glad of; that he might have this answer, to
give the Emperor, That he was forced to it. I cannot tell: but this I believe,
that would Brandenburg have done the King a service, he might have before done
it, by granting Custrine unto him: and that might have been the saving of
Magdenburg. This I rather believe, that Magdenburg being thus taken and
destroyed, the Elector was terribly affrighted, and therefore durst not but
desire Spandau again: but hearing now that Tilly was gone a fortnights march
from him; engaged otherwhere; and the Dessau bridge broken down, that he could
not return; he consented unto the King. Well! the agreement being made, the
King on the same 12. of June goes thence by water unto Stetin, there to give
audience unto the Russian Ambassador: which he did upon the 14th after.

By this time, there having been some murmuring amongst the Protestants
against the King, concerning the taking of Magdenburg; as if he had been too
slow or defective in his aids or counsels, unto that City: His Majesty,
though in himself guiltless; yet considering that he is cruel to himself,
who is negligent of his own fame or reputation; he thinks himself bound in
honor to excuse himself; and therefore sends abroad this his Apology, which
we have here abbreviated.

That he could never by any persuasions or assurances draw in the Citizens of
Magdenburg, The Kings Apology concerning Magdenburg.
to disburse any moneys toward the levying of any forces for his service, and
their own safeties: no nor so much as to billet or quarter any of his troops
upon them; until by the blocking up of their town, they were compelled unto
it. That neither could their own Prince the Administrator of Magdenburg, when
in the end of July 1630. he came into their City, obtain so much of them:
which had it been done, Pappenheim had then been diverted; an inexpugnable
Fort might have been raised; and the Seat of war have been turned off from
the City. That the enemy had such potent Agents within the Town, that all
good resolutions in others, were hindered by them: and unto their trecheries,
is the ruin of their own Country to be imputed. That notwithstanding all
this, the City can witness his great care in borrowing moneys from Hambrough
and Lubeck for them; which had been sent unto them. As for any promise from
his Majesty, which the Citizens may allege that they relied upon; they must
know, that this is to be regulated according to conveniencie, possibility, and
the present state of things: so that the King might not then endanger the whole
action, for the particular of one City; especially seeing their own
negligence, had now made his promise impossible to be kept. Moreover, other
most insuperable difficulties have since fallen out and made his relieving of
them impossible. As that Imperial Army in Pomeren and Mecklenburg: which
besides that it was far too strong for him in horse; had even then blockt up
all passages from the East Sea unto Magdenburg. That it had been in vain for
him to have attempted any further, until he had first taken in, those two
mighty passages of Gartz and Grippenhagen. That notwithstanding all his
diligence, he could not conveigh any troops unto Magdenburg, (to any purpose)
until November last; by which time, the enemy had encroached too far upon
them That Gartz and Grippenhagen being taken, he might have ruined the whole
Emperors Army, could he but have obtained the passage of Custrine: but this
had bin denied him by Krachten, then Governor of it. That hereupon, he was
feign to let the enemy escape (in their flight from Gartz) into Landtsbergen:
nor was he able after that, to clear the Elve of the enemies; and all this,
through Krachtens denial. If it had been expected, that his Majesty should
then have joined battle with Tilly: they are to consider, the many labors and
weakness of his forces: the hardness of the winter; and the over-matching
power of the enemy: who had he won the battle, had at that blow conquered
both Magdenburg and Germany. That after Tillyes retyring from him to besiege
Magdenburg, he had strengthened the Imperial Army left against his Majesty,
with 12000 new men: laying them upon all the passages and advantages of
Pomeren, Brandenburg, and Silesia and especially upon the River Oder; and in
the Towns of Franckford and Landtsbergen: that had he stirred to relieve
Magdenburg, they had come upon his back. That to show his willingness, to
relieve Magdenburg, he had adventured upon the taking of Franckford; and after
that advanced as far as Spandaw and Potstayn, toward it. That
notwithstanding the Town so much concerned the Elector of Saxony, yet could
his Majesty never obtain of him, any aids toward the relief of it; or any
passage by Wittenberg, or the Dessau bridge, toward it. That the Elector of
Brandenburg had not, or could not in time deliver him such victuals and
shipping, as were necessary to it: as having a respect unto what the Elector of
Saxony did, or would do. That he yet knew not, whether these two Electors were
or would be, his friends or his enemies. All this considered, his Majesty's
Council of war assured him, That with so over-wearied an Army, first to
pass so many enemies in the way; and then to have set upon Tilly, had ruind
all. Lastly, that he would have relieved the Town, appears by the need
himself stood in of it: seeing upon the news of the taking of it, he was
feign to retire with his Army; and project new designs for his security and
proceeding. This was his Majesty's Apology.

Suppose now in the mean time the General Tilly to be removed from
Magdenburg; whence in Whitsun week about the end of May, he departed. This
known, the King presently has a design of recovering those places; and he
having forsaken the Elve, the King sends toward it. Now does the gallant
Bauditzen all of a sudden one night with his Dragonniers, pass a shallow place
or Foord of the Elve: whereby the Imperialists in Werben are taken sleepers,
killed, Werben taken and Borg.
rowted or imprisoned; their Lieutenant-Colonell, their chief Quarter-maister,
and their Town surprised: Others at the same time do as much to Borg, within
4. leagues of Magdenburg. Tilly now upon his march hearing of these tidings,
and fearing withal that the King had an intention to lay a bridge over the
Elve; away dispatches he four Regiments under Pappenheims Command; to secure
Havelberg, Pappenheym sent to resist the King.
and those neighbor places. Werben thus surprised, now begins some of the
Kings Army to remove from about Potstayn; and the Navy of boats with their
provisions, are sent toward Copenick, to pass by Berlin and Potstain, into
the River Havel: both Army and Fleet moving toward old Brandenburg,
Rattenaw, and so on toward Havelberg. At this time the King having received a
supply of four Regiments out of Prussia, and some new troops levied about
Brandenburg, with some others drawn out of their Garrisons, he divides his
forces: the Lord Oxensterne Chancellor of the Kingdom of Sweden, has 38.
troops of old Soldiers added unto his former Army in Prussia: Gustavus Horn
has his strength in Silesia, again reinforced with Recruites; and a bridge is
laid by him over the Oder at Schamburg, a mile beneath Custrine. By this time
(that is in the end of June) is the King come back again from Stetin unto his
Army; and that dislodged and advanced. Upon the last of June therefore in the
night, is Colonel Duwaldt sent out Others name 98. companies of foot, and 60
troops of horse.
with 2000. horse, and 2000. Dragoniers, or Musketeers on horseback; who
passing through the Elve at a shallow passage (as Bauditzen had done before,)
now falls upon the City of Tangermu^^; Tan^er^und (...).
where both Town and Castle being taken, the most of the Garrison are slain
in the resistance. The next day, thither also comes his Majesty. The
Imperialists of Garleben (another neighbor Garrison) hearing of this,
presently flee away toward Halberstadt: Wolmerstat is presently also taken:
yea the Swedish fly out so far, that they took away fifty horses which were
grasing even under the walls and Ordnance of the City of Magdenburg.
Tangermund thus taken; a bridge is laid over the Elve, and there the King
entrenches himself, there he fortifies, and forms a Camp. And now begins the
bustling, and not till now.

Papenheym ^eaten.
Papenheym with his 4 Regiments of Crabats and others, with the expulsed
Garrisons thereabouts, being sent by Tilly to keep those places; does his best
to hinder the proceedings. The Rhyne-graue Charles Lodowicke therefore with
some Swedish forces being there abroad about Borg and Wolmerstadt, not far
from Magdenburg, upon them falls Papenheym: of whose approach the King having
notice, with all the horse he could make, and some 2000 Musketeers, comes time
enough to make one in the medlye. A bartell.
Papenheym's Foot are almost all cut off, most of the Horse played the
Pultrons, and ran away: himself escaped into Magdenburg first, from whence
he hastened toward Halberstat, there to expect his Master the General Tilly.
^teindal taken.
It was said that some 20 Companies were here defeated, and some 14 Ensigns
taken. The Garrison of Steyndall beyond Tangermund hearing of this, presently
trusse up their bag and baggage, and away are they packing.

Papenheym thus removed from about Havelberg; early in the morning July 9th.
comes Sr John Bannier, the Kings Lieutenant general at that time, ^avelberg
ta^^^.
and he falls upon Havelberg: so called from the river Havell, on which it
stands. All that are found in Arms are put to the sword, and the Town
taken. This the King having notice of, the same day begins to remove his Camp
from Tangermund, shipping all his provisions down the Elbe toward Werben.
This Town was held the more advantageous place to encampe in, for that it had
the command and passage not of the Elbe alone, but of the Havell also, which
here at Werben runs into the Elbe. The King for^es a strong Camp at Werben.
The Camp lay on both sides the river, the Town it self being comprehended
within it, this he fortifies most mainly, as strong as ever he did that of
Swedt upon the Oder, when Tilly before came by him into Mecklenburg, this he
does upon the same grounds and wisdom too. Tilly was then near unto him, and
now is he again upon his march toward him. Papenheym had sent for him:
(...)derfully ^^^^vered.
Mansfield Governor of Magdenburg had dispatched 4 posts in one day toward
him; help, haste, come away, or all is lost. Tilly therefore then about
Saxony, is enforced to put off his own invasion of Hessen, and to
countermaund his Forces back again already sent thither: and now is Tilly
come back almost as far as Halberstadt, the King calls out all his Garrisons
out of the Towns which could not be defended. This was about July 14th, 1631
from whence he advances unto Wolmerstadt in the Arch-bishopricke of
Magdenburgh.

Hither being come upon the 16th or 17th of July, he first of all dispe^ds
away 4 Regiments of Horse for his Vantcurriers, to stay the Kings proceedings,
whilst himself with his whole Army might come up to him: and if it were
possible to tempt the King out of his trenches, to pitch a battle in the
field. Bernsteyn sent against the King.
These gallant Troops most of them old soldiers, were Papenheyms men, and
very forward therefore now to revenge their fellows. Colonel Bernsteyn, a
valiant Gentleman was now their Leader: his Regiment was all Curiassers, or men
at Arms. The second Regiment was the Italian Count Monte Cuculies (himself
not there) consisting of 12 Cornets of Rutters. The third was Holicke his
Regiment, and in that 5 Cornets of Curiassers, and 5 more with fire-lockes. The
fourth belonged unto Coronino, and 10 Cornets had he under him. All these were
verily persuaded, that the King would not fight, and in this persuasion they
continued, till they came to Tanger, a Dorpe within one Germane league of
Tangermund: not a Swede all that while appearing to oppose them. Here (about
Tanger) do these brave Imperialists take up their Quarter; the Swedish having
before forsaken that, and some other open places.

Whilst the weary Troops there rest; out goes Bernsteyn with some 600
Curiassers to set the watch, and to guard the passages for that night. A
battle.
The King of Sweden fully informed by his skowtes, both of their lodging and
strength; that very day sends out 2000 chosen Musketeers, and 500 Dragoniers,
under the command of Colonel Collenbach, and the Rhyne-graue: before break
of day had approacht the Enemy. The 500 Dragoniers, they set to fall upon
Bernsteyns 600 Curiassers; Collenbach with his Musketeers on foot encompassing
the Dorps, where the Imperialists lay enquartered. The Dragoniers charging,
presently tumble down a many of the Curiassers; Bernsteyn slain.
Colonel Bernsteyn himself being slain among the first, and in him a
Family, for he was the last of his name. The rest neither able with their
horses and pistols, to hold out against horses and muskets; nor yet knowing the
strength of their Enemies, make a disorderly retreat into the Dorp: thither
the Dragoniers pursue them, and there leaping from their horses, they with
their muskets still let fly amongst them. The other Imperialists cannot be
said to have taken the Alarm, but the fright at it; some get horses to fight,
and some to fly: well, which way soever they issue out of the Town, one
Troop or other of Collenbach's musketeers are ready to entertain them. Thus
are 1500 slain, all the 4 Regiments defeated, Bernsteyn killed, Holck and
Coronino fled, some 28 or 29 Cornets taken: whereof of Bernsteyns 10, of Holcks
6, of Monte Cuculies 5, of Coroninoes 7, besides those that were burnt. Great
booty gotten of silver-vessell etc. some one soldier lighting upon 1000
Rix-Dollars, and another upon as many Ducats. This defeat happened upon Sunday
morning July 17: upon which day these Imperialsts were dispensed withal for
being at Morrow-Masse, as having before day light been at a Black-Sanctus.
This defeat was given, Tilly himself being in sight of it.

General Tilly resolving now upon a revenge, upon Tuesday and Wednesday
following, he musters and over-veiwes his Army and Ammunition, gets all things
ready for a battle. Upon Thursday July 21, forward he sets toward the King,
by fair and easy marches (not to over-tyre his Army) coming unto
Tangermund, where the King had before encamped, and from whence he had given
order for his Garrison to retire, if they perceived Tilly about to come upon
them. Tilly at this time (reckoning those that were before slain) brought some
26000 men along with him, and all these like himself, full of anger,
resolution, and desire of revenge. Before he would assault the Kings Trenches,
he was said secretly to have sent unto some confederates and well-wishers of
his, or otherwise corrupted with promises, to do a piece of treacherous service
for him: and that was, to nail the Kings Ordnance, (at least in that part of
the Camp where he meant to fall on) that so it might be made unserviceable
against him. Tilly 3 times assaults the King in his Trenches.
The plot being (by I know not what remorse in the conscience of one of the
undertakers) discovered; The King (it is said) gave not Tilly one Canon shot when
he first fell on, notwithstanding he were come even under the Ordnance; and
that Tilly was said to have made about 60. This made him confident, and his men
brave; who pressing now on in great multitudes, all of a sudden was such a
tempest of shot, chaine-shot, murthering-shot, and what ever was cruellest to
do execution, showred in amongst them; that there was made a miserable
butcherie. By another Avenue at the same time, out sallies Bauditzen with 3
Regiments of horse, who set so rudely upon the Enemies Curiassers, that had the
King seconded him with the rest of the Army, it had been (as it is thought) a
very miserable defeat. Thus is the retreat sounded for that night. Within a
day or two, another revenge must be attempted, before which, it is reported also,
that Tilly should have hired some Boores to have fired the Town of Werben,
round about which the Kings Leaguer was: but these two reports we do only
relate, but press not upon our Readers, these perchance are but devised. Well;
Tilly can make nothing of it neither this day, nor the next, (which was S.
James his day July 25, and the last day that he attempted any thing upon the
Trenches: Tilly beaten off.
and is therefore forced to retire toward Tangermund. In which retreat the
King himself setting upon him, so over-laid the Crabats, that they were driven
back upon their own Foot; who to keep them from disordering of their
rancks, were feign to staue them off, by charging their pikes upon them. Tilly
perceiving the King coming, made Alt or a stand, putting his men in order, and
bringing forward his Canon as the King also did. A skirmish now beginning, was
by the night taken off, both sides retyring to their quarters. Some say that
the King himself was in one of these fights, in some danger and too far
engaged: and that Bauditzen was so hemb'd in, that he was feign by maine force
to break through: and that in the coming off, he should break his sword in
the body of a great Commander, bringing out nothing but the hilts, and some
two handfuls of the blade: and that his horse was 4 times shot, and a piece of
his saddle carried away. The General Tilly not using thus to be foiled, and
having a good mind to be revenged, lays a Bridge over the Elbe at his Camp at
Tangermund, daily sending some out to spy their opportunity and advantage:
but perceiving many of those which he sent out, never to return again, and
victuals to prove excessive dear, yea scarce to be gotten for any money; he
having been almost a whole month about the King and all that to do as the
blind cat did to the fly, Tilly retires from the King
lickt the skin off her own tongue: about the 10 of August he dislodges
with his Army, marching directly toward Garleben, Wolmerstadt, Hall, and so
to the Duke of Saxonies Country. His wants may well be believed to be many,
seeing he was now enquartered upon that Country, which himself had before
dispeopled, and eaten up. Five hundred starved horses left he behind him, (a
most rich prey for a kennell of hounds) and 800 wagons for want of horses to
draw them: with much else perchance, which otherwise he would not have left
behind. Some report him to have lost 6000 or 7000 men; perchance in all these 3
great defeates of Papenheyms, Bernsteyns, and his own he might, and yet is
half so many, a great many for so great a General to loose, nor would the
side have it so many confessed.

General Tilly thus marched off, and the King having now no need to keep so
many Forces together, (it being both inconvenient, and chargeable besides) he
divides his Army into 3 several Quarters: of which we shall by and by tell you
more.

During this time, The Queen of Sweden arriues in Pomeren.
her Majesty the Queen of Sweden arrives with 8000 men at Wolgast, by
Stralesunt, where the King had before appointed a Palace to entertain her.
And now also is the Lord Marquis Hamilton arrived. His Lordship after his going
from London, upon July 18 met with the Forces that were to join with him out
of Scotland, in Yarmouth road in Norfolk: which was their appointed place of
meeting. Thence setting sail the 19th, (being a fleet of some 38 or 40) on
the 25th they came before Elsemore Castle in the Sowndt of Denmark. Marquis
Hamilton arriues in Pomeren.
There went the Marquis a shore to kiss the King of Denmarkes hand, who then
lay at Frederickstadt. The 29th they set sail again, coming to anchor the
next day by the Isle of Rugen. The 31th they sailed into the mouth of the Oder
betwixt Wolgast and the Isle of Vsedome. The 2 and 3 of August were the Forces
landed: being upon muster found to be above 6000 able men; amongst which but a
very few sick, and two dead in all the voyage. The two next days they were
all armed, and wafted over the river from the I Will of Vsedome unto Wolgast side;
and there billetted in 5 Villages. Here-abouts for a while they stay, and that,
for the coming of 4 or 5000 Swedish which were to be sent unto them. These
being at hand to meet them about September 20, up the Oder from Stetin they
go; being about some 41 Companies: some pieces of Ordnance they carry with
them by water, and some (it is said) are drawn over-land along by them. Their
way was toward Silesia, where Gustavus Horn was now with an Army. They were
afterward engarrison'd in Custrine, Franckford, Landtsbergen, His men put into
Garrison
and Crossen: in whose places the old soldiers were drawn out into the field.
A report we here had of a defeat they should give, but this we leave to be
confirmed in our second part. The news of the English-mens coming being
reported at the Emperors Court at Vienna, did something startle and amaze some
of the Courtiers: but the Hubbub was ere long well allaied, by a letter (from a
good Catholic hand no doubt) received out of England. Catholic Intelligence.
The Contents were; how that few or none could here (in England) be gotten, to
come at the beating of the drums, or to serve against the Emperor: whereupon
a most strict press was feign to be set abroad, upon which few or none except
rogues or jayle-birds were taken; so that those Forces were not much to be
feared. You see how much this Army was beholden to their Countryman, this
Spaniolized Intelligencer.

Suppose his Majesty of Sweden employed all this while, about the emptying of
his great Camp at Werben, The King dislodges his Ar^^ie.
into other Stations. Some he keeps there still, others are sent into
Rattenaw; and a third division into old Brandenburg. This was about mid-
August. About which time he has 4000 new men come to reenforce him out of
Sweden. Some Ordnance and Engines of war they brought with them: and they
took their way thorough Brandenburg-land toward Franckford; And these (I
suppose) were the men, whose coming the English stayed for. The King leaving
Bauditzen with chief Command for the time, in the Camp at Werben, with some
ten Regiments of horse, and six of foot: upon the 29. of August, himself in
person departs from Rattenaw toward old Brandenburg; carrying four Regiments
of Dutch, and one of Finlanders along with him. By this time was the General
Tilly a very busy enemy, in taking of Towns in Saxony: and that Duke with an
Army of 20000. men in the field about Torgau, one of his chief Frontier
Towns, toward the Kings Army. The Duke must now declare with the King, or
perish under Tilly: and there had not only many treaties passed with the Duke,
concerning the conjoyning of their Arms; but, as it seems, some assurances of
late times: little or nothing now remaining to be concluded, but some
circumstantiall particulars, points of honor, and proportions of payments to
the Kings Army. All these, it was not hard to be fayrely accommodated; and the
Dukes pressing necessities his Majesty well perceived, would suddenly enforce
him to condescend. Upon these grounds, The King moves toward the Duke of
Saxony.
the King moves forward toward the Duke of Saxonyes Country. So then; the
Kings Infantery or Foot, being fayrely sent a little before; the Cavalry the
same 29. of August, in number 73. Cornets of horse, and 1000. Dragoniers,
marches from old Brandenburg: taking up their Quarter the same night, some two
leagues from that City; and for that he would not hinder his march by taking
of Towns, or going thorough them; A hard Quarter.
he that night pitched in the feilds, near the Town of Zegesern; where the
Army was but very poorly acco^modated; as being constreyned to content
themselves with the hospitality of the wars, and to lodge all night in the
open air, under the blew skies, and to accept of as cold Commons unto it: and
all by reason that the Kings carriages, (in which their baggage and necessaries
were,) was not yet come up unto them. The next day August 30. so soon as the
Army appeared in battle array, his Majesty the King of Sweden, rode up and
down amongst them from Regiment to Regiment, and from rank to rank, giving
them this gracious Encouragement. The Kings Oration to his Soldiers.
Ye Lords and Gentlemen; much grieved I am at this your hard lodging and
entertainment: But courage my hearts; we are now as good as in the Dukedom of
Saxony; and there, indeed, our intention is to enter. Assure your selves, that
things will mend there; there shall you have victuals sufficient, and
provision enough: then also shall we fully pay you the arrier, of whatsoever
means is now due unto you. Let us only make this condition with you; that you
there behave your selves more civilly and gentely, then in some other places
you have done: and in the Marquisate of Brandenburg especially; where, in
deed, it much grieved Us, to see things carried so ill-favouredly. Hark! at
this present the Drums beat a march, and the Trumpet sounds to Arm; the
signals and summons of our moving forward. To morrow our Army breaks up from
Werben; and that also is to follow us. Tilly, notwithstanding his great Army,
stands already in so much awe of us, that he proceeds with more leisure and
wariness, then he was heretofore wont to do; for they have been beaten to
it. It does nothing daunt your valiant hearts, I know, that his Army is called
Invincible; seeing you have found it not to be so. On therefore, my hearts, a
Gods name: We daily pray unto the LORD of Hoasts for you, and we desire you to
do the same for Us; that he would be graciously pleased to go along with us,
to assist us, and to give us good success, in whatsoever just and religious
enterprise we undertake.

The Army thus encouraged, and assured of their enterprise; now rise and march.
So that taking their way by Beltzig they arrive at Coswig, within two leagues
of Wittenberg, August 31. Hither now the same day came the Lord Arnheym,
Feild-Marshall to the Duke of Saxony: and at this time his Ambassador to the
King. Saxons union with the King
The case is now altered with that Duke; Tilly had taught him to request of the
King, what he had before either denied him, or would not time enough declare
himself in: aids, and joining with him. Arnheym humbly now declaring his
Masters estate, requests his Majesty's speedy assistance: the Conditions and
manner whereof being Sept. 1. on the Kings part consented unto, and sent unto
the Duke; are the next day returned in writing, and signed. The Union had these
four Conditions now yielded unto by the Duke, which he so much before stood
upon.

And the conditions of it.
1. That his Majesty of Sweden might freely from henceforth, pass and repasse
through Saxony.

2. That the Elector of Saxony should at his own charges provide the Swedish
Army, with powder, shot, and provisions.

3. That the King should have the absolute and universal Command of the whole
Army: and the Dukes Soldiers to submit themselves unto his direction.

4. That the Duke should conclude no peace with the Emperor, without the Kings
consent: but that both of them should stand as one man, until the end of the
wars.

The first defeat that this Union made, was of the Papists expectation: who
verily believing that the Conclusions of Leipsich would have made the
Protestants fall out among themselves; are now frustrated of that hope. This
done, the bridge at Wittenberg over the Elve, is freed for the King; who Sept.
3. passes his whole Army over it, into the Dukes Country. Sept. 4. the Kings
Army from Wittenberg, and the Dukes from Torgau, advanced as far as Dieben
upon the River Multa, within three leagues of Leipsich: whither also the
Elector of Brandenburgs troops now came. Both Armies here meeting, in sign
that the Duke had yielded unto what the King would have, (namely the
superiority and command of the Saxon Army,) the Horsemen as they came by,
vayled and stooped their Cornets, and the Foot, their Ensigns, toward the
Kings Army. The 5th day both Armies putting themselves into fair Battalia,
the King took a particular view of the Saxon forces, and of the order and
constitution of the Army, resolving the next day to visit the great General
Tilly in his trenches, and to levy his siege of Leipsich: but hearing that
Tilly had that morning prevented them by taking of the Town; the King and Duke
were both put unto new consultations: So that the 6th day was spent in
providing for the great day, the day of battle, which fell out to be the next
day following. And here now leaving both the King and the Duke employed, let us
go aside a while, to fetch their valiant Adversary into the field, the
Imperial General Tilly; whom we lately left retyring this way, from the
Kings Leaguer of Werben.

General Tilly his proceedings from the time of his retyring from the Kings
Camps in Mecklenburg and Pomerland: Historically led along unto the day of his
defeat, at the Battle of Leipsich.
THE General Tilly perceiving the King neither willing to adventure his
Armies, now (like their swords) already worn out with so many
winter-victories) into the plain field against such fresh forces, who would
be desperate, because they must either fight or be gone: and that he lay too
strongly entrenched (in both places) to be forced: and that by carrying away
all provisions, he had left him no means there long to stay without starving:
Tilly retyres from the King
and now hearing news from Coloredo, that there was no forcing of the Kings
new Bridge laid over the Oder at Swedt: bethinks himself therefore of an
expedition against Magdenburg; rises, and retires with his Army. In the end of
March minding wholly to leave these Quarters unto the King, he first of all
dismantles New Brandenburg, which he had so lately conquered: becoming now as
cruel to the Town, as he before had been unto the Townsmen, and their
Garrison: for he beats down the walls, lays all the fortifications level
with the ground, and so takes his leave of it.

Order is given unto the Count of Schomberg to look well unto Franckford upon
Oder, and for the better securing of it, he gives directions for 7000 fresh
men to be sent in, and that Diepenbach should also come into the Town to
assist Schomberg, as you have heard before. And whereas there were yet two
Towns with Imperial Garrisons in them, near unto the Kings Camp at Swedt,
(in Britsen namely, and Moncheberg) which to be sure, the King would fall upon
so soon as ever his back was turned; those Garrisons he therefore sends for,
and away he marches back again, the same way (almost) that he came: to
Ferberlin first, and so to Old Brandenburg. Now he clearly discovers himself,
that his purpose was to undertake what Pappenheym had all this while been
about; the taking of the Town and Arch-bishopricke of Magdenburg. Part
therefore of his Cavalrie he sends to Havelberg: himself with the rest of the
horse, and five Regiments of foot passing the River Havell, takes up his
head-quarter at Mockeren. His magazine for the whole war to come, he appoints
at Zerbst, and that he might go the roundlier to work, he sends for his
Ordnance from Hall and Halberstadt, which he commands to meet him at the
Town of Magdenburg.

Thus having brought the gallant General Tilly so far onward on his way; and
entered withal in that manner into our discourse, as a man should do either
into a goodly Palace or History, namely in the midst of it: we will leave our
General a while taking order for his business, and go to fetch up our Story
from the beginning of these latter troubles.

The Country of Magdenburg is situated upon the West of Brandenburg, from
which the river Elbe parts it: upon the South it touches upon Saxony: upon the
West joining with Brunswicke and Halberstadt: and upon the North of it is the
Elbe again, with the two Dutchies of Lunenburg and Lawenburg. The Country
has the name from the chief City Magdenburg, which is one of the ancient
Hanse Towns of the Empire: and that honored with an Archbishops See, and he
the Primate of all Germany.

The people be Lutheranes, of the Augustane Confession: the Arch-bishopricke in
the hands of a Layman; Christian William, a Prince of the Electorall house of
Brandenburg. His Title is, Administrator of the Bishoprics of Magdenburgh and
Hall, For of that Bishopric is he Administrator also.
and Primate of Germany. This bred the quarrel; for he not giving way to the
Reformation of the Religion (that is, the bringing in of Popery again) and
the restoring of the Church Lands, he is proscribed and Bandited by the
Emperor: and some Forces sent into his Country actually to seize upon them.
His Subjects notwitstanding they were also far out with the Emperor, as
having consented with other Hans-Townes not to suffer any Imperial Soldiers
to be quartered or billetted upon them, and had raised some 2000 soldiers for
their own guards, yet being now terrified by the Emperor durst not assist
their Prince: until at last being encouraged by the King of Sweden, they
receive him, and promise to stick close by him, for which the King sends his
hearty thanks unto them. This false out about the end of July 1630. The
Administrator thus returned, sets forth his Declaration: protesting in it
against the wrongs done him by the Emperor, and putting himself under the
protection of the King of Sweden.

The Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg rises with the Administrator.
With this Prince, had Francis Charles Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg (and for the same
respects) now conjoined himself. In aid of them, had the King of Sweden sent
some troops into the Country. And because the next way through Mecklenburg was
full of Imperial Garrisons, these aids are sent from Stralesundt along by
Sea, landing beyond all Mecklenburg at Dassow, not far short of Lubeck.
These, the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg aforesaid, undertakes to let into
Magdenburg, through his own Country and the passages of Lunenburg; in the Kings
name also levying forces from about Hamborough, Lubeck, and those quarters:
with whom about the end of September, he makes himself Master of the towns of
Boutzenburg, Lawenburg, Nyehusen, and other places upon the Elve. Against him,
toward the end of September, is the General Pappenheym sent with more
Imperial forces: Is taken prisoner by Pappenheym.
who quickly snaps up the Duke, taking him prisoner in his own brother Duke
Augustus of Saxon-Lawenburg his Castle of Ratzenburg: and there an end of him
for that time. And Colonel Bock defeated.
Colonel Bock with aid of the Administrators forces takes the City of Hall;
and otherwhere holds some play a while: but in October following is he taken
off also.

In the end of November the King sends a noble Gentleman and well-beloved by
him, the Lord Diderick Falkenburg, The Lord Falkenburg sent by the King.
Lord Marshall or Chamberlayn of his Majesty's own household. He being with his
forces come into the town of Magdenburg; the Country-Gentlemen and the
Soldiery resort apace unto him; and the course of things begin to turn about
again. Then is Colonel Schneidewin sent out with 600. Musketeers and 200.
horse; and he in December, takes in New Allensleben: slaying there some 60.
Imperialists, and bringing 100. more, away prisoners with him. The town of
Egelen is a little after that taken also. In the beginning of January an
Imperial Captain surprises some 50. or 60. of the Magdenburgers; and they
falling out upon a strong Party, fetch in a booty of 800. sheep and some 84.
head of cowes and oxen: setting fire at the same time upon some of their own
Dorps upon the Elbes side, that the Enemy might not there nestle. I will not
stand upon every petty encounter that passed this Winter time. The Spring
coming on, they become more busy, on the second of March the Count Ladron,
together with his Lieutenant Colonel Kirckner, are snapt up and slain by the
Magdenburgers at Coswick, near unto the City. The Citizens making out all
their strength, cast up three Out-workes hard without their Ports; and the
Imperialists falling on upon two of them at once: Falkenburg with 2 pieces of
Ordnance sallying the same time out of the City, sets upon their Quarters,
fires and spoils all their Huts and Cabbins, where they had all this while
wintered. Thus these lesser fishes play a while with one another, till at
length the great Pike General Tilly comes amongst them, and devoures them
altogether. To him now turn we.

Suppose him now at Mockeren (where we last left him) already within the
Bishopric of Magdenburg, and within two or three leagues of the very Town: in
which of Soldiers and Burgers, there were some 4000. fighting men. Upon the
12.th of April he first presents himself in full Battaglia within a mile of
the City: The ^iege of ^^^^^enburg.
at which time believed it was, that he would at least have fallen upon the
great Starre-Sconce by the old Elve: but that day attempted he no more then to
beat some Guards out of their Redoubts into the City. The 13. he planted 12.
pieces of Canon against the bridge over the Elve; against which he made 568.
shot that same day: his intent being to cut that passage off, that the Town by
it might send no succors to the foresaid Sconce or Toll-house; but the
General Falkenburg conveniently planting some pieces upon the Toll-house,
quite at last dismounted the enemies Canon. This not succeeding, Tilly falls
pell mell at once upon both these places, giving eight several assaults unto
them: but the Lord Falkenburg with four whole Canon double charged with
stones, old iron, etc. about 12. a clock at night made them to give over. Some
prisoners the next day taken, confess there were 2000. men that day slain of
the assaylants. This (...)
Toll-house, was a nocable piece of Fortification, built on the other side the
Elve. To this Tilly now turns all his battery; here falls he to myning: and
all to no purpose. On the 15th, both by land and water he lays at it: but 300.
Musketeers being by him sent in boats, to assail it on the waters side, were
by those of the Fort driven ashoare, and either all drowned or slain by the
Citizens; 200. also at the same time, lost their lives on the land-side. Now
was there news brought into Tillyes Camp of the King of Swedens being upon his
march, for the relieving of the besieged: a Council of war being thereupon
being called, some troops are sent toward Wittenberg, and the Dessau bridge;
there to staue off the Kings forces. The news of his coming now slackning,
April 21. to work he falls again: and giving on upon the Toll-house, he
finds that notable piece forsaken by the Magdenburgers; who at their retreat
offering to fire it, the place was rescued by the Imperialists. Upon this, were
all the Forts on that side of the Elve, either taken or given over; the bridge
also by Tilly burned: and approaches made unto the City, which was from thence
immediately battered. Now were the besieged forced to burn their own new
Town: where 2000. Imperialists immediately lodging themselves, fell to myning,
and shooting of Grenades into the Town. The 29. by a sally out upon these in
the new Town, are some 100. slain. The mines do no hurt, until one
Farenbacke, a notable Enginer takes them in hand, who sapps himself under the
Towne-ditches to the very hard walls: in reward of which service, the Emperor
makes him a Colonel; granting him Commission to raise two new Regiments. May
2. the Imperialists in the new City having suddenly in the nightime cast up
a battery, shrewdly punish the besieged. May 7. General Tilly comes himself
into the new Town, together with Pappenheym then General of the Ordnance, and
Schomberg Sergeant Major general; and a great show of Ladders is made, as if
there were a purpose of a general scaladoe. Tillyes hope was, that the Town
would presently parley, upon sight of these preparations: but they taking the
Alarm at it, instantly man all their bullwarkes. The 8th day is spent in
shooting at a certain high Tower, from which the Towne-Canon much plagued the
besiegers. This day Tilly sends a Trumpet to summon the Town: they send
another to him; signifying their willingness to yield, might but their
Administrator still enjoy his Bishopric, and the Town their privileges.
This not consented unto, the 9th day Pappenheym attempting to scale the walls,
is by a sally beaten off: in which some of the enemies mines being discovered,
are by countermynes in the Town defeated. That day is another Trumpet sent
into the Town: toward Evening, was there much bustling observed, and
carriages too and again in the enemies Leaguer: yea they were perceived to
rise with their whole Army, (as the Town thought) and to march to Ottersleben,
half a mile from them. All that night was the Lord Falkenburg upon the walls:
and perceiving in the morning no danger of assault, he calls the City together
to give answer to the enemies Trumpet; yea so secure they were, that the
overwatcht Soldiers are suffered to go from their Courts of guard, to take
some sleep: and some say, that the Townsmen were gone to Church to give God
thanks for their deliverance from the siege. Thus the walls being found
empty, about 7. on the tuesday morning, May 10. Pappenheym having given the
word Iesu-Maria to his Soldiers, Magdenburg taken.
and a white string about their Arms; makes toward the Heidecker port: where
having thrown turffs and faggots into the Ditch to fill it, through it up to the
middle the Imperialists run, with scaling ladders upon their backs. The
walls are in a trice mounted, the Town entered, and the Soldiers fall to
killing. Falkenberg now flying in upon them, beats them back to the very
walls again: but a Port being by this time opened, and the enemies horse let
in, the valiant Falkenberg is slain with a shot, the Administrator hurt, both
in the thigh and head, and so taken. Whilst all thus goes to wrack, a mighty
fire breaks out (how, none knows) and it being a great windy day, all was on
the sudden become one great flame: the whole Town was in twelve hours space,
wholly turned to Cinders, excepting 139. houses. Six goodly Churches are burnt;
the Cathedral together with S. Mary's Church, were by the Monks and Soldiers
diligence, preserved. Twenty thousand people at least, were here killed,
burned, and smoothered: six thousand being observed to be drowned in the Elve.
Tillyes Wallons would give Quarter to few: and the Crabats, never use to give,
or beg any: so that all were killed. May 12. came Tilly into the Town; and
finding some hundreds of women and Children in the Church, he gives them their
lives, and some bread to maintain it too. Next day he forbids pillaging. Upon
Sunday May 15. because he would have this fair Cathedral as like to Rome as
might be, that is, Consecrated in blood; he causes it to be cleansed and new
consecrated; Mass and With a vengeance, can the Papists now say, that this
Mass was ^^ruen^um ^acrificium, an ^nbloudy sacrifice?
Te Deum being sung in it, in thankesgiving for the Victory. Future ages may
perhaps compare the destruction of this goodly City, unto that of Troy, or of
Jerusalem. The King of Sweden, (who for want of horses to draw his Carriages
and Ordnance, could not come time enough to the relief) hearing of it, vowed
(as some say) to be revenged; rising and retyring a little with his Army. There
is a prodigy reported in Gallobelgicus, portending some dire abodement unto
the City. Thus. A Citie-Captaines wife dying in Childbed, desires to be ripped:
the child was found a boy, In capite cass^dem, thoracem ferreum, ocreas
amplas, quas alla modo vocant.
almost as big as one of three years old. He had, an head-peice, and an iron
breast plate upon him: great boots of the French fashion: and a bag by his
side, with two like Musket-bullets in it. This take upon his credit, or upon
theirs that told it him.

The same day that Magdenhurg was taken, had Count Tilly given order for the
burning of the Dessau bridge upon the Elbe where the Multa runs into it:
which was the only passage, by which the King of Swede^ might endanger to
disturb his siege: of this act he much repented him after the taking of the
City, seeing that by destroying of that Bridge, he had cut of himself from
having any more to do on the further side of the River. Being not able therefore
to return that way, and hearing of some levies of Soldiers now making by the
Leaguers of Leipsich, in Saxony, Hessen, and Durengen; those he resolves by
his presence to hinder. In the end of May therefore from Magdenburg he remoues;
leaving 3 Regiments in the Town, to defend what the fire had left. The Count
of Tilly marches toward Duringen.
Forsaking the bancks of the Elbe, and bending a little westerly, at first
through the Hercynian forest he goes; with some 20000 men after him: in
passing through which, many of his straggling Soldiers were knocked down, by
the Boores of the Country: his Ordnance are sent to Gruningen, and so forward
to Allesleben. Thither being come, he there pitches; Pitches at Aldersleben.
for hither had the Dukes of the house of Saxony (whose Lands lay there about)
now sent their Ambassadors.

Pappenheym is now dispatched toward Havelburg, (as you have hefore heard:) and
part of Tillies Cavallerie is sent into Saxon-Weymars, Altenburgs, Coburgs, and
Swartzenburgs Countries. Thence goes he to Eisleben: out of which Town he
draws a present contribution of 8000 loaves of btead, and 40 tun of beer:
the City of Ertfurt (who there had their Ambassadors) is forced to yield to
contributions. Thus goes his Army on-wards by slow marches, like a Drove or
Hoard of Tartars, as if they meant to grase and eat up the Country as they
went.

His chief design is upon the great City of Ertfurt in Duringen, and its
neighbor Hessen, that lie to the South-west of Saxony, now bearing due West
of him. Passing therefore into the County of Mansfelt, he over-spreads the
Countries with his Armies: for June the 9th I find some of them at
Sangerhausen, others then at Alstedt, and some at Arnsteyn; all three Towns
near unto Eysleben, and Mansfelt, some leagues to the west of Hall. June the
13th is the greatest part of his Army, so far advanced into the Country as
within three miles of Weymar: but these be his Horses, which had layne upon
them ever since Whitsuntide. June the 15th 112. Cornets of Horse pass the
River Vnstrut: his Foot at the same time being about Sacbsenburgh and
Heildreygen; and himself then lodged at a Cloister by Oldsleben, within 4
leagues of Ertford.

From hence goes he with part of his Army to Mulhausen, a City upon the River
Vnstrut in the County of Duringen, and nearer to the Land of Hessen;
whereabouts for a while he stays. Now has he two designs in hand: 1 one for
the taking of the great City Ertfurt in Duringen: for which he had these three
reasons. 1. besides the wealth of the Town, it would bring about all the
Gentry of the Country. 2. If once conquered by the sword, then were it the
Emperors for ever: so that Saxony must loose his Title of Protector of it, and
that would breed a quarrel with him, which they desired. 3. That would break
Saxonies and Hessens levies, and save their spoiling of the Spirituality in
those parts, and in Franconia. Round about this City therefore he still lies,
sometimes at Mulhausen, and sometimes at Oldsleben, till toward the end of the
month. His second design was upon Hessen: to whom at this time he sends
those 4 (which some make 5) Articles, of which See Page. ^^
we before told you: concerning which he receiving no contentment, resolves to
fall into the Country.

June 28. I find Tilly come to Mulhausen, from whence he sends his
Vant-curriers before him into Hessen: Colonel Cratz goes to one place; Coloredo
unto Saltzurgen and Creutzberg: others toward Eischweg and Vach: himself
speedily resolving to follow with the whole Army.

But now is the hook put into his nose, Tilly Marches toward the King.
and he is turned back (just) by the way that he came. For now hearing of the
King of Swedens Conquests about the Elbe; of Pappenheyms defeat; and of
Mansfelts poast have from Magdenburgh: he is feign to call off his
Vant-curriers again, and about the 10 of July to turn with all speed toward
the King of Sweden at Werben: forsaking the halfe-destroyed Countries of the
Princes of the house of Saxony. How he there sped we have before * told you.
After which he again betook himself into Garleben, Wolmerstadt, and so at
last into Hall.

And hither now have we brought him back again, the same way he went: for he
beats over this ground as often, as if he were the ordinary Post of the place.
Tilly counter-marches, and returns into Saxony.
Perceiving his forces by the 3 late defeates beginning to weaken, he sends
for the Count of Furstenberg with his Italian and Bavarian Troops: who was now
(as we See Page 33
told you) with 18000 men busied in the Duchy of Wirtemburg: which Country
together with the Circles of Swaben and Franconia, he having constrained to
renounce the conclusions of Leipsich, was at this instant ready to fall upon
the Landtgraue of Hessen also. Now was the General Tilly thoroughly chafed; and
seeing he was not strong enough of himself to beat the King, he resolved to be
made strong enough by Furstenberg to beat some body.

Furstenberg was to come to him by the way of Erdfurt, and to meet him about
Mansfeldt: whereabouts he after joined with him Aug. 16, not that the two
Armies united themselves into one body; for victuals were now so dear that
Tilly would not suffer that, but, for that Furstenburg was now at Tillyes
devotion. Having thus made up a complete Army of some 45000 men, of his own
Wallons, and old Germane Troops, Furstenberg's, Italians, and Bavarians, with
other old Soldiers: they now called themselves The invincible Army; Now was the
General Tillyes intention with those mighty Forces, first of all to have
constrained the Duke of Saxony to have renounced the conclusions of Leipsich,
and to have made him resign over his own Army unto him, with which being made
up above 60000 strong; he was purposed at the City and Bridge of Wittenberg to
have passed the Elbe, and there to have set upon the King of Sweden, or have
fallen into Brandenburg, Mecklenburg, and Pomerland again.

Furstenberg being thus joined, the Duke of Saxony (now about Torgau with his
Army at which Town there is a Bridge over the Elbe) is sent unto by Tilly,
and invited into Mersburg; where a meeting, was given him by the Lords
Mitternicht and Schomburg, Ambassadors from the Emperor: together with Bernard,
chief Secretary unto the General Tilly. The Ambassadors peremptorily in the
Emperors name propound unto the Duke, that his Majesty's great pleasure and
intention was, to annihilate and to break the Conclusions of Leipsich: to
command there should no more Soldiers be levied by the Protestants: but that
all their Troops should be cast and licenced: and his Imperial Mandate in all
things obeyed, upon their perils. There must be no nay, excuse, nor delay in
the Duke: and his final resolution must be had within a few days. The Duke
desires to consult with his Counsel upon it, and so takes his leave of them.
His return not being speedy enough, a Trumpet is sent unto him for his answer
unto these 4 Propositions, whieh we See Page 36. (...) where (by ^he way) there
^a small error ^f time; the Dukes answer ^^ing there ^^d to be in ^e beginning
^f September, ^hereas it was ^out the 24. (...) August.
before told you of: and then upon the Dukes denial before the Emperors
Ambassador (whom he then dismisses from his Court) the General Tilly not
regarding that the Princes of both Leagues and Religions, were even now met at
Franckford upon Main for the compounding of differences concerning that which
bred the quarrel; the Reformation, and the Church Lands: About Aug. 26. Tilly
takes Mersburg.
takes he the Episcopal Town of Mersburg aforesaid, 3 leagues from Leipsich,
belonging unto the said Duke: fairly turning out the Garrison with bag and
baggage; and an oath never to serve against the Emperor, and the Catholic
League again. Betwixt this Town and Hall some 2 or 3 leagues to the North of
it, he now pitches his Army: thence sends he some to pillage the two other
Bishopprickes of the Dukes Naumburg; Mersburg, Naumburg and Zeitz which were 3
appropriate Bishopprickes whose Temporalties the Duke held in his own hands.
By this it appears that Tilly had private commission to take the Church Lands
from Saxony also though it had not been discovered till now.
upon the same River of Sala with Mersburg, and Zeitz upon Elster, the River of
Leipsich, with other of his Towns and Manors. Aug. 28. Schomberg, General of
the Artillery, with the Commissary Walmerode come to the City of Hall; and
within a day or two of that time, Furstenberg comes thither from Eisleben:
advancing forwards to get the passage, (if it might be,) betwixt Wittenberg and
Saxony: but that the Dukes going Page 37.
to Torgau and Dieben, prevented. Aug. 29. Count Tilly sends to the City of
Leipsich to demand provisions for his Army. This denied, unless he brought
their Electors consent; he the next day plunders all the Country for 3. leagues
about, and coming by the way of Ranstadt, he on that side places his Guards
before the very Ports, takes possession of the Suburbs, peremptorily demanding
their speedy and final resolution. Their answer is, that their Duke having
lately sent in six Companies of Foot, and the Lieutenant Colonel Pforten to
command in the Town; seemd rather desirous to defend his own, then to yield
unto any such violent motion. Hereupon, Sept. 3. Tilly with full 40000. men
sets down before the Town; out-come the Deputies to demand his reasons:
Leipsich besieged.
They are threatened with fire and sword if they yield not. The Citizens resolve
to stand to it; and the enemy makes his approaches. Some greater pieces be
mounts on that side toward Pfaffendorff, upon the hill nere the Euteritzch
Sconces: so to cut off all provisions from coming in. On Sunday Sept. 4. the
Town sets fire on their own fair Suburbs, to prevent the enemies lodging in
^^m: killing that day with a piece of Ordnance, one that stood hard besides the
General Tilly. He thus enraged, batters them with pieces of full Canon, and
shootes wildfire and Grenades in amongst them. Next day he sends in
something, more terrible then all the former: most thundering vows and
threats, from himself and Pappenheym, to serve them like Magdenburg, Parlyes.
if they presently yielded not. This quayld their courages, and brought them
unto a parlie. The conditions are; Free exercise of Religion; not to be drawn
from their obedience to the Duke; nor to be overcharged with too great a
Garrison. Yeeldes.
The Governor Pforten with his men of war, have Soldiers conditions, and so
the same monday the Townsmen signing the Articles, the next morning they
forsake the Town. One company with the Defensive Banner of Saxony goes into
the Fort of Pleisenburg, (which Fort the next day also yielded it self) and
the other five, into Eitenbergh. One thing fell out ominously for General
Tilly; that at his entering the Town, he stayed to talk with the Deputies in
the Town Graue-makers house near the Grimischen port. This done, he out of the
said Graue-makers house now mounting up on horseback, returns into his
Leaguer, because he now heard the King of Sweden to have passed the Elve, and
the Duke of Saxony to be joined with him.

In the time of this siege, was the whole neighbor Country ravaged and
plundered: the Soldiers, with licentiousness enough, there exercising their
wonted cruelty and beastliness. Now were Pegaw, Lutzen, Luca, Weisenfels and
other places spoiled. Here were the Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others, like
beasts and dogs yoked and coupled together, to be led into the Woods and
ravished: who for resisting, had their clothes stripped off, their bodies whipped,
their ears cut off, and so sent home again. Hereabouts gat they together
betwixt three and four thousand head of Cattle: and what beast soever could
not, or did not readily follow them, they either houghed, or killed; least (as
they said) it should serve some Heretic.

THE BATTLE OF LEIPSICH.
General Tilly, having now intelligence of the King of Swedens passing of the
Elve, and of Saxonyes joining with him: sends (as it is reported) a Letter by a
Trumpet unto the King, To invite him, as he was a brave Cavalier, to give him
Battle. This low term of Cavalier, Tilly invites the King to pitched field.
the Kings heroical spirit taking disdainfully, stamps upon the Letter;
replying thus unto the Trumpet; What does your General think me worthy of no
better a style then of Cavalier? I am a King: and tell him, I shall well find
him out. Tilly upon receipt of this message, prepares his Army, as if to accept
of a Victory, rather then to fight much for it: so confident they were of
themselves, and so glad of the opportunity. Proclamation is made, that upon the
hearing of certain warning pieces, every man should repair to his Colors and
to his order. Upon the fatal seventh of September therefore being Wednesday,
he with 44000. brave men, in goodly order of battle first takes the field;
which was upon a fair plain or heath (about a mile from Leipsich) called Gods
Aker: said to be the very same place, where the Emperor Charles the 5 heretofore
overthrew the Duke of Saxony. Tilly like a prudent General, being careful for
all advantages, had placed himself upon a little hill thereabouts, (where the
place of execution is,) having a wood also to hide his men, and for their
retreat. The watchword for his Army was The high Dutch relation says, Mary
the mother of God,
Sancta Maria: the token to know one another by, was white strings or ribbands
about their arms, and in their helmets, as if they had been Diademes, and
that that day would have made them all Kings.

The King moves toward the field.
The King of Sweden having prepared his Army by prayers unto God, and
encouragements to his men the day before, upon the same Wednesday morning
before day, he advances from Dieben toward the place of battle. His own
Troops were some 18000: and the Duke of Saxony, together with the Marquis of
Brandenburg some 20000 or 22000. His strength.
Two Regiments of Saxonies, I find not to have been this day in the field: the
Foote-Regiment (namely) of the Count of Solmes, and Hoftkerks Horse-Regiment.
The watchword was Godt mit Vns, God with us: their token, green branches in
their hats or helmets; with which ere night their brows were crowned, as if
with victorious Laurel. The King being come as far as Seehausen and
Podelwitz, A good Omen.
and now in sight of the Enemy; behold an Omen, which a Roman Augur would
have esteemed for a most fortunate abodement. Upon the place of battle which
the Enemy had left for the King, there sat a flock of birds; which being
sprung by the Kings coming, took their flight directly over Tillyes Army;
and fetching there a circle about, (and that also the Romans would have
accounted an happy presage) they turned again toward the Kings Army: as who
should say, we went to fetch you victory. But the King had a better Augury on
his side then a flight of birds, God with us; and that which the Roman
General sometimes preferred before the birds: Romano milite dignus, Ensis
adest augur; his valor, namely, and his sword.

The Armies meet.
Being now ready to come unto the Shocke; the Battles were thus ordered, Tilly
made choice of the ancient order, to fight in great square bodies, himself
leading now the right wing, Their order.
the Duke of Holsteyn the left, and the Count of Furstenburg the Battle. The
King dividing his men into many smaller bodies; takes the right wing to
himself, committing the left unto the Duke of Saxony and his men: the wings
of either battle, took up two English miles in length. The wind was now at
the West; which Tilly had gotten of Saxony: and was so desirous afterward to
compass from the King, that in wheeling about, he came within the command of
the Kings Ordnance, who also to save the wind turned a little to the right
hand. The fight was about 12 a clock, The fight begins with great Ordnance.
first begun with their Canon, for that purpose placed before every division.
Their roar made the very earth to tremble, and men to groan their last; for
two hours together: about which time, the General Tilly drawing out of the
wood, passes by the Kings wing, (which had also gotten one end of the same
wood) and set amain upon the Duke of Saxony. Two charges the Saxons endured
well enough: but the Enemy having direction to lay hardest upon the Dukes
own Guards (amongst whom himself fought;) they not able longer to endure it,
begin to give ground a little. The rest of the Saxons now perceiving their
Duke, The Duke of Saxony flees.
and bravest men thus to retire, think all lost; and all in confusion away
they fly, leaving 3 Canons to the mercy of the Enemy; and pillaging their
own wagons by the way: that so they might at least seem to be Conquerors; in
carrying home spoils of the wars, though not of their Enemies. Yet all fled
not; for the Lord Arnheym (Field-Marshall to the Duke, and an old Soldier)
together with Colonel Bindauff, Some write him Taub.
Dove, and Vitzthimb, with their 4 Regiments, bravely yet stood unto it.
Steinau, a Colonel of Horse, was with 4 Cornets taken prisoner by the Enemy;
who at length perceiving the Kings party to prevail, brake through the
Enemy, and assisted his own side. The Imperialists now seeing the Saxons
flying, cry Victoria, Victoria, follow, follow, follow: but the old Lad their
General quickly countermaunded that; saying, Let them go, we shall overtake
them time enough: but let us beat the Swede too, and then all Germany is our
own. In this medlie, Furstenberg with his old Regiment of Italian Horse,
having charged quite through the Saxons, The Count of Furstenberg defeated.
was now coming upon the Swedens back: which they perceiving, with such
resolution second his charge, and follow their own, that they chase him almost
an English mile from the place, so utterly cutting off and dispersing the whole
Regiment, that they could not recover it all that battle: Slain.
and here perchance himself was slain.

In this time, the Duke of Holsteyn with his left wing having charged the King;
The Duke of Hossteyn defeated.

and slain.


was with such resolution and valor answered, that after 5 or 6 charges bewixt
them, the Duke was mortally wounded, and taken prisoner; his whole Army
defeated, and 3 pieces of Ordnance taken.

By this time the King having notice of the Duke of Saxonies leaving the field,
and that Tilly was ready to charge his battle: presently draws out 2000
commanded Musketeers of the brave Scottish Nation led by Colonel Havord,
they having some 2000 horse upon their flancks; to staue off the enemy a
while. The Scots of the Lord Reayes Regiments, as it is said, first break
Tillyes rancks.
The Scots ordering themselves in several small battagliaes, about 6 or 700 in
a body, presently now double their ranks, making their files then but 3 deep
(the discipline of the King of Sweden being, never to march above 6 deep) this
done, the foremost rank falling on their knees; the second stooping forward;
and the third rank standing right up; and all giving fire together, they
powered so much lead at one instant in amongst the enemies horse, that their
ranckes were much broken with it. This advantage the Swedish Horse (lined with
Musketeers) apprehending; resolutely falling amongst them upon their Croopes,
utterly now disperse them. The foot perceiving their horse (upon whose
braverie they so much depended) to be thus put to rowte, stand sore amazed at
that which they so little expected. And now the King with his Foot falling in
upon their Van, and with his Horse upon their flancks; Tilly utterly defeated
and taken prisoner
after 4 hours hard fight, utterly defeated them. In this hot service was the
General Tilly himself much distressed, and some say prisoner a while (though
unknown) unto the Kings Army: certain it is, that he was twice or thrice
wounded with pistoll-shot, Wounded.
which the Saxon writers say, was done by their men: most affirm, that he was
fetched off by the valor of Brother to him that Pap^enheym had before taken
prisoner about Magdenburgh.
Rodolp Maximilian Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, that day serving on the Emperors
side, who fought like a lion: with whom and two other horsemen, Tilly came, and
conjoined himself unto the valiant Baron of Cronenberg. This bold Baron and
his Regiment serving in the right wing, had 4 times in those 4 hours, Tilly
rescued.
charged the Kings Forces: and he at last, when no more could be done, bravely
carried away his General, in the midst of his own (now flying) Troops.

Thus, notwithstanding that the left wings of both Armies had been rowted and
defeated, yet the right wings under their old and experienced Cheiftaines,
stood stiffely and bravely to it, from 2 in the afternoon, till 6 at night: by
which time, the Imperialists were quite defeated, and beaten out of the field,
The Chase.
being miserably slain and trodden down in the chase. Had the King had but 3
hours more of day light, scarcely had 1000 Enemies come off alive: but the
darkness which was safest for them to fly, being not so for him to pursue; the
joyful retreat is sounded, and the chase given over for that night. There
were full 15000 of the Enemies slain upon the place of battle, or in the
chase; the same night and the days following, as one of our High Dutch
Relations assures us: 14 pieces of half The Dutch word is, Kartunen whence
ours.

The booty and losses.


Curtoes or Demi-canons: and 16 lesser pieces of 8 or 10 pound ball, taken.
Some of them having the Arms of the Emperor, Duke of Bavaria, and
Wallensteyn: others those of the Pals-graue, the Elector of Brandenburg, Duke
of Brunswick, etc.

The Enemies whole Leaguer near unto Leipsich, was taken full standing; and in
it 3000 Wagons, and all their baggage, Tents, and Pavilions: together with a
great number of Cattle, oxen, sheep, Asses, poultry, bread and wine; much
costly stuff, with some gold and silver. Before the Leaguer, was there a great
square sconce, which the Defendants had forsaken.

And this was as complete a victory as possibly could be gotten. Not stolen
by night, which Alexander scorned: but atcheived by fine force in the broad
daylight, betwixt 12 and 6 in the afternoon. No advantage of place to assist
the King; it was upon a fair level, and Campagnia. No casual advantage, but
was against him; the wind, the wood and higher ground; all possessed by the
Enemy. No advantage in numbers, or reputation of men: Tillyes were the more;
the older Soldiers, and their Army was called Invincible. Nay, one
disadvantage had the King, as great as possibly could be; a maine fleshing to
the Enemy, a weakening of half his own Army, and a discouragement to the rest;
by the early defeat of the Duke of Saxony. So that all the advantages lay on
the Enemies side, and the disadvantages upon the Kings. His Majesty lost not
above 1200 men in the whole fight, Chief men slain on the Kings side.
and the Duke of Saxony not full 2000. Of chief Co^maunders on the Kings
side, these slain. Baron Teuffell, Collenbach, Corwille, Hall, Adergast, all
Colonells: with diverse Captains and Lieutenants. On the Duke of Saxonies side
these. Coll He is called B^ud^orp, page 36.
Bindtauff, Starchedell, Sergeant Major Holbeirsdorff, and Lemminger, both
Lieutenants, Colonells: Hans George of Humrott, General Adjutant: On the Dukes.
Gerstorff, Musculus, Count Mansfield, Lubers, Lemminger, Carlowitz,
Willenstein, Rockonitz, Henneger, Lord Otto of Villaz, all Captains of Foot
or Horse, with Sergeant Major Drandorff: whereof some died the same day, and
some the next.

Of Tillyes side slain.
Of Tillyes side slain these following. Duke Adolp of Holsteyn; the General
the Count of Furstenberg; Schomberg, General of the Ordnance: Erfft, Sergeant
Major General: Baumgarten, Coloredo, Gallas, Wallensteyn, Lebel, and Zabilli,
all Colonels; Caratelle, Lieutenant Colonel: together with the Lieutenant
Colonels of the Regiments of Saricour, Hartzfeldt, and of the Duke of Saxon
Lawenberg: with diverse others whose dead and naked bodies were not known:
besides Captains and Lieutenants both of horse and foot, and many brave
Cavaliers more; which died either upon the place, or in the Towns of Delitz,
Eylenberg, and Leipsich, whither they had fled. Prisoners.
Taken prisoners, the General Adjutant Zinzendorff, the Imperial Commissaries
General, Walmerode, and Graff: with Coronino, Blankhard, Barcelli, Kratz,
Hazelung, Larme, Klinzi, and Wincleman, all Colonels: together with Bernhard,
that was Tillyes Treasurer and Secretary; diverse Captains and some Jesuits:
who, no doubt, came thither to bless the Army. Diverse Protestants were also
taken, who betook themselves unto his Majesty's service. Tillyes manly heart
(it is said) could not refrain his tears, when he perceived his brave old
Soldiers thus going to wrack. The whole fault he laid upon his own Horsemen,
who after a few hard charges, cowardly ran away, and never made head again.

Tilly and Pap^e^heym flee.
Tilly himself thus wounded as he was, made shift to fly into Hall that
night, 7 Dutch miles from the place of battle: from whence in a hackney Coach,
both he and Pappenheym, fled the next day toward Halberstadt. Some 200
Musketeers followed their General, and about 2000 Horse rallying themselves
together, in all haste went also after him. Reported it was that Tilly should
have his wounds dressed by the Town-Barbar of Hall, who (it seems) affirmed to
the King, that Tillyes body was hard-shot, or shot-free: and that the bullets
had not peirced the flesh, but made bruises rather in his arm, neck, and
shoulder: and that to his horrible torment, he was feign to endure to have the
bruised flesh cut out to the very hard bone. Whether this were so or no, we
leave upon the Barbars credit: and because we have not heard it seconded out of
Germany, we are loath to charge so brave a Warrior, with so base an
imputation, as to owe his life unto a Most surely, such a practice there is; of
which no soldier in Germany makes doubt: The Charm which they wear makes
their bodies Gefrorn, that is, frozen, and hard: If they show it by day time,
it looses its force. No bullet nor iron weapon can pierce them. 100. shots at
least, have bin made upon one fellow, that braved the English at Stoade: his
clothes were shot to pieces, and the wastband of his breeches: which he taking
up, went his way. This has been an old practice of Mithraes soldiers, 2000.
years ago: who made themselves invulnerable both against weapons, frost and
fire.
Charm; which is practiced by none, but the reprobate raskalitie of the Army.
No man (since the King of Portugal) has been so often killed and revin'd by
report, as Tilly has been: yea that side would have him to be yet alive. He
was said to speak of nothing but peace, and of making a good Peace, which is
indeed far more happy then victory.

The Chase and slaughter being done, (which continued all the next day) the day
after Sept. 9. went the King on to Mersburg, whence he ferretted out the
Imperialists that had fled thither from the battle; 3000 whereof he
entertained into his own service: by which, and others of Tillyes, taken on
before and after, he was made 7000 stronger then he was in the day of battle.
Sept. 10. he besieged Hall, which the next day was yielded unto him. The Castle
of Morisberg he took in Sept. 12. where he made Sergeant Major Groschen, and
Captain Wincleman prisoners: whom he delivered to the Duke of Saxony;
redeeming Colonel Vrseler, with some others, that had been taken prisoners at
Magdenburg: taking the Protestants which lay in Garrison in it, into his own
service. From Hall his Majesty commanded diverse Regiments of Horse and Foot
to go toward Halberstadt, Mansfeldt, Regenstein, Stolberg, Hohenstein,
Magdenburg, and Brunswicke, to scour those Coasts of the Imperi^lists: who
hearing of the Swedens coming, packt with all speed away toward the River
Weser; after their General Tilly. And hereabouts (the Priests and Monks
lately put in by the Emperors commission, now flying away) were the late-exiled
Ministers, by the King restored unto their Churches. Whilst the King was busy
hereabouts; the Elector of Saxony employes himself about the reducing of his
own Town of Leipsich, and the Fort Pleisenbergh unto his obedience. This
Fort, had John Vopelius (a Saxon) the Captain of it, cowardly delivered up
unto Tilly, before ever any force was offered to it; and that upon the day of
battle, so soon as he heard the fight begin. Leipsich being besieged by the
Duke, Leipsich taken again.
upon Sept. 12. in the evening come there 350 Imperialists out of the Fort
aforesaid into the City: Sept. 13. before noone, Colonel Wangler left
Governor in the Town by Tilly, parlies, and yields: whereupon 3000 soldiers
(almost) are suffered to depart. The conditions were to have 18 wagons of bag
and baggage; 10 red Ensigns furled, (not displayed or flying) swords by their
sides only, and without sound of drum. Some of these forthwith betook
themselves unto the Dukes service: and whereas after the fight some had gotten
themselves into the Town, more then were by agreement to come in when the Town
was first yielded unto Tilly; these the Duke lays hold of, and retains as
prisoners. Among these, was Coronino, and Count Walmerod the Commissary, and
Zintzendorff, (all before mentioned) with some Jesuits. The rest were to be
conducted into Bohemia: where the Boores were ready, with club-law to
entertain them.

Altringer and F^gger retire.
Whilst this is done, the other 2 Imperial Generals Altringer and Fugger, who
were with 6000 men come as far as Erdfurt to have joined with Tilly; hearing
of his defeat, run about the Duringer forest like mice whose holes were
stopped: retiring now with all speed: and seeking by some otherway to conjoyne
themselves with him. And now no enemy being near; the King of Sweden sends
for the Duke of Saxony, and other the great Commanders of his Army, to come
to Hall unto him. The King calls a Council of war.
A Council of war is there held, which way to keep the enemy from
gathering head again; and how to pursue the ^^^torie: the second part of a
Conqueror being, to know as well how to use his victory, as how to win it.
And at this consultation we leave them, much about Michaelmas.

FINIS.

