MONODIA.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted by Peter short.

MONODIA.
An Elegy, in commemoration of the Virtuous life, and Godly Death of the
right Worshipful and most religious Lady, Dame Hellen Branch Widdowe, ( late
Wife to the right worshipful Sir John Branch knight, sometimes L. Mayor of
this Honorable City, and daughter of M. W. Nicholson sometimes of London
Draper) who deceased the 10. of April last, and lies interred in Saint Mary
Abchurch in London, the 29. of the same, 1594.
Since unto me unworthy, you commit
This worthy task (for better muses fit)
To sing (nay rather sadly to deplore)
This common loss, that nothing can restore:
You sacred brood, borne of celestial race,
You virgin Ladies which power down the grace
Of Arts and learning on your servants decre,
Vouch safe assistance to my moornings here.
Teach me sad accents and a weeping measure
To strain forth pity, not to stir-vp pleasure.
And you my private cares, (although the cause
Of your dispaires do never, never pawse)
Pawse you a little, and give leave awhile,
Mid public griefs my private to beguile;
Give leave I pray you; for a private case
Unto a public ever must give place.
Alas how fitly is this life of ours
Compard to field-grasse and to fading flowers,
Fresh, green and gallant, in the morning sun;
Witherd and dead before the day be done.
Did ever yet the worlds bright eye behold,
(Since first The Eternal, earthly slime en-sowld)
A frame of flesh so glorious here beneath,
But has bin ruynde by the rage of Death?
Of Death dread victor of al earthly things,
Who in a moment equals clownes with kings.
For majesty can nothing him dismay,
No strength nor courage can his coming stay,
No wealth can wage him, nor no wit prevent him,
No lovely beauty can at al relent him,
Nay (which is more) no virtue can avail
Ay me, that death on virtue should prevail.
But it is decreed, death is the meed for sin,
This by ambition did our grand sire win;
And we the heirs both of his work and wages
Must all die once, throughout all after ages.
And here for instance see this sable hearse
Shrowding the subject of my moornefull verse,
The breathless body of a worthy Dame,
The Lady Branch, a Nicholson by name:
A godly, virtuous and religious Matron
For maids, and wives, and widows al a pattern.
Worship and wealth adornd her parentage,
Favor and beauty grast her personage,
But virtuous manners, by good education,
Brought to her youth the greatest commendation,
Wherein so well she spent her virgin-daies
That Enuies self saw nothing to dispraise.
Now when her age had made her apt to mary,
With friends advise that of her choice were chary,
She was espousd to one of special sort,
Welthy in purse, and worship full in port,
Master John Minors, praisde for zeal and piety,
One of the Drapers worshipful society:
To him she bare four children, one a boy,
The rest al daughters, al, their parents joy.
But all these joys (alas) but little lasted,
Al these fair blossoms were untimely blasted.
All dyed young; for what draws lively breath
But young or old must yield at last to death?
But they, long moorning for their mutual loss,
Frame mutual comforts to each others cross,
Till time, that all things wears had worn away
Their sorrows edge, uneasy to allay.
Then happily many fair days they spent,
To others comfort and their own content,
In all the practice of a christian life,
And mutual duties meet for man and wife,
He happy in his chance, she in her choice,
Both jointly blessed in them selves reioce.
But ah these earth-ioies do not ever last.
After long cleerenes clouds will over cast:
After long calmes still follows stormy weather.
When they had lived full forty years together,
He died alas; for what draws lively breath,
But young or old, must yield at last to death?
Then desolate and comfortless alone,
Like to the Turtle when her mate is gone,
With sigh-swolne heart and sorrow-clowded eyes:
She wayles her lost love in a woeful wise
Till time that althinges wears, had worn away
Her sorrowe's edge, vn-easie to allay.
Then after modest and meet intermision,
Becoming well her years, and her codition,
In second wedlock she was linckt again
Unto another wealthy Citizen,
To Master Branch who after wards became
Lord Mayor of London, worthy well the same,
In which high office he him so acquighted,
That for his service he was after knighted.
He was her husband twenty years, or more,
And much increast her style, her state, and store.
But boughs and Branches, shrubs, and Cedars tall
Wither and die and into ashes fall,
So fell this Branch, for what draws lively breath
But old or young must yield at last to death?
Then all forlorn, thus having lost her knight,
This doleful Lady left al worlds delight,
Al shows of pleasure, and al pomp for saking,
Her self to sadness and to solenesse taking,
with inward sighs and outward tears lamenting
His death, whose life was al her lives contenting.
Even like unto the sad and woeful Winter,
Who (soon as ever the bright season-stinter
Has left her widow of his wonted rays,
Whilst to another world he takes his ways)
Casting aside her rich enameld crowns,
Flower-powdred ma^tles, and embrodered gowns
Of gras-green silk-shag, and the gawdie pride
Of all her Jewels and her iems beside,
Her mirth-lesse self in moornfull manner shrouds
Down to the ground in robe of sable clouds,
And from her swoln-hart sighs a thousand stowres
And from her drowned eyes weeps a thousand showers.
But now become her self, her selfs co^mander,
To shield her life safe from al shot of slander,
(As 'twere) sequestered from much conversation,
She past her time in holy meditation,
In thanks and prayer unto Christ our Lord,
And often hearing of his sacred word;
Jn godly alms, and liberal pensions rife,
And all the duties of a christian life,
Laying up treasure with the joyful just,
Safe from the force of the eues, and fret of rust.
So that her threefold godly life alludeth
To virgin Ruth, wife Sara, widow Judith,
This life she led; but this life will away,
We are but pilgrims, here we may not stay.
No more might she: for when thrice thirty year
(A goodly age) she had expired here
She also died; for what draws lively breath,
But young or old must yield at last to death?
Such life, such death: well ends the well begun,
And by the even the fair days praise is wun.
Well she began and wundrous well she ended,
Fair rose this sun, and fairly it descended,
To rise again to glory at the last,
At that great angels al-awaking blast
And therefore (deer friends) do not wail nor weep,
For her that is so happy fallen asleep,
But wail our loss, our common cause of grief,
The riches load-star, and the poores relief,
For to the rich in life she gave example,
And to the poor in life and death was ample.
Weep rich, weep poor, let high and low lament
But most you poor, let your salt tears be spent,
For you alas have lost your liberal Lady,
Your nurse, your mother, but alas why wade I
With my poor style in so profound a stream?
You springs of arts, eyes of this noble Realm,
Cambridge and Oxford, lend your learned tears,
To wail your own loss, and to witness theirs:
Tell you, that have the voice of eloquence,
This bounteous Ladies large benificence,
First to your selves, for love unto your lore,
Then seueralie to every kind of poor,
Within this City. To the Drapers Hall,
To every Prison, every Hospital,
To Lunatikes, and poor Maids marriages,
And many other worthy leagacies,
And when you have drawn all your tear-springs dry;
For her decease, here let your comfort lie,
That of this Phaenix ashes there reuiues
Another, where her virtue still suruiues.
Ios. Siluester.

FINIS.

