A Defense of the Appendix. OR A REPLY TO CERTAIN AVTHORITIES alleged in
Answer to a Catalogue of Catholic Professors, called, An Appendix to the
Antidote.

WHEREIN Also the Book fondly entitled, The Fisher catched in his own Net,
is censured. And the sleights of D. Featly, and D. White in shifting off the
Catalogue of their own Professors, which they undertook to show, are plainly
discovered.

By L. D.

To the Rt. Worshipful Sir Humphry Lynde.

Eccles 7. v. 30. Solummodo hoc inueni, quod fecerit Deus hominem rectum; Et
ipse se infinitis miscuerit quaestionibus.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XXIIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Humphry Lynde.
SIR It may be you will take it unkindly to see unawares your self and your
papers thus in print. But I was moved to do it by due consideration of that
which follows. I received them not as secret, neither do I think you gave
them to be concealed. You wrote against a printed Catalogue of Catholic
Professors, whereof a dear friend of mine is the Author, given you upon a
former Conference which your self procured between some other of my Friends
and your Doctors, concerning a Protestant Catalogue; which Conference though
privately intended, was afterward victoriously printed. Wherefore writing them
as you did, against such a Book, and upon such an occasion, you might easily
think they would be answered; and it is not strange they should come to be
printed. As the great opinion which others had of your deep learning, and your
own profession of your great skill and reading in the Fathers, made me
diligently to peruse those authorityes alleged by you: so having well
examined them, I thought my self diverse ways obliged to give a large and full
Reply unto them. And being as you are most extremely, and most vehemently
distant in opinion from me; no marvel, if to be better understood, I speak so
loud that all the Land may hear me. And for the same cause you must pardon me,
if I rather choose to expose both you and my self to the judgment of others,
then having taken some little pains in this matter to make you the only judge
of my labors. The old Master Buggs being carried away with Ecce in
Penetralibus, thinks to have found the Messiah in your study, and was wholly
transported with those chosen places, and selected authorities contained in
your papers; which tending to no less then the loss of his soul, merited
great compassion: the like may happen to others which deserves prevention.
Your own Doctors have already adorned the Pageant of their victory with the
publication of your Names: Unto you is given the driving on of the Chariot: and
the old Master Buggs is led in Triumph. Some perchance have been taken in the
net of the Title, and may be freed again by the net of Christ; which therefore
should not hang in the Rivers of private papers, when the other flies in the
air, but should be cast into the Sea of the wide World, to gather and draw
together all kind of fishes. In this net the Fishers themselves are happily
taken, and all they that are not taken, are lost for ever. The other of the
Heretics is but a net to catch flies, which though cu^ningly wrought, must in
time be swept away together with the Spiders. They have printed against us,
and renewed an old Decree against our printing: if no Reply should be made,
some of them would think, that now they might lie by Proclamation. What
greater sign of falsehood, the^ having told your own tale to seek to stop the
mouths of your Adversaries with old Statutes? But the State never intended to
make a Law against God, his Word will not be tied. All Princes should serve it,
and all printing Presses must be subject unto it. Therefore no marvel, if the
taking of one Press do set two more on work, and that your Doctors by seeking
to suppress the Truth, do press it forward. You know then what moved me to
diuulge your papers giving the Fathers their due. I have told you your own,
but sparingly; and if you knew my heart, you would see, and confess that I had
done it friendly, Believe, and you shall understand, Believe the Fathers and
you shall understand the Fathers, He that hears not the visible universal
Church, is no better then a Heathen, and belieueth neither Church nor Fathers:
but the unlearned not knowing the doctrine of the Church and the unstable
forsaking that which they have known, as they peruerte the Scriptures, so also
they preuert the Fathers to their own damnation: from the which I beseech God
deliver you, praying you likewise to think no otherwise of me, then as of

Your vnfaygned Friend, and servant in Christ. L. D.

THE AVTHORITIES ALLEGED BY Sir Humphry Lynde, against the Appendix.
Of Miracles.
EPIPHANIVS conuinceth not Ebion of false belief, because neither he nor any
of his faction had the gift of working Miracles, but because Ebion lykened
himself to Christ for his Circumcision, and for his Birth: and he answers him,
he could not be like to God, for that he was but a mortal Man, and was not
able to raise Lazarus out of the grave, nor heal the sick etc. If he would be
lykened to Christ, he bid him to do those things; the which things, if he had
required at Epiphanius hands, I think noe man but would have doubted of the
performance of them. --

-- Read the place at large, and you shall find it has no such meaning, as is
here alleged.

Miracles were necessary before the world believed, to induce it to believe,
and he that seeks to be confirmed by wonders now, is to be wondered at most of
all himself, in refusing to believe what all the world belieueth besides
himself. De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. in principio.

Showed to be falsified.

Now we for our parts, say not, that we must be believed, that we are in the
Church of Christ, because Optatus or Ambrose has commended this wherein we
are, or else because that in all places of the world where our Communion is
freque^ted, there are so many Miracles wrought of healing diseases etc. For all
these things that are done in the Catholic Church, are approved in as much as
they are done in the Catholic: And not that it is therefore Catholic, because
such things are done there. August. de vnitat. Eccles. cap. 16.

Tertullian. They will say (says he) to excuse themselves for having followed
Heresy: that their Doctors have confirmed the Faith of their Doctrine: that
they have raised up the dead, restored the sick, foretold things to come, so
as they were worthily taken for Apostles. As if (says he) this were not
written, that many should come working great Miracles, to fortify the
deceitfullnes of their corrupt preaching. De Praescrip. cap. 44.

S. Hierome. The Galathians had the gift of Healing, and of Prophesy, and yet
they were ensnared by the false Prophets; and it is to be observed, that powers
and signs are seen to be wrought in those that hold not the Truth of the
Gospel, which may be said against the Heretics, that think their Faith is
sufficiently proved if they have wrought any Miracle, who in the day of
Judgment, shall deserve to hear this saying: I know you not, depart from me.
In Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3.

S. Augustine. Let no man sell you fables. Pontius has wrought a Miracle.
Donatus has prayed, and God has answered him from Heaven. First, either they
are deceived, or so deceive. In Joan. tract. 13. Et cont. Faustum Manichaum.
lib. 13. cap. 5. Et de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19.

Answered, Sect. 5.

Of Justification by Faith only.
THis is the work of God, that he which belieueth in Christ, should be saved
without works; freely (by Grace only) receiving the pardon of his sins. Amb.
cap. 1. in Corinth.

What is the Law of Faith? Even to be saved by Grace. Here the Apostle shows
the goodness of God, who not only saves us, but also justifies and glorifieth
us, using no works heerunto, but requyring ( Faith only.) Chrysostom. Hom. 7. Romans
3.

Basil. This is true and perfect rejoicing in God, when a man is not lifted up
with his own righteousness, but knows himself to be void of true
righteousness, and to be justified by ( Faith only) in Christ. Homil. de humil.

Theodoret. We have not believed of our own accord, but being called we came;
and being come, he exacteth not purity and innocence of life at our hands, but
by ( Faith only) he forgave our sins. Coment. 2. Ephesians.

Bernard. Whosoever is touched with his sins, and hungreth after
rightneousnes: Let him believe in God, that justifies sinners, and being
justified by ( Faith only) he shall have peace with God. Cant. Sermon. 22.

Answered, Sect. 6.

Of Free Will.
BEllarmine. Man before all Grace, has Free Will, not to things moral and
natural, but even to the works of piety, and things supernatural. De Great.
and lib. Arbit. l. 6. cap. vltim.

Basil. There is nothing left in thee O man, to be proud off, who must mortify
all that is thy own, and seek for life to come in Christ, the first fruits
whereof we have already attained in Christ; owing all, even that we live, to the
Grace and gift of God. For it is God that gives both the Will, and the Deed,
according to his good pleasure. Basil. conc. de humil.

Bernard. To will, is in us by Free Will, but not to perform nor will. I say,
not to will either good or evil, but only to will; for, To will good, is a
gift of Grace, to will evil, is a defect. Free Will makes us well-willing,
from Free Will we have power to will, but to will well comes of grace. De
Great. and lib. Arb.

Augustine. It is certain that we are willing when we are so, but it is he
that makes us so, of whom it is said, It is God that works the will in us:
It is certain that we work when we do so, but it is he that gives us this
working power, by adding unto our will, most effectual strength, as if he
said, I will make you work. De bono persevere. cap. 13.

False cited, and showed to be falsified.

Idem. Except God first make us to be willing, and then work with us being
willing, we shall never bring to pass any good work. De Great. and lib. Arbit
cap. 16.

Idem. We must confess, that we have Free Will, both to good and evil, but in
doing evil, every man, just and unjust is free, but in doing good, none can be
free, in Will and Act, unless he be freed by him that said; If the Son free
you, you are truly freed. De Corrept. and Gra. cap. 1.

Augustine. We will, but it is God that works in us to will; we work, but it
is God that works in us to work, according to his good pleasure. This is
behooffull for us both to believe and speak. This is a true Doctrine, that our
Confession may be humble and lowly, and that God may have the whole: we live
more in safty, if we give all unto God, rather then if we commit our selves,
partly to our selves, and partly to him. August. de bono persevere. lib. 3. cap.
6.

False cited.

Augustine. Far be it from the Children of promise, that they should say:
Behold, without thee we can prepare our own hearts; let none so think but
those that are proud defenders of their own Freewill, and forsakers of the
Catholic Faith: for as no man can begin any good without God, so no man can
perfect good without God. Contr. duas Epistol. Pelag. lib. 2.

Augustine. Why do we presume too much of the power of Nature? It is wounded,
maimed, vexed, and lost: let us confess it freely, and not defend it falsely;
therefore let us seek Gods Grace, not to form, but to reform it thereby. De
Nature. and Great. cap. 35.

False cited.

Non volentis, neque currentis, sed miscrentis est Dei, vt totum Deo detur, qui
hominis voluntatem bonam and praeparat adiuuandam, and adiuuat praeparatam.
August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 32.

Answered, Sect. 7.

Of the Sacrament.
CYprian. The Bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, not in Shape, but in
Substance or Nature, changed by the Omnipotency, of the Word, is made Flesh.

1. The words of Cyprian are, Panis non effigy, sed natura mutatus etc. which
you have translated in Substance or Nature: where there is no word of Substance
in Cyprian.

2. The Chapter of Coena Domini, where this place is urged, is none of
Cyprians. Extat inter opera Cypriani Sermo de Coena Domini, qui Cypriani
Episcopi Carthaginensis esse non videtur (inquit Bellarminus) lib. 2. Euchar.
cap. 9. Author Sermonis de Coena Domini, non est Cyprianus, sed aliquis
posterior. Bellarm. lib. de Euchar. 4. cap. 26. Author Sermonis de Coena
Domini, est ignotus, inquit Garetius. De veritate Corporis Christi. fol. 181.

Cyprian. The Lord in his last Supper wherein he did participate with his
Apostles, gave Bread and Wine with his own hands: but he gave his Body to be
crucified on the Cross, to the hands of his souldiars etc. Vt diuersa nomina
vel species ad vnam reducerentur essentiam, and significantia and significata
ijsdem vocabulis censerentur. De Unction Chrismatis.

Showed to be falsified.

Whereunto you add, page 47. in the Margent. Tertullian; Hoc est corpus meum,
hoc est figura corporis mei. cont. Marci. lib. 4. Aug. Christus figuram
Corporis sui Discipulis commendauit. In Psalm. 3. Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 4.
cap. 5. Hier. ad verb. Iouin. lib. 2. Aug. in Leuit. quaest. 57. Gelasius cont.
Eutichem. Aug. de Doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. It is a figure commanding
us to lay up in our Remembrance, that his Flesh was crucified and wounded for
us.

Answered Sect. 8. and sequent.

A DEFENSE OF THE APPENDIX. TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Humphry Lynde.
Section I. The Fisher freed, and the Catcher caught. In reference to the first
point of the Appendix, showing the continual Visibility of the Catholic
Church.
YOur own Doctors in your own house professed, as you know, The true Church
must be able to name Professors in all Ages; and made it the very ground of
their Argument, in that Dispute. Wherefore in all reason, before you went about
to answer the Book, which you received of the Catalogue of our Professors,
you should have given another, or referred us to some book of an other of
yours. And that so much the more, because hitherto such a Catalogue on your
side has been held impossible to be found, made, or produced. And having been
evermore demanded and required for a hundred years together, could never as
yet be seen nor obtained.

Certainly, those your Champions which were chosen by your self, and with
great expectation undertook to do it, when they came to the Trial, performed
nothing; and all that they did, was but cunningly to avoid the Question, given
in these express terms.

Whether the Protestant Church was in all Ages visible, especially in the Ages
before Luther; and whether the Names of such visible Protestants in all Ages
can be showed, and proved out of good Authors?

Wherein every man may see, there was nothing else demanded, but a plain
Catalogue or Table, of the Names of your Professors in all Ages proved by good
Authors. According whereunto, they received also another paper before the
meeting, which there was publicly read, that each party should produce their
Catalogues out of good Authors, and then interchangably by terms defend them.
But this Table or Catalogue of the names of our Professors seemed a Lion in the
way of your Doctors, which therefore they durst not come near nor behold, but
sought by diverse strains to eschew it, and to turn the eyes and ears of the
audience from their expectation of it.

As first they sought to make two Questions of the Question propounded; and
flying the latter part, instead of showing the visibility of their Church, they
would have proved it a Priori (as they termed it) without showing their
visible Pastors, which was the point demanded.

Secondly, they deride their Adversaries, for demanding the Names of their
Professors, as if they had impertinently called for a Buttry Book, of the
Names of those, that ever were admitted into the Church of Christ; irregiously
comparing the Histories of the Church wherein the Names of her Bishops,
Martyrs, and other holy Men, were carefully recorded, to Buttry Books of
Names. And for the same cause calling their Adversaries Nominalls, they boasted
themselves to be Realls; as if their Adversaries had demanded, no Men, but
only Names of Men: or as if the Professors of the true Faith, like Knights
Errants, or those of the round Table, had been no real Men at all, but only
names; which is as much to say, as that the Hystories of the Church were mere
fables.

Thirdly, they sought to flinch by propounding sundry times, diverse other
Questions to be disputed. Which was, as it were, to put up many Hares before
the Hou^ds, thereby to conceal the Kennell of that Fox which was then hunted.

Fourthly, they endeavored to divert the Question, from proving themselves the
true Church, by naming the visible Professors thereof in all Ages, which was the
thing demanded; to prove the same by assuming they held the truth, that is to
say, in every particular Controversy; as for Example, in denying of
Transubstantiation, Merits of Works and the like. Which was as plain a
Transition, as if in case the Question had been about Transubstantiation, their
Adversaries should have gone about to prove it, by proving themselves to be the
true Church that held it. For both these kind of proofs by a remote Medium do
evidently transfer the Question; the one from a general to a particular
point, which was your Doctors fault: the other from a particular to a general,
as in the other Example.

Fifthly, being called upon by the Hearers, and especially by the Protestants
themselves, which were ten to one, and confided much in their own cause, to
give the Names of their Professors in all Ages; they named only Christ and his
Apostles, with others, one or two more of the first Age alone. Which according
to the question undertaken, they should have proved to be Protetesta^ts, by
naming Protestants that succeeded them in all Ages following; but seeking
evermore to avoid that Rock, they would have stayed there, and before they
went any further, urged to prove the Professors of the first Age to be
Protestants, not by naming their Successors, but by examining their Doctrine;
Which again had been to diuerte from the matter, and to run from the
general point then in Question, to all particular Controversies.

Sixthly; Therefore when none of these devises could satisfy the expectation of
the Hearers, fearing as it seemed, least, according to the words of the
Question and plain intention of that meeting, they should have been urged
again by the Hearers, to set down a full Catalogue of all Ages, as once
before they were importuned to do, they suddenly brake off, and so departed.

Seauenthly; My L. of Warwick imagining percha^ce that this proceeded not so
much from lack of ability, as from want of due preparation, on their behalf
promised a Catalogue within 2. or 3. days, which though sought again by
letter, never yet appeared.

Eighthly; The Answerers themselves repaired the next day to your own house,
again offering to deliver their Catalogue with one hand, so they might receive
yours with the other. Which another standing by, whom they also took to be a
Protestant Minister, affirmed to be very reasonable and indifferent. But you
answered, You knew their mind for that point, and that they would never do
it, before the Names of the first Age were tried, and so of the rest in order.

Ninthly; a printed Catalogue was sent to your self in particular, hoping it
might serve as an engine to importune, and as it were to extort another from
you, or from your Doctors. But all in vain, which makes many much to fear,
that this Catalogue of your Professors, will never be produced, and
consequently that your Church, cannot possible be the true Church of Christ.

And now no marvel if some of the Hearers, when they saw the Book of The
Fisher catched in his own Net, written as it were in triumph of your victory in
that Dispute, compared it to those other Puritan Books, which have been lately
printed of the great victories of the Protestants in their Wars against the
Catholics beyond the Seas: whereas in truth, not the Catholics, but the
Protestants themselves, have been always notoriously vanquished and
overthrown. And presuming it came forth from his own fingers that has the
principal part therein, they spare not to say, that it better deserved to be
called, The feats, and lies of Doctor Feat-Lye, then the other Title; which in
falsehood well agreeing with the Book it self in that respect alone, might
justly seem a fit lace or facing for it. For besides the sundry shifts and
slights of the Doctors contained in it, they accuse it also of many gross
untruths without end or number; in relating things out of due place and order,
to their own advantage; in daubing and amplifying the speeches of D. Featly
with much addition, and substraction of matter: As for Example.

1. That M. Bugges, the old Gentleman, who first desired the former Dispute,
was sick, and solicited in his sickness by some Papists about him to forsake
his Religion: And that it was feared he would have fallen from his Faith, if he
had not recovered of his sickness: which is altogether false.

2. That he was much confirmed in his Religion, by hearing the former
Disputation: which unless he did extremely forget himself (having often said
the contrary) is also false.

3. That you Sir Humfrey, found M. Fisher by chance in Drurie Lane; whereas you
know, you came of purpose to offer him a friendly Conference with D. White.

4. That M. Fisher having written the Question, added under his own hand, he
would answer upon it negatiuely, As challenging and expecting Opposers; which
was false, for he was first asked by your self, whether he would oppose or
answer: whereupon he wrote he would answer.

5. That you Sir Humfrey, told M. Buggs, if M. Fisher would come with four,
or six at the most, they should be admitted for his sake, whereas it was
expressly agreed on, that D. White and M. Fisher, should only bring an
Assistant, four Witnesses, and a Writer, and no more, with each of them, and
that the matter should be kept secret, thereby to make the meeting very
private. Which M. Fisher duly observed, but when he came he found the house
full of Protestants contrary to former agreement.

6. That D. White and D. Featly, being invited by you to Dinner, and staying a
while after Dinner, had notice given them (as it were by chance) that some
Jesuits were in the next room, ready to confer with them, and that the Doctors
were at last persuaded to have some Conference with them. As if forsooth they
had never heard of the meeting before; when the truth is, that some days
before, D. White had received the Question, and undertook to oppose against
it, though afterward for more security he used D. Featly for his Champion, and
both of them came thither of purpose, to make good the former challenge.

7. The Question was falsely and sophistically printed, by putting into the
midst thereof the figure of (2) in favor of the Opposer, who sought to make it
a dubble Question.

8. Before the Disputation began, D. Featly having propounded many other points
of Controversy to divert the Question, That M. Sweet should answer they were
scholasticall points not fundamental. Which was not so; only he affirmed they
were nothing to the purpose. Which he was moved the rather to say, because a
little before he had desired two things of the Auditorie. 1. That all bitter
speeches might be forborne. And 2. that nothing might be heard or spoken which
was beside the Question.

9. That M. Fisher being charged to have slaundred Doctor White in a former
Conference, answered nothing: which is false, for he stood up, and solemnly
protested upon his Conscience, that he never slaundred him.

10. And again, that being charged to answer upon his Conscience, whether he
believed Christ and his Apostles taught the Protestant faith, he refused to
answer. Which is merely false. It is true, that D. Featly before he began to
dispute, coniured M. Fisher after an insolent manner, to answer according to
his conscience, which M. Fisher accepted, and wished him to do the like.

I omit many other such Feats, which the Hearers when they read, affirmed to
be plain Lies, from whom soever they proceeded. If the Doctors according to
their undertaking, had given a sufficient and full Catalogue of their
Professors in all Ages, The Fisher had been taken indeed in his own Net, and
caught in the Question which himself propounded; but contrarily having taken
more upon them then they were able to perform, and not being able to set down
the Catalogue, which according to the issue of the Question was then expected,
the Doctors themselves were manifestly taken in the Net of the Fisher. Wherein,
by professing as they did, that, The true Church must be able to Name
Professors in all Ages, they have so entangled themselves, that howsoever they
may dance in this Net to their own shame and confusion, they can never get
out, until they name them.

And now to come home again to your self (endeavoring in the mean time as
you do to overthrow the succession of their Church, and not being able to show
another of yours) what do you get, or what do you seek thereby, but only the
ruin and demolishment, both of your Church and theirs, leaving no true Church
upon the earth, which cannot subsist without a visible succession of Professors
to be named in all Ages, as you and your Doctors have urged? And by
consequence, for want of such a visible Church, you leave no true Faith at all,
nor true Religion in the world. And who is a Natural, but he that denies it?

Wherefore to conclude this Section, your Doctors with a great deal of noise,
having filled the air with nothing but smoke. If now their Adversaries should
turn their own Ordinance against them and reason thus, it is not your valor
that would be able to defend them.

The Church that is Catholic as it ought to be, or the Church whose faith is
Eternal, or the Church of Christ and his Apostles, must be able to name
Successors in all Ages. But the Protestant Church is not able to name the
Professors of their Faith, nor the Successors therein, to Christ and his
Apostles in all Ages. Ergo, the Protestant Church is not Catholic as it ought
to be, nor the Church whose Faith is eternal, nor the Church of Christ and his
Apostles. The Mayor is their own, and publicly produced by the^. The Minor
cannot be denied until the Names be showed. Wherefore until this Fort be
built, how can you defend them, or where will you hide them from the power of
this Gunshot? And yet as this work is plainly impossible to be raised or
performed, so it is no less impossible, that the Protestants should be found
the true Church, and by Consequence, that any may be saved remaining in it.

Section II. In reference to a second point of the Appendix, showing their
Conuersions in all Ages.
HAD you given us such another Catalogue of your Professors, as you received of
theirs, to make your party good against the^, you should have showed the like
Conuersions of Heathen Nations to the Faith of Christ by your Ministers in all
Ages; as that Book has showed, by their Apostolical Preachers. And that
especially after those times wherein you pretend their Church was fallen, and
the spirit of God was departed from them. As for Example, in the third Age were
converted Donaldus King of Scotland, his Wife, Children, and Nobility. The
Court of the Prince of Arabia, page 20. In the fourth Age, the Bessites,
Dacians, Getes, and Scythians, page 26. In the fifth Age, the Sarazens, the
Scots, the Irish, page 32. In the sixth Age, the Pictes, the Goths, the
Bauarians, the English, page 36. 38. In the seventh Age, diverse Sweuians, the
Westphalians, and many of our Nation, People of Teisterbandia, of Westphalia,
of Holland, the King and Queen of Persia, with forty thousand Percians, page
42 44. In the eight Age, Saxons, Borucluatians, the Frisians, the Hassits, the
Thuringians, the Catti, the Erphordians, two Saxon Dukes, page 48. In the ninth
Age, the Danes, Swethens, and people of Aquitania, the whole Island of the
Rugians, the Bulgarians, the Ruthens, or Russians, page 52. 54. In the tenth
Age, Worziuous the last Pagan Duke in Bohemia, the King of Norway, the
Polonians, the Sclauonians, and Hungarians, Heraldus King of the Danes, and
Sueno his Son, page 60. In the eleventh Age, the Prussians, the Vindians,
also Pannonians and Transiluanians, the lapsed Hu^garians, page 64. 68. In the
twelfe Age, the Pomeranians, the people of Norway, Magnus King of the Goths,
page 70. 72. In the thirteenth Age, the Liuonians, the Lituanians, innumerable
Tartarians, page 76. 78. In the fourtenth Age, the Canary Islands, the Chumans,
the Lipnensians, Bosnians, Patrinians, and other Sclauonian Nations, page 84.
In the fifteenth Age, Samogessians, the Kingdoms of Bentomine, Guinaea,
Angola, and Congo, Zerra Jacob Emperor of the Abissyns, page 90. In the
sixteenth Age, the Kingdom of Manicongo in Africa, the Kings of Amanguntium
and Bungo, innumerable Indians, Iaponians, Brasilians, and other Western and
Oriental people, more Countries and Kingdoms then all Christendom before. In
the seaue^teenth Age, the King of Sarra Leaena in the East Indies, with his
Brethren and Children, besides many other in China, Iaponia, Persia, and other
Nations.

This Argument taken from the great increase of fruit which continues, and
abides among them, Joan. 15. 16. and from the wonderful propagation of their
Religion, not only in the first five hundred years after Christ, but also much
more in the Ages following to this present time; is surely a most forcible and
strong persuasion, that they alone among all other sorts of Christians, are
the company, and people whom God had blessed. Have Idolaters been chosen and
preserved by Almighty God, before his own Servants, to persuade in the force
of his word innumerable people from time to time, to renounce and tread under
their feet the Ancient Gods of their Forefathers, in whom they so much
confided; and to receive him for their true and only God, who whipped and
crowned with thorns, was nailed to a Cross in the sight of the world, and so
dyed? Have all these several Countries and Kingdoms, so extremely different
in clymats, in tongues, in affections, in customs, and in natures been
voluntarily reduced to the unity of one and and the same Faith in Christ, and
to the obedience of one Pastor under Christ, by the followers of Antichrist?
Have the limbs of the Devil reformed the savage, brutish, and wicked manners
of so many People and Nations, changing their hearts, and bringing them upon
their knees, to serve their Creator, with piety and humility, and in exercise
of all kind of virtue?

Then I must needs confess, it seems unto me, that either God himself must
be in love with Idolatry, or Christ himself must become Antichrist, or the
Devil himself having forsaken his malice, is now changed to be a servant of
Christ. Neither do I see how possibly you can deny these innumerable Nations to
have been converted by the true Church, recommended unto us in holy Scripture,
unless we deny both Church and Scripture. For by these Conuersions of Nations
in all Ages, your Adversaries do manifestly prove themselves to be that Church
which must in the end convert all Nations, and was therefore surnamed Catholic
or Universal. And thereby it cannot be denied they make it most apparent (the
promises thereof in the Law, Genesis 22.17. Gal. 3. In the Psalms, 2. and 71.6.
and 21. and 28. In the Prophets, Isa. 2.2. and 11. and 60. and 61. and 62.
Hier. 33. Ezech. 33.22. Dan. 2.44. etc. In the old and new Testament, Matthew.
24.14. and 28.19. Luc. 24.47. being so evidently performed by the^) that they
alone are the spiritual seed of Abraham, Romans 4.13. Gal. 3. The inheritance
of the Son of God, Psalm. 2. and 47. The Mountain on the top of
Mountains, Isa. 60.12. The Mountain filling the world, Dan. 2.44. The
glorious City, Psalm. 86. whose gates must be always open, that the strength
of the Gentiles and their Kings may be brought unto it: and the Nation and
Kingdom, that will not serve it, must perish, Isa. 60.11.12. That blessed
Company Isa. 61.9. whom our Savior promised to assist all days, or every
day, teaching and baptizing all Nations unto the end of the world. Matthew. 28.
and 24. Here again (as in the end the former Section) if they should argue
Syllogistically against your Doctors in this manner, though you had the
strength of Hercules, I think you would hardly be able to defend them. That
Church which converted Nations in all Ages, is the true Church of Christ and
his Apostles, recommended unto us, in holy Scripture. But the Catholic, and
not the Protestant Church, has converted Nations in all Ages. Ergo, the
Catholic, and not the Protestant Church, is the true Church of Christ and his
Apostles, recommended unto us in holy Scripture.

Section III. In reference to a third point of the Appendix, showing their
Religion to have been confirmed by Miracles in all Ages.
HAd you given us a view of so many Nations reduced to the Faith of Christ by
your Professors as he has named converted by theirs, that your Church might
not appear altogether inferior to theirs, you should have showed some points
of your Religion confirmed by Miracles against them, as that Book has
declared many points of theirs in all Ages, miraculously authorized, and as it
were subscribed by the hand of God against you; and those so evidently
testified not only by Ancient Histories, but also by the holy Fathers
themselves, not liable to any exception, in the first five hundred years and
downwards, as they seem to enforce all good Christians to believe them.

As for Example, in the second Age, Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, turned
water into Oil for the use of the Church, Eusebius lib. 6. Cap. 8. and 9. S.
Balbina and her Father restored to health by touching the Chains wherewith with
Pope Alexander was bound, Baron. An. 132. n. 2. Cures wrought by the Bodies and
Sepulchers of Martyrs. Justin. quast. 28.

In the third Age, the Miracles of S. Gregory the wonder-worker, and some of
the^ wrought by the sign of the Cross, Nissen. in vita Greg. Thau. And S.
Basil. de Sp. Sanct. cap. 29. Also Miracles confirming the Eucharist, and Real
Presence. Cyp. ser. de Lapsis. Also S. Cecily showed to Valerian the Angel
Guardian of her virginity. Metaphrastes and Surius in her life.

In the fourth Age, a sick Woman cured, and a dead Body restored to life, by
the wood of the Holy Cross, when it was first found out by Queen Helen.
Ruffin. Hist. lib. 10. Cap. 7. and 8. and Sever. Sulpit. Hist. sacra lib. 2.
Paul. Epist. 11. Niceph. lib. 8. The same myraculously multiplied to satisfy
the devotion of all Christians throughout the world. Paul. Ep. 11. Cyr. catech.
10. Many other Miracles wrought by Relics, Chrysostom. orat. cont. Gentes. By
Holy Water, Epiph. haer. 30. By adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, Naz. orat.
11. By prayers to our Lady, Nazian. in S. Cyp. By the merits of Martyrs.
Ambros. sermon. 91.

In the fifth Age, many Miracles wrought by Relics of S. Stephen, Aug. lib.
22. de Ciuit. cap. 8. By the sign of the Cross, Constantinus lib. 1. cap 22.
apud Surium, Tomo 4. by S. German. Also Miracles wrought by S. Hierome, lying
on his death bed, and after his decease, the blind, deaf, dumb, and sick
were cured: some by touching, some by kissing his Corpse, Eusebius Cremon. Ep.
de morte eius.

In the sixth Age, Miracles wrought to confirm the Sacrifice of the Mass, S.
Greg. l. 4. Dial. cap. 57. and Real Presence, Euag. lib. 4. Hist. cap. 35.
Joan. Diac. lib. 2. de vita S. Greg. cap. 41. To confirm the honor and
invocation of Saints, Procop orat. de Edificat. Justin. Euag. loco ^it. Greg.
de Myrac. S. Martini l. 2. cap. 5. 6. 7. The use of Images in Processions, and
how by one of our Blessed Ladies, painted by S. Luke, a contagious Pestilence
was dispelled in Rome, Ciac. in Greg. 1. From another Image stabbed by a Jew,
issued blood, Greg. Turon. de glor. Mart. cap. 22. Sigeb. ann. 560. Holy Oil
flowed from a Cross, and from an Image of our Blessed Lady, curing many
diseases. Baron. ann. 564. Thus the Author of the Catalogue you received; And
the like Miracles he shows in the rest of the succeeding Ages. As many more
he might have added as well in the first five hundred years as after, but that
he thought it not necessary, and therefore spared the labor to recollect them.

Which myraculous attestations, we must either believe, and by consequence must
also confess those points of Religion confirmed by them, or else we shall not
only condemn all Christian Antiquity of lying, and believing of lies, but must
likewise reject all evidence of credibility founded upon human testimony; which
is no less then to destroy the very foundatio^s both of Church, and
Commonwealth, and all Society. Wherefore to bind this Burden also on your
back, that it may sit the closser, I will wind it up in this manner. That
Church whose Doctrine has been confirmed by Miracles in all Ages, is the true
Church of Christ and his Apostles. But such is the Doctrine of the Catholic,
and not of the Protestant Church. Ergo, the Catholic, and not the Protestant
Church, is the true Church of Christ and his Apostles.

Section IIII. In reference to a fourth point of the Appendix, showing the
Doctrine of the Protestants to have been censured, and condemned by the
Fathers in all Ages.
HAd you likewise confirmed your Doctrine by such divine Authority, you should
have showed some one point of their Religion censured by any of the Fathers, or
condemned by any lawful Counsel, as that Book quoteth above twenty of yours
notoriously opposed and condemned by them.

As for Example; Justification by Faith only, and Denial of Justice by Works;
condemned in Simon Magus, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 20. Extrinsecall Justice by
imputatio^ only; in the Gnostickes, Iren. lib. 1. cap. 5. That no sin can
hurt them that are indewed with Faith; in Eunomius, Epiph. haer. 76. Aug. haer.
64. That sin abides in the regenerate; condemned in Proclus, Epiph. haer.
64. That Baptism does not wash away sin; condemned in the Messalians, Theod
lib. 4. haer. fab. Neglect of the ceremonies of Baptism; condemned in Nouatus,
Eusebius. lib. 6. Of holy Chrisme and the seal of our Lord (which is the sign of
the Cross so called) condemned in Nouatus and his Disciples, Theod. lib. 3.
haer. fab. Derisions of Exorcismes, and Exufflations in Baptism; condemned in
the Pelagians, August. de Not. and concupis. lib. 2. cap. 29. The Absolution of
Priests not available, and the abolishment of Confession; condemned in Nouatus
and his Disciples, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 23. Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
43. Theod. lib. 3. haer. fab. Pacian. lib. aduers. eos. Denial of enjoined
Penance; in the Audians, Theod. l. 4. haer. fab.

Denial of the Real Presence; condemned in Judas Iscariot, Claud. Xanct. Rep.
2. de Eucha. cap. 14. Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Joan. 6. In the Simonians and
Saturnians, Theod. Dial. 3. condemned likewise by Iren. l. 4. cap. 34. post
medium. Impugning the reservation of the B. Sacrament; condemned in the
Anthropomorphites, Cyr. ad Calosyr. Denial of Oblations, and Prayers for the
Dead; condemned in Aerius, Aug. haer. 53 Epiph. haer. 65. Denial of Freewill;
condemned in Simon Magus, Clem. Roman. Recog. lib. 3. In the Manichees, Aug.
lib. cont. Fortunat. Manic. Ordination and Predestination to sin, and by
consequence, that God is the Author of sin; condemned in the Predestinate,
Sigeb. 415. Geneb. in Zosimo. condemned likewise in Simon Magus, Vin. Lirin.
adu. prop. haeret. nouitat. cap. 34. And in Florinus, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 20.
That Saints are not to be inuocated; condemned in Vigilantius, Hier. cont.
Vigil. cap. 2. and 3. The Images of Christ and his Saints not to be worshipped;
condemned in Xenaias; Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 27. Worship of Saints Relics to
be Idolatry; condemned in Eustachius, Socrat. l. 2 cap. 33. and condemned
likewise in Vigilantius, Hier. 161.

Impugnation of single life, and vowed Chastity, and that Marriage is equal to
Virginity; condemned in Heluidius, and Iouinian, Hier. cont. Heluid. and Iouin.
Disallowance of prescript Fasts; condemned in Aerius, Epip. haer. 75. August.
haer. 53. and in Eustachius, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33. Noe difference of Merits
in Heaven; condemned in Iouinian, Hier. lib. 2. aduers. Iouin. Good use of
Riches, preferred before Evangelical Poverty; condemned in Vigilantius. S.
Thom. opusc. 17.

Denial of one Chief Pastor in Earth; condemned in Nouatus, Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 43. Denial of unwritten Traditions; condemned in the Valentinians,
Tertul. lib. de Praesc. and hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 16. lib. 3. cap. 36.
That the visible Catholic Church, might remain in one part, and perish in
the rest of the world; condemned in the Donatists, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2.
cap. 108. and lib. de Vnitat. Eccles. cap. 2. and per totum librum.

Thus the Author of the Catalogue; whereunto if I should add out of the
Protestant Apology page 74. and page 127. and page 207. how insolently and
impiously the most and best learned Protestant-writers do likewise censure,
and condemn the Fathers of the first five hundred years, I know you would be
ashamed to read them. But this may suffice, to give the Reader just occasion
to admire the little conscience of your late English Doctors, in challenging
the Fathers of the first five hundred years, wherein if their Adversaries
might come to an indifferent and equal trial with them, the very Titles of
the Fathers Books against them, were sufficient to overthrow them. Only in this
place I will give the Reader this short Notandum: for the which if he desire
sincerely to know and believe the Doctrine of the Fathers, he shall have cause
to thank me. When any of the holy Fathers, do censure any point of Doctrine,
taxing it of Heresy, or notes it as the particular opinion of some Heretic,
or reproves it very much, or wondreth at it, especially if it be such a thing
as every learned Man may easily know, or was necessary to be taught, and that
no other Father did therein oppose himself against him; It is an evident
Testimony, that his Doctrine therein was the general Doctrine of the Church at
that time; and ought to be so received of the Ages that follow. Wherefore the
Author of that Book, having showed so many points of your Doctrine to have
been so notoriously ce^sured and condemned by the Ancient Fathers of the
first five hundred years in the Hetetikes of those times, besides many other
points and some of those also condemned by Fathers and Counsels in after Ages
(whereunto you have not answered a word) it is for ought I can see, or
perceive, a clear demonstration, that the Fathers of those times were theirs,
and that, either your Professors were none at all, or no other then those, that
were condemned by them.

Thus, all things with them are infallibly certain, easy to be known, and
most conspicuous. They follow the stream and current of that Doctrine, which,
by many known Successions of holy and learned Men, Martyrs, and Bishops, as
it were by so many Channells, they derive from Christ and his Apostles. They
follow the fame and greatness of that Church, which by converting Countries and
Nations in all Ages, is become eminent and apparent above all other sorts of
Christians, like a City upon a Hill, above the Moale-hills; or like the Little
Stone in Daniel, which growing to be a Mountain, fills the world with it is
greatness. They follow the security of those Letters Patent which the hand of
God has signed with his own Seal, and commended to the world, by Attestation
of many Miracles in confirmation of their Doctrine. And lastly they follow the
infallible and powerful Authority of that Body, which by Ce^sures of Doctors,
and Decrees of Cou^cells from time to time has ever confounded all those that
opposed themselves against it; While you in the mean time, without any lineall
Descente from those whom you pretend to have been your Ancestors; without
the Progeny of any Gentills converted by you; without any warrant of Gods
hand, or sentence of his Judges for you, do still remain in the darcknes of
your invisible Church, tossed in the Sea of Error, with every wind of new
Doctrine, not knowing certainly whom to follow, nor what to believe, until at
the last, even the wisest of you being weary of seeking, and desperate of
finding that which they seek, come to hold all opinions probable, which is in
effect to believe nothing.

Good Sir, had you produced such a Succession, such co^uersions of Nations,
such Miracles and Censures, in the defense of your Church, as that Book has
showed in confirmation of theirs, all zealous Protestants had been bound to
have fallen at your feet, and to have honored you for ever. But now, on the
other side, against such weighty and massy matters, such clear and conuincing
proofs as these, not being able to give in evidence so much as one Professor
in every Age, nor in any Age the conversion of any Nation, or the testimony of
any Miracle, or the Censure of any one Father in favor of your Religion; who
sees not, that instead of reason there is nothing but passion on your part;
and certainly for the honor of your cause, it were better to hold your peace,
then reply so weakly in a matter of such importance.

For besides all that has been said against many other most express
Sentences of the Ancient Fathers, in those very points which you have chosen
to touch; you have only produced a few dribling Authorities, as it were on the
Bye, some falsely translated, and some falsely cited, and some in respect of
other express words against you, plainly falsified; that, not to accuse you
of a bad Conscience, though you make profession to be much versed in the
Fathers, yet the Reader must needs think, you never saw, or read so much as
those few places which your self have cited, but only took them by retaile
from others. And howsoever, though they were admitted and taken as you give
them up; yet in my poor opinion, they either touch not your Adversaries at
all, or being a little considered, make rather with them, then against them.
Which shows great want of judgment in you: and I verily think, if you will
be pleased to examine them with me, I shall make you see it. Wherefore as in
the former Section, so that you may know in this also, how far you are
chargable, I give you the sum of your account in this manner. The Doctrine of
that Church which was condemned by the Fathers of the first five hundred
years, was condemned by Christ and his Apostles. But the Doctrine of the
Protestant Church, was condemned by the Fathers of the first 500. years, as
the most and best learned Protestants themselves have also confessed. Ergo, the
Doctrine of the Protestant Church, was likewise condemned by Christ and his
Apostles.

Section V. Miracles defended to be a sufficient Testimony of Truth, and the
Doctrine of the Fathers therein declared.
WHerefore to begin, as you do, with Miracles, most certain it is, that no
true Miracle can be wrought, but only by him, Qui facit mirabilia magna solus;
and therefore whensoever any true Miracle is showed, or sufficiently testified
unto us, in confirmation of any point of Doctrine; it is an evident proof of
the truth thereof. For a Miracle in that case, is the Testimony of God, who
speaks by works, as men by words (says S. Aug. Epist. 49. quaest. 6.) and
is the subscription (as it were) of his hand and seal unto it. And certainly
if Miracles were no sufficient proofs of true Doctrine, they would never have
been called, Signs and Testimonies in holy Scripture. God would not have
given Moses power of working Miracles. Exodus 4. That the People of Israel
might believe he had appeared unto him. Our Savior would not have said, the
Jews had not sinned in not receiving him, if he had not done those works
which no man else had done before him. Joan. 15. And in vain should he have
promised, that Signs should follow those that believed, and have cooperated
and confirmed the Doctrine of the Apostles by them. Neither could he in Justice
have commanded the world upon pain of damnation, to believe a thing so
incredible, as that Christ being Crucified, was risen again in his own flesh,
and ascended into Heaven, if many other Miracles which the Apostles wrought in
confirmation thereof, had not made it evidently credible, as S. Austen disputes
in his book de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 7. and in the former Epist. 49.
quaest. 6. albeit he well observed, that this kind of proof was ever lowdly
and extremely laughed at, by the wicked Pagans: yet most true it is, which there
he also affirms, that we should not believe, Christ to be risen again from
the Dead, if the Faith of Christians did fear in this point of Miracles, the
laughter of Pagans.

Wherefore to answer those places of the Fathers which you object, not only
against so many of their own Testimonies alleged by your Adversary, but also
against Scripture, and against Christian belief it self, grounded upon
Miracles as has been noted; you must further understand, that the world
having been once persuaded by myraculous operations and works of wonder to
believe the Doctrine of the Apostles with this firm promise, that it should
always remain with them and their Successors, the visible Pastors of the
Catholic Church, universally spread over all the world; it ought not to
believe any other Doctrine, or any other Miracles pretended to be done in
opposition to that Doctrine which by continual Tradition has been received
from them. For as there can be no after-word of God, contrary to that which was
first preached; so there can be no latter Miracles contrary to the testimony
of those, by which the world first believed; but rather as S. Paul says, If an
Angel from Heaven should preach otherwise then we have received, we should
hold him accursed. This made Tertullian in the Book you cite de Praesc. cap.
44. to protest against all Miracles supposed to be done against the Tradition
of the Church; whereof S. Augustine in his Book de unit. Eccles. objected by
you, gives the reason yet more plainly, showing that the Catholic amplitude
or universality of the Church, by conuersions of Nations in all Ages, does more
evidently prove it to be the true Church of Christ, then any other work which
is done therein; for it is more manifest to sense and human reason, that the
clear Prophesies of the true Church in holy Scripture are fullfilled and
accomplished only in the Catholic Church, which accordingly in all Ages does
visibly spread it self over all the world, then it can possibly appear, that
any work of admiration is truly a Miracle surpassing the force of Nature, or
power of the Devil; whereof it follows, that the true Church is more
manifestly known by the accomplishment of those promises, then by the wondrous
effects of any Miracles; and that Miracles do not so well, and clearly prove
any Church to be Catholic, as the Church being visibly Catholic, does
manifest those Miracles to be true, which are approved by it.

Whereof it follows again, that all Miracles which are done against it, or
against the unity thereof, are as firmly and constantly to be rejected. Which
is it that he also teaches, lib. 13. cont. Faust. cap. 5. and Tract. 13. in
Joan. and lib. 22. de Ciuitat. Dei, cap. 8. objected by you. And here by the
way I beseech you to note, how much Saint Ansten esteems the former Argument
of the conuersions of Nations in all Ages, according to the promises thereof in
holy Scripture, which he makes such an evident mark, and such an infallible
proof of the true Church, that he prefers it before Miracles. And for the
same cause, lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 8. he spares not to say: That he who
seeks to be confirmed by Wonders now, is himself to be wondered at, in
refusing to believe, that which all the world (or the visible Church through
the world) belieueth. Which your self also having observed, you may wonder at
your self, both in refusing to believe, what you know the visible Catholic
Church, for a thousand years, through the world, believed, and (wherein I also
wonder my self) at your not observing, that S. Augustine does wonder at you in
that very place, wherein you suppose he agreed with you, as by and by I shall
make it appear.

Add in the mean time to that which has been said, that the Miracles
whereunto the holy Fathers, alleged by you, forbid us to give credit, as unto
Arguments not sufficient to prove the Truth of Religion, were either Miracles
in appearance only, and such wherewith Heretics might easily be deceived, or so
deceive, as S. Augustine speaks in the former place upon Joan: not such as
might reasonably induce any prudent man to believe the^. As Dreams, and
Visions, and exauditions of Prayers, like unto those of the Donatists, against
whom wrote Saint Augustine lib. de Unit. Eccl. cap. 16. Or such as were
Testimonies of the Justice and mercy of God in general, and not of Doctrine in
particular, as were those whereof S. Hierome speaks: Or finally such as being
wrought by wicked men, exceeded not the power of the Devil, as S. Augustine
observes, lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 19. and Tract. 13. in Joan. Or were not
sufficiently testified, but rather said then proved, which Tertullian lib. de
Praeser. derideth and says, that the power of Heretics was nothing like, but
rather contrary, to the power of the Apostles; for their virtue was not to
raise the Dead, but rather to kill the living, literally fullfilled in Calvin,
Bolsec. in vita Caluini, who pretending by his prayer to raise a counterfaite
dead man, being then truly alive, was thought to be the cause, that he was
instantly slain, either by God, or the Devil. In the same sense also Epiph.
lib. 1. de haer. cap. 30. urges Ebion, to raise some dead man etc. assuring
himself that he could not do any true Miracle, by means of his false Faith,
yea though he called upon the name of Christ. Not so the Miracles alleged by
your Adversary, which having been wrought and believed, and most authentically
testified by so many most holy, most prudent, and learned Witnesses, in
confirmation of that Doctrine which is professed against you, need no more to
fear the laughter of Protestants, the^ the Miracles of former times, as S.
Austen says, had cause to fear the laughter of Pagans. And such as believe
them not, may justly fear to be condemned as Pagans, for believing nothing. To
deny therefore this Doctrine of Miracles, seems noe less impious, then to
deny Christianity it self: and to affirm that miracles have ceased sithence
the time of the Apostles, were noe less unreasonable, then to reject all
humane Testimonies, and in particular the Authority of S. Augustine himsefe, in
those very places objected by you.

For in that very place of S. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. which you
allege against Miracles, That they were necessary before the world believed,
to induce it to believe: And, That he that seeks to be confirmed by wonders
now, is himself to be wondered at, in refusing to believe that which all the
world (or the visible Catholic Church through the world) belieueth: which
being well considered, makes little for you. In that very place (I say) you
could not choose but read these other words directly against you; That now also
Miracles are wrought in his Name, either by his Sacraments, or by the prayers,
and memories of his Saints; together with the relation of many Miracles done
in his own time, and of those in particular wrought by the Relics of S.
Stephen, which though not necessary after the World had once believed, as S.
Austen there disputes; yet God in his mercy has ever showed them in all Ages,
as well to confound the obstinate that would not believe the visible universal
Church, as also to confirm those in their Faith, that already believed. In
this place therefore you have plainly falsified the sense of the Author,
either very fraudulently, or very ignorantly, choose you whether.

Section VI. Merits of Works defended, according to the Doctrine of the
Fathers: and Sir Humphry answered.
IN the next place against the Merit of Works, you object many places of the
Fathers, but none to the purpose. You know full well, that the Catholics
distinguish between works that go before Faith, and works that follow.
Works going before Faith, and proceeding only from the light of Nature, or
from the knowledge of the law of Moses (called therefore by S. Paul Romans 3.
The works of the Law) your Adversaries do all hold, neither to save, nor to
be needful to saluatio; according whereunto S. Paul also says; That a Man is
justified by Faith, without the works of the Law. But that works following a
lively Faith, formed with Charity, and proceeding from it, do justify, and
are needful to salvation, your Adversary proves not only by express
Scripture, James cap. 2. Ye see then how that of works a man is justified,
and not of Faith only: But also by the like Testimonies of all the holy
Fathers, noting and condemning the contrary opinion of the Protestants as
heretical, in Simon Magus, in the Gnostickes, and in Eunomius, as has been
showed. And further he alleges S. Aug. de fide and oper. cap. 14. testifiyng
of the Apostles themselves, that because this opinion of Faith only, sprung up
in those days, by perverting the words of S. Paul's Epistle before related,
the Epistles of S. Peter, S. John, S. James, and S. Jude, were principally
written, vt vehementer astruant, vehemently to urge, and contest that Faith
without works does profit nothing. Against all which manifest proofs, you
bring only some Authorityes of the Fathers, showing that our own works and
righteousness (as Basil. hom. de Humil.) or works of the Law, going before
Faith (as S. Chrysos. with S. Paul. Hom. 7. in 3. ad Rom.) and before Sin
pardoned (as S. Ambrose) and forgiven (as Theodoret comment. 2. S. Bernard in
Cant. Ser. 22.) do not justify, but only Faith without them; which is nothing
to the purpose because therein your Adversary agrees with you. But you bring
not a word to prove that works following Faith do not justify, nor are
needful to Salvation; which opinion of yours, your Adversary has showed to
have been often times condemned by the Apostles themselves, and by the
Ancient Fathers in other Heretics that have gone before you.

Section VII. Free Will defended: and Sir Humphry answered.
IN the Controversy of Free Will, you seem first to suppose your Adversaries
believe, that Man has Free Will to perform supernatural acts and works of
Piety without Grace, and then you proceed to dispute against them. How can you
imagine, they are so absurd as to think by the power of Nature alone to do
that which they the^seues confess to be above the power of Nature, wherein
there appears not only a great deal of passion in you, (which hanges like to
a Cloud between the Eye of your mind, and the light of truth) but also (as it
seems) great want of conscience.

For you know they hold, that without grace, it is impossible either to
believe, or to do any other act which may avail, or so much as dispose to
Salvation. This also you know to be the Doctrine of Bellarmine every where in
that whole Book, out of which you seem to cite his words in a contrary sense:
and the words that immediately follow in the very place you cite, do plainly
show, that against your Conscience you falsify his meaning. His words are
these: A Man before all grace has Free Will, not only to natural and moral
works, but also to works of piety and supernatural, as you faithfully cite
them: but then it follows, Thus S. Augustine teaches, l. de Spiritu and
litera, cap. 33. where he says; That Free Will is a natural and middle power,
which may be inclined to faith, and infidelity. Thus Bellarmine; whereby it is
manifest his meaning to be, that by Grace, Free Will is not made, or given unto
us, but that we have the power thereof by Nature, which afterward by Grace is
inclyned and strengthened to do those things which by the force of Nature,
without Grace, we are not able so much, as to will, or to think, much less to
perform or perfect; according whereunto, in the same place, he cites also S.
August. de Praedest. Sanctorum, cap. 5. teaching, that the Posse, or power to
have Faith and Charity, is in man by Nature. And in the same Book, cap. 11. he
alleges S. Augustine again Epist. 49. quaest. 2. to the same purpose,
saying: Free Will is not taken away, because it is helped (by Grace;) but
because it is helped, therefore it is not taken away. If it be given by Nature,
and not taken away by Grace, most certain it is, that still we have it. In
this sense therefore, your Adversaries not only affirming, that we have
Freewill by Nature, but also teaching that it is so excited and strengthened by
Grace, as we cannot so much as think, much less accomplish or perform any
supernatural act without it; they would easily grant with S. Basil, con. de
Hum. that we owe all, even that we live, to the Grace and gift of God; but that
you falsely translate it. They grant with S. Bernard de Gratia and lib. Arbit.
That to will Good, is a gift of Grace. And with S. Augustine. That it is God,
who makes that we work, by adding to our will most efficacious strength. That
unless he make us willing, and then work with us, we shall never bring to
pass any good work. And again with S. Augustine de correp. and great. cap. 1.
That though we have Free Will to do good, yet none can be free in will and
act to do it, that is to say, perfectly, or in actu secundo, as the Scholmen
speak, unless he be freed by the grace of God. And again: That all is to be
given to God, not the first part unto our selves, and the rest unto God, as the
Pelagians did, against whom S. Augustine disputes, but all unto God, and unto
our selves nothing that is not of God. And again, That without God we cannot
prepare our own hearts. And again, That Gods grace does not form, but reform
our Nature, by giving it the grace wherewith it was first formed. And finally,
Ench. ad Laurent. cap. 32. That of his mercy he prepares our will to be
helped, and helps it being prepared. Whereby (condemning your Adversaries as
you do, and yet either not knowing what they hold, or maliciously mistaking
their meaning) you may see at the last, that with a great deal of labor, for
want of a little learning, if not for want of Charity, you have rather
confirmed, then censured their Doctrine.

But now that we have no Free Will to any act at all, in such manner, as it
lies not in our power to do it, or not to do it; and that all things are
done necessarily, though willingly, because all things are done by the
inevitable decree of God, being the point you should have proved; none of the
Fathers you allege, either thought or said, but have condemned it for Heresy
and Error in Simon Magus, and in the Manichees: yea, and because it follows
from hence, that God is the Author of sin, even for more then Heresy, in
Florinus, vt refert Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 20. Here again I must friendly admonish
you, that negligently or ignorantly being deceived by others, you have falsely
quoted S. Augustine de great. and lib. Arbit. c. 16. Except God first make us
willing etc. And again, de Not. and Great. cap. 35. Why do we presume so much
etc. which words with the rest that follow, are not to be found in those
place: neither if they were, would they make any thing for you, as your self
will judge by that which has been said. And again you allege S. Augustine
lib. 13. de bono persevere. cap. 6. there being but one single Book of that
Argument, and in that Chapter, those words are not found which you have there
alleged. You cite him also, cont. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 2. which second
Book having 10. Chapters, you quote no Chapter. Will your Reader impute so
many imperfect and false quotations only to the error of your pen, and not
rather to your ignorance, or want of due perusal?

But how will you defend your self, in alleging these other words out of S.
Austen: It is certain that we work, when we do so, but it is he that gives
us this working power, by adding unto our will, most effectual strength; as if
he had said, I will make you work. Whereby you will make your Reader believe,
that according unto S. Austen we have no power of Free Will by Nature, but that
God gives it, by adding his Grace; which is not so: for S. Austen does not
say, It is he that gives us this working power, by adding strength to our will
as you allege, but that, He makes us to work, by adding strength to our will
(or which is all one) to the power of our will; which therefore proves, that we
have power of will by Nature, though not sufficiently able to do any
supernatural act, before he add the strength of his Grace unto it. Again you
find not in S. Augustine these other words of yours: as if he said, I will
make you work; but they are by you fraudule^tly foisted in, to cut off, and
co^ceale the words that follow. For whereas Pelagius, to prove that we are able
by Nature without Grace to keep the Commandments objected out of
Ecclesiasticus: Si volueris, seruabis mandata, if thou will, thou shall keep
the Commandments: S. Augustine answers, he knew as well as Pelagius, that
they that will, shall be able to keep them, yet not by Nature as he would have
it, but by Grace, holding it for certain, that we are able to keep them, but
so as that God is he who works in us both to will and to perform them. The
words of S. Augustine are these that follow: It is certain, that we will when
we work, but it is he that makes us to will, of whom it is said; It is God
that works in us ^o will; It is certain that we work when we work, but he
makes that we may be able to work, giving most efficacious strength unto our
will, who said; I will make them walk in my Iustifications, and to keep my
Judgments, and to do them. Which last words you partly changed, and partly
omitted, to conceal the Doctrine of S. Augustine, and his proofs out of
Scripture, showing that by Grace we are able to keep the Co^maundeme^ts, which
the Protestants have ever held impossible. Lastly as if you meant not to be
discovered, you cite the former words out of his Book. De bono persevere. lib.
13. cap. 6. which are only to be found in De Great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 16. Let
this be ignorance in you, which in another were plain forgery.

Section VIII. S. Cyprian falsely alleged by Sir Humphry, against the Real
Presence.
FInally concerning the B. Sacraments, you only tax one Authority cited by
your Adversary out of S. Cyprian in his Sermon Of the supper of our Lord, and
allege another against it out of the same Author, in his Sermon Of the
Unction of Chrisme, which Chrisme (as it is there recorded) was usually made at
that time upon holy Thursday of Oil and Balsamum (as now also it is
accustomed) for the use of the Church in Baptism, and other Sacraments: So
hard it is for one of you to allege any thing out of the Fathers, which one
way or other does not make against you. The words alleged by your Adversary
are these: The Bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed not in
shape, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the Word, is made flesh. A place so
plain for Transubstantiation, or change of substance in the Sacrament, that
when I read it, it makes me blush at the bouldnes of those Divines who dare to
avouch that Tra^substantiatio^ was never known before the Council of Lateran.
Now in this sentence, (forgetting the beam in your own eye) you seek a mote
in the eye of your Brother, accusing him, because to be understood, he
translated the word which signifies Nature, to signify Substance, or Nature.
If you were as good a Philosopher, as you pretend to be a great Divine, you
could not be ignorant that these three words, Nature, Substance, and Essence,
are all equiualente, signifying the same thing in diverse considerations; that
which is called Nature in order to motion, is called Substance in relation to
the Accidents, and Essence in reference to the definition of it. And I pray you
Sir, there being nothing in Bread but shape and substance, he who says, That
Bread being changed, not in shape, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the
Word, is made Flesh, what does he affirm, but that it is changed in substance?

Secondly, you accuse him for alleging those words out of Cyprian, which
Bellarmine himself lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 9. holds to be none of Cyprians;
Wherein you must give me leave to tell you, that your self much more deserve
to be accused. For first, albeit Bellarmine does say, he thinks that Sermon
de Coena Domini, not to be S. Cyprians, yet he adds immediately in the same
place, that it is, The Sermon of some ancient, most holy, and most learned
Man, as the Adversaries (meaning Protestants) do confess; which words (that
you might with more show eleuate, and avoid the former Authority) were
fraudulently concealed by you. It is the work of some learned Man of that Age,
says Erasmus in his annotations upon the works of S. Cyprian, In time not
much inferior to Cyprian, says Fulke, in 1. Corinthians. cap. 11. Wherefore do we
reverence the Authority of S. Cyprian, but because he was an Ancient, holy,
and learned Father? If therefore the Author of this Sermon, was a most holy and
learned Man, as Bellarmine says the Protestants themselves confess, and of
the same Age with S. Cyprian, or in time not much inferior unto him, as I have
showed that the Protestants themselves do likewise witness, why should any
Protestant reject him?

Besides, though Bellarmine thinks this Sermon to be none of Cyprians, yet
many other Deuines of great name Cypriano tribuunt, do judge it to be the
work of S. Cyprian, as well for the likeness of the stale, as for the dignity
of the matter, says Gaulortius a learned Protestant in his annotations
thereupon. Why then may not your Adversary follow herein, the judgment of
many other great Deuines? In fine, your Adversary may allege for himself in
this matter, the testimony of S. Augustine cont Donat. lib. 4. cap 22. his
words are these: From that Thief to whom, not being baptized, it was said,
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; the same S. Cyprian took no
slight document, that passion (or death, or Martyrdom) does sometime supply
the place of Baptism. According whereunto both in sense and words in the same
Sermon de Coena Domini, it is said (and therefore according to S. Augustine, by
S. Cyprian) That our Lord etc. deferred not his benefit, but with the same
speedy Indulgence he gave presently as well a document, as also an example
thereof, saying unto the Thief; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. He
had his condemnation and punishment for robery, but his contritio^ of heart
changed his pain into Martyrdom, and his blood into Baptism. Why now may not
your Adversary cite that Sermon as Saint Cyprians, which Saint Augustine
himself so long a go alleged under the name of Cyprian?

First, therefore herein you deserve both blame and shame, insimulating your
Adversary of fraud for misalleaging S. Cyprian by the testimony of Bellarmine,
and fraudulently co^cealing those words of Bellarmine in the same place; which
even the testimonies of Protestants themselves do show the words alleged by
your Adversary out of Cyprian, to be of no less Authority, then the words of
Cyprian.

Secondly, you deserve the more blame herein, because you allege against it
another place out of S. Cypria^, which according to the opinion of Bellarmine
in the same place, in the same Chapter, is none of Cyprians. And plain it is,
that the Sermon of the Supper of our Lord, alleged by your Adversary, and the
other of Chrisme alleged by your self, are both the Sermons of the same
Author; for the whole Book containing 12. Sermons, is entitled, Of the
Cardinal works of Christ, and dedicated to Pope Cornelius the Martyr, who
lived in the time of Cyprian: And therefore he that denies the one, has no
reason to affirm the other to be the work of Cyprian. How then out of the
same mouth could you breath both hot and cold? And how out of the same
Bellarmine could you prove the Sermon alleged by your Adversary to be none of
Cyprians, and affirm against Bellarmine the other alleged by your self, to
be the work of Cyprian?

Thirdly, the like foul fraud committed by you appears yet more grossly in
the words which you cite out of the same Author, who when you take him to be
with you, is Cyprian, but not Cyprian when he speaks against you. The words
of the Author are these: Our Lord therefore at that Table wherein he made his
last Feast to his A^ostles, with his own hands, gave Bread and Wine: but at
the Cross he gave his Body to be wounded by the hands of his Enemy; that
sincere verity, and true sincerity (being more secretly im^^inted in the
Apostles) might expound to Nations, how the Wine and the Bread was Flesh and
Blood: and after what manner t^ causes agreed with their effects: That diverse
shapes might: brought to one Essence, and the things signifiyng, and the things
signified, might be called (and known) by the same names. Thus S. Cyprian. But
not thus Sir Hu^phry, for having alleged the words which seemed to make for
him, he gave Bread and Wine to his Apostles, but his Body to his Enemies, he
chopped off with an etc. the words following, That sincere verity, and true
sincerity, (being more secretly imprinted in the Apostles) might expound to
Nations, how the Wine and Bread was flesh and Blood: which as every man may
see, are expressly against him, and serve to expound the meaning of the Author
in the rest of that Sentence; which though otherwise being a little obscure,
yet being a little considered, may be thus explained. Our Lord said to his
Apostles, This is my body, which shall be given for you, when at the table he
gave to them visibly Bread and Wine, but at the Cross he visibly gave his own
Body; that his Apostles thereby might visibly see, he had given them inuisibly
his own Body; because he gave them the same Body into their own hands, which
was given for them, into the hands of their Enemies. 1. That the sincere
verity, and true sincerity hereof, being thus secretly imprinted in the hearts
of the Apostles, they might confidently expound to all Nations, how the Bread
and Wine of that table, was truly and sincerely Flesh and Blood. 2. How the
causes agreed with their effects, and the words of our Savior, which were the
causes going before, agreed with their effects, both at the Table, and at the
Cross, that followed after. 3. How under diverse ^hapes of Bread and Wine at
the Table, was contained but one and the same Essence, because the same shapes
remaining, the Natures of Bread and Wine, by the omnipotency of the Word, were
changed, o^ reduced into the Nature of his Body; as before you have heard ^ut
of his former sermon. 4. How the things signifying (which were the shapes of
Bread and Wine remaining) and the things signified (which were the Body and
Blood of our Savior) came both to (...) called by the same names, because the
one did signify, exhibit, and co^aine the other. By all which it appears (the
Author having his right brought back again, and his own breath being
restored again unto him, which you had thought to steal and smother) that he
plainly confesses the Bread and Wine to be Flesh and Blood, and that the
Nature of the one being changed into the Nature of the other, they are both
reduced into one Essence; which is the same Doctrine, that your Adversary
professes, and maintayneth against you.

Your Adversaries affirm, the Bread to be made a Sacrament and the Body of
Christ, by the words of Consecration, for the which cause they not only adore
it before they receive it, but also they have ever held, that it might be
lawfully given to Infants, and that which remains thereof they are wont to
reserve to be given afterward to the sick, or to others that come to receive,
as occasion requires. You Protestants affirm on the other side, that it
becomes a Sacrament, and a Seal of the Body of Christ unto you, without any
change in the thing, by the lively Faith of the Receauers; and consequently you
give it not to Infants, because they cannot receive it with that Faith which
makes it a Sacrament: and that also which remains thereof, after the whole
Action, you take to be no better then common Bread, and so you use it. As
custom is the best interpreter of the law, so the practice of the Church is
the best interpreter of her own Doctrine. Wherefore to know what S. Cypria^
with the Church of God in the second Age after Christ believed at that time,
concerning this point of the B. Sacrament, there can be no surer way, then to
examine what is practiced in communicating the same to Infants, and in
reserving of it, to be taken as need required. Which S. Cyprian in his sermon
De Lapsis, his own undoubted work, has not obscurely recorded: for he
relates (Test meipso) and sacrificantibus nobis; my self being witness, and
we our selves offering sacrifice, that an Infant having been fed with a sopp
of wine before an Idol, and being afterward brought to Church, was much
tormented during the time of the Sacrifice, and when it is turn came to
receive, it resisted so vehemently, that the Deacon was feign perforce to open
it is mouth, and to power in somewhat of the Sacrament that was in the Chalice;
but (says S. Cypria^) The drink sanctified into the Blood of Christ, brake
out of her polluted bowels etc. In which Sermon he likewise testifies: That a
certain Woman when she would with unworthy hands have opened her coffer,
wherein was reserved the Holy Thing of our Lord, there sprung up fire from
thence, wherewith she was so terrified, that she durst not touch it. And, That
another defiled Person presuming to receive with others, could not eat, nor
touch the Holy Thing of God, for in his opened hands (instead thereof) he found
Ashes. By Document whereof (says S. Cyprian) it is showed, that the Lord does
depart when he is denied. By which Documents of reserving the Eucharist, and
giving it to Infants, they (who will not be obstinate) may also learn out of
S. Cyprian, that the Eucharist after the words of Consecration, was believed to
be really the Body of Christ, and not figuratively by Faith only, to him that
does worthily so receive it. Wherefore to conclude this Dispute, concerning the
Testimony of S. Cyprian for Transubstantiation, and Real Presence, as it was
false that your Doctors claymed him in the former Conference, so being plain
against them in this point, besides many other of no less importance, it was
fondly done of you, to say they claymed him.

Section IX. S. Augustine falsely alleged by Sir Humphry, against the Real
Presence.
Finally against the Real Presence you object other places of the Fathers,
affirming the Sacrament to be a figure of Christ's body, which your Adversaries
deny not. For they define all Sacraments to be signs and figures, according
whereunto they also hold, that as the Sacrament of the Eucharist is a figure,
in respect of the Shape or external accidents thereof, so it is the Body of
Christ, in respect of the thing contained in them.

But now that the Eucharist is only a figure, or that it is not the Body of
Christ, which you should have proved against them, or else you prove nothing,
none of the places alleged by you do show; neither is it possible in all the
Fathers to find so much as one place, that does sufficiently prove it. While
they in the mean time (besides many most express Scriptures, Matt. 26. Marc.
14. Luc. 22. Joan. 6. 1. Cor. 11. confuting also your principal obeiction,
that the Body of Christ cannot be in two places, Act. 9.5.22.8.23.11. 1. Cor.
15.8.) They, I say, on the other side produce so many superabu^dant Authorities
from the Fathers and Counsels in all Ages, conuincing the holy Eucharist to be
the Body of Christ, that I must needs say, they have discovered more bouldnes
(if not impudency) the^ learning or conscience, who either in books or in
Pulpits have pretended to show, that the Fathers in this point are plainly
against them. To make this appear, it may suffice at this time, briefly to
set down the belief only of those Fathers in particular, which your self in
your papers have produced for you, Tertullian, S. Austen, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome and Gelasius, showing, how evidently they teach the contrary Doctrine
as well in their writing elsewhere, as in those very places which your self have
cited. First therefore let us begin with Saint Augustine; who in his Works
making often mention of the Sacrament, gives us these particulers of his
Doctrine therein; That before the words of Consecration, that which was offered
is called Bread; but after the words of Christ have been pronounced, now it is
not called Bread, but it is called the Body, Sermon. 28. de verb. Domini. That if
Children had never seen the likeness of those things, but only when it is
offered, and given in the Celebration of the Sacrament, and that it should be
told unto them with most grave Authority whose Body and Blood it is, they
would believe nothing else, but that our Lord had never appeared to the eyes of
Men, save only in that likeness, lib. ^. de Trin. cap. 10. That Children were
wont to receive it, apud Beda^. in 1. Cor. 10. Who have not the mouth of Faith
to receive it. That it pleased the Holy Ghost, and was universally observed
that our Lords body enter into the mouth of a Christian before other meats, in
the honor of so great a Sacrament, Epist. 118. cap. 6. which must needs be
meant of the mouth of the Body. That we receive with our heart and mouth the
Mediator of God and Man Jesus Christ, Man giving us his Flesh to be eaten, and
his Blood to be drunk, although it seem more horrible to eat Man's flesh,
then to kill it, and to drink Man's blood then to spill it, lib. 2. cont.
Aduersaer. legi^ and Prophet. That we do not eat dead flesh dilaniated, and
cut in pieces, as the Capharnaites understood it; for this indeed were horible,
and would profit nothing; but we eat the flesh of Christ, as it is living
flesh, vegetated with his Spirit, which is Christ himself entirely as he is
now in Heaven, Tract. 27. in Joan. and 63 That no man eats that Flesh, before
he adore it, in Psalm. 93. That the rich men of this World coming to the Table
of Christ do receive his Body and Blood, which though they adore, yet are not
filled with it, because they do not imitate it, eating him that is poor, but
contemning poverty, Epist. 120. ad Honoratum. That the Apostles did eat the
Bread which was their Lord, Panem Dominum; though Judas did eat but the Bread
of our Lord, Panem Domini, Tract. 59. in Joan. For our Savior was not truly
his Lord, because Judas was not truly his servant; And if at the day of
Judgment he should say, Domine, Domine, our Lord would answer, I know thee
not.

Protestants may well say with Judas, that they eat the Bread of our Lord, if
our Lord did ordain it to be a figure of his Body, but they cannot say with
the Apostles, that they eat the Bread which is their Lord, because they deny
it to be their Lords Body. That Judas Iscariot received That (says he) which
the faithful know, the price of our Redemption, Epist. 162. ad Glor. That our
Savior did literally bear himself in his own hands when he gave it, Conc.
1. in Psalm. 33. That Bishops and Presbiters in the Church of Christ, are
properly Priests, de Ciuit Dei, lib. 20. cap. 10. Which does infer, that
properly also there are Priests and Sacrifices, and that Christian Priests do
properly offer Sacrifice upon Altars. Wherefore making often mention of MASS,
Sermon. 91. de Tempore, and Sermon. 251. he says likewise, that our Savior
changed the Sacrifice according to the order of Aaron, and did institute a
Sacrifice of his own Body and Blood, according to the order of Melchisedech,
in Psalm. 32. and in Psalm. 39. and lib. 17. de Ciuit, Dei, cap. 20. That he
prayed God, to give him contrition and a fountain of tears, when he assisted
at the holy Altar, to offer that marvelous and heavenly Sacrifice, which
Christ the immaculate Priest did institute and command to be offered, in
Manuali. That a Priest of his offered the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ in a
house infested with wicked spirits, which was thereby freed, lib. 22. de Ciu.
Dei, cap. 8. That he desired all Priests (whom he called his Brethren, and
his Masters) who should read his Book of Confessions, to remember his Mother
at the Altar, where the also desired to be remembered after her death, lib 9.
Confess. cap. 13. That it is not to be doubted, the dead are helped thereby,
because the universal Church receiving it from the Fathers, observed that it
should be offered for those, who departed this life in the communion of Christ's
Body, Sermon. 32. de verbis Apostoli. He reckons it amongst the Heresies of
Aerius, that he denied Oblations and Prayers for the Dead, Haer. 53. Could any
Catholic at this day, or Bellarmine himself if he were now alive, more fully
declare his own Doctrine in this point of the Real Presence, and of the
Sacrifice of the Mass; then does S. Augustine against you? though in other
things you may retain some difficulties, yet in this me thinks you should
freely acknowledge, that you are wholly convinced.

Finally, upon Leuiticus, quaest. 57. in the very place which your self have
cited, where there is nothing that may found for you, but only that the figure
is sometimes said to be the thing figured, (which as I take, it is only in
those cases, where it is known and presupposed to be a figure) he demands
why the people should be so much forbidden from the Blood of the Sacrifice of
the old Law, when as none were forbidden to take for their nourishment, the
Blood of this one Sacrifice, which was signified by all the former; but all
that desired life, were rather exhorted to drink it.

Now therefore hereupon, might not your Adversaries deeply charge you, that
you had egregiously abused S. Augustine, and plainly perverted his meaning?

Section X. S. Ambrose falsely alleged by Sir Humphry, against the Real
Presence.
LEt us now come to S. Ambrose, who converted S. Augustine, that we may see how
the Master and the Scholar agree together; he makes mention of the MASS,
and that himself said MASS, Epist. ad Sororem Marcellinam. He repeateth a
great part of the Canon of the MASS, which is now used: We offer unto thee
this immaculate Host; this reasonable Host; this unbloody Host; this holy
Bread, and Cup of life everlasting etc. And we pray thee to receive this
Oblation as thou did vouchsafe to receive the gifts of thy servant Abel the
just, and the Sacrifice of our great Father Abraham, and that which the high
Priest Melchisedech did offer unto thee, lib. 4. de Sacramentis, cap. 6. He
says: We daily adore the Flesh of Christ in the Mysteries (that is to say, in
the MASS, or Sacrifice) lib. 3. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 12. He makes his
prayer unto that Bread, to heal his infirmity, to come into his heart, to
cleanse both his flesh and his spirit from all that defiles, in his prayer
preparatory before Mass. And in his Book De Mysterijs init. cap. 9. he
obiecteth in this manner; Perchance thou will say, I see another thing, how
do thou affirm unto me, that I receive the Body of Christ? Whereunto he
answers: How many Examples have we to prove it, not to be that which Nature
has formed, but that which Benediction has consecrated: And that Benediction
is of greater power then Nature, because by it, even Nature it self, is
changed? And then declaring many Miracles wrought by Moses, Helias, and
Helizaeus, he concludes: If human benediction were able to change Nature, what
shall we say of Divine Consecration? If the speech of Helias was able to bring
Fire from the Heavens; Shall not the speech of Christ be able to change the
forms of the Elements? If the word of Christ were able to make of nothing that
which was not, can it not change the things that are, into that which they were
not? For it is no less matter to give new Natures unto things, then to change
their Natures. And a little after he says: It is manifest that a Virgin
brought forth against the ordinary course of Nature, and the Body which we
(Priests DO MAKE) is of the Virgin: What do thou require the order of Nature
(to be observed) in the Body of Christ, who was borne of a Virgin against the
order of Nature? Could the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or change of Nature
in the Sacrament, be more avouched, or better proved by any modern Papist? Who
likewise lib. 6. de Sacram. cap. 1. thinks it no blasphemy to say, as he
does, That as our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Son of God, not as man by
grace (or by Faith) but as the Son of the substance of his Father: so (as he
himself has said) it is true Flesh which we receive; That is to say, not by
grace, or by Faith only, but in Truth, and in Substance.

Finally in the place which you cite for your self, lib. 4. cap. 5. de Sacram.
(where there is nothing to be found in your favor) he has these express
words. Therefore before Consecration, it is Bread; but after the words of
Christ come to it, it is the Body of Christ. And before the words of Christ, it
is a Cup full of Wine and Water; when the words of Christ have wrought, then it
is made the Blood which redeemed the People. To conclude, our Lord Jesus
testifies unto us, that we receive his Body and Blood; Ought we to doubt of
his Faith and Testimony? Here if I had concealed the name of S. Ambrose, would
not the Reader think, the man had lived in our time, that wrore so forcibly
and vehemently against you?

Finally, in the former Chapter of the same Book he says again: The bread,
is bread before the words of the Sacrament, but after the words of
Consecration, of Bread is made the flesh of Christ. And again in the same
little Chapter, as if by often repeating the same thing he meant to vex or
confound every obstinate Protestant that should read it, he says: Therefore,
that I may answer thee; It was not the Body of Christ before Consecration, but
after Consecration, I say unto thee, it is the Body of Christ. And again a
little after, repeating the same again, as if he had now convinced his
Readers, he concludes: You have therefore learned; that our Bread is made the
Body of Christ, and that Wine and Water is put into the Chalice, but is made
Blood by the Consecration of the heavenly Word: But it may be thou will say, I
see not the form of Blood. But it has the likeness; for as thou have
received the likeness of death, so thou drinkest also the likeness of Blood,
and not the visible form of Blood, that there might be noe horror of Blood;
and yet the price of our Redemption, which is the Blood of Christ, might work
in us. Thou have learned therefore, that thou receauest the Body of Christ.
Which you also might have learned, if you had read him your self, and not
trusted others that read him for no other purpose, but only to wrest his words
against his meaning.

Section XI. S. Hierome falsely alleged, by Sir Humphry, against the Real
Presence.
NOW come we to S. Hierome, who thinks it noe blasphemy to say Epist. 1. ad
Heliod. That Priests with their sacred Mouths do make the Body of Christ.
And, Epist. ad Euag. That his Body and Blood is made at their prayer. And, in
cap. 25. Matthew. writes as follows: After the typical Passover was ended
etc. he takes Bread and passes over to the Sacrament of the true Passover,
that as Melchisedech the Priest of the most high God had done, offering Bread
and Wine to prefigure him; he also might represent the truth of his Body and
Blood. That is to say, as Melchisedech offered Bread and Wine to prefigure him;
so he also taking Bread and wine, offered the truth of his Body and Blood to
fulfill the figure. According whereunto, in Ps. 190. speaking to our Savior he
says: As Melchisedech offers Bread and Wine; so thou also offerest thy Body
and Blood, the true Bread and the true Wine. In that sense, true Bread, as in
Epist. ad Hedibiam, quaest. 2. he says, that Moses gave noe true Bread; And
as our Savior said, Joan. 6. That his Father gave them true Bread from heaven.
Where also S. Hierome has these words: Let us hear the Bread which our Lord
brake, to be the Body of our Lord and Savior. And he adeth a little after. He
sat at the Banquet, and was himself the Banquet; he the eater, and be that
was eaten.

Finally, lib. cont. Vigil. cap. 3. he reprehendeth Vigilantius, for speaking
against Relics in this manner; Therefore (according to thy speech) the Bishop
of Rome does ill, who upon the Bones of Peter and Paul (which we call
venerable, but thou esteemest most vile dust) does offer Sacrifices to God, and
makes their To^bes to be the Altars of Christ. According whereunto in Proverb.
11. he also says; That after this life, small sins may be taken away, by
pain, by prayers, and alms of others, and by celebrations of MASS.

Lastly in his Book against Iouinian, which you cite at random without any
number, I find nothing but this that may any way please you: In the type of his
Blood he offered not Water, but Wine, lib. 2. cap. 4. This testimony I find
alleged by your Doctors as S. Hieroms, for their mere figurative or typical
Presence; wherein they discover either ignorance or desire to deceive their
Readers. For whosoever shall take the pains to peruse the place, will find the
aforesaid words not to be S Hieroms but Iouinians, whose discourse against
Abstinence from flesh and wine, S. Hierome there setts down in that Heretic
his own words, whereof these are a part, In the Type of his Blood he offered
not water but wine. And S. Hierome afterward coming to answer this obeiction
against drinking of water, and Abstinence from Flesh says, that Christ never
used wine nor dainties, excepto mysterio quo Typum suae passionis expressit,
and pro probanda corporis veritate. Where the Saint terms the holy Eucharist
a Type, not of the Body and Blood of Christ, as the Heretic did; but of his
Passion, which is represented in the Mystery of the Mass, which is the
ordinary Catholic Doctrine and phrase.

Notwithstanding, seeing this Heretic, erred not against the Catholic
Doctrine of the Real Presence, his words have a true sense, and make against
you Protestants. For you deny, that in his last Supper, he offered any thing at
all, and say, that only upon the Cross, he offered himself once for all, not
only sufficiently by his Blood and Passion, Heb. 2. but also effectually,
against Mal. 2. without any other clean oblation, for the application of the
merit of his Passion unto us. This place therefore makes not for you, neither
is it any way against them though it were S. Hieroms, for they grant he
offered Wine in type or figure of his Blood, but he offered also his Blood,
answering the figure in Truth and Substance. As he was Priest after the order
of Melchisedech, in Bread and Wine, he offered Bread and Wine in figure: As the
offering of Melchisedech was a figure of his offering, he offered also his Body
and Blood, which was the Truth or Substance of that figure. Which to be the
meaning of S. Hierome, may sufficiently appear by that which has been said,
and these other words of his Epist. ad Marcellam, do make it yet to appear
more plainly saying: Melchisedech in the Type of Christ offered Bread and
Wine, and dedicated the Mystery of Christians, in the Body and Blood of our
Savior.

Section XII. Tertullian and Gelasius falsely alleged by Sir Humphry, against
the Real Presence. And S. Ignatius absurdly claymed by the Protestant Doctors.
THere remains behind of the Authors you allege, Tertullian and Gelasius.
Tertullian is clear for them, who in his Book De resurrectione caruis, to
prove that our flesh shall rise again and be saved, uses these words that
follow: The flesh is washed, that the Soul may be cleansed. The flesh is
anointed, that the Souls may be consecrated. The flesh is fed with the Body
and Blood of Christ, that the Soul may be fatned. Though the Soul may feed on
Christ by the metaphorical mouth of Faith; yet the flesh has no such mouth to
feed upon him, and if it had, being only fed metaphorically therewith, nothing
would follow thereof, but that it might rise and be saved only metaphorically;
and so Tertullian should have proved that which he there impugned. In fine, as
the flesh is here said to be truly washed and anointed, so also it must be
understood to be truly fed, and not to be fed by faith only, or in figure.

Which Argument to prove the Resurrection, Tertullian seems to have learned
of Irenaeus lib. 4. cont. Haer. cap. 34. whom also he calls Omnium
Doctrinarum cariosisim^m Exploratorem. lib. cont. Valent. prope initium. And
therefore because the Doctrine of Irenaeus in that place does serve very well to
confirm both the doctrine of Tertullian, and the Real Presence here in
question, I will give you his whole discourse. Quomodo constabit ijs etc.
(says he of the Heretics against whom he wrote) How can they assure
themselves, the Bread wherein thanks are given, to be the body of their Lord,
and (the Cup to be) the Cup of his blood; if they do not confess him, to be
the Son of him that made the world? And how again do they say that, that
flesh must go into corruption, and not receive life, which is nourished by the
body and blood of our Lord? Therefore either let them change their opinion, or
let them cease to offer the things aforesaid. But our Dictrine agrees with the
Eucharist, and the Eucharist again confirms our Doctrine; for we offer
(therein) unto him those things that are his, (because being the Son of God,
he makes the^ by his omnipotency his own Body and his own Blood) and
consequently we teach the communication and unity of (his) Flesh, and of (his)
Spirit (with us; (our flesh being fed with his Body and Blood, and receiving
thereby his Spirit to live for ever.) For as the bread which comes from the
Earth, receiving the vocation (or word) of God, is now no more common bread,
but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, the one earthly (coming from the
earth) and the other Heavenly, (the Body and Blood of the Son of God:) so
also our bodies receiving the Eucharist (by the communication and unity of his
flesh with ours) are no more corruptible, having now the hope of Resurrection.
So that according to these ancient Fathers; as we believe our Savior to be
the Son of God: so must we believe the Eucharist to be his Body and Blood.
And as we believe the Resurrection of the Flesh: so must we believe that our
flesh is fed with the flesh of Christ. And either you must change your opinion,
or else, as now you have ceased to offer these things, and to feed your flesh
with the body and blood of Christ; so you are also in danger to change your
belief as well of the Divinity of Christ, as also of the Resurrection of your
own bodies.

But it may be, the place which your self have cited, lib. 4. cont. Marcionem,
out of the same Author, is no less with you the^ was the former against you:
his words are these: Professing therefore that with a desire he desired to eat
the Pasche as his own (for it was not seemly that God should desire to eat the
Pasche of another) having taken the Bread, etc. he made it his own body,
saying: This is my body; that is, the figure of my body. But the figure had not
been, unless there were a true body. Whereof citing imperfectly, but half
the Sentence: This is my body, This is the figure of my body, and changing
that, into this, to make it sound more fully for you, you guilefully omit the
other half; The bread which he took he made his body, saying, This is my
body: which are evidently against you. The words also which you cite, wherein
the Author seems to say, This is my body; that is to say, this is the figure
of my body, and no more, your Adversaries do clearly show to have another
meaning.

First, because otherwise, he should not only teach that which is directly
contrary to his former Doctrine in the place before alleged, but also should
contradict himself in this very sentence: for according to our exposition he
should not have said, that Christ took bread and made it his body, which is
false, if it be only a figure of his body; but that he took bread, and made it
the figure of his body, saying: This is my body, that is to say, the figure of
my body, and consequently in the words that follow, he should have said, But it
were not a figure unless there were a true body; and not as he does, but there
had not been a figure, if there were not a true body. For if the figure and
the body were both at the same time, why should he say of the one, that it had
been, and of the other, that it was?

Secondly, your Adversaries therefore do say, the meaning of those words, This
is my body, that is, the figure of my body, to be; This is my body, that is,
the figure of my body in the law, now by me fullfilled; Or, This is my body,
that is to say, this is the bread which was a figure in the Law signifying my
body, and is now fullfilled by me; having relation to the words of the Prophet
Jeremy which a little after he cites and expounds, and shows to have been
then fullfilled by our Savior. As in the like sense S. John Baptist, for
example, when he saw our Savior might have said, This is the Messiah, that is
to say, The Lamb of God which was the figure of the Messiah in the Law, to
signify, that the Prophecy of the Lamb of God in Isa. 16. was then fullfilled
in our Savior.

Therefore that Tertullian meant to say, This is my Body, that is to say, the
figure of my Body, now fullfilled etc. your Adversaries do plainly prove.
First, because it is evident that Tertullian in this place intended to show how
our Savior in his Pasche, fullfilled the law, against Marcion, who being an
Enemy of the Old Testament, contended that our Savior came to dissolve it; and
Tertullian argues against him in this manner. The Bread of Christ in the law
did signify the Body of Christ, which he proves out of Jeremy 11. saying:
Come, let us put Wood on his Bread: that is (says Tertullian) the Cross upon
his Body. But our Savior gave his Apostles, that Bread which he made his Body,
saying, This is my Body, therefore he fullfilled the law, in giving that Body
which the law figured in Bread, and was therefore called Bread in Jeremy.

In the same manner again he proves, that giving his Blood in the form of
Wine, he fullfilled the law, because he gave that which the law figured in
Wine, and therefore Genesis 49. was called Wine, where it was prophesied of our
Savior; That he should wash his stole in Wine, that is, (says Tertullian) his
Flesh in blood; So says Tertullian, he, qui tunc vinum in sanguine figurauit,
who then made Wine a figure of his Blood, now consecrated his Blood in Wine.

Secondly, your Adversaries prove the same, because Tertullian urges these
former words, to prove also against Marcion, that our Savior had a true Body,
and not the shadow or phantasme only of a Body as he contended. Which supposing
that his Body was (as Tertullian speaks) the figure of his Body then
fullfilled; he proves, because unto the figure of a Body to be Crucified,
there must answer a true Body: for of a Phantasme (says he) there can be noe
figure.

Secondly he proves the same, Because in the mention of the Cupp, instituting
his Testament signed with his Blood, he confirmed the substance of his Body.
That is to say: he confirmed his Body to be no shadow, but a substance; for,
says he, the proof of Blood, is a proof of Flesh; and the proof of Flesh, is a
proof of a true body. Wherefore having given Blood in his Testament, he gave
also a true Body.

These Arguments therefore have place, if according to the sense which your
Adversaries make of the words of Tertullian, Our Savior fullfilled the law, by
giving that which was figured in the law. But if according to your exposition
he gave only a figure of his Body and Blood; he gave not that which was figured
in the law, as Tertullian himself expounds the law; for that which was
figured in the law (says Tertullian) was that Body which was to be crucified,
and by consequence he fullfilled not the law: which notwithstanding was the
Heresy of Marcion, there condemned by Tertullian. And again, if our Savior
had given that which was only a figure of his Body, Tertullian could not have
proved thereby, that our Savior had a true Body answerable to the figure
thereof, in the Prophet Jeremy. For if there might have been a figure of a
figure, there might have been also a figure of a Phantasme. And if in the
mention of the Cup, he had not signed his Testament with true, but only with
figurative Blood, his Testament had not been true, but only figurative;
neither had he thereby confirmed, that his Body was a true Substance. For
figurative Blood, could have proved but figurative flesh, and figurative flesh
could have proved but a figurative Body.

Add unto this, that if in your sense Tertullian has said, This is my Body,
that is, the figure of my Body: Marcion might as well have said in like manner:
This is my Body, that is to say, the shadow, or Phantasme of my Body. And so in
effect, Tertullian had agreed with Marcion, whose Heresy he there condemned;
and had impugned the Truth of the Eucharist, which he there mentioned; for as
Ignatius long before observed the Simonian and the Saturnian Heretics, did not
admit Eucharists and Oblations, because they did not confess the Eucharist to
be that flesh of our Savior which suffered for our sins, Epist. ad Smyr. vt
citatur a Theodoreto Dial. 3. Wherefore if Tertullian had not confessed the
Eucharist to be the flesh of Christ, he must also have denied the Eucharist and
the oblatio^ thereof; and for the same reason the Protestants denying it to be
the flesh of Christ, and consequently denying the oblation thereof, it is
evident that they admit not the Eucharist of Ignatius, no more, then the
Simonian and Saturnian Heretics have done before them; but instead of the
Eucharist which was in his days, they have supposititiously brought in another
of their own invention.

This is that S. Ignatius Martyr, the disciple of S. John, thought to be that
Boy, who was found to have the five Barley loaves and two fishes which our
Savior multiplied, that thereby the hearts of men might be the better disposed
to believe the local multiplication of his own body in the dreadful Mystery.
Even from thence he took a great devotion thereunto, and was even then
ordained to be a witness of the admirable Doctrine thereof. I delight not, says
he, Epist. ad Romans post med. in the nutriment of corruption, I desire the Bread
of God, the Heavenly Bread, which is the Flesh of Christ the Son of God, and
the drink which is his Blood, And as he had been fed with the bread, which
was Christ's flesh while he lived, so when he came to dye, he desired that his
flesh might be grown'd as in a Mill with the teeth of Lions, that he might be
made clean bread for the mouth of our Savior. Where also he says: It is not
lawful without a Bishop (that is to say, without orders received from a
Bishop) to baptize, nor to immolate Sacrifice. And what Protestant Minister
will take upon him, to immolate Sacrifice? Or what Protestant Bishop, either
can or will give him power to do it? For which cause the Centurists, Cent. 2.
cap. 4. affirm those words of his, to be incommodious, Col. 55. dangerous,
and as it were the seeds of errors, Col. 167. Yet this is that Ignatius of the
first Age, whom your Doctors with unspeakable bouldnes claymed to be theirs,
as you know in the former Conference; and in their Book would make fools
believe, that the Catholics when they heard him named, much rejoiced, taking
him to be Ignatius Loyola, the founder of the Society of JESUS. But the truth
is, your Doctors might as well have claymed the latter as the former. For i^ his
Religion be tried by Works, or Epistles that are extant, then your Authors
disclayme from the former no less then from the later. Your M. Wotton being
urged with the saying of Ignatius in the behalf of Merit, taken out of his
Epistle to the Romans, undoubtedly his, as both S. Hierome and Eusebius
acknowledge, yea S. Irenaeus (lib. 3. aduers. haeres. prope finem) does allege
a sentence of this Epistle yet to be found therein: being I say, pressed with
this testimony, your Doctor in his defense of Perkins page 339. answers in
these words: I say plainly, this man's testimony is nothing worth, because he
was of little judgment in Divinity. What more could he have said in contempt of
the testimony of S. Ignatius of Loyola? But your Grand Master Calvin yet
speaks more plainly in his Institutions l. 1. c. 14.. 44. Ignatium quod
obtendunt, nihil naenijs illis quae sub Ignatij nomine edita sunt, putidius.
Whereas they produce the testimony of Ignatius, I say nothing is more rotten or
corrupted (with Papistry) then those trifling Epistles that go under his name.
If nothing be more rotten, that is, more Papisticall, and contrary unto
Protestants then the Doctrine of the writings we have of S. Ignatius the
Apostles Disciple, then is he as much for us as S. Ignatius of Loyolae. And the
same M. Calvin in his Book de participatione Christi in Coena, whereas
Westphalus the Lutheran alleges the testimony of Ignatius cited by Theodoret
in his 3. Dialogue, out of his Epistle ad Smir^enses, where he charge the
Menandrian Heretics with his Caluinian heretical Doctrine, Non confitentur
Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi, they do not believe
the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ; Calvin, I say, not
without disdain frames this answer: What ingenuity is this to cite the
Epistle of Ignatius which even an ordinary (Friar or) Monk would hardly
acknowledge as his own? They know that have read those toys that they
contain nothing but tales of Lent, of Chrisme, of Tapers, of Fasting, and
festival days, which through superstition and ignorance crept into the Church
after Ignatius his days. Thus Calvin speaks of the Epistle cited by
Theodoret, by Eusebius, by S. Hierome, for the Epistle of Ignatius. So that as
I said, if the Religion of S. Ignatius the Disciple of S. John, be tried by his
writings, which all antiquity acknowledge as his, he is found, even by the
confession of Protestants, as very a Papist as was S. Ignatius of Loyola, to
wit, more then any ordinary Friar or Monk. What desperation then was it of
Doctor Featly, and to what a Nonplus was he brought, when he was forced to
give unto Ignatius and his writings the first place after the Apostles in the
Catalogue of Caluinian Professors? For this Author can no more be coupled
together with Calvin in the same Religion and Church, then light can agree
with darkness, Christ with Beliall. Which (besides what has been said) may
appear in the Preface of his Epistle to the Romans, by the great Encomium he
makes of that Church, Quae praesidet in Regione Romanorum; which presidence
must needs be understood of the Church of Rome above other Churches.

Thirdly, to draw to an end of this point, Tertullian seems to prove, that
our Savior gave his true body, because he professed, That with a desire he
desired to eat the Pasche as his own; for that it had been unseemly, that
God should have longed after the flesh of the Jewish Lamb (or quid alienum) or
after any thing else that was another. But if he had desired to eat bread with
his Apostles, he had not desired to eat his own, but that of another; and it
had been no less unseemly, that God should have longed to eat the bread of
another with his Apostles, then to eat flesh of another with the Jews.

Lastly, if this sentence of Tertullian be obscure, it must be expounded by the
other place before alleged, where he says, without any ambiguity, that our
flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ. For it were against all reason
that the plain words thereof should be expounded by this other place, which
seems to contain two contrary senses, and therefore is often alleged by us
against our Adversaries, and by our Adversaries against us.

As concerning Gelasius cont. Eutichem, the last Author that you allege; I will
be content that Chemnitius a learned Lutheran, and as great an Enemy of
Transubstantiation as your self, be judge between us, whether that place does
favor it, or does sound any way for it: his words are these Examen. part. 2.
page 88. Gelasius says, that the Wine and the Bread of the Eucharist, by the
work of the holy Ghost, do pass (or convert) into the divine Substance of the
Body and Blood of Christ; and verily these words do seem to sound very
strongly for the establishing of Transubstantiation. For that which passes
into another substance, and that by the working of the holy Ghost, certainly
does seem, not to remain in his former Substance. If you had seen this
place, or if passion had not blinded you, had it been possible you should have
cited Gelasius against Transubstantiation, which by the judgment of such a
professed Enemy thereof, does make so strongly for it?

Section XIII. The Conclusion of this Treatise.
THus much concerning the Authories of the Fathers alleged by you, partly
false cited, which may be pardoned; partly falsified, which seems to touch
your Honor; and all of them either wholly perverted, or far from the matter;
which coming from a Knight shows an excusable ignorance in this kind of
learning: But against the substance of the book you received, as I have showed
in the 4. first Sections of this Treatise, you have answered nothing. Now
therefore, good Sir, if according to your Degree, you will do your own self
Knights service, indeed set to your shoulders, and underprop your Church, as
Atlas was feigned to support the heavens; for as you have heard and seen in
the former Sections, it is so mainely battered with four such pieces of great
Ordinance, that unless it be mightly sustained, the sound of the^ alone is
sufficient to shake it down and ouerthow it. 1. Their visible Succession in
all Ages. 2. Their Conuersions of Nations in all Ages. 3. Miracles in
confirmation of their Doctrine in all Ages. 4. Censures of Fathers and
Counsels, for the condemnation of yours, in all Ages.

For 1. your Doctors did but beg the Question, when they made claim to Christ
and his Apostles, and began at the wrong end, making that their Argument, which
should have been their conclusion, and was to be proved, by nominating
Protestants to succeed them in all Ages, and especially in the Ages before
Luther, according to the words of the Question, which they undertook, to
answer. What foul shame, and extreme confusion is it to your Cause, when
being urged to name or bring forth but one Protestant in 500. or 1000. years,
before Luther, you are either constrained to answer it is not necessary, or
else supposing the ignorance of those that hear you, you are enforced to cloth
your nakedness, with the rags of Wyckliffe and Waldo, and other such accursed
Heretics; all of them holding some points with your Adversaries against you,
and being for other gross heresies noe less detested by them, then condemned
by you. Rather let the bowels of Oxford Library be ripped up, and ransacked
from end to end. Or else never leave digging, until you have wrought your
selves into those caves where Protestants lived for so many hundred years, to
find some Volumes, some Comme^taries, or some Records of the Acts and Gestes
of your Ancestors. If nothing can be found in Europe, recommend the matter to
the East Indian Company, or to the Western Voyagers, to seek and search among
furthest Nations, for Protestants, lineally descended from Christ and his
Apostles; which being discovered, were better found then Mines of gold. For
unless by some such means, the Professors of your Ghospels may be brought to
light, your Church cannot long continue above ground, but the former Question
alone, will suffice to conjure it down again into her ancient darkness.

2. What can be more unworthy, the^ when Priests, Jesuits, and other Religious
men execute the co^ma^deme^t and co^missio^ of our Savior in carrying his
Ghospel to the ends of the Earth, as their Ancestors have done in all Ages
before them, thereby proving themselves their true Successors, whom our B.
Savior, according to his promise, Matt. 28. has ever assisted, and will
always accompany, Teaching and baptizing all Nations, Omnibus diebus, vsque ad
consu^mationem saeculi, all days, or every day unto the end of the world: that
your wiued Ministers in the mean time, fatned with their benefices, should
only execute their own malice in railing upon those laborious men, and
deprauing their Christian endeauours, thereby showing themselves to be that
perverse and bastard generation, which instead of co^uerting Infidells does
labor only to subvert belieuers; instead of planting the faith of Christ, only
indeauor to extirpate that Faith, which they found to be already planted; and
instead of sowing the first corn, only scatter cockle and darnell upon that
corn which was first sowed by others. Rather set forth whole fleets of
Ministers, with their numerous families both for the East, and for the West, to
bring those miserable Nations unto the liberty and light of the Gospel, that
have layne so long captive under the foul bondage and execrable Tyranny of the
Prince of darkness. Then it would be quikly tried whether in those parts the
devils would submit themselves, and fly before them: or, Whether like the
stronger party Luc. 11.18. as hitherto in Virginia they have showed themselves,
they would be able to keep in peace the souls and vessels which they have
there so long possessed; until there come others stronger the^ your Ministers
that may be able to bind them.

3. What can be more impious, then whereas your Adversaries, like true
Christians confirm their doctrine in all Ages by those signs and myraculous
operations, which were promised to follow the true belieuers, Marc. 16.17. you
on the other side should have nothing to answer, but only like Jews and
Pagans to laugh at them, and at the holy Fathers themselves that were so
simple, as either to testify or to believe them. Rather join your hearts and
your hands together, that once in your time, you may see a General Council
from all Protestant Provinces meet together, where out of so many Religions
spru^g up amongst you, having chosen one by Lot to be generally professed,
beseech him, who hears all those that with a true Faith do call upon him, to
confirm that chosen doctrine by some ostension in the Sun, or in the Moon,
or with some such notorious sign from Heaven, as might no less exceed the
former Miracles of the Papists then the wondrous works of Moses, confounded
the magical practices of the Egiptian Sages.

4. And lastly, what can be more void of shame and conscience, then to claim
those Fathers of the first 500. years for yours, that have so impartially
censured so many several points of your Doctrine in the Heretics of their
times (for the which I refer me to the fourth Sectio^ of this Treatise) as he
that considers them, may justly esteem the body of your Religion to be
almost nothing else, but only a confarcination or bundle of old Heresies,
condemned by them. Rather join all in prayer, that if your Cause be true, as
Almighty God vouchsafed in his own person, to justify Job, against his
friends; so that our Savior would be pleased with a voice from Heaven, to
justify you against the Fathers. But over Shoes, over Head and Ears, says
the Proverb; according whereunto, if being once entered into a bad cause, it be
resolved, that still you must needs go forward; ceasing to falsify the words,
and to pervert the meaning of those holy Fathers, least God in his justice
double your punishment, as you double your iniquity, hold your selves to the
Scripture alone, and to your own interpretation of Scripture (with M. Luther,
and M. Calvin, and those learned Protestants of your own Nation for so many
years together) not fearing to reject the Fathers that were but men, and
directly refuting their errors* for in so doing, though you should want verity,
yet God might be pleased at the length, to have mercy upon you for your
sincerity.

O Merciful God, the Author of all truth! If you be in the truth, why should
you defend it by fraud and falsehood! And how can it stand with his good will
and pleasure, that against so many powerful Arguments and evident
demonstrations to the contrary, you should any longer thus contentiously hold
it? And obstinately so continue to profess it?

Certainly those 4. Considerations before remembered and reported more at large
in the 4. first Sections of this Treatise, do make it so evident unto me, that
theirs and not yours is the only true visible and universal Church ordained
and founded by Christ and his Apostles, to teach the world; that I wonder in my
heart how any learned Protestant can be so blind as not to see it, or so void
of honesty, as not to confess it. Neither if I were now a Protestant should
any thing withold me from joining my self unto them, unless it were only in
honor of that Religion wherein I was bred, to expect a little, Whether the
foresaid Catalogue of the Names of your Professors in all Ages, and especially
in the Ages before Luther, might be found and produced. The Question is now
very happily set on foot; I hope it will be soundly followed; and it were to be
wished, that no other Controversy might be embraced, before this, which is but
matter of fact and the key of all the rest, be fully cleared. If Satisfaction
may be given in this point, you may the better hope to be satisfied in the
rest. But if not so much as one man can be produced in 500. years before
Luther, that held not some maine points of Popery against you, or some other
gross errors condemned by you: if when Luther first began, not one Protestant
can be named, that did not first fall from the Religion wherein he was bred, or
which he had first received; then certainly it is not to be marueiled, if
thousands and thousands ere it be long, do renounce and abandone (with prayer
for those to come after the^, whom they shall leave behind them) that vpstart
Faith which was new when Luther began, and none at all before Luther.

ALmighty God, inspire the heart of his Majesty, whom it imports noe less
then our selves, that whereas the Catholic Recusants were never as yet accused
of heresy, according to form of Ecclesiastical justice, much less sommoned
and called to make their answer, or iuridically condemned; and that their
Enemies formerly ce^sured by General Cou^cells according to the Ancient Law
and received custom of the Church, have notwithstanding, been hitherto
admitted, not only as accusers, but also as witnesses and judges against them,
whereby the people of the Land, being constrained to hear the one party, and
restrained from hearing the other, have been morally compelled to love the one
and hate the other, to magnify the one and detest the other; his Majesty would
be pleased to grant unto all his loving subjects, for the salvation of their
poor Souls committed to his charge, that now at the length they might be
allowed both their ears, to hear both sides indifferently, to weigh and
ponder both causes, and well to consider of both Religions. Left under the
plausible name of spiritual liberty, they be cunningly held in miserable
captivity: being flattered with the show of light, they be ensnared in dubble
darkness: and being deluded with presumption of knowledge, they be bound and
buried in most dreadful ignorance. A request so favorable both in the sight of
God and Man, and so agreeable to the principles of Protestant Religion, as I
think it can be ungrateful to none, who do wish unfeignedly, that only
falsehood may be suppressed, and the truth maintained. For the which all those
that sincerely desire to serve God uprightly, shallbe infinitely obliged to
pray for his Majesty; not only as for their Gracious King, but also as for
their deliverer from the thraldom of conscience wherein he found them, and for
the Author of their chiefest liberty wherein he should place the^.

FINIS.

