A SPIRITVALL POSIE FOR ZION. OR Two Decades of Observations, Theological and
Philosophical.

BY ARCHIBALD SYMMER, Preacher of Gods word at Great-Oakley in
Northhampton-shire.

Virus ero, sime carnalis aranea carpat, Sed mel, siqua legate spiritualis apes.

LONDON, Printed for W. Sheares. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir THOMAS BROOK of Great-Oakley Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace in North-hampton-shire, and my very gracious
Patron. Grace in this world, and glory in the world to come.
Right Worshipful,
Wonderful is the power of the Almighty in the sense of Smelling, and
powerful is his providence in the object of the same, whether corporal or
spiritual: for as the first object is double; natural and artisiciall, so is
it a double demoustration of that vigilant care. The first part of this ocular
argument is this goodly Theater, the earth garnished with her glorious garment
of Flora's fertilities, that admirable diversity of fragrant flowers, The
second part is apparent by that acumen hominis, which God has instilled into
his reasonable creature, for the refreshment of the spirits through the
nostrils: for the witty industry of man about the procurement of artificial
smells, is great, as appears by his diligence about the Moschat, Sivet,
Conradus Gesner. Hist, of four footed beasts.
etc. But as the spiritual smell of the soul is far more precious, so is the
Divine Love and Providence in this, far more great and gracious; the
impregnable proof and pregnant truth where of is his eternal word, whence the
Redeemed of the Lord do gather odoriferous flowers, to prevent the noisome and
loathsome smell of impiety; the contemplative smelling of which gracious
garlands is the continual delight of David's Blessed man, Psalm 1.2. and the
practique a sweet savor unto the Lord, as in the example of Noah, Gen 8.21.
Now out of this sacred Garden (by the blessing of that ever. blessed Gardener)
I have gathered a few spiritual flowers, which I present unto your Worship in
testimony of my thanksulnes for all your constant loves, earnestly craving
that these first fruits of my poor Labors may pass into the world under the
shelter of your gracious acceptance; which patronage if I obtain, then shall
this Tuzzimuzzie have its wished and expected smell. Though theresore the
mighty Apolloes of this Learned generation could have dedicated unto your W. a
far more odoriferous Nosegay, yet reject not this simple one.

The Persian Prince took in good part
The water of the well,
Because he saw the giuers heart
The givers gift excel.
So let it please your W. to respect, Non quid, sed quo animo: for what I can,
I offer.

For lo I offer at your kindness shrine
This little Incense, or this flower of mine.
And so I humbly take my leave, commending both your self, and all yours to
the effectual blessing and grace of the Lord, and to the power of his word,
whereby he is able to build you up further, and to give you an incorruptible
inheritance among those that are called, and sanctisied through faith in the
Lord Jesus.

Your Worships ever to command, ARCHIBALD SYMMER.

To the Christian Reader.
IT may come to pass (Christian Reader) that some affe-ear'd Midas will
misconstrue these words of the Wife-man: Heeks. 12.12.
Of making many books there is no end, and much reading is a weariness of the
flesh: and some Cynicke Momus will mutter with the COmicke: Niljam dictum, quod
non sit dictum priur; all this therefore is but (...). But let thy Christianity
canse thee to consider the truth of that tried Position: (...): Nil tam facile
quam otiosum and dormientem de alioram labor and vigilijs disputare. Hieron in
Hos.
Martial shall sooner find Lelius carping his verses then publishing his own.
Sed tu vide, et side. The drift of my labors is thy good, the information of
the ignorant, and reformation of the rebellious. If I obtain this thing,
blessed is my desire. If thou attain this end, bless God the Beginner, and
finisher of the same: and so let carping Theon bite till his gums ache, and
viperous Zoilus spider-like consume his own bowels through unregarded malice:
but thou

Vive, vale, siquid novisti rectius is it is,

Candidus imperti, si non, his utere meeum.

And so I commend thee to the grace of the Almighty, and rest

Thine in the Lord Jesus A.S.

A SPIRITVALL Posie for ZION.
The first Decad.
Fl. 1. Of CHARITY.
IEhova Alpha and Omega, Invocatio. Genesis 15.1. Ps. 18.2.
thou All sufficient Shield to thy Saints, who out of the mouth of babes,
Psalm, 8.2.
and sucklings have ordained strength, and perfected thy praise, direct, and
protect, I humble entreat thee, both the mind and pen of thy poor servant,
that whatsoever shall proceed from hence may be according to the Analogy of
faith, and tend to the declaration of thy most orthodoxall will, through Christ
our Immortal Redeemer. Amen.

And thou (Gentle Reader) because I would have thee use me, and peruse my
labors in Love, and Judgment, I have begun with thee in Love, and of
Charity, and Sebrietie.

Aristotle enters into the treatise of his Demonstratiue Syllogism in his
Posterior Analytikes with the consideration of the these three Questions
principally: Cap. 1.
(...): so (to borrow the Egyptian spoil) we will begin our Love, the
Infallible Demonstration of unfeigned Christianity.

(...), (...) 2 Cor. 13.11.
that there is Brotherly Love even among the Militant Saints of God, is
questienlesse: for as Ichova the true God is the God of Love, so the true
Chrulian the man of God is the man of Love, as were Abraham, Genesis Romans 9.3.
Col. 1.4.1 These. 1.3. Philem. 5. Heb. 6.10. Apoc. 2.19.
45.15. Moses, Exodus 32.32. Paul, the Colossians, the Thessalonians, Philemon,
the Hebrews, and the Angel and Pastor of the Church in Thyattia. Neither
indeed is it possible to be otherwise: for as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13.1.
Though I speak with the tongue of men and of Angels, and have not Charity I
am become as sounding brass, or a tinckling cymball. And as by faith the
Redeemed of the Lord possess Christ lesus their Immortal Husband, Gal. 3.26.
and by patience their own souls, Luke. 21.19. so by the eternal bond of
Christian Amity they enjoy one another, 1 Cor. 13.13.
Ps. 133.1.

Though therefore, as the Lord lesus says, Matthew. 24.12. Among the wicked,
because iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold, yet the Love
of the Elect shall continue; and whosoever denies this, shall of necessity
infer, and aver this monstrous and rediculous absurdity; that there is no
treu Congregation on the earth; which flatly contradicts that truth of the
holy Ghost, Psalm. 97.10. The Lord preserves the souls of his Saints. Then
take away Charity, and take away the Congregation of Charity: Ephesians. 1.23. and
5.30.
for this Mystical Body of Christ is the Church of the God of Love, and
Kingdom of Amity; else should it be divided, and as the Lord says: Matthew.
12.25.
Every Kingdom aivided against it self, is brought to desolation. So certain
then and amiable is the admirable residence of this sacred affection in the
sanctified hearts of the godly, that they need not ask, (...), is there
Charity? All this therefore is written for the information and refermation (if
it be possible) of these prodigious and malicious monsters of men, who being
destitute of this heavenly grace; like the Salamander love to live in the fire
of viperous contention; that at the last they may be brought to a sense and
sight of their tragical estate and lamentable condition, that they are yet in
their sins, in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, they are
strangers from the life of God, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Hrael. Now
since this Love is so lovely, and this Charity is so charitable, (...), what
is it?

Answ. (...) Desinition of Charity.
It is that regenerated affection of the sanctified will, whereby the true
Christian embraces his sellowfaint with glorious exultation, and triumphing
gladness, (...), Charity is that Ecernall Tie, whereby the members of Christ's
Mystical Spouse are inseparably united, and conjoined, by the means of which
entire Obligation is set a work, that brave and noble fire of Christian Zeal,
that Zelus amicitiae, which is a compounded assection, of loy and griese, loy
for the prosperity of the Righteous, and Grief for their adversity, The
first was in David, 2 Samuel 6.14.
which made him dance before the Lord with al his might, because of the
spiritual tranquillity of Israel, The second was in Phine ths wife, wherefore
she named her child, 1 Samuel 5.21.
Ichabod, and said: The glory is gone from Israel, because the Philistines
took the Ark of God from them. Thus the Saints of God are both the Subject,
and Object of this celestial affection. Of the first already; now of the
second, and that for the illustration of our definition.

The Spirit of God, Heb. 13.1. The object of Charity.
calls this renewed motion of the heart, (...); so then materin obiecti is
(...), according to the notation of the word, frater uterinus, but in sense
more, that is, the party beloved is our Germane brother, not only by carnal
and natural generation, but likewise, yea more, by spiritual and
supernatural regeneration, whereby Iehoua is our Father, 1 John 3. (...) Gal.
4.16.
and the new Jerusalem our Mother.

But the extendure of this Fraternity and Brotherhood is more perspicuous, Gal.
4.26.
Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, but
especially unto them, who are of the household of faith. And which is St. Paul's
Household of faith, Deuteronomy. 5.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
and his all men? Even Moses Neighbor, Eocod. 20. from verse. 12. to 18. the
epiteme and sum whereof, is: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Luke
10.27. If some tempting Lawyer, or lusticiarie Pharisee ask, who is my
neighbor? the Lord Jesus himself answers there: A certain man in his journey
from Jerusalem to Jericho was wounded of thieves, ^uke 10.30.
and left half dead; The Priest and the Leuite that passed by, shut up their
bowels of compassion from him; but a certain Samparitane as he iourneyed that
way, came where the poor distressed wight, and oppressed soul lay, he was
touched with a sympathy, and fellow-felling of his misery, and extended his
warchfull pains, his loving cre, and merciful liberality unto him, and all
to procure his comfortable recoverie: Which now f these three was neighbor
unto him that fell among the robbers? Let the Lawyer answer: He that showed
mercy an him.

Herein appears the truth of the Apostles Allmen, and the equity of his
universal love, and that by an argument a minori: If a stranger be a
neighbor, then much more our domestikes, fellow-citizens, etc. but the first
is true, ergo, the last, at least should be so, if this bastard generation,
would no more degenerate.

The proposition is plain, the assumption is proved out of the Lawyers answer
to Christ: The Samaritane that showed mercy on the robbed man, ws neighbor
unto him. Now that the Samaritanes in general, and so consequently this
merciful one, were all strangers to the Jews, is evident: for our blessed
Redeemer calls the thankful Samatitane Leper, whom he had cleansed, A
stranger, Luke 17, 18. and the woman of Samaria marvelled that Christ, ( as
concerning the flesh, Romans 9.5.) being a Jew, would ask drink of her which
was a woman of Samaria: For the Jews, said she, have no dealings with the
Samaritanes, John 4.9. Therefore, as the Apostle says: Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew nor Greske, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ lesus: so there is
neither American, nor Indian, neither Barbarian of Morocco, nor In habitant of
Monomotapa, but all are brethren, whom, as we have opportunity, we must
embrace with Charity; those that are true Saints, with joy for their
sanctification; those that are not, in the judgment of Charity, with hearty,
and earnest supplications to the Lord for their true and timely conversion.

Wherefore, to concluded this passage with that noble practice of Plato: It is
written of that Moses Atticissans, that when he did give alms to a poor
profligate wretch, his friends admired that (...) Plato that divine Philosopher
would take pity on such a misereant; but he answered: Do bumanitati, non
homini, I show mercy on this man, not as he is wicked, but as, and because he
is a man of mine own nature. And indeed his reason was good; for as Tullie
says, Sanguinis conjunctio devincit homines charitate, Consanguinitie is a
necessaries bond, and natural motive to Charity. And if we consider our
first Parents, we shall find our selves bound (though e longinquo) by the same
obligation: for as Saint Paul says to the too superstitious Athenians: Acts
17.26.
The Lord has made (...) of one blood all nations of men, etc. Wherefore,
Exodus 23.4.
If thou meet thy enemies Ox, or his Ass going aftay, thou shall surely bring
it back to him again, etc. And, If thine enemy hunger, seed him, if he
thirst, give him drink; Romans 12.20.
for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. And if thou will
not obey, that heathen shall rise up at the day of Judgment, and condemn thee,
w ho art but a bastard Christian.

Now since this (...), this definition of lone shows, (...) The cause of
Charity,
what a blessed affection it is, it may be demanded in the third room (...),
what is the cause of it? for as the Poet says, Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere ausas. Charity is an heavenly agitation both in and on the
sanctified heart, whence then is it? from the earth? no: for all that is of the
earth, is both earthie, and earthly, but brotherly love is heavenly, therefore
it must needs come from the Lord of heaven, heavenly.

This fire then is kindled from the Empyrell Paradise of God, and this love is
enlived, and caused after this manner: The God of Love, yea the Lord of Love it
self has loved us, 2 Cor. 13.11.1 John 4.16. Zeph. 2.1. Ephesians. 1.4.
when we were not worthy to be loved, yea before we were at all in rerum
natura, which divine, and supreme love moved and procured him to choose us in
Christ before the foundation of the world, That we should be holy, and
blameless before him in love. This love of the Lord to his Saints, kindles in
their hearts this their dear love to their loving God again, which is a
final cause of that sempiternall love. So then that archetypus and primigenius
amor, that un searchable love of IEHOVA is the efficient cause, hujus amoris
ectypi, of this our love to our Maker: for as the seal imprinteth into the
wax that image and character that is engraven first into it self; so the Love
of God to us, imprinteth into our hearts our love to him again. And of this
love of ours to the Lrd arises our bounden Charity to our Brethren.

The Faithful love one another, because they love the Lord. Neither is it
possible to be otherwise: for the Spirit says, If a man say, I love God, and
hates his Brother, be is a liar, for he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. The
necessity then of the connection of those two loves of God and man, is great,
yea absolute, and the equity of of the dependencie of the latter upon the
former, is infringible: because man is the Image of God, created after the
same; Calvin. Just. 1.2. c. 8. sect. 40.
Genesis 1.27. and the Samts recreated and renewed in knowledge, etc. Colos. 3.10.
whence it follows, that whosever loves the Lord dearly with Danid, Ps. 18.1.
cannot choose but love his children sincerely. We do not speak of that
mercenary love, wherewith the servile Mammonists, and slavish drudges of this
perishing world, with the Jews, do love God for his Wine, his Oil, and such
transitories, nor of that evanishing shadow of s^^ming Charity, wherewith the
Hypocrites of this subtle generation favor the righteous for by-respects, and
sinister ends; but we treat of that true love wherewith we love our blessed God
for his own most sweet and gracious self, and of that upright Charity, by the
means whereof, in truth of heart we may say one to another, as Paul to his
Corinths, It is not yours, but you that I seek. a Cor. 12.14.
And so this Brotherly love is that (...), that infallible sign of true saving
grace planted in that sanctified heart that enjoyes it, whereby such a noble,
faithful, and loving Brother may most certainly persuade his own soul, that
he truly loves his God, and was first beloved of him, and that before the
^oundation of the world, so that now all things work together for his best,
his Bliss, Romans 8.28.
even his eternal Joy, being called according to the purpose of God, which is
his sweetest consolation. For never did, yea never could there any man love the
chosen Darlings of God, but only he, who was first beloved eve^lastingly, and
mercisully chosen of God.

O then let us labor for the real practice, Application.
true exercise of this most joyful and blessed affection. The woman of Samaria
when she knew that gift of God, namely the excellency of the water of Life,
she entreated the Lord to give it her, that she might thirst no more; John
4.15. So behold and consider the dignity of this fire of Love and Life, and be
ravished with a servent desire of it. Motives to Charity.
And that we may be moved unto the amiable performance of this most acceptable
obedience; let us listen to these two mighty motives: the first is the
soeveraigne will and imperious precept of the Lord of hosts; the second is the
fruitfulness and gracious bounty of this liberal Grace.

Concerning the first; we are most frequently commanded to love our neighbor,
Exodus 23.4. L^uit. 19.18: D^ut. 22.1. Proverb. 15.17. Esaias 1.17. Matthew. 19.19.
Luke 11.42. John 13.34, 35. c. 15.12. and 17. Romans 12.9. and 10. c. 13.8.1 Cor
1.2.2 Cor. 2.8. Gal. 5.6.13, 14. and 22. Ephesians. 3.17. c. 4.2.15. and 32. Phil.
1.9. c. 2.2. Colos. 2.2.1 These. 3.12. c. 4.9. etc 5.8.1 Timoth. 1.5. c. 2.15.
c. 4.12. etc. 6.11.2 Timoth. 1.13. and 2.22. Tit. 2.2. Heb. 10.24. Iam. 1.27.1
Pet. 1.22. c. 2.27. c. 3.8. c. 4.8. etc. 5.14.2 Pet. 1.7.1 John 2.10. c.
3.11.14.16, 18. and 23. etc. 7.11. and 21.2 John 5. Jude 2. So frequent is the
precept, because the duty is so necessary.

Concerning the second motive; great is the utility and bounty of love, for
first it causes that amiable and quiet peace of assotiation, which the
Psalmist declares, with the blessings that accompany the same, in this manner:
Behold how good, and how comely, and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to
dwell together in unity. Psalm. 133.
It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard,
even Anrons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments: as the deaw
of Hermon, and as the deaw that descended upon the Mountains of Sion; for
there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. Charity is the
exercise of the faithful, Call. 5.6.
1 Cor. 16.14. Whence it comes to pass, that as the ungodly bury many good
gists in others, under that one infirmity of malice; ^rov. 10.12.
so Gods Children cover many infirmities in others, under that one good gist of
Charity: for as St. Hierome says, Non aeque audiunt Inimici, and Amici; qui
Inimicus est, etiam in scirpo nodum quaerit. Envy has the yellow laundies: 1
Cor. 13.5.6.
but Charity is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoy ceth not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: for Charity is not suspicious, but
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things. Chap. 8.2. Chap 13.4.
Charity edifieth. Wherein? in many things; for it works longanimitie and
patience, kindness, benevolence, and humility. Unto these Charity adds
spiritual magnanimity; 1 John 4.18.

By the virtue of Charity the Saints live in the light of the Lord, and are
blameless, 1 John 2.10. By Charity we are persuaded of the sanctifying grace
of God in this world, Chap 3.14.
and of his crowning glory in the world to come.

Finally, Charity is the bond of perfection, Coloss. 3.14. and the fulfilling
of the law, Romans 13.8. And if perpetuity and eternity can conciliate condign
commendation to any of Gods Graces, then behold the worthy praise of Charity,
even above faith and hope: And now abides Faith, 1. Cor. 13.13.
Hope, and Charity, these three: but the greatest of these is Charity.
Therefore Ho, every one that lists, and longs to eat of this peaceable
fruit, desire of God, and labor that this fruitful Tree of Charity may be
planted in your hearts; for it is the gift of God, 2 Timothy 1.7. 1. John 4.7.2.
Cor. 5.2.4.
and every one that groaneth earnestly, desiring with the Apostle to be
clothed upon with that eternal building of God, which is from heaven, that
mortality might be swallowed up of immortality; let him nourish, and cherish
this heavenly Plant, that it may be fruitful and eternal; so shall he be
like David's tree planted by the Rivers of water, Psalm. 1.3.
that brings forth his fruit in due season, (...) even in his own appointed
season: his lease also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.

Fl. 2. Of SOBRIETY.
SO BRIETIE is a moderation, and refraining of sensualtiei, and unruly
affections. Defin.
This Virtue is taken two ways; sometimes in a larger sense, and sometimes in
stricter signification: Sobriety in the larger sense, is that Virtue whereby a
man resists and conquereth four mighty monsters of darkness, Comus,
Bacchus, Venus, and Nemesis; he refraineth, and abstaineth from gluttony and
drunkenness, chambering and wantonnosse, strife, and envy; and it is twofold,
Philosophical call and Christian: Offic. lib. 1.
Philosophical Sobriety is Tullics fourth Cardinal virtue: Christian
Sobriety is that Sancta abstinentia, wherewith the Saints of God in former
times, Exodus 24.18.
as Moses, David, Job, Ezekiel, Daniel, John Baptist, and the Apostles, were
singulatlie endued Sobriety in the stricter signification, 2 Samuel 16.10. Job.
31.1. Ezekiel 4.9, 10, 11 Dan. 18. etc. 10.3. Matthew. 11.18. Luke 10.7.
is Virtus ebrictatis fugax, a shunner of drunkenness, for if we respect the
notation of the word, so much does the erymologie of the same import, that is,
sine ebrietate; and so does Martial take it: Ebrius es, nec exim, saceres haec
sobrius unquam.

With this Sobriety was David endued, when he refused to drink of the water
of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23.16. so were the Rechabites, Ierem. 35.6.
and 14. Of this Sobriety in sobriety, by the blessing of the Almighty, will
we speak; which grace that it may the more evidently appear, and shine forth
in its' orien: (...), and most gracious beauty, let us a little, in derision,
with the Lacedaemonians, Silenus
view that old drunken ass rinding on his Ass, -- Quibacnlo titubantes ebrius
artus
Sustinet, and pando non fortiter baeret asello.


Behold the chidish and sottish countenance, the swinish and hellish behavior
of monstrous, and Bedlem Ebriery: for, Contraria juxta se opposita clarius
cluceseunt. Marcilins Ficinus speaks of two kinds of drunkenness, one above
the Moon; that is, celestial and heavenly, stitred up by spiritual and
immortal drink, whereby the mind being set above it self, forgettech all
mortal diseases, and only considers divine things. Musaus calls this the
reward of virtue; and Orpheus says, that this metaphorical drunkenness was
signified by the holy ceremonies of Dionysius. Of this speaks Salomen,
Proverh. 9.5. and Christ Matthew. 26.29. The other kind of drunkenness is under
the Moon, and worldly, which is stirred up of drink taken of the infernal
fountain Lethe, that is, carnal drink, whereby the mind being set without,
and under it self, forgets diving things, and doteth; as appears by
Alexander the Great, who being drunk killed Clitus one of his dearest friends,
for rebuking his laseivious behavior, and so perished himself at last by the
fatal cup of Hercules. This drunkenness do I declare, which is a most
brutish work of darkuesse; for of a man synony^^^, is makes a man homonym^s,
of a man indeed, it makes a man but in show, yea hardly so much, but rather an
Ape in a man's shape, which is worse then Apuleius his golden Ass: for as the
Prophet faith, Whoreaome, Apul. de auren Asino. Isa. 5.11.1 Cor. 6.10.
wine, and new wine take away the heart. Hos 4.11. Drunkenness causes
everlasting woe, and misery, Prove. 23.29. and all other vices; as says the
Peet?

Ebrietas in seculpas complectitur omnes. It is the Metropolitan City of the
Province of all vices, for it is the Devils liquout, wherein having steeped the
Drunkard, he forms him like soft clay, into whatsoever shape he lists, and
so drunkenness expels grace from his heart, and debareth him from the
kingdom of grace in this world, and of glory in the world to come. 2. Sam.
13.25.1 King. 16.9.10. Conr. Gesn Hist. of sour footed beasts.
Behold the truth of these things in Amnon, Ela, etc. The Ape is an ironicall,
ridiculour, and unprofitable Beast, whose slesh is not good for meat, as a
Sheep; neither his back for burden, as an Ass, nor yet commodious to keep
a house like a Dog, but of the Greciuns is called, (...), a Beast made for
laughter: so is the Drunkard, Telluris inutile pondus, fungus, and testudo,
good for nothing but to be the Devils fool. But the night is far spent, the
day is at hand: Romans 13.12, 13, 14. The use.
let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of
light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting, and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. We may behold the beautiful face of Sobriety in this mirror of
drunkenness, whose guardarobba Heaven would have us to put on, Luke 21.43.1
These. 5.6.
Therefore, let us not sleep as do others, but watch and be sober: Job 1.7.
etc. 2.2.1. Pet. 5.8.
for the Devil our common inveterate adversary walks about as a roating
Lion seeking whom he may devour. But what are the means of this singular
virtue? Sobriety of mind: wherefore lee us study, (...), Romans 12.3.
not to think of our selves more highly theu we ought to think, but to think
according to Sobriety.

Fl. 3. Of DIVINE PROVIDENCE.
IBi incipit Divinum auxiliu^ ubi desinit humanu^, the Saints extreuntie sare
Gods opportunities, which is evidently proved, by his gracious dealing with his
chosen darlings from time to time; Exodus 14.
as with Moses, and Israel at the red Sea: for incamping before Pihahiroth
between Migdol, over against Baal-zephon, when they were enclosed of the
Egyptians, so that the bleare eye of carnal reason could not lee any issue,
or way to escape that imminent exterminion, but that Pharaoh would root the out
of the Land of the I ving; then did dest thou O powerful Provident IEHOVA,
divide the Sea, and thy people passed through as by dry land, which their
Adversaries assaying to do, Heb. 11.29.
were drowned: and so thine Inheritance saw thy joyous alvation, O Lord our
strength and our Redeemer. Thus of Preservation, now of Prevision.

The Psalmist restifieth by daily experience, that in all the course of his
days he never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed beg ging bread: 1 King.
17.6.
Psalm. 37.25. Eliyah, though he was in adversity, yet did he not sterve: for
God commanded the Ravens to bring him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread
and flesh in the Evening; and he drank of the brook. What hope of earthly
help was there left for the poor Widow of Zarephath? for the famine was so
great among the Zidonians, verse. 12.
that she had but an handsull of Meal in a barrel, and a little Oil in a
Cruse, and was gathering two sticks, when the Prophet came to her, that she
might go in, and dress it for her, and her son, that they might eat it and
die. But behold the timely virtuous presence of Gods Providence. verse 16.
The barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the Cruse of Oil fail, until
the day that the Lord sent Rain, and plenty upon the earth.

There be a muleitude of facred passages touching this divine vigilant care,
but for brevities sake, we will measure Hercules on Olympus by his foor, and by
the sweetness of these few, lee us esteem of the rest accordingly. Now this
reverent esteem and high valuation of our bountiful Fathers uncessant care
over his Elect, it is both contemplative, and practique: for as the theorique
speculation and knowledge of a thing is perfected by the practice of the same,
so fares it with this point of Christianity. It is an easy matter for a man
in prosperity, and the comfortable sense of the Lords palpable Providence, to
know, and consesse his divine bounty; but he only makes the right use of this
knowledge, who in the dolorous days of bitter grief, and cutting claimitie,
can rely upon his God for release and consolation. Such an upright Christian
proved David, who in the Agonic of his deepest distress, Ps. 1301.
when deep called unto deep by the noise of the wat erspoutes of the
Almighty, yea when all his billows were gone over him, then cried he unto the
Lord, v. 5.
even out of the depthes: for in Gods word was his hope. So in thy most
deplored adversity, trust in thy Redeemer: Job 13.15.
Though the Lord would kill me, yet will I trust in him: and the Lord will make
thee a triumphant Champion over all thine enemies. I am persuaded by joyful
experience, that although thou wer'st as it were at the very brinke of death,
yet the Lord would never fail thee, nor forsake thee: for the seven eyes of
the Lord run too and fro through the whole earth. Zeph. 4.10.


Fl. 4. Of SINCERITY.
GOD is a Spirit, (says the holy Ghost, John 4.24.) and they that worship him,
must worshap him in spirit ana intruth. Therefore sarth the Wise man, Prove. 23.
Of the hypouite.
26. Mysonne, give me thue heart. What shall we say then of the Hypoenite,
that will give unto God but the body? O dignum Thebano anigmate monstrum! a
prodigious monster, as mostrous as Virgils fama; wheresore we will answer, even
as Diogeres did concerning the flatterer: Amng wlde beasts, the biting of the
back biter and slanderer is most dangerous: and among the tamer fort, that of
the siattering Hypocrite. He may sitly be likened to the Heathens Centaurus,
halse a man, and halse a horse; or to the Poers Chimara, which had the head,
and breast like a Lion, and the hellie like a Goat, and the tail like a
Dragon: so the Hypocrite in formal ostentation has the body of a Saint,
Matthew, 25.33.
but in truth the soul of a reprobate Goat, and heart of a Devil, whole end
shall be as the red Dragons. The Gentiles Ianus had two laces, the one behind,
and the other before; even so has the Formalist, one to God, and another to
the Devil. The Partridges of Paphlagonia have two hearts, Flin. Not. Hist.
lib. 11. c. 37.
so has this Formal Prosessor; for as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 12.2. (...).
i. With a heart, and a heart, with a double heart does he speak: and this his
double heart makes him to be of a double Religion, as the Poet reports of
Artemidorus.

Pinxisti Venerem, colis Artemindore Minervam,
Et miraris opus displicuisse tuum? Mart;

So with his mouth he worships, with the Jews, the living God, but with his
heart some Idol, as that of Mammon, Isa. 29.13.
swinish sensualtie, or terrestraiall glory, etc. and so with the carnal I
fraelites his body marches on toward the land of Promise, but his mind is the
fleshpots of Egypt. Exodus 16.3.
He is in the Chureh, as the Devil in somer times was in an Interlude, or
Stage Play: for as Satan, not withstanding his dexterious histrionicall acting
of his part of the Comedy, was no true real man, as were the rest of the
Actors: so the Hypocrite, not withstanding his apish formal show of Piety and
devotion, is no true man of God, as are the actors of his honor. Therefore
Cardinal Cusan calls the whole Body and Company of all them that be called
Christians, reck oned universally together, Ecclesia conjecturalis, a Church
conjecturall, becaute we know it not by certainty, but by conjecture; for in
this Church they that seem Predestinate before men, are oste^times reprobare
before God: Act. 1.24.2. Tim. 2.19.
and that Omniseient (...) Iehova he only knows them that are his, and will
one day sinde out the Hypocrite to his immortal shame and consusion.

To whom then does he appertain? to his Infernal father that taught him this
apish trick of dissimulation. For first that old Dragon transformeth himself
into an Angel of light, and then he trains up this Mimique, 2 Cor. 11.14.
his firstborne in the art of this servile formalitie. Avaunt then, O Satan,
away with hypocrisy, and thrice-welcome, O most saithfull Sincerity. This is
a blessed companion, the most gracious of ten thousand: for the heart that is
garnished with this gift of grace, is ever graced with the presence of God the
giver; so that the works of such a Nathanael, though imperfect, yet are they
pleasing and acceptable unto him. The Lord that works both the will and the
deed, will accept the affect for the effect, and the will, for the deed, Phila,
13.
And finally, 2 King. 10.15.
as John said to Iehonadab; If thy heart be right, as my heart is with thine,
then give me thine hand, and come up into my Charet: so if our hearts be right,
as the Lords heart is with ours, Psalm 4.3.
then will he say; Ascend now into my holy Mountain of Grace, and so shall ye
sit hereafter in my triumphant Charet of Glory world without end.

Fl. 5. Of TRVE BLESSEDNESS.
ALL things (says Aristotle in the beginning of his Moral Philosophy) desire
some Good; Ethic. Lib. 1. c. 1.
but all things, yea even man neither knows which is that Good, nor the way how
to attain unto it; and therefore he shall never find it out, as long as he
leanes to the subtlety of humane wisdom, and fantastical quirkes of
corrupt reason. The profound Philosophers of the Gentiles, who gloried of their
surmounting knowledge; labored hard for the understanding of this secret, but
never could they reach their intended scope. The Jews also traveled herein,
but went not all one way in searching this, as may appear by their diverse
sects that arose about one hundred and thirty years before the Incarnation of
Christ. Gualt. in Luc. c. 6
Many held that True Happiness did consist in terrestrial, and earthly goods,
even transitory trifles and Childish nifles: some in Riches, some in Honor and
flourishng Pomp, and some in sensual pleasures, etc. But they were al most
grossly deceived; 1 Samuel 16.7, 9, 10, 12.
for as among the sons of Iesse, neither Eliab, nor Abinadab, nor Sha^ma, nor
any of the seven, but David was anointed King of Israel, so neither plenty, nor
popular applause, nor any such fading vanity, but only that glorious
Immortality in the loyfull Paradise of God, and his unchangeable Love in
Christ Jesus, this is poor man's True Foelicity.

But suppose they had hit the mark, and one of these things had been that
True Blessedness, yet had they been still in an error, because they mistook
their Summum bonum, the chief good of a man, and confounded it with foelicity,
as though they were one and the same thing, whereas indeed they are diverse:
for, Polan. Synt.
Beatitudo non est Summum Bonum, sed fruitio Summi Boni; Happiness is not the
Chief Good, but the use, and enjoyment of it; as the Mammonist his riches are
his Summum Bonum, not his soelicitie, but the cause thereof; for his imaginary
Happiness, is the use and effect of his riches, as says the Poet: Pauper enim
non est, cui rerum suppetit usus. Hor.
So the Saint; Chief Good, is God, but their Blessedness is the fruition of
this supreme most Blessed Good God, which is his saving Grace in this lise, and
crowning Glory in the life to come. Now albeit the Tenants of all these
natural men were most erroneous, Arist. Foelicitie.
yet I may prefer Aristotle to the rest of them, for his Foelicitie, as being
more civil and moral then theirs: for Epicurus his foelicitie is most
sensual, and beastiall, and so fit only for swine; but of all these, (...);
is, (...); for that is virtue, which he defines after this manner; Foelicitie
is the chiese Action of a man's mind, arising of the most excellent Virtue. But
herem he fails, for this Genus is erroneous. Though the principal Action,
even of the most Virtuous regenerate mind, (whereof natural Aristotle never
dreamed) as that serious meditation of David's Blessed man, Ps. 1, 2.
in Iehovaes Law both day and night be true Happiness, yet that only is not
the True, nor chief blessedness of a man, but beside, yea before action,
there is Reconciliation and Acceptance with God, whereby the Elect, both Jews
and Gentiles are Justified, and Blessed in his sight. Romans 4.6, 7, 8.
Even as David describes the Blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying. Blessedare they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Justification then by the faith of the
Son of God, is True blessedness indeed, yea in an high degree both
unspeakeable and glorious. And this does the Original Language punctually
declare; for says the Psalmist (...) O terque quaterque beati Most blessed is
that poor man, Verse 2.
etc. O divine Paradox. here, miser, and miserabilis Adam, a piece of red
earth, but dust and ashes, Genesis 3.19. and 18.27.
a sinful poor wretched soul, a Child of the Devil, an heir of eternal
indignation by nature, becomes a friend of God, and by grace a Son of the
Most High: a most cursed Caitife, is made a most Blessed Saint; for, (...) is a
noune of the plural number only, though (...) de quo praedicatur (...) be sub
jectum singular, and it is as much in signification as Beati; as Rabbs David
Kimhi interprets, Munsterus.
because such a one is blessed, not with one, but with a plurality of
foelicities, Romans 8.32.
and benedictions: for Christ is his, and so all that is Christ's, is his.

Now Christ is rich in Blessings, for in him are hid all the treasures of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, who of God the Father, is made unto us both
Wisdom, and Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Sanctification, and Redemption. Wherefore, to conclude, this man is Truly
Blessed, this man is only Blessed, and cannot possibly any more be cursed,
even as he that has the Philosophers stone, how can he choose but be rich? Ho
then, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters of Bliss, Isa 55.1.
Psalm. 118.22. Match. 21.41. Act. 4.11. Rom 9.13. 1 Pet. 2.6. Ps. 4.6, 7.
and let him that would be rich in God. get this Tried, Elect, precious
Cornerstone in Zion. There be many that say, who will show us any good? but
Lord lift thou up the lovely light of thy joyful countenance upon us: for then
shall thou put more joy and gladness in our hearts thereby, then all profane
Esaues that embrace the dung of this world in their arms for their
inheritance, and happiness, cais possibly enjoy, even in the time that their
Corn and their Wine do most abundantly increase: for this is that swectest
secret voice of God from heaven saying unto our weary souls, Isa. 40.1.
that this comfort belongs unto us, our iniquity is pardoned: for Jerusalem
has received of the Lords hand doable for all her sins. Romans 5, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God; through our Lord
Jesus: Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein
we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God: and not only so, but we
glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works pationce, and
patience experience, and experience hope: and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given
unto us. Therefore, Solon, thou art deceived with thy natural Motto: --
Silicet ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, Ovid Metam
dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremdque funera debet.


The true Saints and servants of God, are Truly Blessed and ought so to be
esteemed, even in this life, as the very precious darlings, of the Lord of
life, infranchized denisens of the Subuibs of that immortal Kingdom of
glory, enjoying heaven upon earth, Prove. 15.5
and continually feasted of the Lord God of Sabbath with such internal
supernall dainties, as the world can neither understand, give, nor take from
them: Their condition far surmounteth that of Croesus; for no Cyrus can
despoyle them of their Blessed riches, and most durable inheritance. For if God
be for us who can be against us? Wherefore neither tribulation, Romans 8 31.
verse. 35, 38.39.
nor nakedness, nor perall, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, but in all these things we are more
then Conquerours through him that loved us.

Fl. 6. Of THE LOVELINESS OF MESSIAHS SPOUSE.
THere be two motives, and impulsive causes of love, namely Beauty, and
Bounty, which is manifest by the frequent procurement of carnal affection,
Oculis and digitis, as we say, in many. Now both these are in the Church, the
Bride and the Lambs wise: Apoc. 21.2. and 9 The Churches Beauty.
therefore she is lovely. Concerning the first: Jerusalem is builded as a
City that is compact together in it se le. Psalm. 122.3. And the gates thereof
are after the names of the Tribes of I^rael, Ezekiel. 48.31. Though she be black
in the eyes and esteem of the world, yet she is comely to the sight of the
Lord her Redeemer, even as the tents of Kedar, and as the Curtains of Solomon,
Cant. 1.5. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. Like a
Lilly among the Thorns, so is the Love of Christ among the daughters. Cant.
2.2. Chap. 7.4.
Her eyes are like the fish-pooles in Hesbon by the gate of Beth rabbim: her
nose is as the Tewer of Lebanon that looks toward Damascus. Verse. 7. Verse 5.
Arist. Cat.
Her stature is like a Palm tree, and her breasts like clusters. The King is
tied in her rasters. Now of the quality is the denomination of a thing.
Beauty makes beautiful: who then is so beautiful as the Israel of God? for
the never fading beauty of holiness, Psalm. 90.17.
and the glorious Majesty of the Lord their God is upon them. The Churches
bounty.
And as touching the second: The members of Messiah being united together by
the indissoluble obligation of love, cannot possibly choose but be truly
liberal: for true love is liberal. Cornelius gave much alms to the people,
Act. 10.2. At Antiochia when Agabus had signified by the Spirit, that there
should be great famine throughout all the world, which also came to pass under
Claudius Caesar: then the Disciples every man according to his abthtie,
purposed to send succor unto the brethren, which dwelt in Judea; which thing
they also did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul,
Act. 11.28, 29, 30. The Churches of Macedonit, to their power, yea beyond their
power they were willing, and prayed Paul with great instance, and entreatie,
that he would receive their liberality, and see to the distribution thereof,
among the same poor Saints, 2 Cor. 8 3, 4. What Jupiter Hospitalis was ever so
bountiful to his guests as was that reverent Gaius, whom that beloved Disciple
loved in the truet^ 3 Ioh. 1 and 5. John 13.23
so amiable is the congregation of the faithful; Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, let them prosper that love thee: peace be within thy walls and
prosperity within thy Palaces For my brethren and neighbors sakes I wish thee
now prosperity: because of the house of the Lord our God, I will procure thy
wealth, Psalm 122.6, 7, 8, 9. The like affection bare the upright Christians
one to another under the tyra^^izing Emperors, as witnesses Tertullianus in
Apologetico. But as the Magnet and Loadstone, though it draw iron unto it,
Plin. Not. bist. lib. 36. c. 16.
yet the stone Theamedes abhors iron, rejects and drives the same from
it; so the godly have many mortal inveterate enemies, yea from the very
beginning of the Primitive, and Original world: ( -- Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut durimiles Vlissei
Temperet a lachrymis?) --


They have been most frequently infested with the martial horror of hell, and
annoyed with the boisterous floods of Belial. Caine slew his brother, Genesis 4.8
and wherefore slew he him? because his works were evil, and his brothers
righteous, 1 John 3.12. and his infernal posterity opposed themselves to the
religious Progeny of S^th, and so barbarousls maligned them from time to tune,
that they decreased, and many degenerated, whilst the other increased, and
flourished by the building of Cities, and inventing of trades, so that all the
holy fathers being dead, only Noah with seven souls were preserved in the
Arc, Genesis 7.13.
was the Seminatie of the subsequent Church. So fared the people of God in the
days of Abraham. Ismael mocked and persecuted Isaac, Genesis 21.9. Gal 4.29.
Neither were the Prophets and their Disciples any better then their Fathers:
Matt 5.12.
for the Prophet Isaiah was sawen asunder with a wooden Saw by blood thirsty
Manasseth. Jeremiah after that he had been persecuted even by his own
fellow-cit zens, his evil neighbors of Anathoth, Ier. 11.21. c. 12.14.
in the end was stoned of the Jews in Egypt. Amus was killed with a bar of
iron. Iewal. apolog.
And the Lord of hosts ^elieth Iehoshua the high Priest, that his fellows
that si. before him, are contemned in the world, and esteemed as monstrous
persons, Zechar. 3.8. even as the Children whom the Lord had given Isay were
instar Portenti, as signs and wonders in Israel, Isa. 8 18.

As touching the persecution and tribulation of the Apostles; the Lord Jesus
himself prophesies that they should be hated, Luke 6.22.
and separated from their Synagogues for the Son of man's sake, which also came
to pass on the Primitive Church, namely the Aposiles, and their diseiples, who
ended their Pilgrimage under Trajan; and so continued on the Successive Church
under the burchering Roman Emperors during the space of three hundred years
almost, even unto the time of Constantme the Great. The Philosophers, Act.
17.18.
Epicureans and Steikes of Athens called S. Paul (...), Seminivorbius, a
babbler: and after many tribulations Nero beherded him. Mark was burned at
Alexandria. And as Iusiin Martyr witnesses, all Christians were called, Apolog.
(...), a Godiesse people: and Christian Religion as Eusebius writes, for very
spite was called (...): yea says Pliny, Eib. 1. c. 4.
It is Contemptus omniam Numinum. And as touching the anguish and distress of
the Lords poor Inheritance, and the malice of the wicked against them ever
since, who can express the same but with tears of blood? Genesis 49.18.
O Lord, we have waited for thy salvation all the day long: Come thou
therefore, O God, from Teman, Hab. 3.3.
and thou Holy One of Israel from mount Paran. Thus is the lovely City of the
God of Love hated: But behold the spiritual madness of the intoxicated
brains of their opposers. The hatred is no more strong and malicious, then
strange and mavelous. Certainly some Circe, or Proserpiua has given them a
Stygian potion, else they could never prove such boistrous bedlams, and
ravening Woolues among the poor Sheep of the Lord lesus. For it is only for
the love of the Lord to his dear Children, that these ingrate Rebels receive
any good. But for the Churches sake, the Sun should beturned into darkness,
the Moon into blood, and the Stars should withdraw their shining, yea the
ground would cleave asunder, that is under them, Number. 16.31, 32.33.
and the earth would open her mouth, and swallow them up as it did Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, so that they, and all that they have should go down alive
into the doleful pit of endless perdition. But as cork causes iron to swim,
and keeps it from sinking while they are joined together, so by the means of
the Elect the Reprobate are preserved (for a while) from sinking and
destruction.

Whilst righteous Lot continued in Sodom it was safe, Genesis 19.24.
but as soon as (...) it, the Lord rained upon it both fire and brimstone from
Iehova out of heaven. Exodus 14.22.
No sooner had Israel passed through the red Sea, but the waters returned, and
overthrew the Egyptians, so that Pharao, Ver. 28 and 15.10. Heb. 11.29.
and all his host sanke as lead in the great depths. So at the consummation
of the world, when the number of the Elect shall be pertected, and they ready
for the Lord, and their blessed immortality; then shall the heavens at the
brightness, and terror of that dreadful Judge of the world, pass away with
a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, the earth also,
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 2.10. where then
shall the wicked appear? then shall they confess, that as God blessed Obed
Edom, and all his household while the Arc continued with him, 2 Samuel 6.11. so
they enjoyed the blessings of God while his Saints continued with them. And as
the soes of the Church are foolish and mad, so are they accursed of God for
their fury and malice against his children, and their end tragical and
lamentable. For they (like Ovids Giants) war against God himself. Met. lib.
1.
when they hate and persecute his dearest servants. What do ye against the
Lord? says the Spirit, Nah. 1.9. The machination and enterpriles of the
Assyrians there against Judah and Israel, were against the Lord God himself.

Whosoever spoyleth the members of Christ upon earth; let him fear that
dreadful complaint of their vindictive Head from heaven: Act. 9.4.5.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou met? it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks. Wherefore unto all such belongs the most just vengeance of the Lord
of hosts. They shall all be consumed and turned back that hate Zion, they
shall be as the grass upon the house tops: which withers before is grows
up: wherewith the mower fills not his hand, nor the gleaner his lap: neither
do they which go by, say; The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we bless you
in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 129.5, 6, 7, 8.

What was the end of Antiochus Epiphanes? most woeful: for after that he had
sudued both Egypt and Judea, 1 Maecab. 1.18, 19. spoiled the Temple, and
wasted the City of Iernsalem, 1 Mac. 1.23. Dan. 8.9, to 15.
erected an Idol upon the Altar of the Lord, and purposing to ransacke the
Cities of Elimais and Persepolis, 1 Mac. 6.1.3.4. 2 Mac. 9.5. to 12. 1 Mac.
6.13.16. 2 Mac. 9.9. and 28.
he was repulsed by the Citizens: and being stricken with an incurable disease,
he dyed an ignominious death, and that in a strange land, in the mountains:
for the worms rose up out of his own body, and whiles he lived in sorrow and
pain, his flesh fell away, and the filthiness of his smell was noisome to
himself, and all his Army. Wherefore (as says discomfited Senacheribs
inscription) (...). Learn by the tragical ruin of this merciless monster to
fear God, and love his Saints: for they that recieve these his Darlings,
receive Christ himself, Matthew. 10.40.
and they that receive Christ, receive the Father that sent him.

Fl. 7. Of CONIVG ALL AMITY.
IN humane society there be diverse kinds of Loves, as Fatherly, Filial,
Brotherly unity, etc. but as Solomon says of the Virtuous Wise: Prove. 31.29.
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all: so I say of
Cordial Amity between Husband and Wife: many Lovers have been loyal, but
thou surmountest them all. Love is the mightiest and most imperious affection
of the whole heart, and nature of man, and this is the most durable and
constant of all loves.

Slender trifles can quickly destroy other amities, which are merely improper
to this; but this Divine and Entire affection being sealed and ratified by the
power of that supreme prerogative, cannot be separated, Genesis 2.22.
neither by tribulation, nor anguish, famine, nor nakedness. Nothing but death
can be the divider. For Love is strong as death, Jealousy is cruel as the
grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vebement flame.
Many waters cannot qnench Love, neither can the floods drown it; If a man
would give all the substance of his house for Love, it would utterly be
contemned. Which appears by the practice even of sundry Gentiles. Quintus
Curtius writes that Darius being conquered by Alexander the Great, Darius.
sustained that disparagement and bitter distress with courageous patience:
but when news was brought him, that his fair Queen Roxana was dead, to show
that he affected her more then all his royal dignity; he wrung his hands,
and wept bitterly. Baptista Fulg. reports, that a poor labouting man in
Naples, being berest of his Wise by a foyst of Moors, threw himself into the
Sea, and swum after them, till they took him up into the Gally. Afterward they
were both brought before the King of Thunis, who being moved with compession at
the relation of his love, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 36. c. 5.
sent them both home again. Artemisia bare such a love to her Husband
Mausolus, that she builded a Sepulcher for him, and called it Mausolaeum, after
his name, which was so glorious, that it was ranked among those marchlesse
Monumens, which are termed, The seven wonders of the world, and that next unto
the Temple of Diana in Ephesus; so that the great Colosse of the Sun at
Rhodes, the statue of Jupiter Olympius the walls of Babylon, the Egyptian Pir
mides, and the Obeliske of Semiramis, were reckoned thereafter.

Howbeit there be many, alas, in the state of wedlock, that have lived, and
do live, or rather dye destitute of this sweetest Amity. Such unnatural
monsters were those obstinate Jews, Dent. 24.1. Matthew. 19.7, 8.
whose he arts were so hard, that Moses was feign to permit them to write their
Wives a Bill of divorcement, and to put them away. But of all such beasts most
beastiall was Calphurnius Bestia, Plin. Not. hist. 1. 27 c. 2.
who (as Plinius Secundus reports) killed two of his Wives asleep by his
side, with the poison Aconite, as appears by that challenge, and declaration,
which M. Coelius his accuser, made against him. Jude v. 13.
Now to all such is reserved the blackness of darkness, even a woeful
separation from the members of the Bride and the Lambs wise, and from their
joyful communion for ever more. The Use. Ephesians 5.25, to tho end.
Wherefore, Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of
water through the word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrickle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy
without blame. So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies: he that
loves his wife, loves himself. For never man yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it even as the Lord does the Church. For we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Genesis 2.24. Matthew. 19.5.
Mark 10.7. 1 Cor. 6.16. Col. 3.18.
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his
wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. This is a great secret, but I speak
concerning Christ, and the Church. Therefore every one of you do ye so: Let
every one love his wife even as himself, and let the wife see that she fear
her husband, and submit her self unto him, as it is comely in the Lord.

Fl. 8. Of CONTINENCY.
THe Apostle Paul (says Calvin Instit. lib. 2. 1 Cor. 7.34.
c. 8. sect. 43.) defines Pudicitiam, conjunctam cum castitate corporis, antmi
puritatem. The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may
be holy both in body and in Spirit. The Subject then of this chaste virtue, is
both the body and the loule. Wherefore speculative wantonness and
Incontinencie of the mind is condemned of the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 5.28.
Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart. Saint Augustine commends three sorts of Chastity;
Virginalem, Conjugalem, and Vidualem. Three sorts of Chastity, Lib. 3. c. 19.
de Lamiis.
Concerning the first, the same fatner says? Nulla carnis foecunditas sanctae
Virginitaeti carnis etram comparari potest. And as Wierus says: Est magnum
crimen Perrumpere virginis hymen.

And it is styled by diverse of the ancient fathers to be the Queen of
Virtues, sister of Augels, Heavens gravitie, and divine Chastity. The dignity
of Virginity.
The second is commended of the holy Ghost, Heb. 3.4. Whereby the honorable
estate of Marriage is blessed, and the bed kept pure and undefiled. And the
Apostle calls her, that is graced with viduall chastity, a widow indeed, who
being left alone, trusts in God, and continues in supplications, and prayers
night and day, but she which lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.5, 6.

Admirable was the Chastity of diverse Heathens When Scipio Asricanus entered by
force of arms into Carthage, among the Captives, Scipios Continency.
there was a young gentlewoman of wonderful beauty presented unto him, who,
though he was in the prime of his youth, yet conquered his own affections, and
would commit no act of dishonor with the Virg^ine. Q. Curtius.
When Alexander the Great conquered Darius, notwithstanding his Queen was of
such exquisito beauty, that all Asia could not equalize her, and that mighty
Conqueror was of like years to this ^oyall Lady, etc. yet would he not
entertain a wicked thought toward her, Pedro Mexi^.
but sent Leonatus one of his favorites to comfort her. It is reported of
Francis Sforsa, Count, Coronell of the Florentines, that (during the sackage of
Casanova) whensome of his soldiers had taken Prisoner a very beautiful young
woman, who submitted her self unto him, he would not touch nor know her after
any uncivil manner whatsoever. Now if these uncircumcised Gentiles were so
continent, Genesis 39.8. 2 Samuel 13.12, Job. 31.1. Exodus 18.19.
what shall we say of the sanctified continency of Joseph, Thamar, and Job?
wherefore let every purehearted member of Christ, uncessan^ly imitate these
blessed patterns of modesty. And as Iethro the Midianite counseled Moses, so
let the chaste practice of these heathen, incite and encourage Christians to
honesty and purity of living.

For Continency, it is a fruit of the Spirit, against which there is no law;
Gal. 5.2; And this is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3,
4.
that ye should abstain from fornication: that ^verie one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in holiness, and honor, etc. for whereas every
sin that a man commits, 1 Cor. 6.18. v. 5. Iam. 1.5.
is without the body; the fornicator sins against his own body, and
without true repentance shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Therefore if any
man lack this wisdom of abstinence, let him ask of God, which gives to all
men liberally, and reproacheth no man, Matthew. 9.11.
and it shall be given him: It shall also be manifested in him: for a modest
man dwells at the sign of a modest countenance, and an honest woman, at the
sign of an honest face; which may be sitly compated to Salomons Temple, whose
gate was called Beautiful, Acts 3 2.
showing that if the entry be so beautiful, within is exquisite Beauty.

Fl. 9. Of LABOUR.
HE that gathers by labor, Prove. 13.11. c. 14.13. Eccl. 7.15.
(sait hthe Wise-ma^) shall increase; and, In all labor there is abundance.
And Jesus Siracides praises it in this manner: Hate not laborious work,
neither Husbandry, which the most High has ordained for therich blessing of
the Almighty accompanies the diligent hand, Isaac sowed in the land of Gerar,
Job 42.10. Prove. 10.3.6.
and received in the same year an hundred fold, and the Lord blessed him, Genesis
26.12. And the Poct attrlbuteth great force, and might to industrious pains:
-- Labor omnia vincit
Improbus, and duris urgens in rebus egestas. Georg.



There is no difficulty, but laborious Travelis of power to conquer, which is
evident by that universal conquest of that Mighty Maccdouian, Alexander the
Great.
and those twelve notable labors, (which as Poets write) Hercules performed.
And Pliny in his History of Nature records, Lib. 11. c. 30.
that the Pismires wear the very flint and pibble stoneswith their ordinary
and continual passage too and fro, so that one may see a very pathway made,
where they use to go about their work. If Heathenish, The Use.
and natural industry be so forcible, how mighty is sanctisied Christian
labor? the fruit thereof, says Solomon, is sweet; yea, says the son of
Sirach, Ecclus. 11.15.
It is wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of the law from the Lord. What is
the state then of the sluggard, the lazy Lizzard, and the luskish Lubby? It is
most lamentable, and to be deplored even with tears of blood: for his poverty
shall come, Prove. 6.11.
as one that travelleth, and his want as an armed man: and in the field of
tentation he stands unarmed, and unfensed: and so in this his lethargicall
drowsinesse the Devil serves him (says Saint Ambrose) even as the Crab does
the Oysters; Pet. Martyr.
for as the Crab by putting a stone into the mouths of Oysters, whilst they
open themselves to the Sun, and gape to take the Air, then thrusts in his
claws, and eats the meat of them; so when men be given to Idleness, and
open their minds to pleasures; then the Devil puts in filthy cogitations,
so that when they are not able to draw back their shell, as it were, wherewith
they were armed before, they are devoured.

Hannibals idleness at Capua was the only cause of the Romans victory
against him. Aegistus his lithernesse was the cause of his Adultery. Ovid.
What moved Arbactus and Belochus to conspire against Sardanapalus? his strange
sensuality, and effeminate wantonness. Go therefore to the Ant, Prove. 6.6,
7, 8.
thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise: which having no Guide,
Overseer, or Ruler provideth her meat in the Summer, and gathers her sood in
the Harvest.

Fl. 10. Of PATIENCE.
THe Greeks call this Patient Virtue, (...), because it sustaineth, and
supporteth the weary soul in the day of calamity, Luke 21.19. It is like
those two courageous Searchers that spied out the land of promise. Caleb and
Joshua. Number. 13.17, 28, 30, 33.
Though the Canaanites were strong, and there they saw the Giants, the sons
of Anak, which came of the Giants, so that they were in their sight as
grasshoppers, and the cities were walled up to the middle Region of the air:
never thelesse they pronounced their suture triumph; undoubtedly we shall
conquer them: So the patient man, albeit deep call unto deep by the noise of
the Lords water-spoutes, and squadrons of cares do sound their fresh alarm,
yet like a brave invincible Champion, he answers their martial Taratantara
with noble Nehemiah: Nehem 6.11: Romans 8.37.
Shall such a man as I, fly? I am well able to overcome tribulation and
distress. It is nothing to endure persecution, it is nothing to endure famine;
it is nothing to abide nakedness, reproach, and toylesome labor, or any such
things, through Christ that loved us. O then Nobile vincendi genus est
Patientia: vincit,
Qui patitur: si vis vincere, disce pati.


Noble is the grace of victorious Patience, and therefore commended unto the
Saints both by Precept, and practice: by precept, Iam 5 8. Be patient,
stablish your hearts for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. And 1 Peter 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you in due
time. And the practice of the Redeemed is frequent, as of Isaac, Genesis 22.9. of
Joseph, c. 50.17. of Moses, Job 1.20. and. 2.10. Ps 38.13: Acts 5.41. and 7.60.
1. Cor 4.3. Heb. 10.34. Apoc. 1 9. c. 2.19.
Numb. 16.46. of Job, David, the Apostles, Steven, Paul, the Hebrews, John,
and the Angel of the Church in Thyatira.

The end of the first Dec.

Decad. 2.
Fl. 1. Of TIME.
OCcasio (says Hippocrates) est momentanea, and momentosa. The Curetes had a
bush of haite on the hinder part of the head; but golden Opportunity has it
only on the fore part; whence is the Poets Motto: Fugit irrevocabile Tempus:
Ovid met. l. 7.
all the gold of Opbir cannot recall one minute of Time, as the Poets fable of
Aeson. The Sun by his anniversary revolution makes the day and the year;
The glorious means, and secondarie causes of Time.
the Moon by her monthly course the Months and Quarters; the Pleiades, and
Hyades make the seasons, and the Dogge-starre the heat of the Summer: all
these celestial Spheres, and Rounds do labor by their ordinary passages to
bring us this most precious Occasion. O then, with what Prudencie and
Providence ought we to catch, Grimst.
and embrace it? Merchants bring us precious stones from Brama, and Rubies from
Pegu, and with us they are of great value and account: but laborious Phoebus
brings a dearer lewell from a more remote region, even from the end of
Heaven; Psalm. 19.6.
but alas we do not regard it. And of all the parts of this orient The bright
luster of the Eastern O pals does figure, and represent the liveliest colors
of all precious stones: in it you shall see the burning fire of the Carbuncle,
or Rubiethe glorious purple of the Amethyst, the green Sea of the Emerald,
etc. Plin. Not. bist. lib. 37. c. 9. So does the diligent use of Time show you
the excelle ney of many virtues and blessings.
Opall, and precious Pantaurus draws all other s^ones unto it, as the Cal^^ite
does steel, so does the diligent use of time bring great riches.
Pantaure, (...), only this present minute is ours, wherefore it is extreme
doltishnesse to defer the practice of Wisdom until the next, and to
procrastinate repentance by the groundless hope of a few uncertain days.
Howbeit in the nature of Time note we this privilege; Though that which is
past, cannot be recalled, yet it may be redeemed by the double diligence of
the wise, Ephesians. 5.16. wherefore the penitent Redeemer of Time, may be pourtrayed
out in colors like Medea, with two contrary affections appearing in his face,
in the one side sorrow for the lamentable loss of that occasion which is past,
and in the other side joy for the redemption of Opportunity present.

Fl. 2. Of THE BREVITIE OF MAN'S LIFE.
MAN that is borne of a woman (says Job) is of few days, Job. 14.1.
and ^^ll of trouble. The 969 years of Methushelah, Genesis 5.27.
and the extraordinary age of Triseclis Nestor, were but spithamaei dies,
Psalm. 39.5:
as a spanne, remooved as a Shepherd, Tent, what was the life of Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.32.
but (...), a dream, and the days of Cato Major, but (...), the very dream
of a shadow? Cic. de Senect.
for the life of every man has its period, and term, as says the holy Ghost,
Genesis 3.18. Heb. 9.2.7. which the Poet could aver by ocular evidence: Sorius
aut citius sedem properamus ad unam.

But every ones period is not semblable, not the same for there is a natural
Period, and there is a period of divine Prescience. If a man reach to his
natural Period, Titelman, Not. Philos. lib. 8. c. 20. and. 21.
then the days of his years (says Moses, Psalm. 90.10) are but threescore
years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is
his strength then but Labor and sorrow. An aged man is but a mooving Anatomy,
or a Living mortuarie. But scarcely does one of a thousand reach unto this end,
yea of Gods own Inheritance, according to the vulgar Position: Optimi quique
minime diurnant; Camb. Brit.
but they finish their days at the term of Divine prescience, which they
cannot pass. Lachesis is weary of spinning the difficult thread of our sinful
life. By our rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and
envying, Fatal Atropos is enforced as it were to cut it. This is our misery,
let us be warned of it; but it is the Lord that must deliver us from it, and
teach us to number our days, Psalm. 90.1^.
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. So shall the truth of the
Gymnosophists Motto appear in us; The day of death is the Birthday of
virtuous souls.

Fl. 3. Of the SOVLES Immortality.
IN all things natural, there is one thing or other which is the spoil of it:
as is the canker to the Rose, the worm to the Apple, and the Caterpiller to
the lease: but the soul of man, not being compounded of Physical principley,
is not subject to the dissolution of the same. Eccles 12.6 7.
When the silver coard is lengthened, and the Golden ewer, and the pitcher
broken at the well, and the wheel at the crikeme, and dust returns to the
earth, as it was, then the spirit returns to God, that gave it. Plato does
frequently ternie (...), i. of kin unto God, and conseqaenely, (...). i.
everlasting, and of one self same nature with the immortal ones. And that
which Virgil writes in his second Eclog. concerning the Drug, or Spice of
Assytia, and the growing thereof every where: -- (Assyrium, vulgo nascetur
Amonum)

it is interpreted of some men to be meant of the Immortality of the Soul,
whereof Phocylides speaks.

(...):
The Soul of man Immortal is, and never wears away
With any age, or length of time, but lives fresh foray.
Damnable then is that Atheistical Tenent of Pliny the Naturalist, that The
Soul is subject to Mortality: And desperate was that dying speech of Pope Paul
the third, Now at length I shall try three things, whereof I have much doubted
all my Life: 1. Whether there be a God? 2. Whether there be any hell? 3.
Whether Souls be immortal? O thrice-barbarous stupiditie, and monstrous
Incredulity! More tolerable was poor Cleombrotus; that believed Platoes
report concerning the Souls Immortality: Thus Immortal is the Spirit, and
Immortal is its condition. O then aspire we unto that only proper and
blessed Immortality in the Bosom of the Immortal God blessed for ever. Mat.
6.20.
Let us lay up treasures for our selves in heaven, where neither the moth nor
canker corrupts, and where thieves neither dig through, nor steals.

Vt corpus redimas, quicqnam toler are negabis?
At pretium pars hac corpore majus habet.
For our backs we provide Luxurious apparel, for our bellies delicious
dainties, and for our beasts hay, and provender. Are not our souls much
better then these? Luke. 10.40.
Choose therefore with Marie the better part for this better part, which shall
never be taken from us.

Fl. 4. Of KNOWLEDGE.
LIse without Lea^ning (says Cato) is like the Image of death. Hominis men's
discendo alitar. (...) lib. 1.
A Lord without Letters is as a trce without fruits, a day without Sun, and a
night without Moon or stars. For this cause Literature has been of great
value and esteem from time to time even among Ethnickes. The Athenians chose
(...) to be the Patron of their City, and preferted Minerva, because of her
knowledge, to Neptune; for they knew there could be no greater glory then to
have a Learned Patron; therefore they preferred her peaceable Olive to his
martial sword, and her dragon to his Triton, and that in wisdom; for (...);
No riches so noble as divine Instruction.

It is recorded of Philip King of Maecedony, that he rejoiced, notso much
because Alexander was borne unto him, as that he was borne in the days of
Aristotle: Alexander the Great.
for of his father he received but his simple (...), but of his Master his
(...), his happy Philosophical Being, by the means whereof he spared
Aristotle's Native City. And when he found among the spoil taken from Darius,
the Kings Casket of Persumes, he made of it a Case for Homers Iliades. Pindarus
for his Learning was spared, and with his whole family escaped destruction.
Ptolemeus Philadelphus, notwithstanding he had already made a great Library
containing 50000. books, yet he rested not contented therewith, till he
procured the Septuagints Translation, which with him was of highest value So.
do all they love the joyous beams of knowledge, 2 Cor 4.6. Genesis 1.3.
in whose hearts God, that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined, to gine the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. For an Ignorant man (as the Grecians say) sees nothing, although
he have eyes. Now Ignorance is twofold; Positive and negative. The first is
wilful, and damnable blindness: the second again is twofold, including
either negationem infinitantem, simply denying knowledge, or any aptitude to
Learning, as in native sooles, and beasts; Pravae dispolstionis, et purae
negationis.
or negationem Privantem, which is subdivided into Irrationalem, and
rationalem: Irrationalis is brutish Ignorance, such as was in us, and is in our
Children being first borne, and it is called by Iunius, Ignorantia miserabilis.
Rationalis Ignorantia is that whereby a man may be ignorant of many things, the
knowledge whereof is not expedient for him. For although we ought to labor for
knowledge, yet must it be with diser^tion, which Pliny wanted, in searching to
know by reason, why the hill Vesuvius burned so as it did? wherefore he reaped
the due guerdon of untimely death. But what the Na^malist wanted, the Psalmist
had: Lord, my heart is not haughty, Psalm. 131.1.
nor mine eyes losty: neither do Lexercise my self in great matters, or in
things too high for me. But of those things we are bound to know, the
voluntaire and rebellious Ignorance condemns. Let us therefore first be
(...), desir^us of knowledge, and then we shall be (...) learned indeed, yea,
(...), even taught of God.

Fl. 5. Of RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Justice in general is (...), a Conformity with the Law of God: and it is
twofold, uncreated, which is Sempiternall Iehova, that Iustitia Arch^typa;
Polan. Syatag.
and created, Instioa Ectypa, which is twofold, Legal, and Evangelicall;
Legal is twofold, Universal, and Particular: Universal is twofold,
Philosophical, and Christian. The best Philosophical Righteousness, and the
most plausible works of moralitse, are but splendida peccata, glistering
sins, gilded abominations, as the Justice of Aristides, the wisdom of
Xenophon, the Muse of Athens, the rare Loyalty and admirable fidelity of
Attilius Regulus: for they were not of faith. Romans 14.23.
But Christian Righteousness, though imperfect, is pleasing to God through
Christ, of whom we are made Christians. Particular lustice is twofold,
Commutative, and distributive: Commutative Justice is that Common Equity, which
should be practiced in our civil Commerce, and Humane Conversation, Justinian.
whereof Justinian notes ten particulars; as the Observation, of right in
traffic, of reason in Contracts, and of equality in exchanging of one thing
for another, etc. By distributive Justice the Magistrate assigns unto every
one his fit order and function in the Republique. Gal. 3.11.
All these species of Righteousness are not able to justify a sinner in the
sight of God: For when we have done all those things which are commanded us,
we must confess, we are unprofitable servants: for we have done but that
which was our duty to do: And if thou, Psalm. 130.3.4.
should straightly mark what is done amiss, who could stand before thee?
But, Lord, there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. Wherefore we
fly to the shelter of the Lords sovereign bounty. to the supreme Sanctuary
of that Evangelicall Justice, the Immortal Merits of the Son of God; Phil.
3.9.
even that Righteousness, which is through the faith of Christ, whereby we are
Justified. Gal. 6.14.15.16.
God forbid then that we should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature: And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them,
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Fl. 6. OF HVMILITIE.
CLementia est (...), Paser. Prove. 15.33. Iam. 4.6
Meekness is the glory of the mind, the grace of the whole man, and
harbinger of his honor. For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble.

Iehova talked with Elijah, 1. King. 12.13.
neither out of the blustering wind, nor out of the boisterous carth-quake,
nor out of the furious fire, but the still and soft voice spoke unto him: so
with those that Chamoeleon-like are puffed up with the wind of pride, and with
the Salamander live in the fire of contention, the God of peace will not dwell,
2. Cor. 13.11. Isa. 57.15.
but ontly with the contrite humble peaceable Spirit. When the men of Ephraim
murmured against Gidcon; because he did not call them, when he went to fight
with the Midianites, he answered: Judge. 8.1.2.3.
What have I done now in comparisn of your? Is not the gleaning of the grapes
of Ephraim better then the Vintage of Abiezer? Your last act, which have slain
two princes Ored and Zeeb, is more famous, then my whole enterprise; and so by
Humility he appeased them, Judge. 8. Agathocles King of Sicilia garnished his
palace with earthen Vessels, in memory that he was but a potters son, and so
by his Humility he embroydered the baseness of his birth. Humble thy self
therefore under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6.
that in due time he may exalt thee. For thou see no just cause of Arrogance
in why self.

Vnde superbit homo, cujus conceptio culpa est, Text.

Nasci poena, labor vita, necesse mori?
Let Christ be thine Examplar, and his lowliness thine Exemplum, or Pattern,
who washed the Disciples seet. Learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart,
and thou shall find rest unto thy soul.

Fl. 7. OF THE PEACE OF CONSCIENCE.
SPeciosum nomen Pacis, (says Hilarie) beautiful is the name of Peace; where
of there be four sorts, Ioh. 13.52. Matthew. 11, 29 2 Cor. 13.116
External, Internal, Suprnall, Eternal. External Peace is the Civil Quiet
of association, and is enjoined, Romans 12.18. Supernall Peace is that Joyful
Liberty of Reconciliation, whereby we are reconciled and made at one with our
God again, and is men^^oned. Isa. 40.1. Eternal Peace is that Perfect case
and rest of Glerification, and is cemmended. 1. Cor. 2.5.
Apo^ 21.4. Internal peace is that unspeakable tranquillity of mande (...)
passes all natural understa^nding, Prove. 15.15.
which the peaceable King calls a continual seast, c. 18.14. Job.
1.21.13.15. and 19.25
which will Lastaine all the infinacies of the body. This made Job a triumphant
conqueror over all his crosses: and by the power of this Inward Victory the
Righteous can rejoice even in Phalaris Bull. But a wounded Spirit who can bear
it? The pain of the body is but the body of pain, but the sorrow of the Sold
is the Soul of sorrow. When the heart, Primum viwens, et ulti number morieas.
which is the fountain of Life, fails, then death prevails: so when the
Conscience is appaled, Infirmity conquereth, tlibulation has the vpper-hand
over the whole man. This soul of sorrow and quin^essence of pain selt Nero,
whiles (as Suctonius writes) the Internal suries scourged his naked
COnscience for the monstious murder of his mothr.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautuns. Happy are they whom this
Miscreants misery can persuade to seek for mercy; 1 Cor. 1.12.
In all things with the Blessed Apostle to keep a good Conseience.

-- Hic murus akeneus esto
Nil conscire sili, Prove. 28.11
n^ll^ palles^ere culpa.
So while the wicked fly, when none pursues, we shall be bold as a Lion.

Fl. 8. Of SPIRITVALL JOY
THY The One, O God, is an everlasting Throne, The scepter of thy kingdom is a
scepter of righteousness: thou love righteousness, Ps. 45.6, 7.
and hate iniquity, therefore God, even thy God has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows. 1 Ioh 2.27. v. 20.
This same Anointing and Balm of Joy, which the faithful have received of that
Holy One, abides in the^: how the^ can they choose but evermore rejoice? for
this unction teaches them of all things; 1. These. 5.16. Romans 8.15, 16, 17. v.
28.
that they are the redeemed of the Lord, and Adopted sons of the Father, that
they are helies of God, and joint-heires with Christ, so that all things work
together for their true and ever lasting Happiness. Only these are the men
that have true cause of solid gladness: for the joy of the wieked, is but
superficial, like the noise of thorns under a pot: for even in the midst of
laughter the heart is sorrowful. Wherefore as the Persians became Jews, that
they might be participant of the light and gladness of the Jews; so let
Atheists become Christians, Ester. 8.17. Romans 14.17.
that they may be partakers of the joy and honor of Christians. For all true
peace and joy proceeds of the holy Ghost.

Fl. 9. Of THE RESVRRECTION OF THE IVAT.
BEhold the noble practice, honorable condition, and invicible hope of the
Righteous. They set the Lord dwaies before their faces, Ps. 16.8, 9, 10.
because he is at their right hand, they shall not be moved: therefore their
hearts are glad, and their tongues rejoice, their flesh also shall rest in
hope: for the Father has not left the soul of his Son Christ their head in
hell, neither did he suffer that his Holy One to see corruption, but now is
Christ risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. Col. 3.4.
and become the first fruits of them that sleep: and when Christ, who is their
life, shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory. This will
the boundless power of Iohova persorme: for if weak simple man can make of
the dust of the earth, the carious glass, then can the Omnipotent Wise God
reform our corruptible bodies out of the dust. 1 Cor. 15.19. v. 57.
This will his mindful mercy also bring to pass: for here our Joys are
deferred until that day: for if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. Therefore be we steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that our labor is
not in vain in the Lord. So, Apoc. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

Fl. 10. Of ETERNAL LIFE.
IN the Kingdom of Glory (says Cassiodorus) there is no cross, In Psalm. 6.
no calamity, never man failed on the raging sea of this turbulent world in so
great a calm, that sometime has not bin tossed too and fro with the
tempestuous wind of adversity, and Euroclidon of calamity; but there is sinus
maris, and sinus matris, the haven of endless rest. This is that Arabia
foelix, that abounds in the spiritual plenty of all delectations. So great
is that glory, that the Scripture describes it in allegorical, and sigurative
phrases, as Apoc. c. 21. and 22. As we account this world a better mansion then
the womb; so shall we account the world to come a better dwelling place then
this valley of tears; even as they that stand on the top of the Alps, judge
the Cities of Campania to be but low cottages. The refore as the watch of a
Dial touched with the Calamite, moves always, and trembles, till it be
turned toward the Pole-Articke; so we must never rest, but walk continually
from strength to strength, till every one of us appear before the Lord our God
in Zion. Amen.

FINIS. Laus Christonescia Finis

