A SHORT COMPEND OF THE HISTORY OF THE FIRST TEN PERSECVTIONS MOVED AGAINST
CHRISTIANS, DIVIDED INTO III. CENTVRIES.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADded in the end of every Centurie treatises arising upon
occasion offered in the history, clearly declaring the noveltie of Popish
Religion, and that it neither flowed from the mouths of Christ's holy Apostles,
neither was it confirmed by the blood of the holy Martyrs who died in these ten
persecutions.

IEREM. 6. ver. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand in the ways, and behold, and
ask of the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls: but they said, we will not walk therein. LVC. 10.
ver. 42. Marie has chosen the good part which shall not be taken away from
her. EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart, and are to be sold at his shop on the
North side of the high street a little beneath the Cross, ANNO DOM. 16. 13.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, Virtuous and elect Lady MARIE Countess of Mar wishes
Grace, Mercy and eternal Felicity.
IT has pleased God (most noble and elect Lady) to prolong my life these
years bypast under many infirmities of a daily decaying tabernacle, yet my
good God has not left me destitute of comfort, to the end I might fulfill my
course with joy. One of my chief comforts under God was your La. reverent
hearing and faithful practicing of the word of God. I delited to see that
thing begun in earth which shall be perfited in heaven. The glorified Saints in
heaven they cast down their crowns at Apoc, 4. 10.
the feet of the Lamb, who sits upon the Throne. When noble persons in earth
humbly kisses the feet of the Son of God, beares' his light burden, and
submittes themselves unto his easy yoke, then some resemblance of the heaven
is found in the earth. The rarer this virtue is, the more I reverenced it in
your La, person, and the oftener I commended your noble household to God, and to
the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Acts 20. 32.


The Queen of Adiabene HELENE when she left her own country and came to
dwell at Jerusalem, she filled the bellies of the poor with the corns of
Egypt, and the Eusebius. lib. 2. Cap. 12. loseph. antiquit lib. 20, cap. 2,
fruits of Cyprus (forit was a year of universal famine) and spared for no
cost to do good to the Saints that were in Jerusalem: therefore her name is
until this day in reverent remembrance. And in our days, honorable Ladies,
who refreshes the barren souls of ignorant people in this land with examples
of humility, modesty, godliness and all other Christian virtues, many
generations after us shall call them blessed. The Lord in mercy augment the
number of honorable persons who rejoice to go unto the house of the Lord.
These are the tops of the mountains, which being once free and not covered
with ouerflowing waters it is a comfortable presage that the great flood that
drowned the world shall be abated. These Genes. 85
are the Minerals of gold and silver, which are not easily found out, but after
they are discovered, they replenish the land with infinite treasures of riches.
The Prophet ZACHARY when he saw in that celestial vision IEHOSHVA his Zach. 3.
body honored with change of apparel, wished also the Diadem to be set upon
his head: but if he had seen the Diadem set upon his head, and the body
lapped up with rags of vile apparel, he had wished the body also to be
honored with ornaments proportionallie agreeing to the head. It has pleased
the wisdom of our God in this part of the country, whereinto I dwell, first
to deck with glorious ornaments the head: the Lord in mercy cloth the body
also with change of raiment, to the end that Satan that vigilant enemy who
delights in the filthy rags of our beggarly apparel may be grieved for our
change from worse to better. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness, that it is lawful to me, toreuerence the image
of Christ, where ever I see it clearly shining, either in rich or in poor.
And so much the more, because it was my lot to confer with many persons of a
contrary religion, whom I found to be like reprobat silver, fra who^ the
dross could not be separated. What is next? If they will harden their hearts
against the truth of God, then let the dead bury their dead, but let the noble
house of Mar follow Christ. Receive from my hands Madam this short co^pend of
the ten first and great persecutions, with certain treatises added to the
compend of the history, and be not afraid to follow the religion, and faith of
the Apostles and Evangelists: because their ears heard the words of the great
shepherd of our souls, their eyes saw God manifested in the flesh, they were
chosen to be faithful witnesses to the world of the doings, sufferings and
doctrine of Christ: the holy Ghost was sent to teach them in all truth. Here
we may rest upon a sure foundation, against the which the gates of hell cannot
prevail. Next to the Apostles, their true successors are to be had in
reverent regard, who sealed up that faith, which they received from the
Apostles with rivers of blood for the space of three hundredth years. To this
antiquity of Apostolic doctrine, let us firmly adhere. This is the clearest
mirror whereinto the precepts of wholesome doctrine are contained. After the
holy Apostles had finished their course, the disciples of the Apostles were
worthy men, yet not like unto the Apostles who had been both called and taught
immediately by Christ. If any dou^g was in their sacrifices, it was covered by
the glory of their sufferings: the fire wherewith they were burnt, the water
wherinto they were drouned, the air wherinto their bodies were hanged up, the
mountains and wilderness through which they wandered, the dark prisons
whereinto they were enclosed as people unworthy of liberty, whom
notwithstanding the Son of God had made sree, and they were free indeed. Yea
all the Joan, 8. 36.
very elements, and the light of Heaven, wherefra by most unrighteous violence
the righteous heirs of heaven were excluded, all these (I say) were witnesses
of their glorious sufferings Under pretense of climming to this antiquity, the
Papists would cloacke the turpitude of their new found doctrine: So did the
Hagarenes boldly usurp the name of Saracenes, yet they were but the brood that
spran^s out of the belly of HAGAR the handmaid of SARAH. And the Priests boy
in the days of ELI came unto the Caldron while the flesh of the peace offering
1. Sam, 2. 14.
was seithing, and thrust in his flesh-hooke, all that the flesh-hooke brought
up, the Priest took for himself. This thing was done by violence, but the
Priest had not just right to every piece of the sacrifice that the flesh-hooke
brought up. The Roman Church in our days has borrowed the flesh-hooke of
the Priests boy, and violently arrogates unto themselves the faithful keeping
of ancient Apostolic traditions. When we demand where is the charter
containing their title and right, we see nothing but the flesh-hook with three
teeth in their hand. The Church cannot err. We are the true Church. And,
Cursed be he who says that in matters of faith our general Councils can err.
Madame accept under your La. favorable protection these my travels, in
weakness not unlike to the writer, always containing a faithful testimony
of my humble endeavor to confirm the branches of your noble household in the
true faith of Christ. Now the great Mediator of the covenant of God stablish
all your hearts in the certainty of his undoubted truth unto the end and in
the end.

Amen,
Your La. humble servant P. SYMSON.

The Preface.
THE estate of the Church of Christ, whereo^ we (...) to be counted feeling
members, has been very troublous from the beginning of the world, not like
unto the estate of Moab settled upon her dregs, and not powered out from vessel
to vessel, Ierem: 48. 11. yet the more afflicted, the more beloved of God.
Whose face watered with tears is fair, and whose mourning voice is pleasant in
the sight of God, Cantic. 2. 14. And like as doing of good willingly has a
great recompense of reward from God: eucn so patient suffering of evil for
righteousness sake is highly commended in Scripture, and richly rewarded in
heaven. Yea the very Ethnicke Philosopher PLATO (to whom the glory of the
sufferings for Christ was unknown) affirms that men who suffer scourging,
binding, tormenting, boring out of eyes, and finally strangling of their breath
for righteousness sake, are exceeding happy, or (as the word (...) imports)
thrice happy: PLATO in Repub. Howbeit the superlatiue degree of suffering that
can be found amongst the Ethnickes could never equal the glory of the
sufferings of Christian people. They who were initiated in the mysteries of
MITHRA (this word in the Persian language signifies the sun) could not be
admitted to that honor before they had bin tried by suff^ring of four score
diverse sorts of torments, such as long abstinence from meat and drink,
solitary living in the wilderness a long time, trial of suffering the
fervent heat of fire, and the coldness of water, and many other torments
until the number of four score had been completely filled out, Nazian, in
Iulianum. These voluntary sufferings, like as in the beginning they wanted the
warrant of Gods calling, so likewise in end they shall want the hope of Gods
reward. But the mouth of God himself pronounces Christians to be blessed who
die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Apoc. 14 13. The manifold persecutions of the Church, may be divided
into three ranckes: some of them were fierce and bloody, some were crafty, the
third was and is both cru^ll and crafty. The ten Ethnic Emperors, NERO,
DOMITIAN, TRAIAN, etc. were so prodigal of the blood of the Lords Saints,
that they powered it out like water upon the ground. The Arrian Emperors were
subdolous and crafty, but the persecution of the Antichrist (which is the
third) goes beyond the rest both in crutltie and craft. The experience we have
had in our own days of the cruelty of the supposts of the Antichrist, and
their crafty convey of their malicious interprisesintended against our
Sovereign Lord, his royal race and noble Counselors does clear^y prove that
the malice and craft of the Antichrist goes as far beyond the malice and
craft of all Emperors, as the flood of NOAH goes beyond the inundation of
Nilus.

ONVPHRIVS confounds the first two ran^ of the persecutions by a secret
preterition of the name AVRE^AN, and counts DIOCLETIAN to be the ninth
persecuting Emperor, and the ARRIAN persecution for the tenth; I can neither
have a good liking of his opinion nor of himself: His opinion smells of
nou^ltie: himself was an aduocat for heretics, and all bad reprobat causes:
he will plead the cause of HONORIVS condemned as an herctique in a general
Council, and the cause of GREGORY the seuinth, and impudently dare deny that
ever there was a Pope of the feminine sex sitting in the chair of Rome. True
it is that all the Emperors who lived after the ascension of our Lord into
heaven until the Halcyon days of CONSTANTINE the great (only some few
except, such as NERVA and PHILIPPUS and few more) might have their names most
justly enrolled into the Catalogue of persecuting Emperors, because they
suffered the fire, that others had kindled, to burn on still, and quenched it
not by the might of their authority. But these are chiefly counted
persecutours, who either kindled the fire as NERO did, or else by n^we edicts
and commandments set forth in their names they added f^well to the fire, to
the end that the augmented flame of the furnace might strike the greater
terror into the hearts of Christians. A short compend of the first ten great
persecutions I have collected out of sundry authors, whereinto necessity
drives me to write of persecuting Emperors so far as appertains to the
history of the Church, and no further, and of persecuted Christians, specially
teachers, against whom the rage of persecuting Tyrants was most ba^efully
bent. The names of the heretics also behooved to be remembered, the most
malignant vleer that ever bred in the Church of Christ. These are the wandering
stars of whom the Apostle Jude speaks, to whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever, Epist. Iud. ver. 13. I have made little mention of
Councils, except of that famous Council holden at Jerusalem by the Apostles,
Acts 15. Provincial and national Councills during the space of the first
three h^ndreth years were few in number, by reason of the rage of persecuting
Emperors, and some of them that were gathered were obscure, and the l^sse
regarded, in respect of their contradiction one to another. There was a Council
gathered at Rome, another in Caesarea Palestinae, another in France, the fourth
in Pontus, and one in Asia, all these were gathered for one and the self same
purpose, to deliberate anent the keeping of Pasch day, Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 23.
In Rome VICTOR was in one opinion, POLYCRATES in Asia held another opinion,
IRENAEVS in France was wiser then the rest, and was more careful to keep
unity in the Church of Christ, then to dispute contentiously anent keeping of
days. The national Council of Philadelphia in Arabia against ARTEMON and
BERYLLVS, wherein ORIGIN was present. Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib, 6. cap. 37. A
Council holden at Rome by CORNELIUS, and another in some parts of Afric for
the timous suppressing of the error of NOVATVS, Cyprian, epist. lib. 1. Epist.
2. A notable Council holden at Antiochia against PAVIVS SAMOSATENVS a
pernicious heretic, Eusebius: lib. 5. cap, 29. All these were gathered for
suppressing of heretics. Some Councils were gathered by CYPRIAN B of Carthage
for rebaptising of those who were baptized by heretics. This weakness both
in CYPRIAN and in other B shops of Afric was after corrected by the Church.
In the treatises that I have subjoyned after every Centurie, I had regard to
discover the fountains of errors, that began to spring up in the first three
hundredth years after our Lords ascension to heaven. How ancient so cuer the
small beginnings of errors do seem, yet are they posterior unto that
wholesome sum of true doctrine delivered to the world by Christ and his
Apostles. Who so lists to use the like order in all the rest of the Centuries
until our own days, no necessity shall drive him to use HERODOTES modest
excuse in the description of the rivers of Nilus, and Boristhenes, whose
fountains in his days were unknown, and therefore his preterition of a thing
unknown was to be favorably comported with by the reader: but the welspring of
all the rest of popish errors according to the order of time wherein they began
to set forth their head, may be as easily pointed out by the finger as these
whereof I make mention in the first three hundreth-yeeeres. The R^etoricall
ornaments of NAZIANZENVS speaking to the dead, and bringing in a virgin
craving help at the blessed virgin, the mother of our Lord, in^ourageth
LINDANVS to count invocation of Saints to be an ancient Apostolic tradition.
Nazianzenus in laudem Cypr. ye^ could be not be ignorant that invocation of
Saints began not to take root before the four hundredth year of our Lord,
and that in great weakness of doubtsome speeches, O anima Constantini (...),
That is, O soul of CONSTANTINVS, if thou have any sense or feeling, to wit, of
things done amongst us, Nazian. oratione (...). contraJulianum.

Therefore the treatise of invocation of Saints may more conveniently he
subjoyned to the fourth Centurie. The other cause wherefore I have compiled
these treatises, is to declare how circumspectly we should beware of the small
beginnings of defection from ancient verity, because the beginning of error
is like unto a soft vapor rising out of the sea, thickning in the air,
converting into a cloud, and in end sending down mighty storms and tempests
upon the earth. Who could have once imagined that Natalitia Martyrum a thing in
i^ self not unlawful, could have turned to that horrible abuse that now is in
Popery, that all these holy. Martyrs are made mediators of our intercession?
Or who could have imagined that the reverent keeping of the relics of Saints
could have turned in end unto adoration and knceling before them with
confidence to be the better heard of God? The Lord grant we may beware in time
of the beginnings of defections both in doctrine and in manners that have cr^pt
in of late days into this land.

Amen.
To the Reader.
IT was admired of old, that APHRAATES who lived in the cottages of the
wilderness al his time, yet once he was found in the streets of Antiochia in
the days of the Emperor VALENS, Theodor. hist. eccl. lib. 4. cap. 26. he
excufed the change of his former behavior, by the similitude of a modest
virgin lurking quietly in secret corners of her fathers house so long as it is
in safety, but if it be set on fire, it is skaithfull modesty to lurk any
longer, necessity compels her to run out to the streets, to cry and
give warning of the pe^ill ofher fathers house. This example of APHRAATES might
sufficiently excuse mine unaccustomed boldness to set forth my head, that
has been lapped up so long in hurtful silence. But now the power of darkness
in creaseth, and as the Prophet says, Woevnto us, for the day declineth, and
the shadows of the evening are stretched out, Ierem. 6. 4. Yea the shadow of
mount Athos reaches to the Isle Lemnos, a sure fore-running token of the going
down of the Sun. Now it is time to creep out of our subterraneall caves,
and to give warning to sloken the fire in time before it spread further, and
bring greater desolation to the House of our GOD. Papists are waxed insolent of
late days, like unto Serpents in Summer weather taking courage and biting the
heels of horses, that the riders may fall, not sparing both in word and write
to reproach our religion, as a thing not countenanced with antiquity, and our
Ministry as altogether naked and void of the knowledge of ancient learning.
Shall we now stand as idle men do in market places one looking upon another?
Rather then we should sustain such apparent damage and skaith, through
vntimous silence, I had rather step forth with the Lacedemonian soldier
impotent of his legs, and neither meet to fight, nor able to fly, yet had
he this comfort that possible he might blunt the edge of his enemies sword,
and make others ashamed who were meeter for fighting then he was. Take in good
season my weak trauelles, Christian Reader, I have many honest witnesses who
know that I was never purposed to send forth unto the open view of the world
any thing that came from me. How this compend came into the Printers hand I
remit unto his faithful testimony. It was my purpose, in write to have given
warning unto noble houses who had been my ordinary auditors to beware of the
contagion of lying doctrine, that is nowesecretly spreading in our land: this
being done, the ordinary exercises of my calling would have been my chief
employment, if the Lord pleased. Therefore [gentle Reader] take in the better
part the Goats hair, and Rams skins that I present to cover the
Tabernacle of my God. I refer the ornaments of gold, silver and precious
stones for beautifying the inner parts of the Tabernacle to others upon whom
God has vouchsafed greater gifts, Exodus 25.

Farewell.
CENTVRIE I.
Chap. 1.
Augustus Caesar.
OUR Lord Jesus the true Prince of peace, was borne in Bethlehe^ Judah of a
maid, in a very peaceable time in the 42. year of the reign of AUGUSTUS
CAESAR. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5 at what time the temple of IANVS was
cloied and locked up, Functii Chron. which in time of wars was continually
patent and open. At the time of this blessed Nativitie the Angels of God
rejoiced, Luc. 1. the devils trembled. Some affirm that all the Oracles of
IVPITER, APOLLO and HECATE were silent and gave no responses: always it is
certain that many years before the Lords blessed Nativitie the Lord
permitted the world to be wonderfully blinded with the delusions of the devil.
The top of IVPITERS oak in Dodona was shaken, the caldron was smitten with the
rod that was in the hand of IVPITERS image: The Prophetesses forewarned by
these fore-running tokens of inspiration were ready to utter IVPITERS oracles,
and the deceived people were humbly kneiling and attending upon the response
that should be given, Nazianz in Iulianum. Annot. Nonni. the tripode in
Delphis, the laurel and fountain in Daphne, APOLLO his deceitful ensigns,
the ram-faced image of IVPITER AMMONIVS in Cyrenia with many more places
whereinto the sound of the devils trumpet was heard, to these places (I say)
did people bewitched by Satan resort in frequent numbers to be taught by the
mouth of him who was a liar from the beginning, and who remains a liar,
albeit he speak at some time the truth, because he speaks it animo fallendi
upon a purpose to deceive. It is very credible, that the blessed Seed, who
came to break the head of the Serpent, did stop his mouth also in the time
of his blessed Nativity. The country of Iude^ at this time was subject to the
Romans, and paid tribut to CAESAR, Luc. 2. The deputies of AUGUSTUS in Judea
and Syria were CYRENIVS, COPONIVS, AMBIBVCHVS and ANNIVS RUFUS one succeeding
to another, Joseph Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. HEROD the son of ANTIPATER by
favor of ANTONIUS obtained this honor to be governor of the nation of the
Jews, but the honorable name of a King he received from AUGUSTUS CAESAR:
this was ratified for his further assurance by the Senate of Rome, Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 15. cap, 10. for which cause HEROD to testify his thankful mind
toward ANTONIUS builded a Castle in Jerusalem very near to the temple called
Arx Antonia: And to the honor of AUGUSTUS he builded Caesarea Palestinae
sometime called the tower of STRATON. Now a forreiner and stranger, of his
fathers side an Idumean, of his mothers side an Arabian, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and an aliant both from the stock of DAVID, and also from the Commonwelth of
Israel was reigning in Judea, and the scepter was sliding from Judah, now I say
was it time that SHILOCH should come, according to JACOBS prophecy, to Christ
Was borne when the scepter was apparently sliding from Judah.
whom the people should be gathered, Genesis 49. 10. Now was it time that the
promised M^SSIAS should come and sit in the Throne of his father DAVID, and of
his Kingdom there should be none end. And indeed how can the Kingdom of
Christ have an end, who acquireth a new title and right of government by
death, which is the last period of other Kings gouernements, and in death they
leave a vacant room to a successor but Christ Jesus by dying, and rising
again has a right to rule both over dead and Christ's kingdom is everlasting,
quick, Rom, 14. 9. Yea in very death it self he was practicing his kingly
office in most effectual manner, and tramping Satan under feet, and undoing
the power of death, Hos. 13. 14.

In AUGUSTUS time also JOSEPH was admonished in a dream to take the babe and
his mother, and to flee into Egypt, Mat. 2. 13. SOZOMEN not content with the
certainty of Scripture adds a particular nomination of the town Hermopolis
in Thebaida whereinto Christ sojourned until the The uncertainty of tradition.
death of HEROD the great. This he had by the uncertainty of tradition. The
miracle of the hudge and high tree Prestis, that bowed the top lowly to the
ground and worshipped her maker Christ, and afterward had a medicinable virtue
in fruit, leaf, and bark to cure diseases, rather derogateth credit to that
Egyptian tradition, then assures us of the verity of that report, Sozom. lib.
5. cap. 21. HEROD before his departure from this life, had put to death three
of his sons, ARISTOBVLVS, ALEXANDER, and ANTIPATER, and by testamentall
legacy had divided his dominions amongst his remanent sons, ARCHELAVS, HEROD
ANTIPAS and PHILIP: which testament being ratified by AUGUSTUS, Judea, Samaria
and Idumea were alloted to ARCHELAVS, the Tetrarchie of Galile to ANTIPAS, and
Iturea and Trachonitis to PHILIP. Joseph, Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 13. JOSEPH being
returned from Egypt, when he heard that ARCHELAVS did reign in Judea in stead
of his father HEROD, feared to dwell in Judea, but being warned of God in a
dream went to the parts of Galile, and dwelt in a city called Nazaret, Mat.
2. ver, 22, 23. All this was done in the days of AUGUSTUS. After he had
reigned 56. years, or as Josephus writes, 57. years, viz. with ANTONIUS 14.
years, and after he overcame ANTONIUS and CLEOPATRA Queen of Egypt in
sea-warfare over against Epirus, he had the imperial soveranitie himself
alone all his days, and died in the 77. year of his age, Joseph, Antiq. lib.
18. cap. 3.

Tiberius.
AFter AUGUSTUS reigned TIBERIUS NERO 22. Roman Deputies in Judea.
years 7 months, 7. days. Bucolc. Index. The Roman Deputies that were sent
to Judea in the time of his reign were VALERIVS GRATVS, PONTIVS PILAT and
VITELLIVS. VALERIVS GRATVS for love of gain removed the Priests of the Jews
from their offices at his own pleasure. ANANVS, ISMAEL, ELEAZARVS, SIMON the
son of CAMITHVS, all these were denuded of their priestly dignity, when as
two of them, viz. ELEAZARVS and SIMON had continued scarce one year in office.
In end JOSEPHUS CAIAPHAS is advanced to the priesthood. This is the cause
wherefore the Evangelist John calls CAIAPHAS the high Priest of that same
year, John 18. ver. 13. Matters of religion were now come to an horrible
abuse, and were not ordered according to Gods holy ordinance, but according to
the appetite of the Roman Deputies Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. After
GRATVS, PONTIVS PILAT was sent to be Deputy in Judea, a man vigilant and
active in all civil adoes, as the blood of the Galileans mixed with their
sacrifices clearly proves, Luc. 13. 1. but in the cause of Christ remiss,
negligent and slack. After the issue of ten years VITELLIVS is appointed
Deputy in Judea and PONTIVS PILAT addresseth toward Rome. By gratifying of the
Jews in a matter of small importance The priestly garments.
he conquessed great favor. The priestly garments were wont to be kept in the
Castle called Antonia, but VITELLIVS gave commandment to the Captain of the
Castle to let the high Priest have the use of them when he pleased, and to
choose what place he liked best for the custody of the priestly garments. He
disauthorized CAIAPHAS, following (as appears) the example of VALERIVS
GRATVS, and gave his office to JONATHAN the son of ANANVS sometime high
Priest, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap, 6. In the 15. year of the reign of
TIBERIUS Christ our Lord and Savior was baptized by JOHN in Jordan, was led to
the wilderness, fasted forty days, was tempted of the devil, and began to
preach, Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. Mat. 3. and 4.

In the eighteenth year of TIBERIUS the Lord Jesus was Christ crucified in the
18 year of Tiberius.
crucified, and offered a sacrifice for our sins, which has a perpetual
virtue to save such as believe, Heb. 7. He arose again the third day from
death. The high Priests and rulers of the people gave money to the soldiers
to obscure the glory of his resurrection, yet it was sufficiently known, not
only to Christ's disciples, by his frequent apparitions to them, but also to
PONTIVS PILAT the Roman Deputy himself, who had given out a sentence of
death, against Christ. PILAT by letters signified to TIBERIUS the miracles of
Christ, his resurrection, and that he was supponed of many to be God: but the
Senate of Rome refused to The Senate of Rome refuses to acknowledge the
divinity of Christ.
acknowledge the divinity of Christ, because he was worshipped as God, before
his Godheade was approved by the Senate of Rome, Eusebius. eccles. hist lib, 2.
cap. 2. The words of the Apostle PAVL had performance in the Roman Senate
(...) they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full
of darkness, when they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools,
Romans 1. ver. 21. 22. The very smoke that rises from the furnace seems to be
somewhat at the first, but when it mounteth up into the air, the hier it
ascends, the more it scatters, and the sudden disparition of it declares
it is but a vain thing. Such was the wisdom of the Roman Senate, when they
mounted up so hie as to judge of divine things far surpassing the reach of the
natural understanding of man, they proved stark fools, and people destitut
of true understanding: and PILAT himself ouerladen with many heavy calamities
Pilat kills himself.
in the days of CAIUS put hands into himself, and so ended his wretched
life, Eusebius. lib, 2. cap. 7.

Caius Caligula.
CAIUS CALIGVLA successor to TIBERIUS reigned three years and nine months,
Eusebius. lib 2. cap. 8. He was a proud tyrant, enemy to all righteousness, the
very child of the devil. I insist only upon Church matters. He was an
hateful enemy to the Jews dwelling at Jerusalem, and at Alexandria. For one
and Caius would be counted a god.
the selfsame cause were they both despised and hated of CAIUS, because they
would not give unto him divine honors by building Temples, and altars, and
offering sacrifice to new IVPITER CAIUS, and swearing by his name. First
concerning Jerusalem, he had sent PETRONIVS to be Deputy in Judea, with
commandment to dedicat the Temple of Jerusalem to IVPITER CAIUS, and to set up
his image in the Temple, Eusebius eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 6. Joseph. antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 11. The Jews were more willing to die, then to see the Temple of
their God polluted. PETRONIVS advertised the Emperor of the grevance of the
Jews, but before The Jews abhorred the vpsetting of the image of Caius in
their Temple.
his letters came into the hands of CAIUS somewhat interueened that both
disappointed the purpose of CAIUS, and also incensed his heart with fury and
rage against his Deputy PETRONIVS. At that time HEROD AGRIPPA was at Rome
whom afterward the Angel of God smote at Casarea, so that he was consumed
with worms, Acts 12. he was exceedingly beloved of CAIUS, because in the days
of TIBERIUS he had been cast in prison, and bound with bands for the love he
carried to CAIUS, in so far that CAIUS invited AGRIPPA upon a certain time to
a banquet, and bade him The petition of Agrippa.
ask what he pleased, and it should be granted. AGRIPPAES petition was this,
that CAIUS would suffer the nation of the Jews to live according to their own
law. CAIUS was moved somewhat with this unexpected petition; yet partly for
his excessive love toward AGRIPPA: also, lest he should seem to them which
sat at table to be a promise-breaker the petition is granted. But the venom
of his indignation against the Jews he poured out against PETRONIVS, because
that by lingering in executing his commandment occasion was offered to AGRIPPA
to present this foresaid petition. The letter of CAIUS sent to his Deputy was
cruel and bloody, the like whereof was seldom heard: because he The bloody
letter of Caius written to Petronius his Deputy.
fulfilled not the Emperors desire, he is commanded to give out a sentence
of death against his own life, and to be both judge and burrio to himself,
Joseph. antiq. lib. 18 cap. 11 Such mercy was in this new IVPITER CAIUS.
Before I writ anything of his cruelty against the Jews that dwelt in
Alexandria, it is a meet place to admonish the reader of the hypocrisy and
counterfaitholines of HEROD AGRIPPA who seemed both in the days of CAIUS, and
also in the days of the Emperor CLAUDIUS to be a pattern of godliness,
preferring at the banquet of CAIUS the liberty of the people of God and the
inviolable observation of the law of God to all the riches that the liberality
of an affectioned Emperor could be able to afford. In CLAUDIUS days he sailed
from Italy to Judea, he acknowledged God to be the author The hypocrisy of
Agrippa.
of his deliverance from prison and bands, and offered a chain of gold to be
hung up in the Temple of Jerusalem, in testimony that he received that benefit
with a thankful mind out of Lords hands, Joseph, antiq. lib 19. cap. 5. In
outward things he was a builder of the walls of Jerusalem, until the emulous
envy of MARSVS, or enuyous emulation the hinderer of all good works, compelled
him to desist and to leave the work imperfited, Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap 7.
For all this outward show of holiness, the lessons of CAIUS whom he loved beyond
all things, never left him till his last breath CAIUS desired to be counted a
god so did AGRIPPA in Caesarea delight when his oration was called the voice of
God and not of man. Acts 12. CAIUS persecuted the Jews without a cause, so did
HEROD AGRIPPA the Christians, Acts 12. CAIUS the higher he advanced himself,
the greater was his fall, the like also happened to AGRIPPA. So pernicious a
thing is ungodly company, Contention between the Jews and Grecians who dwelt
at Alexandria.
burning their associats with their fire, or else blecking them with their
smoke, and hurtful every manner of way. In the town of Alexandria the Grecians
contended against the Jews, both parties sent ambassadors to Rome, the
Grecians sent APPION, the Jews sent PHILO a very prudent and learned man.
APPiON with flattering words insinuated himself in the favor of the Emperor
CAIUS, and accused the Jews, that they neither builded temples, nor offered
sacrifices to the honor of CAIUS, as the Grecians did. PHILO was ready to
answer, but CAIUS ruled with affection rather then with reason caused PHILO to
be thrust out of his palace, and would not hearken unto him, Joseph. antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 10. Eusebius. lib. 2. ecles. hist. cap 5. In these two mirrours we
may see the cruel disposition of this Emperor, whose dependers were
persecuters of Christians, like as he himself was a persecuter of the Jews.
If any good turn fell into his hand, it was rather by accident then of purpose
to glorify God, or to punish sin: he banished HEROD ANTIPAS, who beheaded
JOHN the Baptist, and his wife HERODIAS that incestuous harlot, who ended their
life's in penuritie and misery in Lions of France, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 2.
cap 4. But all this was done for favor of AGRIPPA, Joseph. antiq: lib. 18. cap
9. but not for detestation of murder and incest. In end CAIUS was slain by
his own servants, CHEREAS and LVPVS, whom the Emperor CLAUDIUS afterward
punished unto the death, Joseph. antiq. lib. 19, cap. 3. This new IVPITER I
count him to have been in worse case then old IVPITER the son of SATVRN,
albeit both of them died, yet the one after his New Jupiter in worse case then
old Jupiter.
death, was counted a god, but the other after his death was counted a devil.

Claudius,
CLAUDIUS reigned thirteen years, eight months, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 19. He
ratified the gift of the kingdom of Judea, bestowed by his predecessor CAIUS
upon HEROD AGRIPPA, and added thereto all the dominions of HEROD ANTIPAS, whom
CAIUS had banished, Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap 4. This HEROD AGRIPPA when he
returned from 'Italie to Judea builded the walls of Jerusalem, sparing for no
cost, so high and strong, that if the work had not been hindered by the
procurement of MARSVS governor of Syria he had made them impregnable. He was
not so careful to build the walls of the spiritual Jerusalem, for he
beheaded the holy Apostle S. JAMES the brother of JOHN, and did cast PETER into
prison, whom the Lord miraculously delivered, Acts 12. This HEROD and the
Jews made havoc of the glory of God, and blood of his Saints. For he
gratified them by shedding the blood of the Apostles of Christ, and again they
gratified him by giving him the glory that appertained to God alanerly. For
which cause he was stricken by the Angel of God, and consumed with worms, Acts
12. The famine foretold by Agabus.
In this Emperor CLAUDIUS days, the famine foretold by the Prophet AGABVS,
Acts II. afflicted the world. One of the causes of this plague doubtless was
the manifold abuses of the creatures of God, in the mids of the abundance of
bread, the contempt of the poor, which faults were so universally ouerspread
in the world, that some of the Emperors themselves were not free of the foul
spot of intemperancie: as the scoffing speeches of the people did witness in
stead of CLAUDIUS TIBERIUS NERO calling the Emperor CALDIVS BIBERIVS MERO,
Funct. Chron. This is referred to the successor of AUGUSTUS.

In the year of our Lord 48. and in the sixth year of the reign of CLAUDIUS,
as CHYTRAeVS reckons, was gathered The Council of Jerusalem. ANNO 48.
that famous Council of Jerusalem described viuely by the Evangelist LVKE,
Acts 15. whereat were present the Apostles, PETER and PAVL and JAMES, and
BARNABAS a reverent man of God, in whom Apostolic gifts were not inlacking,
with other worthy men, IVDAS surnamed BARSABAS and SILAS notable Prophets and
fellow laborers of the Apostles: likewise the Commissioners of Antiochia, and
Elders of Jerusalem with many others who were believers. What was concluded in
this Council, I remit to the faithful narration of the Evangelist LVKE, Acts
15. Always if vot^s be pondered rather then numbered, this is the Council of
Councils more worthy to be called O Ecomenicke then the Councils of Nice, of
Constantinople, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon. In the Council of Nice were worthy
Bishops, who came from all quarters of the world, but in this Council were
holy Apostles, who could not err in matters of faith, O Ecomenicke Bishops
indeed, and any one of the holy Apostles was illuminated with more abundance
of clear light in things pertaining to the worship of God then all the 300.
and 18. Bishops conveened at Nice in Bithynia. Many Roman Deputies were sent
in the days of Roman deputies:
CLAUDIUS to keep Syria and Judea in subjection to the Romans, such as
MARSVS, LONGINVS, CVSPIVS PHADVS, TIBERIUS ALEXANDER, CVMANVS and FELIX. I
leave MARSVS and LONGINVS for desire to open up in what Deputies time things
mentioned in holy Scripture came to pass. When CVSPIVS PHADVS was deputy,
there arose a deceitful man named THEVDAS, to whom resorted a number of men
about 400. who were slain, and all who followed him were scattered, Acts 5.
ver. 36, JOSEPHUS writes that PHADVS sent forth a troop of horsemen, who
suddenly charged the people that followed THEVDAS, and slew them, and took
THEVDAS alive, and cutted off his head, and brought it to Jerusalem, Joseph.
antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 11 After this man arose one IVDAS
of Galile in the days of the tribute, and drew away much people after him: he
also perished, and all that obeyed him were scattered, Acts 5 37. If GAMALIEL
in that narration keep the order of time, as these words (After him) would
import, of necessity the words of the history of the Acts must be understood
of another THEVDAS then that man of whom JOSEPHUS writes in the place above
mentioned. For IVDAS of Galite lived in the days of AUGUSTUS, and when
CYRENIVS was Deputy of Syria and Judea, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2. and
likewise antiq lib. 20. cap. 3. But I am not certain whether or no the words
(...) do absolutely import that IVDAS of Galile was posterior in time to
THEVDAS. When CVMANVS was Deputy, who succeeded to TIBERIUS ALEXANDER the
insolency of one Roman soldier was the destruction of twen^ (...) innocent
people, he discovered the secret parts of his body upon a solemn feast day,
near unto the Temple, and in the sight of the Jews, they counted this a
contempt done to God in the porch of his own house: CVMANVS drew the Roman
soldiers to the Castle called Antonia very near the Temple, and set them in
order, and the people of the Jews, fearing the invasion of the soldiers,
fled, and in the narrow passages ouertro de one another, and a great multitude
of people were slain, Joseph. antiq. lib. 20, cap. 4. After this the people of
the Jews came to Cesarea where CVMANVS was for the time, and complained of a
Roman soldier, who had casten a book of holy Scripture into the fire, whom
CVMANVS beheaded, and so pacified the Jews Joseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4. In
end CVMANVS through his evil government procured to himself the indignation
of the Emperor CLAUDIUS, he favored the wicked cause of the Samaritanes, who
had stopped the passages of the Galileans, and slain a great number of them.
They were accustomed yearly to go up to Jerusalem to holy feasts, and their
way was through the towns and villages of the Samaritanes. CVMANVS rather
favored then punished this wicked fact of the Samaritanes, therefore he was
removed from his place, and FELIX was sent to be Deputy of Judea, Joseph.
antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. Whether CLAUDIUS was impoisoned by AGRIPPINA his wife
to prepare an easy passage to NERO her son to be Emperor or not, I leave
that to be read in authors, who have entreated the life's of Emperors
politickly. It contenteth me to write of the estate of the Church in their time.

Nero.
DOMITIVS NERO succeeded to CLAUDIUS: he reigned thirteen years and eight
months, Eusebius. lib 3. cap. 5. His mother AGRIPPINA after the death of CNEVS
DOMITIVS AENOBARBVS was joined in marriage with the Emperor CLAUDIUS. In the
first five years of his government he abandoned the insolency of his wicked
disposition, so that it was a proverb in the mouths of men, Neronis
quinquennium, in regard of his good carriage for the space of five years. But a
fire long covered, in end breaks out into a mighty flame, that no water can
sloken it. His cruelty against his mother, his wifes OCTAVIA and POPPEA, his
master SENECA, the Poet LVCAN, and the vile abuse of his body with persons of
his nearest consanguinitie, I remit to the reading of learned authors, who have
written exactly the history of the Roman Emperors, and I haste to that
which is the principal purpose of this compend, how wicked NERO kindled the
first great Furnace of horrible persecution against the Christians. It cannot
be denied but in the days of TIBERIUS our Lord Christ Jesus was crucified: in
the days of CALIGVLA and CLAUDIUS the hands of that cruel persecuter HEROD
was mightily strengthened by the favor, countenance and bountifulness of both
these Emperors, so that he laid hands upon the pillars of the house of God:
and so I deny not but the Church of God before the days of NERO was in the
furnace of trouble, but now come the days whereinto the Romain Emperors like
unto NEBVCHADNEZAR werefull of rage, and the form of their visage was changed
against the Christians, and they commanded that the furnace should be hoate
seven times more then it was wont to be hoate, Daniel chap. 3. ver. 19. The ten
persecuting Emperors wrestled against God,


This history henceforth contains on the one part, the great wrestling of
persecuting Emperors against God, not like to the wrestling of JACOB with God,
Genes. 32. The place of JACOBS wrestling was Peniel where he saw God, the
form of wrestling was with many tears and strong supplications, Hos. 12. the
end was, that the Angel should not hastily depart from him leaving him
comfortless, the success was the obtaining of a blessing, which was the
armor of God to save him against the hateful malice of ESAV: but by the
contrare, NERO, DOMITIAN, TIAIAN, ANTONIUS, and the rest set their faces
against the heaven, commanded the holy One of Israel to depart out of the
world, endeavored to quench the saving light of his Gospel, and by so doing,
brought down upon themselves, in stead of a blessing, that wrath that is
reueiled from heaven upon all them who detain the truth of God into
unrighteousness, Romans 1. ver. 18. On the other part is set down the constant
faith and patient suffering of the Saints who hated not the burning bush,
because it was set on fire, but they loved it, because in it they were
refreshed with the comfortable presence of the great Angel of God, Exodus 3.
who would not for gaining of their life's once fashion themselves according to
the similitude of Idolaters in outward and external things. TERTVLLIAN in his
book de corona militis declares that true Christian soldiers abhorred from
setting a garland of flowers upon their heads when they received wages for
their painful service in warfare, because it was the habit of Idolaters who
sacrificed to IVPITER. O happy men of God, whose virtues the dead colors of
Painters cannot represent, and the feastered manners of this corrupt age cannot
imitat! Oh when shall our shadows depart? when shall the fresh oil of the
grace of God be powered into our lamps, that the light of our faith, patience,
and constant perseverance may shine clearly to the world as theirs did?

The occasion of this first great persecution of NERO was his own barbarous
and cruel fact: he caused the town of The first persecution. ANNO Chr. 65
Rome to be set on fire, which wasted the buildings of the town for the space
of six days, Bucol. Index chron. Funct. chron. Chytr. chron. and to eschew
the vile infamy of this barbarous fact, he laid the blame upon the Christians,
and gave forth edicts and commandments to persecute them to the death. NERO
was so hateful an adversary to all righteousness, that EVSEBIVS following the
example and words of TERTVLLIAN, affirms that if the Gospel had not been an
excellent good thing it had not been condemned by The martyrdom of Peter and
Paul.
NERO, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 25. It is supponed that PETER was
crucified, and PAVL was beheaded at Rome in time of this persecution. And
EVSEBIVS is in that opinion, lib. 2. cap. 25, If this betrue, the very dead
bones of PETER and PAVL are witnesses against the Roman Church if they
continue not in that same faith that PETER and PAVL sealed up with their blood.
The estate of the Jews under NERO was very hard in respect of the often change
of the Roman Deputies. For in NEROES time continued FELIX for a space, whom
the Emperor CLAUDIUS had sent to Romain Deputies.
Judea, and after him FESTVS, ALBINVS, and FLORVS. This last Deputy was
fashioned according to the similitude of the manners of NERO his master, and the
Proverb holds true in NERO and FLORVS, Such man such master. In the time that
FELIX was Deputy, a certain Egyptian man pretending to be a Prophet, and
promising great things, persuaded four thousand of the Jews to follow after
him, Acts 25. but FELIX sent forth companies of horsemen and footmen, who slew
four hundredth of the people that followed the Egyptian, and took two hundredth
of them alive, the rest were scattered, but the seducing Prophet escaped, and
could not be found, Joseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 6. When FESTVS was Deputy,
King AGRIPPA heard the Apology of PAVL, and said that in a part PAVL
persuaded him to be a Christian, Acts 25. This AGRIPPA (I say) the son of
HEROD whom the Angel of God slew, Acts 12. was advanced to great honors by
the Emperor CLAUDIUS, as his father had been before him by the favor of
CAIUS, and he possessed not only his fathers dominions, but also the Tetrarchie
of Iturea and Trachonitis sometime belonging to PHILIP the son of HEROD the
great. His might and riches procured trouble to the nation of the Jews. He
had a palace situat upon the West Side of the Temple of Jerusalem, and in
regard it was builded upon a mountain he had a delectable profpect of the
town of Jerusalem: yet not content with this, he mounted up the walls of the
Palace by a new building, so high that they who were in the palace might have
seen the altar, and sacrifices of the Jews offered in the inner court which
at that time was called Atrium Iudeorum. This doing grieved the hearts of the
Jews. They on the other part to cut off the sight of those who dwelt in the
palace, from beholding their sacrifices raised up the wall of the inner court
on the West Side to such eminency, that no man could behold the sacrifices of
the Jews from the palace Contention between Agrippa and the Jews.
King AGRIPPA and FESTVS with authority commanded the Jews to demolish their
new builded wall. In end this matter was referred to the Emperor NERO, who
being solisted by his wife POPPEA, gratified the Jews in this point, and
compelled them not to cast down their wall, Joseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 7.
FESTVS died in Judea and ALBINVS was sent to be Deputy in Judea. ANANVS was
the high Priest of the Jews in these days, and finding opportunity of time,
to practice the malice of his heart against JAMES the son The martyrdom of
James surnamed Iustus.
of ALPHEVS surnamed IVSTVS, an holy Apostle and kinseman of our Lord Jesus.
When ALBINVS was upon his journey, and had not as yet arrived neither to the
coasts of Egypt nor of Judea, this ANANVS (I say) caused JAMES surnamed
IVSTVS, and the brother of our Lord to be stoned to death, Joseph. antiq. lib.
20. cap. 8. EVSEBIVS writes that he was thrown down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, Eusebius. eccl. histlib. 2. cap. 23. This cruelty of ANANVS albeit it
displeased both king AGRIPPA, and ALBINVS the deputy of the Romans, and the
people of Jerusalem, yet wicked men are wiser in their own generation then the
children of light: and ANANVS saw that if he had lingered until the Roman
Deputy had arrived, he could not have procured the death of a man counted so
just, and so well-beloved of the people, as the Apostle JAMES was It is to be
marked that EVSEBIV in the forementioned place describes the martyrdom of
JAMES surnamed IVSTVS before the edict of the persecution of NERO, after which
followed the martyrdom of PETER and PAVL in the 12. year of NERO his reign,
Epiphan. contrahares. nevertheless the Roman Church had forged epistles
decretall whereinto CLEMENS Bishop of Rome writes to JAMES surnamed IVSTVS
after the death of PETER. What credit these decretall epistles deserve, it
shall be declared hereafter Godwilling. But FLORVS who succeeded to ALBINVS
was an avaritious and cruel man: he exhausted the treasure that was in the
Temple, and took out of it sixteen talents of silver. And when the jews at
Jerusalem murmured against him, he came to the town in great wrath, and
permitted the soldiers to slay and to spoil the citizens of Jerusalem at
their pleasure. Likewise he afflicted with unaccustomed cruelty men of noble
birth, by scourging and crucifying them, Joseph. de bello Iudaico lib. 2. cap
25. This was the ground of the war between the Romans and the Jews, wherein
Jerusalem came to that lamentable ruin foretold The ground of the war
between the Jews and the Romans.
by our Savior Christ, Mat, 24. Now to return to the Emperor himself, and
form of his death, After he had reigned 13. years and eight months, the
Senate of Rome proclaimed him to be an enemy to mankind, and condemned him
to be whipped with wands to the death, and to be harled through the city. For
fear of which punishment he was forced to fly, and by slaying of himself
made an end of his most wretched life. Justin.

Uespasian.
AFter NERO, OTTO, VITELLIVS, and GALBA contended for the empire, and were all
hastily cut off, and made out of the way, and FLAVIANVS VESPASIAN was chosen
Emperor by the Roman army, he reigned 10. years, Bucol. Index Chron. The
nation of the Jews at this time for the most part was given over into a
reprobate mind, according as it was foretold by the Prophet ZACHARY: Then
said I, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die, and that that
perishes, let it perish, and let the remnant every one eat the flesh of his
neighbor, Zach. 11. 9. Like as the intolerable crueltle of FLORVS had irritat
the nation of the jews: even so on the other side the unsupportable obstinacy
of the Jews had incensed the wrath of the Romans unes against them. They were
now become so headstrong that they rejected the sacrifice that was wont to be
offered for CAESAR, Joseph. de bello Iudsico lib. 2. cap. 30. The calamity of
the Jews who dwelt in Alexandria and in Damascus, was but the beginning of
sorrows: fifty thousand Jews were slain in Alexandria, ten thousand in
Damascus, Joseph. debel. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 36 and 41. Besides this many signs
and wonders both in heaven and earth, did proclaim their future desolation and
destruction. A Comet was seen in heaven hanging over the town of Jerusalem
for the space Foreranning t^kens of the destruction of Jerusalem,
of a year, and having the similitude of a sword: in the Temple at the mid
time of the night, a clear light was seen shining round about the Altar, in
brightness not unlike unto the light of the day: and the great brazen port of
the Temple opened of the own accord about the sixth hour of the night:
chariots of fire were seen compassing towns, and a voice was heard in the
sanctuary warning to flit and to transport, with many other fearful signs
and wonders. Joseph. de bello Iud. lib 6 cap. 31. But a people senseless, whose
eyes were dim, whose ears were dull of hearing, whose heart was fat and
locked up by Satan in infidelity, they could take no warning of the wrath to
come, because the Lord was minded to destroy them. FLA. VESPASIAN and his son
TITUS VESPASIAN leading an army of threscore thousand armed men from
Ptolemaida besieged the towns of Galile and Trachonitis: so many as would not
willingly be subject to the Romans, the towns of Gadara, Tiberias, Iotopata,
Tarithea, Gamala, all these were brought under the renerence of VESPASIAN, and
JOSEPHUS, who had been lurking in a cave (after the town of Iotopata was
conquessed) was taken alive, and kept in bands by the Romans: he foretold
that VESPASIAN should be Emperor, and saluted him CAESAR, and (...) while
NERO was yet alive. de b^llo Iud. lib. 3. cap. 27. When this prophecy came to
pass indeed, and he was chosen to be Emperor, he sent for JOSEPHUS and
commanded that he should be loosed from bands, but TITUS his son thought
more expedient that his bands should be cut off from him, rather then loosed,
to the end he might be counted a worthy man who never deseuned captivity nor
bands, de bello Iud. lib. 4. cap. 39. FLAVIVS VESPASIAN returned to Rome, and
left behind him his son TITUS to sub due the Jews, and to besiedge the town
of Ierus^lem. but the Christians who dwelt at Jerusalem were warned by God to
depart out of the town of Jerusalem, so they left it, and dwelt beyond Jordan
in a town of Decapolis called Pella, Eusebius eccles. hist lib. 3. cap. 5.
Separation of the corn from the chafe goes before the unquenchable fire
wherewith the chafe shall be burnt. TITUS began to besiege Jerusalem in the
first year of the reign of his father, at the time when the people were
gathered to celebrate the The destruction of Jerusalem. ANNO Chr. 71.
feast of the Passover, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap 7. The terror of the sword of the
Romans without, the fear of merciless brigands within in the bowels of the
town prevailing, the flewere of the dead (wanting the honor of burial)
infecting the air, and devouring the living with contagious sickness,
theviolent plague offamine breaking asunder the bands of Nature, and
constraining women to eat the birth of their own bellies, Joseph. de bello
Iud. lib. 6. cap. 21. AH these calamities seized upon them at once in the just
judgment of God. They despised the father of eternity, and the Prince of
peace, and said to PILAT. We have no King but CAESAR, Ioh 19. 15. now they
find that the mercies of CAESAR were cruel, and his son TITUS who was
commended in all men's mouths as meek, merciful, liberal and eloquent, and was
called amor and delitiae humani generis, that is, the love and most dainty
thing of all mankind, yet God made him a terrible scourge to the nation of the
Jews, who forsook the Lord Jesus, and preferred CAESAR unto him. In Scripture
we read of many great vials of the wrath of God powered down upon unrighteous
men, but these are greatest that resemble by most viue representation the great
condemnation of the wicked at the last day, such as the flood of NOE, the
overthrow of Sodom, and destruction of Jerusalem. The flood of NOE was
universal and sudden, so shall be the condemnation of ungodly men at the last
day, Mat. 24 37. 38. 39. The overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, was a
destruction unsupportable, and the more meet to be an example of the vengeance
of eternal fire. epist. Iud. ver. 7. The destruction of Jerusalem, and the
forerunning tokens thereof are so mixed with the tokens preceding the
condemnation The flood of Noe, the overthrow of Sodom and destruction of
Jerusalem types of the great judgment to come
of the great day, that it may be clearly perceived that God has appointed the
one to be a type and figure of the other, Mat 24. So ost as we call to
remembrance the flood of NOE, the overthrow of Sodom and the destruction of
Jerusalem, let us fear and stand in awe to fall into the condemnation of
ungodly men, because all the terrors of these judgments concur and are
massed together in the judgeme^t of the last day. What are the deep Weeles of
water, what are the shoures of fire and brimstone, what is famine, pest and
sword, both intestine and foreign, in comparison of that worm that never
dies, and that fire that shall never be quenched, and the blacknesle of
darkness, with weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc.? It is a terrible thing to
fall into the hands of the living God. Concerning the number ofthem that were
slain in Galile, Trachonitis, Samaria and Judea, chiefly in the Metropolitan
town Jerusalem, over and beside those that were sold to be siaues, and those
that were devoured by wild beasts, in the triumph of FLA. and TITUS at Rome,
read Joseph. d^ bello Iud. lib. 6 cap. 45.

Titus.
AFter FLAVIVS reigned TITUS VESPASIAN his son two years, two months,
twenty days, Bucolc. index Chron. The nation of the Jews being now subdued,
there was great peace in all parts of the Roman dominions, both by sea and
land, and the temple of IANUS in Rome was closed and locked up again, Bucolc.

Domitian.
FLAVIVS DOMITI AN was associat to his brother TITUS The second persecution.
AN. Chr. 96.
in government during his lifetime, and after his death was his successor: he
reigned 15. years, Chytr. chron. He was proud like NERO, and persecuted
innocent Christians as he did, so prone and bent is our corrupt nature to sin,
and to follow evil examples. Now again the Church of Christ militant upon the
earth must learn obedicnce by suffering, and must give a proof before the
world, that the Covenant of God is written in the tables of her heart, and so
deeply ingraued by the finger of God, that no tribulation, anguish,
persecution, famine, nakedness, nor death it self can separate her from the
love of Christ. The members of the Church were the good merchants, of whom
Christ speaks, Mat. 13. who having found a pearl of unspeakable value, were
content to sell all that they had for love of gaining it: they had tasted of
the Well of water springing up into eternal life, and thirsted not again for
the water that cannot satisfy the heart of man with full co^tentment, Ioh. 4.
14. In this second great persecution the belooued disciple of Christ the
Apostle JOHN was banished The banishment of the Apostle John
to the Isle of Patmos for the word of God Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 18.
FLAVIA DOMICILLA, a woman of noble birth in Rome was banished to Pontia an Isle
lying over against Caieta in Italy, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 19. PROT
A'SIVS and GERV ASIVS were martyred at Millain, Chytr. Chron. concerning the
miracle wrought at their sepulchers, Godwilling, we shall speak in the third
Centurie, and in the treatise of relics. CHYTRAEVS writes that the
Evangelist TIMOTHY was stoned to death at Ephesus by the worshippers of DIANA,
and that DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA was slain by the sword at Pareis. DOMITIAN had
heard Domitian afraid by rumors of the Kingdom of Christ.
some rumors of the Kingdom of Christ, and was afraid as HEROD the great had
been, after the Nativity of our Lord: but when two of Christ's kinsemen,
according to the flesh, the Nephews of the Apostle IYDE were presented before
him, and he perceived them to be poor men, who gained their living by handie
labor, and when he had heard of them that Christ's Kingdom was not of this
world, but it was spiritual, and that he would come at the latter day to judge
the quick and the dead, he despised them as simple and contemptible persons,
and did them no harm, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 20. In end as the
life of DOMITIAN was like unto the life of NERO, so was he not unlike unto him
in his death: for his own wife and friends conspired against him, and slew
him: his body was carried to the grave by porters, and buried without honor.
The Senate of Rome also decreed that his name should be rased, and all his acts
should be rescinded, Sueton. in Domit. Ierom. catal. script. eccles.

Nerva.
COCCIVS NERVA after DOMITIAN reigned 1. year, 4. months, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap.
21. Bucolc. And hitherto all the Emperors that ruled, were borne in Italy:
from this forth strangers do rule: for TRAIAN the adoptiue son of NERVA his
successor was borne in Spain. NERVA redressed many things that were done
amiss by DOMITIAN, and in his time the Apostle JOHN was relieved from
banishment, and returned again to Ephesus where he died. Eusebius. cccles. hist.
lib. 3. cap. 21.

CENT I. Chap. 2.
AFter the Lords resurrection, his twelve Apostles were endued with grace from
above, and sent Apostles.
forth to conqu^sse all people to the obedience of Christ: whose travails the
Lord so wonderfully blessed, that within a short time many thousands of all
nations and languages, whom God had appointed to eternal life were converted to
the faith of Christ. This conquest that Christ made by the ministry of 12.
poor and contemptible men is more worthy to be called a conquest, then all the
valiant exploites of CYRUS, ALEXANDER, CAESAR, and other conquerours. For he
made this conquest by a small handful of poor and infirm disciples: also he
conquessed not only the bodies of men, but also their hearts to his obedience,
and finally he made this conquest not by shedding of peoples blood, but by
preaching of his own death and blood shed for the redemption of many. Neither
conquessed he free men to make them slaves, as other conquerours had done but
they who were slaves indeed to Satan, unto the^ he gave the liberty of the
sons of God. Now these 12. Apostles the more faithfully they labored in the
work of their ministry, the worse were they entreated by the unthankful
world, according as Christ had forctold, John 16. The most part of them were
put to death, the rest were not free of many painful sufferings and rebukes
which they willinglysustained for the Name of Christ. PETER and PAVL are
supponed to have been martyred at Rome, ANDRO to have been crucified in
Achaia, MATTHEW beheaded in Ethiopta, JAMES the brother of JOHN was beheaded by
HEROD in Judea, Acts 12. JAMES the son of AIPHEVS called IVSTVS was thrown
down headlong from the pinnacle of the Temple of Jerusalem, SIMON of Canaan was
crucified in the days of TRAIANVS, for he was an hundredth and twenty years
old, when he suffered martyrdom, Eusebius, eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32 Ierom.
catalog. script. eccles. BARTHOLOMEW is said till have been martyred in
Armenia, and SIMON ZELOTES, to have been crucified in Britain JOHN died at
Ephesus, PHILIP in Hierapolis. FVNCTIVS calls the town Hierosopolis, Judas
LEBBEVS at Edessa, THOMAS in India, and MATTHIAS in Ethiopia, Ierom. catal.
script. ecccles.

As concerning the Evangelists they were fellow laborers Evangelists.
with the Apostles in the work of Christ, and were also partakers with them of
Christ's sufferings. The Evangelist MARK died in Alexandria, Funct. chronol.
LVKE in Buhynia, others say in Constantinople, Ierom. PHILIP, who first was a
Deacon, and afterward an Evangelist, died in Cesarea, BARNABAS in: the Isle of
Cyprus. Where TIMOTHY and TITUS did compleete their days it is not certainly
known. CHYTRAEVS opinion anent TIMOTHY I have already declared. IEROM
supponeth that TITUS died in Candie. The successors of the Apostles and
Evangelists are not to be reckoned as the successors of Emperors: because
he who next obtains the Imperial diadem and place of The true successors
of the Apostles.
government, is counted the successor of the defunct Emperor. But he who
obtains a faithful Pastors chair, and teaches a doctrine contrary to that
which a faithful Pastor has taught, is to be counted a grievous Wolf stepped
up into his room, Acts 20. And NAZIANZENVS calls such a man an adversary
standing up into the place of a faithful Pastor, darkness succeeding to
light, a tempest succeeding to calm weather, and madness obteining place
where right reason was wont to be, Nazian. in orat. in laudem Athanasu. And
therefore those Bishops and doctors following, who keep inviolably that form
of wholesome doctrine which they received from the Apostles, these, I say,
alanerly are to be counted true successors of the Apostles. Of this number was
LINVS Bishop of Rome, who after the martyrdomes of PETER and PAVL governed
Bishops of Rome. Linus.
that Church 10. years, 3. months, 12. days. EUSEBIVS thinks this is that
same LINVS of who^ the Apostle PAVL writes in the last chap. of his 2. epist.
to TIMOTHY, Eubulus and Pudens and Linus, and Claudia salute thee. Eccl. hist.
lib. 3. cap. 2. After him succeeded ANACLETVS, and governed 9. years 3 months,
10. days, and after him CLEMENS, ruled 11. years, EVSEBIVS also thinks this
is that CLEMENS of whom the Apostle PAVL writes to the Philip. cap. 4, ver. 3.
Yea I beseech thee faithful yoke fellow help those women which labored with
me in the Gospel, with Clement also and with other my fellow laborers, whose
names are in the book of life. IGNATIUS Bishop Ignatius.
of Antioch had his heart so inflammed with the love of Christ, that when his
dissolution was near approaching, he said to the Romans: now do I begin
to be the disciple of Christ, I covet for no thing that can be seen with
bodily eyes, to the end that I may enjoy Jesus Christ: let the fire, the
cross, the beasts, the breaking of bones, convulsion of members, and bruising
of the whole body, and the torments of the devil sease upon me, providing I
may be partaker of Jesus Christ. He was devoured with beasts in the days of
TRAIANVS, and so patiently endured death for the Name of Jesus, that he allured
the devouring beasts to approach near unto his body, that it being ground
with the teeth of beasts, he might be found as fine flower in the house of his
father, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 36. About the same time also
flourished PAPIAS Bishop of Hierapolis, Papias.
who was a man of great authority, because of his neerenes to the Apostles
days, yet leaning more to the report of the doctrine of the Apostles, then to
the certainty of their own writings, he fell into the error of the
Chiliastes, who imagined that Christ should raise the godly first, and live
with them a thousand years in this earth in all kind of delicat pleasures,
Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 39.

CENT. I. Cap. 3.
BEcause it is the accustomed dealing of Satan to Heretics.
pervert men from the simplicity of Gods truth, also it stands well with
the justice of God to give over men to strong delusions who will not believe
the truth of God. Therefore in the third head we are to speak of the
Heretics that sprang up in this age. Heresy I count to be an opinion
repugnant to the grounds of our Christian faith, obstinately maintained by
those that profess the Name of Christ. As touching them who lead an evil
life, yea and in effect deny the Son of God by a profane conversation, but
maintain not an opinion that it is lawful so to do, they may be counted
Atheists and not Heretics. Jews and Turks also who deny the divinity of
Christ, because they do not profess the Name of Christ, we call them
infidels but not Heretics. And the Corinthians who erred in some
foundamentall points of the Christian faith, yet seeing they maintained not
their error with obstinate minds, but yielded to the wholesome doctrine of
PAVL, no man does count the Corinthians Heretics, but infirm and weak
Christians. And the Apostle himself writing to them calls them Gods
building, and Gods husbandry, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 9. But when these three things
concur together, that men profess the Name of Christ, and yet they maintain
opinions repugnant to the very grounds of true faith, and will not receive
instruction, but obstinatly persevere in their error, they are to be counted
Heretics. Of this number was SIMON MAGVS the father of Heretics, who being
confounded Simon Magus.
in Samaria by the great power of God which appeared in the ministry of
PHILIP and of PETER, Acts 8. he fled from the East to the West, and came to
Rome, where he prevailed so far in short time that he was counted a god, and an
image was set up for him with this superscription, Simoni deo sancto, that is,
to SIMON an holy god. Thus the Romans who in the days of TIBERIUS refused to
acknowledge the divinity of Christ, in the days of CLAUDIUS they honored a
sorcerer, and a seducing Heretic with divine honors. He taught them who
followed him to fall down before pictures and images, and in special to
worship his own image, and the image of HELENA a certain woman, who
accompanied him in his journey from Asia to Rome, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 13 and 14.

After SIMON sprang up another suppost of Satan called MENANDER like to his
master SIMON in many things, for he was both a Samaritane, and a sorcerer, but
in absurdity of monstrous opinions he was far beyond SIMON: for he Menander.
said that the world was created by Angels, and that he himself was sent from
above to save the world, and by virtue of his Baptism men should be made
immortal, even in this world, in such sort, that they should neither wax
old, nor taste of death, Eusebius, eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26. This heresy
EPIPHANIVS compares to Aspido-gorgon in Egypt a great serpent enclosed into a
vessel of lame with many other serpents, after he has devoured all the rest of
the serpents, he begins to gnaw his own tail for hunger, and to destroy
himself, Epiph. contrahareses: so did this heresy undo it self by promising
great things, which MENANDER could not perform, neither in himself nor in
others.

In this age also sprang up EBION who denied the divinity Ebion.
of Christ, and said he was only a man begotten between JOSEPH and MARIE,
and that the observation of MOSES Law was necessary to eternal life: his
followers were called Ebionites either by the name of their master EBION, or
else, as EVSEBIVS thinks, for their poor and beggarly opinion they had of
Christ, supponing him only to be a man: for EBION in the Hebrewe language
signifies one that is poor, Eusebius. eccles. hist lib. 3 cap. 27. These
Ebionites damn all the epistles of PAVL, and count him an Apostat from the
law, and they admit no part of the New Testament for canonicke Scripture,
except the Gospel of MATTHEW.

CERINTHVS about the same time was the author of Cerinthus.
strange revelations which he said he had received from Angels, that after the
resurrection from the dead Christ should have an earthly kingdom in this
world, and that the subjectes of Christ's Kingdom should eat, and drink, and
marie, and keep holy days, and offer sacrifices, for he himself was a man
given to fleshly lusts, and he imagined that the pleasures of Christ's Kingdom
should consistin fulfilling the concupiscence of the flesh, Eusebius. eccles. hist,
lib. 3. cap. 18.

Likewise in this age sprang up the error of the Nicolaitanes upon this
occasion, as CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS does write, Strom. 3. One of the Deacons
chosen by the Nicolaitans^
Apostles to have the oversight of the poor, Acts 6. had a beautiful woman to
his wife, and was accused of over great jealousy. To purge himself of all
suspicion of that fault, he brought his wife into the mids of his brethren,
and said he was content that any man should marry her. Of which words many
took occasion to live promiscuously like beasts, no man having his own
proper wife, but making them common. Howbeit NICOLAVS is said to have lived
himself in matrimonial chastity, contenting himself with his own wife
alanerly, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 29. Noght the less his foolish and
unadvised speeches were the occasion of a most wicked and damnable error of
the Nicolaitanes, whereof the Lord speaks in the Revelation of JOHN that he
hated it, Apoc. 2. This is that heresy which GREGORY the seventh imputed to
all married priests: but with what equity marriage ordained by God, and
honorable among all men can be called an heresy hated of the Lord, let the
Christian reader judge.

Of Antiquity.
TO the history I have adjoined certain Treatises containing contrauerted
questions in our time, for A Treatise of antiquity.
decision whereof it is necessary to have recourse to the writings of the
Apostles, and the custom of the Primitive Church, adhering to the Apostolic
doctrine firmly even unto the death. Our first treatise Godwilling shall be of
Antquitie. Now this doctrine is to be spread out into four branches. First we
shall speak Godwilling of Antiquity of verity, next of Antiquity of error,
thirdly Antiquity of verity.
of Antiquity of custom, and fourthly what is the best way to discern
between the ancient verity and the old lie. Antiquity of verity is the way
of salvation pointed out by the finger of God from the beginning of the world,
and of this way speaks JEREMY cap. 6. ver. 16 Seek out the ancient ways,
and walk in them, and ye shall find rest unto your soul^ Antiquity of error,
is an adding, pairing, altering, or Antiquity of error.
contradictio^ to the ancient way pointed out into this word of God, and of
this Christ speaks in the Gospel of Matthew. Ye have heard it said of old,
Thou shall not slay, etc. but I say unto you, he who is angry with his brother
without a cause is worthy of judgment. Mat. 5. ver. 21. and 22. Whereby Christ
declares that the false interpretation of the law, whereby the spiritual law
was drawn to a corporal and a gross sense and meaning, yet was this error
ancient, and was heard of old time: but the very description of antiquity of
error declares that it is not so ancient as the truth, for so much as it is a
depravation and marring of the afore-existent truth, either one way or other.
The third sort of antiquity Antiquity of custom.
is antiquity of custom, that is, certain customs that crept in into the
Church of God, partly in the days of the Apostles, partly soon after their
days, such as was (...), that is feasts of love epist. lude. ver. 12. and
after the Apostles days, (...), that is, three dippings in water in the
sacrament of Baptism. These customs were neither authorized by Apostolic
precept and commandment, neither abrogated by Apostolic prohibition, but
tolerated into the Church until the time they were abused Where verity is to
be ^ound.
as we see clearly 1. Cor. 11. ver. 20. 21, 22. Now as concerning antiquity
of verity, first we shall declare where it should be sought: secondly, when it
is found* what is the virtue and power of it: thirdly how it ought to be
reverenced, loved and followed of us. And first, antiquity of verity is to be
sought, as the Apostle S. JOHN and beloved disciple of Christ sought it, to
wit, out of the mouth of him who was from the beginning, (...) that thing which
was from the beginning, John. 1. ver. 1. as if he would say, I present unto
you no new doctrine, but that which I received from the mouth of Christ
himself, who was existent (albeit not manifested in the flesh) even from the
beginning of the world. In the beginning was the word, etc John 1. ver 1. If
this way we seek antiquity, we assuredly find the ancient way of God*
whereinto we should walk, and get rest unto our souls, Ierem, 6. ver. 16.
Antiquity is not to be sought as PSAMMETICHVS King of Egypt sought it from new
wained babes keeping them in in secret custody without hearing any articulate
voice, or intelligible speech, whereby he might discern what people and
language was most ancient, HERODOT. EVTERP. this was a follish seeking out of
antiquity from them that were not ancient.

Next when we have found out the ancient truth, consider The power of the
verity,
the virtue and power of it. It is strong and mighty in operation like unto
Christ the author of it, whose hnmilitie and apparent weakness bruiseth and
dasheth in pieces all the glorious, strong and stately things of the world that
are lifted up against him: for the little stone hewed out of the rock without
hands it dashed in pieces, and bruised into powder the gold, silver, brass
and Iron of the hudge and terrible image set against it, Daniel 2. even so the
verity whereof Christ is the author, is like unto himself, in outward
appearance weak, but in operation strong and mighty, defacing and abolishing
all the apparent pomp, glory and power of the lie, To this well agrees the
ruin and ignominious fall of DAGON to the very breaking of his neck and
palms of his hands, 1. Sam, 5.

In the third room consider what reverence, love and The reave, rence that
should be c^ried to the verity
honor we ought to carry to this ancient verity, after it be manifested unto
us. Be not like the babes of Alexandria in the days of PTOLEMEVS PHILOPATER,
when the maine huge and great ancre of the ship Thalmegos was laid out upon
the shore, the children did ride on the stalk, and crept through the ring of
the ancre as it had been made for the pastime of children, but wise ship-men
knew it was appointed for a better use, namely to stable and make sure that
great vessel in time of great and tempestuous storms: even so when we have
found the ancient veritic of God, let us carry a great reverence to it, as unto
the holy and sacred ancre fashioned by God to stablish our souls, that no
tempest of false doctrine or cruel perfecution make us to shrink from that
ancient verity of the Almighty. Moreover consider what commandment is given
from God, even concerning hoare headed men, Leuit. 19. ver. 32. to whom we are
commanded to rise and to honor their countenance, but greater reverence is to
be carried toward the hoare-headed verity: for the commandment given
concerning ancient men sustaineth some exceptions. The sovereign King of a
nation and his honorable counselors for the eminency of their places will
not arise to honor ancient men, but ancient men rather arise to honor them,
as JACOB arose and sat in the bed, because his infirmity could not permit him
to rise and stand on his feet to do honor unto JOSEPH, Genesis 48. ver. 2, But
as concerning the ancient verity of God it should be honored of al men
without exception. EGLON King of Moab arose out of his chair when EHVD said
unto him, that he had a message unto him from God, Judge. 3. ver. 20. and BALAAM
uttering his prophetical revelation says, Rise Balak and hear, and take
heed unto me thou son of Zippor. Numb. 23. ver. 22.

With reverence should be joined an ardent love, and The more the verity is
despised in the world, the more ardently it should be loved.
constant following of the ancient truth unto the end, following the worthy
example of godly JOSIAS, who despised not the holy book of the Covenant of
God, because it had been long misregarded, despised, vnreade, and far less
expounded unto the people in the days of his father AMON, and of his goodsire
MANASSE: for the book of the Lords Covenant all this while lay in an obscure
corner of the Temple, neglected and covered with dust, yet when it was drawn
out of the dust, and presented unto the King, he received it reverently, he
loved it ardently and followed this holy Covenant even unto the day of his
death: so ought we to love the ancient verity of God at all times, but
specially when it is despised and misregarded by men, as JOSIAS did, 2. King.
22. The love of the natural mother when she pleaded before SOLOMON for the
living child, was not abated, but rather inflammed, and increased by the
apparent danger of her child, 1. King. 22. And that which is more admirable,
the love that IEZABEL carried toward the idolatrous service of BAAL was not
quenched by all these dashes that BAALS service got from heaven above and in
the earth beneath The fire that came miraculously from heaven witnessed the
falsh oode of the worship of BAAL, and the covenant made between HELIAS and
the priests of BAAL with advise of the King and whole body of the people,
whereinto the priests of BAAL with shame, skaith, and unspeakable disgrace
succumbed, 1. King. 18. Yet all this I say quenched not the fond love that
IEZABEL carried to that idolatrous worship as appears, 1. King. 19. where she
binds her self with an oath to pursue HELIAS to the death. Should we not
then be ashamed to carry less love to the verity of God, which brings rest
unto our souls, then this woman did to a false worship, which led her soul
headlong to perdition?

As touching Antiquity of error it is to be marked that whatsoever honor
antiquity adds unto the verity, the Antiquity is no honoar to error.
like dishonor, rebuke and shame it heapeth upon the error. For Satan
himself, who is the author of all errors when he is called metaphorically a
serpent, he is thereby rebuked, but when he is called an old serpent,
Apocal. 12. ver. 9: he is more mightily rebuked, even so when antiquity is
joined with error, then error is not graced but utterly disgraced, as who
would say, this woman is an old harlot, or this man is an old fool, or this
canker or rottenness in the flesh is an old feaster: all these are reprochful
speeches pointing out the malady of an unsupportable evil. So the pains that
are taken in our days to prove error to be an old thing is al taken in vain,
for by so doing they only discover the turpitude and shame of the error. The
Grecians bragged much of antiquity, so do the Papists. But the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, and Phenicians to who^ antiquity was better known said no less
confidently then truly of the Grecians. (...). Plat in Timeo. Theodo serns 1.
de fide. The like I say of the Papists, who brag of antiquity more then of any
other thing, that in such heads of doctrine wherein they differ from us they are
not so much as countenanced by antiquity. As touching their foolish questions
demanding of us where was our Church 600, years before our time, I answer by
two other questions. First, Where was their church 1600 years ago: that is,
When the Apostles called by Christ immediately were dispensators of the Gospel
to the world, where was there a Church saying Masses, worshipping images,
believing Purgatory? They will answer that the Apostle PAVL himself said
Mass at Rome. In testimony whereof they keep until this day amongst their
relics that table or altar whereupon the Apostle PAVL said Mass at Rome. But
I will replye that Popery is a kingdom of lies. For the Apostle in his
epistle to the Heb^wes sets down these two things as flat opposite the one to
the other, a sacrifice propitiatory and unbloody: saying, Without shedding of
blood there is noremission, Heb. 9. ver. 22. But the Papists will confidently
affirm that the Mass that PAVL said at Rome was propitiatorium sacrificium,
and incruenta hostia, that is to say, a propitiatory and unbloody sacrifice,
which is impossible and repugnant unto his own doctrine. Secondly I demand of
them another question anent the woman described 12. Apocal. she was clothed
with the sun, and had the Moon under her feet: she had a diadem of twelve
stars upon her head, which undoubtedly was the celestial light of
Apostolic doctrine she travailed in birth to bring forth children to God:
she was persecuted by the Dragon: to her was furnished wings of an Eagle, and
she fled unto the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her there a thousand two hundredth and threescore days. Now
(I say) I demand of the Papists what wilderness was this, whereinto the woman
lurked so long time? for no man dare deny but this woman represents the true
Church of Christ the mother of us all. Lurked she in the wilderness of Nitria
or Schethis? Or lurked she in the wilderness of Arabia or Lybia? Or lurked she
in the wilderness of Persia, where IVLIAN the Apostat concluded his wretched
life? Or in what other wilderness of the world did she lurk? When they have
given me an answer to this second question, let them think in their own mind
that they have answered the question proponed against us. If they can give no
answer to this question, neither do I tell them where our Church was six
hundredth years ago: but let them demand this question at him who furnished
Eagle wings to her, and prepared a place for her in the wilderness. Always it
is an article of our faith. I believe the holy ca^holicke Church, albeit she
was lurking, yet she was not dead nor gone out of the world. And like as the
blood of Christ was not shed in vain: even so there is in all ages a number of
men and women washen in the fountain of that precious blood, and prepared for
heaven, albeit we can not at all times point them out by the finger.

Now error in religion consisting in adding or pairing or altering, or
contradicting the truth contained in the Error in religion an execrable thing
word of God. It is evident, I say, that error in religion is a cursed and
execrable thing. To him that adds unto the Lords word shall be added all
the plagues written in the book of God, and if any man take away from the
words of Gods book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life,
Apoc. 22. ver. 18. 19. The like condemnation no doubt abides them who dare
presume to alter the truth and change the right sense or meaning of it, or to
make a flat opposition and contradiction thereto. And truly all these curses
which God commanded to be pronounced out of mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27 every
Christian is commanded to say Amen unto them, a part whereof may justly be
applied against maintainers and forgers of error in religion. First, Cursed be
the man that shall make any carved or molten image which is an abomination to
the Lord, and all the people shall answer, Amen. ver. 15. In the 17. verse he
who remoueth his neighbors mark is accursed, how much more he who remooueth
the marches of Gods most holy Law and covenant. In the 18 verse. Cu^sed he be
that makes the blind go out of the way. But a thousand times more cursed is
he who peruerteth the minds of ignorant people from the simplicity of the
truth ofGod. Unto all these curses openly pronounced we are bound by the
commandment to say Amen.

And like as error in religion is a thing accursed of God, so in like manner it
is in itself an absurd thing, and full of Error repugneth to itself.
horrible confusion, not only repugning unto the truth, but also to it self,
much like unto JONAS gourd, which had into it a worm that smote it, so that it
withered, Jonas 4. 7 even so there lurketh into the bowels ofancient errors a
worm consuming them until they utterly wither and evanish. The error of
EVTYCHES may serve for example, He thought that the immensitie of the divine
nature of Christ did so swallow up his humane nature, that in Christ there is
no more two natures, but one alanerly, namely his divine nature. Now if so be,
how are we saved by the death of Christ? Can the divinity die? Which
absurdity of EVTYCHES error was well marked by ALAMVNDARVS prince of
Saracens, as writes THEODORUS lector. lib. 2. More over the ancient errors
which sprang up even in the Apostles own days, and immediately after, had some
portrate and shape of that absurdity that should continue in all errors that
were to spring up afterward, ever pairing the glory that was due unto the most
High, and advancing creatures out of measure. EBION and CERINTHVS denied
Christ's divinity, and on the other part MENANDER thought that the world was
created by Angels. Here we see Christ's honor impaired, but the honor of
Angels infinitely augmented. Both ancient and late errors magnify creatures
With the diminution of the glory of the Creator.
In like manner afterward ARRIVS denied that the Son of God was
consubstantiall with the Father, diminishing and pairing the honor due to
Christ. But PFLAGIVS another Heretic magnified the power of man's corrupt
nature, as if in it there were an ability to perform all the commandments of
God. Thus we see that the very shape and similitude after the which Satan
fashioned the error of EBION, CERINTHS and MENANDER continues in ARRIVS and
PELAGIVS. And in our days, the Papists will not go out of the byas of old
Heretics: for Christ must not be the only Mediator both of redemption and
intercession, but some thing must be paired from the honor of Christ, to the
end that the Saints may be enriched with the spoil of Christ, and be made
up mediators of intercession. The truth is not to be judged by outward
appearance.


Here I leave off to speak any further of the absurdity of ancient and
execrable errors. But now it may be demanded, how comes it to pass that
absurd errors have so many followers? To this question let the Prophet JEREMY
answer, who speaking of the people of his own days utterly addicted to old
idolatry, and to the worshipping of the host of heaven, he declares also
the reason moving them to be so bent to old errors. O (say they) When we
s^rued the host of heaven, then had we plenty of all things, but since we left
off to do so, we are consumed with the pest, the famine and the sword, Ier.
44. ver. 17. 18. Here we see that the multitude judges that religion to be
best, the professors whereof injoyes greatest ease, wealth, and worldly
prosperity. But in the book of the Psalms, we receive a better instruction
to judge of the truth of God, and professors thereof according to the hearing
of faith, and not according to outward things: There are glorious things spoken
of thee o city of our God. Psalm 87. ver. 3. And these who judge according to
outward appearance, they err in two things: first, they know not the right
cause of the prosperity of Idolaters, secondly they know not the right cause
of the penuritie of those who apparently have forsaken idolatry. The Apostle
says that God ouerlooked the time of ignorance, Acts 17. ver. 30. but in time
oflight when the candle of the Gospel clearly shines, and points out unto
us the way of ancient verity, the Lord will not spare them who have
hypocritically professed his verity, but in their heart they love the deceit
of error and lies, as the people in IEREMIAS days did. This is the
condemnation (says theEuangelist JOHN) that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then light. John 3. ver. 19. Antiquity of custom
differs from antiquity of commandment.


Antiquity of custom which we have before described, lacks many things that
areto be found in antiquity of verity. For it is not authorized by any
Apostolic commandment, whereupon 3. things do follow. First there is no
necessity urging us to keep things that are not commanded by Apostolic
precept in matters concerning religion. Secondly, where there is no necessity
of doing, there is no fear or terror of conscience in leaving the same undone.
Thirdly, where it is gone out of custom or use, there is no necessity to
reduce it again, as the feasts called (...) in the Apostlesown time, and the 3.
dippings in Baptism after the Apostles time. Of these ancient customs we may
boldly say four things. 1. That the Apostles gave no commandment to observe
them, 2. that there is no necessity to keep and observe these customs. 3.
there was no just cause of fear to the conscience, where these customs were
pretermitted or neglected. 4. experience declares that since use and custom
which brought in these exercises has also obliterat and worn them away, the
Church in our time has taken no regard of renewing these ancient customs
again. Now anent the examples which I have already brought forth there are
many who will make no contradiction, but as touching other ancient customs
observed of old in the Church, without any written commandment, if those be
touched, and the like be said of them also, more stir and greater ado will
be made. Yet if I prove by ancient writers that the observation of Pasche day,
and the observation of Lent were rites introduced in the Church without warrant
of any Apostolic commandment, it will follow that there is neither
necessity in keeping, nor leaving these things vnkeeped: wherefore consider
what SOCRATES says in his ecclesiastical history, lib. 5. cap. 22. Nusquam
igitur Apostolus, nec ipsa Evangelia jugum ser vitutis illis imponunt, qui ad
praedicationem accedunt: sed Paschatis festum, and alios dies festos ipsi
homines suis quique locis propter remissionem laborum and memoriam salutiferae
passionis, sicuti voluerunt, ex consuetudine quadam celebrarunt, neque Servator
hoc, aut Apostoli nobis lege aliqua observandum esse mandarunt. Neque poenam
nobis aut supplicium Evangelia vel Apostoli, sicut Iudaeis Lex Mosi,
comminantur, sed historico tantum modo ad reprehensionem Iudaeorum, quod
homicidium diebus festis exercuerint, and quod Christus tempore Azymorum passus
sit, conscriptum est in Evangeliis. That is, Therefore no where does the Apostle
or the Euangell lay upon them the yoke of bondage, who come to the preached
word, but the feast of Pasche day, and other festival days men every one in
their own places, for intermission of labor, and for the remembrance of the
salutiferous passion they kept as liked themselves best, these said feasts by
a certain custom. Neither did our Savior or his Apostles by any law command
us to do this thing, neither did the Apostles or Gospel threaten a punishment
against us (to wit if we leave these things undone) according as the Law of
MOSES does against the Jews, but the history only for reprehension of the
Jews in the Gospel sets down in write, that the Jews upon festival
days practiced murder, and that Christ suffered in the days of unleavened
bread. Here all that I have spoken, is clearly declared concerning the
observation of the feast of Pasche day. 1. no precept or commandment
proceeding from Christ and his Apostles to keep it. 2. no threatening
pronounced against the^ who kept it not. 3. that it was brought in into the
Church by custom, but not by commandment. 4. that when men endeavor to
authorize by commandments such ancient customs, then they bring a yoke and
bondage upon the consciences of men. The like and more also is written in that
same chapter by SOCRATES concerning the observation of Lent before the feast of
Pasche day, that it was observed with such diversity of customs, both in
number of days, and also in diversity of meats, from which men abstained in
Lent as easily declared that the Apostles interponed no commandment in such
matters, but left such customs free and indifferent to the discretion of
Christians.

In the head of antiquity of customs, because I like not to be contentious in
my judgment, two extremities would be eschewed. I. that we should not equal
ancient customs to ancient commandments, for the causes aboue-written, which
caveat SOZOMEN an ecclesiastical writer not observing, did affirm all these
who are not thrice dipped in water to have departed this life without the
sacrament of Baptism, Sozom lib. 6, cap. 26. In which opinion he equalled an
ancient custom to an old commandment. And yet this same SOZOMEN, who is so
precise in observation of an ancient custom of 3. dippings in Baptism, is not
so precise in another ancient custom of abstaining from eating of flesh in
Lent, but commends SPIRIDION who gave unto a weary stranger in time of Lent
swines flesh to eat, and eated himself of it also, affirming that to the
clean al things were clean, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1 1. Tit. cap. 1. ver. 15.
Thus we seee how SOZOMEN confuteth himself at sometimes remembering that
ancient customs are not equal to ancient commandments (as abstinence from
flesh in Lent) and in other things forgetting himself, and making the ancient
custom of thrice dipping in Baptism absolutely necessary. 2. anci^nt customs
not directly repugnant to the word, if they be kept free of commandment,
necessity and fear (as is above specified) should not be so hatefully
impugned, as ancient errors are impugned, but if abuses fall into them, these
abuses should be timously reprehended as the Apostle PAVL reprooueth the abuses
ofthe feasts ofloue in the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 11. But above all things
beware that we rent not for matters of no great moment the unity of the Church
of God, as VICTOR Bishop of Rome was purposed to have done, if he had not been
timously stayed by the prudent advise of IRENEVS Bishop of Lions Socrat. lib.
5. cap. 22. Now to conclude this short treatise of antiquity of custom, if a
wise man would send a tongue to it to speak for it self, it would be so far
from matching and equalling itself with the ancient commandments, that it
would speak modestly and humbly to them, as ELIZABETH the mother of JOHN
Baptist spoke to the blessed virgin the mother of our Lord. Andwhence comes
this to me (says she) that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? Luc 1,
ver. 43. So might old customs speak to old commandments. Whence comes this
to me that commandment my mistress and Lady will tolerat me to be within the
doors of the house of God, wherein she has such soueraignitie and swey? How
ancient truth may be discerned from ancient lies.


In the fourth head we are to entreat by what means ancient errors may be
distinguished from ancient verity. And first, verity is not in all points
like unto an old man whose strength is daily abated by debilitie and
weakness, till at length the old man die, and go to the grave: yea rather
verity the older it be, the virtue, strength, and vigor of it is the better
known: but errors when they wax old they become weak, they die and euanish,
and are vile as a filthy and stinking carrion, so as if any man in our days
should open the grave of ARRIVS, and renew his ungodly opinion, he should see
all Christians shake their heads, and stop their ears, and grip after a manner
their noses with their hands, that the abominable flewer of that filthy
carrion should not be felt: but by the contrary, the sweet smell of the
ancient Verity of Christ is like a precious ointment powered out, filling the
house of God with no less delight now then it did of old when it was first
preached by the Apostles in Ierusale, Acts 2. And as the house of DAVID daily
waxed stronger, and the house of ISHBOSHETH daily waxed weaker, 2. Sam. 3. 1.
such like is the estate of the Verity and the lie.

Secondly, verity and error are best distinguished when they are riped up
into the very ground, and frivolous and superficial trialls are laid aside,
As NEHEMIA did when he tried after the captivity who had a right of
Priesthood to stand at the altar, and to offer sacrifices, he commanded them to
produce their writes and genealogies, and make good their lineal descent from
the loins of AARON, which right ^ey who could not find out were put from the
Priesthood, Nehem. 7. ver. 64 Even so they who pretend verity of ancient
doctrine, let them verify clearly by the written word, that this their
doctrine came from the mouth of Christ and his holy Apostles: For as the
procreation of AARON gave a right to stand at the altar, so also the doctrine
that came from the mouth of Christ and his Apostles, has an undoubted right to
be sounded in the Church of God. Remember now that wise NEHEMIAH was not
superficial in his trial. The sons of HABAIAH, the sons of HAKKOZ, the sons
of BARZILLAI could have showed in write that they were come of the descent of
LEVI, and of the family of COAH, but that which was of greatest moment of all,
that they were descended from that branche of the family of COAH which was
separated to the scruice of the altar, to wit, from AARON, Numb. 16. ver. 40.
that they could not prove. So the Papists of our time can prove that their
doctrine has had place six, seven, or eight hundredth years, and more also
before our days, but that which is of greatest weight, to wit, that their
doctrine came from the mouth of Christ and his holy Apostles, in that probation
they succumbe.

Thirdly, let us try and discern the lie from the verity as AUGUSTUS CAESAR
discerned him who falsely called himself ALEXANDER the son of HEROD, and the
son in law of ARCHELAVS King of Cappadocia, and husband of GLAPHYRA, Joseph.
antiq lib. 17. cap, 14. This ALEXANDER son of HEROD the great with his brother
ARISTOBVLVS were both executed to the death, by the commandment of their
father. But after the death of ALEXANDER, an artificer bearing that same name,
and in stature, beauty, lineaments, and all agreeing proportion, so nearly
resembled the very similitude of ALEXANDER the son of HEROD, that they who
best knew HEROD'S son, did most confidently affirm, that this same artificer
was he indeed, and he himself affirmed that he was HEROD'S son, and had
escaped death by the favor of the executioner: Always when he was brought to
Rome to the Emperor, AUGUSTUS would not be deceived with the liklyhood of his
face, but groped his hand, and found it to be hard like to the hand of an
artificer, and discerned him to be a deceiving fellow and punished him. This I
grant may be applied more properly to Christ then to us. For albeit we be
easily deceived and seduced with lies, yet the great King of heaven Christ
Jesus cannot be deceived, he will not regard the brazen face of the lie
calling it self truth, but he will wisely grope the hand of the lie, and
examine what operations it has wrought among the people, it has blinded men's
understanding it has har dened their hearts, it has learned them to be proud
obstinat, and contemners of the truth of God, and finally it has learned the^
to honor creatures with impairing of the glory of the Creator. Then will the
great King say, O full of al deceit thy hand and thy operations that thou have
wrought amongst men testifies that thou art not of God. Nevertheless the
members of Christ also, in some mean measure, may be groping the hand of the
lie, and finding it to be hard and dric, and void of all sap and moisture of
spiritual grace, we may say in our hearts, O doctrine of lies, barren and
withered within thy self, and communicating no grace unto thy hearers, the
Lord separat us from thee, and thee from us, that we may adhere firmly unto our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus unto the end.

Finally, when we have done all that we can do to discern the lie from the
verity, yet let us not live in security as though we could never be
deceived. IOSVA that holy man of God was deceived with old garments, old
bottels of wine, old bread and shoes, because he consulted not with the mouth
of God, Ios. 9. ver. 14. Then above all things we should seek counsel at the
mouth of God by earnest prayer, diligent reading of the written word, attentive
hearing of godly sermons, and if we seek, we shall find, and if we knock,
it shall be opened unto us. And the Lord direct us both in seeking and finding
with the gracious conduct of his holy Spirit.

Here I purposed to have finished my treatise of antiquity, but when I
remember with whom I have to do, and Four counterfaite masks of antiquity
in Popery.
that they will say, I have purposely passed by the principal demonstration of
antiquity in the Roman Church, therefore I have subjoyned the four forged,
fained and counterfaite maskes of antiquity in Popery, which will never prove
them to be an ancient church: The false interpretation of Scriptures: the book
of the Canons of the Apostles: the decretall epistles falsely ascribed to the
fathers of the first three hundredth years of our Lord, and the book of
DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA. Anent the false interpretation of Scriptures Godwilling I
shall speak in the treatise of heresy. Anent the book of the Canons of the
Apostles if there were no more but only the last Canon containing a rehearsal
of the books of holy Canonicke Scripture, it declares the book to be
supposititious, wherein the 3. books of Maccabees are comprehended as books
of the old Testament: And again among the books of the new Testament (...)
(note the preeminent dignity) it reckons the two epistles of CLEMENT, and
his precepts given to Bishops comprehended into 8. books which were not to be
published to all men, in respect they contained some secret mysteries, Canon
Apost. cap. 84. Is then the epistles of CLEMENT, the 8. books of his precepts
written to Bishops, the acts of the Apostles written by him Canonicke
Scripture, books of the new Testament, equal to the writings of the Apostles,
and yet dited for the most part as secret mysteries to Bishops, to be concealed
and hid from the people. when as the Apostle PAVL by the contrary writing to
TIMOTHY and TITUS writes unto them wholesome precepts to be communicate to the
people. And the Apostle JOHN writes to the Angels of the seven Churches of
Asia nothing but wholesome precepts to be imparted and communicate to the 7.
Churches, Apoc. 2. and 3. such a candle that shall be hid under a bushel, and
not set upon a candlestick to give light unto the household of God? I dare not
imagine that either the holy Apostles, or yet CLEMENT one of the Apostles
faithful successors did ever light such a candle. The allowance which these
Canons of the Apostles got in the sixth general Council Anno 681. whereof
GREGORIVS HOLOANDER the conuerter of them out of Greek into Latin, glories so
much, was upon an occasion whereof the Roman Church has cause to blush and
to be ashamed rather then to glory much. First, because in that general
Council HONORIVS 1. sometime Bishop of Rome was condemned of heresy.
Secondly, because in that Council the Bishop of Constantinople was ordained to
be in equal authority with the Bishop of Rome. And thirdly because the
constitutions of the Latin Church forbidding men who were in ecclesiastical
offices to marie, these constitutions (I say) were utterly disallowed, and the
5. chapter of the Canons of the Apostles got better allowance, because in it,
it was statute and ordained that the Bishop, Elder or Deacon, who repudiateth
his own wife under pretense of religion, shall be excommunicat, and if he
continue so doing he should be deposed. Now this general Council making in so
many principal points against them, and only gracing the supposititious book
of the Canons of the Apostles of purpose to disgrace the constitutions of the
Roman Church, if HOLOANDER had remembered what he had been doing, he had been
more sparing in alleging the authority thereof. The shortness of the treatise
will not permit me to make plain to the reader how the Council gathered by
CONSTANTINVS POGONATVS, and the fathers of that same Council gathered again
by IVSTINIAVNS 2. to perfect the work, they had immediately before begun, both
constitute but one general Council. Always if any thing seem to be made up
against us by the alledgance of a testimony out of the book of the Canons of
the Apostles, remember in what time this testimony is alleged, namely, in the
68 1 year of our Lord. If IVSTINVS MARTYR, or IRENEVS, or any ancient father
near unto the Apostles days had cited a testimony out of this supposititious
book, it had been more likly that the Apostles had given command to CLEMENT
Bishop of Rome to write that book. As touching the third mask of antiquity,
to wit, the decretall epistles in the first Tome of Councils, and the
distinctions of GRATIAN falsely ascribed to the ancient Bishops of Rome, I hope
in the mercy of God to remember a few of them, specially in the 3. Centurie,
but not to the honor of impudent and unlearned fellows, who have forged these
decretall epistles, as if the world in all ages could produce no broods of
better spirits, then the asses compositours of these decretall epistles. As
concerning the accurate speculations of DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA, who was never
ravished up unto the third heaven as PAVL was, neither saw things that were
(...) that is things that cannot be spoken, and which are not possible for any
man to utter, as PAVL did, 2. Cor. 12. ver. 4. I say of him only two things.
First, if he had been so ancient a writer as Papists speak, and the disciple
whom PAVL converted by his preaching in Mars street, Acts 17 then ancient
writers had made mention of him, such as IVSTINVS and IRENEVS, and CYPRIAN, and
such others: but of his writings no mention is made in the greatest antiquity,
Secondly, I say with that reverent Doctor of our own nation Mr THOMAS SMETON
that the books given out under the name of old DIONYSIVS AREOPAGITA sunt
prorsus (...), they are altogether fecklesse, impertinent and frivolous books.

Of Heresy.
EPIPHANIVS Bishop of Cyprus, when he writes against Heretics, he
intituleth his book Panarium that is a medicinable box or shrine whereinto
are contained saving medicaments against the venom oflying doctrine: albeit
heresy be a poysonable and hurtful thing yet treatises of heresy have been
compiled not to hurt any man, but to give warning to eschew the pernicious
snares of the devil. Like as learned men who have written of the nature of
herbs, have not only written of such herbs as are meet for food, and of
such as have a medicinable virtue to cure diseases, but of those also that are
venomous and poysonable, to the end that men being warned of the peril, that
is in eating of them, they may escape danger, and be kept in safety. In all
ages wicked men have been like unto IVDAS when he entered into the garden of
Gethsemane where Christ was praying, and sweating bloody tears for the
salvation of mankind: he stepped in into the garden only of purpose to betray
his master: so do wicked Wicked men read holy Scripture of intention to
gainesay the truth of God.
men in our days read the holy Scriptures diligently walking as it were in the
mids of the garden of God, but only of intention to betray Christ Jesus, and
to gainsay his everlasting truth. On the other side it becomes us well when
we are driven either by necessity, or by some honest occasion to be in places
where Satan has set up his throne, and to be walking as it were through the
garden, that Satan has planted, then let us mark diligently the abominatio^s
of the devil, the multitude of serpents and vipers that are lurking there, and
give warning to poor souls, who are entangled with error, to leave that
habitation of Dragons, and to come forth out of that comfortless den, to the
end their souls may be refreshed with the delectable flowers of the garden of
God I hope in the mercy of God so to speak of heresy, as I shall move no man to
be an Heretic. And as concerning the railing words of the adversaries of the
truth, who have with open mouth proclaimed unto the world that we are
Heretics, I am the less moved with their speeches, because it is the custom
of lamed and creeple men to be mounted up on horseback, and an evil cause
supporteth the own infirmity by the loud trumpet of railing words: yet have
they not cleared to the world, that we maintain obstinatly any point of
doctrine repugnant unto the articles of true faith, and unto the principal
grounds of Christian religion preached by Christ, and committed to write by the
holy Apostles. Let them be as prodigal in their curses as they please, crying
out against us (...), I answer with simplicity of a humble mind Or (...).
(...): this word written with (...), and not with (...), signifies a thing
hanged up in the Lords Temple, and dedicat to God. Have we not seen with our
own eyes deep wounds made in the flesh of man, that have been needled by
skillful Chirurgians, and in end cured and healed, and the skin of man cutted
in twain by the sword, united again by the needle and medicinable plasters?
That doctrine which endenoureth to needle the wounded world, and to unite it
again unto that holy doctrine taught by the Apostles and Evangelists, and
professed in the first hundredth year of our Lord, shall we call it heretical?
Shall we be so babish, that we cannot discern the sword from the needle,
conjunction from separation, healing from hurting, welfare from woe? If we knew
Christ Jesus, and the power of God working by his word, we had not so rashly
condemned the truth of God. The Jews spoke as confidently against Christ, as
ever the Council of Trent has spoken against us: We have a law and according
to our Confident speaking without a sure ground is not to be regarded.
law he ought to de, because he made himself the Son of God, Ioh. 19.
ver. 7 Under pretense of zealous keeping of the Law made against blasphemers,
Leuit, 24. 15. they condemned the holy One of God as a blasphemer. But his
father by loosing the sorrows of death, and receiving him into heaven, and
placing him at his own right hand annulled ipso facto that rash sentence given
out in earth against the innocent Lamb of God. Even so the Lord in his own
appointed time by receiving our souls into those celestial mansions prepared
for his own Saints shall undo the rash decreetes that are given out against
us in the earth. In all ages this matter has been contrauerted, and Heretics
have obstinatly maintained their bad and reprobat opinions, and as obstinatly
refused the odious and vile name of Heretics: and this question in our days
is like to a flame of fire which no abundance of water can sloken. The
definition of an heresy we have already set down in the 3 chap, rests now
in this treatise to ponder the name it self, to consider the ground of
heresy, the propagation and prevailing power of it at sometimes, and the
greater and more prevailing power of the curse of God, making heresy in end to
wither as the fig tree did that was cursed by Christ: And finally to declare
what should be the carriage both of Pastors, magistrates and people toward
Heretics. (...) is a word of the Greek language, and very ample in
signification, for it What the word heresy does signify.
signifies a choosing. Now it is certain, that it is no fault to a man to
take a choice when God does offer it unto him: as when it was offered to
SOLOMON to ask what he liked best, he choosed rather to crave wisdom then
riches from God, 1. Reg. 3. and when DAVID choosed rather to fall into the
hands of God then of man, 2. Sam. 24 ver. 14. DAVID in choosing the pest rather
then the sword or famine, took a choice which was offered unto him by God.
And the pondering of the generality of the word may declare, that in things
indifferent wherinto God has granted unto men a liberty and free choice, such
as eating of flesh, or abstinence from it, marying or not marying, a man may
take his choice in these things at such times as he finds it granted by God
as well as DAVID and SOLOMON, and a man is not to be called an Heretic
because he marieth, because God has given him liberty to marie, or not to
marie as a man lists best, providing always he seek counsel of God, to
dispose him in such indifferent things that way, whereby he shall be most meet
and able to glorify God. For true it is that the Evangelist writes No man
has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son of God, who is in the
bosom of his Father, he has reueiled him, Ioh. 1, which words plainly do
testify, that in matters of faith God has not given unto a man a free choice
to embrace what opinion he pleases, but God has tied and bound us in matters
of faith to the mouth of his dear Son, to the end we should think no other
thing of God then Jesus Christ has reueiled unto us. The groun^ of heresy.


Now anent the ground of heresy, I follow the opinion of AUGUSTINE in his
book of exposition of some places of the epistie to the Galathian, wherein he
compares Heretics to the sons of KETVRA whom ABRAHAM married after the
death of SARA, Genesis 25. These children were procreated of an old father, and of
a young mother, even so Heretics pretending antiquity of Scripture, but
forging unto them a new and young sense whereinto Scripture was not written they
become defenders of a false opinion. The words of S. AUGUSTINE are these: Ex
occasion antiquaeveritat^s in novitio temporalique nati sunt mendacio, that
is, through occasion of antiquity of the truth they are borne into the
noveltie of a temporal lie: so that AUGUSTINE his judgment sounds to this
that Heretics pretend antiquity of scripture for their father, but they are
more like to KETVRA then ABRAHAM, following rather the novelty of error,
Similitude^.
then the antiquity of verity. In this manner IRENEVS thinks that heresies
do spring up of a false understanding of holy Scriptures; using the comparison
of men who break the golden image of the king, and after it is molten, again
fashion it according to the similitude of a Fox, now it can not be called the
kings image any longer, albeit it be composed of that self same gold whereof
the kings image was made, even so, when words of Scripture are drawn to a
new, false and heretical sense, count that new sense heresy and not
Scripture. Iren adversus Ualent. lib. 1. cap. 1. Now these opinions of IRENEVS
and AUGUSTINE concerning the original ground of heresy do well agree with the
word of Christ himself written in holy Scripture, Are ye not therefore
deceived, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God. Marc
12. 24. The Sadduces knew well eneugh the words of scripture, but not the right
sense and meaning of them. And therefore it is great wisdom to mix our reading
with prayer, to the end that the Lord who guided the pen of Prophets in
writing, may guide also our hearts in reading.

With this ignorance of the meaning and true sense of holy Scripture is joined
an unspeakable and deuilish pride, for they make no account of any body under
heaven, but Pride accompanying ignorance.
of themselves alanerly, and hypocrites have their own opinions in so
wonderful admiration, that they stop their ears from hearing all wholesome
admonition, which pertinacie and pride, is the cause wherefore the Apostle PAVL
calls them (...), that is, condemned of themselves, Titus 3. For like as
there are some persons so bent to destroy their own bodies, that it is not
possible to the vigilant attendance of friends to keep them from mischief
and harm, the experience whereof kythed in PORCIA the daughter of CATO and
wife of BRUTUS: even so there are a number of men carried so headlong to hell,
that no wholesome doctrine or admonition can be heard, because like to the
Gadarenes swine, the swift pace of their race cannot be stayed, until they be
drowned in the lake. Of this cause of heresy NAZIANZEN writes ad Cledonium
that the heretic APOLLINARIS counted of his own songs as we count of the
old and new Testament, even so his associates counted his songs and rhymes to
be the third testament. In like manner the heretic MARCION was a pattern of
incorrigible pride, who came to Rome after the death of HYGINVS, and when he
heard that he was not admitted to an ecclesiastical office, he demanded of
the preaching Elders there, what was the meaning of Christ's words, when he
said, That no man pieceth an old garment with a piece of new clothe: for
that, that should fill it up, takes away from the garment, and the breach is
worse, Mat. cap. 9. ver. 16. 17. In their answer they declared the true
meaning of Christ's words. But the proud stomach of an headstrong Heretic
applied the parable to himself, and avouched that he should make a remediless
breach among them, because they had refused to receive him into their
fellowship. Epiphan, contra hareses which thing he endeavored to perform
until his last breath. The propagation of her^sie,


Heresy was propagated and increased rather in the Halcyon days of
CONSTANTINE, VALENTINIAN, THEODOSTVS and MARTIANVS, then in the woeful days of
NERO, DOMITIAN, TRAIAN, ANTONIUS, SEVERUS, MAXIMINVS, DECIVS, VALERIAN,
AVRELIAN, DIOCLETIAN, through the wise providence and wisdom of God, who would
not at one time ouercharge his Church with unsupportable burdens, neither
would he suffer his Saints to be tempted above their strength. For if heresies
had been in number as many, and in power as strong before the days of
CONSTANTINE as they were after his days, it had been hard till have borne
forth so many mighty assaults: but our merciful Lord would have the faith
and patience of his Saints to be tried by persecuting tyrants in some ages, and
again the knowledge of the Church to be tried mightily by Heretics in other
ages. So that we shall find more heresies springing up in the 4. Centurie,
then in all the preceding 3. Centuries, yea if it had pleased that godly
father AUGUSTINE to have abridged his abridgement of heresies written ad Quod
vultdeum, the number of heresies in the first 300. years should not be found
great. But AUGUSTINE dividing these Heretics who were called Gnostici in
three bands, to wit, in Saturniniani, Carpocratiani and Basilidiani, who all
were but one rank of Herctiques, he makes the number to seem greater then
it was. And in like manner d^iding the Mo^tanists in Pepuziani, Cataph^yges,
Pris^lliani, and Montanistae, makes also the number to seem great, how beit
all these four are but one heresy, receiving sometimes a name from the author
MONTANVS, sometime from the country of Phrygia whereinto this heresy was
bred, so^time from the town of Phrygia called Pepuzum where they dwelt, and
sometimes from the false prophetess PRISCILLA, who propagated the error of
MONTANVS. In like manerthere were many obscure heresies who could find few or
no followers, because it seems that the heresy died as soon as the
Heretic, such as Helc^saitae, Caiani, Sc^hiani. And there is no great
necessity to discourse of such abortiue birthes as incontinent died before
they came to any kind of ripeness: EVSEBIVS says haeresis helce saitarum
simul etiam at que coepit, extincta est. That is, the heresy of Helcesaitae
mmediatly after it was begun it was quenched, Eusebius, lib. 6. cap. 38. And
finaily AVGSTINE reckons among Heretics of the first 300 years
Tessares^aidecataitae in the Latin Quaterdecimani who maintained no opinion
repugnant to the grounds of faith, but only kept Easter upon another day then
the Roman Church did observe it.

But albeit heresies sprang up in the days of good Emperors, Heresy
strengthened by the arm of manalanerly.
yet were they not fostered and nourished by them, but by all possible means
were abandoned, but God punishing the contempt of the truth, and the love of
false and lying doctrine, suffered an evil Emperor to rise after a good, such
as CONSTANTIVS after CONSTANTINE, and ANASTASIVS after MARTIANVS, and these
evil Emperors by their own profession, countenance and authority
strengthened the heresies of ARRIVS and EVTYCHES which were bred in the days
of the good Emperors forenamed: so that the strength of an heresy was borne
out by the arm of man allanerly, and it was not a plantation that our heavenly
father had planted, and therefore in end behooued to be rooted out.

Then mark the power of the wrath of God against Heretics, heresies, and
sometimes against the very places of The curse of God upon Heretics,
heresies, and places of their meetings.
their meetings. It is known that ARRIVS brast asunder, as IVDAS did, and that
his bowels gushed out, a just recompense of his troubling of the intestine
peace and bowels of the Church of God. MONTANVS and his two mad prophetesses
PRISCILLA and MAXIMILLA hanged themselves as IEROM does write, citing
APOLLONIVS for his author, Ierom. catal script. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS, a man
leper both in soul and body, was excommunicat in all Churches professing
Christ in the whole world, and by the authority of the Emperor (as shall be
declared Godwilling) with shame and ignominy was driven from his usurped
chair in Antiochia. MANES was excoriat by the king of Persia. The bad fortune
of the priests of BAAL contending against HELIAS, and slain at the brook
K^shon, 1. Reg. 18. ver. 40. The most unfortunate condition of AMAZIA the
priest of Bethel, whose wife became an harlot in the city, and his sons and
daughters fell by the sword, and his land was divided by line, and himself
died in a polluted land, Amos 7. ver. 17 All these examples (I say) declare
that terrible is the wrath that the Lord will power out against false prophets
and false teachers. In like manet the heresy of ARRIVS when it was at the very
height, began to shed it self into three contrary opinions as a kingdom
divided in it self, and could no longer stand some were still called Arrianes,
and utterly denied that the Son of God was (...), that is, consubstantiall
with the father, yet they granted that he was (...), that is of like
substance with the Father. But AETIVS, ACATIVS and EVNOMIVS another race of
ARRIANS, thought that the Son was neither (...), nor yet (...) to his Father,
and for this cause they were called Anomoe^.

The third faction of A^rianes were MACEDONIVS and his adherents, who were
inconstant and wavering minded in their opinions concerning the Son of God,
sometime leaning to the Homoo^sians, sometime to Homoiousians, and sometime to
Anomoei, according as any occasion of grief was presented to them by any one
party, they leapt to the opinion of another party: but these wandering
stars and wavering fools, obstinately spoke against the divinity of the
holy Ghost. This division amongst themselves was the first forerunning token of
the decay of this heresy. What desolation also came upon Nicomedia the
principal town of Bithynia appointed by the Emperor CONSTANTIVS for the
meeting of Arrian Bishops the history does record. The Lord shook the
town of Nicomedia with an earthquake, and disappointed the meeting of the
Arrians, Socrat. ecclef. hist. lib. 2. cap. 39. THEODORETVS differs from
SOCRATES an^nt the place appointed for the convention of A^rian Bishops,
always he grants that it was shaken with earthquake, and overthrown,
Theodoret. lib. 2 How Heretics should be dealt with by the Pastors,
cap. 26.

In the last room, let us consider after what manner of way should Heretics
be dealt with by Pastors, magistrates, and people. As concerning the Pastor,
because he should be a man of knowledge, and able to convict those that gainsay
the truth, Tit. 1. the Pastor should confer with the Heretic, and
admonish him once or twice to return to the soundness of faith, Tit. 3.
Wherein it is to be noted, that the word in the Greek language betokening
admonition is (...) which word point^th out the end and purpose of the
preachers travails, rather then his painful travails, for the end should be
to put a right mind into him, or to bring him to his right wits again, for
an Heretic is a mad fellow indeed, and out of his right wit, as NAZIANZEN
spoke of A^OLLINARIS who denied that Christ had a soul as we have, but his
divine nature joined with his body supplied the room of his soul. NAZIANZEN
writes of him that when he spoke of the mind of Christ, he was mad, and by
his mind (...). And it is a very hard matter to reduce a mad man to his right
wit again: therefore let a preacher take it to heart that to convert a
Heretic is a difficill work, for he is dealing with a man possessed with a
strong devil, who cannot be cast out by Christ's disciples, except Christ
himself put hand to the work, Mat. 17. This the Apostle writes, not to make
Pastors to despair and give over the care of conquessing of Heretics, but
to do this work circumspectly and warily, with humility and reverent fear,
craving that our Lord and master Christ Jesus would kyth his strength in our
weakness, otherwise this turn can not be done. Yet lest any faithful
preacher should be utterly dismaide in regard of the difficulty of the work,
two things are to be considered: first, the Apostolic commandment warning us
to admonish him once or twice, which warning, seeing it is not given in vain,
it should be obeyed Secondly, God has blessed the travails of some of his
servants, and by them some Heretics have been reclaimed to the right faith:
as namely BERYLLVS Bishop in Bostra in Arabia, who denied that Christ was
existent before he took flesh of the virgin, yet by the painful travails of
ORIGIN he was converted to the true faith again, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 6.
cap. 33. And this is the cause wherefore I separat BERYLLVS from ARTEMON in the
subsequent history. In like manner God blessed the travails of DIONYSIVS
Bishop of Alexandria, by whom in a place of Egypt called Arseno^is, Coracione
was converted, who had been before infected with the error of NEPOS an
Egyptian Bishop, and father of the Chiliastes, Eusebius. eccl, hist. lib, 7. cap.
24. And therefore let not the faithful Pastors despair, because the work is
difficil, but obey Gods commandment, and commit the issue to God himself.

Concerning Magistrates, like as they prescribe to all men their duties, so in
like manner, God who is their only superior, HAVE the magistrate should deal
with Heretics.
prescribes their duty to them in all things, and in this matter also: for the
Lord commanded the false prophet, who allured the people to follow other gods,
to be slain, Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 5. What reward then belongs unto Heretics,
their successouts, for it is all one to worship a false god, and to worship
the true God falsely, and if the false prophets who ent^sed the people to
worship a false god should die, what other sentence can be given out by the
magistrates against an heretical teacher, who entiseth people to worship the
true God falsely, but only that he should be slain. He is worse then a
murderer who kills a man's body, for there may be some valuation of the
harm and skaith that a murderer has done, but who can value and ponder the
harm that an Heretic does, who by false doctrine murthereth the souls of
infinite numbers of people, he is worse then an infidel, forasmuch as he
has obtained a more abominable name then an infidel. For an infidel as S.
AUGUSTINE speaks cannot be called desertor fidei and oppugnator ^ius, that
is, a forsaker and impugner of the faith, because he never embraced it, but an
Heretic is a backslider from the faith which sometime he professed, and an
hateful impugner of the same. Finally he is more pernicious then a Schismatike
who labors to cut the band of love wherewith we are coupled with our
brethren, but an Heretic endeavors to cut the very throat of faith,
wherewith we are coupled with our God. Also a schism has many times been
found without an heresy, but an heresy was never found without a Schism.
Then this question may be conceived in these terms. What shall be done with a
man who is worse then a murderer, worse then an infidel, worse then CORE,
DATHAN and ABIRAM, who by a pernicious schism, rent the unity of the holy
people? yea, what shall be done with them who like unto Foxes suck out the
blood of Christ out of the souls of the poor sheep of Christ? Now let God
answer from his Sanctuary. Let such a false prophet be slain. Deuteronomy 13.

True it is indeed that the doubtsome judgments of ancient and learned
fathers have made this question more debatable then otherwise it needed to have
been. For S. AUGUSTINE in the book of his Epistles is found till have altered
his opinion anent the punishment of Heretics twice or thrice. In the Epistle
written to DONATVS Deputy of Af^ke he would have Heretics to be dantoned,
but not to be slain, writting to him in these words. Sic igitur little
peccata compesce, ut sint quos poeniteat peccasse, that is to say, Therefore so
subdue their faults, that they may be before hand to repent that they have
faulted, Epist. 127. But in another Epistle written to GLORIVS and ELEVSIVS he
thinks that Schismatikes and Heretics (such as the Donatists were) deserved
greater punishment then Idolaters themselves, for he says, Qui fecerunt
idolum, usitata gladii morte perempti sunt, qui vero s^hisma facere voluerunt.
hiatu terrae principes devorati, and turba consentiensigne consumpta est. that
is, These who made an idol, were stain with the accustomed death of the sword
but these who endeavored to make a schism their princes were devoured by the
gap of the earth, and the people that consented to them were consumed by fire,
Epist. 162. In these two foresaid Epistles AUGUSTINE in the one is very
gentle, in the other very rigorous. Now hear the third opinion of^.
AUGUSTINE in these words. Non solum mansuete, verum uiam utiliser,
salubriterque plectantur, habent enim quod corpore incolumes vivunt, hubent
unde vivunt, habent unde male rivunt, duo prima salva sint, ut quos poeniteat
sint, hoc optamus, hoc quantum in nobis est impensa opera instamus. Tertium
vero si Dominus voluerit, tanquam putre noxiumquc resecare, valde
misericorditer puniet. that is, Let them be punished not only meekely, but
also profitably and wholsomely, they have whereupon their bodies are
healthfully entertained, and they have whereupon they live, they have also
whereupon they live wickedly, Let these two former parts safely remain unto
them, that penitent men may be to the fore: this we wish and we earnestly
endeavor so far as in us lies, that it may be brought to pass, but the
third part as rotten and hurtful, if it were cutted away, they were very
gently punished, Epist. 254 this epistle is written to NECTARIVS. Wherein it is
evident that AUGUSTINE himself was not settled in one constant opinion how
Heretics should be punished by magistrates. But what shall we say? When Nilus
and Danube have wandered long, in end they power their waters Similitude.
into the sea, and when AUGUSTINE has been sometimes in one opinion, and
sometimes in another, in end he is compelled to say Amen to that which God
has said in his word, that is, that a false prophet should be slain, Deuteronomy.
13. I speak of deceiving teachers, but not of deceived people. As touching the
people, the weaker they are, the wiser they should be, not exponing their
weakness to the hazard of strong tentations, but following the counsel How
the people should deal with Heretics.
of the Apostle writing to the elect Lady, ver. 10. 11. If there come any unto
you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him
God speed: for he that bids him, God speed, is partaker of his evil
deeds. But seeing a blind man may be shoueled out of the way, and poor
simple people may be soon bewitched, Galat. 3. therefore it is expedient for
the people to acquaint themselves well with the 12. Articles of their faith,
and so firmly to adhere to them that in no case they sufferthem selves to be
miscarried from that short sum of Christian faith. For EPIPHANIVS when he had
written a Catalogue of heresies that sprang up before his own time, he thought
it expedient also to write another book called Anchoratus, which book
contains a declaration of the true and right faith according to the writings
of holy Scripture, which faith if it be firmly kept, it shall be like unto
an ancre that stablisheth a ship, that it be not drowned in the tempest of the
raging sea: even so the fast gripping to the heads of our faith, and right
understanding of them saves us, that we be not miscarried with the tempest of
heretical doctrine.

Also the counsel of AUGUSTINE is not to be misregarded. In reading of
Scripture if we can not take up the very genuine sense and meaning of the
place, at least let us not expone that place of Scripture in a sense repugning
to the analogy of faith. So shall we be like to a man who has aberred from
the direct way, yet he wandereth in the fields leading to the town whereat he
would be, Augustine de doctrina Christiana. lib. 1. cap. 37.

Above all things let not the people hearken to those teachers who would
enforce the words of Scripture, and wrest them to a sense flatly repugnant to
the principal purpose entreated in that passage of Scripture: for words are
invented for to express the purpose, but the purpose is not devised for the
words. A clear example we have in the sixth of JOHN his Gospel. Our master
Christ is speaking in that Chapter to a carnal and fleshly hearted people, who
were offended at his doctrine: for remedy whereof our Lord teaches them, that
his doctrine was spiritual, and consequently was not to be received with
fleshly ears and hearts saying unto them, It is the Spirit that quickneth,
the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, are spirit and
life. Ioh. 6. ver. 63. That is, as S. AUGUSTINE writing upon this place does
expound, my words should be spiritually understood. Now therefore whosoever
will expone the words of Christ spoken in the sixth of JOHN (except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, yo have no life in you) ver.
53. into a corporal and carnal sense I say people ought to beware of such a
teacher, because he wrests Christ's words to a sense flat repugnant to the
purpose that Christ has in hand at that time. And the counsel given by the
Apostle to TITUS, although it be given to Bishops yet it is necessary also
for people in these words Holding fast the faithful word according to
doctrine, Tit. 1. ver. 9. Mark well the word (...), which signifies not only
an adherence, but also a firm adherence. The word (...) is so general that we
are tolerated to have many things, but in such way as we had them not, 1. Cor.
7. but the compound words (...) and (...) that is to possess and firmly to
keep, are to be restrained only to Christ, who is our portion, and to his
faithful word where unto we ought so firmly to adhere that we will rather be
separated from our lives then from that faithful word. And to this faithful
word ALAMANDARVS Prince of Saracens unseparably adhering deluded the Eutychian
Bishops sent from SEVERUS Anno 512. So I conclude that there is nothing so
expedient for Gods people as clearly to know the sum of their faith, and
firmly to adhere unto the same.

Of the foundation of the Church.
SEeing that the Church is counted the Lords city builded upon his holy
mountain, Psalm. 87. ver. 1. And that house that is builded on a rock so
firmly, that the stormy tempests of winds, floods and rain cannot procure
the fall of it, Mat. 7. This house I say is undoubtedly the building ofGod. Let
us therefore seek out the true foundation of it, which being found out, let
every one of us endeavor to be a living stone adhering by faith to the true
foundation.

The word foundation is sometime properly taken, sometime improperly.
Properly, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 11. in these words: For another foundation can no man
lay, then that is laid The word foundation taken properly (...) only to Christ.
which is Christ. Improperly the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is called
a foundation, because it leads to Christ the very true foundation. Ephesians. 2.
yer. 20. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. In like
manner faith that coupleth us to the true foundation, figuratively bears this
name, Epist Iud. Build your self in your most holy faith, ver. 20. These
figurative speeches should offend no man no more then if a man dwelling in
Rhegium or Syracuse were demanded where is Icrusalem, and he should point out
his finger toward the East, and say there it is, his meaning is, there is the
way leading to Jerusalem: even so when we say that the Apostles doctrine is
the foundation of the Church, our meaning is, that Apostolic doctrine is a
lantern leading to Christ the true foundation.

The Prophet ISAI speaking of Christ in a proper sense writes. Therefore thus
says the Lord. Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone, a sure foundation, and he that believes shall not make haste.
Isa. 28. ver. 16. Many Metaphores are here I grant, and if any man list to be
contentious, he may affirm that in the very word foundation there is not
inlacking a piece of figurative speech. Yet this stands certain, that
nothing is properly called the foundation of the house of God, except Christ
Jesus alanerly.

In this description of the true foundation of the Church we have two great
comforts, and one wholesome admonition. The first comfort is this, that he who
knows all our infirmities, and by what remedies they may be best supported,
he has sent his own Son in our nature to bear our burdens as a foundation
bears the weight of the whole house. He commanded MOSES to make a brazen
serpent in the wilderness, by the sight whereof the people bitten with fiery
serpents were cured, Numb. 21. 8. And the Lord knew best to what foundation
his poor Church leaning, might find surest safety and sweetest refreshment.
Therefore O people stinged with serpents be not afraid to look up unto the
brazen serpent, because it is the remedy prepared by God himself to support
your wounded bodies. And O weak, afflicted and persecuted Church take
boldness to adhere to Christ the precious and sure foundation appointed by God
himself for the support of your distressed estate.

And the Prophet to move the Church to serious and diligent attendance uses
the word Behold. As if the Lord Take heed to the demonstrations of God, and
beware of Satan's demonstrations
were pointing out a comfort with his own finger to weary sinners, and
saying, O sinner that art weary with that burden that hangs on thy back so
fast, and presses thee down so sore, come I will show thee a resting place,
even the stone that I have laid in Sion, go to it, behold, I have laid it
there my self, and that stone will bear all thy burdens, and refresh thee in all thy tentations. On the other part mark that Satan that great deceiuer, when
he would most subtly deceive people, he will needs counterfaite God, and
point out his finger also, and make demonstrations and say. Behold, Christ is
in the d^sert: or behold, Christ is in the secret place. Mat. 24. ver. 26,
believe it not says Christ. When God says behold, we will take diligent
attendance what is it that the Lord has pointed out unto us. But when Satan
puts out his finger also, and says, behold, Christ is even here presently,
really, corporally in the box carried by the Priest, then beware of the devils
demonstrations, for he is an old subtle serpent, and has deceived many.

The Papists taking advantage of demonstratiue words (...) thou see, (...)
thou shall see, (...) look thoroughly into it, they take the boldness to
affirm that the body of Christ is corporally present in the holy Sacrament:
which body we not only see, but also we touch, and we not only touch, but
also we eat it, and not only do we eat it, but also we carry it home
unto our houses. Upon this place of CHRYSOSTOM they have grounded such
undoubted assurance that Christ is corporally present in the Sacrament, that
the Papists in the Northern parts of Scotland s^nt a letter to Sterling to
M. P. S. to resolve the Marquess of Huntley in the matter of the Sacrament,
because CHRYSOSTOM apparently condescendeth to corporal presence ofChrists
body in the Sacrament. When I read the letter, I said, and as yet do say, that
they needed not to have taken so much pains to seek for resolution of that
question either for them, or for others, but read forward the words of
CHRYSOSTOM that follow, where he makes his own meaning plain, saying,
(...). that is to lay. Therefore clenge thy soul, and prepare thy mind for
the receiving of these mysteries. Can there be a more cuident declaration of
his meaning then this? First where he says (...), thou see him not in the
crib, but upon the altar. But I pray you with what cye see we Christ upon the
altar, or table? (for both are one thing as the learned know) (...) says
CHRYSOSTOM, that is, with the eye of our soul and mind. Again he says that
we touch that blessed body of Jesus. But with what finger? (...), with the
finger of our soul and mind. Again he says that we eat that blessed body,
but with what mouth? (...), with the mouth of our soul and our mindc: and
lastly he says that we carry him home, but in what stomach? (...) in the
stomach of our soul and mind. For this cause he exhorts us to cleanse and
prepare our soul and mind for the participation of divine mysteries, Prepare
the eye of our mind to see Christ, the finger of faith to touch him, the mouth
of faith to eatc him, and the stomach of our soul to keep the Lord Icsus,
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor cap. 10. Homil. 24. Is there in these words one syllable
that sounds to corporal and carnal manducation of the flesh of Christ? I
hauc cast in this short digression to let our Northern Papists understand that
the arguments which they supponed to be invincible, may be easily answered.

The comparison of Christ to a stone is so frequently used in Scripture that
the very prophecy of Christ's nativity, death and latter coming to judge the
world are illustrate The similttude of a stone frequently vsedin Scripture.
by this similitude. In like manner to represent the plenitude of his wisdom,
the unspeakable goodness and irresistable power of Christ, this similitude is
brought in. He is a stone cut out of a rock without hands, Dan. 2. ver. 34.
Here is his nativity represented. His sufferings by the similitude of a carved
stone, Zach. 3. ver. 9. His latter judgment by the similitude of a stone, that
falls upon a man and grindeth him to powder, the fullness of wisdom and
understanding in Christ, by a stone full of eyes, Zach. 3. ver 9. His power by
a stone smiting the feet of the great image, and destroying all the glory of
it. And finally his unspeakable goodness by the similitude of a corner stone,
and of a stone that is a sure foundation. The secon^ comfort.


The second comfort contained in this description is this, that Christ is a
precious stone, a corner stone and a sure foundation. Wherefore Christ is
called an elect or tried stone, we shall hear Godwilling hereafter in the
description that the Apostle PETER makes of this same stone. Now Christ is not
like unto the stones of other buildings more different one from another in
place then in nature: for the stone in the foundation is but a senseless stone
as well as the stone of the wall that is builded upon it. And it is possible
that if the house and building be casten down, that some of the stones that
were in the wall, be laid in the foundation, and some again that were in the
foundation be laid in the wall, whereupon arises this vicissitude, that the
stone sometime sustained, now sustaineth, and by the contrary. the stone now
sustaining sometime was sustained. But Christ Jesus is a precious stone
sustaining us at al times, and never sustained by us, partaker of our nature,
but not of our sins, in many things like, but in infinite things unlike unto
us: holy, blameless, undefiled, separat from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens. Heb. 7. And in this also that he is a corner stone, he has a
prerogative above all other corner stones for other corner stones join walls
together, that are not far distant one from another, such as the sidewall and
the gauell of an house: but Christ has joined Jews and Gentiles together so
infinitely separate one from another, that none could unite them but Christ
alanerly. For who could cast down the partition wall, and abolish the law of
ceremonies, which made infinite alienation of the minds of the Jews from the
Gentiles, but only Christ? Ephesians. 2. 14,

The Prophet unto the two comforts adds an wholesome An wholesome admonition
admonition, that he who believes in him shall no make haste: this speech is
borrowed from men that make haste to fly from their towns and holes, for
fear of the force and power of the prevailing enemy, as the people of the
tribe of ISSACHAR did, when SAVL and JONATHAN were slain by the Philistims
upon the mountains of Gilboa, they left their towns for fear, and the
Philistims dwelt in them, (...) Sam. 31. But they who have once betaken
themselves to the holy mountain of God, and rock of their salvation Christ
Jesus, they have no need to make haste and to fly, because in him they find
assured protection and defense.

The people of the Jews in the days of ISAIAH sent down to Egypt and had
confidence in the horses of PHARAOH, but they fande the strength of PHARAOH to
be their shame, Isa. 30. ver. 3 And the Jews in the days of JEREMY, who
would not lean upon the suretieof Gods promises, and tarry in Jerusalem, but
they would needs fly to Egypt, in Egypt they died by the sword, Ier. 43. ver.
16. But he who leans with constant faith to this sure foundation, shall not
make haste, or as the Apostle PETER expounds it, He shall not be ashamed, 1.
Pet. 2. ver. 6.

The doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is called a In what sense the
doctrine of the Prophets, etc. is called the foundation.
foundation, as said is, because it leads to Christ. Wherefore we have to
learn how firmly we ought to adhere unto the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles as a lantern leading to Christ: for this cause let no man mix light
with darkness, nor obscure the bright shining light of Apostolic doctrine
with the traditions of men: for this doctrine is like unto pure gold, Psalm. 19.
ver. 10. And like as fine gold is marred with mixture, because there is no
other metal ^imilitude
in finenesse comparable unto it: even so prophetical doctrine is utterly
spoiled when it is mixed with the traditions and doctrines of men. For that is
a mixing of dross with gold, and of rotten waters with pure and clear
waters. After this unhappy form of dealing CAROLVS 5. Emperor presumed to
mix together the dregs of Popery with the wholesome Apostolic doctrine by
the mercy of God professed in many nations as appears in the book called
Interim set forth at his commandment Anno 1548. which book neither pleased
the Roman Church, neither those of the true reformed religion, but within the
space of four years it wallowed and euanished as an abortiue birth. Now it is
to be remarked in this point what difference is between the persons of the
Prophets and their doctrine. The Prophets continued not long alive Zach. 1.
ver. 5. but their doctrine continued, because it was after a manner a
foundation. The like may be said of the Apostles.

In like manner faith in some sense may be called a foundation, Epist. Iud. ver.
20. because it is the mean whereby we Faith is called afoundation.
are coupled to Jesus Christ, Ioh. 3. ver. 16. And the Apostle IVDE calls it
our most holy faith no doubt opponing faith to infidelity: for infidelity
utterly polluteth the soul, and makes it prophaneHeb, 3 ver. 12. And in
another place. Let there be no fornicatour or profane person like Esau, who
for one mease of meat sold his birthright, Heb 12. 16, Thus we see if
infidelity once take root in the heart it will make it so profane, that the
Covenant of God, the land of Canaan, the blessing, yea and heaven it self will
be set at light avail. But on the other part, when the heart is coupled by
faith to Christ, then is faith like unto a whippe in Christ's hand scourging
out infinite abuses out of our souls, John 2.

Now seeing that Christ is the only true foundation by The offices of Christ
declare that he is a true foundation,
the determined counsel of God appointed to sustain the weight of the whole
house. Let us consider how meet a foundation Christ is in respect of all his
offices, for the Church is weak, and Christ is an almighty King able to sau^.
Isa, 63. The Church militant is subject unto sin, and Christ is an high
Priest, whose sacrifice once offered, has a perpetual virtue to save those
that believe, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb, 7. ver.
25. Finally, the Church is naturally ignorant, and Christ is the great Angel of
the counsels of God, who has reueiled unto us all things needful to be
known, John 4. ver. 25. Therefore on this sure rock and holy mountain let us
repose with assured confidence of faith.

Now I come to the words of the Apostle PETER a faithful Christ is a living
f^undation.
interpreter of the words of the Prophet ISAIAH. H^e calls Christ A living
stone refused of men, but chosen of God and precious 1. Pet. 2. ver. 4. He is
a living foundation, not so much in respect of our natural life, where of also
he is the author, For in him We live, we move and we have our being, Acts 17.
ver. 28, as in respect of our spiritual life, where of also he is the author,
and where of the Evangelist JOHN speaks. In him was life, and the life was
the light of the world, Ioh. 1, ver. 4 Christ is the author of that life that
consists in the true knowledge of God. And this is life everlasting, that
they know thee, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. ver. 3. What is
the life of a man without the true knowledge of God reconciled to him in Christ
but spiritual deadnes? yea deadness more miserable then the deadness of
dogs killed in Similitude
their mothers belly, miserable for this that they never saw the light, and
more miserable, because the light never saw them. And these who have not seen
by the eyes of faith God reconciled to them in Christ, they are double
miserable, neither have they seen the true light, neither has the true light
ever looked upon them but in anger and wrath.

This living foundation (says the Apostle) was disallowed of men, but chosen
of God and precious. But I pray you The contempt of men cannot impair the
glory of Christ.
wherefore did men disallow him? Because he appeared in the similitude of a
servant: because he was like unto a root in a dry ground: because he was a man
full of sorrows and had experience of infirmities: because he was wounded for
our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and because of his
chastisments and his stripes, Ifa. 53. So miserably is our corrupt nature
disposed, that not only we err anent persons, despising them whom we ought
to reverence, but in despising them for the selfsame cause, for the which
they should most reverently be regarded. Christ is to be regarded of us for
many causes, chiefly for this that he humbled himself to the end he might
exalt us, and he was content to be wounded to the end we might be cured by his
stripes, Ifa. 53. In the next words the A postle admonishes us, that all the
attempts of men against the souerainitie of Christ, are foolish and vain,
because he ever is, and shall be the very elect and precious stone whereupon
the house of God is builded. The gainsayings of men against Christ, are li^e
unto the tempests of wind, that are moved in the air, Similitude.
whereby men and beasts, and trees, and ships are mightily troubled and
shaken: but the sun, moon and stars are so highly eleuate above the air,
and the region of the winds, that they cannot perturbe nor trouble those
c^stiall creatures. Even so the contempt of men done against Christ cannot
impair one jote of his most excellent honor. He is chosen of God and a
precious, and a worthy foundation, albeit all the whole world should grind
their teeth, and speak in the contrary.

To this foundation so viuely described both by the Prophet, Isa. 28. and by
the Apostle PETER 1. Pet. 2. we are exhorted We draw nere to Christ by faith.
to draw near, to wit, by faith. For like as infidelity separateth the heart
from Christ, even so faith coupleth the heart to Christ. The Apostle says.
Take heed lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief
that departet^ from the living God, Heb. 3. ver. 12. An unbelieving heart
departs further from the Lord then the East is distant from the West. For the
unbelieving heart in doubting of the verity of the promises of Christ would
make Christ no Christ. If he who promises to save us, do not save us, then is
he no Savior indeed but in word only. But the faithful and believing
heart draws near to Christ touches the hemme of his garment, draws virtue
out of him: yea He that (...) has received the testimony of God, and sealed
up that God is true, Ioh. 3. ver. 33. Of all handwrites the hand write of the
heart is the principal. God deliteth to Write his covenant in our hearts, Ier.
31, ver. 33. Even so in like manner God deliteth to have his Covenant sealed and
subscribed with our heart blood, which no man can do, but he that believes in
Christ.

To conclude this short treatise after that the ground of the house of God is
so clearly known by the very demonstration of the finger of God to them who
will not believe, that may justly be said which Christ spak to the unbelieving
Jews Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father, there is one that
accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust. For had ye belecued Moses, ye
would have believed mee^ for he Wrote of me. John 5. ver. 45. 46. The like I
say to the Papists in our days, they shall not want an accuser, for the
Apostle PETER shall be their accuser: who sending us from himself to Christ
the elect, and precious and sure foundation of the Church. conuicteth all those
who adhering to the person of the servant, misregardeth the honor due to the
Sovereign Lord and Master. The Lord work true faith in us, that we cleaving
fast to Christ have never need to be ashamed

Amen
CENTVRIE II
Chap. 1.
Traianus.
TRAIAN the adoptiue son of NERVA was Of Emporours.
the first stranger who obtained that honor to be king of the Romans. He
reigned 19. years 6. months, Eusebius. eccl hist. lib. 4. cap. 3. A man so
exceeding well beloved of the Senate and people of Rome, that after his days
whenever a new Emperor was elected, they wished unto him the good success
of AUGUSTUS, and the uprightness of TRAIANVS. Notwithstanding of this, he was
a cruel persecuter of Christians. And this third persecution is justly The
third persecution. ANNO Chr. 108
counted greater then the two preceding persecutions. To other afflictions now
is added contempt and shame. It was no great dishonor to be hated of NERO and
DOMITIAN, wicked men and haters of righteousness, but to be hated and
persecuted by TRAIAN, a man counted a pattern of upright dealing, this was a
great rebuke. Notwithstanding Christians looked to Jesus the Author and
finisher of their faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of
God, Heb. 12. ver. 2. Many have more patiently endured pain in their flesh,
then shame and contempt in the world, but Christ's true disciples must resolve
to be a gazing stock to all the world and to be countedthe offscourings of the
earth, as the holy me^ ofGod did in the days of the Emperor TRAIAN. These
were citizens of heaven, living in earthly tabernacles, living upon the earth,
but not fashioned according to the similitude of this world, Romans 12. In doing
great things by faith, they surpassed mighty Monarchs: In patient suffering
of cuil they ouerwent admired Philosophers. In this persecution SIMON the son
of CLEOPAS an ^oly A postle suffered martyrdom being now The martyrdom of
Simon the son of Cleopas,
an hundredth and twenty years old: he was first scourged, and then
crucified: but all this rebuke he most patiently suffered for the Name of
Christ, Eusebius. eccl hist lib. 3. cap. 32 Of IGNATIUS martyrdom we have spoken
in the first Centurie, the time of his suffering was in the time of TRAIANVS.
Plin. 2. Deputy in Bithynia breathing threatenings against innocent Christians
persecuted great numbers of The letter of Pliny 2. written to Traian,
them to the death. In end he was commoued and troubled in his own mind,
considering both the number and patient suffering of Christians that were put
to death, he wrote to the Emperor, declaring that Christians were men of good
conversation, and detested murder, adultery and such other ungodliness:
only they had conuentions early in the morning, and they sang Psalms to the
honor of Christ whom they worshipped as God, but they would not worship images
(here make the portrait of the ancient Apostolic Church, and what conformity
the Roman Church in our days has with it the Lord knows) This letter of
PLINIVS mitigated the Emperors wrath in a part yet gave he no absolute
commandment to stay the persecution, but only that the judges should not
search them out narrowly, but if any happened to be presented before them, then
let them be punished, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 33, What confusion was in
this edict it is well marked by TERTVLLIAN: the one part of it repugneth to the
other. In forbidding to search them out narrowly, he declares their
innocence, but in commanding to punish them, when they were presented, he
pronounces them to be guilty. Tcrtul. Apol. This is that Emperor for whose
soul GREGORY the first made supplications to God 400. years after his death,
and was heard of God as DAMASCEN writes sermon. de defunctis. Gregorie^. prayed
for the soul of Traian.
This superstitious Monk of the descent of Saracens blood if he supponed
GREGORY to be so full of charity that he prayed for the soul of one
persecuting Emperor, why would he not bring him in praying also for all the
ten persecuting Emperors, to the end that they being all delivered from the
condemnation of hell, heaven might be counted a mansion both for Christ's true
disciples, and also for Christ's hateful and impenitent enemies*

Adrianus.
AFter TRAIAN AELIVS ADRIANVS reigned 21. years, Chytr. Chron. In his time
ARISTIDES and QVADRATVS, the one a Bishop, the other an Orator at Athens wrote
learned apologies in defense of Christian Religion, and did so mitigate the
Emperors mind, that in his time no new commandment was set forth to persecute
Christians, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4 cap. 3. Ierom Catal. script. eccles.
BARCOCHEBAS at this time perverted the nation of the Jews, and called himself
the promised Barcochebas a false prophet seduced the nation of the jews.
MESSIAH: whom the foolish Jews followed to their own overthrow and
destruction. TYNIVS RUFUS Deputy in Iadea besieged this man in Bethera a town
not far distant from Jerusalem, and destroyed him with all his adherents.
Also the whole nation of the I^wes was banished from their native soil: and
the town of Jerusalem was taken from the Jews and delivered to other nations
to be inhabitants of it, and was called by the Emperors name Aelia Eusebius.
eccl. hist lib. 4. cap 6. Thus we see that the Jews who would not receive
Christ, who came in his fathers name, yet they received another who came in his
own name, and like unto babes who are easily deceived with trifles, they were
bewitched with the splendour of a glorious name: for BARCOCHEBAS signifies the
son of a star: and he said to the Jews, that he was sent as a light from
heaven to succor their distressed estate: but he might have been called more
justly BARCHOSBA the son of a lie. Here I give warning again, that we take
heed to our selves lest we be circumveened with the deceitful snares of the
devil: for it is an easy thing to fall, but a difficill thing to rise again.
The Christians who lived in the days of ADRIAN were glad to be refreshed with
the crumbs of outward comfort, which are denied to no accused person in the whole
world. viz. that Christians shall not be condemned to death for the importunat
clamors and cries of a raging people accusing them, except it be proved that
they have transgressed the Law, and have committed some fact worthy of death.
Read the epistle of ADRIAN written to MINVTIVS FVNDANVS Deputy in Asia,
Eusebius, eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 9. The good intention of ADRIAN in building a
Church for the honor of Christ, void of images (because such was the custom
of Christians) was impeded and hindered by some of his familiar Adrianus his
intention to build a Church for the honor of Christ.
friends, who said, that if he so did, all men would for sake the temples of
the gods of the Gentiles, and become Christians, Bucolc. citing the testimony
of LAMPRIDIVS writing the life of ALEXANDER SEVERUS. In this point good reader
mark what Church is like unto the ancient primitive and Apostolic Church,
whether the Church decked with images, or the Church void of images.

Antoninus Pius,
TO ADRIAN succeeded ANTONIUS PIUS his adopted son, and reigned 23. years,
Chytr. Chron. He was so careful to preserve the lives of his subjects, that
he counted it greater honor to save the life of one subject, then to destroy
the lives of a thousand enemies, Carrion lib. 3. Monarch. 4. In this Emperors
time IVSTINVS MARTYR wrote notable books of Apology for the Christians, which
were presented and read in the Senate of Rome, and mollified the Emperors
mind toward Christians, as clearly appears by his edicts proclaimed at
Ephesus in time of most solemn conuentions of all Asia, Eusebius. eccl. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 13,

Antoninus Philosophus, and L. Uerus.
AFter ANTONIUS PIUS succeeded his son in law ANTONIUS Philosophus
otherwise called MARCUS AURELIUS with his brother L. AURELIUS VERVS. This is
the first time whereinto the Roman empire was governed by two Augusti. Albeit
TITUS had associated his brother DOMITIAN to be a fellow labourer with him in
the work of government, yet was not DOMITIAN counted or called AUGUSTUS
until the death of his brother TITUS. But now at one and the self same time
two Emperors do reign. ANTONIUS Philosophus reigned. 19. years, LUCIUS
VERVS his brother 9. years. And so after the death of VERVS the whole
government returned to ANTONIUS Philosophus alanerly, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib.
5. cap. 9. Bucolc. He was called a Philosopher not only in regard of his
knowledge, but also in respect of the practice of Philosophy. He was neither
greatly puffed up by prosperity, nor greatly casten down by adversity: yet he
was a cruel persecuter of innocent Christians. Now is the fuel added to the
furnace the fourth time, and the flame is great, and the arm of wicked men who
hated the The fourth persecution. ANN. Chapter 168.
name of Christians is strengthened by the Emperors commandment. The trumpets
of the Monarchs of the world sound the alarm against him who made them Kings
and rulers on the earth. The poor innocent Lambs of the sheepfold of Christ
appointed for the shambles strengthened their hearts in God, and in the power
of his might, and chused rather to suffer adversity with their brethren, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. ver. 25. they were
content to be racked, and would not be delivered, that they might be partakers
of a better resurrection, Heb. 11. ver. 35. whose bodies lacerat with stripes
until their very inward bowels were patent to the outward sight, witnessed the
vnrent firmness and stabilitie of their faith. They were so supported with the
power of that grace that comes from above, that they were not terrified with
the multiplied numbers of cruel torments newly excogitate for dashing that
invincible courage of faith which was seen in Christians. Yea further then
this. When the persecuting enemies were compelled to change the high tuned
accent of their menassing speeches, and to crave but a little conformity to the
Emperors desire in swearing by his fortune, the holy men of God would not once
seem to fall away from their profession, by answering with timorous and
doubtsome words: but glorified God with a clear and constant confession of
their Christian faith. POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna, and IVSTINVS MARTYR a man of
The martyrdom of Polycarpus and Justinius.
singular erudition were both martyred in the fervent heat of this
persecution. But above all other places, the consuming flame of the furnace
brast out most vehemently in France that happy nation, whereinto both of old
and late time so many were found worthy to give their blood for the Name of
Christ. VETIVS EPAGATHVS MATVRVS, PROTHENVS, ATTALVS, SANCTVS, and PHOTINVS B.
of Lions, all suffered for the testimony of Christ in France. And BLANDINA a
worthy woman suffered many torments, and renewed her spiritual courage by
continual iteration of these words, Christianasum, that is, I am a Christian,
Eusebius. eccl, hist. lib, 5. cap 1. Bucolc. Index. In like manner Christians were
Slanderous speeches against Christians.
persecuted with the sla^derous speches of Pagans, objecting unto them the
bankets of THYESTES, and the chambering of OEDIPVS, that is, the eating of men's
flesh and incestuous copulations, Eusebius. ibid. But men who are given to the
mo-mentaneal delites of sin are not willing to die, because that by death they
are separat from all bodily pleasures. The Christians by patient and willing
suffering of death for Christ's sake clearly witnessed unto the world, that
they were not addicted to the deceitful pleasures of sin, Justin. Martyr.
Apol, Nevertheless these slanderous speeches were credited by the Pagans. and
took such deep root in their hearts, that these who seemed before to be more
meek and moderat then others, now they became full of madness and rage
against Christians: and that which was foretold by our master Christ, it was
fulfilled at this time, to wit, The time shall come, that whosoever kills
you, shall think he does God service, John 16. 2. the huge number of martyrs
that were slain in the fury of this persecution are both accuratly and at
great length set down by that holy man of God who lately wrote the book of
the martyrs: I only point out shortly the estate of the Church at this time.
In this Emperors time good men were not inlacking, who admonished him to
appease his wrath against Christians: such as CLAUDIUS APOLLINARIS B. of
Herapolis, and MELITO B, of Sardis. But nothing could assuage his cruel heart,
until he was casten into the furnace of grievous troubles himself: for his
arm^ that fought against the Germans and Sarmatians fell into great distress
for want of water, but was supported by the prayers of the Christian legion
that was in his army. For The Romain army supported by the prayers of the
Christians.
they bowed their knees to Christ, and prayed for help, and the Lord Jesus
sent rain in abundance to refresh the army of the Romans, and dashed the
Barbarians with thunder and fire. In remembrance whereof the Christian legion
was after that time called (...) or Fulm^natrix, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5. After
this victory he assuaged his anger, and wrote to the Senate of Rome to deal
gently with Christians, by whose prayers he acknowledged both himself and his
army to have received deliverance from God.

Commodus.
COMMODVS the son of ANTONIUS reigned 13. years, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5
Cap. 27. Many of the Roman's not without a cause called him INCOMMODVS. He
presumed to do great things, and to change the names of months, and would have
the month of December to be called C^mmodus like as the two names of two months
Qu^ntilis and Sextil^s had been changed in time bypast, and called Iulins and
Augustus for honor of these two well-beloved Emperors. But he was not so well
favored of the people, that this ordinance could have place any longer, then
during his own lifetime. The Churel in his days was not altogether free of
persecution: for APOLLONIVS a man of noble birth in Rome and a man of great
erudition fuffered death, because he would not forsake the Christian religion.
His accuser also was punished to the death, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21. Such
advantages Judges might Contrary l^wes.
easily have taken, finding so many discrepant laws, some made in favor, and
some conceived in disliking of Christians.

Pertinax and Julianus.
AELIVS PERTINAX Imp. 6. months. DIDIVS IVLIANVS 21 months. Chytr. Chron.
EVSEBIVS makes no mention of D. IVLIANVS but of PERTINAX alanerly, to whom
succeeded SEVERUS, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 27.

Chap. 2
IN this second Centurie the Bishops of Rome for the most Bishops of Rome.
part proved faithful and worthy servants of Christ. A great number of them
were baptized with the Baptism of Christ, and drank of the cup that Christ
drank of, and were drenched with their own blood, and they watered the Church
of Rome with the streams of their blood, as Egypt is watered and made fruitful
with the inundation of Nilus. Men of blessed remembrance. DAMASVS writes, that
from S. PETER to TELESPHORYS all the Bishops of Rome were martyrs. Others
added, that until the days of SYLVESTER who lived in the time of the reign
of CONSTANTINE all the Bishops of Rome had the honor of martyrdom. But in
these hyperbolicke speeches, neither has the distinction between a Martyr,
and a Consessour been rightly considered, (albeit well marked by Eus^b. eccl.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 2.) neither has the history of the reign of ANTONIUS
PIUS been rightly pondered, in whose days HYGINVS and PIUS lived, and were not
slain for the testimony of Christ. Always it is a maleuolous mind that
holds back from worthy men their due praise and commendation both in doing
of good and patient suffering of evil for Christ's sake. In rehearsing the
names of the Roman Bishops, I thought meet to follow IRENEVS and EVSEBIVS
rather then PLATINA. In the first Centurie after the martyrdom of PETER and
PAVL, LINVS, ANACLETVS and CLEMENS were teachers of the Roman Church, In the
second Centurie follow EVARISTVS, ALEXANDER 1. XISTVS 1. TELESPHORVS, HYGINVS,
PIUS 1. ANICETVS, SOTER, ELEVTHERIVS, and VICTOR. This VICTOR must needs be
called the 13. Bishop of Rome, if ELEVTHERIVS be the 12. according to the
computation of IRENEVS lib. 3. cap. 3. ONVPHRIVS according to his own custom
gives more credit to old parchments, that he has found in the Vatican
bibliotheke, then to any ancient father. He begins early to distinguish
CLETVS from ANACLETVS, that by taking liberty to thrust in one more in the
first Centurie he may have the greater boldness to thrust out another of the
feminine sex in another Centurie. For it grieueth him to the heart to hear
this thing so universally affirmed, and to see the pen of PLATINA blushing,
when he writes of IOANNES the eight, he makes little contradiction to that
settled and received opinion of the feminine Pope. But I leave ONVPHRIVS
sporting with his own conceits as a Pleasant does with his own fingers when
no other body will keep purpose with him. EVARISTVS finished the course of his
ministration in 8. years. ALEXANDER who is in express words called the fist B.
of Martyr.
Rome after the death of PETER and PAVL, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1.
governed 10. years, and suffered martyrdom in the days of ADRIAN, as PLATINA
writes. After him XISTVS 1. continued 10 years, Eusebius. lib. 4 cap 5 and died
a M^tyre. Ma^tyre
martyr, Platin. TELESPHORVS the 7 Bishop of Rome after the days of the
Apostles lived in that ministration 11. years and was honored with
martyrdom, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap 10. HYGINVS An. 4. And PIUS the 1. ministered 11.
years. These two suffered not martyrdom, because their lot was to live in the
calm days of a meek Emperor ANTONIUS PIUS. ANICETVS ministered in that
office 11. years, with whom Martyr.
POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna conferred at Rome anent the observation of the
festiuitie of Easter day. He concluded his life with the glorious crown of
martyrdom, Eusebius. eccl. hist, lib. 4. cap 14. To him succeeded SOTER An. 9.
After him ELEVTHERIVS An. 15. In whose time LUCIUS King of the Britons desired
that he and his people should be baptized and recei^ed into the fellowship of
Christians to whom ELEVTHERIVS sent FVGATIVS and DAMIANVS, who satisfied the
desire of the King, and his people, so they were baptized and counted
Christians, Platina de vita Eleutherii. After him VICTOR An. 10. He intended to
have excommunicat all the Churches of the East because they kept not the festi
The rashness of Victor.
uitic of Pasche day conform to the custom of the Church of Rome, but rather
upon the day wherinto the I^wes were accustomed to eat their Paschal lamb. But
this rashness of VICTOR was somewhat abated by the grave and prudent counsel of
IRENEVS B. of Lions, who admonished VICTOR, that there was no less discrepance
of customs anent keeping of Lent then was anent the keeping of Easter day, yet
was not the unity of the Church violated nor rent asunder for this
discrepance. And when POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna came to Rome, in his conference
with ANICETVS neither of them could persuade the other to change the custom of
keeping of daves which they had received by tradition of their predecessors.
Notwithstanding they kept fast the band of Christian fellowshippe, and
ANICETVS admitted POLYCARPVS to the communion of the Roman Church, and they
departed in peace one from another, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib 5. cap. 26.

QVADRATVS B. of Athens lived in the days of ADRIAN. This Emperor upon a
certain time wintered in Ath^ns, and Of other Doctors and Preach^.
went to Eleusina, and was (...)* that is to say, initiat into all the
mysteries of Grecia. This fact of the Emperor gave encouragement to those who
hat^d Christians without allowance of the Emperoures commandment to vex the
Christians. Concerning his apology for Christians given in to the Emperor
together with the apology of ARISTIDES a learned Philosopher and eloquent
Orator in Athens, we have spoken already in the description of the life of
ADRIAN, Ierom. Catal script ec^l.

AGRIPPAS CASTOR a very learned man answered to the Agrippas Castor.
books of the Heretic BASILIDES, who with the novelty of barbarous and
uncouth words troubled the hearts of rude and ignorant people, talking of a
god whom he called ARBRAXAS, and of his prophets BARCAB and BARCOB, words
invented by himself to terrify simple people, Eusebius. lib 4 cap. 7. Such
delusions of Satan Quinti^sts in our days an ignorant race of braine-sicke
fellows have used. And so the blind led the blind, and both fell into the
ditch.

In this age HEGESIPPVS of the nation of the I^wes was connerted unto the faith
of Christ, and came to Rome in Hegesippus.
the days of ANICETVS, and continued until the days of ELEVTHERIVS, Eusebius.
lib. 4. cap. 11. But for what cause he came to Rome, or in what part of the
world he bestowed the travels of his ministry no mention is made, neither by
EVSEBIVS, nor by any other ancient writer, no not by IEROM himself, a man most
accurate explorator of all antiquities.

MELITO B. of Sardis a famous town in Lydia wrote an apology for the
Christians to the Emperor ANTONIUS Melito.
Philosophus, whom EVSEBIVS calls MARCUS AURELIUS VERVS, Eusebius lib. 4. cap.
13. His apology was written with Christian freedom and courage: for he is not
afraid to declare to the Emperor what good success AUGUSTUS CAESAR had in
whose days Christ was borne, and what unprosperous ^successe, NERO and
DOMITIAN had, who persecuted the Christians, hist. Magdeburg. EVSEBIVS calls
him an Eunuch. lib. 5. cap. 24.

In the fourth persecution died IVSTINVS MARTYR, accused and delated by
CRESCENS. He was converted to Christ's Justinius Martyr.
religion by the travels of an old man, whom he supponed for his gravity to
have been a Philosopher, but he was a Christian. This ancient man counseled
IVSTINVS to be a diligent reader of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
who spoke by divine inspiration, who knew the verity, and were not covetous of
vain glory, neither were they dashed with fear, whose doctrine also was
confirmed with miraculous works, which God wrought by their hands. Above all
things willed him to make earnest prayers to God to open unto him the ports of
true light, because the truth cannot be comprehended, except the father of
light, and his son Christ Jesus give unto us an understanding heart, Justin.
dialog cum Troph. He wrote two books of apology for Christians to the
Emperor ANTONIUS PIUS, and to his sons, and the Senate of Rome. In the
second book of his apology he declares that Christians were put to death not
for any crime they had committed, but only for their profession. In witness
whereof, if any of them would deny his Christian profession, straightway he
was absolved, because there was no other thing wherewith he was charged,
Justin. apol 2.

In this same persecution also suffered the holy martyr of Polycarpus
Christ, POLYCARPVS B. of Smyrna. He was willing to have remained in the town
of Smyrna, but by the earnest supplications of friends was moved to leave the
town and lurk secretly in the country. Three days before he was
apprehended by his persecuters, he dreamed that his bed was set on fire and
hastily consumed, which he took for a divine advertisement that he behooued
to glorify God by suffering the torment of fire. His conference with the
Roman Deputy, and how he refused to deny Christ whom he had served 80. years,
and ever found him a gracious Master: also how he refused to swear by the
fortune of CAESAR, and how patiently he suffered death for the Name of Christ,
this history is set down at length by Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. 16.

IRENEVS B. of Lions in France, and successor to PHOTINVS Ireneus.
a martyr and disciple of POLYCARPVS in his youth, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5.
flourished in the days of the Emperor GOMMODVS, whose meek conversation and
peaceable carriage answering to his name (...) that is peaceable, made his name
to be in great account amongst Christians. How he pacified the fury of VICTOR
B. of Rome, and the pernicious schism springing up in the Church of God upon
very small occasion it has been already declared. He lacked not his own
infirmities and errors, even in doctrine. He was entangled with the error of
the Chiliasts, lib. 5. contra Valentin. He supponed that as Christ being 30.
year old, was baptized, so likewise he began to teach when he was 40. year
old, and suffered when he was 50. because he came to save all, and therefore
he would taste of all the ages of mankind, Iren. lib. 2. cap. 34. Yet is this
opinion repugnant to the narratio^ of the 4. Evangelists.

CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS lived in the days of the Emperor COMMODVS. He was the
disciple of PANTENVS. These Clemens Alexandrinus.
two seem to be the authors of Universities and Colleges: For they taught the
grounds of religion, not by sermons and Homilies to the people, but by
catechetical doctrine to the learned in the schools, Bucolc, Chron. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 11. This CLEMENS esteemed too much of tradition, like as PAPIAS
did, of whom we spoke in the former Centurie, whereby it came to pass that he
fell into many strange and absurd opinions directly repugnant to the written
word of God, affirming that after our calling to the knowledge of the truth,
possibly God may grant to them that have sinned, (...), but if we sin ofter
then once or twice, there is no more renewing by repentance or pardon for sin,
but a fearful expectation of judgment, Strom. li. 2. And in his 4. book of
Strom. as it were forgetting his own rigorous sentence against these who sin
ofter then once or twice after their illuminatio^ with the light of God he
says, (...), that is to say, whether here or else where (viz. creatures do
repent) for no place is void or the mercy of God. In which words he would in
sinuat that these who repent either in this world or else where (that is in the
world to come) may possibly obtain favor at Gods hand, nothing can be
written more repugnant both to the word of God, and also to his own
forementioned opinion.

Many other worthy preachers and learned men flourished in this Centurie, whose
names of purpose are pretermitted. In Athens PVBLIVS and ATHENAGORAS: In
Corinth PRIMVS, DIONYSIVS and BACCHILVS: In the Isle of Candie PHILIPPUS and
PINYTVS: In Anticchia HIERON, THEOPHILUS, MAXIMUS, SERAPION. hist M^gdeburg. In
Jerusalem before the days of the Emperor HADRIAN the Bishops of Jerusalem
were of the nation of the Jews. But after the days of HADRIAN who banished
the Jews from their native soil, Christian preachers of other nations were
bishops in Jerusalem, such as MARCUS, CASSIANVS, PVBLIVS, MAXIMVSIVLIANVS,
CAPITO, VALENS, DOLICHIANVS, NARCISSUS, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 12. the most part
of all these lived in this Centurie, but NARCISSUS with some others, are known
to have lived in the days of SEVERUS the fifth persecuter, and some space after
him, Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 9. But to write of all other worthy preachers and
doctors in particular, it were an infinite labor, and far surmounting the
ability of these ecclesiasticke writers who wrote in ancient times, and much
more our ability who live in a posterior age.

Chap. 3.
IN this second Centurie Satan inuying the propagation of the Gospel, sent
forth a pernicious swarm of Hetiques, Of Heretics.
such as SATVRNINVS of Antiochia, and BASILIDES of Alexandria, the one of them
through Syria, and the other through Egypt dispersed the venom of their
heretical doctrine. To whom EVS^BIVS adds CARPOCRATES most properly counted
the father of the Heretics, called Gnostici, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7. They
received this name, Gnostici.
because they profesled a knowledge of dark and hid mysteries. The golden age
of the Apostles and Evangelists was now spent, and false teachers took the
greater encouragement to teach a doctrine of devils, disallowing marriage, and
commanding fornication, and practizing abominable and filthy things, which
mine heart abhors to think upon. What necessity drone EP^PHANIVS in
particular to manifest to the world the detestable and execrable mysteries of
those Heretics I cannot tell. One thing I know, that it should not be comely in
my person to offend the chaste ears of Christians by renewing the memorial of
that beastly uncleanness whereof EPIPHANIVS expressly writes. Epiph contra
haer^s. They were justly called Borboritae or Caenosi, because they were
filthily polluted in the mire of uncleanness, August. index hares. Ad
Quodvultdeum The followers of CARPOCRATES had in secret places images of gold
and silver, which they called the images of Jesus, and therewithal the images
of PITHAGORAS, PLATO, and ARISTOTLE, and they worshipped them all, Epiph.
contrahaeres. So that the worshipping of images and the adoration of the image
of Jesus himself is not a custom borrowed from the ancient fathers of the
first three hundredth years, but rather a custom borrowed from old
Heretics, such as CARPOCRATES and his follower MARCELLINA. By their dishonest
and filthy conversation it came to pass, that the true professors of the
Gospel were vilely slandered by persecuting Pagans objecting to Christians the
bankets of THYESTES, and the chamberiug of OEDIPVS, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7. This
superlatiue degree of excessive uncleanness could not endure long, because
every one of these Heretics. SATVRNINVS, BASILIDES and CARPOCRATES. with
augmentations of new invented absurdities, changed the fashion and countenance
of their error, and so in end it euanished. But the beauty of the true Church
of Christ, ever like unto it self in gravitie. sincerity, liberty
temperancie and holiness of unreprovable conversation brightly shined among
the G^ecians and Barbarians, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7.

The country of VALENTINVS was unknown to EPIPHANIVS. He was brought up in
learning in the schools of Valentinu^
Alexandria. In his foolish opinions of the plurality of gods as well
masculine as feminine, the multitude of heavens, and ages or eternities, which
he calls (...) thirty in number deepenesse and silence being the beginning
of all the rest, August index haeres. In this his opinion (I say) EPIPHANIVS
conjectureth that he has followed HESIODVS in his Theogonia, yet the man
being ambitious, by permutation of names, he would seem to have been the
author and finder out of these mysteries. Against whom IRENEVS has written
five books wherein. he both discovers and also refuteth the vanity of his
error. MARCUS one of his disciples a notable sorcerer invented a new form of
Baptism, Marcus.
to baptize in the name of the unknown father of al things, and in the name of
the verity the mother of all things and in the name of him who descended upon
Jesus, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11. All the disciples of the school of
VALENTINVS are called Gnostics with the forenamed Heretics, SATVRNINVS,
BASILIDES and CARPOCRATES, they all denied the resurrection of the body, and
supponed that salvation did belong only to the soul of man. VALENTINVS and
his disciple MARCUS with COLORBASVS and HERACLEON, all their opinions were so
intricate and obscure, that men of mean understanding could not conceive them,
and men of deep judgment would not conceive them, because they had not
spitted out their brains (as EPIPHANIVS speaks) that is, their head was not
so void of wisdom as to hearken to the new invented to yes of brainsicke men.

CERDON and MARCION were authors of the opinion Cerdon. Marcion.
of two gods, or two beginnings, the one they called the author of all good
things, the other the author of all evil things. They denied the verity of
Christ's humane nature and the verity of his suffering, whereupon of necessity
follows this conclusion, that we are not saved indeed, but only (to use
MARCIONS own words) putative, that is in fantasy or supposition. The death of
Christ is the true ground of our salvation, if he only seemed to die, and died
not indeed then we seem to be saved but are not saved indeed. They denied
also the resurrection of the body, August. index haeres. MARCION was justly
called by POLYCARPVS Primogtnit^s d^aboli, that is, The first borne of the
devil, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 14. This heresy by the work of that old serpent
was dispersed in Italy, Egypt, Palestina, Arabia, Syrta, Cyprus, Thebaida,
Persia, and in many other places. This is the cause wherefore TERTVLLIAN, and
after him, EPIPHANIVS inveighes so sharply against this pestilent Heretic
MARCION. He was the inuenter of a strange and new custom in Baptism, that
after a man has been once baptized, he may be baptized again the second time,
and the third time also. This he did to wash away and put in oblivion the
foul fault of whoredom committed by him His father was a preacher of Gods word
in Pontus, and he himself had vowed chastity, and afterward polluted himself
with whoredom, and was cast out of the Church by his own father, and when he
came to Rome at the time when HYGINVS (the ninth Bishop after the martyrdom of
the two great Apostles) was lately departed this life, he was not admitted to
the fellowship of the Church of Rome: therefore he joined himself to the
fellowship of CERDON, and augmented his error. To the two beginnings of CERDON
he added the third in this manner. First he said there was one supreme and
universal God, and him he called the good God, who created nothing that is in
this world. Secondly there was a visible God who was Creator and maker of all
things, and thirdly there was the devil as a midthing between the visible and
invisible God, Epiph contra haeres. No heresy sprang up in this Centurie that
was so universally ouerspred in many nations and countries, as the heresy of
MARCION was. So bent is the corrupt nature of man to follow a doctrine of
lies, when it is colored with a show and pretense of reverence toward God.
For they feared to attribute the making of any thing that is evil to God, who
is infinite in goodness. But this was a needless fear, because creatures
which now are ^uill, they have not this wicked disposition by the creation of
God, but by their own voluntary defection from the first estate whereinto
God created them. LVCIANVS and APE^PS were the disciples of MARCION whom many
did follow, in so much that Marcionists were called Lucianistae and
Apeiletani. Nevertheless APELLES could not agree with his master MARCION in
all things: for he granted that Jesus Christ the son of the good God had a
true body, yet not made of the substance of the Virgin MARIE, but of the four
elements, and that he died and rose again, not putative as MARCION said, but
truly and in very deed, yet he thought that this true body of Christ like as
it was composed of the four elements, so likewise after his resurrection he
dissolved it into the four elements, and afterward returned to heaven from
whence he came. This error EPIPHANIVS abhors for many great absurdities.
First (says he) did Christ build up again that Tabernacle which men destroyed
to the end that he himself in continent after the building of it should
destroy it again by a dissolution of it into the elements? Secondly if Christ
dissolved his own body, why would he not let his disciples see at least the
relics of his body resolved into elements, to the end they might have
honored the relics of his dissolved body, as the women came to the sepulcher
with precious ointments to have honored his dead body. Thirdly (says he)
APELLES speaks of Christ's body after his resurrection that which neither
Christ, nor his Apostles ever spoke of that blessed body. This is the right way
to undo heresies, to bring them to the right balance of the mouth of Christ,
and writings of his holy Apostles, and then heresies cannot consist and stand.

In the days of ANTONIUS and L. VERVS the authors of the 4. persecution.
TATIANVS a Syrian came to Rome and was converted to the true faith by IVSTINVS
MARTYR, during Tatianus.
whose lifetime he maintained no error openly: but after the death of
IVSTINVS he became the author of the sect Encratitae, who were so called,
because they abstained from wine and eating of flesh and creatures quickened
Encratitae
with a sensitive life. They damned marriage and blasphemed the Epistles of
PAVL, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 28. This they did no doubt, because PAVL in his
Epistles calls the prohibition of marriage, and the prohibition of meats
appointed by God for the use of men with thanksgiving to be a doctrine of
devils, 1. Tim 4.

MONTANVS a man of Phrygia seduced two women, PRISCILLA and MAXIMILLA to leave
the company of their Montanus Cataphryges.
husbands, and to be his prophetesses. He called himself the holy Spirit whom
Christ sent to instruct his disciples in all truth, Ioh. 14. He instituted
laws concerning fasting, and damned the second marriage, and affirmed that
PAVI. gave liberty to widows to marie, because he knew the will of God, but
only in a part, August. Index h^eres. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14 and 16.

I purposely pass over that rabble of obscure Heretics, whom I compared in
the treatise of heresies to abortiue births, such as Opbitae, Caiani, Sethiani
and such like: of whom notwithstanding EPIPHANIVS vouchsafes to writ at
length, no doubt to manifest! the corruption of man's nature, stouping sometimes
so basely, that not only they hearken to the counsel of the old serpent the
devil, but also they worcester ship the very instrument of the Devil, viz. the
serpent, as these Ophitae did. Again, some Heretics magnified CAIN and
called him their father. And others gave to SETH the honor due to Christ. So
it comes to pass, that men destitute of the grace of God, that comes from
above, are like unto drunkards staggering on the right hand, and on the left
hand, and falling on their faces, and beating out their own brains.
Sometimes they extol wicked men like unto CAIN, and fall at the left hand: at
other times they praise good men like unto SETH with excessive praises, and
with derogation of the glory of Christ, and fall at the right hand And at
sometimes are so benumbed, that they spare not to set the very devil and his
instruments in the chair of God, and fall like drunken fools on their faces,
and knock out their own brains.

Let no man marvel wherefore the names of AQVILA a Aquila and Theodosion
rath^r Apostatstben Heretics.
man of Pontus and THEODOSION of Ephesus are not reckened in the roll of
Heretics in this age. True it is that they once professed the faith of
Christ, and made defection again but this defection made not a division into
the Church which is the body of Christ, because they joined themselves to the
unbelieving Jews who utterly denied the divinity of Christ, and therefore of
Christians became infidels rather then Heretics. Like as no man calls the
Emperor IVLIAN an Heretic, but an apostate: so AQVILA and THEODOSION were
notable apostats from the faith of Christ. How they labored to pervert by
sinistrous translations of places of Scripture giving clear testimony to
Christ who was borne of a virgin, EVSEBIVS declares lib. 5. cap. 8. The
translation of the Septuagints (...), that is, Behold a virgin shall conceive,
Isa. 7. was translated by them, (...), behold a young woman shall conceive But
this bad translation of Apostat christians and Proselites of the Jews so well
liked of the Jewish nation could never take place in the Church of Christ:
because the Prophet ISAIAH in that chapter is speaking of a miraculous sign
which God will give unto his people to confirm their faith, such as is the
birth of a maid, which indeed is a mitaculous work, but the birth of a young
woman clad with an husband is no miracle.

Of Scripture and Tradition.
IN the first Centurie PAPIAS deceived by tradition sell into the error of the
Chiliasts: In the second Centurie CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS stumbling at the same
stone fell into diverse errors, as has been already spoken. This presents
unto us manifest occasion to speak of the certainty of Scripture, and the
uncertainty of tradition. Scripture dited by divine inspiration (as the
Apostle speaks of it, 2. Tim 3.) is such a sacred and holy thing, that to
doubt of the perfection, purity, utility and operative virtue of it is
notable blasphemy, and a manifest contradiction to the spirit of God speaking
by his servant DAVID, Ps. 19. from the 7. verse to the 11. verse. So that these
barking dogs, who speak irreverently of the Scripture, are more worthy of a
whip wherewith dogs are driven out of Churches then of an answer. This is the
incorruptible seed whereby we are begotten to be Gods children, 1, Pet. 1. and
the sincere milk whereby we are nourished in Gods house, 1 Sacred scripture
cannot be sufficiently commended.
Pet. 2. this is the wine and milk that God has given us without money, Isa.
55. ver 1 wine fine and purified, Isa. 25. ver. 6. This is a mirror wherein we
see the glorious image of Christ, into the which we should be transformed, 2,
Cor. 3. ver. 18. This is a lantern to our feet, a light to our paths. Psalm.
119. ver. 105. and a very diadem to the head of the woman that trauaileth in
birth to bring forth children to God, Apoc. 12. The holy Scriptures are like
unto the author of holy Scriptures, of whom MOSES says, that God is
fearful in praises, Exodus 15. ver 11 When we praise a mortal man, it is to
be feared lest we give too much honor unto him: but when we praise the
immortal God it is to be feared lest we hold back a part of his due
honor. And truly the word of God in this point is like unto God himself.
When a man enters into a commendation of the Scriptures of God, he has
nothing to fear but this one thing, that he speak not so reverently of it as
becomes him to do. It is the witness Similitude.
of Christ, John 5. It is the candle of God shining in a dark place, 2. Pet,
1. It is the sword that the spirit furnishes us to fight against spiritual
wickedness, Ephesians. 6. ver. 17. In a word let us be wise like men who find
precious stones, they go to the Lapidars to try the value and virtue of the
stones that are found, for every man has not skill to judge of such precious
things: so let us consider diligently what the Prophets and Apostles, the very
penmen of the holy Ghost have spoken anent the written Word of God and we
shall find it a pearl of infinite value, Matt. It is perilous to separat the
book of the word from the book of the works.
13.

This volume of the book of the Word is one of the two principal books
wherein we learn to know God, as the Prophet declares, Psalm. 19. In the
book of the works we know the power and divinity of God, Romans 1. but in the
book of the written word of God we know the will of God and his favor toward
us in Christ lesus: and therefore the Prophet says, that the statutes of the
Lord rejoice the heart, Psalm. 19 ver: 8. Satan knowing what profitc comes to
men by joining these two volumes together, has labored to separat them, to
the end, that men seeing the beauty of the creature, should worship it in
stead of the Creator. And like as a ship that is spoiled of a prudent Pilot or
Similitude.
shipmaster, it is drowned in the sea: even so the word of God, when it
directs not the knowledge that men have by the looking upon the creature,
then men mal e shipwreck of their salvation, and worship the creature in
place of God the Creator of all things.

Another artifice of Satan is to separat the word and the Spirit which God has
joined together as two inseperable means to set up the Kingdom of God in our
hearts, as the The spirit and the word are not to be separated.
Prophet ISAIAS says. And I will make this my covenant With you says the
Lord, my Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever, Isa. 59. ver. 21, But the
Anabaptists in our days brag of the revelations of the spirit, which
revelations notwithstanding agree not with the written word of God and therefore
it is certain that their revelations are but fantasies and toys of
brain-sicke men.

This written word of God is to be read in the books of MOSES and the
Prophets, of whom Christ said, Search the The Word of God is to be found in
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.
Scriptures, for they bear testimony of me, Ioh. 5. And in the books written
by the Apostles and Evangelists, whom Christ commanded to tarry at Jerusalem
until they were endued with power from above, Acts 1. ver. 8. This power
wherewith they were endued from above was double: First a power to know the
sense and meaning of the Scriptures of God. Secondly power to utter boldly and
courageously in all languages and to all nations the truth which they knew.
This (...) distinguishes the writings of the Prophets and Apostles from all
other writings, as THEODORETVS prudently has noted de principio. Sermon. 2. The
will of God says he, is not to be sought in the books of PLATO, who like as
he knew little in matters concerning God, so likewise he was timorous, and
durst not utter unto the world boldly that little sponke of knowledge which he
had. He knew there was only one God, but in his letters written to DIONYSIVS
if they were serious, (...) was the beginning of the letter, that is, o^e God:
but if the letter was not serious, nor dited from the ^ound of his heart, then
the beginning of the letter was (...), that is plurality of gods. Who can give
undoubted credit, in matters pertaining to God, to such men as know but a
little, and the little thing that they know, they dare not presume to tell it to
others? But the Apostles were endued with strength from above, they were taught
by the Spirit of Christ in all truth, John 16. and they were not dashed with
fear of the countenances of men, Acts 4. but courageously preached the truth
of God to the great admiration of their hateful adversaries.

The word of God written by MOSES was so perfitly written, The Prophets and
Apostl^s added nothing to Moses.
that it was not lawful to add any thing unto it, nor to pair any thing from
it, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Neither did the Prophets or Apostles add any thing unto the
writings of MOSES, but they were faithful interpreters of MOSES books, and
uttered that same thing more clearly, which was somewhat darkly shadowed into
the ceremonies of the Law. For like Similitude.
as a merchant man who has fine cloth rolled up in his shop if he shall lay it
out in breadth and length upon a table, it remains the self same cloth it
was before, but it is better seen and known then it was before: even so the
Apostles have uttered the mysteries of the Kingdom of God more clearly then
MOSES did, but they have said no more anent the salvation of man then MOSES
said before them.

This pure and perfect word of God should not be mixed Three inturies done to
the Written Word by reueiencing of traditions.
with humane traditions, for by this mixture three injuries are done to the
written word of God. First by this mean the reverence due unto the written
word of God is impared and diminished. Secondly, traditions by time are
equalled unto the written word of God, and thirdly, traditions are preferred
unto the written word of God. And this being the last period whereunto the
reverence of human traditions tends to make the writ^n commandementes of
God of none effect by their traditions, as Christ clearly testifies, Mat. 15
ver. 6. humane traditions are the less to be regarded of all true hearted
Christians, to the end the written word of God may have the own due honor and
reverence.

Many false imputations against sacred Scriptures are forged False accusations
of holy Scripture.
by Papists to transport the hearts of people from the perfect reverence of
scripture, calling it imperfite and insufficient, and that it is obscure, and
that it is perilous to Laicke people to read it, lest they fall into error.
The first accusation of Scripture is the insufficiency of it. The Bishop of
Enereux that blasphemous man was bold to write Insufficiency.
a book of the insufficiency of Scripture, and the greatest argument he
uses if it were granted, yet proves it not his purpose: for he thinks that
we have not sufficiently by Scripture convicted the Anabaptists, who deny that
children should be baptized till they be of perfect years to give a confession
of their own faith. We suppone that all this were true yet it proves not
insufficiency in scripture, but rather insufficiency in us to whom the
mysteries of the book of God are not sufficiently known. There is a place of
Scripture, Exodus 3. I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. In this place (I
say) is an argument secretly latent and prooning the resurrection, as Christ
clearly declares, disputing against the Sadduces, Mat. 22, ver. 31. 32. yet
no man before the manifestation of Christ himself ever perceived that this
argument was lurking in these words: shall it be said, this argument was not
in scripture, because it was not perceived by weak men to be in scripture?
Truly it were good for this Bishop to follow the example of the Judges that
are in this Isle of Britain, when an act of Parliament is made and ratified,
the Judges of our country decerne all causes according to the Acts, but give
not out rash sentence against the Acts: but when the Covenant of God is made
and ratified by the blood of Christ, it were better to judge according to it,
then to give out rash sentence against it.

Let us consider what is written of the three books that shall be opened at
the day of Judgment, and whereby the world shall be judged. One of the three
books is expressly nominat, to wit, the book of life, Apocal chap. 20. ver. 10
the other two no man can deny to be the Book of the Law, and the book of
the conscience, because the Book of the Law declares all that we should
have done, and the book of the conscience being opened, manifests all that
we have done: whereupon the righteous Judge of the world groundeth a just
sentence of condemnation against ungodly men in this manner. The book of the
Law manifests what ye should have done, the book of your own conscience
manifests that ye have done the contrary, and moreover also your names are
not found written in the Book of life. Therefore depart from me into the
fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. Now I demand of Papists
concerning these three books that shall be opened, is any of them imperfite?
Is there any elect person whose name is not written in the book of life? Is
there any evil that we have done that is not written with a pen of Iron,
and with the point of a Diamond in the book of the conscience, Ierem. 17. ver.
I? These two books are perfect. Ho, but the third book of the Law and
written Word of God is not perfect. In the day of the Lords blessed
appearance we shall find it perfect, containing all that we should have
either done or believed.

Secondly, they say that the Scriptures are difficill to be understand, and
therefore should not be read by common people. And indeed the Apostle PETER
grants that some places of the Epistles of PAVL Difficulty.
are hard to be understood, 2. Pet. 3. but he bids no man for this
abstain from the reading of PAVLS Epistles. To overcome difficulties there are
better remedies. The blessed virgin the mother of our Lord, when she
understood not Christ's words, she kept and pondered them in her heart, Luc.
2. IVSTINVS MARTYR was admonished by an ancient and reverent Christian to join
prayer with reading, that God would please to open the ports of light and
understanding, that he might conceive the true sense and meaning of that he
read. Justin, dialog Tryphen, CHRYSOSTOM in his preface upon the Epist. to the
Romans declares, that if a man would acquaint himself familiarly with the
scriptur by continual exercise of reading, he should the more easily
understand Scripture as he who is familiarly acquainted with his friend, will
know by his nod or becken what is his meaning. AUGUSTINE likewise says, that
as there is difficill places in Scripture, to exercise the understanding of the
strong: so likewise there is plain and easy passages of Scripture, as
pleasant meadows whereinto babes may securely walk. August. Above all the rest
our master Christ Jesus has taught us by his own example to confer Scripture
with Scripture, Math. 4. to the end we be not deceived by Satan's false glosses
and commentaries upon Scripture. This is better then upon occasion of
difficulty to reject and cast away from us a thing so necessary.

Thirdly they say that the reading of Scriptures is dangerous to simple people,
because they may easily fall into Peril.
an error for fault of understanding the right meaning of that which is read.
I might answer compendiously, that by this argument no man should read sacred
scripture, neither learned nor unlearned men. For many learned men by reading
Scripture, and not understanding it aright have been patrons of heresy, such
as ARRIVS, MACEDONIVS, NESTORIVS, EVTHICHES and diverse others. Also the very
Monks, whose solitary life and continual exercise in reading and praying
might seem to exeeme them more then others from error and heresy, yet by
mistaking the places of Scripture that spoke of the eyes, the nostrels, the
face of God, the breath of God, the arm of God, they supponed God to be
fashioned according to the likeness of a man. And so both learned and
unlearned, Priests and people, men living in towns, and lurking in cottages
of the wilderness have erred through misunderstanding of Scriptures, Yet
Scriptures must be read by all true Christians, and our meditation night and
day must be upon the Law of God. Psalm. 1. ver. 2.

Let us here consider that some things are not necessary unto eternal life,
and when they are abused, it is not amiss Things necessarte are to be kept
al-beit they be abused.
that they be removed, and put out of the way: such as the brazen serpent
which HEZEKIAS brake in pieces, and called it Nebustan, 2 Reg. cap. 18. ver. 4.
But other things are so necessary unto eternal life, that albeit they were a
thousand times abused, yet they cannot be forsaken, such as is that food that
feeds our souls unto eternal life, Ioh: 6. for the which we are commanded
continually to labor. And like as when many thousands are poisoned in
Similitude,
meat or drink, as it fell out in the army of CONRADVS 3. yet necessity
compels men to cate and drink: cuen so we must read and meditate upon the
written word, albeit infinite numbers of people have been miscatied by not
taking up the right sense and meaning of Scripture.

Now the cause wherefore so many accusations are forged Why Heretics do hate
the Scripture. Similitude,
against Scripture is this, because it is the powerful instrument of God,
whereby teachers of lying doctrine are convicted and confounded. Places of holy
Scripture are like unto the smooth stones that DAVID took out of the brook,
and fastened one of them into the head of GOLIATH, 1 Samuel 17. ver. 49. Even so
Heretics are so confounded by the testimonies of Scripture, that above all
things they hate Scripture. This IRENEVS touches shortly spealing of
Heretics in these words: Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem
convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, lib. 3. cap. 2. that is, When they (to wit.
Heretics) are argued by Scriptures they turn themselves to the accusation of
Scrip tures. Thieues do hate the light, and traitors the face of a ludge and
Heretics hate Scripture, the very axe that is laid to the root of their tree,
that it may be hewed down, cast into the fire, and utterly abolished.

Notwithstanding of all these false accusations, let us fast adhere to the
written Word. The fathers that lived in the The care of Christians of old to
keep the scripture from burning.
time of these ten persecutions counted the volume of holy Scripture so
precious a treasure, that they could willingly offer their bodies to be burned
with fire for the faith of Christ, but they would not give one page of the holy
Scripture to be burned: and if any man did it, he was called proditor, that is,
a betrayer, and was counted a companion to the traitor IVDAS who betrayed his
master, which custom was the ground of that great and long-lasting
controversy between CECILIANVS B. of Carthage, and the Donatists. For the
Donatists alleged that he had admitted to an ecclesiasti cke office a man, who
in time of persecution had been proditor, and had delivered a volume of holy
Scripture to be burned.

If we will not follow the zeal of ancient Christians, I will set down a
more familiar example of an ancient and A remarkable speech of an old honorable
Lady.
honorable Lady of blessed memory. My ears heard her call the Scripture the
charter of our heavenly inheritance, because we have no right to heaven but
only by the promises contained in the Scriptures of God. No man will be content
to have their charter rest out of their hand. If any difficil question arise
by reading of it, they will send for a wise Lawier, and seek resolution at
him, but they will assuredly keep and read their own charter. Even so (says
the foresaid nobleLady) Gods people should not have been debarred from reading
the holy Scriptures of God, the very true charter of their heavenly inheritance.

This written word is the shepherds staff of Christ, whereby we are comforted
in our life and vpholden even when we Scriptures belong to the sheep of
Christ as their proper treasure.
walk through the shadow of death, Psalm. 23. ver. 4. Which staff Christ
holds in his hand, not for his own sake as other shepherdes do, to rest
upon it, and to relieve their own infirmity, but only for our sake who are
sheep of the sheepfold of Christ to guide us by it, to correct our wandering
ways, and to hold us in decent order. Therefore of all things in the world,
let us count Scripture a thing most pertinent to us, according to the saying of
MOSES, the secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but the things
reueiled belong to us and our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this Law, Deuteronomy. 29. ver. 29. to wit, the Law written, as is
clearly declared, Deuteronomy. 27. ver, 2: and 3. When thou shall pass over Jorden
into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shtli set up great
stones and plaster them with plaster, and Shelt wit upon them all the words
of this Law. etc. Now if the written word be that very portion that belonged
properly to our fathers, to us, and to our children, we should stick as fast
to it as ever NABOTH did to his vineyarde, remembering ever these words of
MOSES. Things that are reuei led (to wit in writ) pertain to us, and to our
children for ever.

According to the pattern of this written word were al reformations
Reformation of religion made according to the Written word
of religion made, and not according to the uncertain report of traditions.
JOSIAS made reformation according to the book of the covenant that was found
in the house of the Lord, 2. Reg. cap. 23. ver. 2. And therefore this word of
God ought diligently to be kept as the very pattern of all true reformation in
religion, if any abuse fall out at any time. In our native country men are not
so careful by diligent custody to keep other measures as the measure whereby
all other measures in the land are measured, one town has the weightes,
another has the jug, the third has the furlot, another has the el-wand:
these are diligently kept, because that bythem all faulty measures are
corrected and reformed: so above all things in this world, the holy Scriptures
should be most diligently kept.

Now before I speak of humane traditions the very end wherefore the Apostles
committed to write the sum of The cause wherefore the Apostles put in write
the sum of their doctrine.
their wholesome doctrine is a sore prejudice to tradition. For some persons
who heard the Apostles preach went from Jerusalem to Antiochia, and troubled
the hearts of the Gentiles, saying, that they behooued to be circumcised, and
keep the Law of MOSES, to whom the Apostles gave no such commandment, Acts
15. Therefore the Apostles took occasion to put in write the sum of their
doctrine Now if tradition was not a faithful keeper of the Apostolic
doctrine in the very days of the Apostles and in the Be not deceived with the
generality of the word tradition.
mouths of them who heard the Apostles preach with their own ears, how
shall we lean unto the uncertainty of traditions after the issue of sixteen
hundredth years.

The generality of the word tradition is an occasion of error to many: for
so soon as this word sounds in their ears, incontinent they think that all
things necessary unto eternal life is not contained in Scripture, but the
want of Scripture must be supplied by traditions, yet the Apostle calls the
very articles of our faith traditions, namely that Christ died for our sins,
that he was buried and that he rose the third day again, 1. Cor. 15 ver. 3.
The Papists take good heed to the word (...), and say, here mention is made
of tradition, but they observe not so diligently the subsequent words (albeit
they be twice repeated by the Apostle) (...), that is, according to Scriptures.
If they will needs obtrude unto us traditions, at the least let them be
agreeable unto Scriptures, and then the controversy will cease. For I may
boldly speak of Popish traditions Similitude.
that which CLEMENS speaks of the Philosophy of the Grecians, comparing it
unto a nut, (...), that is, all the nut is not meet to be caten, the kirnell is
for eating, but the hard shells whereinto the kirnell is enclosed, are not
nourishing food, even so says CLEMENS not all the Grecian Philosophy is to
be embraced and credited. The like I say of Roman traditions, that we must
not glut over their traditions shells and kirnell altogether, but those that are
agreeable to Scriptures we receive, but traditions repugnant to Scripture, such
as worshipping of images (which DAMASCENE grants to be an unwritten
tradition) we utterly detest and abhor.

The place of PAVLS Epistles that seems to favor unwritten tradition, is
this, Therefore brethren, stand sast, and keep The true meaning of the words of
Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
the instruction, which ye have been taught either by word, or by our
epistle, 2 Thessalonians 2, ver. 15. Here I affirm that like as they who rehearsed
Christ's words, and wrested the true sense and meaning of them, they are called
false witnesses against Christ, Math. 26. ver. 61. Christ spoke these words
indeed, Destroy this Temple, and within three days I w^ll build it up again,
but not in that sense that the false witnesses reported. Even so they who cite
a testimony out of the Epistles of PAVL in another sense then PAVL writes it,
they are false witnesses against PAVL: for PAVLS tongue in preaching was guided
by the holy Ghost, and PAVLS hand and pen in writting was guided by the
holyGhost and that same self truth he preached, that same self truth he
committed to write, to the end that the faith of the Thessalonians might be
the better confirmed and strengthened. If they will obstinatly contend that the
particle (...) is disjunctiue, I will constantly affirm with the most learned
ANTONIUS SADEEL that in this place it is copulative in this sense Keep that
instruction which ye have received both by word and epistle, And in the same
sense (...) is taken, 1. Cor. 13. ver. 8. Whether prophesying shall be
abolished, or tongues shall cease, that is, both prophesying shall be
abolished, and tongues shall cease, Stand fast and keep the instruction, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 15 It is not the purpose of the Apostle in these words to
exhort Constancy differs from wilfulness.
any man to wilfulnes and obstinacy, but unto constant adherence unto the
verity of God. For the Apostle PETER describing the qualities of false
teachers calls them (...), that, is, men presumptuous and standingon their
own conceits, 2. Pet. 2. ver. 10. Wherefore a difference is to be noted between
obstinat men and constant men. It is obstinacy when a man walks in his own
ways and will not be corrected by the wisdom of God: but it is constancy
when a man walks in the ways of God, and will not depart out of them for the
favor or fear of men. CAIN was obstinat, Gen 4. PETER and JOHN were constant.
Also to keep fast the doctrine whereby they were taught both by word and
Epistle, is not only to keep it in memory, and to keep the volume wherein
scriptures are written, but to keep it indeed by the obedience of faith. For
men are thrice miserable to keep in their bosoms the testimonies of their
own condemnation as the Jews did, who kept the books of MOSES and of the
Prophets which bear testimony of Christ, Ioh. 5. yet they believed not in
Christ, and they kept them indeed to our great profit, but to their own just
condemnation: because they neither believed the promises of the word, neither
were terrified with the threatenings of that same book, which they kept. I pray
God we may be better keepers of holy writings then the reprobate Jews were.

In this controversy to defend unwritten traditions, the books of ancient
fathers are sifted and raked, and infinite pains are taken to hold up this
maine, and yet daily decaying The testimome of Ireneus abused.
pillar of their kingdom. It is not my purpose neither to defend nor to excuse
every thing that fathers have written. Only I say in good conscience that
great injury is done to some of them by the Papists, namely to the most
ancient father IRENEVS B. of Lions. He strives against VALENTINVS an
Heretic, and conuicteth him by tradition of the Churches which were thought
in his time to be Apostolic: but the heads that he proves by tradition are
the principal articles of our faith. That there is one God maker of heaven and
earth, and that Christ was borne of a virgin, and suffered under Pontius
Pslate, and rose again, and was received into the brightness of glory, and
that he shall come again to save such as are to be saved, and to judge such
as are to be judged, etc, And such sort of traditions as are altogether,
agreeable to holy Scriptures, we contrauert not upon Secondly IRENEVS had a
conflict with Heretics who regarded not scripture, but said they were
ambiguous and doubtsome, and had no authority, and that tradition was more
ancient then scripture, and therefore necessity compelled IRENEVS to fight
against him with his own weapons, as PAVL did against the Athenians with
testimonies of Poets, Acts 17. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2. and cap. 3. Yet was it not
IRENEVS purpose to prove any thing repugnant to scripture.

The traditions which they read of in other fathers, if any be bound to keep
them, it is they themselves who Papists will not bind themselves in all points
to old traditions.
lean unto them as a necessary supplement of the want that is in scripture,
but they themselves will not be bound to the observation of them all, but have
let many of them go out of use, such as praying between Easter and Whitsonday
not upon their knees, but standing on their feet to put them in remembrance of
Christ's resurrection: such like, three dippings in water, whereof we spoke in
the head of antiquity. And after Baptism the taste of a temper of milk and
honey, to signify their spiritual infancy, and many other traditions they
have suffcred to euanish and go out of use, so that we are the less bound to
them.

To draw unto an end of this treatise. It may be demanded, Was not tradition
at some time in honorable regard in the house of God and how it comes to
pass, that now in the last age of the world we will bring al traditions unto
the balance of the written word counting light all these traditions that are
not agreeable to the Scriptures? For answer unto this question, we shall
distinguish the world into three ages, and speak of the force of tradition in
every age Godwilling. In the first age of the world from ADAM to the flood of
NOE tradition had the greater place, because the Worde' of God was not as yet
written, but God spoke by Oracles to ADAM, and that which the Lord spoke to
him he delivered it by faithful tradition to his poste^ritie. Now in this
first age, it cannot be denied but tradition had great place, and to the end
the faith of the The value of tradition in the f^ age.
posterity should not lean upon the naked report of their fathers, as upon an
uncertain ground it pleasedGod to bestow upon these fathers of the first age
two great privileges. First they were endued with the spirit of prophecy,
for ADAM prophesied of secret things that were done when he was sleeping, Genesis
2 ver. 23 And HENOCH the seuinth from ADAM prophesied in the first age of the
world of things that are to be done in the last age of the world, Epist. Iud
ver. 14. 15. And LAMECH prophesied of his son NOAH, Genesis 5. Beside this, God
bestowed upon these fathers long life, so that ADAM lived until he delivered
the Oracle of God spoken unto him to HENOCH, and HENOCH lived till he delivered
the same to LAMECH, and LAMECH to NOE, so that NOE needed not to be in doubt
whether the report of his fathers concerning the Oracle spoken to ADAM was
true or not, because it was conveyed to him by the hands of faithful
witnesses of vnsuspect credit, yea, holy Prophets delivered the holy Oracle
of GOD to NOE and holy Prophct of GOD also as they were. In the Second age,


In the second age of the world, it pleased God to register his blessed will in
write in the days of MOSES, and then tradition was nothing else but a page and
handmaide to the written word of God. For true it is that God commanded
fathers to tell their posterity the wonderful works of God in slaying the
first borne of Egypt and sparing the first borne of the I ewes, Exodus 13. ver.
8. yet this tradition of fathers to their children was agreeable to the word of
God written by MOSES, in so far that the posterity believed not the writings
of MOSES, because they were agreeable to the report of their fathers, but rather
the report of their fathers, because it was agreeable to the word of God
written by MOSES: and so tradition in this age was a page and handmaide to the
written word of God, neither do we read after the word was written that
God commanded fathers to tell anything to their children that was not expressly
contained in the written word of God.

In the last age of the world we should be more attentively In the last age.
addicted to the written word, and less to tradition, in regard the Apostles
were moved to put the sum of their most wholesome doctrine in write, because
their doctrine was not rightly reported, even by those who heard the Apostles
teach as said is. And if the writing of the sum of their wholesome doctrine
was a remedy devised by the Apostles themselves against false traditions and
wrong reports of Apostolic doctrine, what injury do we to the Roman
Church when we examine al their traditions by the rule of the written word, and
that which is not agreeable to the written word, we reject it, as a doctrine
neither catholic nor Apostolic, because that it is found light when it is
weighed in the just balance of the written word of God. Now consider how
damnable an inclination is in this our corrupt nature. When God reueiled his
blessed will by tradition men were not attentive to it, but preferred their
lust unto the will of God reueiled by tradition: for the sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair, and took wives unto themselves whom
they liked, Gen 6. ver 2. And on the other part when God will needs reueile
his blessed will by the written word, then will we fly to un written
traditions, even to such as be repugnant to the written word. And so men become
like to a shadow: when the sun shines in the East, the shadow goes toward the
West, and when the sun goes down in the West, the shadow inclines to the
East, so do men obstinatly repine against the will ofGod. Beside this, we are
to consider what great detriment has ensued upon those who leaving the
certainty of the written word, leaned upon the uncertainty of Apostolic
traditions. Beside PAPIAS B. of Hicrapolis who fell into the error of the
Chiliasts, CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS travailed through many nations, but took
better heed to tradition then to the written word of God, whereby it came to
pass, that he filled his books called (...) with most ungodly and foolish
opinions, as has been declared in the history of his life.

When we have said all that we can say, that place of the second epistle to the
The ssalonians, cap. 2. ver. 15. ringeth so loud in their ears, that they can
hear nothing that sounds The word therefore to be considered 2 Thessalonians. 2.
ver. 15.
to the contraric: wherefore we are to consider the illatiue words (...), that
is, therefore, which coupleth this verse with the preceding text, wherinto the
Apostle admonished the Thessalonians of the coming of the Antichrist, whose
coming is after the working of Satan in all power, and signs and lying
wonders, ver. 9. And his coming shall be so strengthened by the hand of the
devil, that he cannot be borne down but by the breath of the mouth of God, and
brightness of his coming. Now to the end that the poor handful of the
sheep of Christ may be saved from the deceit of the Antichrist, he exhorts
them to adhere fast unto the Apostolic doctrine which they had received both
by word and write. Scripture is abused when it is wrested to another sense
different from the meaning of the writer: but it is more abused when it is
drawn to the clean contrary sense. This place is set down to teach us to
beware of the deceit of the Antichrist by fast adhering to the Apostolic
doctrine, but the Papists abuse it to make us believe that their traditions
repugnant to the word of God should have alike authority with the writren word
of God, which is the ready way to fall into the snare of the Antichrist, and
not to be fred from his deceits. Christ does great honor to the Scriptures.


To conclude, like as DAVID did great honor to ABISHAI when as in great
matters of weight and importance he took him to be his follower to view the
host of SAVL, 1. Sam. 26. ver. 7. even so God does great honor to his holy
scriptures, when he uses them as an instrument to do his great works by them,
Christ reigns as a King, and he has made his word to be the scepter of his
kingdom, Psalm. 110. Christ is the shepherd of our souls, and the word is his
shepherds staff, Ps. 23. Christ is the builder of his fathers house, and the
word is the measuring line of the building: Christ is our Savior, and the word
of God is the power of God to salvation toeuery one that believes, Romans 1.
ver. 16. Seeing Christ has done so great honor to the scriptures, what are we
that we should regard any thing spoken in the contrary? God grant we may
conform our selves to the will of Christ,

Amen
Of the doctrine of Devils,
THe Heretics called Gnostici disallowed marriage, and allowed fornication,
and the Heretics called Encratite damned the eating of flesh and drinking of
wine as a sin, and abhorred the Epistles of PAVL, (as has been declared in
the history) and the Romanists themselves acknowledge that Gnostici and
Encratitae were Heretics, and taught a doctrine of devils, as likewise the
Manicheis (of whom we shall speak in the next Centurie Godwilling,) but the
doctrine of the Roman church concerning prohibition of marriage and meats is
different from the doctrine of Gnostici, Encratitae and Manichaei. True it is,
there is some difference concerning persons, times, and some other
circumstances. For the Heretics called Gnostici damned marriage in all
persons: the Roman church damneth it only in the person of Priests, and men
having church orders. Likewise Eucratitae damned at all times the eating of
flesh and drinking of wine: but the church of Rhyme only prohibits the eating of
flesh at certain seasons, and upon certain days, such as in Lent, and upon
Friday etc, and that without prohition of drinking of wine moderatly. Thirdly
the Manicheis counted the good creatures of God flesh and wine to be in
themselves polluted and unclean, but the Roman church thinks not so, but
for memory of the Lords suffering, for mortification of the flesh, for
preparation to receive the sacraments, and for testimony of obedience to the
vicar of Christ, and successor of PETER. it is necessary to abstain in manner
abouewritten. This difference is cast in to exeeme the Roman church from the
imputation of the doctrine of devils, yet is not the difference very great for
the Roman church forbids marriage, and meats to some men at all times, and
to all men at sometimes: but consider again, that differences of magis and
minus, that is, of more and less, do declare a communion rather then a
contrariety, as IRENEVS speaks, Plu. and minus non de his dicitur, quae
inverse communionem non habent, and sunt contrariae naturae, and pugnant
aduersus se: sed de his quae sunt ejusdem substantiae, and communicant secum,
solum autem altitudine and magnitudine differunt, lib. 4. cap. 22. As a little
water, and a little fire differs from a great water and a great fire, not in
substance but in quantity: even so the Papists differ from the Manicheis, not
in substance, but in the discrepance of Plus and Minus,

The words of the Apostle are the ground whereupon all this treatise is
founded. Now the Spirit speaks euid^ntly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving beede unto spirits of error, and doctrines
of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with an
hot yrone, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which
God has created to be receiu^d with Defection in the visible Church no new
thing.
thanksgiving of them which believe and k^ow the truth: for every creature of
God is good, and nothing to be refus^d, if it be received with thank^sgiuing,
1. Tim. 1. 2. 3 4. In these words the Popish church will grant that the Mam.
hets and other forenamed Heretics are damned, but they deny that these
predictions of the holy. Apostle do damn the doctrine of the Roman church
anent forbidding of marriage to some persons, and meats at some times as a
doctrine of devils: crying out that it is not to be credited that God has
suffered the world to go astray in such ways so long time, and so many
years. What is this, but as a wette sack wherewith a naked man is covered?
(as a learned Pastor said) it is so far from arming him against the cold,
that it increases his shuddering and grwing, even so this excuse utterly
undoes their cause: they say God would not have suffered his visible Church to
have erred so many years, but the Apostle PAVL says otherwise, that the
Spirit speak th evidently that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith: so that it is not a wonderful thing to see apostasy fall out in the
bowels of the visible Church, and the golden calfe to be worshipped by carnal
israclites, Exodus 32. But it is a wonderful thing indeed to see sincerity of
doctrine and purity of manners to continue long among the very watchmen of the
Church: so prone and bent is the world to defection, that sometime the
ordinary watchmen cannot declare where Christ is, whom the soul of the Church
loves, Cant. 3. ver. 3.

Secondly consider that the doctrine of prohibition of meats and marriage is
called a defection from the faith and a doctrine of devils. When these odious
styles are applied to Gnostici, T atiani, Or Encratitae, Montanistae and
Manichai and others: all this is heard patiently without stir and excess of
choler: and why? because the ancient fathers examining all these opinions
according to the rule of the word of God, have found the^ heretical opinions
But when we come nearer to say, that the prohibition of marriage in some
persons, and the prohibition of meats at some times, is also a doctrine of
devils, and a defection from the faith, O then it is cast in as a wall of
brass, that the ancient fathers who damned all the forenamed heresies, yet
liked very well of supplications and prayers to be made to God every Friday,
and consequently of abstinencie from delicat meats for the furtherance of
prayers in remembrance of the Lords suffering, Sozomen lib. 1. cap. 8. And like
wise that Priests should be chaste and continent, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 9. And
to damn these opinions also, is all on^ as if we should damn all antiquity
and imagine that the truth was ever buried Differences between the ancient
fathers and Papists of our time con cerningmeats and marriage. The Council of
Ancyra.
since the Apostles days until our time. To this I answer that the fathers
are not to be balanced with the Papists of our days in the opinion of meats
and marriage: for many causes: first, because the fathers of the first 300.
years made no laws and constitutions to astrict the consciences of men in
matters of meat and marriage as the Papists of late days have done. The
Council of Ancyra (which is a town in Galatia) clearly manifests unto us
what was the custom of the ancient Church, in admitting men to ecclesiasticke
offices, namely this. If a man in time of his ordination did protest that he
had not the gift of continency, but that he was purposed to marry, and after
his ordination, he married a wife, he remained still in his ministetie. But so
many as in time of imposition of hands did profess continency and abstinence
from marriage, if afterward they married they were debarred from their ministry,
Tom. 1. Council. Here evidently appears, that in the primitive Church there
was no law made anent prohibition of marriage to men in spiritual offices. In
like manner we read under DECIVS the seuinth persecuting tyrant (of whom
mention will be made in the third Centurie) that DIONYSIVS B. of Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria a married man.
Alexandria was a married man, and had children, and that by the great
providence of God both he and his children escaped the hands of the cruel
enemy who was laid in wait for him to take him. Yea and after the Nicene
Council, the assembly gathered at Gangra a town in Paphlagonia detested the
opinion of EVSTATIVS who admiring the monasticke life, as a conversation
angelical began to damn marriage, The Council of Gangra.
and to persuade married women to separate from the company of their husbands,
and to persuade the people not to receive the holy sacraments from the hands
of married preachers. But when the fathers conueened in the Council of Gangra
pondered the opinion of EVSTATIVS in a just balance, they found it to be cursed
and execrable, not only in the question of marriage, but also anent his doctrine
in prohibition of meats: for he thought that a religious man who eated flesh,
by so doing was cut off from the hope of better pleasures which God has laid
up for saints in heaucn But let us hear a few of the Canons of the Council
of Gangra, Tom. 1. Council.

CANON 1.
If any person vituperat marriage, and will detest a faithful woman, because
the sleeps with her husband, and counts her to be culpable, and that she
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Let him be accursed.

CANON 2.
If any man condemn him who in faith, and religion eats flesh (that is
neither mixed with blood nor sacrificed to idols) as if by such participation
of slesh, he wanted hope, Let him be accursed.

CANON 4.
If any man make difference, and will not receive the oblation from a preachers
hand when he ministers it, because he has a wife, Let him be accursed.

CANON 10.
If any person keeping virginity for the Lords sake, extol himself above
those that are married. Let him be accursed. In all these constitutions of the
council of Gangr^, there is no usurpation of authority over the conscience in
matters of marriage and meats. Secondly, because even at that time, when
custom without a ratified law had brought in an use in the Church of God,
that unmarried men should be admitted unto Bishoprics and spiritual offices
rather then others. Yet when such continent men could not be had, GRATIANVS
himself witnesses that a married man was admitted by PELAGIVS I. Ann. 556. to
be Bishop of Syracuse, Distinct. 28. Thirdly the fathers of ancient time spoke
reverently of marriage: but the Papists of late days have called it a work of
the flesh, and the error of the Nicolaitanes. The probibition of meats and
marriage is an apostasy from the faub.


These two doctrines of the prohibition of meats and marriage are called an
apostasy from the faith, and endited by the spirit of error. Here it may be
objected that the Apostle PAVL himself who writes this, in another place
says, that the Kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Spirit, Romans 14. ver. 17. How then is
that thing to be counted an apostasy from the faith wherein no matter is
touched that pertains to the Kingdom of God? To this I answer, that there
is a great difference between abstinence from meats, and prohibition of
meats: for these whose conscience is weak will abstain from many meats, and
content themselves with herbs, Romans 14 ver. 2. as it were contenting
themselves with the food of the beasts rather then that their mouth should
eat that thing that should perturbe their conscience: but such men as take upon
them authority to forbid to eat meats that are created by God to the use of
men, they usurp authority over the conscience of men, binding where God has
loosed, and loosing where God has bound, and mixing heaven and earth through
other, as if men on earth should have such absolute soueraignitie over the
conscience, even as the God ofheauen has. This is called an apostasy from the
faith, not because all defection is finished in this, but because all defection
is grounded in this one point, to set a mortal man in the chair of God, and to
attribut unto him such absolut souerainitie over ourco^science as God had over
the conscience of ADAM, Genesis 3. as miserable experience has clearly
manifested in the Popedom. Does not the Apostle PAVL crave that the service
that we offer to God should be (...), that is, a reasonable service, Romans 12.
ver. 1, But when we are led away either with the conceits of our own hearts,
or yet when we cast off the Our service to God should be a reasonable service.
yocke of God, and stoop down the neck of our conscience under the laws of
mortal men in (matters of religion what equity of reason is kept in such
doing to match and equal our selves or others to God.

Moreover the A post. PAVL foretells that these backsliders The Popish church
speak lies in hypocrisy rather then old Heretics.
from the faith should speak lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience
seared with an hot iron, 1. Tim. 4 ver. 2. These words cannot be properly
applied to the old Heretics of who^ we have spoken, who ascribed the
institution of matrimony to Satan, and the creation and procreatio^ of
mankindvnto the devil, because they spak not falsehood in hypocrisy but in open
blasphemy: and therefore they might have been easily discerned and avoided yea,
in other heads of their doctrine concerning the nativity and death of Christ,
they were so blasphemous that in the word putative natus, mamfestatus,
mortuus, they were the very aduocats of the devil, lren. lib 3. adversus
Valent. cap. 20. and 39. But in the Popish church the laws forbidding marriage
to some men, and meats at sometimes are so colored with appearance of
holiness, that the forgers of such laws in hypocrisy had need to be pointed
out by the finger of God in his word, to the end that no mask nor visard put
upon ungodliness should pervert the understanding of men. But the more subtle
hypocrisy that should be used, the more vigilant and wakrife should the Lords
forewarned people be, that they were not deceived by lies spoken in hypocrisy.

Likewise the Apostle foretells that these deceivers should have their
'consuence seared or cut off with an hot iron. In What is meant by a cons^ence
seared with an hot iron.
which words the Apostle alludeth to members of a body, first feastered, next
senseless, and thirdly cut off with an hot yrone. So are the conscience of
those deceivers, f^st cankered with error, next past feeling, (albeit
wholesome admonitions be used for reclaiming them from error) and last of all,
their conscience is a rotten thing, and utterly cut off. Wherein it is to be
marked that feeling of all senses is most necessary, and a most inseperable
companion of the life, begun when the sensitive life begins, and ending
when it ends: so that to be past feeling is all one as to be utterly dead in
body or conscience. But let us see to whom this can be justly applied. If we
call to mind the obstinacy of the old Heretics, true it is that they were
sens^sse men, of whom IRENEVS justly said that they counted themselves not
overcome by the power of the truth so long as they adhered fast unto their
error. As if an impudent fellow who wrestleth and is overthrown, and is lying
on his back on the ground, yet he would deny that he is overthrown, because
he sticks fast by the grip of his adversaries garments, Iren. lib. 5.
adversus Valent. But apply this to the Papists of our days, and we shall find
them tenfold more senseless and obstinat then the old Heretics were: for they
have found out means to harden their hearts in error, that when they are a
thousand times convicted by the clear shining light of the Gospel, then the
authority of their Church, and opinion that it cannot err, does lock them up
so fast in the bands of the devil, that all the travel taken upon them is
spent in vain, they remain senseless, having their conscience seared with the
hot iron of Satan, as the Apostle speaks.

In particular the Apostle points out two heads of doctrine, Forbidding and
bidd^ng words of authority.
that deceiving teachers should maintain, to wit, they should forbid marriage,
and they should command to abstain from meats. Mark these two words (...),
that is, forbidding and commanding. The word commanding is not in the Greek
text: but EPIPHANIVS thinks this ellipsis must be supplied by the word
(...), that is, commanding to abstain from meats: both these words are
imperious, and pointing out men in authority, and practicing their
soueraignitie in all things, wherinto the eminent power of a Sovereign is
manifested, he bids, forbids, he makes laws and constitutions, the
disobedience whereof brings the contraueeners under fear of great
punishment: even so the deceivers of whom the Apostle speaks in matters of
marriage and meats should not be content to tell their opinion, and to allure by
persuasiue reasons others to embrace their opinion but being mounted up in high
authority, they should command to abstain from meats and they should
enterdite marriage to some persons with authority, adding pains to the
commandment, that the contraueeners should be deposed from their office, they
should be counted Heretics, they should be condemned to hell: beside all
other civil punishments which magistrates addicted to their authority could
inflict. These words (...), that is, forbidding and bidding cannot be applied
to Gnostici, Encratitae, nor yet to the Manicheans of the next Centurie,
because they had no soueraignitie nor power to command. Yea MANES himself was
excoriat and put to death by the king of Persia, as SOCRATES writes lib. 1.
cap. 22. and that for a light cause, by reason he could not cure his diseased
son. But the words of the Apostle clearly declares that he speaks of men
furnished with authority to bid abstain from meats, and to forbid marriage,
and this agrees well with the Roman Antichrist and his usurped authority.

Notwithstanding of all these laws made in the Roman church and strait
prohibition of marriage to the clergy, we ought to follow the example of
Christ's disciples, who after that they knew that celestial voice that sounded
from heaven in time of Christ's Baptism, This is my well-beloved Son in whw I
am well pleased, hear him, Mat. 3. They closed their ears, and locked up their
hearts from harkening to any voice in the earth that spoke the contrary, some
said that he was ELI AS, other said that he was IEREMIAS or some of the old
Prophets, but the disciples harkening to the voice that came down from heaven,
said that he was the Son of the living God, Mat. 16. Even so, whatsoever the
men in this world speak of marriage, the trumpet of God sounding in We ought to
hearken unto the voice that comes down from heaven.
his word allows marriage and pronounces a blessing unto it, Psalm, 128. And
the Apostle says, Marriage is honorable in all persons, Heb. 13. ver. 4. but
the honor that the Roman church gives to marriage calling it an holy
sacrament is like unto the purple garment wherewith the soldiers clad Christ,
and yet they spared not to buffet his blessed face: even so the church of Rome
in one word will call marriage an holy sacrament, in another they will call it
a work of the flesh, and a state vncompetent to dispensators of heavenly
Similitude.
mysteries. But let them bark against marriage as the dogs bark against the
moon until they be weary of barking, this, word stands fast, Blessed are
they that fear God and walk in his ways, Psalm. 128. And this is spoken of
persons married, yet from my heart I like the words of CHRYSOSTOM who inculcats
in our ears the word of fearing God, and declares, that albe it all that came
to the altar without a lawful calling, had an evil success, as CORAH and his
retinue, yet not all that came to the altar with a lawful calling had a good
success: even so every one that goes in unto an harlot, is accursed of God,
but every one that goes in unto his own wife is not blessed of God, but only
he who fears God, Chrysostom in epist Heb. cap. 11. homil. 33.

Follows now in the words of the Apostle that men should be bold to forbid
meats which God has created to Great arrogancy in prohibition of meats.
be received with thanksgiving. No doubt but the Apostle here sets down as
two opposite things God and man, God creating, blessing and permitting the use
of created and blessed creatures to man with thanksgiving. And on the other
part arrogant fellows starting up and correcting the wisdom of God, and
saying, albeit God has given liberty to eat of such and such meats with
thanksgiving, yet for many causes such liberty must be restrained, and eating
of flesh on Friday must be as great a sin as the eating of the forbidden tree.
What it this but a plain spitting in the face of God? As if he who has taught
us the way to eternal life, could not also in his blessed word reach us how to
eat and drink. Truly the whip is meet for the back of the fool, and he who
will needs be wiser then God in any thing, if it were but in the precepts of
eating and drinking he is more worthy to be scourged out of the Temple of God
then the buyers, sellers and money changers, Ioh. 2. For the buyers and sellers
albeit they made merchandise into a place appointed for another use: yet no
unclean beast nor foul was brought in into the temple to be bought or sold:
but these miserable wretches will make the very clean creatures of God unclean
at their pleasure, which is no less fault, then to fetch in an unclean beast
into the Temple of God.

Next it is to be marked in the words of the Apostle to Arrogancy mixed with
foolishness.
whom belongs the use of the creatures of God namely to the belceuers only.
Here the Apostle declares that there is foolishnes as well as arrogancy in
the question of meats. It is arrogance (as we have already spoken) to be wiser
the^ Gods word in this matter of meats, and it is as great foolishnes to fear
that we shall be polluted with moderate eating of the creatures of God. It is
not eating of flesh that will defile us, but rather fleshly affections of an
heart that is not renewed by faith, that defiles a man, as our master Christ
speaks. That thing that enters into the mouth defiles not the man, but that
which comes out of the heart. Mark 7. ver. 18. As if a corpulent fool
sweating and blowing into an hot summer day should take up his staff, and
beat his own Similitude.
shadow, yet is not his shadow the cause of his grieuance, but the fatness of
his own belly: even so foolish men are afraid to be polluted with meats, but
indeed it is the foolishnes of an unbelieving heart that polluteth a man. It
is a custom Similitude.
among men, when they would handle a fine and white linen cloth, they look to
their hands, lest their foul and filthy fingers defile the cleanness of the
cloth: even so when we meddle with the creatures of God, take heed to our
conscience, lest it being polluted with infidelity it make Gods creatures
unclean unto us, as the Apostle speaks, Unto the pure all things be pure,
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even the
mind and conscience of them is defiled, Tit. 1. ver. 15.

Now consider whether or not the spirit has spoken evidently and given a
clear warning to the last age to beware The last age of the world more
senseless then the first.
of false teachers: yet is the last age more senseless then the first age of
the world that was drowned with a flood of waters. God spoke not in secret but
openly to NOE the righteous preacher, Genesis 6. and God spoke not only by word,
but also in deed by the building of the Arc, Heb. 11. ver. 7. yet would not
the first age take warning, but lived in deep security, and was drowned with
waters. But the last age of the world is more benumbed then the first age was.
In the last age the spirit speaks evidently, but men will not hear: the
spirit ordains this prediction to be written, but men will not read nor
ponder, nor understand the forewarning of the spirit: the spirit points out
by the finger of his word who are the deceivers of whom we should beware, to
wit, men who teach a doctrine of devils, forbidding marriage and meats which
God has created for the use of man with thanksgiving. For all this threefold
warning, in word, in write, and in particular demonstration, yet the last age
cannot hearken to the warnings of God, because God has determined to destroy
the most part of them, as he did the incorrigible sons of ELI, who would not
hearken to the counsel of their father, 1. Sam. 2. ver. 25. The men of this
age are like unto a deaf, ignorant and foolish Similitude,
fellow: one comes to him and cries loud, but he hears nothing at all,
then he begins to set his mind in write, but that also profits nothing,
because he cannot read: In end he begins to sign with his finger, but he
takes no notice that way, because he is a fool, and the last age of the
world in not receiving so evident and so clear a warning has kythed
deafness, dullness, ignorance and foolishness.

It may now be objected, has the Apostle PAVL soretolde only the hypocrisy
of the Roman Antichrist in the Both blasphemy and hypocrisy in the matter
of marriage and meats is condemned by the Apostle.
matter of marriage and meats? and is there nothing foretold anent these
ancient Heretics, specially Encratitae and Manichaei, who uttered and
dispersed in the world a doctrine of devils, that it was a sin to eat flesh,
that wine was the gall of the Prince of darkness, that marriage was an evil
thing, and a mean to bring in captivity a part of the substance of the good
God, namely the soul, within the bands of the substance of the prince of
darkness, that is, within the body, has the Spirit of God (I say) foretold
nothing of these vile heresies in this prediction? I answer, That the Spirit
has both foretold the hypocrisy of some, and the open blasphemy of others.
And this is insinuated in these words: For eue^y creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with tha^kesgiuing. Truly in these
words the Apostle would turn our hearts both from blaspheming Manicheis, and
from hypocrite Papists. The Manicheis say, that it is never lawful to eat
flesh, and that the doing of it aduanceth the kingdom of the prince of
darkness. The Papists again say, that the eating of flesh on Eryday is a
grievous sin: but what says the Apostle guided by the Spirit? Every creature
is good, and nothing to be refused, so that both the Manicheis speak
blasphemously, and the Papists hypocritically: both willing to abridge
Christian liberty, the Manicheis by their opinion, the Papists both by their
opinion and authority. The Manicheis will needs have some creatures of God
unclean at all times, the Papists will needs have men polluted by eating of
flesh at sometimes, both these opinions are cut off in this word, Every
creature of God is good. Mark that in this diversity of opinions of Manicheis
and Papists, both of them shoot at one mark, to wit that Christ Jesus shall
not be the only Lawgiuer in his Church, but something shall be abridged of
that liberty that Christ has given to his Church. Now the aiming and shooting
at one mark is more forcible to prove the unity of Manicheis and Papists,
then the diversity of opinions whereby either of them labors to attain to
their intended purpose can prove their diversity, and therefore let the reader
the less offend with this fellowship of Manicheis and Papists.

These two diverse opinions shooting at one mark (as said The Papists more
subtle ^en the Manicheis were.
is) are both to be damned, but chiefly that opinion that with greatest
subtlety and craft would thrust God out of his chair, and spoil him of his
glory, not to be counted the only Lawgiuer in his Church. And I do confidently
compare Manicheis and Papists as AUGUSTINE compare^h APOLLO and HECATE lib.
19. de civit. Det, cap. 23. disapproouing both of them, because both shot at
one mark, to hinder people from Christianity, but HECATE more then APOLLO,
because in praising of Christ as a just man, whom APOLLO dispraised as an
unrighteous man, and justly condemned to death by the Jews, yet she called him
only a man, and not God, hindering people after a more subtle manner from
adhering to Christianity then APOLLO did. And truly the Manich is by damning
flesh at all times, as a creature in it self unclean. did not so great hurt
to the Kingdom of God as the Papists, who grant that both flesh and wine are
the good creatures of God, and yet they dare be bold to set out laws
commanding men under the pain of cursing and condemnation, that they taste not
flesh at some times. If these times were times of a public calamity,
whereinto God by a secret voice latent in the trouble did cali us to fasting
and mourning, and abstinence from fish flesh and wine, Isa. 22. ver. 13. then
no new or uncouth yocke should be presented 10 men's consciences, but Christ's
own yocke which we are commanded to bear, Mat. 11-but to appoint certain
days of fasting and abstinence from this meat, and not from another meace is
a novelty under the Gospel, and not the yocke of Christ, but of the
Antichrist.

Whereas mention is made of thanksgiving, the Apostle will not have us to set
our hearts upon the creature and upon The grace of thanksgiving witnesses that
we enjoy both the gift and the giver.
the gift, but upon the Creator and the giver. Whatsoever delight we have in the
creature, there is infinitely greater delight in the face of the reconciled
Creator: and therefore lift up our hearts, and let our tongues be loosed to
praise his blessed name from whose hands we have received the use of his
creatures. This if we do, we have both the gift and the giver, and the
presence of the giver shall not only sanctify the gift to our use, but also
shall turn our water into wine, John 2. when as by the contrary, if we
devour and glut up the benefits of God without thanksgiving, we have the gift
without the favor of the giver, eating of Gods creatures as the carnal I^wes
eated Quails in the wilderness, Numb. 11. ver. 33. and the wrath of God was
kindled against them: and assuredly those who have the gift without the giver,
some day their wine shall be turned into water. But there is not great
controversy in this point, and therefore I pass it over in fewer words.

In end the Apostle leads us unto a sure ground that may quiet our
consciences, so that we shall not be troubled with We oug^t (...) be ruled by
Gods word i^ all things both corporat and spirisuali,.
the commandments of men, for bidding us to eat of meats which God has
created for our use, namely this, thatGod has sanctified his creatures to us
by his word, Genesis 9. ver. 3. And incase we join with this sanctification of
them, prayers proceeding from faith, that we also may be sanctified, and
receiueGods creatures with a good conscience, there is not great peril whether
we eat this or that meat moderatly. Here mark that the Apost. in the very
matter of meat and drink and corruptible food will have us to depend vponGods
word, and to think that we have not liberty to put one morsel of meat in our
mouths, but so far as God gives us allowance in his word, how much more in
matters pertaining unto eternal life, we are to depend absolutely upon the
undoubted assurance of Gods written word.

In all this discourse it may seem that we loose the raines to licentious
living, to eating and drinking. and marying, and The conscience is subject to
the yocke of God.
living wantonly as the original world did, when they were drouned with
waters, but it is not so indeed. Only in matters of religion we would have the
yocke of the commandments of men taken off men's consciences, to the end that
the yock of Gods commandments only may ly upon the conscience according as
Christ speaks, Take up my yock upon you, Mat. 11. ver. 29. Yea in the very
matter of meats and marriage, there is a time wherinto God calls us to
mourning, lamentation, baldness and sackcloth, Isa. 22. ver. 12. and to
abstinence from eating of flesh and drinking of wine. Yea the very bridegroom
must come out of his chalmer, and fast, and lay aside his costly apparel, to
the end he may mourn with the humbled society of Gods people, loel 2. ver.
16. And this comes to pass whenever the heavy hand of God is laid upon
a family, upon a town, or upon a country, in the very calamity hinging over
their heads, there is a secret voice of God calling them to humiliation and
repentance with fasting and abstinence from all lawful pleasures: and when the
Priest blows the trumpet in Sion, and sanctifies a fast unto the Lord, he
lays not the yocke of men's commandments upon the consciences of men, but the
yocke of God's commandments. For the Prophet brings in the Lord saying, that
he calls them to mourning, lamentation and to abstinence. The Lord is our
Sovereign, commander and Lawgiuer, having power to bid and to forbid at his
blessed pleasure. Under this yocke will we gladly stoop: but the yocke of
bondage that men would lay upon our consciences the Apostle PAVL expressly
forbids us to admit, but to stand to our liberty, Galat. 5. ver. 1. And so
I conclude this treatise misliking and disaprouing the loose raines of fleshly
wantonness, but wishing from my heart that the bit of the Lord may be cast in
our jaws, to turn us from the delight of earthly pleasures to the delight of
that celestial city that has a foundation, and whose builder is God.

Amen.
Of Succession.
IT has been the custom of godly men in all ages, who were descended from the
loins of godly fathers, not to brag of their parentage, but to be so much the
more ashamed of sin, that the vnreproouable lives of their predecessors were
a great testimony couicting them of some piece of defection. Therefore the
Prophet ISAIAH brings in the Lords penitent people, in humble manner
acknowledging, that they were not worthy that ABRAHAM and ISRAEL should once
know them to be their posterity: but they entreat the Lord by a free
forgiveness of sins to become their father, Isa. 63.. 16. But on the other
part a wicked generation descended from godly parents could boast of their
parentage,' and say to Christ himself, ABRAHAM is our father, John 8. ver. 39.
and again. We are not borne of fornication, we have one father, which is God,
ibid. ver. 41. Notwithstanding of all this confident bragging of their parents,
the Lord Jesus who judges righteously, says to carnal Jews. Ye are of
your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He has been
a murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him When he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own: for he is
a liar, and the father thereof, John 8. ver. 44. This place of scripture will
clearly prove that God will nothing regard the vain ostentation and vaunting
speeches of men who brag of their descent from godly parents, and their
succession to godly preachers: yet the dissimilitude of their faith and manners
from the faith and manners of their predecessors declares that they are the
very children of the devil.

In this age I find succession whereof the Romans brag so much to be in some
reverent regard. For IRENEVS Bishop of Lions in France reasoning against
VALENTINVS and MARCION, whose errors have been before declared, to confute
these Heretics, he brings in the succession of the Roman Bishops. After
PETER (says he) were LINVS and ANACLETVS, and CLEMENS, and EVARISTVS, and
ALEXANDER, and SIXTVS, and TELESPHORVS, and HYGINVS, and PIUS, and ANICETVS,
and ELEVTHERIVS the twelfth from the Apostles. Now, says IRENEVS, these
received the wholesome doctrine from the Apostles, and delivered it faithfully
to others, yea and some of them also sealed it up withtheir blood. Yet none of
them spoke such things concerning God the father and his son Christ Jesus, as
VALENTINVS, MARCION and BASILIDES have spoken. Therefore he condemns their
doctrine to be false and heretical, Iren lib. 3. cap. 3. contra Valent.

Now the followers of the Roman church demand why we do not as reverently
esteem of the succession of Roman Bishops now, as IRENEVS did of old, and why
do we not count them to be Heretics who bring in a new doctrine not agreeing
with the doctrine of the B. of Rome as IRENEVS counted VALENTINVS, MARCION, and
BASILIDES Heretics, because they uttered a strange doctrine which the B. of
Rome had not received from the hands of the Apostles? To this I answer, that
we count reverently of all the Bishops of Rome who kept faithfully that form of
wholesome doctrine which they received from the Apostles. Yea and we count them
Heretics also who depart from that verity which LINVS, ANACLETVS, CLEMENS,
and the rest received from the Apostles. But the question stands in this,
whether these holy fathers, of whom JRENEVS makes such reverent record,
received from the mouths of the Apostles, and preached to the world such
heads of doctrine, as are now sounded in the Roman church, that is,
invocation of Saints, worshipping of images, plurality of mediators, of
intercession, purgatory and infinite other things. As concerning the Apostles,
the sum of their doctrine is contained in their writings, and they taught not
LINVS, ANACLETVS, CLEMENS, otherwise then they taught the rest of the Romans,
the Corinthtans, Galatians, Ephesians, the inhabitants of Pontus, Cappadocia.
Asia, Bithynia, 1, Pet. 1. And in all their writings The cause wherefore the
succession of Romam Bishops was magnified of old.
there is no mention of invocation of Saints, worshipping of images, etc.

The cause wherefore godly fathers rejoiced in the succession of the Bishops of
Rome was this, because they were nearest to the danger of persecuting tyrants,
and kept the faith of Christ most inviolablie. Many of them were martyrs: such
as ALEXANDER, SIXTVS, TELESPHORVS, and ANICETVS. Others were Confessors, who
suffered prisonment, poverty, and diverse other rebukes, albeit they were not
put to death for the Name of Christ. And what marucll was it, that these who
loved Christ had their hearts inflamed with a love of this holy succession,
whose commendation was purity of wholesome doctrine received from the
Apostles, whose glory was sufferings, and whose preeminence was examples of
constant continuance in the true faith. And like as the days of MOSES and
IOSVA were happy days: they had among them the Tabernacle of God, and
therewith also the Arc and propitiatory, which was the glorious ornament of
the Tabernacle: so were the days of these holy fathers happy days, having
personal succession from the Apostles, and therewith succession of true
doctrine, the glorious ornament of personal succession. As concerning the
decretall Epistles falsely ascribed to them, we shall speak hereafter in the
head of supremacy Godwilling. But when all these things are inlacking for
which the succession of the Roman Bishops was regarded in this Centurie,
and men erring in the true faith of a long time possessed the chair of Rome,
what avails it to glory of that old commended succession, when the glory of
true doctrine, patient suffering, constant perseverance in the Apostolic
doctrine is utterly lost among them? so that the succession whereof the Roman
Church now glories, is not unlike their transubstantiation, wherein are
accidents without a subject: and in their succession are persons of men
succeeding one to another without purity of doctrine.

In Scripture we find succession to be counted of according to the greatness of
the promises annexed to the succession, The succession of David.
as namely the succession of DAVID, of whom God said His seed also will I make
to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven, Psalm. 89.. 29 and
again ver. 35. 36. I have sworn once by my holiness that I will not fail
David, saying, his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be as the
Sun before me. Here are ample promises to DAVID and his succession confirmed
by the Lords oath, and by the Sun and Moon as faithful witnesses in heaven.
And that which was more then all the rest, this succession of DAVID was a line
leading to the great King Christ Jesus, who should sit in the throne of his
father DAVID, and of his kingdom there should be none end, Luc. 1. for all
these causes the succession of DAVID was greatly regarded. Yet it is to be
marked that all the promises, oaths, testimonies, and honors did not carry with
them a necessity, that every successor of DAVID should be in faith and
religion like unto DAVID, but rather God foreseeing the contrary, faith, If
his ch^ldren forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments: if they break my
statutes and keep not my ordinances, then w^ll I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquitte with strokes, ibid ver. 30. 31. 32. I suppone
that no succession ever had more glorious and ample promises then the
succession of DAVID, yet these promises inferred no necessity that every king
sitting on the throne of DAVID should be heir also of the religion and faith
of DAVID as well as of his kingdom. And therefore to infer upon this ground,
that ample promises are made to the Apostles and their successors, that every
one who succeeds to the Apostolic chair, shall keep the true faith of the
Apostles, it is but a foolish and impertinent conclusion. If any man shall
reply that this was a succession of civil governors, but the question now
contrauerted is anent succession of Bishops and men in a spiritual calling.
True it is that DAVID'S successors succeeded to a civil government, yet seeing
this succession was ratified by the oath of God, and led also to Christ who is
sovereign Lord both of soul and body, whatsoever privilege of standing in a
good estate can be alleged in any succession, the pattern of it is to be
found in the succession of DAVID. But this privilege that the successors of
DAVID cannot err in the true faith is not found no not in the great succession
of DAVID.

Now to come to ecclesiastical succession. The priesthood of AARON was
institute by God, Numb. 17. ver. 5. It was confirmed The succession of Aaron
by the miracle of the budding rod, ibid. ver, 23. The vsarpers of AARONS
office without a calling were also miraculously destroyed by fire that came
down from heaven, Numb. 16. Others were debarred from it even in the days of
NEHEMIAH, Nehem. 7. ver. 64. This succession of AARON was personal, the son
succeeding to the father in the Priesthood, except some mutilation of a member
or impotencie did hinder, or any such like cause. After AARON ELEAZAR and his
son PHINEAS and ABISHVA PHINEAS son, and BVKKI, and HVZZI, ZERACHIA, MERAIOTH,
AMARIA, ACHITVB, ZADOK, AHIMAAZ, 1. Chron. 6. ver. 50. 51. 52. 53. Many others
after them were Priests of the stock of AARON, yet did not all keep fast the
faith and religion of AARON: yea, some Priests of AARONS stock were notable
Idolaters and men-pleasers, such as VRIAH in the days of AHAZ king of Juda,
who set up an altar at the kings commandment, according to the similitude of
the altar of Damascus, and offered sacrifices thereon, 2. Reg. 16.

Anent the succession of the Prophets, even when one good man succeeded to
another good man, the history of The succession of the Prophets.
scripture clearly declares, that men pointed out by God himself successors
to an office, yet by this are they not made succ^ssours to their gifts: for
ELIZEVS was pointed out by God as successor to ELIAS in his prophetical office,
1. Reg. 19. ver. 16. yet by this was he not successor to his gifts as ELIZEVS
petition of a double measure of the spirit of ELIAS clearly declares 2. Reg.
2 ver 9, If the gift did necessarly accompany the succession, what needed
ELIZEVS to be careful of the gift, seeing he was sure of the succession? The
holy Apostles of Christ have had a succession, and shall have unto the end of
the world, to who^ belongs the promise of Christ, Behold I am with you unto
the end of the world Mat. 28. 20 But who are to be called true successors of
the Apostles, we The succession of the Apostles.
have declared already in the 1. Centurie, taking our ground out of scripture,
Act. 20, 29. And out of Nazian. in laudem Athanasii, that darkness succeeding to
light is not counted the true successor of lignt for the dissimilitude that is
between darkness and light. But here the question arises, whether or not al
Churches keeping the holy Apostolic doctrine are bound to show in write their
succession from the Apostles^ as the Priests of the stock of AARON after the
captivity produced in write their lineal descent from AARON, Nehem. 7. To this
Tertul answers, lib. de pres^ript. adversus baret. that Churches truly
keeping the Apostolic doctrine, albeit they could not show in write their
succession from the Apostles, yet are they to be counted Apostolic Churches
propter consang uinitatem doctrinae, that is for their consanguinitie of
doctrine.

But to come nearer, and to examine whether the Roman church has kept
Apostolic doctrine in their succession, The alleged succession of the
Roman Church spotted with heresy, schism and idolatry.
without all spot of heresy (as they affirm) or not. And first the chair of
Rome was not free of the heresy of EVTYCHES, as clearly appears by the sixth
general Council which was the third of those Councils which were gathered at
Constantinople in the 12. year of the empire of CONSTANTINVS, POGONATVS. Ann.
681. Buco^. In this Council MACARIVS Patriarch of Antiochia, and STEPHANVS his
disciple stood up and pertinaciously defended the error of EVTYCHES, and were
excommunicate by the Council: yet they had defended their opinion by the
Synodicke letter of HONORIVS sometime B. of Rome written to SERGIVS B. of
Constantinople. Wherein it was clearly known that HONORIVS was infected with
the error of EVTYCHES: for the which cause HONORIVS B. of Rome after his death
in the sixth general Council was also excommunicat as an Heretic, Tom Council
hist. Magdeb. This is not unknown to some writers, who notwithstanding defend
this opinion that the Bishop of Rome cannot err in matters of ^aith. ONVPHRIVS
says that the Acts of the sixth general Council containing a condemnatory
sentence against HONORIVS Bishop of Rome were corrupted by the Grecians, and
that the Canons of this Council as they are set forth are supposititious and
false. Forsooth ONVPHRIVS is a worthy advocate to plead such a bad and
reprobat cause. The faith of the Romanists leaning upon two maine and
principal grounds, upon the authority of the Bishop of Rome, and upon the
authority of general Councils, ONVPHRIVS to uphold the one, undoes the
other, and to clear HONORIVS of all suspicion of heresy, he brings the
general Council under a suspicion of falsification. Then let ONVPHRIVS either
produce the true and vncorrupt acts of the sixth general Council, which he
will never be able to do, or else for all his fectlesse apology HONORIVS name
is spotted with the blame of heresy. And of late days the Roman chair has
not only renewed, but also doubled the heresy of the Collyridians damned in
the days of EPIPHANIVS. For the Collyridians gave only some piece of divine
The heresy of the Collyridians renewed and increased by the chair of Rome.
honor to the blessed virgin the mother of our Lord: but the Roman Bishops
in suffering by their toleration, conniuence or rather allowance, the Psalter
of our Lady (as they call it) to be printed, diuulgat and used by Christian
people, wherein all the honor due to Christ, not excepting the sitting at the
right hand of the Father, Psalm. 110. is all attributed unto the virgin MARIE.
In so doing, I say, they have not only renewed, but also doubled the heresy of
the Collyridians.

In the Council of Basil gathered Ann. 1431. EVGENIVS 4 Eugenius 4. B. of Rome
a notable schismatic.
then B. of Rome was deposed by the general Council of Basil as a notable
schismaticke and perturber of the peace of Christ's Church. Yet his name is in
the roll of the succession of Roman Bishops, and all these who have sitten in
the chair of Rome since the days of EVGENIVS 4. are successors to a perjured
schismaticke justly deposed by the general Council of Basil with consent of
the Emperor SIGISMVND. Now let Romanists advise whether they will blame the
general Council or the Bishop of Rome EVGENIVS 4. If they blame the general
Council, then the general Council may err, even in great and fundamental
points of their own faith, for it leans upon the authority of the B. of
Rome and Councils. And if they will blame EVGENIVS 4. as a schismaticke and
worthy of deposition, then is their succession whereof they glory so much,
utterly cut off since the days of EVGENIVS the fourth.

As touching idolatry, I dare boldly set the Roman chair in higher degree
then the idolarrous Jews of old, of whom The chair of Rome defiled with
idolatry.
JEREMY speaks, that according to the number of their cities was the number
of their gods, Ier. 2. ver. 28, Now there are not so many cities in Juda, as
there are Angels, Apostles, martyrs and Saints in heaven, to whom the Roman
chair gives the glory of Christ, and makes them mediators of intercestion.
Therefore it is an impudent presumption to brag of Apostolic succession, when
as by heresy, schism and idolatry they have so often fallen, and yet continue
in falling away from the footsteps of the Apostles.

Now because commonly like errors have like grounds, let us consider what was
the ground of the error of the succession Lkeerrours have like grounds.
of AARON, and thereby may easily be discerned the ground of the error of the
alleged Apostolic succession. The posterity of AARON being reproved by
JEREMY the Prophet, took the reproof in a very evil part, supponing that
they were exeemed from error in matters of religion, because of the promises of
God made to the tribe of LEVI: and therefore they say, Come and let us imagine
some devise against Jeremiah: for the L^w shall not perish from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. Cone and let v^ smite
him for his tongue, and let us not tak^ heed to his words, Ier. 18. ver 18.
The promises made to the tribe of LEVI are contained Deuteronomy. 33 ver. 8. 9 10. 11.
And after the captivity of Babylon, MALACHI making an ample declaration of the
promises made to LEVI says, My covenant was with him of life and peace: and
Igaue him fear, and he feared me, and was afraid before my name. The Law of
truth wa^ in his mouth, and there was none iniquity found in his l ps: he
walked with me in peace and equity. and did turn many away from iniquity.
For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should secke the Law
at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mal. 2. ver. 5. 6.
7. Of this promise of God spoken by MOSES, and long after amplified by the
Prophet MALACHI, many did collect that the successors of AARON and LEVI could
not err in religion: but how erroneous and false this conclusion was, the
words of the Prophet MALACHI immediately after following do declare. But ye are
gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the Law, ye have broken
the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. ver 8. If we had no
further to allege but these two testimonies, that JEREMY and MALACHI did
reprove the successors of LEVI and AARON of great errors and defection,
notwithstanding of the promises made to them and their posterity, yet these
two witnesses being Prophets of God do abundantly prove, that promises made
to LEVI and AARON do not exeeme their succession from error in religion.

But mark another circumstance in the ground of this error of AARONS
succession, which was this. God made a promise conditional, which they
supposing to be absolute, took liberty to do what they lifted. The
conditions are The Romain church like to the successors of Aaron,
clearly set down by the Prophet MALACHI, cap. 2. If they feared God and
converted others from their wicked ways, and kept the key of knowledge, then
they should be counted the Ambassadors of the Lord of hosts, but these
conditions being broken, and they having gone out of the way, and having caused
many to fall by the law, and having broken the covenant of LEVI, they were so
far from being counted the Ambassadors of God, that God made them vile before
all the people, ver. 9 Yea and the Lord cursed them, and cast doung upon their
faces, even the doung of their solemn feasts, and made them like unto it,
ibid. ver. 3. This was the tragical event of AARONS successors, who opened
one of their ears to hear the promise of God, but closed the other ear from
hearing and marking the conditions that were required of them to whom the
promise was made.

The Roman Church not unlike to the successors of AARON, have their ear
opened to hear the promise of God made to the Apostles and their successors in
these words, Behold I am with you unto the end of the world. Mat, 28, ver. 20.
but they close their ears from hearing the condition required of the Apostles
and their successors contained in the same verse in these words, teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I command you. Although they teach a doctrine
repugnant to Christ's commandment, yea and a doctrine of devils as PAVL
speaks, 1. Tim. 4. yet must they be counted the Apostles successors, and that
Christ is with them, and that What inconuenients follow if the promise made to
the Apos^les successors be absolute.
they do not err. But God will cast their doung in their faces and make them
like to it, that is, vile and filthy, as he did unto the Priests of the
succession of AARON.

If any man will obstinatly contend that the promise made to the Apostles and
their successors was absolute and not conditional, consider the inconuenients
that will follow. Seeing this promise was not made to PETER only, but also to
all the rest of the Apostles and their successors, then as none of the Roman
Bishops can err in religion, because they are the successors of PETER as they
allege: so in like manner the Bishops of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antiochia,
Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, Corinth, and diverse other places are all
exeemed from error, because the Apostles and Evangelists preached and
constitute Churches in all-these places, and they are successors to the
Apostles in that same sense that the Bishops of Rome are successors to PETER.
And if none of all these can err, what privilege has the church of Rome
above all other Churches? Or how can that be performed which was foretold by
the Apostle concerning apostasy that should fall out, and the revelation of
the man of sin. and child of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2? For all the successors
of the Apostles being exeemed from error, what place could be given to the
Antichrist, or what door could have been opened to MAHOMET, by whose delusions
the Oriental Church has been so miserably abused?

But seeing the Apostles had some extraordinary things, The Apostles had
calling, g^es and prerogatives extraordinary.
such as calling, gifts and prerogatives: They were called immediately by
Christ, and were taught immediately by his Spirit and mouth, Gal. 1. They
received from heaven the gift of tongues and languages to utter this celestial
knowledge to all tongues and nations, Act. 2. They had power by imposition of
hands to confer to others the gift of the holy Spirit, Act, 8 With these
extraordinary gifts they had also extraordinary prerogatives, that in
teaching the doctrine received from Christ, they should not err. Now these who
call themselves successors to the Apostles, they dare not clame to the Apostles
immediate calling, nor yet to their extraordinary gifts, but that which of all
the rest was most extraordinary to the Apostles, viz. to be exeemed from
error in teaching and writing, that is so fast adhered unto, that it is one of
the principal grounds of the Roman faith in our days, that the Bishop of
Rome cannot err in faith and religion. Yea so unfortunate are the Bishops of
Rome of late days, that they would climme up to the highest top and
preeminence of Apostolic dignity to be exeemed from error, when as in
things of less importance they cannot attain (as we speak) to the Apostles
garters.

This proud conceit of Apostolic succession with power of binding and loosing,
and exemption from error, made some of the Bishops of Rome so high minded, so
vain and ridiculous, that learned fathers conueened together in Councils,
thought their pride more worthy to be received with scoffing words, then with
prolixe refutations. Example whereof we have in a Council gathered at Rome in
the time of the Emperor OTTO the first, about the year of our Lord 956. In
which Council JOHN 13. Others write Pope JOHN the 12. he fled for fear of
the Emperor OTTO. Many grievous accusations were given in against him, such as
incest, murder, saeriledge, playing at dice, and drinking to the devil,
admitting of boys to be Bishops for money, with many other villainous things,
ou^r and beside his perfidie in assisting BERENGARIVS and his son ALBERTVS
against the Emperor OTTO, contrary to his promise, and oath made before to
the Emperor. Liberty being granted to Pope JOHN to compeare without fear,
and to answer to the accusations objected against him, he being convict in
conscience would not compeare, but he sent a short letter to the Council,
bearing that he was PETER'S successor, and had power of binding and loosing, and
by virtue of this power he band them under pain of cursing that they should
not proceed to his deposition. To this proud letter the Council gathered at
Rome returned this answer, that Christ gave power of binding and loosing to
all his disciples as well as to PETER: but one of them, to wit, IVDAS, by
abusing his power, lost his power: only he retained some power of binding, to
wit, he had liberty to bind his own neck to the gallous. In which words
they call him IVDAS, and biddes this vile beast go and hang himself if he
lift, Hist. Magdeb urg Cent. 10. cap. 9. PLATINA call^th JOHN 13. homo
sceleratissinus, a most wicked man. ONVPHRIVS the advocate of all wicked causes
blusheth, and dare not stand at the bar to plead the cause of JOHN 12. the
predecessor of LEO the eight, for both are one man, he whom PLATINA calls
13. and he whom ONVPHRIVS counts - 12. The Bishops of Rome might have been
admonished by this one example (if there were no mo) not to be high minded, and
not to cum to the supreme top of Apostolic preeminence. In a word the
Bishops of Rome of late years are mo^e like to the successors of CAIAPHAS
(who would needs have Christ to stand before his judgment seat, and judge of
Christ, his doctrine and disciples, Ioh. 18 ver. 19.) then they are like to the
successors of PETER: for I can see no inexcusable boldness in CAIAPHAS damning
Christ's doctrine, but I grope the like in the Roman church, that usurps
authority over the written word, over Councils, and consequently over Christ
himself.

To conclude this treatise, I will compare succession, whereof the Roman
church braggeth so much, to the way that lay between Samaria and Jerusalem:
this way led the people of Ephraim, Manasse, Jssachar, Zabulon, Nephthali and
Aser to Jerusalem, when they set their face Southward, and when they went
upward, but the same way again led them from Jerusalem when they turned their
faces Northward, and when they went downward. Even so if a man set his face
toward heavenly Jerusalem, he shall find a number of holy successors of the
Apostles in purity of doctrine, honesty of conversation, and patience in
suffering that shall lead him to Christ, and to heavenly Jerusalem: but
again, it is as certain if a man will set his face Northward to defection, to
backsliding and to prefer the traditions of men to the ordinances of God,
there shall not inlacke a number of guiders in the roll of personal
successors (as they call it) to the Apostles, who shall lead him from
Jerusalem to Samaria, and from the mountain of God to the valley of Benhinnon.
Therefore while we are in the way take heed what way our faces are set, whether
to Jerusalem or to Samaria, and if they be set to Jerusalem, let us follow
these sure guides who were true successors to the Apostles, and they shall
indeed lead us to Christ, to heavenly Jerusalem, and to the glory which in
heart and mind we wait for, whereunto God lead us for his Christ's sake,

Amen.
CENTVRIE III.
Chap. 1.
Seuerus.
AFter PERTINAX and IVLIAN SEVERUS governed The fist persecution, ANN. Chapter 205.
17, years, 8. months, EVSEBIVS reckons only 12. years, lib. 6. cap. 12.
He stirred up the fifth persecution against the Christians. The crimes objected
against the Christians beside those that were objected in the former
persecution were these: Rebellion against the Emperor, sacrilege, murdering
of infants, worshipping of the sun, and worshipping the head of an Ass:
which last calumny was forged against them by the malice of the Jews. This
persecution raged most severely in the towns of Alexandria and Carthage, like
as the former persecution had done in Lions and Vienne in France, Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 1. LEONIDES the Leonides the father of Origin.
father of ORIGIN was beheaded his son, being but young in years, exhorted
his father to persevere in the faith of Christ constantly unto the death.
POTAMIEA a young beautiful virgin in Alexandria was by the judge condemned to
death, and delivered to a Captain called BASILIDES, who stayed the insolency
of the people that followed her to the place of execution with outrage of
slanderous and railing word crying out against her: for this cause she prayed
to God for the conversion of BASILIDES to the true faith, and was heard of God,
in so much, that he was not only converted to the faith of Christ, but also
sealed it up with his blood and had the honor of martyrdom, Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap 5. ALEXANDER who was fellow laborer with NARCISSUS Alexander fellow
laboure^ with Na^cislus,
in Jerusalem, escaped many dangers, yet was he martyred in the days of DECIVS
the 7. great persecuter, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 39. Of this Emperor the Senate of
Rome said, Aut non nasci, aut non mori debuisse, that is, Either he should
never have been borne or else should never have tasted of death. So it pleased
the Lord by his wise dispensation to suffer the days of TRAIAN, ANTONIUS
Philosophus, and SEVERUS, Emperors renoumed in the world to be more cruel
against his own people then the days of NERO, DOMITIAN, CALIGVLA or COMMODVS,
to the end the poor Church might learn to be content to be spoiled of all
outward comfort, and to lean upon the staff of the consolations of God
alanerly. Many that were brought Rhais a mar tire hrunt before she was baptized.
up in the schools of ORIGIN suffered martyrdom, such as PLVTARCHVS, SERENVS,
HERACLIDES, HERON, and another having the name of SERENVS also, Eusebius. lib, 6.
cap. 4. Among women RHAIS was burned with fire for Christ's sake before she was
baptized with water in Christ's Name, Eusebius. ibid. Innumerable more martyrs were
slain for the faith of Christ, whose names in particular no ecclesiastical
writer ever was able to comprehend, therefore it shall suffice to hear the
names of a few. The rest whose names are not expressed, enjoy the crowns of
incorruptible glory, as well as those do whose names are in all men's mouths. It
is the comfort of our hearts to remember that the Apostles and Evangelists
sealed up with their blood the doctrine which they taught, and committed to
writ, and no other doctrine, and the holy martyrs immediately after the
Apostles days sealed up with the glorious testimony of their blood that same
faith, which we now profess, and which they received from the hands of the
Apostles, but they were not so prodigal of their lives to give their blood for
the doctrine of worshipping of images, invocation of Saints, plurality of
mediators, of intercession, the sacrifice of the Mass both propitiatory and
unbloody, expressly against the words of the Apostle, Heb. 9. ver. 22. and such
other heads of doctrine unknown to antiquity. The Roman Church in our days
is a persecuting and not a persecuted Church, more fruitful in murders then
martyrdomes, glorying of antiquity, and follow ing the forgerie of new
invented religion. This Emperor SEVERUS was slain at Yo^ke by the Northern
men and Scots.

Bassianus and Geta.
SEVERUS who was slain at York left behind him two sons, BASSIANVS and
GETA. BASSIANVS slew his brother, and reigned himself alone 6. years, so that
the whole time of his government both with his brother and alone was 7. years,
6. months, Eusebius. lib: 6. cap, 21. He put to death also PAPINIANVS a worthy
lawyer, because he would not plead his cause anent the slaughter of his
brother before the people, but said that sin might be more easily committed
then it could be defended. Bucolc. He took to wife his own mother in law
IVLIA, a woman more beautiful then chaste. In all his time (as he confessed
with his own mouth) he never learned to do good, and was slain by MACRINVS.

Macrinus with his son Diadumenus.
MACRINVS and his son reigned one year alanerly. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21.

Antoninus Heliogabalus.
ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS reigned after MACRINVS 4. years, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
21. He was a prodigious belly-god, a libidinous beast, an enemy to all
honesty and good order, Func. Chron. So many villainous things are written of
him, that scarcely if the Reader can give credit to the history, that ever
such a monster was fashioned in the belly of a woman. At his removing in his
progress oftimes followed him 600. chariots laden only with baudes and common
harlots. His gluttony, filthiness, and excessive riotousnes are in all men's
mouths. He was slain of the soldiers, drawn through the city, and cast
into Tiber.

Alexander Seuerus.
ALEXANDER SEVERUS the adopted son of HELIOGABALVS reigned 13. years, Eusebius
lib. 6. cap. 28. Chron. Func. He delited to have about him wise and learned
counselors, such as FABIVS, SABINVS DOMITIVS, VLPIANVS, etc. This renowned
Lawyer VLPIANVS was not a friend to Christians but by collecting together a
number of laws made against Christians in times Vlpianus an enemy to
Christians.
bypast, he animated the hearts of judges against them. And this is a piece of
the rebuke of Christ, that Christians have borne continually to be hated of the
wise men of the world. hist. Magdeburg. Cent. 3. Hereof it came to pass that
in this Emperors time, albeit he was not so bloody as many others had been
before him (and therefore his Empire was called (...) that is, unbloody) yet
not a few suffered martyredome even in the days of ALEXANDER, such as AGAPETVS
a young man of 15. year old at Praeneste a town of Italy, He was assaied
with many torments, and finally with the sword he was beheaded. The judge who
gave out a sentence of death against him, fell out of his judicial seat and
suddenly died. The martyredome of CECILIA, if by her travails VALERIAN her
espoused husband, and TIBVRTIVS his brother, and 400. more had been converted to
Christ and secretly baptized by VRBANVS B. of Rome immediately before her death,
I marvel that no mention should be made by EVSEBIVS of such a rare and
miraculous work. Senators and noble men at Rome, such as PAMMACHIVS,
SIMPLICIVS, and QVIRITIVS, with their wives and children died for the faith of
Christ with many others, Hist. Mag. Cent. 3. The favor that this Emperor
showed to Christians against whom the very sloobering cooks did contend
challenging unto themselves the right of a place whereinto Christians were
accustomed to conueene for exercise of divine service, this favor, I say,
seems to have proceeded from the coun sell of MAMMEA his Christian mother,
rather then from the counseli of VLPIANVS that renowned lawyer an hateful
adversary to Christians. But MAMMEA his mother hearing the report of the
learning of ORIGIN sent for him and Mammea the Emperors mother is instructed by
Origin in the faith.
by him was instructed in the grounds of Christian faith. The learned doctor
who wrote the book of the martyrs, very judiciously observes the iniquity of
this time, whereinto no Christian Churches were erected, when as yet
(notwithstanding of the favor of the Emperor at some times) no public house
could quietly be obtained for the Christians: so that by reason hereof may
appear the decretall epistle of Pope HYGINVS concerning the dedication of
Churches is forged and fained, because the reign of ALEXANDER is a long time
posterior to the days of HYGINVS (who lived under the reign of ANTONIUS
PIUS) and in the reign of ALEXANDER as yet there was great difficulty to
obtain a place whereinto Christians might assemble together. The just deserved
punishment of TVRINVS, whom the Emperor caused to be fastened to a stake in
the open Turinus killed with smoke.
market place, and there to be killed with smoke, the Herald standing by and
crying to the people, Smoke he sold and with smoke he is punished, This
punishment I say declares that this Emperor counted flatterers worthy of
great punishment. ALEXANDER and his mother MAMMEA were both slain by his own
soldiers, Bucolc: Index Chron.

Maximinus.
AFter ALEXANDER SEVERUS MAXIMINVS was Emperor and reigned 3. years, Eusebius
lib 6 cap. 28. A man of base parentage, of an huge stature, promoted to honors
by ALEXANDER, who nounished a serpent in his own bosom (as the proverb
speaks) when he advanced MAXIMINVS an ingrate foster to great dignities and
honors. For by his means the army killed ALEXANDER, and his mother MAMMEA,
and saluted him and his son Emperors without advise of the Roman Senate: a
man hated of all good men, beloved of evil men, more grievous to the citizens
of Rome then to their enemies, Bucolc. Index Chron. who for hatred of the house
of ALEXANDER (as EVSEBIVS records) raised up the sixth persecution against
Christians, specially against the teachers and leaders of the Church, thinking
the sooner to vanquish the rest if the Captains and guiders of them were made
out of the way, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib 6. cap. 28.

ORIGIN at this time wrote a book de martyrio, and dedicated it to AMBROSIVS
and PROTECTETVS a preaching elder of the Church of Casarea: because these two
under this persecution Origin wrote a book de martyrio.
had sustained great afflictions, and constantly perseuered in the true faith,
Eusebilib 6. cap. 28. No persecution was more violent, no persecution endured
shorter time. In no persecution are the names of suffering martyrs so obscured
and covered with silence possibly because the book of Origin de martyrio
through injury of time is not to be found, therefore some learned men do
refer the martyrdom of such as we have spoken of in the days of ALEXANDER
to this time, or to the persecution of DECIVS. I will not dispute of such
doubtsome things. Three other things that are more necessary to the
edification of the Church I will touch. First the malice of the devil, who
hates the welfare of the sheepfolde of Christ, and labors The malice of
Satan against true 'Pastors.
either to spoil it of true Pastors, or to send in among the poor sheep
hyrelings, and men not regarding the well of the flock, but their own gain:
or clse, if they have true pastors, to move the flock to be disobedient to
faithful and vigilant Pastors. The flock that can eschew all these three
snares of the devil, and all these three woeful calamities so often seasing upon
the poor sheepesolde, they are in good estate. Read CHRYSOSTOM writing upon
the 13. chap Heb. ver. 17. Another thing is worthy to be marked, that in three
great persecutions, in the fifth, sixth and seventh, ORIGIN a man more renowned
in his lifetime then after his death, God vouchsafed upon him two great
honors, but not the third, whereof he was most of all desirous. He encouraged
his father LEONIDES, and his disciples, PLVTARCHVS, two SERENI, HERON and
HERACLIDES patiently to fuffer martyrdom in the days of SEVERUS. Next he
wrote a book de martyrio in the days of MAXIMINVS the sixth persecuter,
whereby doubtless many were encouraged patienly Origin got not the honor of
martyrdom.
to suffer evil for Christ's sake. What remains now but the third and
principal honor of martyrdom it self, whereunto he had a bent desire in the
days of DECIVS the 7 perseter, but then he fainted, as shall be declared
hereafter Godwilling? When we call to mind this weakness of ORIGIN, let all the
cogitations of our hearts stoop, and think that we are not meet for great
things, but if the Lord call us to suffer great things for his Names sake, the
Lord perfect his strength in our infirmity and weakness. Thirdly let us
mark the great difference that is between the volume of the book of holy
canonicke and sacred Scripture, and all other books whatsoever. In Scripture
the ouerpassing of matters of great importance and moment is not for ignorance,
misknowledge or doubting of those things that are ouerslidden, but for mystery
and representation of things Difference betwixt holy scripture and other books.
more necessary to be known, as namely when MOSES a most accurat writer of
the life, death and genealogies of holy Patriarchs, yet he ouerpasseth the
description of the genealogy, death and beginning of the life MELCHISEDECK
this was done of purpose to bring in MELCHISEDECK: as a type and figure of the
true king of peace Christ Icsus, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 7. but among
ecclesiastical writers I find a preterition of the names of these worthy
Pastors who were martyred for the cause of Christ in the sixth persecution, and
this ouerpassing with silence so weighty a matter, is a secret confession of
ignorance in this part of the history, together with a doubting, whether
VRBANVS the first, VALERIANVS, TIBVRTIVS, CECILIA, and MARTINA suffered under
ALEXANDER, or under MAXIMINVS, or under DECIVS. Yea PLATINA writes it was the
opinion of some men that VRBANVS 1. was martyred in the persecution of
DIOCLETIAN. I have insisted at greater length in this purpose to the end that
every man may give unto sacred scripture that reverence that is due unto it,
but other writings let us read them with judgment, for assuredly there is
palpable weakness into them. In end this wicked persecuter MAXIMINVS and his
son were slain by his own soldiers at the siege of Aquileia, Func. Chron.

Gordianus.
THe tyranny of MAXIMINVS enforced both the senate of Rome and likewife their
oppressed confederates in Af^icke to advise by what means the distressed
estate of the Commonwell might be supported. And first GORDIANVS a man of noble
birth in Rome, and at that time PROCONSVL in Afric, with his son bearing
the name of GORDIANVS with his father, these two were declared to be Emperors
to resist the tyranny of MAXIMINVS, but they were both cut off by CAPELLIANVS
Captain of the Mauritanians. Within a short time the senate of Rome chused
MAXIMUS PVPIENVS and BALBINVS to be Emperors, and to resist the tyranny of
MAXIMINVS. But this election displeased the people of Rome, therefore they were
compelled to associat GORDIANVS a young man of 13. years old in conjunct
authority with them. This GORDIANVS was the nephew of him who was Proc^nfull
in Afric: and the soldiers made out of the way, MAX. PVPIENVS and BALBINVS.
So GORDIANVS reigned himself alone without associats six years. Chron Func.

Philippus.
PHILIPPUS a man borne in Arabia and his son reigned five years, Chron, Func.
Bucolc. EVSEBIVS says 7. years. He was the first Emperor who became a
Christian, and was baptized by FABIANVS B. of Rome He was content to stand
among the number of the penitents who made confession of their sins, for his
life was reproouable in some things before his conversion, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
34. especially in slaying of GORDIANVS an Emperor inclined to peace. DECIVS
one of the Captains, of his army conspired against him, and slew him and his
son, and reigned in his stead.

Decius.
DECIVS and his son obteiued the empire 2. years, Chron. Func. Whether for
hatred of PHILIP his master, whom he had slain, or for detestation of The 7.
persecution. ANN. Chapter 250.
Christians, or for covetous desire of the treasures of PHILIP left in the
custody of FABIAN B. of Rome, or for some other cause, it is not certain.
Always he moved a terrible persecution against the Christians. The martyrs
who suffered death in the time of this persecution were innumerable. Alexander
and Babylas both dicd in prison,
Some few of the principal martyrs I shall rehearse. ALEXANDER Bishop' of
Jerusalem died in prison at Casarea. BABYLAS B. of Antiochia died likewise in
prison. FABIAN B. of Rome suffered martyrdom. DIONYSIVS ALEXANDRINVS by a
wonderful providence of God escaped the hands of persecuting enemies. CYPRIAN
B. of Carthage was banished and reserved to the honor of martyrdom until the
days of VALERIAN the eight persecuter. ORIGIN who from his childhood was
desirous of the honor of martyredome, in this persecution of DECIVS he
fainted, and his heart was so oucrset with fear to have his chaste body
defiled with an ugly Ethiopian, that he choosed rather to offer incense to the
Idol, then to be so filthily abused. For this cause he was excommunicate by
the Church of Alexardria, and for very shame fled to Judea, where he was not
only gladly received, but also requested publickely to preach at Jerusalem.
Origin at Jerusalem closes the book and wepeth.
Nevertheless in stead of teaching he watered his face with tears, when he
read these words of scripture. To the wak d man sath God, What have thou to do
to declare mine ordinancse, that thou should take my covenant in thy month?
Ps. 50. ver. 16. These words so deeply wounded his heart with grief, that he
closed the book and sat down and wept, and all the congregation wept with
him, Hist Mag. Cent. 3. cap. 10. No pity nor compassion was had neither of
sex or age. In this persecution, APOLLONIA, a virgin of good years, after
The teeth of the holy martyr Apollonia.
they had dashed her face with battons till all her teeth were stricken out of
her jaws, they burned her quick at the port of Alexandria. This is that holy
martyr whose teeth the Roman church in our days say that they have them as
holy monuments kept in the treasures of their relics until this time. But
the trial that was taken of late days by HENRY the eight king of England,
seeking for the teeth of APOLLONIA as a remedy of the toothach clearly proves
that many teeth are supponed to be the teeth of APOLLONIA that were never
fastened in her jaw bones, Chemnisius dereliquiis. The death of QVINTA,
AMMONARION, MERCVRIA, DIONYSIA, clearly declares what pity was had of the
weaknesses of women. IVLIANVS an old and gowtie man burned with fire
testifies what regard was had to the gray hairs of ancient men. DIOSCORVS a
young man not exceeding 15. years of age, albeit they were ashamed to condemn
him to death, yet he escaped not many painful torments, and was a glorious
Confessor with patient expectation awaiting until the Lord should call him to
the honor of martyrdom, NEMESION was accused in Alexandria as a companion of
brigants, and was punished with stripes and fire unto the death with greater
severity then any brigant, albeit his innocence was sufficiently known.
AMMON, ZENON, PTOLEMEVS, INGENVVS, THEOPHILUS warriors and knights standing by
the tribunal seat beckened with their hands to a certain weak Christian,
who for fear was ready to incline and fall, that he should continue
constant, and stepped to the bench, and professed themselves to be Christians.
This daily increasing courage of Christians, who were emboldened by the
multitude of sufferings astonished and terrified the Judges, Eusebius, lib. 6.
cap. 41. ISCHYRION was slain by his own master. The number of martyrs in
Alexandria and Egypt, of whom DIONYSIVS in his epistle written to FABIVS
Bishop of Antiochia makes mention, clearly testifies that if the names of
all those who suffered martyrdom in the towns of Rome, Carthage, Antiochia,
Ephesus and Babylon, were particularly set down, over and beside others who
suffered in other towns of Asia, Afric and Europe subject to the dominion of
the Roman Emperor, it were not possible in the volume of a little book to
comprehend them all. For mine own part I presume not to do it, but I reverence
the painful trauelles of learned men who have dipped deeply into such a
fruitful subject, specially the writer of the book of martyrs. Only I find
somethings in this seventh persecution, which the principal purpose wherefore
I have collected this compend will not permit me to pass over with silence.
Namely these: first, let no man think that the verity is weak, and has
need to be strengthened by a The verity has no need to be underpropped
with lies,
lie, as NICEPHORVS is accustomed to do. The seven martyrs of Ephesus, whose
names were MAXIMIANVS, MALCHVS, MARTINIANVS, DIONYSIVS, IOANNES, SERAPION, and
CONSTANTINVS, were lurking in a cave, the entry where of DECIVS commanded to
be closed with great heaps of stones, to the end that the forenamed Christians
might be killed with famine, which came to pass indeed: Yet famine could not
s^parate these holy. Martyrs from Christ. But NICEPHORVS the father of many
other fables also says, that they fell on sleep, in which they continued till
the time of THEODOSIUS, that is, from the 250 until the 379. year of our
Lord, and then they did awake out of their sleep says NICEPHORVS, lib. 5.
cap. 27. But he who will give hasty credit to NICEPHORVS fables, writing of
the 7. martyrs, who lurked in a cave of mount Caelius and to EVAGRIVS
description of BARSANVPHIVS an Egyptian monk, who enclosed himself in a
cottage beside Gaza for the space of 50. years, and used no kind of bodily
refreshment to sustain his earthly tabernacle, he may be easily led to all
kind of error. The second thing worthy to be marked, is, that many persecuted
preachers had wives and children, as the history clearly records. CHEREMON
B. of a city in Egypt called Nilus fled to the mountains of Arabia,
accompanied with his wife, and returned not again to Egypt, neither was he
seen of those who sought him in the wilderness, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap, 42,
DIONYSIVS Married Bishops.
B. of Alexandria, who miraculously escaped the cruelty of persecuters, makes
express mention of his children, Deo mthi ut migrarem praecipiente, vianque
mirabiliter aperiente, ego and liberi, and multi fratres egressi sumus, that
is, after that God had commanded me to remove, and had miraculously opened a
passage unto me, I and my children, and brethren went forth, Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 40. If antiquity be regarded, Bishops who do marie, are not Nicolaitan
Heretics, but rather such as forbid to marie teach a doctrine of devils, 1,
Tim cap. 4. ver. 3. Thirdly it is to be marked, that in time of this vehement
persecution; many fainted and fell back from the open profession of Christian
faith. Others to provide timous remedy against such defections, The rigor of
Novatus.
gave out a rigorous sentence against such as had fallen of infirmity, that
they should not be received again into the fellowship of the church. In this
opinion was NOVATVS, and his accomplices. And by their example we should learn
to beware of such men as under pretense of zeal pertur be the unity of the
Church, and invent remedies to cure the maladies of the diseased Church, that
are worse then the sickness it self, as the Nicolaitanes did, Eusebius, lib. 6
cap. 43. Weakness at somo time is to be pitied, but deuilish rigor pitying no
man who falls of infirmity, is a lesson that has no allowance in the book
of God, Gal. 6. ver. 1. This cruel tyrant, after he had reigned two years,
made war against the Scythians (some call them the Goths) by whom he was
vanquished in battle, and fearing to be overtaken, and to come under the
reverence of barbarous people, he cast himself into a deep pit, where he
ended his life, and his body could not be found, Bucolc. Index Chron. Chron
Func. The great desolations that were made in the world about this time by the
plague of pestilence the Hethnickes imputed the cause of them to the
Christians. But CYPRIAN, whose pen the Lord guided better, declared that the
cause of all these calamities was the worshipping of Idols, the contempt of
Gods true service, and the persecuting of innocent Christians. Cypr. ad
Demetrianum.

Gallus and Volusian.
AFter DECIVS, GALLVS and VOLVSIAN his son reigned 2 year. He walked in the
footsteps of DECIVS. Eusebius. lib. 7 cap. 1. He was slain by EMILIAN who
presumed to reign, but he was so hastily made out of the way that Eusebius. and
many other historitians misknow his name in the Catalogue of Emperors.

Valerianus and Gallienus.
VALERIANVS and GALLIENVS his son reigned 15. years Eusebius. viz GALLIENVS
with his father in coniunct authority 7. years, after his fathers captivity
and death he reigned alone 8. years, in the first three or four years of the
Empire of VALERIAN he was favorable and friendly to Christians and great
numbers of them were found in the Emperors court: But afterward he was seduced
by an Egyptian sorcerer, who hated Christians, because that by them he was
hindered from practicing his magical charms. So the eight persecution began
under VALERIAN. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 10. In this The 8. persecution. ANN. Chapter
259.
persecution suffered three Bishops of Rome, LUCIUS, STEPHANVS, and SIXTVS 2.
and a Deacon Laurence, who was laid upon an hot boiling iron, and patiently
endured the torment of fire. This is that Deacon who called the poor the
treasure of the Church: for then is the Church rich, when it is rich in good
works, and feeds, clotheth and visits Christ in his hungry, naked and
diseased members. DIONYSIVS Bishop of Alexandria was banished to Cephro, a
place in the wilderness of Lbya. Eusebius. lib. 7 cap. xi. PRISCVS, MALCHVS,
ALEXANDER were devoured by beasts in Caesarea Palestinae. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
12 The martyrdom of Cyprian.
CYPRIAN B. of Carthage was beheaded. Nazianz. in laudem Cypriani. MARINVS a
Roman Captain in Caesarea was invied for the dignity and honor he was
advanced unto, and he was accused to be a Christian, and consequently to be
incapable of great preferments and dignities: he was encouraged by THEOTECNVS
B. of Caesarea patiently to suffer Theotecnus B of Caesarea incourageth Marinus.
death for the cause of Christ by taking him in into a secret chalmer and
laying before him a drawn sword and the book of the Gospel, and bidding him
take his choice of one of these two which he liked best. MARINVS liked better
of the book of the Gospel then of the sword, and was martyred for the faith
contained in that sacred book of holy Scripture. Eusebius. lib. 7 cap. 15.
ASTYRIVS a noble Senator carried the body of this holy martyr MARINVS upon his
own shoulders and buried it honorably. Eusebius. ibid. cap. 16. In end the Lord
delivered this persecuting Tyrant into the hand of SAPOR King of Persia, who
not only deteened him in strait captivity, but also abused him most filthelie,
and made his body a footestoole, and trampled upon his neck at such times as
he was about to mount on horseback. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 7. cap. 13.
Bucolc. Index chr.

This fearful captivity of VALERIAN had into it a notable testimony of the
wrath of God against persecuters. For like as he trampled under his feet the
Church of Christ: so in like manner the Lord gave his neck and back to be
trampledvpon by the feet of his enemies. This example of Gods heavy
indignation somewhat terrified GALLIENVS his son, and he gave out an edict,
for the fafe returning of such as were banished, to their own dwelling p aces,
and for staying the rage of persecution. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13. DIONYSIVS B.
of Alexandria having liberty granted by the Emperors edict to return from
banishment, came back again to Alexandria, wherein he found such terrible
desolation by famine and pestilence, that there remained not of men, women and
children so many alive as there were wont to be of ancient hoare headed men,
walking upon their streets: the Lord was so highly displeased with the
unthankful world, that he Christians full of pitis
was determined to consume the^ who had consumed his people

The good carriage of Christians at this time is worthy to be marked, who were
full of charity and love, and visited the sick, and did all offices of
humanity to those, who were diseased or dead: whereas the Pagans by the
contrary forsook their dearest friends, left them comfortless, and thrust
out such as were half dead unto the streets, and left them there vuburied,
and to be eaten with dogs. This is written in the letter of DIONYSIVS insert in
the history of Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 21 and 22. so great difference is between
Christians trained up in the school of Christ, and others, who have not been
fed with the sincere milk of the word. Christians in time of sickness were
more dutiful to their enemies then others were unto their friends.

If any man would defend worshipping of images, to be an ancient custom in the
Church, by the two brazen images, The history of Eusebius concerning the two
b^asen images in Caesarea Philipi.
which were set up in Caesarea Philippi, for a memorial of the miracle that
Christ wrought in curing of the woman who had the bloody issue, Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 18. the foresaid place of EVSEBIVS will make nothing for him. For these
images were not m^de for adoration, neither were they set up in temples nor
worshipping places, but in the very street before the door of the woman who
had been cured. The places whereunto Christians were gathered together for divine
service at this time are called in the mandat of the Emperor GALLIENVS
Coemiteria, Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 13. In these places no man reads that images
were set up. Beside this these images were graven or moiten by the hands of
Pagans, and not of Christians: and this fact was done by imitation of the
Gentiles, (...), that is, according to the custom of the Gentiles, he faith
not (...), according to the custom of her own kindred, but (...) as said is.
Yet may we take warning by this place to beware of the small beginnings of
error. Images have been like unto a base borne fellow who at the first can
have no credit to set his head into the Kings palace, but afterward he gets
ingresse into the utter court, and in end, his credit daily increasing by
degrees, he gets favor to ly in the Kings bed chalmer: even so in the first
300. year of our Lord images were not brought in into places of holy
conuentions: afterward they were brought in into Churches, but not worshipped,
as the Epistle of GREGORIVS the first, written to SEVERUS B. of Marsil clearly
testifies. But in end adoration of images was in so frequent use, as if it had
been the principal point of the worship of God.

Claudius and Quintilius.
CLAUDIUS after GALLIENVS reigned 2. years, Eusebius. lib 7, cap. 29. And his
brother QVINTILIVS 17. days. He is not reckoned by EVSEBIVS in the roll of
Emperors.

Aurelianus.
AFter QVINTILIVS AVRELIANVS possessed the crown, 6. years, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap
30. In the beginning of his reign he was not a great disturber of Christians.
Notwithstanding in continuance of time, The 9tpersecution. ANN. Chapter 278,
his nature somewhat inclinable to severity, was altered to plain tyrannic,
which tyranny first he showed beginning with the murder of his own sisters
son, as witnesses EVTROPIVS. After that, he proceeds to move the ninth
persecution against Christians: albeit the merciful working of God did soon
overthrow all the wicked purpose of the Emperor. For as the edict and
proclamation should have been denounced for the persecuting of Christians the
mighty hand of the Lord from above did suddenly stop his purpose: clearly
declaring to all men, that there is no power to work any violence against the
servants of God, unless his permission do suffer them, and give them lieue,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. Func. Chron. Here I see that D. I. FOX writer of the
book of martyrs takes lieue of VINCENTIVS martyrologie. If others had done
the like, they had not heaped up so many martyrs in the days of CLAUDIUS
QVINTILIVS, and AVRELIAN as they have done. For EVSEBIVS had assuredly made
mention of it, if the number had been so great as VINCENTIVS records. Before
the Emperors mind was altered and inclined to tyranme against Christians, he
assisted with his authority the Bishops conueened at Antiochia for the
deposition and excommunication Aurelian with ctutle authority assisteth the
Church against Samosatenus.
of the Heretic SAMOSATENVS. And so the Emperors authority being
interponed, this proud Heretic was compelled to stoop and to give place, and
with great ignominy was driven from the town of Antiochia, Eusebius. lib. 7,
cap. 30. In his place DOMNVS was elected to be Bishop of Antiochia, a man
endued with good graces, the son of DEMETRIAN, who immediately before
SAMOSATENVS governed the Church of Antiochia. And here again it is to be
marked that the Bishops at this time (albeit it was a time of persecution) yet
did they not abhor from marriage: for DEMETRIANVS Bishop of Antiochia was a
married man and had children, and DOMNVS was his son, so that the prohibition
of marriage to men in spiritual offices is not an ancient doctrine.

Annius Tacitus and Florianus.
AFter AVRELIAN was flaine between Bizans and Heraclea the imperial chair was
vacant 6. months The Senate of Rome elected ANNIVS TACITUS to be Emperor. He
continued but 6. months in his government, EVSEBIVS oue rpasseth his name with
sil^nce, as lik^wise the name of his brother FLORIANVS who aspired to the
imperial dignity, Func. Chron.

Aurelius Probus.
AURELIUS PROBVS a gentle and peaceable Emperor reigned 6. years 3. months,
Eusebius. Func. chron. He was inuied by his captains and soldiers, because he
appointed them to plant vineyardes and said there was no great need of
soldiers where no enemy was to be feared. He was slain by his soldiers,
Func. Chron. Bucolc.

Carus, Carinus, Numerianus.
CARVS with his two sons, CARINVS and NVMERIANVS reigned after PROBVS. All
these three continued not above the space of 3. years, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30.
And NVMERIANVS was slain by his own father in law called APER, Func. Chron.
CARVS was slain by thunder: and CARINVS was overcome in battle and slain by
DIOCLETIAN, whom the Roman army had declared to be Emperor while CARINVS
was yet alive, Bucolc. Index chro.

Diocletianus and Maximianus.
Like as DIOCLETIAN overcame CARINVS the son of CARVS in battle, even so
likewise he slew APER the father in law of NVMERIANVS with his own hands,
Func. Chron. Whether this was done for detestation of sin, or for desire of
government it is uncertain. Always some affirm that his concubine DRVAS had
said unto him that he should kill a wild Boar before he should be Emperor.
And after the killing of APER (which name by interpretation signifies a wild
Boar) he became Emperor. In the beginning of his reign he chused for his
college MAXIMIANVS surnamed HERCVLEVS, father to MAXENTIVS. And these two
chused other two, viz. GALERIVS and CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS the father of
CONSTANTINE, who^ they called Casars: but the honorable title of AUGUSTUS
DIOCLETIAN and MAXIMIAN retained to themselves. These two A A. reigned 20
years. CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS CAESAR. continued 15. years. GALERIVS CAESAR 21.
years. DIOCLETIAN and MAXIMIANVS HERCVLEVS abstained from persecuting of
Christians until the 19 year of their reign. Before I touch the history of
the tenth persecution three things are to be premitted. First, that after the
persecution of VALERIAN the 8. persecuter, the Church enjoyed great peace,
which albeit it was like to be cut off by the altered mind of AVRELIAN, yet
the wise dispensation of the wisdom of God provided that all his cruel
enterprises were disappointed. The righteous Lord cutted the cords of the
wicked, Psalm. 129. ver. 4. Secondly Christians were in great favor and credit
with Emperors, and to them was committed the government of Provinces and
nations, as clearly appeared in the preferment of DOROTHEVS and GORGONIVS.
Thirdly they had liberty to build oratories and temples, large and ample in
every city, Eusebius eccl. hist. lib. 8. cap. Temples (...) built by Ch^stians
after the death of Valerian.
1. All this came to pass in the forty years peace that interueened
between the reigning of VALERIAN, and the nineteenth year of the reign of
DIOCLETIAN. Yet the Church of Christ in this short time began to be
feastered with the corrupt manners of carnal and fleshly people, so that
contentions abounded, but charity waxed cold in the Church of God. Eusebius.
ibid. What wonder was it then that the Lord permitted this tenth and most
horrible persecution of DIOCLETIAN to stir and to waken drowsy Christians
who were beginning to be fashioned'according to the likeness of the world?

In the 19. year of his imperial authority, and in the month of March this
horrible periccution began to arise, The 10 persecution. ANN. Chapter 308.
DIOCLETIAN in the East, and MAXIMIANVS in the West bending all their forces to
root out the profession of Christians out of the world. DIOCLETIAN was puffed up
in pride for his manifold victories and triumphs, and would be counted a
God, and adorned his shoes with gold and precious stones, and commanded the
people to kiss his feet. This persecution continued 10 years, even until the
seventh year of the reign of CONSTANTINE the great. So that whatsoever
cruelty was practiced by MAXIMIANVS, MAXIMINVS, MAXENTIVS, and LICINIVS
algoeth under the name of DIOCLETIAN the author of this tenth persecution.
Crnell edicts and proclamations were set forth in the beginning of this
persecution, commanding to overthrow and cast to the ground the temples of
Christians, to burn the books of holy scripture, to displace all such as were
magistrates and were in office, and to cast Christian Bishops into prison, and
to compel them with sundry kinds of punishments, to offer unto Idols. Also
common people, who would not renounce the profession of Christianity to be
spoiled of their liberty, Eusebius. lib. 8 cap 3. These edicts were hastily put
in execution. Many Christians were scourged, racked, and cruciated with
intolerable torments. Some were violently drawn to impure sacrifice, and as
though they had sacrificed, when indeed they did not, were let go: some were
cast down upon the ground, and drawn by the legs a great space, and the
people was made to believe, that they had sacrificed: some stoutly withstood
them, and denied with a loud voice that they had been, or ever would be
partakers of idolatry. Notwithstanding, of the weak sort many for fear and
infirmity gave over even at the first brunt, Eusebius lib 8. cap. 3. When the
foresaid edicts were John a noble man borne, rent in pieces the Emperors
proclamation.
proclaimed, both the Emperors happened to be in the town of Nicomedia:
notwithstanding a certain Christian being a noble man borne, whose name was
JOHN, ran and took down the proclamation, and openly tare and rent it in
pieces. For which fact he was put to a most bitter death, which he patiently
endured until his last gasp. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 5. The general captain of
the army of DIOCLETIAN gave choice to the soldiers, whether they would obey
the Emperors commandment in offering sacrifices, and keep still their
offices, or else lay away their armor, and be deprived of their offices: but
the Christian soldiers were not only content to lay away their armor, but
also to offer themselves unto the death, ^ather then to obey such unlawful
commandments, Eusebius. lib. 8 cap. 4. In Nicomedia the Emperor refrained not
from the slaughter and death of the children of Emperors, neither yet from the
slaughter of the chiefest princes of his court, such as PETER, whose body
being beaten with whips and torn that a man might see the bare bones, and
after they had mingled vinegar and salt, they powered it upon the most tender
parts of his body, and lastly roasted him at a soft fire as a man would roast
flesh to eat, and so this victorious martyr ended his life. DOROTHEVS and
GORGONIVS The martyrdom of Peter, Dorotheus and Gorgonius.
being in great authority and office under the Emperor after diverse
torments were strangled with an halter. The torments that PETER suffered,
encouraged them to give a worthy confession that they were of that same faith
and religion that PETER was of, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6. This persecution raged
most vehemently in Nicomedia, where the Emperors palace through some occasion
being set on fire, the Christians were blamed as authors of that fact:
Therefore so many as could be found out, were burned with fire, or drowned in
water, or beheaded with the sword, amongst whom was ANTHIMVS Bishop of
Antiochia, who was beheaded. The bodies of the sons of Emperors that were
buried, they dug out of their graves, and sent them in boats to be buried
into the bottom of the sea, lest Christians should have worshipped them as
gods, if their sepulchers had been known. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6. such opinion
they had of Christians. The number of twenty thousand burned in one temple of
Nicomedia by MAXIMIANVS smells of the liberty that NICEPHORVS takes in
adding many things to the verity of the history. The martyrdom of SERENA the
Emperor DIOCLETIANS wife is rejected by learned men as a fable, albeit
recorded by HERMANNVS GIGAS. The number of Christians cast into prison and
appointed for death was so great, that scarcely if a void place could be found
in a prison to thrust in a murderer, or an opener of graves, such heaps of
Christians were enclosed in dark prisons, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6. The martyrs
of Palestina, of Tyrus in Phenicia, of Tarsus, of Antioch^a, of Alexand^ia, of
M^letina in Armenia, and of Pontus, Cappadocia and Arabia they could not easily
be numbered. In Thebaida horrible and unnatural cruelty was Horrible cruelty
against Christian women.
used against Christian women, whom they hanged upon gibbetts with their
heads down-ward toward the ground, and fastened one of their legs allanerly
to the gibbet, the other being free: thus their naked bodies hanging upon
trees in manner foresaid presented to the beholders a spectacle of most vile and
horrible inhumanitie, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 9. In like manner the branches of
trees were artificially bowed down to the earth, and the feet and legs of
Christians tied to them, so that by their hasty returning again unto their
natural places the bodies of Christians were rent in pieces. This was not a
cruelty finished in a short space of time, but of long continuance, some days
20. some 30. some days 60. and at some times an hundredth were with sundry
kinds of torments excruciated unto the death. And these torments they suffered
with joy and gladness, and singing of Psalms until the last breath, Eusebius.
ibid. In Phrygia a town was set on fire by the Emperors commandment (the
name where of EVSEBIVS passes over A town in Phrygiaset on fire, and all the
inh^bitants bu^nt with fire.
with silence) and the whole inhabitants being Christians, men women and
children were burned with fire, Eusebius lib. 8. cap. 11. TIRANNION Bishop of
Tyrus, ZENOBIVS Presbyter of Sidon, SILVANVS Bishop of Gaza, and PAMPHILVS a
worthy Presbyter in Casarea, whose life and death EVSEBIVS has described in a
several treatise, all these (I say) were crowned with martyrdom, Eusebius lib.
8. cap. 13. MAXIMIANVS Emperor of the West, whose persecution EVSEBIVS
describes not at such length as the persecution of DIOCLETIAN in the East, he
was like unto a wild Boar trampling under his feet the vine-yarde of God.
He slew MAVRITIVS a noble Captain with a legion of Christian and Thebane
Mauritius with a whole legion of Christian soldiers martyred.
soldiers, because they would not consent to offer sacrifice unto idols. This
was done beside the river of Rhonne, hist. Magd. Cent. 4. The martyrs of
France, Italic and Germany, specially at Colen and Triers, where the blood of
Christians was shed in such abundance, that it ran like small brooks, and
it colored great and maine rivers, the multitude (I say) of these holy
martyrs, and the diversity of torments daily excogitate against them, what
memory is able to comprehend, or what tongue is able sufficiently to express?
In end, when these two Emperors were drunken with the blood of the Saints of
God, and saw that the numbers of Christians daily increased, they began to
relent their forie and madness a little, being at last content that the
punishment of Christians should be the thrusting out of their right eyes, and
the maiming of their left legs with condemning them to the mines of
Mettalles, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 12. The mercies of the wicked are cruel, says
SOLOMON Prou. 12. ver. 10. Before two years were fully compleete after the
beginning of this tenth persecution, these two furious persecuters (for what
cause God knows) gave over their imperial function, and remained not
Emperors any more, but as private persons, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 13, DIOCLETIAN
after he had denuded himself Diocletian and Maximian give over their imperial
function.
of the imperial dignity, lived almost 9. years. MAXIMIAN within four
years after, was slain by the commandment of CONSTANTINE, Bucolc. The
imperial dominion then remained with CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS and GALERIVS
MAXIMINVS. These two divided the whole monarchy between them. CONSTANTIVS
contented himself with France, Spain and Britain: GALERIVS MAXIMINVS had
the rest. CONSTANTIVS took CONSTANTINVS his son to be CAESAR under him, and
GALERIVS MAXIMINVS chused his two sons, MAXIMINVS and SEVERUS to be CAESAR'S
under him. The Roman soldiers also set up MAXENTIVS the son of MAXIMIANVS
HERCVLEVS to be their Emperor: against whom GALERIVS sent his son SEVERUS,
who being slain, he chused LICINIVS in his stead. Of these five, who reigned
all at one time (the like whereof came not to pass at any time before) two
Emperors and three Caesar's, three of them viz. GALERIVS and MAXIMINVS his
son, and LICINIVS prosecuted the persecution, begun by DIOCLETIAN, near the
space of 7. or 8. years, which was to the year of our Lord 318. The other
two, CONSTANTIVS and his son CONSTANTINE, were favorable to Christians.

Constantius and Galerius Maximinus.
CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS reigned as Emperor 13. years. Others say 16 some say 11
years. He ended his life in peace at York, Hist. Magd. He was not only
friendly to Christians, but also he counted them the only faithful subjects to
Emperors. And such as he perceived that for love of honor, gain or any
Constantius tried his captames whether they were Christians or not.
worldly commodity would make shipwreck of a good conscience and sacrifice to
idols (albeit they had allowance by his own fained commandment, given out
for exploration of the religion of his Captains and soldiers, rather then
seriously and from his heart, allowing the worshipping of idols) these (I say)
who made no conscience to worship idols for conquessing favor at the
Emperors hands, he disauthorized them, removed them from offices and counted
them men who were false to God, and would never be true to him, Eusebius. de vita
Constantini: lib. 1.

MAXIMINVS elder and younger in the East parts of the world were cruel
persecuters. Because ecclesiastical writers do not clearly distinguish the
cruelty of the father from the cruelty of the son, I shall comprise al under
the name of GALERIVS MAXIMINVS the father of the other MAXIMINVS. He was not
unlike unto PHARAO, for when the correcting hand of God was upon him, then he
relented his fury: but when the plague ceased, he returned again to his
wonted malice. First God smote him with a wonderful uncouth disease, so that
his flesh began to putrify and innumerable multitude of vermin swarmed out of
his inward parts, then he commanded that the persecution should cease, and
that Christians should pray for him, and he published edicts of peace in their
favors throughout all his dominions. But scarce continued he in this good
resolution 6. months, when as he sent out contrary edicts, and caused them to
be engraued in brass (which thing was not done at any time before) and to be
set up in every city, Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 7. whereupon ensued grievous
persecution. SILVANVS B. of Emisa. LVCIANVS B. of Antiuchia, who suffered
martyrdom at Nicomedia after he had given in his apology to the Emperor,
and PETER B. of Alexandria, Eusebius. lib 9. cap. 6. The martyrdom of king
ANTHEAS and 37. thousand more martyrs with him 1 pass by as a thing uncertain:
because EVSEBIVS could not have ouerpassed with silence such a rare and
wonderful cruelty committed in his own time, if it had been of verity done,
as some allege. Other thirty thousand are said till have been martyred in
sundry places, and this is very probable, because the martyrs who suffered in
this tenth persecution were innumerable. QVIRINVS B. of Scescania a town of
upper Pannonia was thrown into the flood having an hand mill hanged about his
neck, and so was drowned. I leave a recital of the names of all the rest of
the martyrs, of whom I read to have suffered martyrdom at this time, like as
I have done in all the preceding persecutions.

Now to speak somewhat of the cruel edict of this Emperor ingraued in
brass, and hanged up in all principal Edicts against Christians ingraued in
brass.
cities, specially in Tyrus. In it he gloried, that peace, wealth, prosperity
and plenty of all good things were in his time: and he attributed the glory of
all this abundance to the deuote worshipping of the heathen gods. At this time
(says EVSEBIVS) was that fulfilled which the Lord Jesus foretold that the
tribulation of those days should be so great, that except those days had been
shortened, no flesh could have been saved: but for the Electes sake those days
should be shortened: yea and if it were possible the very Elect should be
deceived, Mat. 24. ver. 22. and ver. 24. But the Lord pitying A sudden change
of the prosperity of Pagans into adu^suie.
the infirmity of his Saints, and to stop the blasphemous mouths of heathen
people, turned suddenly al their joy into mourning and lamentation, with
famine, pestilence, warfare and uncouth diseases, whereby the eyes of men and
women were blinded, the Lord dantoned the insolent pride of this bloody
Tyrant. It is to be noted that in time of this public calamity, Christians
and no others but they only, were found to be fraughted with love and full of
charity even toward their hateful enemies, Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 8. The second
time whereinto MAXIMINVS seemed to change his mind toward Christians was after
the victory obtained by CONSTANTINE and LICINIVS against MAXENTIVS. The said
two Emperors set forth edictes in favor of the Christians: and MAXIMINVS
rather fearing CONSTANTINE then loving God, began in his bounds also to stay
the rage of cruel persecution, as the letter written to his Deputy SABINVS
clearly declares, Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 9. But incontinent after he altered
his mind and set forth Maximinus was overcome in battle by Licinius.
new commandments to persecute the Christians. Yet the Lord pitying the
grievous afflictions of his persecuted Church, brought this Tyrant to an end.
For he made war against LICINIVS being counseled thereto by his sorcerers
and charmers, who promised unto him good success in his battle against
LICINIVS: but the contrary fell out: for he was discomfited, and cast off his
imperial ornaments, and fled feeble and naked, and mixed himself with the
effeminat multitude, wandering through towns, and lurking in villages, hardly
escaped the hands of his enemies. After this he killed and put to death those
enchanters and deceivers who had bewitched him all his days, and had put him
in esperance of victory in his battle foughten against LICINIVS, and shortly
after oppressed with a certain disease, glorified the God of the Christians,
and made a most absolute law for the safety and preservation of them. And so
the Tyrant of Tyrants by the vehemency of his sickness ended his life, Eusebius.
eccl. hist. lib. 9. cap. 10.

After we have spoken a little of MAXENTIVS who was chosen Emperor by the
Praetorian soldiers, rests nothing but to conclude this short sum of the
history of the ten persecutions with the end and death of that notable
hypocrite LICINIVS. MAXENTIVS was so villainous in his behavior, that he
abstained not from abusing of the wives of noble senators, whom he reft
violently from their husbands, and contumeliously abused them, and sent them
back again, Eusebius, lib. 8. cap. 14. The like villainy also he intended till
have done to a certain Christian gentlewoman at Rome, called SOPHRONIA,
Sophronia chused rather to kil^her self then to be abused by Maxentius.
whose husband neither could nor durst make resistance to the vile appetite of
the proud Emperor, but this noble woman desiring liberty to go to her
chalmer to adorn and deck her self a short while, and after she would go
with the messingers to the Emperor, she chused rather to put her self to
death in her chalmer then to be abused by him, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 15. Which
lamentable fact being reported to him, he was nothing moved therewith,
neither abstained he any white from his wonted sins. The people of Rome
being weary of his villainy sent to CONSTANTINE for aid, who gathered an
army in France and Britain to repress this Tyrant: to whom when he
approached, he feared MAXENTIVS charms (wherewith he was supponed to have
vanquished SEVERUS, whom GALERIVS MAXIMINVS had sent against him before) and
stood in doubt what to Constantine sees the similitud of a bright cross
inheauen.
do: and as he was doubting he cast his eyes oftimes to heaven, and saw
about the going down of the sun a brightness in the heaven in the
similitude of a Cross, with certain stars of equal bigness giving this
inscription like Latin letters, In hoc vince, that is in this overcome, Eusebius.
lib. 1. de vita Constantini. After this vision his banner was made in the
similitude of a Cross, and carried before him in his wars. MAXENTIVS was
compelled to issue out Maxentius over come in battle by Constantine.
of the town against CONSTANTINE, whose force when he was not able to
sustain, he fled, and retired in hope to get the city, but was overthrown
off his horse about the bridge called Pons Milvius and drowned in the flood.

DIOCLETIAN hearing tell of the prosperous success of CONSTANTINE, and what
edicts he had set forth for the peace of Christians, for very grief he
died. Others allege that he poisoned himself. Ann. 317.

LICINIVS was made CAESAR by MAXIMINVS, as said is. He was very familiar with
CONSTANTINE and was his colleg in the government 7. years, and married
CONSTANTIA the s^er of CONSTANTINE, Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 8. Likewise he
concurred with him to subdue the tyrant MAXENTIVS. Also he overcame MAXIMINVS
in battle. He purposed likewise to have circumueened and slain the good
Emperor CONSTANTINE to whom he was many ways greatly addebted but the Lord
disappointed his counsels, and preserved CONSTANTINE to the great benefit and
well of his Church. But LICINIVS failing of his purpose converted his rage
against the Christians, notwithstanding he had set out edicts before to procure
their peace. He pretended this quarrel against them, that they prayed for the
welfare of CONSTANTINE and not for his welfare. Eusebius. lib. 2. de vita
Constantini. He Three cruel edicts of Licinius against Christians.
set forth against the Christians three cruel edicts. 1. Inhibiting
assemblies and conuentions of Bishops to consult in matters belonging to their
religion 2. He discharged women to resort to the assemblies where men were to
pray or to be instructed in matters pertaining to religion. 3. He commanded
that no man should visit imprisoned Christians or succor them with any
relief, threatening against the contraueeners such punishment as the imprisoned
persons were to suffer, Eusebius. li. 10. ca. 8. After these edicts the
mountains, woods and wildernesses began to be the habitation of the Lords
saints, Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 8. The Bishops about Libya and Egypt were taken,
cut in pieces, and their flesh cast into the sea to be bait to the fish. And
this was done by the flatterers of LICINIVS, supponing to gratify him by the
cruel handling of the Lords servants. In his time were put to death these 40.
martyrs of whom BASILIVS writes, who were set in a pond of water all night
lying open to the blasts of the cold Northern winds, and in the morning they
being frozen and almost senseless with the extremity of the cold, yet were
carried upon carts to be burned with fire, to the end their poor carkeises
might feel by experience whether the extremity of cold or heat were the
greater torment Of these 40. noble soldiers of Christ one being stronger then
the rest endured the vehemency Forty martyrs tormented first with cold and
next with heat.
of the cold better, to whom his mother came, not to desire him to embrace
this present life by a filthy denial of Christ, nor to weep for the pains of
the tormented body of her son, but rather to exhort^her son to persevere
constantly in the faith of Christ to the end: for she craved license to lift
up her son with her own hands into the cart, admonishing him to accomplish
that happy journey he had begun. But whether these were the 40. martyrs who
suffered the like punishment in Sebastia a town of Armenia, or not, Sozom.
lib. 9. cap. 2. it is not certain, in respect that some circumstances set
down by BASIL. do not agree to those of Sebastia, Basil. Magn. in 40 martyrs.

Likewise in this persecution suffered BARLAN a noble man mentioned in a sermon
of BASILIVS, who after many torments was in end laid upon the altar, whereupon
they used to offer sacrifice to idols, and while there was yet some strength in
his hand, they put franckincense into his right hand, thinking that he would
have scattered the incense upon the altar, and sacrificed but he endured the
torment patiently, saying the words of the Psalm 145. Blessed be the Lord who
teaches mine hands to fight. In end LICINIVS made war against CONSTANTINE
and being diverse times overcome both by sea and land, he yielded himself at
length, and was sent to Thessalia to live a private life, where he was slain
by the soldiers. SO CONSTANTINE obtained the whole empire alone.

Here end the ten persecutions.
CENT. III. Cap. 2.
TO VICTOR succeeded ZEPHYRINVS the 14. Bishop of Rome, who lived in that
charge 8. years, 7. months Bishops of Rome. Zephyrinus
10. days, Platin. EVSEBIVS attributes unto him 18. years, Eusebius. lib 6 cap.
21. so uncertain is the computation of the years of the government of the
Bishops of Rome. EVSEBIVS writes nothing of his decretall epistles, and these
that are forged by late writers are foolish and ridiculous. Consecration of the
holy cup in a vessel of glass alanerly. A Bishop to be accused before
honest Judges, twelve in number, whom the Bishop himself shall choose if need
be: honest and unspotted witnesses to be heard in his cause no fewer then 72.
conform and above the number of these 70. disciples whom Christ adjoined as
fellow laborers in preaching with his Apostles. And finally that no definitive
sentence should be pronounced against a Bishop until the time his cause were
heard of the Patriarch of Rome. This is but a mocking of the Church of God, to
attribut such swelling pride, such unaccustomed forms of judicatorie, such
defensive armor, fencing and gwarding unrighteous men against just deserved
punishment unto the simplicity of an ancient Church, humbled under the cross,
and sighing under the yocke of heavy and long-lasting afflictions. These false
and forged decretall epistles altogether unknown to the fathers, who lived
before the days of CONSTANTINE, will procure one day a decreete and sentence
of wrath against these, who have given out new invented lies under the names of
ancient and holy fathers.

The canons of the Apostles (albeita book falsely attributed to the Apostles)
do agree better with scripture then the constitution of ZEPHYRINVS. For the
Scripture says, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall
be confirmed, Matt. 18 ver. 16. The Canons of the Apostles say, (...) (...),
that is, Let not an Heretic be admitted to bear witness against a Bishop,
neither yet one witness alanerly, albeit he be faithful: because that by
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be confirmed. Canon
Apost. cap. 74. The writer of the Canons of the Apostles had some remembrance
of the words of Scripture: but the forger of the decretall epistles of
ZEPHYRINVS is like unto a ship-man, who has hoised up his sail and auanced
his ship so far into the sea, that he has tint the sight of land and towns,
as the Poet speaks Provehimur Pelago, terraeque v^besque recedunt. Surely
this lying fellow, who ever he has been, that has written this
supposititious decretall epistle of ZEPHYRINVS, he has hoised up his sail,
and is so bent to lie, that he has tint both sight and remembrance of the
words of holy scripture.

CALLISTVS the 15. Bishop of Rome continued in his Callistus.
charge 5. years, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 21. PLATINA says 6
years, 10. months, 10. days. The fable of Pope DAMASVS, who affirms that
CALLISTVS builed a Church to the honor of the virgin MARIE beyond Tyber is
rejected by PLATINA himself, because the history of the time clearly
proves that in the days of SEVERUS and his sons, the conuentions of the
Christians could not have been in magnificke temples, but rather in obscure
chapels or subterraneall places, so that the multiplied number of lies written
of the Bishops of Rome who lived in this age, and the decretall epistles falsely
attributed unto them plainly prove, that the garment of antiquity, under the
lap whereof Papists would so feign lurk, is altogether inlacking to them.

VRBANVS 1. was the 16. Bishop of Rome. He continued in his office eight
years says Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. Vrbanus.
22. PLATINA four years, ten months, twelve days, Of his martyrdom EVS
EBIVS makes no mention. Others who record his martyrdom are not certain in
what Emperors days he was martyred. Iproceede to his successor PONTIANVS
the 17. B. of Rome. He continued Pontianus.
in his charge 9. years, 5. months, 2. days, Platin, Eusebius. says 6. years.
He was banished to the Isle Sardinia where he died. Of the two decretall
epistles ascribed unto him, the second is general written to al men who fear
and love God and the very first words of it prove it to be false and forged,
Pontianus sanctae and uniuersalis Ecclesiae Episcopus, etc. that is, PONTIANVS
Bishop of the holy universal Church, to all them who fear and love God,
wishes welfare, Tom. 1. Council. Such magnificke styles as these were not as
yet in use, and when they crept in into the Church afterward, they were given
by persons who admired the virtues of some singular and rare men, such as
CYPRIAN and ATHANASIVS and EVSEBIVS: but no man did usurp such proud and
arrogant titles of dignity in his own writings direct to other Christians,
and therefore the learned reject this epistle as composed by some late
unlearned and flattering fellow. After PONTIANVS succeeded ANTERVS the 18 B.
of Rome, to whom EVSEBIVS assigns but one mouth of continuance Anterus.
in his ministry, lib. 6. cap. 29. DAMASVS assigns to him 12. years,
PLATINA 11. years, 1 month, 12. days, and this diversity of counting cannot
be reconciled. Next to ANTERVS succeeded FABIANVS the 19. Bishop of Rome upon
whose head a dove lighted when the people were co^sulting Fabianus.
anent the election of a Bishop, therefore with full consent of the
wholeCongregation he was declared to be theirBishop. The people at this time
were so far from being secluded from giving their consent to the election of
him who should be ordained their Pastor, that the consent of the people had
the principal swey in the election of Pastors, Func. Chron, and Commentar. He
suffered martyrdom under the reign of DECIVS the 7 great persecuter, after
he had continued in his office 14. years, 11. months, 11. days, Platin de
vit. Many constitutions made by him are cited by GRATIANVS and insert Tom 1.
Council. One of them I cannot p^sse by. We constitute that upon every Lords day
the oblation of the altar shall be made by every man and Woman both of bread
and wine to the end that by these oblations they may be deliuerea from the
heaps of their sins. First mark in this constitution that the bread and
wine which the people brought with them upon the Lords day for the ministration
of the holy communion is called the oblation of the altar. the table whereupon
the bread and wine were laid, was called the altar: the bread and the wine are
called the offering or the sacrifice, because part of it was distributed in the
holy communion to keep a memorial of the Lords death, and the rest was given
to the sustentation of the poor, and in that respect also it was called a
sacrifice as the scripture speaks, To do good and to distribute forget not,
fo, with such sacrifices God is pleas^d, Heb. 13. ver. 16. The last part of the
decree is blasphemous and falsely attributed to FABIAN: because the sins of
men and women, who beleeue^ and repent, are forgiven only for the m^rite of
that bloody sacrifice which the Lord Jesus offered upon the cross for our
sins. But our furnishing of elements to the communion and sustentation of the
poor cannot merit forgiveness of sins.

The successor of FABIANVS was CORNELIUS the 20. Bishop Cornelius A council at
Rome against Novatus.
of Rome. He had a great strife against NOVATVS and his accomplices. He assembled
a Council at Rome of 60. Bishops, besides Elders and Deacons, by whom the
heresy of NOVATVS was condemned, and the Novatians were separated from the
fellowship of the Church, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. CORNELIUS was banished from
Rome by the Emperor DECIVS and sent to a town in Hetruria called Centumcellae
where he had great comfort by the mutual letters that passed between him and
CYPRIAN Bishop of Carthage. When the Emperor got knowledge of this, he sent
for CORNELIUS, and accused him as a man who not only despised the worshipping
of the gods, and was disobedient to the Emperors commandment, but also that
he was a trafficker against the estate of the empire by receiving and sending
letters beyond sea. CORNELIUS answered that he wrote os matters pertaining to
Christ and the salvation of men's souls, and not of matters belonging to the
estate of the empire. Notwithstanding the Emperor DECIVS commanded that he
should be scourged with plumbats (this was a sort of grievous whip) and
afterward that he should be led to the temple of MARS with commandment to put
him to death, incase he refused to worship the image of MARS. Thus was
CORNELIUS beheaded for the name of Christ, after he had governed 2. years, 3.
days, Platin de vit. Oras EVSEBIVS writes, 3. years, lib. 7. cap. 2.

LUCIUS the 21. Bishop of Rome was successor to CORNELIUS, and continued in
the government of the Church of Lucius.
Rome 3. years. 3 months, 3. days, Platin. Eusebius. only 8. months, lib. 7.
cap. 2. One decretall epistle is asligned unto him, written unto the Bishops
of F^ance and Spain, whereinto he braggeth that the Bishops of Rome cannot
err in matters of faith, Tom 1. Council. but the ineptitude of a barbarous
Latin style whereinto the Epistle is dited, declares it has been written by
an unlearned Ass, and not by LUCIUS Bishop of Rome.

STEPHANVS 22. Bishop of Rome ruled that Church 2. years Eusebius. eccl. hist.
lib. 7. cap. 5. Platin. 7. years, 5. months, 2. Stephanus.
days. He was greatly commoued against CYPRIAN B. of Carthage, because* that
by his opinion of rebaptizing those who were baptized by Heretics, the unity
of the Church of Christ was perturbed and rent. PLATINA writes that CYPRIAN
before his martyrdom forsook his opinion of rebaptizing and was content by
imposition of hands according to the custom of the Roman Church to receive
such as had been baptized by Heretics, Platin. in vit. Lucii. The
constitution anent consecrated garments that men in spiritual offices should
wear in the Church, and no else where, lest they incur the like punishment
with BALTASAR, who abused the holy vessels of the house of God, Dan. 5. in my
opinion is not judiciously attributed by PLATINA unto this Bishop STEPHANVS:
because the ordinance smells rather of Iudaisme then of Christian religion,
and the reason subjoyned to the constitution is altogether impertinent. It was
sacrilege indeed and a proud contempt of God in the person of BALTASAR to
drink common wine with his harlots in the vessels of gold dedicated to the
holy service of God, but an holy preacher to walk in that same apparel in the
street whereinto he preached and ministered the communion in the Church, this
is no sin nor a thing forbidden by any Apostolic precept. But PLATINA is
dreaming when he ascribes such frivolous constitutions to a Bishop, preparing
himself for death, for PLATINA supponeth that he was martyred in the days of
GALLIENVS. Let the reader mark upon what sandy ground of f^iuolous
constitutions (and falsely alleged) Popish faith is grounded. The decree of
STEPHANVS anent marriage, bearing that the Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons of
the Oriental Church were coupled in matrimony, but in the Roman Church no
person in a spiritual office from the Bishop to the Subdeacon had liberty to
marry, Tom, 1. Council. ^x Gratiano. if it were true, as it is assuredly false,
the Oriental Church has a great commendation, because they would not be wiser
then God, and they would not lay the yocke of the ordinances of men upon the
consciences of their Churchmen but prohibition of marriage (which I have
proved to be a doctrine of devils) cannot be referred to so ancient a
beginning.

The Roman church desirous to be masked with a show of antiquity, they have
attributed Canons to the Apostles which are not found in their writings. Yet it
is a shame to the forgers of these canons to be found the principal impugners
and transgressers of them, cap. 5 (...), that is to say, A Bishop, elder or
Deacon, who under pretense of religion repudiateth his own wife, if he cast
her off, let him be excommunicated: and if he persevere in so doing, let him
be deposed. How can this constitution of STEPHANVS agree with the Canons of the
Apostles? Here I appeal the consciences of honest and upright men if they
find not that the lie i^ not only repugnant unto the verity, but also unto
it self. The supposititious Canons of the Apostles, and the supposititious
constitutions of STEPHANVS cannot both consist. I know what they answer, viz.
that the Canons of the Apostles speak of those Bishops, Elders and Deacons,
who had wives when they were admitted to ecclesiastical offices, these should
not repudiat their wives under pretense of religion: but anent others who were
unmarried in the time of their admission the 25. Canon declares otherwise.
(...), that is, to unmarried men who are promoted to the clergy, we command
that if they please, they shall marie, but only readers and singers, to wit,
shall have this privilege. It is an insufferable thing to hear such leuitie
and inconstancy imputed to the holy Apostles, that they debarred no man from
the office of a Bishop, Elder or Deacon, because he was a married man. O but if
any man enter unmarried to be a Bishop Elder or Deacon, then he must not marie.
If marriage had been an unclean thing it might have debarred men from entering
into holy offices, but if it be a clean thing it cannot exclude them after
they have entered.

The other decree alleged out of Gratian, did 79. Oportebat ut haec, etc.
that by the constitution of PETER and his successors it was ordained, that one
of the Cardinal Elders or Deacons should be consecrated to be Bishop of Rome,
and no other. Such styles of preeminence are unknown to scripture, and to the
antiquity of this time. XISTVS or Xistus. 2
SIXTVS the 2. of that name, and in number the 23. Bishop of Rome succeeded to
STEPHANVS, and governed 2. years, 10 months, 23. days, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
27. And Func. Chron 11. years, such uncertainty is in counting the years of
their administration. The chair of Rome through the vehemency of persecution
was vacant without a successor one year 11 months, 15. days, as DAMASVS
grants, and ONVPHRIVS the corrector of PLATINA cannot deny. If the Bishop of
Rome be the head of the Church, then was the Church headless almost for the
space of two years.

To XISTVS 2. succeeded DIONYSIVS the 24 Bishop of Dionysius.
Rome, and continued in his ministration 9. year, according to the computation
of EVSEBIVS. DAMASVS assigns unto him 6. years and 2. months, MARIANVS 6.
years and 5. months such certainty is in the maine and principal ground of
the Roman faith, anent the succession of the Roman Bishops, that scarce two
writers do agree in one mind anent the time of their succession.

To DIONYSIVS succeeded FELIX 1. the 25. Bishop of Felix. 1.
Rome, and governed 5. years, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 32. He lived in the days
of AVRELIAN the 9. persecuter, and obtained the honor of martyrdom, Platin.
In the three supposititious decretall epistles assigned to him, the second
epistle written to the Bishops of the Provinces of France, very sollicitously
cares for Bishops that they be not accused by secular men, but with so many
caueats, as in effect exeemeth them from all accusation. The language whereinto
the epistle is dited, cannot agree with the ornat style of the Latin tongue in
this age, he being a Roman borne as PLATINA writes. Pustquam ipse ab its
charitative conventus fuerit. Adsummos primates causa ejus canonice deferatar.
Concilium regular^ter convocare deb^bunt, etc. The Galilean language manifested
not more evidently that PETER was a man of Galile, Mat. 26. ver. 73. then the
first of these three phrases manifests that the foresaid epistle was
compiled into a time of great barbaritie.

EVTYCHIANVS the 26. B. of Rome followed after FELIX Eutychianus
1. He continued scarce ten months in his ministry, Eusebius, lib. 7. cap. 32.

CAIUS the 27. B. of Rome succeeded to EVTYCHIANVS and continued 15. years,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 32. Func. Chron He lived Caius.
in the days of the persecution of DIOCLETIAN, and lurked for a time in
subterraneall places. In end he was found out by the persecuters, and put to
death, and with him his brother GABINIVS and his brothers daughter SUSANNA
suffered martyrdom, Platin de vit. Here it is to be marked that many martyrs
died before the edict of horrible persecution was set forth in the 19. year of
DIOCLETIANS reign. For MARCELLINVS succeeded to CAIUS, Ann, 298. Func. but the
cruel edicts of the persecution of DIOCLETIAN were not set forth before the
308. year of our Lord. Whereby it appears evidently, that many Christians were
put to death before the edicts of horrible persecution were renewed by the
Emperor DIOCLETIAN. So hard was the outward estate of Christians, that they
were put to death upon the warrant of the edicts of VALEPIAN and AVRELIAN,
before the edicts of DIOCLETIAN and MAXIMIAN came forth. To CAIUS is attributed
the constitution of ecclesiastical orders and degrees by which men must mount
up to the dignity of a Bishop. First he must be Ostiarius, next Lector, 3.
Exorcista, 4. Acoluthus, 5. Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbyter, and last of
all Episcopus, Platin. decret. Caii, ex lib. Pontif. Damasi.

This order of ascending by degrees to the dignity of a Bishop is confidently
referred to the constitution of the Apostles: but I say, Beatus quinon credi^,
that is, happy is he who beleeneth it not. Like as within scripture there is
no lie, so likewise without scripture there is no truth in matters of faith,
ordering of manners, and appointing of ecclesiastical offices, all that is
necessary is contained in the written Word of God. But now to perform a part
of that which I promised in the end of my treatise of Antiquity, and to let
every man see what unlearned Asses they have been who have set forth the
fained decretall epistles of the fathers of this age. In the epistle written by
CAIUS to the Bishop FELIX aboue-mentioned he says, If any man, of what
dignity so. ever he be, delate such persons (viz. Bishops, Elders, Deacons)
for faults that cannot be proved, let him understand that by the authority
of this constitution he shall be counted infamous. This constitution has three
parts: First: that no ecclesiastical person should be accused before a
secular Judge. Secondly if any accusation be intended against Bishop, Elder of
Deacon it should be qualified by sufficient probation. Thirdly if the accuser
succumbe in probation, he should be counted infamous how eminent so ever his
dignity and estate shall be. The compiler of this supposititious decretall
epistle had no consideration of the time whereinto CAIUS lived. It was a time
of persecution, Christian Bishops were continually drawn before seculare
Judges, and accused of odious crimes whereof they were most innocent: and CAIUS
himself was compelled to lurk a long time in a subterraneal cave. At this time
to bring in CAIUS, as it were sitting in a throne, commanding that no B should
be accused before a secular Judge, etc. what is this else but profusion of
words without judgment and understanding? If this decretall epistle had been
attributed to BONIFACIVS 8. GREGORIVS 7. ALEXANDER 3. it had been a more
competent time, and the constitution had seemed more probable to the reader.
Moreover the language is like unto the matter it self. Intelligat jactur am
infamiae se sustinere in place of jacturam famae.

MARCELLINVS the 28. B. of Rome succeeded to CAIUS and Marcellinus.
ruled 9. years, Platin, Func, Chron, he fainted in time of the persecution of
DIOCLETIAN, and sacrificed to idols, but afterward he repented as PETER did,
and gave his life for the testimony of Christ. He who accuses himself,
closes all other men's mouths from accusation of him: he who truly repents,
by his repentance is restored to all the dignities of the children of God which
were lost by sin: he who suffered martyrdom for Christ, and he whose body
lacked the honor of burial for the space of 30. days, for the cause of
Christ alanerly, this man (I say) his name should be kept in reverent
remembrance as if he had not fallen. Marcellus.


After MARCELLINVS succeeded MARCELLVS the 29. B. of Rome who continued in that
ministration 5. years 6, months, 21 days. He lived in the days of MAXENTIVS,
by whom he was enclosed into a filthy stable, to the end that lacking the
salubritie of wholesome air, he might be destroyed with the filth and stink of
the dung of beasts: which thing also came to pass indeed, for he died in the
stable. This holy martyr, so long as he lived, he made the stable like unto a
sanctuary: for he never intermitted the holy exercises of prayer, and
fasting, and the Church when peace was granted to them by the mercy of God,
they builded a temple in that same place where the stable had been, whereinto
MARCELLVS died, Platin. de vitis. The name of MARCELLVS is pretermitted by
EVSEBIVS.

After MARCELLVS succeeded EVSEBIVS the 30. B. of Rome Eusebius.
and continued 6. years, 1, month. 3. days, In his time PLATINA writes that
HELENA the mother of CONSTANTINE found the cross of Christ. But ONVPHRIVS
himself is compelled to grant that both DAMASVS and PLATINA erred in that
narration, because CONSTANTINE at this time had no dominion in Syria, neither
was he as yet converted to the faith of Christ. But the tyrant MAXIMINVS with
great cruelty oppressed the Church of Christ in the bounds of Syria and
Judea. And therefore such as read the history of the primitive Church, let
them read with judgment: because it is an easy thing to err, if any man give
such undoubted credit Of other preachers and doctors. Tertullian,
to ecclesiastical writers as he gives to sacred scripture.

TERTVLLIAN a learned preacher of the African province, and of the city of
Carthage, a man of a quick wit and pregnant ingine, flourished under the
reign of SEVERUS the 5 persecuter. When he came to Rome, he vas not free of
the envy and reproaches of the clergy of the Roman church, and moved with
anger, he declined to the opinion of the Heretic MONTANVS, and wrote books
against the true Church such as the volumes following, De pudicitia, De
pe^cutione, De jejun^s, De monogamia, De exstasi, lib. 6. and his 7. book
against APOLLONIVS. This lamentable defection of TERTVLLIAN may be an example
to all men of great understanding and excellent learning, not to be puffed up,
nor to be high minded, lest they fall into the snare of the devil. For
TERTVLLIAN wrote learned apologies for the Christians, and mightily confuted
the error of MARCION: notwithstanding of all this, he was high minded, and
joined himself to the opinion of MONTANVS, Ierom. Catal. script. eccl. if he
had kept himself free of this foul spot, he was worthy for his gifts to have been counted among the most famous doctors of the Church after the days of the
Apostles, Hist. Magd. Cent. 3. cap. 10.

ORIGIN the son of LEONIDES an Egyptian was a young Origin.
man of 17. years of age, when his father was martyred in the persecution of
SEVERUS, Ierom, Catal. script. eccles. His ingine was so pregnant in his youth
and so capable of all kind of instruction, that his father would oftimes
uncover his breast when he was on sleep, and kiss it, giving thanks to God who
had made him father of so happy a son, hist. Magd, Cent. 3. cap. 10. After
his fathers death, he sustained himself, his mother and six brethren by
keeping a school, for all his fathers goods were confiscate for his confession
of Christ. When ORIGIN had spent his young age, the description of his life in
Greek says. (...), that is, when he was in his mid age, the Churches of
Achaia vexed with Heretics sent for him: and as he was upon his journey to
Athens he went through Palestina and was ordained to be a preaching Elder by
ALEXANDER B of Jerusalem, and THEOCTISTVS B. of Caesarea. This fact offended
DEMETRIUS B. of Alexandria so highly, that he was full of rage against ORIGIN:
and wherefore? because he being a man of Alexandria received ordination to an
ecclesiastical office from the Bishops of Jerusalem and Caesarea.

When Bishops become serious in trifling matters, and have a greater regard to
their own glory then to the advancement of the kingdom of God, then that may
be spoken of them which IEROM writes of DEMETRIUS, Qui tanta in eum
debacchatus est insania, ut per totum mundum super ejus nomine seriberet, that
is, He was so full of rage against him that he replenished the world with
writings mentioning the name of ORIGIN. But consider, what fault was in ORIGIN,
who was craving no ordination: And what fault was in ALEXANDER and THEOCTISTVS,
men whose names shall be had in everlasting remembrance. They did nothing of
intention to grieve the heart of DEMETRIUS B. of Alexandria, but only being
careful of the advancement of the kingdom of God, they endeavored to
strengthen the hands of ORIGIN, against the Heretics of Achaia, by conferring
unto him the calling of a Presbyter. No man can justly offend against me, if I
cast in this sentence, as a common admonition to all preachers (...), Let us
not be over serious in ridiculous matters. The name of ORIGIN was so famous,
that not only the Bishops of Achaia solicited him to come to their bounds for
stopping the mouths of Heretics, but also he was sent for at two diverse
times to be present at the Councils conucened in Arabia against Heretics.
Some Heretics affirmed that the souls of men perish with their bodies, and
are raised up again in the day of the resurrection with the bodies, whom
ORIGIN mightily refuted, Comment. Func. in Chron. lib. 6. Likewise he was
present at the Council in Arabia gathered against BERYLLVS B. of Bostra, who
denied that Christ was existent before his manifestation in the flesh, and by
the trauelles of ORIGIN BERYLLVS was reclaimed and reduced to the true faith:
therefore I reckone him not into the roll of Heretics, Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 33.
FIRMILIANVS B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia invited ORIGIN to come to Cappadocia
where he detained him a long time. Likewise MAMMEA, the mother of ALEXANDER the
Emperor, sent for him to come to Antiochia, and had him in reverent regard.
Likewise he wrote to the Emperor PHILIP, and to his mother who was the first
Emperor that professed the Name of Christ, Ierom. catal. script. eccl. He
studied to be acquainted with the Hebrew language, far contrary to the
custom of his own nation: and he conferred the Hebrewe text with the Greek
translations, not only the Septuagints, but also the translations of AQVILA,
THEOLOSION and SYMMACHVS, and he found out the fifth, sixth and seventh
editions, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 17. Ierom catal. scrip. eccles. Notwithstanding
of all these excellent gifts and renoumed fame of ORIGIN, he wanted not his
own gross errors and foolish facts. In expou^ding of scripturs he became a
curious searcher out of allegories. Yet this father of allegories ORIGIN took
the words of Christ spoken of Eunuchs, There be some chaste, which have made
th^mselues chaste for the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 19. ver. 12. these words, I
say, spoken in an allegorical sense, he took in a simple and vnfigurat
meaning, and gelded himself, to the end he might live without all suspicion
of uncleanness, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 8. No learned man has commended this fact
of ORIGIN so far as my reading can extend, for if a man might lawfully
dismember his own body, to the end that he might live chastely, why might not a
man in like manner cut off his own hand, to the end he should not in hasty
motion of anger kill his neighbor? But the obedience of the commandments of
God is seated in the heart, and more commended for voluntary subjection, then
for necessity of abstinence of committing evil, because there is not an
instrument in the body able to commit transgression. Finally by seeking of
divinity without the bounds of the holy scriptures of God, in stead of true
divinity he was entangled with foolish errors, anent the creation of many
worlds, one succeeding to another, anent the pains of devils and wicked men
after long torments to be finished, and anent the possibility of man's nature
to keep the whole law of God. For which opinions long after his death he was
excommunicat in the 5, general Council holden Ann 551. Concerning his
weakness in offering to idols rather then to suffer his chaste body to be
abused, I have spoken in the history of the 7. persecution. He lived until the
days of GALLVS and VOLVSIANVS, and died in the 69. year of his age in the
town of Tyrus where he was also buried. CYPRIAN was an African, borne in
Carthage, in his youth altogether Cyprian.
given to the study and practice of Magical arts. His conversion was by the
means ofCECILIVS a preacher, whose name after he bare, and through occasion of
hearing the history of the Prophet JONAH, Ierom catal script. eccles. and
Ierom. comment in Ionam. After his conversion he distributed all his substance
to the poor, Ierom. ibid. and became first a preaching elder, and afterward
Bishop of Carthage. He was banished in the persecution of DECIVS, and martyred
under VALERIAN, Nazianz, in laudem Cypriani. The worthy D. I. FOX thinks
that NAZIANZEN commends another Bishop of that same name, borne in Antiochia
and Bishop in Antiochia, who suffered martyrdom in the days of DIOCLETIAN.
This CYPRIAN B. of Carthage was a man full of love, a great comforter of
CORNELIUS B. of Rome. He suffered martyrdom as IEROM writes, that same day,
albeit not in that same year, that CORNELIUS concluded his life by glorious
martyrdom, Ierom, Catal. script. eccles. He had great strife against two
contrary sects, viz. against NOVATVS, who was excessive rigorous against
those who had fallen in time of persecution: and against NOVATIANVS and
FELICISSIMVS, who by the contrary would have had both Heretics and Apostats
received without all form of ecclesiastical discipline, Hist. Magd Cent, 3.
cap. 10. He esteemed much of those who suffered rebuke for the Name of Christ:
and he said of the metal mines, and those that were condemned for Christ's
sake to work in them, that whereas they were wont to deliver gold and silver
and precious things unto the world, no we by the contrary the mines received
gold and silver and the most precious things in the world, counting the
Confessors and martyrs of Christ the rich treasures of the earth, of whom the
world was not worthy.

His opinion anent rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics, albeit it
was erroneous, yet his modesty in not damning the^ rashly, who were of a
contrary opinion, is great ly praised by S. AUSTEN, who says that the modesty
of CYPRIAN in his error was mo^e to be regarded then a sound and right opinion
anent baptism without humility and modesty August de Baptis. contra Donat.
lib. 5. cap. 17. He was a faithful builder of the house of God, not by word
only, but also by write, and his books remain until this day as a precious
treasure in the Church of Christ. The book de Revelatione capitis Ioannis
Baptista is supposititious, because in it mention is made of the reverence that
PIPINVS king of France did to the head of JOHN Baptist, when it was
transported from Constantinople to France, and it is known that PIPINVS was
not borne three hundredth years after the martyrdom of CYPRIAN: how then could
CYPRIAN write of a fact done so long time after his death?

The Church of Christ was multiplied under the persecutions of SEVERUS,
MAXIMINVS, DECIVS, VALERIAN, AVRELIAN and DIOCLETIAN. All these six
persecutions are comprehended in the third Centurie. In Jerusalem was
NARCISSUS, against whom wicked men banded themselves together, with forged
accusations and false testimonies sealed up with oaths and imprecations to
grieve the heart of NARCISSUS, in so much that he left his calling, and fled
to the wilderness where he Iurked a long time. But the false witnesses who
bare testimony against him escaped not the punishment of God: One of them and
his whole family and substance was burned with sudden fire: another of them
was stricken with an heavy disease, such as he himself in his imprecation
had wished unto himself: the third was terrified with the sight of the
judgments of God that lighted upon the other two, and he repented and powered
out the grief of his dolorous heart in such abundance of tears that he
became blind. All these false witnesses were punished, Eusebius. lib 6. cap 9.
and he who was penitent, albeit the Lord pardoned his sin, yet he
chastised him with temporal punishments. The Bishops of the next adjacent
Churches, because they knew not what was become of NARCISSUS, they admitted
another called DIOS, who continued but a short time. To him succeeded
GERMANION and after GERMANION GORDIVS, in whose time NARCISSUS manifested
himself again to the Church of Jerusalem, who requested him to undertake his
office again: for they reverenced him as a man raised from death to life
again and the punishment of God inflicted upon his accusers increassed their
reverence toward him. He was old and not able to discharge the weighty office
of a Bishop theresore ALEXANDER a worthy man was joined as fellow laborer
with him. EVSEBIVS writes that he was admonished, by a celestial vision of
the will of God, that he should be Bishop of Jerusalem with NARCISSUS (for he
had been Bishop of another parochin before in Cappadocia:) by the like
celestial vision NARCISSUS and others of the clergy were admonished, that the
day next following a Bishop should enter into Jerusalem whom God had
appointed to be an helper to NARCISSUS, Ierom Catal. scrip. eccl. He defended
ORIGIN against the fury and madness of DEMETRIUS B. of Alexandria, who set
both himself and others to great business for a matter of no importance as
said is, Ierom ibid. In the persecution of DECIVS he was carried to Casarea,
closed into a dark prison, and died a martyr as has been declared.
ALEXANDER is supponed till have been the 35. Bishop of Jerusalem. MAZABANES,
HYMENEVS, LEBDAS, THERMON, all these followed ALEXANDER, Eusebius lib 7. cap. 14
Func, chronol.

In Alexandria to PHILETVS and DEMETRIUS succeeded Bishops of Alexandria.
HERACLAS the 12 Bishop of that town. He was the disciple of ORIGIN and a
fellow laborer with him in governing the school of Alexandria, in end he was
chosen to be Bishop of Alexandria: whose successor was DIONYSIVS 13. Bishop,
whom God delivered miraculously from the hands of persecuters, in the days of
DECIVS, by the sudden onset of a number of people who had been at a marriage
feast. When they heard that DIONYSIVS was taken by soldiers and led away to
Taposiris, they arose from table and followed with a speedy pace, and with a
tumultuarie voice, so that the soldiers who had DIONYSIVS in keeping, were
afraid and fled: and so DIONYSIVS by the great providence of God was delivered
out of the hands of his enemies, Eusebius. lib, 6. cap. 40. After him MAXIMUS,
THEONAS, PETRVS, a martyr under DIOCLETIAN and ACHILLAS were Bishops of
Alexandria, Func. Chron. Bishops of Antiochia


After SERAPION succeeded (...) of Antiochia, of whom ALEXANDER B. of
Jerusalem, (being the prisoner of Christ in Casarea) wrote unto the people of
Antiochia, that it was a comfort to him, and it made his imprisonment and
bands the more easy, that he heard it reported that ASCLEPIADES, a man well
exercised in the true faith, by the providence of God was made Bishop of
Antiochia, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 11. PHILETVS was the 10 ZEBENVS the 11. and
BABYLAS was the 12. Bishop of Antiochia, of whom EVSEBIVS records that he
died in prison, like as ALEXANDER B. of Jerusalem ended his life in prison,
both the one and the other suffered such kind of martyrdom under the
persecution of DECIVS, Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 39. In the catalogue of Emperors,
catholic Bishops and Heretics subjoyned to the eccesiasticall history of
THEODORETVS. we read that BABYLAS B. of Antiochia would not suffer DECIVS to
enter into the Temple whereinto Christians were conueened, and that before he
was beheaded, he gave direction to bury into the sepulcher with his dead body
the chain also, wherewith his body had been bound, as a funeral ornament of
his buried body. But EVSEBI US deserves best credit, who affirms that he
died in prison, and makes no mention of his beheading. Some imagine that he
who died in prison, and he who was beheaded were both Bishops of Antiochia, but
living in different ages: yet seeing the catalogue foresaid speaks of this
suffering under the Emperor DECIVS, it is more probable that there is some
oversight in the writer of the catalogue. To BABYLAS succeeded FABIVS. He was
entangled with the error of NOVATVS, but was reclaimed again by the vigilant
travels of DIONYSIVS B. of Alexand^ia, Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 44. DEMETRIANVS a
married man was successor to FABIVS. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS a pestilent Heretic
was the 15. Bishop of Antiochia. DOMNVS the son of DEMETRIAN the 16. TIMEVS
the 17. CYRILLVS the 18. and TYRANNVS the 19. Bishop of Antiochia.

The names of the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria and Antiochia were the more
accuratly observed and registrat after the Council of Nice (albeit I recite
them before) because it happened in that general Council that for timous
suppressing of heresies the Bishops of these places were called Patriarchs,
and had power to convocat Councils within their own bounds for suppressing of
Heretics. Always it fell out far contrary to the expectation of holy
fathers: for the Patriarchs were the chief protectours of heresy, as the
history of the subsequent Centuries evidently declares. Nevertheless in this
Centurie beside those men of God above mentioned (nothing inferior in
spiritual graces to the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Antiochia and Jerusalem)
there were many worthy men in other places such as FIRMILIANVS B. of Caesarea
in Cappadocia, a man familiarly acquainted with ORIGIN. GREGORIVS and
ATHENODORVS, brethren and Pastors in Pontus. HELENVS in Tarsus, and NICOMAS in
Iconium. THEOTECT US in Caesarea Palestinae. MAXIMUS in Bostra, Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 28. EVSEBIVS and ANATHOLIVS Bishops of Laodicea. QVIRINVS B. of Scesiana,
or as others call it, Scescania, a worthy martyr, about whose neck a millstone
was hanged, as has been before declared, Func. Chron.

I make an end of this second head with the greater gladness, that I perceive
the little stone hewed out of the mountain without hands to be waxing and
growing to the bigness of a great mountain, replenishing the whole earth,
even in the time of most horrible persecutions, Dan. 2.

CENT. III. Cap. 3.
Of Heretics.
IVstly did EPIPHANIVS compare an Heretic to a modiwart, a beast in quantity
little, lurking in subterraneall holes, and yet working great harm to well
labored ground: Nevertheless when it happens that this noisome and blind
beast creeps out of her hole, and runs upon the superfice of the earth,
she is a ridiculous, wandering and feeble beast, she cannot see the hole out
of which she has crept forth, and she is easily taken and slain: Even so
Heretics, so long as they lurk in secret, they pervert the hearts of many
simple and ignorant people: but when they set out their heads, and
their-doctrine is examined by the light of Gods everlasting word, they are
found to be ridiculous and feeble beasts. In the former Centuries by way of
preterition I passed by many obscure heresies. The like order I intend God
willing to keep in this Centurie also. The Heretics called Artotyritae who
added Artotyritae.
unto the administration of their sacrament cheese unto the bread. Alogi who
rejected the writings of the holy Alogi.
Apostle JOHN, and said they were written by CERINTHVS. Albeit the Evangelist
JOHN of purpose wrote the history of his Euangell against EBION and CERINTHVS.
Adamiani who Adamiani.
had their conuenticles in subterraneall places called Hypocausta, because that
under the place of their meetings, a furnace of fire was kindled to warm the
place of their conuentions: for they unclothed themselves when they entered
into it, and stood naked both men and women according to the similitude of ADAM
and EVA before their fall. Theodotiani who denied the divinity of Christ,
taking the name of their sect from a miserable man in Constantinople called.
Theodotiani.
THEODOTVS, who in time of persecution, for love of temporal life, denied the
King of glory Jesus Christ, and when this filthy denial was objected to him
as a reproach of a cowardly heart, he answered that he denied not God, but
man, by this answer signifying that Christ was man only and not God
manifested in our nature. Melchisedeciani magnified MELCHISEDECK above Christ.
Bardesianisiae M^deciani. Bardesianistae. Ualesii.
were but a branch of the heresy of the Ualentinians and Gnostici, who denied
the resurrection as is already declared in the second Centurie. Valesii, who
gelded themselves. Angelici, whose name was better known to EPIPHANIVS then
the original of their sect. Apostolici, who would have no possessions, but
rejoiced in voluntary poverty, and detested Apostolici.
marriage, giving out a sentence against themselves, that they were unclean,
because they were procreated by marriage. Origeniani, and Turpes. These were
vile and filthy beasts, not Origeniani
abhorring from whoredom, but from procreation of children, to the end they
might seem to be chaste. They were like to ONAN the son of IVDAH whom the
Lord destroyed, Genesis 38. ver. 9. 10. All these heresies mentioned by Epiphan.
contra haereses, lib. 2. I pass by almost with silence, because they were like
unto abortiue birthes, and continued not long to perturbe the peace of the
Church.

Now concerning other Heretics, by whose venomous doctrine the Church of
Christ had greater strife and perturbation. Artemon.
ARTEMON and BERYLLVS B. of Bostra in Arabia denied the divinity of Christ,
and affirmed that he was not existent before he took flesh of the Virgin.
With BERYLLVS ORIGIN conferred, and reduced him back again to the true faith,
and therefore I set not his name in the Catalogue of Heretics, because he
added not unto the fault of his bad opinion an obstinate defending of the same,
Eusebius eccl. hist, lib. 6 cap. 33.

The heresy of Helcesaitae otherwise called Sampsei, because Helcesaitae.
of the short continuance of it is scarce worthy to be reckoned, as I have
declared in the treatise of heresy. They mixed the religion of the Jews,
Gentiles and Christians together, but were more addicted to the superstition of
the Jews then to any one of the other two. Epiphan contra haereses lib. 2.
They rejected the writings of the Apostle PAVL and affirmed that a man who
denied the Lord with his mouth in the time of persecution, if so be he adhered
to the faith in his heart, he had committed no sin. They carried about with
them a singular book which they said was sent down from heaven, and they
promised remission of sins to every man who would hearken to the words of
that book. Comment. Func. in Chronol.

NOVATVS a Presbyter at Rome was a man of a contentious spirit, and men that
are humorous, high minded and contentious, they are wise to do evil, but they
can do no good. Such a man was NOVATVS, who disquieted with schism, and
heresy two of the most notable Churches in the world at that time, viz
Carthage and Rome by giving out a rigorous sentence against those who in time
of persecution had fallen, albeit they had repented after their fall, and all
outward tokens of unfeigned repentance had been seen in them. yet his opinion
was that they should not be admitted again to the fellowship of the Church.
This opinion was not only repugnant to the words of ISA 1. Ezech. 18. Mat.
11. and to innumerable more places of sacred scripture, but also it was a
foolish opinion advancing the kingdom of the devil and not the kingdom of
God. For the two great wheels of the cart of the devil, whereby he carries
men headlong to hell are presumption and desperation: and merciless NOVATVS
taching a doctrine that strengthened not the knees of the weak, he did what in
him lay to move sinners to despare. Therefore CYPRIAN B. of Carthage who
excommunicated him, and CORNELIUS B. of Rome who did the like with advise of a
grave and worthy Council gathered at Rome, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. are to be
counted wise men, because they endeavored timonsly to suppress those errors
that weakened the hearts of the children of God. I read of no heresy
preceding the heresy of ARRIVS and EVTYCHES that continued longer time in the
Church of God then the heresy of NOVATVS, partly because it crept in under
pretense of zeal to the glory of God, and under pretense of a detestation of
sin: partly also, because the Novatian Heretics in the question concerning
the divinity of Christ were comformable to the opinion of the true Church,
Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12. Thirdly, because in time of the Arrian persecution the
Novatians were banished and troubled with no Iesse hateful malice and despite
then the members of the true Church were: yea and the true Catholics and
Novatianes being companions of one and the selfsame suffering were content
also to give their lives one for another, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 38. And the
foresaid author says, Parumque abfuit quin coadunarentur, Socrat, ibid. that
is, They were near by united and agreed together, to wit, the true Catholics
and Novatians. But what was the impediment that hindered their union? Read the
history, and it shall not be found in the true Catholics, but in the
obstinacy and wilfulness of the Novatians. And so it falls out at all times
that men who are authors of heresies and schisms, are also the principal
hinderers of the redintegration of the unity of the Church. The razing and
demolishing of the Temple of the Novatians in Cyzicum a famous town of
Bithynia together with the calamity of the people of Mantinium a town of
Paphlagonia, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 38, clearly proves that the Novatian
heresy continued until the days of CONSTANTIVS the son of CONSTANTINE an
Arrian Emperor and persecuter of the true faith. The favor that they obtained
in the days of IVLIAN I pass over with silence. But in the days of the
reign of THEODOSIUS, the Novatians by the Emperors edict were permitted to
have public conuentions in Constantinople, to enjoy such privileges as other
Christians had, and to possess the oratories and temples whereinto they were
accustomed to serve God. All this toleration and liberty was granted to them
by the good Emperor THEODOSIUS, because in the head of doctrine anent the
divinity of Christ they damned the Acrians, and agreed with the Homousians,
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10. The Magdeburg history says that this heresy
continued in Constantinople until the time that it was conquessed by the
Turks, Cent. 3. cap. 5. I have written of this heresy at greater length to
admonish all true Christians that it is not enough to adhere to some points of
the true faith, and to suffer persecution for righteousness at some times, and
to love brotherly fellowshippe at some times, so that we are content (...) life
for our brethren: all these things did the Novatians, and were favored by the
Emperor THEODOSIUS, as said is, yet were they both sehismatickes and
Heretics, because they would be wiser then God, and debarred them from the
bosom of Christ's compassions whom Christ inviteth to come unto him, saying,
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11.
ver. 28, Let the example of the Novatians admonish men, who study to
singularity, and to bring in new customs or opinions into the Church of God,
to take heed that their opinions be not repugnant unto the written word: lest,
after they have continued a long time, in end they be rejected as opinions,
foolish, vain, heretical, and not agreeing with the scriptures of God. His
followers were called (...) or puritans, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. Hist. Magd.
cent. 3. cap. 5. Let this name rest in the bosom of Heretics. And men who
are not guilty of the faults, that were in the Novatians, if they be
undeservedly charged with this name given of old to Heretics, let them say
with humble hearts, that in one sense they are (...) because they are purged
from sin in the fountain of the blood of Christ, I John 1. ver. 7. But in no
other sense and meaning can true Christians be called (...), except only in
this, because their sins are freely forgiven in Christ, and God has begun
the work of sanctification in them, to be a testimony that they are planted
in the stock of Christ. In this sense speaks the Evangelist JOHN, (...),
that is, Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken unto you, Ioh.
15. ver. 3.

The heresy of SABELLIVS began to show it self unto the world, about the
year of our Lord 257. under the reign of Sabelliani.
GALLVS. It was first fet forth by NOETVS in Ptolemaida, afterward by
HERMOGENES, and PRAZEAS, and last it was propagated by SABFLLIVS the disciple
of NOETVS. Always the heresy rather takes the name from the disciple then
from the master. They confessed that there was but one God alanerly, but they
denied that there were three distinct persons in this one Godhead, viz. The
Father, Son and holy Ghost. By this their opinion they confounded the two
Greek words, (...), as if there were no difference between them. No man dare
presume to say that in God there are three distinct substances, therefore
SABELLIVS and his adherents said that there were not three distinct
subsistences or persons in the Godhead, but the three names of Father, Son
and holy Ghost were given to one person allanerly, but pointed not out
distinction of persons or subsistences in the Godhead, Ruffin. hist. lib. 1.
cap. 29. By this opinion they were compelled to grant that it was the Father
who clad himself with our nature, and died for our sins, and therefore they
were called Patrispassiani because their opinion imported that the Father
suffered.

In the reign of GALLIENVS, and about the year of our Lord 264, a certain
Bishop in Egypt called NEPOS began Nepotiani.
to affirm that at the latter day the godly should rise before the wicked, and
should live with Christ here in the earth a thousand years in abundance of
all kind of delicate earthly pleasures. The ground of this error was the
misunderstanding of the words of the Revelation of JOHN chap. 20. ver. 5. 6.
In refuting of this heresy DIONYSIVS Bishop of Alexandria bestowed his
travels with good success: for he disputed against CORACION a man professing
this error in Arsenoitis a place of Egypt, whom he refuted in presence of
many brethren, who were auditors of that disputation, for the space of three
days from morning till evening. So that in end CORACION yielded, and promised
that he should not maintain any such opinion in time to come, Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 24.

About that same time, that is, in the time of the reign Samosatenus.
of GALLIENVS, CLAUDIUS and AVRELIANVS. PAVLVS SAMOSATENVS Bishop of Antiochia,
'a pestilent fellow, denied the divinity of the Son of God, and affirmed
that Christ obtained the name of the Son of God through his virtuous
behavior and patient suffering, but he was not naturally and truly the Son of
God begotten of the substance of the father. His life correspondent to his
doctrine was wicked and profane. He was accustomed to walk through the
streets of Antiochia accompanied with a number of flattering friends and
servants, some going before him and others following after him, and he
himselse in the mids, reading or meditating letters to his secretaries, Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 30. Which form of presumptuous and stately behavior was
offensive to the people, who thought that pomp and pride was not beseeming to
Bishops, who were preachers of the humility, meekness and patient sufferings
of Christ. But if the men of Antiochia (says PLATINA) had been in his days,
and had seen the stately train of the Bishop of Rome and his Cardinals,
accompanied with so many servants, clothed in silk and sumptuous apparel, and
riding upon gallant and lusty horses, richly decked with gold and costly
foot-mantles of diverse colors, they would have been more offended, and
would have said, that such pride had nothing to do with the simplicity and
humility of Christ. Platin. in vit. Sixth. 2. But to return again to PAVLVS
SAMOSATENVS, he was so covetous of vain glory, that he built unto himself in
the Church a glorious seat according to the similitud of a princely throne,
and from this seat he spoke unto the people, whom he was accustomed to reprove
with sharp words, if they had not received his words with cheerful
acclamations and shoutings, such as were wont to be used in stage places,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. The Psalms also, that were sung in the Church to the
praise of God, he abrogated, and was not ashamed to hire women to sing his
own praises in the Congregation of the Lords people. For this his damnable
doctrine and lewd life he was most justly deposed by the Council conueened at
Antiochia, and excommunicated by all Christian Churches in the whole world, and
was so detested by all good men that FIRMILIANVS Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, and DIONYSIVS ALEXANDRINVS, who for his old age might not travel
and be present at the Council of Antiochia, yet they both damned the
Heretic SAMOSATENVS by their letters sent to the Congregation of Antiochia,
but not to the Bishop thereof, because he was not worthy that any man should
salute him either by word or write, Eusebius. ibid.

MANES a Persian, otherwise called MANICHEVS, a man furious and mad,
answering well unto his Manes and Manichei.
name set forth the venom of his heresy in the time of the reign of
DIOCLETIAN, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 31. a man both in speech and manners rude and
barbarous, in inclination deuihsh: yet he durst presume to call himself the
holy spirit, as MONTANVS had done before, and to represent Christ's actions in
choosing unto him 12. disciples, whom he sent forth to propagat his errors
into diverse parts of the world, Eufeb. ibid. His heresy contained a mass or
venomous composition of old extinguished errors, which he renewed and massed
together, such as the error of CERDON and MARCION concerning two beginnings:
The error of Encratitae in prohibition of meats which God has appointed for
the use of man with thanksgiving, specially flesh and wine: He utterly rejected
the old Testament, as many other Heretics had done before him. He ascribed
not sin to the free will of man and his voluntary defection from the estate
of his first creation, but to necessity, because man's body was made of the
substance of the prince of darkness. This was that heresy wherewith
AUGUSTINE was infected before his conversion, but the Lord who brought forth
light out of darkness, and made PAVL, sometime a persecnter, to be a preacher of
his Gospel, and CYPRIAN a sorcerer to be a worthy preacher and martyr: this
same gracious Lord (I say) in the multitude of his unspeakable compassions
drew AUGUSTINE out of this filthy mire of abominable heresy, and made him
like unto a bright star sending forth the beams of light to the comfort of
Gods house. The opinion of MANES anent the creation of the world, and the
creation of man, the manifestation of Christ in our nature rather in show and
appearance then in verity, and the horrible abomination of their vile
Eucharist, no man can be ignorant of these things who has read but a little of
the books of AUGUSTINE written against the Manicheans. In end like as MANES
exceeded all the rest of the Heretics in madness of foolish opinions: even
so the Lord pointed him out among all the rest to be a a spectacle of his
wrath and vengeance. For the king of Persia hearing of the fame of MANES, sent
for him to cure his son, who was deadly diseased: but when he saw that his
son died in his hands, he cast him into prison and was purposed to put him to
death: but he escaped out of prison and fled to Mesopotamia. Nevertheless the
king of Persia understanding in what place MANES did lurk, sent men who
pursued him, took him and excoriated his body, and stopped his skin full of
chafe, and set it up before the entry of a certain city of Mesopotamia,
Socrat. eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 22. If any man be desirous to have greater
knowledge of this remarkable Heretic, both in respect of his life and death,
he may read the fore. mentioned chapter of the ecclesiastical history of
SOCRATES, and he shall find that the first man called MANICHEVS, who renewed
the error of two beginnings was a man of Scythia. He had a disciple first
called BVDDAS, afterward TEREBYNTHVS who dwelt in Babylon. This man TEREBYNTHVS
was the composer of these books which MANES gave out under his own name.
MANES was but a slavish boy bought with money by a woman of Babylon, in whose
house TEREBYNTHVS had lodged, and she brought up the boy at school: his name
was CVRBICVS when he was bought, but when this woman died, she left in legacy
to CVRBICVS the money and books of TEREBYNTHVS, and he went from Babylon to
Persia, changed his name and called himself MANES, and set forth the books of
TEREBYNTHVS as if they had been composed by himself, so that he added unto
the rest of his villainies this fault also, that he was from his very youth a
dissembled and deceitful fellow, Read the history of Socrat, lib. 1. cap. 22.

After MANES sprang up HIERAX, who spoke of the Father, Hieracitae.
and the Son as of two lights different in substance. He damned marriage,
denied the resurrection of the body, and excluded infants from the kingdom of
God, Epiph. contrahaeres. Hist, Magd. Mark in this Catalogue of the heresies
of the first three hundredth years how many of the devils trumpeters sounded the
doctrine of the prohibition of marriage. The Nicolaitans, Gnostici, Encratitae,
Montanistae, Apostolici, Origeniani called Turpes, Manichei and Hieracitae.
Satan hates marriage to the end that his kingdom might be advanced by
fornication and all kind of uncleanness.

CENT. 3.
A Treatise of Purgatory and prayer for the dead.
IN this Centurie also the opinion of ORIGIN anent Purgatory and worshipping
of relics, errors borrowed from Pagans.
purgatory pains before a man can enter into the kingdom of heaven gives me
manifest occasion to speak of Purgatory. In the beginning of this treatise I
protest, that I detest the worshipping of relics, and the conceit of
Purgatory fire as two heads of doctrine borrowed from Ethnickes and Pagans.
The bones of THESEUS (says PLVTARCH) being transported and placed in the
middle part of the town of Athens, they honored his ashes as if he himself
had been returned to the town, and gave unto him all these divine honors,
calling him (...), that is, he who diuerteth evil from them: also they called
him (...), that is, a patron and a helper: and (...), that is, who receives
the supplications of the humble. What was this else but to honor THESEUS with
divine honors? And the excessive honors attributed to the relics of saints
in the Popish church, with confidence to be helped and better heard of God,
because they were prostrate before the relics of saints, what was it else but
a counterfaiting of the superstition of the Pagans? In like manner the opinion
of Purgatory is but an Ethnicke invention, and PLATO seems to be the first
author of it, (except any man of greater reading can reduce it to a more
ancient beginning) for PLATO in his dialogue called Phedo, vel de anima has
three opinions concerning the souls of men. First, he thinks that the
souls of men who have lived a very honest and vnreproouable life, when they
depart out of their bodies, they go to a place of unspeakable happiness.
Secondly he thinks that the souls of men who have continued into
incorrigible wickedness, they go to a place called Tartarus there to be
punished with endless pains. These two foresaid opinions PLATO by his
traveling to Egypt (where the people of the Jews had remained a long time)
might have learned, to wit, that the souls of good men go to heaven, and the
souls of evil men go to hell. But PLATO thought by Philosophy to mend the
want that was in ancient Theology, and he devised a third place whereinto
souls should be both tried and purged, and after suffering of pains should be
set at liberty, namely the souls of men who had heavily grieved their parents
and afterward repented, or had committed filthy murders, and afterward
repented, these men's souls (I say) according to the opinion of PLATO, behooued
to go through infernal floods, specially through Acheron, C^ytus, and
Phlegeton to be tried and purged, and in end to be set at liberty, providing
they had fully satisfied the persons whom they had offended. These beginnings
of PLATOES conceits had never hurt Christian religion, if CLEMENS
ALEXANDRINVS, and after him ORIGIN had not mingled profane Philosophy with
Theology. But when the question is riped up to the very ground, the defenders
of Purgatory fire and worshipping of relics have cause to be ashamed, as
disciples of Pagans, and not of the holy Apostles, in these two points of
doctrine.

The foolishnes of CLEMENS and ORIGIN has been Foolish borrowing.
very pernicious to the Church of God, because they borrowed not from PLATO
silver and gold, as the Iowes borrowed from the Egyptians, by warrant of Gods
commandment Exodus 11. but they borrowed chafe and doung, lies and fables,
which some time spreading, sometime growing, sometime altering the first
similitude fashioned in the combs of PLATO, in end became an article of Popish
faith, and was so straightly urged, that they who would not believe the fained
fire of Purgatory were burned as Heretics with true flammes of tormenting
fire.

AMBROSE and HILARIVS as foolishly followed the opinion of ORIGIN without
examining it in the balance of Foolish following.
holy scripture. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. says that all men must go through the
fire at the latter day, even JOHN himself the belooued disciple of Christ, of
whose death also some doubted, yet no man can doubt of his passing through the
fire. Thus AMBROSE suffered this opinion of ORIGIN to sincke into his heart, as
though it had been the undoubted Oracle of God, which no man should call in
question. HILARIVS makes no exception of the blessed Virgin the mother of our
Lord in Psa. 118, but she must also go through this fire at the latter day. And
this is a foolish thing to follow any man further then he does follow Christ,
and the warrant of the written word of God, 1. Cor. 11. And therefore the first
general Council Ann. 551. (as wise behind the hand) was compelled to examine
the books of ORIGIN and to exco^municat himself (albeit dead long before) and
to damn his books and vain opinions specially anent his Purgatory.

This Origenian error before it was seriously impugned, it was changed to the
worse, and grew nearer to the original of PLATOES Phlegeton again: for
ORIGIN, AMBROSE and Error growing worse and worse.
HILARIVS spoke of a fire that should burn at the latter day which al men
behooued to pass through before they could enter into the place of
refreshment, but PLATO in his dialogue Phedo spoke of a flood of fire whereinto
men behooved to be tried and purged immediately after their souls were
separated from their bodies, and what souls I pray you? Not the souls of the
best men which went to heaven, nor the worst men, for they went to hell, but
the souls of men that were not into a mid rank, neither very good nor very
evil. This opinion, I say, somewhat nearer to the opinion of PLATO then to the
opinion of ORIGIN, began to take place about the four hundredth year of our
Lord, as the distinctions of AUGUSTINE clearly witness. Valde bom, The error
of Purgatory fire misliked by Augustine, but not fully impugned.
valde mali, non valde mali. Augustine enchiridion ad Laurent. Idem de octo
Dulcitii quaest. Thus wandering errors once taking place, became like unto a
fretting canker every day worse and worse. If any man think strange that so
vile an error neither agreeable to scripture, neither yet to it self, but
changing the similitude of it, as the Chameleon does his color, it prevailed
wonderfully and was so fastened into the peoples hearrts, that scarcely can it
be rooted out of their minds in our days. To this I answer, that besides the
authority of the fathers above specified, who were entangled with error, even
they also who found out the opinion of Purgatory fire to be erroneous and
repugnant to scripture, yet did they not fully and in all points impugn this
false and lying doctrine, but only in a part. As namely AUGUSTINE refuteth
that part of CLEMENS and ORIGENS opinion wherein they thought that the devils
and wicked men after suffering of long torments may possibly be forgiven and
find mercy. By one place of scripture he utterly undoes that opinion,
Depart'vnto the cuerlasting fire prepared for Satan and his angels, Mat. 25.
ver 4 And in the book of the Revelation. And they shall be tormented night
and day for ever and ever, Apoc. 20, August. lib. 20. and 21. de civit. Dei.
Yet the other part of the error, that took deep root in his days,
AUGUSTINE knew it better then he impugned it, lest he should gainsay the
received opinion among all the people, who thought that the souls of many men
after their death were tormented with fire for a while, until a full
satisfaction were made for the faults that men committed in their lifetime.
Against this opinion AVGVTINE speaks but softly. Non valde coarguo, for sitan
verum est, that is, I do not greatly reprove it, possibly it is true, August.
De civit. De^lib 21. cap. 26. This was also some strengthening of error, that
it was not fully in all points and clearly refuted by godly fathers, whose
comporting with the weakness of the people in a part CHEMNIICIVS himself
calls prudence and wisdom: but serious impugning of erroneous doctrine had
been more agreeable to the will of God. Always AUGUSTINE in his doubtsome
speech gives no ground to Papists to make up a new article of faith anent
Purgatory For like as Constantinople was a great city, yet when it was shaken
with an earthquake three days and three nights, no man tarried in that great
town to build a new house during that time: even so AUGUSTINE is a great
doctor, yet when he takes Simil.
him to forsitan or per^aps, this is not a sure ground to lean upon.

This unhappy conceit of Purgatory fire had many handmaids Many handmaids of
Purgatory.
waiting upon her, some going before, and others following after her. Before
the conceit of Purgatory goes an opinion of our own satisfactions. For the
faults committed by us after Baptism, if we do not perfitly satisfy for them
before our death, it rests that in Purgatory fire we should absolve the rest
of our penance that is vnfulsilled. How much this first handmaide derogateth
from the glory of Christ, the Apostle witnesses when he says, The blood of
Christ purges us from all sin, I. Ioh. I. making no exception ofsinnes after
Baptism committed. The other handmaide preceding the conceit of Purgatory,
is prayer for the dead albeit in all the old and new Testament there be not one
example of praying for the dead, or yet offering of sacrifice for the dead.
Pardons followed (sometimes called indulgences in another sense then now they
are) these pardons, I say, are the handmaids following Purgatory, by which the
B. of Rome (as absolut commander of Purgatory) has made unto himself
infinite gain.

Before I proceed any further, I exhort all true Christians, as they detest
Paganism, even so to detest all Ethnic An exhortation to detest the original
of Purgatory. Simil.
errors, when they are creeping in into the sanctuary of God, The golden
Eagle of the Romans was more abominable when it was set up in the Temple of
Jerusalem by HEROD, Joseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 1. cap. 21. then when it was
set up in the Capitol of Rome. And the image of CAIUS CALIGVLA sent to
PETRONIVS his Deputy to be set up in the Temple of Jerusalem made all the
Jews aghast, and they were more willing to die then to see their Temple so
filthily abused with idolatry, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18, cap. 11. It is more
seemly then that the golden Eagle and image of CAIUS remain at Rome, where
they were first fashioned, then to be brought to the Temple of Jerusalem. And
it is more seemly also that the opinion of Purgatory remain in the school of
PLATO at Athens, or in the school of CLEMENS at Alex andria, rather then to
send it abroad through all Christian Congregations to be believed. For
Christians ought to be like to the forlorn son after he returned home again
Simil.
to his father., Luc. 15. He was so well fed and clothed in his fathers house,
that he would not eat any longer of husks and the food of Swine: even so our
heavenly father has fed us with that Manna that. came down from heaven, and
it is no time now to us to be fed with the husks of PLATOES school any
longer.

The cause wherefore foolish people are so addicted to Purgatory, albeit it be
but an Ethnicke invention, is this, Preposterous fear and credulity of people
^pholde people.
a carnal affection that men carry toward their defunct, parents or friends:
to whom they are so affectionat, that if any action done by living men could
help them that are dead, they would do it with all their heart: and of old
time it was a custom that when men were recently departed this life, their
friends would thrust the sacrament in the mouth of the dead body, meaning
thereby to procure some relief to the soul, which custom was damned in the
third Council of Carthage, Canon. 6. In respect Christ bids give the
sacrament with this commandment, Take, eat, but dead bodies can neither take
nor eat. Always it was carnal affection not ordered with knowledge that
moved friends so to do. And in our days men that are in heaviness and full
of affection toward their own friends are both timorous and credulous: so
timorous, that they fear that their friends after death should be pined in
Purgatory: so credulous that they believe that the prayers and alms deades of
the living, their saying of Masses or buying of pardons can help the dead,
either to mitigat their pain, or to procure unto them haistie relief out of
pain. If these two grounds could be removed, that simple people would not
preposterously be both timorous and credulous, the conceit of Purgatory would
cease.

Papists themselves that are corrigible I would exhort before I answer to
their arguments, that they would do this An exhortation to corrigible Papists.
honor to Jesus Christ, not to make his majesty like unto ADONIIAH, 1. Reg.
1. This proud man called IOAB the Captain of the host, and ABIATHAR the
Priest, and the kings sons except SOLOMON to banquet, and by not inuiting to
that banquet SOLOMON and BATHSHEBA his mother, and NATHAN the Prophet, and
ZADOCK and BENAIAH, no doubt but he was minded to bring innocent people under
the guiltiness of treason, as their speeches to DAVID clearly declare, that
they forsawe this inconvenient, But Jesus Christ is not like unto ADONIIAH to
seek e a quarrel against innocent people, whom he himself has purged from
all sin in the precious fountain of his blood, 1. Ioh. 1. Will the Lord
Jesus after he has purged us from all spot of sin in the fountain of his
own blood, send us to Purgatory when we die, and not call us to that
celestial banquet of endless pleasure in heaven: seeing the not calling of us
to that banquet imports a disliking and casting off of us, as ADONIIAH
disliked SOLOMON and his mother, and NATHAN the Prophet, and the rest whom he
invited not to his banquet? Surely whomsoever the Lord has loved so dearly,
that he has purged them from all spot of sin by his blood, he will not be
uncouth to them, by sending them to Purgatory when they should be invited to
his banquet.

Now in this disputation of Purgatory fire a solid ground The use of temporal
pains.
is to be laid down, that every man may know of what sort of pains after
this life we dispute. All pains are either temporal or eternal. Of eternal
pains there is no disputation in this treatise. Temporal pains (say we) are
inflicted upon men only in this life for their amendment, if they be of the
number of Gods elect, or else are forerunning tokens of everlasting wrath, if
they be of the number of the reprobate. For this cause the Apostle says, that
there is no chastisement joyous for the present until it bring forth the good
fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12. ver 11. And here he declares clearly
that temporal chastisements are inflicted upon the godly for their amendment.

On the other part the prophecy that was in the mouth of ZARESH the wife of
HAMAN (albeit grounded only upon experience) yet it declares that the
downe-casting of wicked men is a forerunning token of a greater down cast to
follow after, Ester chap. 6. ver. 13. And this is a short sum of our
opinion anent temporal punishments. But Papists defend that even after this
life there is temporal punishments in Purgatory, the suffering where of
satisfies God for off^nces committed by men when they were aline, and purges
them that their souls may be meet to go to heaven.

This opinion of theirs is linked with another absurd opinion, that when out
sins are freely forgiven, we are not Fault and punishment there of both
abolished in Christ.
absolved both from guiltiness and pain, but from guiltiness only, but it
remains still, that we should suffer pains yea such pains, whereby we
satisfy for our sins committed after Baptism, what is this else but to make
us our own saviors in a part, and manifestly to contradict both scriptures and
fathers? for the scripture plainly says. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. And
AUGUSTINE says, Culpa est quod injustus es, poena quod mortalis es, Christus
suscipiendo panam and non culpam, and poenam debevit and culpam. August. de
verbis domini, sermon. 37. that is, thy fault is this, that thou art unrighteous,
thy punishment that thou art mortal, but Christ by taking upon himself our
punishment and not our fault, has abolished both our fault and our punishment.

Arguments brought in to prove Popish Purgatory are of three ranckes, First,
some arguments taken out of the Plaeces of the old Testament abused for
stablishing of Purgatory
words of Canonicke and Apocryph scripture. Secondly out of the writings of
fathers. Thirdly out of visions, dreams and apparitions, where of some are put
in write for a memorial to the posterity. In the book of the Psalms it is
written. We passed through fire and water into thy rest, Psalm. 65. ver. 12.
alias Psalm. 66. ver. 12. Here say they metion is made of Purgatory fire. But
AUGUSTINE writing upon this Psalm does expone it otherwise. The fire, says
he, burns, the water rotteth, both are to be feared, the burning of trouble,
and rotting of water. When there are disasters and unhappy things in this
world, they are like unto fire: when we are in prosperity and al things
plenteously abound, this is like water. This is the exposition of AUGUSTINE. In
the prophecy of ZACHARY it is written, Thou also shall be saved through the
blood of thy covenant, I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no
water. Is this also spoken of Purgatory? There is in that chapter a prophecy
of Christ of his office, humility, power, love, and the operative virtue of
his blood, by which blood being his own blood, and the blood of the
everlasting covenant of God, we who were sinners and bondmen of Satan are set
at liberty, and we who were heirs of hell and condemnation, are fred from
that terrible pit whereinto there is not one drop of consolation, and soChrist
has found out to us by his suffering foresaid (...) as the Apostle says, Heb.
9. ver. 12, that is, everlasting redemption. This is the true sense of that
place, for scripture conferred with scripture will find out the right meaning
of scripture: but the wresting of scripture to the conceits of our mind is a
perpetual deteining of us in blindness and ignorance. To this agrees well the
exposition of August decivit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 35. and Theodoret. in Zach.
cap. 9. In like manner in the prophecy of Malach. Behold I will send my
messinger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye
seek, shall speedely come to his temple: even the messinger of the covenant
whom ye desire: behold he shall come, says the Lord of hosts. But who may
abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he appears? for he is
like a purging fire, and like fullers soap. And he shall sit down to try and
fine the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as
gold and situer, that they may bring offerings unto the Lord in
righteousness, Malac. 3. ver. 1. 2. 3. If we credit the holy Evangelists,
this is spoken of Christ's first coming, and of JOHN Baptist his forerunner,
and of the effectual ministry of the Gospel in purging sin, Mat 11. ver.
10. Marc. 1. ver. 2 Luc. 1. ver. 76. But Papists not conferring scripture with
scripture, whersoeuer they find fire or darkness, or a deep pit and dungeon,
or a terrible tempest, there they think mention is made of Purgatory, as I
could easily prove by many other places: but let these suffice for examples of
the old Testament wrested and abused.

In the new Testament it is said, And whosoever shall speak a w^d against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever Places of the new Testament
abused.
shall speak against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come, Mat. 12. ver. 32. Ofthese words it is
inferred that some faults shall be forgiven in the world to come, albeit the
finne against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. The true sense and
meaning of these words is set down by the Evangelist MARK in these words, But
he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost shall never have forgiveness, but
is culpable of eternal damnation, Marc. 3. ver. 29. What needs further
requisition when the spirit of God has interpreted his own meaning? Again it
is is said in the new Testament. For other foundation can no man lay then that
which is laid, which is Icsus Christ: And if any man build on this foundation
gold, silver, precious stones, timber hay or stubble, Every man's work shall
be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be reueiled
by the fire: and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any
man's work that he has built upon, abide, he shall receive wages. If any man's
wo^keburne, he shall lose, but he shall be saved himself: nevertheless yet
as it were by the fire, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. The last of these
verses is brought forth as a testimony of scripture proouing Purgatory fire:
and so much the rather because S. AMBROSE does so expone the foresaid verse.
Let us therefore with AMBROSE agree upon all the rest, and contrauert only
upon the last verse. The foundation of Christ, the gold, silver and precious
stones is true and solid doctrine, the timber, hay, and stubble is frivolous
doctrine: the trial by day, and fire is a trial by the word of God, full of
light, as the day, and mighty in operation as the fire. In this trial he
whose doctrine is authorized and not overthrown by the word, he has double
vantage: first his work stands, next himself shall be rewarded as a good
builder. But if in the trial a man's doctrine be found frivolous, albeit not
heretical, he shall sustain double loss: First he shall see his doctrine
overthrown by the light and fire, that is, by the word of God, next, albeit
himself shall be saved, because he adhereth by faith to the foundation, yet
because he has been a slothful teacher in teaching frivolous things with a
glorious show of eloquence of in stead of solid and necessary things, he
shall be saved by fire, that is, as we say, he shall be cast into the
furnace of temporal troubles to learn repentance and amendment in this life,
wherein only is time and place of repentance. But the Papists think that men
after their death shall be cast into the fire of Purgatory, there to satisfy
for their fault, and after satisfaction to be purged and saved Here first note,
that the Apostle uttering by a continuated allegory the estate of those who
build upon the right foundation any kind of doctrine either solid or
frivolous, in the end he perfiteth his allegory, comparing the chastisements
of God sent for our amendment unto a fire. This agrees better then to
interpret all the rest allegorically, and the last words into a simple meaning
without any figure, and to father that opinion upon PAVL whereof neither he
nor any other Apostle makes mention in their writings. Next consider that they
would seem to be followers of the interpretation of AMBROSE, when as their
conscience (I mean of those that are learned amongst them) knows the
contrary, that AMBROSE means of that fire at the latter day, whereof ORIGIN
writes, but not of that Purgatory fire immediately after the issue of this
life, whereof the Papists speak, Indeed if Purgatory fire should be set
forth as an article of Christian faith, it should be grounded not upon
allegories or obscure places of scripture, but upon clear and plain places,
as all the ancient fathers in one voice do consent, but this place of
scripture is an allegory and an obscure place. ORIGIN and AMBROSE take it in
one sense, the Papists take it in another sense, we take it in the third
sense, and some of their own scholasticke doctors are so dashed with the
variety of diverse interpretations, that they dare determine nothing
certainly, but say that either with the fire of Purgatory, or with the fire
of tribulation, or with the fire that goes before the face of the great Judge
men who have committed venial sins shall be purged and saved. THOMAS AQVINAS
in 1. Cor. 3. When their own scholasticke Doctors are in such doubts, there
was no time to step A place out of the book of the Maccabees for c^nsi mation
of sacrifice for the dead, and consequently of Purgaterie
forward, and to make it an article of their faith.

The chief place cited out of Apocrypha books is Macab. 2. cha 12. from the
40 ver. to the end of the cha, in these words. Now under the coats of euerte
one that was sl^ine, they found jewels that had been consecrated to the idvles
of the Famnites, which thing is forbidden the Jews by the Law. Then every man
saw that this was the cause wherefore they were slain. And so eucrie man gave
thanks unto the Lord, the righteous Judge, which had opened the things that
were hid, And they gave themselves to prayer, and be sought him that they
should not be destroyed for thefault committed. Besides that, noble Judas
exhorted the people to keep themselves from sin: for so much as they saw
before their eyes the things that came to pass by the sin of those that were
slain. And having made a gathering through the company sent to Jerusalem
about two thousand drachmes of silver to offer for a sin offering. Hitherto
does the author of that book write the history of that fact, which was done by
IVDAS MACCABEVS and his soldiers. First they were about to bury the dead
bodies of their brethren who were slain in the battle fighting against
GORGIAS. Secondly they found secretly covered under their garments jewels
consecrated to idols. Thirdly they acknowledged this to be a sin, and to
have been the cause of the destruction of their brethren. Fourthly they
thanked God who discovered this secret: for the punishment of their slain
brethren was an admonition to them that were alive to abstain from the like
fault. Fifthly they gave themselves to prayer, fearing lest the whole army
should be plagued by God for the fault committed by a few number of the army,
as the fault of ACHAN troubled the whole host in the days of IOSHVA, Ios. 7.
Sixthly to prayer is added an exhortation of IVDAS to abstain from the like
faults. Seventhly a collection is gathered to be sent up to Ierusal^m that a
sin-offering might be offered, not for the dead, but for the living, who had
not searched out the faults of the host diligently as became them: And
therefore there was some guiltiness also in them. The rest that follows is
the opinion of the author of that second book in these words, Doing very well
and honestly that he thought of the resurrection: for if he had not hoped that
they which were slain should rise again, it had been superfluous and vain
to pray for the dead. And therefore he perceived that there was great favor
laid up for those that died godly. (It was an holy and a good thought) So he
made a reconciliation for the dead, that they might be delivered from sin.
When I read this opinion of the author of the second book of the Maccabees I
am nothing moved with it: first because it seems to be a lie that IVDAS
MACCABEVS sent to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice for the dead, He knew the law
of God, and fought fo the law of GOD wherein was no sacrifice for the dead,
nor yet example in all the old Testament that any man did offer sacrifice for
the dead: but this author brings in IVDAS fighting with his sword for the
law, and with his alleged sacrifice against the law. And it is less
inconvenient to rub this foul spot upon the unwise writer then upon that wise,
valiant and godly man IVDAS MACCABEVS. And I am the bolder to rub this fault
upon the writer, rather then upon the valiant Captain of whom he writes,
because in other places also he takes boldness to commend things forb^dden in
the Law of God, as namely the fact of RHASIS in slaying of himself, 2. Macab.
cap. 14. ver. 46. Likewise I am emboldened to do it, because I read this same
history in other authors more worthy then this man is, who impute no such
fault to IVDAS MACCABEVS, as namely Joseph. antiq. lib. 12. cap. 12. If any man
shall think me presumptuous in charging the writer of the book rather then the
worthy governor with a fault, let him understand that the verity of God is in
nothing empared albeit there had been a fault in both, that is, in IVDAS doing
a thing repugnant to the Law, and in the author praising a thing done
contrary to Simil.
the law. For like as there was no grace in DAVID, that could grace his
adultery* even so therewas no gift in IVDAS MACCABEVS that could excuse his
offering of a sacrifice for the dead, which no man did before him in the old
Testament, and no man is found to have followed him in the new Testament, as
says CHEMNICIVS.

In the next place arguments are brought out of ancient fathers to prove
Purgatory by their prayers for the dead. By the prayers made for the dead of
old Purgatory cannot be sufficiently confirmed.
For after this manner they reason. If souls of men departing from their bodies
went straight ways either to heaven or hell, what needed prayers for the
dead? for they who are in heaven are in glory and rest, and they who are in
hell cannot be supported by prayers. But (say they) the ancient fathers prayed
for the dead, whereby it is clear that they believed a third place, to wit,
Purgatory, whereinto the souls of some men are tormented, and have need of
the support of the living: but the consequence is very false: for they cannot
be ignorant that in CYPRIANS days the name^ of holy martyrs were mentioned in
prayers atthe ministration of the holy sacrament, lib. 3. epist. 6: yet no man
thought that the martyrs were pained in Purgatory. In like manner AMBROSE
affirms that he will pray for the soul of VaLENTINIAN the second, of whom
he said before, aternae vitae fruitur voluptate, that is, he enjoys the
pleasure of eternal life, Ambros. de obitu Valentiniani. And NAZIANZEN prays
for his brother CESARIVS, of whose rest with God he had the like hope,
Nazianz. ^rat. 7. All these prayed for the dead without any opinion of
Purgatory. And therefore LINDANVS for all his confident assertion that
Purgatory is fully proved by the testimonies of AUGUSTINE and CHRYSOSTOM,
who make mention of the prayers for the dead, the one calling it a custom used
by the whole Church. August. sermon. 32. de verbis Apostolt. the other calling it
a tradition of the Apostles, Chrysostom. homil. 3. ad Philippenses, yet I say,
neither of these two believed Purgatory. AUGUSTINE doubted of it as said is,
and CHRYSOSTOM knew it not, as shall be declared Godwilling, Lindan. lib. 4.
cap. 63.

But now let us examine these two places whereunto LINDANVS leans as
infallible grounds, and surer then that any The place of Augustine sermon. 32. de
verbis Aposloli examined.
exception can be taken against them, August. sermon. 32. de verbis Apostolt. It
is not to be doubted that the dead are helped by the prayers of the holyChurch
and by the healthful sacrifice and alms deeds that are bestowed for their
spirits, in such ways, that God deals more gently with them then their
sins have d^serued First, I doubt if this be a sermon of AVGVSVINE. It
seems rather to be a sermon of BEDA, who lived long after AUGUSTINE, because
all this sermon is found in BEDA writing upon 1 Thessalonians Next, like as AUGUSTINE
doubted of Purgatory, so likewise he doubted if it was lawful to pray for the
dead, as his own words testify, August, Confess. lib, 9. cap. 12. after that
he had prayed for the soul of his mother MONICA he subjoyneth this: If any
think I have done wrong in praying in few words for her who prayed so ofi for
me, let him not mocke^mee, but if he has great charity, let him weep for my
sins to the common father of ^l Christ's brethren. If AUGUSTINE speak so
doubtsomely of Purgatory, de civit. dei. lib. 21. cap. 26. and of prayer for
the dead, Confess. 9, cap. 12. LINDANVS had no great ground to proclaim the
triumph of victory for this alleged sermon of AUGUSTINE.

The place cited out of CHRYSOSTOM writing upon the first chapter of the
Epistle of PAVL to the Philippians, homil 3, The place of Chrysostom homil 3 in
epist. ad Phillip. examined.
(...), that is, It was not in vain that the Apostles constituted this as a
law, that in the reverent mysteries a remembrance should be made of those that
are departed. For answer. First, I demand of LINDANVS, if all these of his
religion believe this that CHRYSOSTOM speaks, that prayer for the dead in
time of celebration of the holy communion is an Apostolic tradition? IS
GREGORIVS 1. in that opinion, who affirms that the Apostles in ministering
that holy sacrament used no other prayer but only the Lords prayer? Gregor. in
regist. lib. 7. epist. 63 IS PLTAINA in that opinion, who writing the life of
XISTVS 1. says thus, Petrus enimubi consecr auerat oratione Pater noster usus
est? This being the opinion of the most part of the Roman Church that the
Apostles used no other prayer but only the Lords prayer before the ministration
of the holy communion, how can they adhere to this place of CHRYSOSTOM, who
calls it an Apostolic institution to make mention of the dead in these
prayers? Secondly I demand of LINDANVS (if the passages in that same homily
be not excused by the figure hyperbole) how does CHRYSOSTOM agree with
himself when he speaks of them that are departed this life without
Baptism, he says that they are (...), that is, They are without the palace
with them who are appointed for pain, and with them who are condemned. Which
opinion, or rather hard and merciless sentence he would confirm by testimony
of scripture, Except a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven. John 3. ver. 5. and yet a little after, for
such he bids distribute alms to the poor, and this distribution of alms
says he (...), that is it works some refreshment unto them. What is this
that CHRYSOSTOM speaks, persons who^ he calls condemned and perpetually
excluded from the kingdom of heaven may have some refreshment by the alms
deeds done by their friends on earth? In this CHRYSOSTOM neither agrees with
scripture nor with him self: he ag^eeth not with scripture, because it is
plainly said that not so much as a drop of cold water can be ministered to
those that are condemned, Luc. 16. He agrees not with himself, in one word
counting them perpetually excluded from the kingdom of heaven, and soon after
speaking of some refreshment, that they may get by actions done by the living.
Are we more loving, kind and merciful then ABRAHAM, in whom love and all
true virtues are perfited: yet he saw no refreshment to a condemned man?
Thirdly I demand of LINDANVS and those that be of his opinion if CHRYSOSTOM
was as deep in the opinion of Purgatory as in the opinion of prayer for the
dead? CHRYSOSTOM never knew what Popish Purgatory meaned, because in his time
men who died in the faith, albeit not altogether faultlesse, yet they were
conveyed to the burial places with torches and hymns and spiritual songs. And
wherefore were these funeral rites used, says CHRYSOSTOM. Do we not convey
them (says he) as victorious warriors? Do we not praise God, because he has
crowned with glory him who is departed? Chrysostom. in cap. 2 epist ad Heb.
homil. 4 The funeral Psalm that was usually sung was the 116. Psalm (the 7.
verse whereof is this) Return my soul unto thy rest: for the Lord has been
beneficial unto thee: This was not to Purgatory, but to endless rest. But to
speak freely what I think of that ancient father CHRYSOSTOM in calling
prayer for the dead an Apostolic tradition, I think he has spoken
hyperbolically calling all these opinions, Apostolic traditions, which were
delivered to him by good men, who kept the chief heads of Apostolic faith,
and this amongst the rest (albeit no article of faith) yet being delivered to
him by Christians more ancient then himself, he calls it by a figure an
Apostolic tradition. But the conceit of Popish Purgatory never entered into
the hearts of NAZIANZENVS, BASILIVS, ATHANASIVS, (albeit DAMASCENE falsely
alleges his testimony) THEODORETVS, CHRYSOSTOMVS and the ancient learned
fathers of the Greek Church, as clearly appears by the first protestation
given in at the Council of Florence by the G^ecians there conueened Ann.
1439.. How socuer weak r^en for hope of help from the West were feeble
defenders of the truth, yet they clearly knew that the opinion of Popish
Purgatorywas unknown to their ancient orthodoxe fathers.

In end, Purgatory finding no sure allowance in scripture, nor yet in the
writings of ancient fathers began to creep Fables of Damascene forstablishing
of Purgatory
under the skirts of apparitions of dead men and by dreams, fables,
apparitions and foolish inventions it was so strengthened, that the verity of
the Gospel was not so much regarded by a foolish bewitched people as the fables
confirming Purgatory. It were tedious to rehearse all the fables of DAMASCENE
in his sermons de defunctis. Yet all are not to be past over with silence: He
says that THECLA one of the first feminine mattyrs prayed for FALCONILLA after
her death, and obtained pardon to her, albeit she was an Ethnicke idolattesse,
and died without the knowledge of Christ. This woman behooued to be delivered
out of hell, and not out of Purgatory. But who should lend his ears once to
hearken to fables so repugnant to scripture, Luc. 16. In like manner he says
that holy MACARIVS prayed night and day for the dead, and in end he demanded at
the dry pow or head of a dead man if he felt any comfort by the prayers of
the living, and the dry pow or brain pan answered that they found some little
refreshment. Likewise he brings in the fable of an ancient teacher (whose
name he expresses not, because fables delight to have their head lapped up in
darkness of shadows and silence) who had a disciple that lived licentiously
in excess and ^iot all his days, and so without repentance concluded his
life: the teacher made prayers night and day for his disciple, and in end the
Lord opened his eyes to see his disciple burning in flames of fire to the
neck: after this he increased the earnestness of his prayers, and afterward
he saw his disciple burning in fire unto the middle part of his body. Finally
by the feruencie of multiplied prayers he was fully delivered. The fable of
GREGORIVS 1. cited also by DAMASCENE goes beyond all the rest in absurdity,
that he prayed for the soul of TRAIAN the third persecuting Emperor, and
obtained pardon to it as a voice that came down from heaven, witnessed,
saying, I have heard thy prayers and granted pardon to TRAIANVS, but in time to
come make no prayers for wicked men. All these fables are like unto the gourd
of JONAS, that had a worm within it, which smote it, so that it withered
incontinent, Ion. 4. even so in all these fables there are circumstances
declaring that God would not hear the prayers made for impenitent sinners
after they had died in sin.

Hear I leave Papists dreaming upon Purgatory and confirming it with dreams,
and yet uncertain where it is. As for us, we will lean alanerly upon the
blood of Christ, which True Christians lean upon the purging blood of Christ.
purges us from all sins, 1. Loh. 1. and we know certainly that our high
Priest the Lord Jesus with his own finger sprinkleth his own blood upon our
souls, that we may be found a pure virgin to Christ, 2. Cor. 11. that being
purged from all sin, we may enter into that holy celestial Jerusalem
whereinto no foul and unclean thing gets entresse, Apocal. 21. Now he who
has prepared this holy mansion for us, prepare us also for it, to whom be
praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
CENT. 3. A Treatise of Relics of Saints.
SVch is the corruption of man's nature, that in nothing can we keep the golden
mediocritie commanded by God. Sometimes we hate and persecute Gods servants,
at other times we give unto them the honor The corruption of man's nature.
that is due to God alone. And in this great confusion and disorder how can
order be kept? yea these idolaters themselves, who at sometimes honor the
saints with excessive and vncompetent honor, they keep not one and the
selfsame order. Sometime they begin at excessive honor, and they end at
excessive contempt, as the men of Listra, first, they called PAVL and BARNABAS
gods, and afterward they stoned PAVL as an evil doer, Act. 14. At other times
they begin at excessive contempt, and they mount up to excessive honor as the
people of the Isle of Malta first counted PAVL to be a murderer, after to be a
god, Act. 28. Many other examples may be given, specially in the person of
MOSES under the Law, and of the Apostles under the Gospel. The carnal Jews
that came out of Egypt murmured many times against MOSES, but their more
carnal and unhappy posterity preferred MOSES to Christ, Ioh, 9. ver. 29.
saying, We know that God spoke to Moses, but this man know we not from whence
he is. This is the malice of Satan changing our prison, but not suffering us to
be set at liberty. For when a man is incarcerate in any upper house, and then
his prison is changed, and he is prisoned in the lower prison, where there is
less liberty of air, and great stincke and filth, the estate of this man is
not better but worse by his change: even so when men have misregarded in most
contemptible Simil.
manner the servants of God, this is a snare of the devil, but when they give
unto them the honor that is due to God, this is a greater snare, for they who
called PAVL a mutherer (who was indeed the prisoner of Christ) at that time
they lied, yet they attributed nothing to PAVL but that sin whereunto by nature
he was inclined, and also practiced before his conversion, Act. 9. but when
they called him a god, they attributed unto him that honor that was not
competent to a mortal man, Act. 28.

Albeit we be not able to comprehend the deep and subtle slights of Satan yet
in the first entry we may grope some The great slight of Satan.
deceitfulness in Satan's dealing, because he deals one way with Gentiles
and Pagans who knew not God, and another way with Jews and Christians who had
some knowledge of the true God. He stirs up the Gentiles forthwith to call
men Gods, by whose hands the Lord wrought a miraculous work, Act. 14. and Act.
28. but he deals otherwise with the Jews who had some knowledge of God, not
incontinent to equal MOSES to God, but to prefer him unto other teachers,
and to Jesus whom they denied to be God. In like manner he moved the Jews to
deck and beautify the sepulchers of the Prophets, Mat. 23, which seemed to be
no fault, but Satan was craftily under color of honoring the servants of God,
leading them to persecute the master himself, even Christ Jesus the great
prince of all Pastors. And therefore Christians should beware of the slights
of the devil, because upon very small and not disalowable beginnings (as would
appear he labors to lead them in end to horrible idolatry.

Again Satan is so crafty and deceitful that he will build Another craft of
Satan.
upon another man's foundation. It was not Satan but the Lord himself that
would have the funerals of his Saints reverently handled. God said unto JACOB
that JOSEPH should close his eyes, and that the Lord himself would reduce him
back again to Canaan, that is. the Lord would attend upon his funeral in his
back coming again, Genesis 46. ver. 4. yet that crafty adversary Satan
building as it were upon the Lords own ground under pretense of honor to be
done to the bodies of the Saints, as the temples whereinto the holy Ghost
dwelt, he has brought men so far forward, that they have opened the graves
of the Saints, raised their bones, carried them in procession, and made their
prayers before them with hope to be the better heard of God, because they bow
themselves before the relics of Saints,

Also Satan's craft appears in this, that as the Philistims did not send
SAMPSON immediately to grind in their mill until The third craft of Satan.
they had first pulled out his eyes, Judge. 16 21. even so Satan moved not men
to bow their knees and to say their prayers before dead men's bones at the
first instance, until he had of along time blind-folded their eyes with a
mistie cloud of ignorance, so that all things were welcome that pleased their
blind guides to thrust into their hands. And so we shall see (Godwilling) that
in the first 300. years after the ascension of our Lord there was no adoration
of relics. We read of graves opened for dishonouring but not for honoring.
of bones.
Now let the history speak for it self. In the old Testament we read that some
men's bones were raised out of their graves to dishonor the^, as the bones of
the priests of Bethel, which were burned upon the altar of Bethel by JOSIAH, 2.
Reg. cap. 23. 16. but in that same chapter it is expressly noted, that the bones
of the true Prophet who came from Judah and foretold all these things, ibid.
ver. 17. these bones, I say, were not raised to honor them as the bones of the
idolatrous priests were raised out of their graves to dishonor them. The body
of MOSES buried in the plain of Moab, Deuteronomy 34. ver. 6. whose sepulcher was
unknown to man, but known to Satan, yet he who knew it had not liberty to
open it, and to discover the relics of his body, left it should have been an
occasion of idolatry, because MICHAEL the Archangell of God strove against him
in this point, epist. ^ud. ver. 9. The grave of the Prophet ELIZEVS was opened
not of purpose to raise his bones, and to honor them, but upon a great
suddentie to cast in another dead man: and albeit the Lord wrought a great
miracle by touching of ELIZEVS bones, 2. Reg. 13. ver. 21. yet no man was so
foolish as to raise them out of the grave, or to carry them into the Temple to
be adored and worshipped. The bones of JOSEPH that were in a chest, and
transported out of Egypt by MOSES, Exodus 13 ver 19. yet in the wilderness were
not worshipped, no not by these carnal Jews, who worshipped the golden calfe.
And so the history of the old Testament may be laid aside as an holy history
furnishing no fuel to hold in this fire of Popish superstition anent adorations
of dead men's bones.

In the new Testament like as the doctrine of resurrection No example in the
n^w Testament of ra^sing bones out of the grave to be worshipped.
was clearly preached and believed amongst all Christian people: so likewise a
great care was had that the bodies of the Saints should be honorably buried
as bodies appointed to an happy resurrection. This persuasion grounded in the
hearts of Christians made them to count death a sleep, the grave a bed, and
resurrection a wakening of men out of their sleep, Ioh. 11. Act. 7. Now this
sleep differs from other sleeps in this, that when a servant conueyeth his
masters son to bed to sleep and rest, pos^bly this same servant will waken
him again in the morning that he may rise and walk: but when we are conveyed
to the grave by the Lords servants, these servants will not get that honor to
raise us up again out of our bed, but let us sleep on still until it shall
please our Lord and master Christ Jesus to come again, and raise us up out of
our bed and sleep. But foolish servants to be troubling the graves of the
Saints and digging out their bones which they cannot cloth with flesh, sinews
and skin, neither can they breath a spirit in them, it is both foolish,
superfluous, and vntimous diligence, whereof no example is to be found in the
new Testament.

In the ecclesiastical history it is to be noted that the fathers who lived
nearest unto the days of the Apostles were also freest of this superstition of
worshipping of bones and The fathers nearest to the Apostles days, freest of
superstition
other relics. In the fourth persecution POLYCARPVS Bishop of Smyrna was
martyred (as has been declared) at what time great care was taken both by
Jews and Paganes that the dead body of POLYCARPVS should not come into the
hands of Christians: and to this purpose it was burned with fire. The
Christians who waited on diligently to honor that blessed body, which had
patiently suffered rebuke for the cause of Christ, in end they got his bones,
which albeit they counted to be more precious then gold and silver, yet they
worshipped them not, as EVSEBIVS clearly declares, lib. 4. eccles. hist. cap.
16. but they buried them honorably into a convenient place. Moreover that day
whereinto he was burnt for the Name of Christ, was called by the fathers
natalis, or natalitium POLYCARPI, that is, the birthday of POLYCARPVS, because
by his death he made it manifest that he was the true child of GOD, begotten
and borne of the incorruptible seed of the Word. And in that place where his
bones were buried, and upon the very day of his martyrdom, Christians
conveened to glorify God for the constant suffering of the Martyr and to exhort
others with constant perseverance to be ready to do the like, Eusebius. ibid.

These things no man can justly vituperat in the ancient Church, because their
purpose was to glorify GOD by means not unlawful, and to f^ster in the
hearts Burial of Christians hindered to quench the hope of resurrection.
of the people, the assurance of the resurrection of the dead, by honorable
burial of such as died for Christ, And so much the more they were moved so to
do, because the persecuting Pagans hindered the Christians from burying their
dead, to the end they might quench the hope of the resurrection in their
hearts, as Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1. clearly declares speaking of the Martyrs in
France, who suffered death in the fourth persecution under ANTONIUS VERVS,
whose bodies were left unburied for a ti^e, and afterward were burnt with fire,
and resolved into ashes, and the ashes were cast into the river of Rhodanus, ne
ullam amplius resurrectionis spem habeant, that is, to the end they should have
no more hope of the resurrection. And doubtless there is no Christian heart
that lived in these days, but behooved to increase their cair in burying the
bodies of the Saints, because in want of burial the Pagans would have quenched
the hope of refurrectio^.

The custom of transporting the bones of the holy men of God from one place to
another more honorable place (as What time transporting' of the bones of the
Saints began, and how long this custom continued without adoration
seemed to the transporters) it was not so ancient as it can be proved by
examples for the space of three hundredth years after the ascension of our
Lord, yet these bones were transported after a manner, as the bones of JOSEPH
from Egypt to Canaan, to be buried in a more honorable place. Iosu. 24. verse.
22. without any kind of adoration, as the bones of BABYLAS B. of Antiochia, in
the days of IVLIAN the apostat. Theodoret. lib. 3. cap 3. 10. The bones of
PAVL B. of Constantinople, were transported and buried in the Church of
Constantinople, that was builded by his persecuter MACEDONIVS. Sozom. lib. 7.
cap. 10. This was done in the days of THEODOSIUS the Emperor, and the words
are to be marked. transtulis corpus ejus and in Ecclesia condidit quam
MACEDONIVS persecutor ejus adificaverat, that is to say, he transferred his
body, and buried it into the Church which his persecuter MACEDONIVS had
builded. In the days of the Emperor ARCADIVS the relics of SAMVEL were
brought to Constantinople. Theodor. lector collect. lib. 2. and in the days of
THEODOSIUS 2. his son, the bones of CHRYSOSTOM were transported to
Constantinople. All this time, bones and other relics were tra^sported and
buried, but not set up upon altars nor worshipped.

If it be objected that JEROME disputing against VIGILANTIVS defends the
custom of women, who in the very day time went to the graves of the martyrs
with lighted An answe^ to an objection.
torches of wax to honor them by so doing. To this I answer that the words
of JEROME make little against our opinion. First, because his words import that
the bones of the saints were lying in their graves Secondly, the women who
lighted these wax torches IEROM grants that they had a zeal to God, but not
according to knowledge. Thirdly IEROM in co^pating these lighted torches to the
precious ointment powered out by MARIE upon Christ's head, Ioh. 12. whereof
Christ had no need, and no more have the martyrs need of wax torches to be
lighted at the places of their sepulchers, with IEROMS favor (for honor of
his learning) his comparisons are not good: for MARY'S fact was done in zeal
mixed with knowledge, and has an approbation in Christ's own mouth: but the
sact of those women was done in zeal without knowledge, and has but a slender
approbation in IEROMS own mouth Hieron contra Vigilant..

Again if it be objected that miracles were wrought at Answer to another
objection.
the graves of the Martyrs, as namely in Millain, where AUGUSTINE was present,
at the sepulchers of PROTASIVS and GERVASIVS a blind man was restored to his
sight, and AUGUSTINE himself bears witness of this miracle, because he saw
it done with his own eyes. August lib. confess. 9. cap. 7 To this I answer
that God wrought a miracle at the sepulcher of this holy Martyr PROTASIVS to
confirm that true faith for which he suffered martyrdom. Like as God wroght a
greater miracle at the sepulcher of ELISEVS in restoring a dead man to life
again. 2. Reg 13. to confirm the doctrine of ELISEVS that it was of God. But
the end of these miracles was not to raise up their bones out of the grave and
to worship them, in regard that such superstitious facts plainly repugned to
the sum of their faith and doctrine. Now by good reason the Papists are
reduced to this strait, that either they must prove that the adoration of dead
men's bones was a point of ELISEVS doctrine, and PROTASIVS faith, or else these
miracles were wroght to teach men to raise out of the grave, and to worship the
dead bones of the Prophets and martyrs of God. And AUGUSTINE himself clearelie
declares what was the issue of this miracle. First, men took occasion by the
sight of hat miracle to glorify God, but not to worship PROTASIVS and GERVASIVS
bones. The other end of the working of that miracle was to stay the fury of
IVSTINA the mother of VALENTINIAN the second in persecuting of AMBROSE B. of
Millain, albeit the fame and notoriousnes of this miracle did not convert her
to the true faith, yet it auailed to abate her fury and rage in persecuting
the innocent feruant of Christ. August ibid. confess. lib. 9. cap. 7.

Again, if it be objected that the dead bones of BABYLAS An answer to the
third obje^tion.
stopped the mouth of APOLLO, so that he could not utter his oracle, until
BABYLAS bones were raised, and transported into an other place. Sozom. lib. 5.
cap. 19. and therefore there is virtue in the bones of the Saints to help the
godly, and to confound the power of the devil. For answer I say we should not
hearken to the deceitful speeches of Satan, who seeing Christians already
inclined to transport the dead bones of the Saints, for all his simular and
fained dumnesse, yet he could speak that whereby superstition afterward should
be mightily increased and augmented. Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. de miraculis.
But arguments drawn out of the fountains of Scripture, if they were rightly
inferred, should have greater countenance, credit and regard, No testimony
in scripture to pro^e the Worshipping ofreliques.
then the testimonies of all the fathers joined together. Therefore they will
not seem to be destitute of this armor also. The shadow of PETER Acts. 5. 15.
was helpful to diseased persons, and the napkins, and hand-kercheefes taken
from the body of PAVL, helped diseases, and made unclean spirits to depart
from men. And therefore (say they) to attribute virtue to relics of Saints,
is no derogation to the glory of God, but rather a great confirmation of Gods
truth. To this I answer, that scripture having intention to glorify God
indeed does in these miracles neither magnify PETER nor PAVL, nor PETER'S
shadow, nor PAVLS napkins, wherein there was no saving virtue, but the text
clearlie says that Godw ought miracles by the hands of PAVL Acts 19. ver. 11.
Which verse is cast in of purpose to turn our hearts from PAVL the instrument,
alanerly to God the author of these miracles. And if the holy Scripture will
not suffer us to repose upon PETER and PAVL, and other Apostles, as if by their
own power and virtue they had made any man whole, Acts 3. ver. 12. how much
less can God be pleased with this, that power and virtue be attributed to
PETER'S shadow, and PAVLS napkins? And albeit virtue had been in these things,
yet PETER'S shadow could not have been kept as a permanent relic to the
posterity, nor yet PAVLS napkin, except miraculouslie, could have continued so
long. But this suffices our purpose, that in all the scripture there is not a
word of the worshipping of PETER'S shadow, nor PAVLS napkin. If I were disputing
upon words, I would demand of those that reckon PETER'S shadow among relics,
by what reason they do it, seeing that it has no remaining amongst us, after
that his body is taken from us, and therefore, cannot be called a relic? But
I leave off to speak of the shadow of words as well, as of the shadow of bodies.

Let us remember this well, that GOD works great works by very contemptible
means, to the end the glory may be attributed to GOD alone. Now seeing that
GOD The sheep-heards staff of Moses.
wrought great works by the sheep-heards staff that was in the hand of MOSES,
he dantoned the land of Egypt, divided the red sea, and by the stroke of the
staff brought forth waters out of the hard rock: Seeing (I say) that God wroght
so great works by so contemptible a mean, what became of this sheepheards
staff after the death of MOSES? Some of the learned say that God buried it
with MOSES in the plain of Moab, lest it should have been an occasion of
idolatry: How ever it be, the remembrance of it is buried in scriptures, and we
cannot tell what became of it. But if it had been in time of Popery, it had
been laid up and worshipped among their principal relics.

The c^oake of ELIAS wherewith ELIZEVS divided the The cloak of Elias.
waters of Jordan seems to be a relic of ELIAS, having virtue to work
miraculous works, but the text it self declares the contrary, that there was
no power in the cloak, but in the GOD of ELIAS for when ELIZEVS came to the
river side, he lifted up his heart to GOD, saying, where is now the GOD of
ELIAS? 2 Reg. 2. ver. 15. So that all scripture The Church of the jews might
have had more relics then the Roman Church.
both in old and new Testament with one consent sends us from cloakes,
staves, shadows, hand-kerchiefes, and such like means, to the power of
almighty GOD, working where, when, and by what means he pleases.

Now if al things whereby or wherein God wroght miracles, should be kept as holy
relics, then the church of the Jews might have surpassed the Roman church
infinite degrees. For who can deny but God wrought miraculous works in and by
ail the coats, hose* shoes shirts, headcouerings, napkins, and such other
garments that were among the people of the Jews? Their garments waxed not old,
and their feet swelled not all the space of forty years that they were in
the wilderness. D^ut. 8 ver. 4. If all these garments had been laid up in
store after they entered into the land of Canaan, the Jews might say that their
Church was holier then all the Churches in our days, if holiness be esteemed
according to the multitude of relics. Let us now set forward and declare when
this corruption of worshipping of relics crept in into the Church of God. In
the Apostles days no such thing. In time of the ten persecutions was burying
of Martyrs and celebration of Natalitia Martyrum, as has been declared. From
the three hundredth year of our Lord, till the four hundredth, and almost till
the five hundredth year there was some transporting of holy men's bones to be
buried in a more honorable place (as said is) but not worshipping. There were
torches and wax candles carried to the sepulchers of the martyrs, which custom
was disallowed by some, and excused by others: there was also banqueting at
the sepulchers of the Martyrs, which custom has not great allowance of
AUGUSTINE, de moribus ecclesiae catholicae, cap. 34. for he thought that some
of them who banquetted in such places, buried themselves above buried men. Yet
all this time no worshipping of relics,

But after the five hundredth year of our Lord, in the days of ANASTASIVS,
IVSTINVS the elder, JUSTINIAN, IVSTINVS Worshipping of relics after the 592.
year of our Lord.
the younger, TIBERIUS, MAVRITIVS, PHOCAS etc. superstition began to abound and
relics were worshipped, and the very pens of ecclesiastical writers, who
wrote the history of that time such as EVAGRIVS, smell of superstition. We
read that the cross of Christ was carried through Apamia, and worshipped Euag.
lib 4. cap. 26. The relics of S. SEBASTIAN were carried out of Rome to
Ticinum, and laid upon an altar for staying of the devouring plague. PAVLVS
DIACONVS de gestis Longobard. lib. 6. cap, 2. SERGIOPOLIS is said to bce
preserved from the fury of COSROES king of Persia by the virtue and holiness
of the relics of the martyr SERGIVS. gEuagr. lib. 4 cap. 28. Yea, the blind
guides of this time were not content to fill the world with the relics of the
Saints, but also to ground this opinion in the peoples hearts, that these
relics ought to be worshipped, they found out a thousand lieing miracles, so
that it was fulfilled that was spoken by the Apostle PAVL, that the coming of
the Antichrist should be by the operation of Satan in all power, and sig^es and
Wonders of lying. 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 9 Surely at this time the forerunners of
the Antichrist were ryding post, and busily preparing the way to that man of
sin, and child of perdition, and therefore lying miracles were never more
frequent then at this time.

The miracle wrought at Apamia in the bearing about of the cross by THOMAS
Bishop of Apamia, is more regarded Object.
then many other miracles, because EVAGRIVS witnesses that he himself was
present in the town, and that he saw the bearing about of the cross. Likewise,
that he saw a fire compassing the cross, and the Bishop THOMAS whithersoeuer
he went: and that this sight was more miraculous, that this fire had a shining
virtue to increase light, but not a consuming power to offend the Bishop that
bare the cross. And the sight of this miracle so moved the heart of EVACRIVS,
that he himself fell down and worshipped the cross that was in the hands of
THOMAS Bishop of Apamia.

To this I give these answers. First, that EVAGRIVS in describing The first
answer.
the delivery of. Apamia from the expected siege of COSROES King of Persia,
and the miraculous deliverance of SERGIOPOLIS and EDESSA two towns besieged,
indeed is so fabulous, that he deserves no more credit in this narration, then
in the description of the life of BARS ANVPHIVS an Egyptian monk of whom
EVAGRIVS writes, that he enclosed himself within a shop beside Gaza fifty
years, seen of no man, and using no kind of earthly thing, that is, neither
meat, drink, raiment, nor any other refreshment of earthly things. Euagr. lib.
4. cap. 33. He who can excuse this oversight of EVAGRIVS, let him accuse me
that I give not credit to all that EVAGRIVS writes.

Secondly the authority of THOMAS Bishop of Apamia and The second answer.
EVAGRIVS an ecclesiastical writer, are both nothing in comparion of the
authority of AMBROSE, who was nerer unto the Apostles days, and took better
attendance to the scriptures of God then EVAGRIVS did: he writes of HELENA the
mother of CONSTANTINE who is said to have found out the cross whereon Jesus
suffered, yet he says of her Regem adoravit non lignum, that is, she
worshipped the king and not the tree, for that had been (says he) the error of
Ethnickes, and the vanity of ungodly people, Ambros. de obitu Theodosu.

Thirdly I affirm that in scripture is set down two sorts of lying miracles,
and both are to be misregarded alike. 1. false The third answer.
miracles wherein the senses of men only are deluded, but nothing wroght
neither contrary to nature nor above nature, such as were the miracles wrought
by the sorcerers of Egypt, Exodus 7. 8 9. Other miracles are called lying
miracles, not because the senses of men are deluded, but because they are
brought forth by the operation of Satan to confirm a lying doctrine, Deuteronomy. 13.
1. 23, And in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. 9. they are called (...), because they are both
wrought and alleged to confirm a doctrine of lies. In this rank let us
eount the miracle cited by EVAGRIVS.

Finally I say that if the confidence in the cross was so powerful as to stay
COSROES king of Persia from besieging Apamia, why was it not also as powerful
(the people remaining no The fourth answer.
less superstitious the^ they were before) to save Apamia from the siege of
ADAARMANES the captain of the army of COSROES who afterward took the town of
Apamia and set it on fire? Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 10. Notwithstanding of their
confidence in the cross this superstition was no defense unto them, but rather
fuel to augment the flame of the wrath and indignation of God against them.
And thus I leave EVAGRIVS sporting himself with his own conceits, whereof what
account I make, I have already declared.

In end, Satan counting the ignorance of mankind to be his gaining, brought in
false relics into the world, which False relics.
were worshipped with no less reverence and devotion then the true relics
were. And Satan used the world as the Philistim^ used SAMSON, Judge. 16. First
they bound him, secondly they pulled out his eyes, thirdly they compelled him
to grind in their mil: and last of all they made a play-soole of him. But when
they were at the hight of their contempt, Simil.
then suddenly came their destruction. Even so after that Satan had bound the
world with the bands of idolatry, and blindfolded them, and made them to serve
in vile and filthy offices, in end with false and forged relics, he would make
a playfoole of the world: but then in the mercy of God the kingdom of the
devil began to be shaken and ouerturned. The coat of Christ, his purple
garment, his tears, the foreskin of his circumcision, the crown of thorns,
the spear, that pierced his side, the lots that were cast for his garments,
the linen clothes whereinto his blessed body was wrapped, all these relics
the Roman Church brag that they have them, together with the very house of
Bethleam wherein the Lord was borne, miraculously transported from Judea to
Italy: so impudent are they in forging lies. But if all these things had been
left by Christ in testamental Legacy to the Church of Rome, they had not been
so careful in keeping of the^, as the negligent keeping of the purity of the
word and holy sacraments clearly declares: for they have lost the key of
knowledge. They have added many things to Baptism, and paired a substantial
part from the Supper of the Lord. And no doubt if the forenamed relics had
been left in Testament also to the church of Rome (like unto false executers)
they had made havoc of these in like manner.

The false relics attributed to the blessed Virgin the mother of our Lord, to
MICHAEL the Archangel, and to the martyrs and saints, some of them have such
babish conceits in them, others such absurdity, as it were a shame to make
rehearsal of them, if so be we had not to do with a shameless harlot, who
has dighted her mouth, and says, I have committed none iniquity, Prou, 30.
ver. 20. The virgins hair in quantity more then is beseeming to attribute to
one person, her milk in quality better then is beseeming to attribut to any
mortal creature: her comb wherewith she combed her hair, her girdle and many
other relics unknown to antiquity. In the strife of MICHAEL the Archangell
of God against the devil for the body of MOSES, epist. Iud. ver. 9. the dagger
and shield wherewith he fought, are among the number of Popish relics: as if
Satan could be overcome with the weapons of corporal warfarc, when as men
themselves are taught by the Apostle to fight against spiritual wickedness
with spiritual armor. Ephesians. 6.

The coals of S. LAVRENCE, the incorruptible finger of JOHN Baptist that
pointed out Christ, the iron chain that bound PETER, the teeth of APOLLONIA,
the body of S. DIONISE co^plet aleged to be both in France and Germany, the
multiplied body of S. SEBASTIAN and innumerable other forged relics whereof
they who have inverted the^ have cause to be ashamed. And what shall we say of
the superlatiue degree of al absurdity in defending forged relics? The
arrows that pierced S. SEBASTIAN, the stones that stoned S. STEPHAN, the 30.
pieces of money which the traitor IVDAS received to betray his master, shall
all these also be consecrated and worshipped? SIMON MAGVS money was cursed and
execrable as well as himself, Act, 8. 20. because he thought that the gift of the
holy spirit could be bought with money. Shall not the 30. pieces of money
wherewith the blood of Christ was bought be also cursed and execrable? Now we
see in our time a filthy stable full of forged reiiques and more filthy then
ever the stable of AVGIAS king of Elis was, which couldby no other means be
purged, but by the river of Alpheus, which being let in into the stable the
great heap of 30 years dung was in few days washed away: Even so the great
heap of forged relics, wherewith the world has been bewitched these many
hundredth years, can by no other means be abolished but by the spate of the
authority of godly Princes, whose hearts the Lord stir up to purge the world
from the filth and stincke of false relics by false teachers so obstinatly
defended.

The best remedy to correct all abuses in the Church was ever this, to reduce
all things unto the first and original purity which was this, to do as the men
of God in the Apostles days did. They followed the saints in so far as the
saints followed Christ, 1. Cor. 11. If the saints departed this life, they
buried them honestly, as deuote men did bury STEPHAN, Act. 8 2. with some
lamentation, but not excessive as they do who are without hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13 After their death if they remembered any good they had done in their
lifetime, they commended it, that others might follow their example, because
Christ says that the fact of MARIE should be told for a memorial of her, and
that in all places whersoeuer the Gospel should be taught, Mat. 26. ver. 13. If
they had patiently suffered any evil for Christ's sake, they kept a memorial
of that also, as the godly fathers of the primitive Church did in natalitus
martyrum. Thus doing, we honor the saints and follow them as they followed
Christ, but we cloth them not with the royal apparel which is only due to
Christ, to whom be everlasting glory and honor.

Amen.
CENT. 3. A Treatise of the supremacy of the B. of Rome.
ALbeit that the Bishop of Rome was not openly proclaimed to be the head of
all Bishops, until the year of our Lord 607. by the Emperor PHOCAS, yet is
this supremacy colored with forged lies and appearance of greater antiquity,
and for refutatio^ of alleged antiquity I cast in this treatise in the third
Centurie. And first of all let us consider the grounds of this alleged
supremacy, next let us consider the steps of this ladder (not like to the
ladder of JACOB leading up to heaven, but like to the manifestation of the man
of sin) whereby the B. of Rome, by little and little climmed up unto this
soueraignitie, that in end he sat as a lawgiuer in the chair of Christ. And
thirdly God-willing we shall declare the tragical event of this supremacy.

Now first the principal ground whereupon Papists do ground the supremacy
of the Pope, is the supremacy of PETER Great business to destroy Christ after
he was borne as great business to advance the Antichrist.
above the rest of the Apostles, which if it were grantes they will infer the
superiority of the Bishop of Rome, as his successor above all Bishops. In
this argument I perceive great business to advance the Antichrist, and to set
him up into an eminent chair, like as when Christ was borne there was great
business to make him out of the way, Mat. 2. but all in vain, the cruelty
and craft of HEROD, cannot un do the counsel of God: so great business is to
advance the Roman Antichrist, and to make us believe that Christ himself has
set him in his own chair, and given unto him a sovereign government over al
his sheep, but all this travel is also taken in vain: for the room of Christ
must not be filled until it be vacant, and the breath of Christ's mouth
destroying the man of sin, will one day declare that Christ is living,
sitting in his own chair, and mighty in operation to make his enemies his
footstool, Psalm. 110,

Now to examine the parts of this argument, the first part is, PETER is the
head of the Apostles, and this they prove Christ instituted none of the
Apostles to be supreme head over the rest.
by the words of Christ, I Will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, etc. Mat. 16. In the contrary we affirm that if^in these words
Christ had given any supremacy to PETER above the rest, then afterward when
they strove who should be greatest, Christ had not damned this fault in all his
disciples, but he had only damned the eleven disciples, for that they were not
voluntarly subject to PETER whom he had already made head of all the rest. But
in so far as striving for superiority is damned in them all, Mat. 18. it is
certain that Christ appointed none of the Apostles to be supreme head of all
the rest. And CYPRI AN plainly affirms in his book de simplicitate
Praelatorum. Hoc erant utique (...) and cateri Apostoli quodfuit Petrus pari
consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. that is, All the rest of the
Apostles were that same thing that PETER was furnished with like fellowshippe
and honor. The second part of the argument that the Bishop of Rome is the
successor of PETER has been already entreated in the head of succession.

Another argument proouing the supremacy of the Roman The decretal epistles
attributed to the Bishops of Rome of old are forged and false.
Bishops is taken out of the decretall epistles attributed to the Bishops of
Rome who lived in the second Centurie making mention of the superiority of the
Bishop of Rome above all other Bishops. To this I answer, that these
epistles attributed unto them are supposititious and false, as hist. Magdeburg.
clearly proves by many reasons, whereof I shall rehearse a few. First, the
style and 1.
ditement of all these epistles declares that one and the selfsame man has
endited them all.

Secondly the ineptitude and barbaritie of language, no wise agreeing with the
tightnesse of the Latin tongue used in 2.
this age.

Thirdly, these decretall epistles agree not with the estate of the Church at
that time persecuted by Tyrants, troubled 3
by Heretics, and slandered by the world. If these forenamed Bishops had
written epistles indeed they had contained exhortatio^s to patie^t suffering,
apologies against sla^drous mouths, refutatio^ of Heretics: but seeing they
sound for the most part to the establishing of their own supremacy the very
circumsta^ce of time declares that they are supposititious and forged.

Fourthly the reasons whereby these epistles do prove the supremacy of the
Roman chair, are foolish, ridiculous 4
and unworthy to be attributed to so worthy men. As namely, that PETER was
called CEPHAS, that is an head, for his supremacy. Likewise PETER and PAVL
died at Rome, therefore the Roman B. is head of all other Bishops. Also PAVL
said that he had continual remembrance of the Romans in his prayers. Romans 1.
therefore the Roman Church must be head of all other Churches.

Fifthly, these decretal epistles were unknown to IVSTINVS martyr, IRENEVS,
CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS who lived about 5.
this time, as likewise to JEROME an accurat searcher of al an tiquities, for
none of the^ make me^tio^ of these decretal epistles.

Sixthly, when the question of appellation to the Roman Bishop, and the
question of supremacy was reasoned in the 6.
sixth Council of Carthage, if such decretall epistles had been then exstant
the ambassadors of the Bishop of Rome had alleged them for corroboration of
their cause, but they were not as yet fashioned and shaped.

Finally in these decretall epistles CLEMENS B. of Rome is brought in writing to
JAMES surnamed IVSTVS after the death of PETER: and it is known by the history
that JAMES surnamed IVSTVS was slain at the least 8. years before the
martyrdom of PETER. For James was slain before NERO intended his persecution,
but PETER was martyred in the very furic of NEROES persecution, Joseph antiq.
I. 20. c. 8 Eusebius. I. 2. c 23 and 25.

The 3. principal argument they use is taken from the utility of the Church
of God whereinto unity is very requisite, Ioh. 17. and for keeping of unity
one ministerial head under Christ is necessary, like as in the Church of the
Jews one high Priest, to whom all the people were subject in matters of
religion, was a band of unity amongst the Jews: even so say they, one
ministerial head (viz. the B. of Rome) is necessary for keeping unity: peace
and concord amongst Christians-To this I answer, that all things happened to
them in figures, 1. Cor. 10. and like as the nation of the Jews had one high
Priest as a band of unity, so likewise they had one altar, and one city of
their conuentions, Isa. 33 and these also were bands of unity to keep the
nation of the Jews into an holy fellowship: yet no man will say that it is
necessary to us in our days to resort thrice in the year to any one city for
keeping the unity of Christ No more is it necessary in our days for keeping
of unity to have one high Priest upon whom we shall all depend, but rather
this being a figure (as said is) teaches us to depend upon Jesus Christ the
great bishop of our souls, because we are all members of his body, we are
quickened with his spirit, we have one hope of calling, we have one faith and
one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. These are the bands of our co^junctio^ both with Christ
our head and with his members: but the Apostle PAVL in reckoning out the bands
of our conjunction with Christ and amongst our selves speaks nothing of one
ministerial head vnderChrist: neither is it possible that there can be on^
ministerial head in all the world, as there was one high Priest in one nation of
the Jews.

The second head of this treatise is to consider the steps and degrees whereby
the B. of Rome was mounted up in the chair of Christ. 1. The honorable styles
attributed by other churches The first step.
unto the chair of Rome began to puffed up some of them into great conceit of
themselves. The chair of Rome was called the Apostolic chair and the B. of
Rome was called the universal Bishop: such honorable styles by hyperbolicall
speeches given unto them should not have puffed them up in pride to conceit
supremacy over all other Bishops, because the like styles of dignity are
attributed to other Bishops and other chaires who never usurped superio^itie
over all Churches, Nazianz. in laudem Cypriani says that he was counted in his
time not only a govern our of the Church of Carthage and of all Afric and of
all the regions of the West, but also of all the East and South and North. The
like is written of ATHANASIVS, Nazian in laude^ Athanas^. The like also the
EmperorCONSTAN TINE spak of EVSEBIVS PAMPHILIB of Caesarea Palestinae when he
refused the bishopric of Antiochia. In this (says CONSTAN TINE to EVSEBIVS)
thou art blessed that by the testimony of ye world thou art thought worthy to be
B. of the whole church Eusebius. invita Co^stantn. l. 3. c. 59 yet for all this
neitherCYPRIAN nor ATHANASIVS nor EVSEBIVS were puffed up in pride to think more
of themselves then became the humble dispensators of the mysteries of God. Here
is to be noted that similitude of BASILIVS, that a good Christian should be
like Simil.
unto a straight line, that neither crooketh upward nor downward: eue^ so a
goodChristian should neither be dashed with infamy and trouble, nor puffed up
with honor and prosperity.

The second step of this unhappy supremacy was the appellations The second
step.
of Heretics, and men living inordinatly from the discipline of their own
Bishops unto the Bishops of Rome, whom they received under their shadow, not
so much for favor to their dishonest causes, as for desire of supremacy above
all other Churches. For APIARIVS appealed to the B. of Rome, and EVTYCHES Abbot
in Constantinople appealed from his B. FLAVIANVS to LEO B. of Rome, to whose
excommunication albeit in end LEO agreed in the Council of Chalcedon, yet it is
certain that the cause of the propagation of EVTYCHES error was the lingering
of LEO B of Rome, who did not incontinent separat this pestilent Heretic from
his communion: albeit FLAVIANVS B. of Constantinople had most justly
exco^mmunicat him. Likewise BASILIDES and MARTIALIS Bishops of Asturica and
Emerita in Spain who had sacrificed to idols, and defended their apostasy in
written books, after they were both excommunicate and deposed by the Bishops
of Spain, they had recourse to STEPHANVS B of Rome: whose false apologies were
so much the more favorably heard, that they sought refuge under his wings. But
CYPRIAN gathered a Council in Afric, and absolutely damned these Apostats,
Hist Magd. cent. 3, Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 4. And albeit the African Councils
labored to remead this insolency in time by ordaining these persons to be
excommunicate who should appeal from their own Bishops to any other beyond
sea, yet it was hard to correct by reason or authority of Councils that error
which the Roman Bishop (being once admitted to be called primaesedis
Episcopus) did receive and embrace. Yea the filthy dash the Roman Bishops
got in the sixth Council of Carthage, wherein the act of the Council of Nice
alleged by them to prove the B. of Rome to be supreme Judge of all
appellations was found to be supposititious and false, this filthy dash (I
say) did not correct their effrorr-Ited impudency. And with that learned
Modern I. CALVIN I wonder what malice or ignorance moved GRATIANVS 2.
Gratianus exception from the council of Carthage is foolish.
quaest. 4. c. placuit. when he had mentioned the foresaid decrcet of the 6.
Council of Carthage, that these persons who should happen to appeal to
bishops beyond sea should be excommunicat, he adds this exception, unless
they appeal to the chair of Rome. What shall be done (says he) to those beasts
who are so void of common sense, that they except from the Law, that thing
alanerlie for whose cause the Law was made and constitute, for it is evident
that the foresaid constitution in damning those that made appellations to
Bishops beyond sea, was expreslie made to inhibit men of Africa from appealing
to the B. of Rome.

Also the defection and beastly cowardlinesse of some Bishops The third step
dwelling in places where the pride of the Roman Bishops had been chiefly
abandoned, their defection (I say) from the footsteps and good decrees of their
antecessours, gave encouragement to the Roman B. to set forward his usurped
supremacy, as namely EVLALIVS B of Carthage, dam ned the decrees of the
Councils of Carthage, and submitted himself to the chair of Rome in the days
of BONIFACIVS 2. promising to do all things according to his advise and
direction. Of the which victory BONIFACIVS 2. rejoiced, and gloried, and wrote
to the Bishop of Alexandria, that this promise of subjection which EVLALIVS
made to the chair of Rome, should be divulgat and notified unto other
Churches. But the argument taken from the authority and example of EVLALIVS,
is like unto himself. If he being weyed in a just balance, will be found
foolish unconstant, timorous, rash and naughty, what can we say of the
argument taken from his authority and example but the like? Beside this from
the 6. Council of Carthage, until the days of BONIFACIVS, B. of Rome, and
EVLALIVS B. of Carthage interveened 100 years All this time the godly and
learned fathers that were in the sixth Council of Carthage (not AUGUSTINE
himself except) were under the sentence of CELESTINVS cursing and yet we hope
in the mercy of GOD, that AURELIUS B. of Carthage, AUGUSTINE B. of Hippo, and
the rest of the fathers whom he cursed, are reigning with Christ in heaven,
notwithstanding of CELESTINVS foolish cursing and EVLALIVS more foolish
repentance. This is well noted by PHILIP MORNEY that Phoe nix of France. Lib.
myster. iniquitatis.

The Roman Bishops hunting foral occasions of preferment were like to a wild
halke in the morning, hungry, and The fourth step.
swiftly soaring in the air, if he cannot catch a Partridge, he will make a
Lauerock his prey: even so the Bishops of Rome, taking their vantage by every
light occasion, labored to bring their brethren in subjection to their
soueraignitie. In witness whereof ACACIVS B. of Constantinople, used the advice and counsel of FELIX 3. B. of Rome, in disauthorizing and
excommunicating PETRVS MOGGVS a favorer of the Eutychian heresy. This thing
ACACIVS did by no necessity, but of good will, and as a brother seeking the advice and support of another brother. After this PETRVS MOGGVS being both
disauthorized and excommunicat, he repented, forsook his error, and offered
his supplicant bill to ACACIVS craving relaxation from that fearful sentence of
excommunication. FELIX 3. on the other side, because his advise was not craved
in the relaxation as well as in the excommunication, he cursed ACACIVS B. of
Constantinople, and GELASIVS 1. his successor did the like. What meeting
ACACIVS gave to FELIX it is not needful to rehearse, it is sufficiently known he
was not behind with him. Here every man may see that the Rom an bishops made
vantage of these who soght their counsel, as if it were necessary that he who
craves our advise in one thing should be bound to do nothing without our
advise in any time to come.

Moreover, the hearts of the Roman bishops being excessiuely bent to
preferment, could not abstain from flattering of Emperors and Princes, thereby
gaining vantage and prefer The fist step.
meant, but lossing the favor of God, and falling under that heavy sentence of
the curse of God, spoken by ISAIAH the Prophet. Woe unto them which speak good
of evil, and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. Isa. 5. ver. 20. It
is not known to the world that BONIFACIVS 3. flattered PHOCAS emperor, who by
treason and unspeakable cruelty, put out of the way MAVRITIVS him master, his
wife and children: And for this cause he was advanced to this honor to be
called bishop of al bishops. But mark well by whom, by PHOCAS a tyrant, a
traitor and a murderer of his master MAVRITIVS. Yet the chair of Rome should
had less rebuke, if this flattery had begun at the person of BONIFACIVS 3. or
yet ended in him, but before him GREGORIVS 1. of whom the Roman Church braggeth
so much, he also in whose days that detestable fact was committed, flattered
the tyrant PHOCAS, abusing the celestial so^g of the Angels of God in the time
of Christ's nativity, Luc. 2. 13 14 This same holy song gloria in excelsis,
GREGORIVS sings rejoicing for the inauguratio^ of this wicked emperor. Greg.
lib. 2. epist. 36. And in epist, 48 anent the same purpose, Laetentur coeli,
and exultet terra, and de vestris benignis actibus universae reipublicae
populus htlarscat, that is to say, Let the heavens and earth rejoice, and let
the whole multitud of the co^monwelth rejoice for the bountifulnes of your
actions. O flattring GREGORIVS counted the worst among the best and the best
among the worst, but a flatterer indeed from whom the tongue of DEMOSTHENES and
CICERO both cannot rub away this foul spot of flattery SABINIANVS the
successor of GREGORIVS 1. a Halke of the right nest continued but few months
in his government, there fore I will not open his grave, but I let himly still.
BONIFACIVS 3. barked not without a bone. BALAAM loved the wages of iniquity,
but got the^ not BONIFACIVS loved the^ and got them but not in mercy, but in
the wrath of God. What ZACHARIAS B. of Rome did afterward more prosperously
the^ devoutly in favor of PIPINVS anno 750. he is very ignorant of history
that misknoweth. CHILDERICVS the lawful heir of the kingdom at the comma^deme^t
of ZACHARIAS was shaue^, and thrust into a monastery, and PIPINVS son of
CAROLVS MARTELLVS, was made king. STEPHANVS 2. after ZACHARIAS walking on still
in the paths of flattery, obtained from PIPINVS king of France, not only aid
against AISTVLPHVS king of Lombar^'s but also the exarchat of Ravenna and
Pentapolis. And to the end that this great territory pertaining justly to the
emperor of Constantinople, should not return back againto the righteous
owners of it, what order was taken by PAVLVS 1. STEPHANVS 3. and ADRIAN 1 the
changing of the Empire from the East to the West, and setting up CAROLVS MAGNUS
clearly declares. So that the fifth step of the Roman eminency was falsehood
and flattery as has been declared.

Now if there be any interstice or intervall between the fifth and sixth step,
marueill not at it, because it is a great point, The sixth step.
and he who was a let to the man of sin behooved to be made out of the way 2 Thessalonians. 2. that is (as CHRYSOSTOM exponeth it) the Emperors power behooued to
be utterly trod under foot before the man of sin could usurp absolute
authority, and sit as God in the Lords Temple, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. homil.
4. Therefore the next attempt was the investiment of Bishops per baculum and
annulu^ (as the custom then was) must be violently extorted and wrung out of
Emperors hands. This was hard to bring to pass in respect the Emperors had bin
in so long possession of this right, but it was so necessary a point that the
absolut soueraignitie whereat they aimed of a long time, could no otherwise be
obtained. Therefore the Bishops of Rome put on their armor, and batter at the
authority of the Emperors with all their might, specially with the
thunderbolts of their cursings, to have the investiment of Bishops, per baculum
and annulum given over into their hands. This bargain began in the days of
GREGORY the 7. and inthe days of HENRY 4. and lasted almost 200. years, some
call it bellum Pontificium. HENRY 4. was cursed by GREGORY 7. HENRY 5. by
PASCHALIS. LOTHARIVS 2. was rather content to give over the investiment of
Bishops, then to contend with INNOCENTIVS 2. and so escaped the sentence of
cursing. CVNRADVS 3. was occupied in warrefare against the Saracens and was
traitorously deceived by EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople: but if he had
tarried long at home, there was great appearance of a bargain because he
received not his coronation from the B. of Rome. FRIDERICVS the first called
BARBAROSSA was cursed by ALEXANDER the third, who also in VENICE, and in the
porch of the Church of S. MARK trampled upon his neck. HENRY 6. was cursed by
CELESTINVS, who also when he repented and was crowned Emperor by him, he put
on the crown upon HENRYES head with his hand, and dang it off again with his
foot. PHILIP brother to HENRY 6 was cursed by INNOCENTIVS, OTTO 4. was cursed
by INNOCENTIVS 3. FRIDERICK 2, by HONORIVS 3 GREGORIVS 9. and INNOCENTIVS 4.
CVNRADINVS the nephew of FREDERICK 2. in stead of cursing was beheaded by the
special advise of CLEMENS 4. such elemencie was in our holy fathers. This
large history I have only touched in few words to let you understand that the
Bishops of Rome can be serious in maine points, whereinto the standing or
falling of their supremacy does consist. If the investiment of bishops be
thrown out of the hands of the emperors, then will all bishops follow the
bishop of Rome, and not their own sovereign Lords, and therefore more curses
then ever were pronounced out of mount Eball. Deuteronomy. 27. were thundered out: but
against whom I pray you? Against the anointed of the Lord, of whom it is said,
Thou shall not curse the Prince of thy people. Exodus 22. ver. 28. But wonder
not good reader of the great difference between the curses pronounced out of
mount Eball, and the curses pronounced out of mount Tarpeius. The curses from
mount Eball were given out to bring the people under the obedience of God. but
the curses pronounced out of mount Tarpeius, were set forth to bring Princes
under the soueraignitie of the Roman bishop.

The seuinth step is nothing else but an appendicle of the sixth, to wit after
that the Bishops of Rome had obtained The s^uinth step.
the right of investme^t not by reason but by force and might, then the ancient
order must be inverted. Of old no man could be made bishop of Rome without the advice of the Emperor. Now by the contrary, no man must be Emperor without
the Popes coronation. What is this but like a navigations Simil.
to the East Ind^? We lose the sight of the North pole, and find the degrees of
the elevation of the South pole. The authority of the Emperor is utterly
trodden under foot, and what remains but to see that man of sin and child
of perdition with absolut soueraignitie commanding al things at his pleasure?

One thing is yet inlacking to perfect this mystery of iniquity. The B. of Rome,
must have power also to convocate general The eigh^ step.
cou^cils: themselves or else their substituts must be moderators in these
Councils, and their determinations must have equal authority with the written
word of GOD. All these things were obtained, as it were, without stroke of
sword, and without gainsaying and reluctation. For albeit Emperors were in
continual custom of appointing general Councils, and the place of their
meeting, and to point out the person, who should be moderator, yet after the
investment of bishops was violently plucked out of the Emperors hands and the
Emperors must receive their coronation from the B. of Rome, all the courage of
Emperors utterly failed, and the B. of Rome, will needs convocat general
Councils, and will guide al at his own appetite and pleasure. It is known that
CONSTANTINE convocated the Council of Nice, THEODOSIUS the Council of
Constantinople. THEODOSIUS 2. and VALENTINIAN the Council of Ephesus,
MARTIANVS the Council of Chalcedon. JUSTINIAN the fifth general Council,
CONSTANTINVS POGONATVS the sixth, CONSTANTINVS COPRONYMVS the seuinth BASILIVS
emperor of Constantinople gathered the eight general Council. Hitherto the
Emperors kept their right of convocating O Ecumenick Councils, neither was
their right so much as once controlled. The main question between the Emperors
and the bishops of Rome was de investitura as said is. This being once settled
in the persons of the Bishops of Rome the question anent gathering general
Councils slept, from the eight general Council, till the Council of Lateran,
that is, about 400 years. And then INNOCENTIVS 3. at his own hand no man
making opposition in the contrary steppeth to the rudder, gathered the
general Council of Lateran in Rome anno 1215 and the bishops following him
did the like, no man making opposition in the contrary, except in such
Councils as were to be gathered for impairing the Emperors estate. And they
gave out to the world such laws and ordinances as shall be declared hereafter
Godwilling. GREGORY 10. gathered a general Council at Lions in France, ann.
1273. CLEMENS 5. gathered a general Council at Uien anno 1311. Pope JOHN 23.
gathered the Council of Constance ann. 1414. with advise of SIGISMVND the
Emperor, but welcome God against your will. There were three Popes at one time
contending for the Popedom, JOHN, GREGORY, and BENEDICT: and Pope JOHN to
obtain favor at the Empesours hands, makes him associat to himself in
co^vocating the Council of Constance, but sore against his heart vouchsaueth
he upon the Emperor a lap of his own garment. EVGENIVS 4, gathered the
Council of Basil an. 1431. as likewise the Council of Florence, an. 1439. And
finally the Council of Tr^nt was gathered by PAVLVS 3. an. 1546. Now we have
conveyed by historical narration the B, of Rome to the top of the mast, Prove.
23. ver. 34. where we leave him fast asleep, and the world also bewitched with
his enchantments sleeping into a dead sleep, until it please the Lord with his
terrible tempest to give them both a wakening.

The last head of this treatise is to declare the tragical event of this
supremacy of the Roman B. not like to the supremacy of AARON and his
successors, which was a band of unity amongst the nation of the Jews: but
like unto the supremacy of ABIMELECH, tending not only to the murdering of
his brethren, but also to the utter undoing of the Sichemits who by unlawful
means advanced him to that honor. Acomparison between Christ, and the
Antichrist.
Judge. 9. But in the beginning of the last head before I say any further, in
few words I will institut a comparison between Christ and the Antichrist, as a
Preface to the last head. Christ Jesus after his humiliation ascended unto
heaven, led captivity captive, and distributed good things to men, Ephesians. 4. ver.
8. Psalm. 68. ver. 18. and the hier he ascended the greater benefit redounded
to mankind: the Apostles received the gift of tongues Act 2. and strength
promised from above Act I and a sanctified memory to remember all things that
Christ had taught his disciples. John 14. And more then this, seeing he
ascended to the heavens to sit at the right hand of his father Psalm. 1 10. and
to be our Advocat. 1. John 2. it is certain that not only the Apostles, but
also all Christians have a great and unspeakable benefit by the asce^sion of
Christ on high. Howbeit this ascension of Christ, and sitting at the right hand
of his Father is not a new dignity that Christ had not before, but this
excellent glory was something obscured (...). Heb. 2. that is, through the
suffering of death. But when he ascended to heaven, that mistie cloud was
removed, and the glory of Christ was clearly known.

But when the Antichrist ascended on hie, not by the decree of the mercy of
God appointing him to sit at the right hand of the father, ps 11^, but by such
unlawful means, as have bin declared before, and by the operation of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver 9 and by the decree of the justice of God punishing the world
for the contempt of his truth ibid. ver. 12. Then I say, gifts were not
distributed to men, but the great Vials of the wrath of God were powered upon
the earth, as shall clearly appear by a particular declaration of the
miseries that happened to the world by the advancement of the B. of Rome to the
supremacy foresaid. And above all other things when as he was not content to
sit in the chair of PETER, but also he would make himself a new lawgiver,
not only equal to Christ, but also (...) an adversary to Christ, and
exalting himself above Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver, 4. Then I say, the fountains
of the great deep were broken up and the windows ofheauen were opened Genesis 7.
not to bring down rain, as in the days of NOAH, but to reueil the wrath of
God from heaven against all ungodliness and vnrighteoufnesse of men, who
withold the truth into unrighteousness. Romans 1. ver. 18

Now to keep some order in this great Ocean, whereinto I am embarked, the
principal Tragedies following the Roman supremacy I divide them in three.
First the war ^alled bellam sacrum, that is the holy war followed upon the
neck of this supremacy. Secondly, the war called Pontificium. Thirdly,
laws and constitutions since the 1215. year of our Lord, so flatly repugnant
to the ordinances of Christ, that no man can be Christ's servant, except he
shake off this unhappy yocke of the ordinances of the Antichrist.

After GREGORIVS 7. and VICTOR 3, succeeded VRBANVS 2 The first Tragedy.
This man gathered a Council at Claremont in France, and incitat the Christian
Princes to undertake a most hazardous and dangerous warrefare for recovery of
Jerusalem, and the holy land out of the hands of the Turks and Saracens, for
both these people were massed together, as PLATINA grants in vita Vibani 2,
This warfare was undertaken in the year of our Lord 1084. Bullinger de
Conciliis says 1096. Three hun dreth thousand men marched to this warfare
under the con duct of GODFREY Duke of LORAINE, and BALDVINE, and EVSTACE his
brethren. ROBERT Duke of Normandy, and ROBERT earl of Flanders, HVGO brother
to the king of France, BOEMIVS duke of Apulia, and TANCREDVS son to ROGERIVS
BOEMVNDS brother. In the first entry of this warfare at A^tiochia and at
Jerusalem, such abundance of blood was shed, as BVLLINGER by the testimony of
VSPERGENSIS cites that the horse dipped their legs in blood unto the knees.
At Ascalon a cruel battle was foughten between the Christians and the
Saracens, under the conduct of the SVLTAN of Babylon, wherein an hundredth
thousand men were slain. Thus was Jerusalem recovered out of the hands of the
Saracens with great effusion of blood, and GODFREY crowned king of Jerusalem.
But it was so dear bought, and so soon lost again (for this kingdom
continued not 100. years) that God gave clear testimonies to the world that
he liked not that unhappy Counci^l of Claremont^ whereby the peace of the
world was perturbed, and blood was shed abundantly like water powered out upon
the ground, the minds of the infidels so exasperat against Christians, that
albeit they have paid us home again with the conquest of Thracia, Bulgaria,
Macedonia, Gracia, Ploponesus, and a great part of Hungaria, and illyricum, yet
are not their hearts satisfied, but set on edge through remembrance of the
army that came to besiege Jerusalem. I leave off to speak of the unprosperous
success of CONRADVS 3. and how his army besieging Iconium, was impoysoned by
the falsehood of EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople: and the success of JEWS
king of France, and ROGERIVS duke of Sicil, to whom all things succeeded not
to their contentment, as the siege of Damascus clearly declares. No better
success had PHILIP king of France, and RICHARD king of England who enterprised
likewise to recover again all that was lost but king RICHARDS shipwreck,
captivity and ransom (...) that the voyages to the holy land seldom had a
good succ^sse. The calamity of BARBAROSSA who seemed to prosper, but was
pitifully drowned in the passage of a river: And finally the compelled
returning of FRIDERICKE the 2. in the mids of his victories to save his own
dominions from the outrage and oppression of the Pope: the bad success, I say
of all these expeditions and other more declares that God gave not his blessing
to the Council of Claremont. So that in very deed the advancement of the
Bishop of Rome tends to the calamity of the whole world.

The second tragedy that followed the high advancement ofthe B of Rome was
bellum pontificium, others call it The second Tragedy.
bellum Imperatorium, a cruel and hateful warfare between the Emperors and
Bishops of Rome, wherein no sort of villainy, falsehood and barbarous cruelty
was left unpracticed against noble and worthy Emperors. GREGORY 7 caused the
Emperor HENRY 4. at Canusium in sharp winter weather to stand barefooted, and
to crave absolution from him. He uttered a false prophecy of the Emperors
death within year and day: which when the issue declared to be a lying
prophecy, he took him to his shifting mental meaning, that he spoke of the
spiritual death of the Emperors soul, and not ofhis bodily deathPope.
PASCALIS 2. stirred up HENRY 5. against his own natural father HENRY 4. and
caused raise the body of the noble Emperor HENRY 4 out of his sepulcher, so
that it remained 5. years unburied. Pope ADRIAN 4. was offended because the
Emperor BARBAROSSA held his left stirrup in stead of the right stirrup when
the Pope mounted up upon his horse. Pope ALEXANDER3. trampled upon the same
Emperors neck. Pope GREGORY 9. by his cursings compelled the Emperor
FREDERICK 2. to lead an army to Asia against the Turks and Saracens, and in
his absence like unto a deceitful traitor invaded the kingdom of Naples, and
the rest of the dominions which in heritage belonged to the Emperor. Thus we
see clearly in this second tragedy that the B. of Rome was like unto the melt
in the body, when it waxes great by swelling and Simil.
hardness, all the rest of the noble parts are lessened and become weak: even
so the excessive preferment of the Bishops of Rome was the undoing of the
Emperors and princes of the earth.

The Bishops of Rome not contented with the two tragedies already mentioned, to
wit, to have filled the world The third Tragedte.
with blood, and to have trampled the Emperou^s and princes under foot, they
added the third tragedy wo^st of all. They would be lawgiuers, sitting in the
very chair of Christ, and making of none effect the ordinances of Christ, to
the end that place might be given to their constitutions. INNOCENTIVS 3 in the
Council of Lateran confirmed the blasphemous doctrine of transubstantiation
Ann. 1215. In the general Council holden by GREGORY. 10. Ann. 1273.
forgiveness of sins was promised in most ample manner to those that would be
marked with the badge of the cross, and would go and fight against the
Saracens. But Christ promises remission of sins to such only as repent
their sins believe in him, and in token of true repentance to these who bear
the easy yocke and light burden of Christ, Mat. 11. ver. 28 29. and 30. In the
general Council gathered by CLEMENS 5. in Vienne Ann. 1311. it was ordained
that the Pope should not be subject to the Emperor, but rather the Emperor to
the Pope, and that the Emperor shall give his oath of alledgance to the Pope
express contrary to the written word of God. Let every soul be subject unto
the hier powers, To. 13 ver. 1. Ioh 23. with advise of SIGISMVND gathered a
general Council at Constance, Ann. 1414. wherein the very testamental legacy
of Christ was altered and impaired by sacrilegious prelates in taking from the
people the use of the holy cup in the sacrament. And the clause, Non obstante
set down in their act, made the whole people of Christendom to tremble that
they durst not set their mouths against the heaven and correct the ordinance
of Christ, and that in such rude manner, that notwithstanding that Christ
instituted this sacrament under forms both of bread and wine yet the church
thought meet that the sacrament shall be given to laicke people under the form
of bread only. The late Councils of Basil and Florence are flat repugnant one
to another in the head of supremacy. And last of all the Council of Trent
wherein some piece of reformation was expected made it known to the world,
that the whore will never reform the Borthell, and the Antichrist will not be
consumed with the breath of his own mouth, but with the breath of the mouth of
Christ, which thing the Lord perform in his own time.

Amen.
FINIS.
A SHORT COMPEND OF THE HISTORY OF THE FIRST TEN PERSECVTIONS MOVED AGAINST
CHRISTIANS, DIVIDED INTO III. CENTVRIES.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADded in the end of every Centurie treatises arising upon
occasion offered in the history, clearly declaring the noveltie of Popish
Religion, and that is neither flowed from the mouths of Christ's holy Apostles,
neither was it confirmed by the blood of the holy Martyrs who died in these ten
persecutions.

IEREM. 6. ver. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand in the Ways, and behold, and
ask of the old Way, which is the good Way, and Walk therein, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls: but they said, We will not walk therein. LVC. 10.
ver. 42. Marie has chosen the good part which shall not be taken a Way from
her. EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Heart, and are to be sold at his shop on the
North side of the high street a little beneath the Cross, ANNO DOM. 1613.

A SHORT COMPEND, OF THE ARRIAN and EVTYCHIAN PERSECVTIONS, Comprised in the
IIII. V. and VI. CENTVRIES.

Whereunto is added, TREATISES, DECLARING THE novelty of POPISH Religion.

EDINBURGH, PRINTED BY ANDRO HEART, Anno Dom. 1615.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, VIRTUOUS, AND ELECT LADY, MARIE, COVNTES OF MAR, Wishes
grace, mercy, and eternal felicity.
THE provident care of our GOD (most noble Lady) has appointed, that the
virtues of his Saints like unto gold, should be tried in the furnace, purged
from dross, and counted precious. In the first 300. years of our LORD, the
faith and patience of Christians was tried with the yoke of ten cruel
persecutions. In the next 300. years, the knowledge of the Church was tried by
heretics, who by the mistie clouds of error, endeavored to blindfold the
eyes of men, and to lead them captive from the simplicity of the truth of
God: But in these ages also the power of the light of God was manifested, ever
dissipating darkness, as the Sun rising abolisheth the darkness of the
night. This is an encouragement to us, when we see false Teachers daily
renewing their Fortes, to fight against the truth, as the Philistimes did, who
faught against David in the valley of Rephaim, after they had been often overcome
by him. The last period of all their obstinate reluctation against the Anointed
of the Lord, was loss and hurt unto them selves, and dishonor to their gods,
whom they were compelled to leave behind them, and David took them, and brunt
them with fire, and the place was called Baal. perat-zim, that is, the rupture
of Baal. The adversaries 1. Chr. 14. verse 11.
of the Gospel, in our land, by renewing their forces again, are procuring a
new name unto their idols. They cannot be content with the names of
Baal-P^or, Baal-Meon, Baal-Thamar, Baal-Chatsor, Baal-Gad: But they will spread
out their banners in the valley of Rephaim, against our Sovereign LORD, his
Highness Statutes and Laws, longing for the last name Baal-Peratzim. The
grandour of the speeches of Scottish Papists, is not unknown to me: but
tumor and swelling in the flesh, is seldom joined with salubritie and health.
It is time for me to be afraid of the din of empty pitchers, when I find
them furnished within with holy Lamps, and to be backed with the sound of
holy Trumpets, blown by the Commandment of GOD: I mean such as were in the
Army of Gedion. Of this I am Judge. 6. verse 16.
fully persuaded, that the light of GOD, the trumpet of GOD, the sword of GOD,
and Gedion shall have the vpperhand in GODS appointed time. Some of them seem
to be devout, and they lament for us, as Iaakob lamented for his son Joseph,
whom he supposed to have Gene. 37. verse 34.
beenedead: But our lamentation for them, is grounded on better knowledge, as
the lamentation of Joseph was, when he fell upon his Fathers face, and wept
upon him, Genesis 50. verse 1.
and kissed him. Always (Madame) consider, that the sense of feeling, the
chief of all senses, the most inseperable companion of the spiritual life, is
most inlaking in them, who strive against the Gospel of CHRIST preached in
this land. They have so many easy remedies at hand to unladen their souls of
the heavy burden of sin, such as sprinckling of holy water, auricular
confessions, and penance, indulgences and pardons, that they never suffer men
to enter into a deep consideration of their own misery, and of the
superabundant compassions of GOD, freely pardoning sin: but they are content
with the superfice and scruif of new invented remedies. In the mean time
(Madame) receive under the shadow of your Ladysh. favorable protection, this
Book also, Of the Arrian and Eutychian persecution, wherein, as in a viue
mirror, is represented the falsehood, deceit, and subtilty of lying Teachers;
and likewise their mercylesse inhumanity and cruelty against GODS servants,
when they are assisted by the supporting strength of secular powers. And let
your La. and your noble house continually Epistle Jude, verse 11.
beware of Teachers, whom ye find to be deceitful and bloody, for they walk
in the way of Cain.

Now the mercies of the LORD JESUS, the author and finisher of our faith,
attend upon my Lord your Husband, upon your Ladyship and all your noble house,
for now, and ever,

AMEN.
Your La. humble servant, P. SIMSON.

TO THE READER.
IN writing of COMPENDES, every man, who has presumed to do such a work,
has found difficulties: and it has not been an easy thing to any man, to
satisfy either himself or others, being environed with many straites. If he
be short in his Compend, he seems obscure: if he write at length, then his
Compend seems to have need of an other Compend, to abridge his prolixity. Yet
in all these difficulties, it is better to set forward, to do some good, both
to our selves and others, then to spend our time in idleness, lest our
cogitations be like unto the upper and lower Milne-stones, lacking good grain
to grind upon, they rub violently one upon another, until both be broken: and
incase our cogitations be not well exercised, our thoughts will be spent
upon vain things, which will procure harm both to our souls and bodies.

In my TREATISES I have ouerpassed with silence the question anent Festuall
days, lest I should seem ^t one time to contend both against friends and
foes, as some men have done, who if they had more increased their charity, and
diminished the fervent heat of their contentious spirits, they had benefited
the Church of Christ more then they have done. Would GOD LUCAS OSIANDER had
walked in the foote-steps of Christian love.

Now I will beg this favor at thee, Christian Reader, that my weak travels
may be taken in good part. The house of our GOD in this land is large and ample
(praised be his most holy NAME therefore) it has need of bright-shining
torches, for the Halles, Parlours, and Chambers: and it has need of smaller
Lights, for Sellers and office houses: let my penny Candle give light in the
lowest Seller of the House of our GOD, and mine heart is fully content.

Farewell.
CENTVRIE IIII.
CHAP. I. OF EMPEROVRS.
CONSTANTINE.
THE CHURCH of CHRIST flourished in time of the ten persecutions, as a Palm
tree grows under the burden, and spreads out her branches by increasing
growth toward Heaven. Satan on the other part that pearcing and crooked Isai.
27. verse, 1.
serpent, who strives against the militant Church of GOD, both by might and
slight: when his might fails, it is time to try his slight: which he did by
the Canker-worme of heretical doctrine. Now therefore, let us entreat of the
ARRIAN and EUTYCHIAN Persecutions in the three subsequent CENTURIES. Other
Heretics albeit they were fierce and cruel, such as the Donatists, yet their
cruelty was like unto the stighling of a fish, when the water is ebbed, and
she is not covered with the deepenesse of over flowing Similitude.
water: the more stir she makes, the nearer she is unto her death. But the
Arrian and Eutychian Heretics found Emperors favorably inclined to the
maintenance of their errors, such as Constantius and Valens protectours of the
Arrian heresy, and Anastatius and Heraclius favorers of the Heresy of
Euiyches. This support they had of supreme powers, strengthened the a^me of
Heretics, and made them able to persecute the true CHURCH of CHRIST.

Notwithstanding, betwixt the ten great Persecutions, and the Arrian
pers^cution, a short breathing time was granted by GOD unto his CHURCH, who
will not suffer the rod of the wicked perpetually to lie upon the righteous,
lest they put out their hand unto iniquity. The days of the reign of
Constantine, were the breathing days of the persecuted CHURCH: Men banished
for the cause of CHRIST, by the Emperors edicts were returned from their
banishment, restored to their offices, dignities, and possessions, which duly
belonged unto them. The heritage and goods, of such as had suffered death for
the cause of CHRIST, were alloted to their nearest kinsmen, and incase none of
these were found alive, then their goods were ordained to appertain unto the
CHURCH. These beginnings of an admirable change of the estate of persecuted
^seb. de vita (...). lib. 2.
men, wrought in the hearts of all people a wonderful astonishment,
considering within themselves what could be the event of such sudden and
unexpected alteration.

The care that Constantine had to disburthen persecuted Christians of that
heavy yoke of persecution, that pressed them down so long, was not only
extended to the bounds of the Roman Empire, whereinto Constantine was
sovereign lord, and absolute Commander: But he was careful also to procure
the peace of Christians, who lived under Sapores King of Persia, Sozom. lib. 2.
Cap. 14.
who vexed Christian people with sore and grievous persecution: so that within
his Dominions, more then sixteen thousand were found, who had concluded
their lives by martyrdom. Amongst whom Simeon Bishop of Selentia, and
Ustazares the kings eldest eunuch, and his nurs-father in time of his
minority, Pusices ruler of all the kings artificers, Azades the kings beloved
eunuch, Idem lib. 2. cap. 8. 9. 10. and 13.
and Acepcimas, a Bishop in Persia: all these were men of Note and Mark, who
suffered martyrdom under Sapores king of Persia.

While the cogitations of Constantine were exercised with meditation, Sozom.
lib. 2. cap. 15.
by what means the distressed estate of Christians in Persia might be
supported: by the providence of GOD the Ambassadors of Sapores, king of
Persia, came to the Emperor Constantine: whose petitions when he had granted,
he sent them back again to their lord and master: and he sent with them a
letter of his own, entreating Sapores to be friendly to Christians, in whose
Religion nothing can be found, that can justly be blamed. His letter also
bare the bad fortune of the Emperor Valerian the VIII. persecuter of
Christians, and how miserably he ended his life: and on the other part, what
good success the LORD had given unto himself in all his battles, because he
was a defender of Christians, and a procurer of their peace. What peace was
procured to distressed Christians in Persia by this letter of Constantine, the
History bears not: always his endeavor was honest and Godly.

In Constantines days the Gospel was propagated in East India, by Frumentius
and Edesius, the brother sons of Meropius, a man of Tyrus. This History is
written at length by R^ffinus, Theodoretus, Ruffin lib. 1. cap. 9. Theodor.
lib. 1 cap. 22. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 24. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 10. Socrat lib. 1.
cap. 20. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 23. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Sozomenus, and many others. Likewise it was propagated in Iberia, a country
lying in the uttermost part of the Euxien sea eastward, by the means of a
captive Christian woman, by whose supplications, first a child, deadly
diseased, recovered health, and afterward the Queen of Iberia her self was
relieved from a perilous and dangerous disease, by her prayers made to CHRIST.
The King of Iberia sent Ambassadors to Constantine, craving of him, that he
would send Preachers and Doctors to the country of Iberia, who might instruct
them in the true faith of CHRIST. Which desire also Constantine performed, with
great gladness of heart.

Now to return and to speak of the Dominions subject to the Roman Empire,
Constantine the son of Constantius Chlorus, begun to reign in the year of
our LORD 310. and he reigned 31. years: he gave commandment to reedifie the
Temples of Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4.
the Christians, that were demolished in time of the persecution of Dioclesian.
This commandment was obeyed with expedition, and many more large and ample
Churches were builded, meet for the conuentions of Christian people. Likewise,
the Temples of Idols were locked up: better they had been demolished, and
equalled with the ground: then had it been a Theod. lib. 5. cap. 20. Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 1. Idem, lib. 3. cap. 11. and lib. 3. cap. 18
work of greater difficulty to Julian the Apostate, to have resto^ed again
Heathen Idolatry. Many horrible abuses, both in Religion and manners were
reformed by the auzhoritie and commandment of the Emperor, such as cubitus
mensuralis, called (...) in Egypt, whereunto was attributed the virtue and
cause of the inundation of Nilus by the Egyptians: therefore by Ruffin. lib.
2. cap. 30.
the Emperors commandment this (...) was transported out of their Temples. In
Rome the bloody spectacle of Gladiatores, that is, of Fencing men, with swords
killing one another in sight of Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18.
the people was discharged. In Heliopolis a town of Phoenitia, the filthy
manners of young women, accustomed without controlment, to prostitute themselves
to the lust of strangers, until they were married: this filthy custom (I say)
by the commandment of the Emperor Constantine was interdicted and forbidden.
In Judea, the Altar builded under the Oak of Mambre, where the Sozom. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
Angels appeared to Abraham, and whereupon the Pagans offered sacrifice in time
of solemn Faires, for bying and selling of Genes. 18.
Merchand waires in that place: This Altar (I say) was commanded to be
demolished, and a Temple to be builded in the same place, for exercise of
divine service. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 4.


The care this good Emperor had, to quench the schism that began in
Alexandria, shall be decla^ed in the own time, GOD willing. In somethinges
Constantine was not unlike to King Solomon, who finding his Kingdom to be
peaceably settled, he gave himself to the building of the Temple, of Palaces,
and of Towns, which he fortified and made strong. Even so Constantine finding
that no enemy durst enterprise any longer Sozom lib. 2 cap. 2.
to molest the peaceable estate of his settled Kingdom he builded magnificke
Temples in Bethlehem, the place of the LORDS Nativity, upon Mount Oliuet, from
whence CHRIST ascended to Heaven, upon Mount Caluarie, where CHRIST'S Sepulcher
was. He builded also a City in Bithinia, and called it Helenopolis, for
honor of his Mother Helena, and another in Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Palestina, and called it Constantia, by the name of his Sister. Also he
builded a glorious Temple into Antiochia, which his son Constantius
perfected, and to the dedication of that Temple a great number of Bishops were
assembled, as shall be declared hereafter if the LORD please. And finally, he
builded the Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Functii Chronolog.
great City of Constantinople in Thracia, and called it nova Roma, whereas
before it was called Byzantium. This town was builded, anno 336.

In end the good Emperor intended to have made war against the Persians, and
by the way he was purposed to have been baptized in Iordane, where our
Savior CHRIST was baptized by John: but the LORD had disposed otherwise: for
the John, 3.
good Em. fell sick at Nicomedia, and was baptized in the suburbs of that
principal town of Bithynia, not in Rome, nor by ^ilvester, but in Nicomedia,
and by Eusebius. How this Eusebius coosoned Eusebius. do vita Constant. lib. 4.
the Emperor, and obscured the wicked purpose of his Heretical heart from
him, and continued in good favor and credit with the Emperor, until the
last periode of his life, so that he had the honor to baptize the good
Emperor it will be declared hereafter, GOD willing. In his testamentall
legacy, he left his Dominions to his sons, ended his life happily, and was
buried in Constantinople.

Constantius, Constans, and younger Constantinus.
CONSTANTIUS governed the East parts of the Roman Empire, and he reigned 25.
years. The other two brethren governed the West parts. Constantine the younger
was slain at Aquileia, after he had reigned with his brethren 3. years. The
Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 19. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 46. Idem, lib. 2. cap. 5. Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 32.
Emperor Constans reigned 13. years, and was slain in France by the Tyrant
Magnentius: so after the death of Constans, the whole government of the Empire
turned to the hands of Constantius. He overcame Magnentius in battle, who fled
to Lions, and slew his mother, his own brother, and himself: And so the Tyrant
Magnentius brought himself and his kindred to a miserable end. Constantius
was infected with the Heresy of Arrius, by the means of an Arrian Priest, who
had been in Court with CONSTANTIA, the sister of the Emperor Constantine, and
relict of Licinius. When she was bound to Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 11.
bed by infirmity, and sickness, whereof she died, She recommended this
Arrian presbyter to Constantine her brother, whereby it came to pass, that he
had favor and credit The^. li. 2 cap. 3.
in the Emperors Court. He procured the returning of Arrius from banishment,
and was the first reporter to Constantius of his fathers testamentall legacy:
And finally, he perverted Constantius from the true faith, which his father had
professed. So pernicious a thing is it to have deceitful Heretics lurking in
the Courts of Princes.

During the lifetime of his brother Constans, Arrianisme had no great
vpperhande, because Constans the Emperor of the West protected Paulus Bishop
of Constantinople, and Athanasiu^ Bishop of Alexandria, and the rest of the
Bishops whom the Arrians had most unjustly accused, deposed, and persecuted.
But after the slaughter of Constans, the Arrians were encouraged by the
inconstancy of the Emperor, whose flexible and instable Theoder. li. 2 cap. 3.
mind, like unto a reed shaken with the wind, was inclined to follow the
course, that the forementioned Priest put in his head. This Priest informed
the Emperor Constantius, that the word (...), that is, Consubstantiall, was
not found in holy Scripture, and that the inserting of this word in the sowme
of faith set down by the Nicene Council, was the occasion of many debates and
contentions in the CHURCH of GOD and that the returning of Athanasius from
banishment, was the Th^d. ibid.
ground of a terrible tempest, whereby not only the estate of Egypt was
shaken, but also the estate of Palestina and Phae-nitia, and other places not
far distant from Egypt. Moreover, he added, that Athanasius had been the
author of intestine dissension betwixt the Emperor Constantius and his brother
Constans, so that Constans wrote minassing letters to his brother, either to
repossesse Paulus and Athanasius into their places again, else if he linguered
in so doing (since their innocence was cleared in the Council of Sardica) he
threatened to lead an army to the East, and to see them repossessed into their
own rooms again. The Emperor Constantius was easily incited to wrath
against Athanasius, and he sent Sebastianus, one of his captains, accompanied
with 5000 armed men, to slay Athanasius: but the Theod. lib. 2 cap. 13.
LORD delivered him miraculously out of their hands, when there seemed to be
no way of escaping, because armed soldiers were planted round about the
Temple: yet he went safely through the midst of them, and was not discearned,
albeit many Arrians were present of purpose to design and point him out by
the finger, as a sheep ordained for the slaughter.

Georgius, an Arrian Bishop, was seated in Alexandria, in the place of
Athanasius, a wolf in the chair of a true Pastor, whose fury and madness was
helped by sebastianus, who furnished unto him armed soldiers, to accomplish
all his wicked and devilish devises. A fire was kindled in the town: Christian
Virgins were stripped naked, and brought to the fire, and commanded to renounce
their faith: but the terror of the fire made them not once to shrink. When
the sight of the fire could not terrify them, he caused their faces to be so
dashed with strokes, and misfashioned their countenances, that they could not
be known by their familiar friends: but they, like unto victorious soldiers,
patiently endured all kind of rebuke for the NAME of Theodoret. ibid.
CHRIST. Thirty Bishops of Egypt and Lybia were slain in the fury of this
Arrian Persecution. Fourteen Bishops (whose names are particularly mentioned
by Theodoretus) were banished, of whom some died in the way when they were
transported, others died in the place of their banishment. Forty good
Christians in Alexandria were scourged with wandes, because they would not
communicate with the Arrian wolf Georgius: and so pitiously demained, that
some pieces of the wands were so deeply fixed in their flesh, that they could
not be drawn out again, and many through excessive pain of their wounded
bodies concluded their lives. Here is a viue portrat of the mercies Prouer. 10
verse. 9.
of the wicked, which are cruel.

The like cruelty the Arrians practiced in Constantinople. Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople was banished to Cucusus, a little town in Cappadocia, where he
was strangled by the Arrians. Macedonius was placed in his room, a notable
Heretic, who used no less cruelty, in compelling the Christians of
Constantinople, S^crat. lib. 2, cap. 27.
to communicate with him, then was used of old, to compel Christians to
sacrifice to the Idols of the Gentiles.

The exquisite diligence of the Arrians in procuring Councels to be gathered
for establishing of their error, shall be declared in the own place, GOD
willing. Now to return to the civil estate of Constantius. After that
Magnentius had made an end of his own life in most desperate manner, as said
is, and his associate Britannio had humbly submitted himself to Constantius,
and obtained pardon: yet was not the Emperors estate quiet and free of
trouble: for there arose another Tyrant, called Silvanus, whom the Captains of
Coastantius army in France did hastily cut off, and make out of the way. Also
the jews of Diocaesaria, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 32.
a town of Palestina, rebelled against him, who were overthrown by Gallas the
Emperors coosen, and the City of Diocaesaria was leuelled with the ground.
This good success Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33.
made Gallus somewhat insolent, and he slew Domitia^us, the Emperors great
Treasurer in the East: therefore the Emperor gave commandment to cut him off.
Finally, the Germans, who had assisted him in his wars against Magnentius,
they rebelled against him. And he sent against them his coosen Julian, the
brother of Gallus, who subdewed the Germans, and he likewise waxed insolent,
and suffered the soldiers to salute him with the name of (...), that is, of
an Emperor. This was not unknown to Constantius, who made haste to prevent
all further usurpation. But by the way as he was leading his army through
Cilicia, he concluded his life, sorowing for this, as Theodoretus writes, that
he had changed the form of the Nicene faith. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 32.


Julianus.
IN the year of our LORD 365. Julian began to reign, and he reigned 3.
years. Ruffinus assigns unto him one year, 8. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.
months only: he was Constantius near kinsman, namely. his uncles son:
But he dealt unkindly with Constantius, who made him Caesar, and give unto him
in marriage Helena his sister: He was brought up in Christian Relig on, but was
perverted by Socrat. lib 3. cap. 1.
Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher, whom Valentinian the Emperor afterward
punished unto the death, as a practiser of Magical Socrat. ibid.
arts. In the beginning of his reign he restored those Bisshops to their
places again, whom Constantius had banished, not for love of Religion, but to
impare the fame of Constantius* Socrat. ibid.
yet immediately after, he manifested his affection toward Heathnicke
superstition, and opened the doors of the Temples of the gods of the Heathen,
which Constantine had locked up, Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4.
and encouraged others by his own example, to offer sacrifices to the gods of
the Gentiles.

Julian absteined, for a time, from cruelty, and shedding of blood: not for
pity, and compassion of Christians: but rather for envy: For he enuyed the
glory of Christian Martyrs, whose magnanimity, courage, and constant
perseverance in the faith of CHRIST unto the death, was commended in the Theod.
lib. (...). cap. 8.
mouths of all men. But he endeavored by subtle and crafty means to undo
Christian Religion. He debarred the children of Christians from Schools, and
from the use of Learning: Also he debarred them from warre-fare, from offices
of government of Roman Provinces, and from offices of Socra. lib. 13 and 14.
Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 15.
Collectorie of money: and burdened them with payment of heavy taxations:
which taxations also the auaritiousnes of the Deputies of Provinces increased,
and made them more grievous and intolerable. Nevertheless, when Christians
complained of the unrighteous dealing of the Deputies, the Emperor mocked
them, and said, their happiness was increassed, according to the speech of
CHRIST their LORD and Master, Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for
righteousness sake. Matthew. 5.


Likewise, in the market places of Cities, he set up his own Image, with the
Effigies of the gods of the Heathen pictured round about it: to the end, that
whosoever should do ciail reverence to the Emperors Image, might also seem
Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16.
to worship the gods of the Gentiles: And by the contrary, they who would
not bow to the gods of the Gentiles, might seem also to refuse all due
reverence to the Emperor. When he distributed gold to his Captains and
Warriors (as the custom was) he used a form of distributing not accustomed
before, to have an altar near unto his Princely throne, and coals burning
upon it, and incense upon a table near unto the altar: whereby it came to
pass, that no man received gold, before Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 17.
he cast incense upon the coals of the altar: by this subtle artifice
circumuenting many, who knew not, that it was Iulians purpose to entangle them
with the rites of idolatrous service. In Antiochia, and in the Region round
about, he dedicated all the Fountains to the Goddesses of the Gentiles, and
caused all the victual that was to be sold in market places, to be sprinkled
with Heathnicke holy water. Neu^rthelesse, Ch^istians, without scruple of
conscience, drank of the water that was in the Wells, and ate of the meat
which they bought in the market, being fully persuaded, that to the clean all
things are Titus 1. verse, 15. 1. Cor. 10. verse, 25.
clean: and again, it is written, Whatsoever is sold in the ^hambles, eat
ye, and ask no question for conscience sake. The liberty that Iuuentius and
Maxentius, two worthy Warriors, used in reproving the Emperor in his face,
for his Heathnicke superstition, moved Julian to such wrath, that he punished
them unto the death: And so by degrees the policy and wisdom of Julian in
end breaks forth into the fruits of cruelty and shedding of Theod. lib. 3
cap. 15.
blood.

Albeit no public mandate of Julian was set soorth, commanding to persecute
Christians, yet by many evident testimonies it was known to the people, that
the Emperor hated them, and that no man would incur punishment, for outrage
and violence used against them. Therefore in the town of Sebaste, the
Sepulcher of John the Baptist was opened, his bones Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 28.
were brunt, and the ashes scattered abroad. Likewise the wicked men of Gaza
and Ascalon, killed Preachers and holy Virgins, ripped their bellies, filled
them with barlie, and cast their bodies to the swine to be eaten. Cyrillus
also, a Deacon in Hierapolis, a town of Phoenicia, at the foot of Mount
Libanus, who in time of the reign of Constantine had broken in pieces the
images Theodor. li 3 cap. 6.
of the Gentiles, was taken by them, his belly was ripped, his liver was drawn
out of his body, which with Barbarous inhumanitie they chawed with their
teeth. But the LORD suffered not such uncouth cruelty to escape unpunished:
for the teeth of those who committed this fact of unnatural inhumanitie, fell
out of their jaw-bones, their tongues: otted within their Theodor. li. 3 cap. 7.
mouths, and their eyes were darkened and blinded: a just and deserved
punishment of brutish Savages practiced by men. Marcus A^ethusius had his
body ouerlaide with honey, and it was hung up in hot summer weather, to be
molested with wasps and flies. In Alexandria many Christians were slain for
discovering the abominations of the Pagans, especially in sacrificing Theod.
ibid.
to Mythra bloody sacrifices of reasonable creatures. Among others, Georgius
the Arrian Bishop was bound unto a Camel, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2.
and both he and the Camel were burned with fire: whom no man counts a
martyr, because he kept not the true faith. In the country of Phrygia, and
town of Miso, Macedonius, Theodulus, and Tatianus, for breaking in pieces
images, were broiled upon Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 15.
hot grattes of iron. The persecution of Athanasius, which with great hazard
he escaped, by a stratageme, of turning back his ship in the face of the
persecuting enemy, was procured by Philosophers, Sorcerers, and Inchanters,
who were about Julian, and affirmed that all their travails would be spent in
vain, if Ruffiin. lib. 2 cap. 33.
Athanasius, the only bar, and obstacle of their doings, were not made out
of the way.

The wrath of Julian was highly kindled against the inhabitants of Casarea in
Cappadocia. This town of old was called Maza, but the Emperor Claudius
changed the name of it, and called it Casarea. The inhabitants of the City,
for the most part, Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 4.
were Christians, and they had of old overthrown the Temples of Jupiter and
Apollo, and the Temple of Fortune (which only remained) they overthrew in
Iulians own time. For this cause Julian rased the name of Caesarea, out of the
roll of Cities and exacted from them 300 pound weight of gold, compelled their
Clergy to serve in warrefare: And finally, he threatened to punish unto the
death all the inhabitants of Casarea; but the righteous LORD cutted the cords
of the wicked, and he had not power to perform all his bloody designs.

He had intention to fight against the Persians, yet would he do nothing
without consultation of his gods. He sent his most assured friends to all the
Oracles within the Roman Dominions, and he himself would inquire at the
Oracle of Apollo in Daphne, what should be the success of his enterprises. The
Th^odor. lib. (...) cap. 9, 10 Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 18. 19.
answer of Apollo was, that he was hindered by the dead, to give his
responses. Hereof it came to pass, that Julian gave liberty to Christians, to
transport the bones of the Martyr Babylas. About the same time fire came down
from heaven, and destroyed the Temple of Apollo in Daphne, and beat the image
of Apollo in pieces, like unto the lightest and smallest powder, Theodoret.
ibid.
or dust.

Moreover, he gave liberty to the Jews, to return to Jerusalem, to build
their Temple, and to offer sacrifices conform to the Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 37.
38. 39. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 20. Theod lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 22.
Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.
law of Moses: not for love he carried toward the Jews, but for hatred of the
Christians: therefore the work prospered not, but was hindered by earthquake,
fire and a mighty tempest of wind. Mark how every thing this hateful enemy
of CHRIST enterprised, had an evil success. Julian arrived at Ctesiphon the
Metrapolitane town of Chaldea, after that Babylon was ruined. The king of
Persia had his people in better preparation then the Emp. looked for: therefore
he took deliberation to return back again to the bounds of the Roman
dominions: but he who was deceitful al his days, was in end deceived by an
old Persian captive, Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 1. 2.
who led the Emp. into a barren wilderness, where he concluded his life, wounded
with a darte: but it remains uncertain by whom he was slain.

Jouinianus.
AFTER the death of Julian, Iouinian was chosen, by the Roman army, to be
Emperor, but lived not fully 8. months Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 1.
in his Imperial dignity. He accepted not the souerainty, until the time the
whole army with uniforme consent acknowledged themselves to be Christians. He
made a covenant of peace with the K. of Persia, such as the necessity of a
distressed army compelled him to condescend unto: for Nisib^s, a great City in
Mesopotamia, with some dominions in Syria, were resigned over to the Socrat.
lib. 3. cap. 21. 22.
king of Persia. The blame of this scathfull capitulation, was imputed to the
temerity of Julian the apostate, who had brunt with fire the ships that should
have brought victualles to the army, and gave hasty credit to a Persian
captive. When he had reduced the army to the bounds of the Roman dominions,
he buried the dead body of Julian in Tarsus, a town of Cilicia: and he
reduced from banishment the worthy captain Valentinian, whom Theod. lib. 4,
cap. 2. 3.
Julian had banished, together with the Bishops banished from their places, or
compelled to lurk: and inspecial Athanasius, whose counsel he was resolved to
follow in matters of Faith and Church Theod. lib. 4. cap. 4.
government. In end, he took purpose to go to Constantinople: but by the
way, in the Confines of Galatia and Bithinia, he concluded Sozom. lib. 6. cap.
6.
his life in a Village called Dadastana.

Valentinianus and Valens.
AFTER the death of Iouinian, the Roman army choosed Valentinian to be
Emperor, who reigned 13. years. In whom was accomplished which is promised in
the Gospel, to render an hundreth-folde in this life, to them who suffer any
loss for for CHRIST'S sake, and in the world to come eternal life. Valentinian
CHRIST'S sake lost his office in Iulians Court, and he received Socrat. lib.
4. cap. 31.
in this world a kingdom, and has a greater recompense of reward laid up for
him in heaven. The magnamimus courage of Valentinian in beating on the face
that heathen Priest, who sprinkled Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 2.
holy water upon his garments, whereby he thought his garments to be
contaminate, and not his body sanctified. This courageous fact was the cause
wherefore Julian banished him to Miletina, a Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16.
town in Armenia. He was relieved from banishment in the days of Iouinian, and
was made Emp. after his death. He was borne in a Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 6.
town of Panonia, called Cibale: he addressed himself immediately after his
acceptance of the Emperial souerainty, to Constantinople, and within the space
of 30. days he choosed his brother to be his associate in the government: in
such sort, that the Emp. Valentinian governed the West, and the Emp. Valens
governed Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 1.
the Eastern parts of the Roman Dominions.

The Emp. Valens finding the Persians to be quiet, and disposed to keep the
covenant of peace bound up in the days of Iouinian, he undertook an
unsupportable warre-fare against the Homousians. The usurpation of the Tyrant
Procopius, did somewhat slacken the readiness and quicknes of his attempts: but
after Procopius was delivered into the hands of the Emp. Valens, by Agelon and
Gomarius his Captains, he rent in pieces the body of Procopius, by bowing
down to the ground the tops of strong trees, whereunto he caused the legs
of Procopius to be fastened. The bodies of Agelon and Gomarius, the two
Captains Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 5.
who betrayed Procopius, were cutted in twain with sawes of iron. In which
fact the Emp. Valens had no regard to the oath of GOD, which he made unto them
for their safety.

Procopius being subdewed, he bended all his might against the Homousians: He
banished Mil^tius, Bishop of Antiochia, to Theodor. lib. 4 cap. 13.
Armenia: Eusebius Bishop of Samosata to Thracia: Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea,
to Arabia. The town of Samos^ta was so affectioned to their own Pastor
Eusebius, that they would not communica^e Theod. ibid.
with Eunomius, whom the Arrians sent to fill his place, Val^ns was filled with
wrath against the Fathers conueened in the Council of Lampsacum (this is a
town near unto the strait Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 6.
firth of Hellespontus) because they adhered fast unto the Nicene faith. In
Constantinople he not only banished the Homousians, but also the Novatians,
and their Bishop Agelius, because they would not consent with the Arrians in
the matter of faith. In Edessa, a town of Mesopotamia, the Emperor gave
commandment to slay the Homousians, who were assembled together in the Ruffin.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
Church: but the fervent zeal of one woman, that ran in haste through the
ranks of soldiers, drawing with her, her young Theod. lib. 4. cap. 17.
and tender child, together with her courageous answer to the Captain, stayed
the rage of the Emperor wonde^fully: for she counted it a sweet fellowship,
that she and her babe should be found amongst the number of these, who were
counted worthy Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 18.
to suffer death for the NAME of CHRIST. Nevertheless the Emperor banished of
men who dwelt in Edessa. especially of such as were in spiritual offices, to
the number of fourscore, whom he commanded, by two and two, to be dispersed
through Thracia, Arabia, and Thebaida. The invincible courage of Basilius,
Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, the peaceable death of Athanasius, which
happened in the very time of the Persecution of this Arrian Emperor Valens,
together with the surie and madness of the Arrian Bishop Lucius, intruded in
Alexandria, All these things, GOD willing, shall be touched in their own
places.

Amongst all the facts of unspeakable cruelty committed by Valens, o^e fact
ouerwent all the rest. While the Emperor was at Nicomedia, fourscore
Ambassadors were directed unto him: Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 16.
amongst whom Menedemus, Urbanus, and Theodorus, were the chief. These
complained to the Emperor, of the manifold injuries done to the Homousians.
The Emperor gave commandment Theod. lib. 4. cap. 24.
to Modestus, the Governor of his army, to embarke them into a ship, as if
they were to be banished unto some remote and far distant place: but secret
direction was given unto the ship-men, to set the ship on fire, and to retire
themselves into a boat. So it came to pass, that these fourscore Martyrs
circumuented Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 14.
by the craft of Valens, glorified the NAME of CHRIST, by patient suffering of
many deaths at one time, both tormented by fire, and drowned in water.

Terentius and Traianus, two worthy Captains, used some liberty in
admonishing the Emperor to abstain from persecuting of innocent people,
because his fighting against GOD procured Theo. lib. 4. cap. 34.
good success to the Barbarians: but the LORD was minded to destroy him,
therefore he could receive no wholesome admonition: for a number of the nation
of the Goths, whom he entertained as soldiers, meet to defend his Dominions
against the invasion of forrainers and strangers, they began to waste Ruffin.
lib. 2. cap. 13.
the country of Thracia: and they faught against the Emperor Valens, and
prevailed against him: so that he fled, and was overtaken in a certain
Village, which the Goths set on fire. So this Emperor died miserably, brunt
with fire by his enemies, without succession, and left his name in curse and
execration to all ages, after he had reigned fifteen or sixteen years, as
Sozomenus Sozom. lib. 7. Cap. 40.
reckons.

Now to return to the Emperor Valentinian: He was a defender of the true
faith, and was so highly offended against his brother Valens, that he would
make him no support against the invasion of the Goths: for he said, it was an
impious thing, Theo. lib. 4. cap. 12.
to strengthen the hand of a man, who had spent his days in warrefare against
GOD, and his CHURCH. In his days the Sarmatians invaded the bounds of the
Roman Dominions. Valentinian prepared a mighty army to fight against them:
but they sent unto him Ambassadors, to entreat for peace. When the Emperor
saw that they were but a naughty people, he Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31.
was moved with excessive anger, whereby he procured the ruptu^e of some
arters, or veins, whereupon followed great effusion of blood. And so he
himself died, leaving behind him two sons, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 36.
Gratianus, whose mother was Seuera, and Valentinian the second, whose mother
was Iustina.

Gratianus, Valentinianus the second, and Theodosius.
GRATIANUS, the son of Valentinian, after the death of Valens his fathers
brother, had the gouernament both of Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 13. 14
West and East. His brother Valentinian the second, was his associate in the
government of the West: But when he perceived, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 2.
that the weighty affairs of the kingdom required the fellowship of a man,
who was ripe in years, he choosed Theodosius, a man of Noble parentage in
Spain, to whom he committed the government of the East, contenting himself
and his brother Valentinian, with the government of the West. Gratianus in the
beginning of his reign, reduced from banishment those Bisshops, whom the
Arrian Persecuter Valens had banished. He was slain by Andragathius, Captain
of the army of Maximus, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 11.
who usurped the Empire of the West. This Andragathius, not by valor and
might, but by circumuention, falsehood, and treason, overthrew the good Emp.
Gratian: for he made a report to pass in Lions, where the Emp. Gratian had his
remaining, that his wife Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 13.
was coming to visit him: and he in simplicity went forth to meet his wife
beyond the river of Rhonne: but Andraga^hius (who was covertly lurking in a
chariot) stepped out, and slew Gratianus, after he had reigned with his
father, with his brother, and with Theodosius, 15. years.

His brother Valentinian, young in years, was seduced by the intising speeches
of his mother Iustina, after the death of her husband, in whose days she durst
not presume to auow the Arrian Heresy: yet after his death, she intised the
flexible mind of her son, to persecute Ambrose, Bishop of Millane, because
he Theod. lib. 5 cap. 13.
would not consent to the Arriane doctrine. The zeal of the people affectioned
to their faithful Pastor, hindered the cruel purposes of Iustina. Likewise
the miracle wrought at the sepulchers Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 13.
of Protasius and Geruasius, opened the mouths of the people to glorify GOD,
and to magnify that Faith, which Protasius and Geruasius had sealed up with
their blood: these holy men of GOD were martyred in the second great
Persecution moved August. lib. Confess. 9. Cap. 7.
by the Emp. Domitian. The dolorous tithinges of the death of Gratianus, and
the near approaching of the tyrant Maximus to Italy, compelled Iustina to
leave the persecuting of Ambrose, and to Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 16. Theo. lib. 5.
cap. 14.
fly to Illy^, for safety of her own life, and her sons life. Theodosius being
mindful of the kindness of Gratianus toward him, led an army against the tyrant
Maximus. The captains of Maximus army, terrified with the rumor of he might of
Theodosius army, Socrat lib. 5. cap. 14.
delivered him bound into the hands of Theodosius, and he was justly punished
unto the death. Andragathius, who slew the Em. G^atian (as said is) seeing no
way to escape, threw himself headlonges into a river, and so ended his
wretched life. About the same time Iustina the mother of Valent. the II. she
died, her son was peaceably possessed in his kingdom, and Theodosius returned
to the east Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 17.
again. But within few days he was compelled to gather a new army and fight
against the tyrant Eugenius, and his chief captain A bogastus, who had
conspired against Valent. the II. and strangled him while he was lying in his
bed. This battle went hardly at the beginning, but Theodosius had his recourse
to GOD by prayer: and the LORD sent a mighty tempest of wind, which blew so
vehemently Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 25.
in the face of Eugenius army that their darts were ramue^sed and turned back
by the violence of the wind, in their own faces. Of which miraculous support,
sent from above, the Poe^ Claudian writes these Verses:

O nimium dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris Claudian, d^ 3. consul^ (...).

Eolus armatas hiemes, cui militat ather,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica vent^
The tyrant Eugenius fell down at the feet of Theodosius, to beg pardon: but
the soldiers pursued him so stra^tly, that they slew him at the Emp. feet.
Arbogastus, the author of all this mischief, he fled, and being out of all
hope of safety, slew himself. Like as there was no sacrifice, wherein dung
was not found, eue^ so the life and actions of this noble Emp. was spotted with
some infirmities. Against the inhabitants of Thessalomca the Emp. was moved
with excessive anger so that 7000. innocent people were s^in, invited to the
spectacle of Plays, called Ludi circenses, and in Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 18.
the Grieke language, (...). For this fault the good Em. was reproved by
Ambrose Bish. of Millane, and confessed his fault in sight of the people with
tears: and made a law, that the like Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 17.
commandments anent the slaughter of people, should not have hasty execution,
until the time that 30. days were ouerpassed: to the end that space might
be left either to mercy, or to repentance. In like manner, he was angry out of
mea^ure against the people of Antiochia, for overthrowing the brazen portrate
of his beloved bedde-fellow Placilla. The Emp. denuded their Theod lib. 5. cap.
19.
town of the dignity of a Metrapolitane City, conferring this eminent honor
to their neighbor town Laodicea. Moreover he threatened to set the town on
f^e, and to redact it unto the base estate of a Vil age. But Flauiannus, Bishop
of Antiochia, by his earnest travails with the Emperor, mitigated his wrath:
(for the people repented their foolish fact, and were sore afraid) and the
good Emp. moved with pity, pardoned the fault of the Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 23.
town of Antiochia. His lenity toward the Arrians, whom he permitted to keep
conuentions in principal Cities, was with great dexterity and wisdom
reproved by Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium: For he came in upon a time, and
did reverence to the Emperor, but not unto Arcadius his son (albeit already
associated to his Father in gouernament, and declared Augustus) Theod. lib 5.
cap. 16.
whereat Theodosius being offended, Amphilochis very pertinentlie, and in due
season, admonished the Emperor, that the GOD ofHeauen also would be offended
with them, who tolerated the blasphemers of his only begotten Son, the LORD
JESUS CHRIST. Whereupon followed a law, discharging the conuentions of
Heretics in principal Cities. In all these infitmities, it is remarkable
that the good Emperor (...) gave place to wholesome admonitions. The excessive
raines he was compe^led to undertake in Wa^re-fare, hastened his death: for
he contracted sickness soon after his returning from the battle Theod lib.
5 cap. 26.
faught against Eug^nius. and died in the 60 year of his age, and in the 16.
year of his reign. He left behind him his two sons, Arcadius to g^uerne the
East, and Honorius to govern the West.

CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors.
AFTER Eusebius, Miltiades governed the Roman Bishops of Rome.
Church 4. years, 7. months, and 8. days, as Platina writes. His
ministration was in the days of the reign of Constantine, to whom the
Emperor remitted Mil^iader.
the controversy betwixt Cecilianus and the Donatistes, to be judged by him
and his Colleagues Rheticus, Maternus, and Marinus. Eusebius. lib. 1^ cap. 5.
The Donatistes would not acquiesce to the determination of Miltiades, and his
Colleagues. The good Emperor appointed this cause of new again to be judged in
A^les, by a number of Bishops of Spain, Italy and France, because the
Donatists would August. epi^ 68.
not acquiesce to the determination of Miltiades and his Colleagues. In the
Council of A^les, Cecilianus was likewise absolved, and the Donatistcs again
succumbed in their probation. Notwitstanding they appealed to the Emp.
Constantine: and when the Emp. heard the cause of Cecilianus pleaded before
himself, August. epi^ 162. and 166.
the Donatists could not prove, that either Cecilianus had been admitted
Bishop of Carthage by a man who was Proditor, or yet that he had admitted any
other man culpable of the like fault to an Ecclesiastical office. If the
Bishop of Rome had been supreme Judge in all Ecclesiastical causes,
Constantine had done him wrong, to appoint other Judges to cognosce in this
cause, after the Bishop of Rome, and his Colleagues, had given out their
definitive sentence. His ordinance anent prohibition of fasting upon the LORDS
day, was expedient at that time to be a distinguishing note of true
Christians, from Manichean heretics, August Causula^o epist. 86.
whose custom was upon the LORDS day to fast. The purple garment, the palace
of Lateran, the superiority of the town of Rome, and gouernament of the West,
which honors some allege were conferred by Constantine to Miltiades and
Silvester is a fable, not worthy of refutation: all these honors the
Emperors of the West, successors of Constantine, poss^ssed, and not the
Bishop of Rome, for the space of many hundredth years.

To Miltiades succeeded Silvester, and ministered 23. years, Silvelter.
Platina. de vita Silv^st.
10. months, and 11. days. In his time was the Heretic Arrius
excommunicated by Alexander, without the foreknowledge of the Bishop of Rome:
It was enough, that after excommunication Socrat. lib 1. cap. 6.
intimation was made to other bishops, which duty the Bishop of Alexandria
neglected not Learned men should be Theod. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3.
ashamed of fables, to say that Constantine was baptized by Siluester, for
Siluester was dead before Constantine was baptized. And Platina himself is
compelled to grant that Marcus, the successor of Siluester, governed the Church
of Rome in Constantines days. And Eusebius testifies, that Constantine was
baptized in Nicomedia, immediately before his death. Concerning the donation
Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4.
of Constantine, wherein he conferreth the dominion of the West to the Bish. of
Rome. it is like unto a rotten egg, which is cast out of the basket, lest all
the rest be set at the less avail. No ancient writter makes mention of any
such thing. Yea, Constantine, in his testamentall legacy, allotted the
Dominion of the West to two of his sons, namely, to Constantinus younger, and
to Constans. How then had he, by an anteriour disposition, resigned these
Dominions to the Bishop of Rome? If Papists be not better countenanced by
Antiquity in other things, then in this point, they have no great cause to
brag of Antiquity.

To Siluester succeeded Marcus, and ministered 2. years, 8. months, and 20.
days. Marcus. Platin. de vita Mar. Julius. Sozom lib. 4. cap. 8.


After Marcus, Julius governed the Roman Church, 15. years. Sozomenus
attributes to Julius 25. years. His ministration was in the days of the
Emperor Constantius and his brethren. He was a defender of the true Faith,
and a City of refuge to those who were persecuted by Arrians: as namely, to
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, Asclepas
Bishop of Gaza, Marcellus Bishop of Aneyra, and Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis:
All these were unjustly deposed from their Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15.
offices by the Arrians, and had recourse to Julius. He was neither ashamed of
the Gospel of CHRIST, nor of his afflicted servants. In the Council of
Sardica great honor was conferred unto him, to wit, that men unjustly
condemned by Arrians should have refug^ to Julius: to whom they gave power of
new again, to judge their cause. This was an Act of the Council of Sardica,
and not of the Nicene Council (as was confidently alledg^d in the Council of
Carthage) and a personal honor conferred to one man alone, for respective
causes: but not extended to his successors, as though all the Bishops of Rome
at all times should be Judges of appellation. The Arrians were sore grieved
for this, that Julius both in word, and deed, and writ, assisted Athanasius
and his accomplices. The chafing letters, and mutual expostulations, that passed
betwixt Julius and the Arrians conueened in the Council of Antiochia, are to
be read in the History of Socrates. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15. Idem lib. 2 cap.
17.
Platina, in the grandoure of his speeches, is inconsiderate, as if Julius had
damned the presumption of the Oriental Bisshops, who durst conuocate an
assembly without license before obtained from the Bishop of Rome. Noe such
thing is Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 10.
contained in the letter of Julius, but only an expostulation, that they did
not advertise him of their Council, to the end he might have sent his
Ambassadors, and given unto them his best advise. Julius knew the
Constitutions of the Nicene Ruffin. lib. 1 cap. 6. Canon. 6.
Council, which gave power to every Patriarch within his own bounds, to
conuocate Councils.

To JULIUS succeeded LIBERIUS, and continued six Liberius. Damas. Marian.
Ierum.
years: some assign unto him eighteen years, others ninetecne years: so
uncertain is the computation of the years of their gouernament. He governed
the Church of Rome in the days of CONSTANTIUS, by whom also he was banished
to Thracia, because he would not consent to the depositi^n of ATHANASIUS:
which point was seriously urged in the Council of Millane. THEODORETUS giue^h
ample testimony of his constancy and freedom of speaking to the ^mperour
Theod. lib. 2^ cap. 15. 16. 17.
(not disagreeing with his name) before his banishment. In his absence FOELIX
the second was chosen to be Bishop of Rome: to whom THEODORETUS gives this
praise, that he adhered firmly to the Nicene Council: but blames him for
this that he received his ordination from Arrians. N^twithstanding he was
more hated by the Arrians, Theod. ibid.
then was LIBERIUS, and was put to death by them, after he had governed one
year, four months, and two days. Platina, de vita Foelie.
After two years banishment, LIBERIUS returned back again to Rome. THEODORETUS
is silent in the matter of his praises after his returning. Hilarious, Bishop of
Poitiers affirms, that he both consented to the deposition of Athanasius,
and to the Hilar. in fragmens.
council of Sirmium. There is nothing inlaking now to give out a determinate
sentence, whether or no the Bishop of Rome may err in matters of Faith: but
only the compearance of the great Advocate of all evil causes Onuphrius, who
will needs find out some old partchment, or some unknown manu-script, to free
the chair of Rome from all suspicion of error in matters of faith. But
Bellarmine gives over his cause, and can find Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 4.
cap. 9.
no sufficient Apology for him, because his letters written to the Emp.
Constantius after his returning from banishment, smells of Arrianisme.

After the death of Lib^rius, succeeded Damasus, and ruled 18. Damasus.
years, in time of the reign of Julian, of Iouinian, and of Valentinian: his
competitor Ursinus had many favorers, in so much Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 9.
Ruffiin. lib. 2 cap. 10. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 29.
that the question who should be elected Bishop of Rome, was tried by the
sword, rather then by reasons, suffrages, and votes: so that in the Church of
Sisinum were slain to the number of 137. persons. Damasus prevailed, and had
the vpperhand. He was friendly to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, whom Lucius an
Arrian Bishop imprisoned: but he escaped, and fled to Rome, as Athanasius had
done before in the days of Julius. He damned Theo. lib. 5. cap. 9.
the Heresy of Apollinaris, in a Council conucened at Rome. His Epistle
written to the Oriental Bishops, whereinto he intimates unto the^ the
condamnitour sentence pronounced against Apollinaris and his disciple
Timotheus, is indi^ed with the swelling pride of a lofty mind, breathing
soueranity and pre-eminence Theod. ibid.
above all other Churches, as if the Roman Church were that only Apostolic
chair, whereunto all other Churches aught homage and reverence. So that
Basilius, Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, complains of the pride of the West,
because they cared only for their own pre-eminence, but not for the estate
Basil. epist. 10. ad Eusebius. ^mosat.
of their persecuted brethren in the East, under the Arrian Emperor Valen^,
whose estate they knew not, neither sent they m^ssengers to visit them,
neither would they receive true information concerning the estate of their
brethren. Yea, and Basilius says, that he purposed often times, to have
written to the chief of them, that is, to Damasus, that he should not count
the splendour of pride to be true dignity, and honor. Where it is to be
marked, that when he speaks of Damasus, he calls him (...), that is, the
principal of them, to wit of the Ch^rches of the west: but not the supreme
governor of the uniuersal Church, neither the souera^gn co^mander of the
Churches of the East. It is ignorance of the Ecclesiastical history, that
makes men to imagine, that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is an ancient
thing. When Damasus damned the Heresy of Apolbnaris, in the Council conueened
at Rome, it was the year of our LORD 379. according to the computation of
Ierum: and at this time the very aiming to supremacy is counted Splendour
Supubiae, that is, the splendour of pride. Damasus wrote concerning the lives of
the bishops of Rome preceding his time: and was familiarly acquainted with
Ierom, as Ieroms writings clearly proports.

To Damasus succeeded Siricius, and ministered 15. ye es: at Siricius.
what time Gratianus and Valentinian obtained the Imperial gouername^t: he
ordained, that married men, who were admitted to Socr^t lib. 7. cap 9. H^st
Magd. Cent. 4. Cap 10. Mal^c 2. verse, 14.
Ecclesiastical offices, after their ordination should abstain from the
company of their wives: as if it were great devotion to a man to transgress
against the wife of his youth, the wife of his covenant, and his companion in
all his wearisome labors His prohibition of the second marriage, smells of
the Heresy of Montanus. In his time with pride of the (...) at Rome was
Platin. de vita Pontis.
joined insatiable auaritiousnes increasing daily by degrees, so that the
Emperors Valentintan the II. and Theodo^us, were compelled by a law, to
inhibite widows under pretense of devotion, ^
to leave their houses, treasures, and house-holde-stuffe, to the Church, to
the utter impouerishing and undoing the estate of their children.

Bishops of Alexandria.
IN the third CENTURIE we rested at the name of (...) Bishop of Alexandria,
whose successor was Alexander. His accurate disputation anent the unity in
the Tiinitie, made Alexander.
Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, to think that Alexander was entangled with
the er^our of Sabellius: Hereof arose contertious dispu^ations, new opinions,
exulc^er te minds and open schisms. This intestine malady was not unknown to
the good Emperor Constantine, who sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a man
singularly beloved of the Emperor, together with persuasiue letters from the
Emperor, exhorting both Alexander and Arrius, to leave accurate and profounde
disputations, and keep inuiolably the peace and unity of the Church: But no
means could avail, until this question was desided by the determination of
the general Council of Nice.

After the Council of Nice had damned the opinion of Arrius as Heretical,
Alexander continued not above 5. months Athanasius
alive: In the last period of his life he called for Athanasius, but he was
not present: Of whom Alexander said, Thou have escaped, Theod. lib. 1 cap. 25.
Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 17.
but shall not escape, fore-prophecying that Athanasius should undergo that
wieghtie charge, which he, giving place to nature, and to the calling of GOD,
was leaving. Athanasius in his young years and childish plays was
counterfeiting divine mysteries, and baptizing children: yet after such due
form of interrogatories and answers preceding Baptism that Alexander then
Bishdurst not presume to rebaptize those who apparently in childish Ruffin.
lib. 1. cap. 14.
simplicity had been made partakers of divine grace. He began no sooner to
accept the weighty charge of the Church of Alexandria, anno 333. but the
Arrians began to fret and offend, Hist. magd. Cent. 4. ^ap. 10.
knowing how diligently he attended upon Alexander his predecessor, at the
Council of Nice, and how vigilantly and wisely he had detected the lurking
absurdities of the vilde (...) of Arrius: And they thought the preferment of
Athanasius was the utter undoing of their opinion. Therefore they co^spired
against him, and by a multiplied number of false accusations prevailed Socrat.
lib. 1. Cap. 35.
somewhat against him, even in the days of the good Emper. Constantine. But in
the days of Const^ntius and Julian, almost the whole world conspired against
him: so that except he had been vp-holden by that grace that comes from
above, it was not possible that he could have consisted and borne out such
unsupportable hatred. Justly did Nazianzene compare him in time of adversity
to the Adamant, and in time of prosperity to the Nazianzen. in laudem
Atbanasii.
Magnet In time of adversity no trouble overcame him, in time of prosperity,
he allured the hearts of men more intractable then iron, to embrace the
truth of GOD.

Now seeing Athanasius lived six and forty years, governor of the Church
of Alexandria, his great troubles can not be comprised in better order, then
by declaring shortly what troubles he sustained: first in Constantines days,
next under the reign of Constantius: thirdly, under the reign of Julian: and
last to speak of his peaceable end under the reign of the Emperor Valens,
albeit he was an Arrian Persecuter. In the days of Constantine first he was
accused by an effronted harlot, whom the Arrians had suborned to bear false
witness against him: but Athan. guided the matter with wisdom, and suffered
Timotheus a worthy presbyter, to speak (whom he had brought in with Theod.
lib. 1 cap. 29.
him to the Council) but he was silent himself. The impudent woman pointing
out Timotheus by the finger (as if he had been Athanasius) with clamours void
of all womanly modesty, affirmed that he had abused her in whosedome, so that
all who were present were ashamed of her impudency. This was done in the
Council of Tyrus, to the perpetual shame of the Arrians, who suborned an
harlot to accuse the faithful servant of CHRIST without a cause.

Secondly they accused him for this, that he had cutted off the hand of
Arsenius, some time his own servant: and for great^r evidence, they produced
in the Council of Tyrus before the Judges the hand of a man enclosed in a
case, which hand they affirmed that Athanasius had cut off from Arsenius. This
they spoke the more confidently, because they supponed that Arsenius remained
still secretly kept in their own custody: but by the providence of GOD he
escaped, came to Tyrus, and was presented before the Council, having both his
hands perfect, Theod. ibid.
sound, and vnmutilated, After this the Council was full of confusion, for
the Arrians cried, that ATHANASIUS by magic arts deluded the senses of men:
and they were purposed, by violence and force to lay hands upon him, and to
tear him in pieces: But he fled by a ship, and came to Constantinople, where
the Emperor was, as shall be declared, GOD willing, in the fourth CHAPTER.
The rest of his accusations, and how they dealt against him most unjustly and
falsely, and gave out a sentence of deposition against him in his absence I
remit unto the place foresaid.

Under the reign of Constantius, Athanasius was compelled to fly at two
diverse times. First, while the Emp. Constans was yet alive who procured a
Council to be gathered in Sardica, wherein the cause of Athanasius was tried,
and he found innocent: and was sent back again and re^ored to his place: For
Constantius feared the mina^ng letters of his brother Constans, who threatened
Theod. lib. 2. cap. 8.
to lead an army to the Fast, and to poss^sse Athanasius in his place again,
incase his brother linguered in doing of it. After Idem. lib. 2. cap. 13.
the death of Constans, Sabinianus was sent to kill Athanasius, but he escaped
miraculously, as has been declared.

Again he was compelled first to fl^e, and afterward to lurk in the days of
Julian: He was restored again by the good Emp. Iouinian: and he continued in
his ministration until the days of Valentinian and Valens: And although
Valens was a crew I persecuter, Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 34.
yet he absteined from persecuting of Athanasius, for honor of his gray
hairs and for that he was reverently regarded of all men. Thus Athanasius,
full of days, died in peace, after he Sozom. lib. 6 Cap. 19.
had governed the Church of Alexandria 46. years.

To worthy Athanasius succeeded Peter, whom the Emp. Valens caused to be
imprisoned, and Lucius an Arrian bishop, to be seated Peter
in his room. Lucius was made bishop of Alexandria, against all kind of
Ecclesiastical order: neitheir did the people crave him, nor the Clergy of
Alexandria approve him, nor any Orthodox bishop give him ordination. Peter
escaped out of prison, and fled to Damasus bishop of Rome. Lucius like unto a
ravenous Theod. lib. 4 cap. 22.
wolf, not only banished the Homousians out of Al^xandria and Egypt, but
also that which was more insolent, and never attempted before, he persecuted
the Monks who dwelt in solitary places of the wilderness, and banished them,
who had ^lready banished themselves from all the delicate pleasures of the
world. But mark, To what place could men be banished, who Theod. lib. 4. cap.
21.
inhabited the desert places of barren wildern^sses? He caused them
(especially Macarius and Isidorus) to be transported unto an Isle, whereinto no
Christians were to be found, but only Pagans and worshippers of deuilles. When
these prisoners of CHRIST approached near unto the Isle, the devil left his
old habitation, to wit the mouth of the image, from whence he was accustomed
to speak, and he pos^essed the Priests daughte who ran unto the shore, and
cried words not unlike to those which Acts, 16, verse, 17.
were spoken to Paul and Silas in Philipp^, by the maid who had the spirit of
divination: and after this the devil left her, lying upon the ground, as
though she had been dead: But the men of GOD, by their supplications to GOD,
restored the young woman to health, and delivered her to her father. The
inhabitants of the Isle, who saw the wonderful works of GOD, received the
faith, and were baptized in the Name of CHRIST. LUCIUS was so dashed with the
fame of this wonderful work, and with the out-crying of the people against
him, that he permitted the foresaid monks to return back again to their
own places.

Afrer Peter succeeded Timotheus, for one cause worthy to be blamed, because
he favored the usurpation of Maximus Cynicus, Timotheus.
who presumed without a lawful calling to be Bishop of Constantino. And after
him Theophilus succeeded, whose attempts against Chrysostom I remit to the
next CENTURIE.

Bishops of Antiochia.
IN Antiochia, after Tyrannus, succeeded Vitalius, about the time that the rage
of the tenth Persecution began to be assuaged: Vitalius.
therefore he re-edified a Church in Antiochia, which had been demolished in
time of the Pe^secution of Dioclesian, and his successor Philogonius,
perfected the building. To whom Philogonius. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 3. Eustatius,
Theod. lib. 1. cap. 7. Socrat. lib. 1 cap. 24.
succeeded Eustatius who was present at the Council of Nice, and was Moderator
and Mouth to all the rest. Eusebius, sometime bishop of Berytus, afterward
bishop of Nicomedia, and last of al^ bishop of Constantinople, did insinuate
himself in favor with the Emperor Constantine, and obtained from him
liberty to go to Jerusalem, and to visit the Temples that Constantine had
lately builded in Bethlehem. Jerusalem, and upon Mount Oliuct. To him resorted
a number of Arrian Bishops, who had al^ secretly conspired against Eustatius.
and suborned a vilde woman to accuse him of whoredom. The Arrians upon the
simple deposition of a woman suborned by themselves, contrary ^al kind of
order, dep^sed Eustatius, and persuaded the Emp^rour to banish him, as a man
convict both of adultery, and of tyranny. But Theodor. li. 5 cap. 21.
the LORD laid his correcting hand upon the woman, whom the Arrians had
suborned, so that she died, sore tormented with a grievous sickness, and
confessed that money was given unto her, to accuse Eustatius, and that she had
sworn deceitfully, because the child procreated with her, was begotten by
Eustatius a smith of that name, but not by Eustatius bishop of Antiochia.

The Arrians, in the days of Constantine, had no great vpperhand, except only
in the matter of Athanasius his banishment to Triere, and in the deposition and
banishment of Eustatius to Illyricum. But in the days of Constantius they
took boldness, and planted Arrian bishops in all principal places: so that
in Antiochia (after Eustatius) Eulalius, Euphronius, Placitus, Leontius,
Eudoxius, all these were Arrian bishops, and placed by them in Antiochia. In
end Meletius was ordained bishop of Antiochia, Meletius.
a man of great gifts, whom the Arrians transported our of Sebastia in
Armenia, and placed him in Antiochia, supposing that by the means of his
excellent learning, many should be allured to their opinion: But it fell out
far otherwise: for Meletius professed the true faith. Only the reproueable
form of his entry, by receiving ordination from Arrian bishops, was the
ground of remediless schisms in the Church of Antiochia. There had been
already two factions in the town, to wit, Arrians, and Eustatians: now the
third faction is added of them, who were called Meletiani, with whom
Eustatiani did not communicate, but abhorred them as they did the Arrians. This
schism endured after the death of Meletius for the space of fourscore and
Theodor. li. 3 cap. 4.
five years. Meletius was banished in the days of Constantius, and Euzoius an
Arrian bishop placed in his room. He was restored Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 44.
again by Julian, only for desire he had to undo things done by
Constantius, and to bring his name to disgrace. Likewise under the reign of
the Emperor Valens, he was banished Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1.
the second time. He governed the Church of Antiochia five and twenty
years, and died in Constantinople, immediately after the second general
Council and was carried to Antiochia, to be Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 7.
buried there.

The ordination of Paulinus to be Bishop of Antiochia, Meletius Paulinus.
being yet alive, was the foolish fact of Lucifer bishop of Calaris, in the
Isle of Sardinia. He was restored from banishment in the days of Julian. And
took purpose, accompanied with Eusebius, bishop of Vercellis in Liguria, who
was likewise restored at that same time, to visit the estate of their
brethren. Eus^bius addressed himself to Alexandria, and conferred with
Athanasius: Socra. lib. 3 cap. 6.
But Lucifer went to Antiochia, where he found miserable distractions, even
amongst those, who professed one and the self same Faith. When exhortations to
unity could prevail nothing, but the dissension daily increased, he ordained
Paulinus presbyter of Antiochia, and the chief of those who were called
Eustatiani, to be bishop of Antiochia. This fact of Lucifer was like unto
fuel added unto the fire, and mightily augmented Theo. lib. 3. cap. 4.
the schism. Theodoretus blames him for so doing, and Eusebius Vercellensis,
when he came back from Alexandria, disliked also the fact of Lucifer.
Wherefore Lucifer would not communicate any longer with Eusebius. These
sorrowful times of multiplied schisms, alienated the hearts of a great
number Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 9.
of people from the true CHURCH. Meletius was restored from his second
banishment, in the days of the Emperor GRATIANUS. Paulinus would upon no
condition communicate Idem, lib. 5 cap. 5.
with him, because he had received ordination from the Arrians. When Meletius
had ended his life, the people would not admit Paulinus to be their bishop,
because they said, Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 23.
it was not meet that he should be his successor, who despised his
fellowship and counsel in his life time.

To MELETIUS succeeded FLAVIANUS, a worthy Flavianus.
m^n. Paulinus albeit he appointed Euagrius to be his successor, yet such
forms manifestly repugnant to the approved order of the Church could take no
place. The bishops of Rome Theod. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Damasus, Siricius, and Anastatius, were great adversaries to him, and
misinformed the good Emperor Theodosius against him: but when he compeared
before the Emperor, he spoke before him both freely and wisely, words that
liked the Emperor well, as they are reported by Theodoretus: O Emperor, if
any man do blame my Faith as perverse, or my life as unworthy, I am Theod,
ibid.
content to be judged by my very adversaries: but if the disputation only boe
anent principality, and eusinent places, I will not contend with any man, but
denude my self of all superiority, and com^it the chair of ANTIOCHIA to
whom ye like best. The Emperor admired his courage and wisdom, and sent
him back again to govern his own flock, and was slow to hear frivolous
accusations in time to come against Flarianus. This was that worthy Bishop,
who associated (...) Chrysostom to be his fellow laborer Sozom. lib. 7. cap.
23.
in Antiochia: and who mitigated the wrath of Theodosius conceived against the
City of Antiochia, for misusing the imag^ of his wife Placilla.

Bishops of Constantinople.
CONSTANTINOPLE was builded by Constantine, anno Functii Chronolog.
336. in a pla^e where Asia and Europe nearly confines, b^eing separat^d only
by a narrow firth, called of old Bo^phorus Thracius. The cause wherefore this
Imperial City was builded in this place was not to resign the town of Rome,
and the gouernament of the West to the bishop of Rome: but, as Sozomenus
writes, that Constantinople, or new Rome, might be as a sovereign Sozo^. lib.
2 cap. 3.
Lady to all those who in the East, West, North, or South, were obedient to the
Roman Empire. Learned men in our days are ashamed to mainetaine all the
foolish fables of the Roman Church, for they see clearly the cause of the
building of this great City was to keep firmly both the East and the West
under the Souerainitie of Constantine, and his successors.

Alexander bishop of Constantinople, proved a worthy man, in the days of the
Emp. Constantine. The Arrians finding themselves Alexander.
to be utterly rejected by Athanasius, they addressed themselves to
Constantinople, under the conduct of Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia: and
threatened Alexander, that incase he would not voluntarily receive. Arrius
into the fellowship of the Church, T^eod. lib. 4. cap. 4.
then they should bring him in authorized with the Emperors command, to the
grieuance of his heart. Alexander clothed himself with the armor of GOD, and
all the night long prayed in this sense: LORD, if Arrius be to be received to
morrow into the communione of thy CHURCH, then let thy servant depart in peace,
and destroy not the just with the wicked: but, LORD, if thou will spare thy
CHURCH. whereunto I am assured. thou will be favorable: then LORD, turn thine
eyes toward the words of the Eusebians, and give not thine inheritance to a
desolation and reproach: and cut of Arrius, lest while he enters into the
CHURCH, his heresy also seem to enter with him, and so no difference seem to
be betwixt Piety and Jmpietie. The day next following the prayer of
Alexander, Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, with his retinue came with great
confidence Theo^t. ibid.
and pomp, to perform all which they had threatened they would do: But Arrius
was compelled to go to a secret place, whereinto his bowels gusihed out: and
he concluded his wretched life, with ignominy and shame.

To Alexander succeeded Paulus: His lot was to govern this Church under the
reign of an Arrian Emperor Constantius, Paulus.
who rejected him, and seated Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, in his place: But
this great parrone of the Arrian Heresy, scarcely was placed in
Constantinople, when he ended his life. The Homousians received again Paulus
to be their bishop: The Arrians choosed Macedonius. This was the c^use of
great debate in Constantinople, Saecrat. lib. 2. cap. 7.
and the people divided in factions, hatefully invaded one another. The
Emperor hearing of the tumult, sent Hermogenes, the general commander of his
hors^-men, to remove Paulus from Constantinople: Hermogenes was very ready to
execute the Emperors commandment, but the people being affectioned Sozom.
lib. 3 cap. 7.
toward their Pastor, arose up with pop^re tumult, compassed the house of
Hermogenes, set it on (...) sl^w himself, and fastened a cord to his legs,
and trailed him along the streets. For this cause the Emper. Constantius
willing to punish the authors of this tumult, hastened to come to
Constantinople. The people went forth to meet him, and with reares confessed
their fault, and craved pardon. The Emperor absteined from punishing them unto
the death, but he cutted off the one half of the victual which the
liberality of his father had bestowed upon Constantinople, to be paid
yearly out of the tributes Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
of Egypt. He banished Paulus the second time and seated Macedo^ius in
Constantinople, not without effusion of blood. Paulus was again restored by
the means of the Emp. Constans: but Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 26.
after the death of Constans, he was banish^d to Cucusus, a town of Armenia,
where he was strangled by the bloody Arrians.

The Church of Constantinople was miserably troubled with Nectarius.
Arrianis^ne, under the reigns of Constantius and Valens. The reigns of
Graiianus and Theodosius was a breathing time to the professors of the true
Faith. At this time Nazianzenus a constant defender of the Faith, was chosen
Bishop of Constantinople, who notwithstanding voluntarily left the great City,
in regard the Bishops assembled in the second general Council, gave not a
full and uniuers^ll consent to his admission: Yet gave they all without
hesitation their consent to Nectarius, a man of noble birth, of the country of
Cilicia, at that time (...), and Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 21.
who had received no ecclesiastical preferment before that time. This man (I
say) they made Bishop of Constantinople, with full cons^nt and allowance, both
of the Council and people: ouerpassing Nazianzenus: so frail are the
cogitations of men, even in general Councils, that they are often times more
ruled with affection then reason. Nectarius continued in that office until the
third year of the reign of Arcadius, that is, until the year Hist. magd.
Cent. 4. cap. 10.
of our LORD 401. In his time the confession of sins done in secret, to
presbyter poenitentiarius, was abrogated in the Church of Constantinople, upon
this occasion as Socrates writes, A certain noble woman was confessing in
secret her sins to presbyter poenitentiarius, and she confessed adultery,
committed with one of the Church Deacons. Eudaemon (this was the name Socrat
lib. 5. cap. 19.
of the father confessor) gave counsel to Nectarius, to abrogate this custom
of auricular and secret confession, because the Church was like to be
slandered, and evil spoken of by these means. Socrates can scarce give
allowance to this fact of Nectarius, in respect that by abrogation of this
custom, the unfruitful works of darkness were less coargued and reproved.
But Socrates considered not, that CHRIST, when he talked with the Samaritane
woman at the Well, sent away his disciples to buy bread, to the end the poor
Samaritane sinner might more freely pour out her secret sins in the bosom
of John, 4.
CHRIST, who knew all things that were done in secret. It is not my purpose
to contend with Socrates, he is writing an history, I am writing but a short
Compend of an history: he takes liberty to declare his judgment concerning
this fact of Nectarius, in abrogating confession of secret sins to pres
byter poenitentiarius. No man can blame me to write my judgment concerning
auricular confession. It is in our days not like unto the mantle where with
Sem and Iapheth covered the nakedness Genes. 9. ve^se, 23.
of their Father Noe: but it is in very deed a lap of the mantle of the devil,
covering the nakedness of his children, that is, the horrible treasons that
are plotted in secret by the children of the devil, against Christian
Magistrates. Now is auriculare consession for greater causes to be abrogated,
then of old presbyter poenitentiarius was discharged by Nectarius.

Bishops of Jerusalem.
TO Thermon succeeded Macarius, anno 318. about the 7. Macarius.
year of the reign of Constantine: In his time it is thought, that Helena,
the mother of Constantine, found the Cross of Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 8. Sacrat.
lib. 1. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 1 cap. 18. Ambros. do obitu Theodos.
CHRIST: but Ambrose writes, that she worshipped it not, for that, says he,
had been Gentilis error, and vanitas impioram, that is, an error of Pagans,
and vanity of ungodly people. But now to lay aside the inexcusable fault of
adoration of the tree whereupon our LORD suffered, What necessity had Helena to
be so serious to seek out this tree. and to commit it to the custody. of all
posterities? seeing that Joseph of Arimathea, who sought the body of JESUS at
the hands of Pilate, to the end he might bury Math. 27. verse, 58.
it honorably, yet sought he not the tree whereon CHRIST was crucified, which
with little ado might have been obtained. Secondly, during the time that the
Cross was easy to be found, and e^sie to have been discerned from other
crosses, How could the blessed virgin the mother of the LORD, and holy
Apostles, have committed such an oversight, in not keeping that precious
treasure, if so be in the keeping of it there be so great devotion, as the
Roman Church now talks of? Thirdly, what is the cause, that the Roman Church
brags so much of antiquity? when as the worshipping of the cross, one of the
maine points of their Religion was unknown to the first 300. years of our
LORD: and now in the 4 Cent. the cross is found, but not worshipped yea, and
the adoration of it is detested and abhorred, as an error of Pagans.

To Macarius succeeded Maximus, who had be ne his fellowlabourer, as of old
Alexander was to Narcissus. Macarius governed Maximus.
the Church of Jerusalem, in the peaceable days of Constantine, but Maximus
governed that same Church himself alone, in the days of Constantius. He was
present at the Council of Tyrus: but Paphnutius a Bishop and conf^ssor in
Thebaida pitied the simplicity of Maximus, whom the Arrians with deceitful
Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 17.
speeches had almost circumueened, and he stepped to him, and suffered him not
to sit in the assembly of ungodly people: wher^upon followed a band of
indissoluble conjunction, not only with Paphnutius, but also with Athanasius,
who was charged with many false accusations in that wicked Council of Tyrus.
This warning made him circumspect and wise in time to Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 8.
come: so that he was no^ present at the Arriane Council of Antiochia,
gathered under pretense of dedication of the Temple which Constantine began to
build, but his son Constantius perfected the building of it.

To Maximus succeeded Cyrillus, a man greatly hated by the Arrians, in so much,
that Acacius bishop of Casarea Palestine deposed Cyrillus.
him (no doubt by some power granted to him by the Emp. Constantius, with
advise of Arrian Bishops) Notwithstanding Theod. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Silvanus Bishop of Tarsus received him, and he taught in that Cong^egation
with great liking and contentment of the people. The strife of Acacius against
him in the Council of Seleucia, I remit unto the own place. In time of famine
he had a great regard to poor indigent people and sold the precious vessel
and garments of the Church for their support. This was Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 25.
a ground of his accusation aft^rward, because a costly garment bestowed by the
Emp. Constantine to the Church of Jerusalem, Cyrillus sold it to a merchant in
time of famine, and again, the merchant s^ld it unto a lascivious woman: and
such frivolous things were aggreaged by the Arrians, who hated the men of GOD.

Of other Pastors and Doctors, in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
BESIDES the Patriarchs of principal places, GOD raised up in this CENTURI^ a
great number of learned Preachers, who were like unto the Ibides of Egypt, a
remedy prepared by GOD, against the multiplied number of venomous and flying
Serpents. Even so learned Fathers of whom I am to speak, were instruments of
GOD, to undo the Heresies which abounded in this age, above al other ages. Did
not Nazianzenus undo the Heresy of Apollinaris? Basilius the Heresy of
Eunomius? Hilarious like unto a s^conde Deucalion saw the ouer-flowing speate of
Arrianisme abated in FRANCE. Ambrosius, Epiphanius, and Ierom set their hearts
against all Heresies, either in their time, or prece^ding their days. It were
an infinite labor, to write of them all, who in this age, like unto glistering
stars with the shining light of celesticall doctrine illuminated the
darkness of the blind world: but the names of some principal Teachers (GOD
willing) I shall remember.

Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestina lived under Euseb^us
Pamphili.
the Emp. Constantine, with whom he was familiarly acquainted. He was desired
to supply the place of Eustatius bishop of Antiochia, whose deposition the
Arrians without all form of order had procured most unrighteously: but he
would not consent to accept that charge, so that the chair: of Antiochia vaked
without a Bishop e^ght years. Some expecting the restitution of Socrat. lib.
1. cap. 24.
Eustatius, others feeding themselves upon vain hopes, that Eusebius would
accept that place. The Emp. Constantine commended his modesty, and counted him
worthy to be bishop of the whole world. Nevertheless he was not altogether
free of the Heresy of Arrius before the Nicene Council, and he was remiss
and slack in the cause of Athanasius. He was so familiarlie acquainted with
Pamphilus, who suffered martyrdom in Caesarea, Sozom lib. 3 cap. 2.
that he clothed himself with his name, and called himself Eusebius
Pamphili. He died about the time that Athanasius first returned from
banishment by the means of Constantine the H^st magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
youn^er, about the year of our LORD 342.

Nazianzenus lived in the days of Constantius, Julian, and Theodosius. He was
borne in a little town of Cappadocia, called Nazianzum, Gregoriu^ Nazianzenus.
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6.
from which he received his name. He was trained up in learning in Alexandria
and in Athens: his familiarity with Basilius Magnus began in Athens, and it was
increased in the wilderness: he preached in Sasima, but because it was a
place unmeet Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 9.
for studies, he returned to Nazianzum, and was a helper to his aged father.
After his fathers death he went to Constantinople, where he found the town in
a most desolate condition, in regard the Arrian and Macedonian Heresies had so
mightily prevailed, that all the principal Churches were occupied by them.
Nazianzenus only had liberty to preach in a little Church called Anastatia,
because the truth of GOD, which seemed to Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 5.
have been buried, now by the preaching of Nazianzenus was revived again. In
the second general Council gathered by Theodosius, because some Bishops of
Macedonia and Egypt murmured against his admission, he counterfeited the fact
of Jonas, and was content to be cast out of his place, to procure peace and
Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 9.
concord amongst his brethren. He benefited the CHURCH of CHRIST in the days
of Julian, by writing books of Christian Theodor. lib. 5 cap. 8.
Poesy, whereby the Christian Youth should have no harm by the interdiction
of Julian, prohibiting the children of Christians to be brought up in the
schools of learning. He detected the Heresy of Apollinaris, and the
abominations of Heathen idolatry, whereunto Julian had sold himself, more
clearly then any other man had done. A man worthy for excellency of gifts,
to Sozom. lih. 6 cap. 27.
be called THEOLOGUS.

Basilius Magnus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was so united in heart and
mind with Nazianzenus, that the pen of Socrates will Basilius Magnus.
net separate the treatises of their lives. His father Basilius, his mother
Eumele, his nuise that fostered him, named Macrina, all Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.
were Christians. His father was martyred under the persecuting Emp. Maximus.
He left behind him five sons: three of them were Bishops, namely, Basilius
bishop of Caesarea, Peter bish. of Sebasta and Gregorius B. of Nyssa. He was
instructed in all kind of learning in Caesarea, in Constantinople, in Athens
under Himerius and Proaeresius, in Antiochia under Libanius At his second
returning to Athens, he acquainted himself with Nazianzenus. They spent too
much time in searching out the deepenesse of humane learning: and it repented
Basilius, that he had spent so much time in searching out things that are not
necessary to eternal life. He Basil. Eu^ statio, epist. 79.
was ordained a Deacon by Meletius B. of Antiochia and a presbyter by Eusebius
B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia. The good carriage of Basilius toward Eusebius is
worthy of remembrance, albeit Eusebius conceived indignation against him
without a cause yet he would not expostulate with his Bishop, but he departed
to a solitary place in Pontus, where he remained until the days of the
Emperor Valens. Then did the Arrian Heresy so mightily prevail, that
necessity compelled the Churches of Cappadocia to entreat Basilius to return
again lest in his absence Arrianisme should get a full vpperhand. Basilius
returned, not without the foreknowledge and good advise of Nazianzenus his
dear friend, who counseled him to preueene Ensebius, and to overcome him
Nazian Basilio, epist. 19
in courtesy and humanity: So was he reconciled to Eusebius. and after his death
was ordained B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, whom GOD so blessed, that the
Arrians and Eunomians, who seemed to be excellently learned, when they
encountered with Nazianz. and Basilius, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.
they were like unto men altogether destitute of learning. In the persecution
of Valens he was led to Antiochia, and presented before the deputy of Valens,
who threatened him with banishment and death: but he answered with invincible
courage, so that the deputy was astonished at his answers. He was not afraid
of banishment, because the earth is the LORDS: neither was he afraid Socrat.
ibid.
of death, but wished to have that honor, that the bands of his earthly
tabernacle might be loosed for the testimony of CHRIST. The Emp. son
Galaces at this time was sick unto the death, and the Empress sent him word,
that she had suffered many things in her dream for the B. Basilius, so he was
dismissed, and suffered to return to Caesarea. The provident care of GOD
ouer-ruling all humane cogitations, kept before-hande some sponkes that were
not quenched in the fervent heat of this Persecution. The multiplied number of
his letters sent to the Bisshops of the West, whereof he received no
comfortable answer, gave unto Basilius just occasion to suspect affectation of
supremacy in the West as his own words do testify, which I cite out of the
Latin version as most intelligible: Nihil nos fratres separat, Basil
transmarinis, epist. 77.
nisi animi proposito, separationi causas roburque demus: unus est Dominus, una
Fides, Spes eadem. Sive caput universalis Ecclesiae vos ipsos esse reputatis,
non potest pedibus dicere caput, non est mihi opus vobis, etc. That is, There
is nothing, brethren, that separates us, except the purpose of our own minds
furnish both cause and strength to separation, There is one GOD, one Faith, one
Hope. Or if ye suppose your selves to be head of the uniuersall CHURCH, yet
the head cannot say unto the feet, I have no need of you.

Nyssa is a City of Mysia, of old called Pythopolis. The brother germane to
Basilius Magnus, named Gregorius, was Bishop Gregorius Nyssenus.
of this town. In the second general Council to him was committed the
o^er-sight of the Country of Cappadocia. Albeit the volume of his books be
not extant, yet he is renowned in the Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8.
mouths of the L^arned: and the fragments of his writings declare that he
has been a man of Note and Mark. Anent sin he said, that albeit the
Serpents that stinged us, were not slaughtered, yet we have sufficient
consolation in this, that we are cured from their venomous bits and stinges.
Anent pilgrimage to Jerusalem, Mount Olivet, and Bethlehem, he said, that a
Numb. 21. verse, 6.
pilgrimage from carnal lusts, to the righteousness of GOD, is acceptable to
the LORD but not a journeying from Cappadocia to Palestina: and that GOD will
give a reward in the world to H^st. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
come, only to things done in this world, by warrant of his own
Commandment.

Epiphanius was borne in a little Village of Palestina, called Barsanduce in
the field of Eleutheropolis. He was brought up Epiphanius. Sozom. lib. 6.
cap. 32.
amongst the Monks of Palestina and Egypt. In end he was ordained bishop of
Salamina the Metrapol^tane town of the Isle of Cyprus. He refuted the
Heresies preceding his time in his book called Panarium, and set down a
sum of the true faith in his book called Anchoratus. He had a great regard
to the poor: in so much, that he was called oeconomus pauperum. And like as
Cyprus was naturally situated in a place near approaching to Asia the less,
and to Syria, and to Egypt, and Pentapolis, and not far distant from Europe:
so it fell out, that Christians, who were disposed to support their indigent
brethren, they sent their collections to Epiphanius, and he distributed them
to the poor. With all these commendable virtues, Socrat. lib. 6 cap. 10.
there was mixed a reproueable simplicity in him: he was circumueened by
Theophilus Bishop of Alexendria, and took a dealing against Ihon Chrysostom
Bishop of Constantinople, because he would not be sudden in damning the
books of Origin. Also he taught in Constantinople, with endeavor to alienate
the hearts of the people from their own Pastor, and celebrated the
communion, and ordained a deacon in Constantinople, without the foreknowledge
and consent of Chrysostom, and contrary to Church order. Chrysostom. on the
other part sent him advertisement, that incase he received any disgrace or
harm in the fuery of populare commotions, he should blame himself, who by his
own inordinate doings was procuring the same. After this Epiphanius ceased
from such doings, and entered into a ship, of purpose to return back again
to Cyprus, but he died by the way. It is reported of him, that when he entered
into the ship, he said, he left three great things behind him, to wit, a
great town, a Sozom. lib. (...) cap. 15.
great palace, and great hypocrisy.

It were a matter of infinite labor, and not agreeing with the nature of a
COMPEND, to write of all the worthy men of GOD in the Eastern parts, who did
fight a good Fight, run a good race, and kept the faith. Asclepas in Gaza,
Lucius in Adrianopolis, Basi^us presbyter in Ancyra, a mighty adversary Sozom
lib. 5 cap. 11.
to the Arrians, under the reign of Constantius, and to the Pagans under the
reign of Julian, in whose time he was martyred: Philogonius bishop of
Antiochia, Hellanicus bishop of Tripolis, and Spyridion, who of a keeper of
cattle, became bishop of Trimythus, Theod. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Hermogenes bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who was present at the Council
of Nice, James bishop of Nisibis, in Misopotamia, in the days of Constantius,
by whose prayers the army of Sapores Theo. lib. 2. cap. 30.
king of Persia was miraculously disapointed, Paulus bishop of Neocaesarea:
this town is situated upon the banks of Euphrates, and Paphnutius bishop in
Th^baida, two notable Confessors, who were both present at the Council of
Nice, Eusebius Samosatenus, to whom many of Basilius Epistles are directed, and
who refused to redeliuer unto the Emperor Constantius the subscriptions of
Th^d. lib. 2. cap. 32.
the Arrian Bishops, who consented to the admission of Meletius to be bishop
of Antiochia, which subscriptions were put in his custody. And albeit the
messenger sent from the Emperor, thr^tned to cut off his right hand, incase
he d^liuered not the subscriptions foresaid, yet he constantly refused to
deliver them: and the Emp. both admired and commended his constancy: Theod.
lib. 5 cap. 8.
Barses bishop of Edessa in Mesopotamia, Eulogius and Protogenes presbyters
there, under the reign of Valens were banished to Antinoe in Thebaida, whose
travails GOD wonderfully Idem, lib. 4. cap. 18.
bl^ssed, to the conversion of many souls to the kingdom of GOD: Theodulus
bishop of Trianopolis, Amphilochius bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, Pelagius
Laodicenus, whose name is the more famous for his insolent fact: for he married
a young woman. and the first night after her marriage, he persuaded her to
prefer (...). lib. 4. cap. 13.
Virginal chastity, to matrimonial copulation. Antiochus the brother sone of
Eusebius Samosatenus could not abide the imposition of the hands of an Arrian
bishop. Le^oius bishop of Meletina in Ar^enia, who brunt the Monastrees, or
rather as Theodoretus writes, the Dens of thieves, whereinto the Heretics
Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11.
called Massaliani had their abiding. Ephem Syrus a man borne in Nisibis,
brought up in the wilderness, was counted a famous Writer in the Syriah
language. The books shrouded under his name, are thought for the most part to
be supposititious. Aeas, who lived in company with Zenon Bishop of Maioma,
near unto Gaza, is much reported of, because he married a young Sozom. lib. 7
cap. 27.
woman, procreated three children with her, and in end left her, and entered
into a Manastrie, forgetting his matrimonial covenant. Zebennius Bishop of
Eleutheropolis in Phaenicia, to whom Sozomenus affirms, that by divine
revelation the places were manifested, whereinto the bodies of the Prophets,
Habac^k and Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 28.
Micheas were buried: So superstitious are Ecclesiastical Writers already
become that the searching out of things nothing appertaining to eternal life
are ascriued to divine revelations. The judicious reader will pardon me that I
write not in particulare of the lives of a^l the forementioned Bishops and
Pastors, because the nature of a short COMPEND cannot permit it to be done.

Bishops and Doctors in Afric.
IN Afric, over and besides the Bishops of Alexandria, was Didymus a Doctor
of the school of Alexandria, who through Didymus.
occasion of a dolor that fell into his eyes, became blind from Sozom. lib. 3
cap. 15.
his very youth: Yet by continual exercise of his mind, he became
excellently learned in all Sciences: But above all things the exact knowledge
of divine SCRIPTURES made him a terror to the Arrians. Many do write, that
the very last period of time, whereinto Julian the Apostate concluded his
wretched life, was revealed to Didymus in a dream, and that he Sozom. lib. 6
cap. 2.
again told it to Athanasius, who lurked secretly in Alexandria, during the
time of the reign of Julian.

Arnobius was an Orator in Afric, afterward he became a Christian, and
craved to be baptized. Christian Bishops linguered Arnobius.
to confer the holy Sacrament to a man, who had been a hater of Christian
Religion of a long time. Yet he freede himself from all suspicion of
Paganism, by writing books wherein he confuted the Idolatry of the Pagans,
and was baptized about the year of our LORD 330. Anent the suffering I^, c^n.
of our LORD he writes very judiciously. That like as the beams of the
Sun, that shine upon a tree, when the tree is cutted, the Sun beams cannot
be cutted: Even so, in Ar^b. i^ Psalm. 129.
the suffering of CHRIST, the divine Nature suffered noe pain.

Lactantius Firmianus, was the Disciple of Arnobius. In eloquence he was
nothing inferior to his Master: yet it is thought, Ierom a^ Paulinu^.
that he impugned errors with greater dexterity, then he confirmed the
Doctrine of the Truth.

Optatus Bishop of Meleuitanum in Afric, in the days of Valentinian and
Valens, set his pen against the Donatistes, especially Optatus Meleuitanus.
against Parmenianus, whose absurd assertion he clearelie refutes. First,
whereas the Donatistes affirmed, that the CHURCH of CHRIST was only to be
found in a corner of Afric. He refutes it by Scripture, wherein it is
written, Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,
and Psalm, 2. verse, 8.
the ends of the world^ for thy possession: This place proves the CHURCH to
be Catholic. Also whereas they said, that Baptism was not available,
except some of their sect had been present at the administration thereof: he
answers, That when GOD first created the Element of water, the presence of
the Trinity was powerful in operation to create water, albeit none of the
Donatistes were then present: Even so the Trinity can work effectually in
Baptism, albeit none of the Donatistes be present: Yea, and that it was GOD
(the author of Baptism, and not the Minister) that did sanctify, according as
it is written, Wash me, and I shall be whiter then the Psalm, 51 verse, 7
snow, etc.

Bishops and Doctors of Europe.
ACHOLIUS Bishop of Thessalonica, baptized the Emperor Theodosius, after here
returned from the slaughter of Acholius.
Maximus. The Emp. fell sick by the way, before he came to Constantinople,
and was desirous to be baptized: Nevertheless he would not suffer Acholius to
baptize him, until he was assured Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6.
that Acholius was not spotted with the Airian Heresy. After baptism the
Emperor recovered his health again. Acholius Sozon. lib. 7 cap. 4.
was brought up in Monastries, like as Epiphanius, and many other worthy men
were brought up.

Hilarious Bishop of Poitiers in FRANCE, lived under the Hilarious.
reign of Constantius: a man in Religion constant, in manners meek and
courteous. He was banished immediately after the Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Council of Millane, to Phrygia, as some suppose. Theodoretus writes, that
he was banished to Thebaida: and relieved again from banishment under Julian.
But it is more apparent, that he Theod. lib. 3 cap. 4.
remained in Phrygia, until the Council of Seleucia: unto which Council he
was brought from banishment, not by any special commandment from the Emp. but
by a general commandment given to his deputy Leonas, to assemble together
the Bishops of the East. Under pretense of obeying this commandment, Hilarious
being banished in the East, was brought to the Hist magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
Council of Seleucia: from Seleucia he went to Constantinople. The Emp.
refused to hear him reason with the Arrians in the matters of Faith, but gave
him liberty to return to his own country again. He took great pains to
purge the country of FRANCE from the poison of Arrian heresy: and he
prevailed so far, that Ierom compares him to Deucalion, who both saw the
flood of waters ouer-flowing Thessalia, and the abating of Ierom. in Chron.
them also: Even so Hilarious saw both the growth and decay of Arrianisme in
FRANCE. He lived six years after his returning from banishment, and
concluded his life under the reign of Valentinian.

Ambrose the son of Symmachus, was a man of noble parentage: Ambrosius
under the Emp. Valentinian he was governor of Liguria. At this time Auxentius
bishop of Millane (an Arrian) died. Great sedition was in the town, for the
election of a new bishop, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 11.
every man contending to have a bishop chosen of that faith which he himself
best liked. Ambrose fearing the undoing of the town by this intestine
contention, exhorted them to unity and concord, with words and reasons so
perswasiue, that the people with one consent cried out, they would be all of
one mind, incase that Ambrose were appointed to be their bishop. Socrat. lib.
4 cap. 30.
The Emp. thought this inexpected consent of the people came from GOD, and he
consented to the desire of the people. So was Ambrose ordained bishop of
Millane. After the death of Valentinian he was grievously troubled by Justina,
the mother of Valentinian the second: for she was infected with Arrianisme.
Ambrose was sauoured by the people and would not betray the Theod. lib. 5 cap.
13.
sheepe-folde of GOD to Wolves. The particulare description of the broile of
Iustina may be read at length in the Epistle that Ambrose ad Marcellinam ep:
fi. 33. August. Con. fess lib. 9. cap. 7. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Ambrose writes to his sister Marcellina. The miracle wrought at the sepulchers
of Protasius and Geruasius, mittigated somewhat the fury of Iustina. But the
dolorous tidinges of the slaughter of Gratianus compelled Iustina to fly from
Italy to Illyricum for safety of her own life, and her sons life. He
sustained also great trouble under the two Tyrants Maximus and Eugenius: so
that he was compelled in the time of Maximus, to fly to Aquileia: H^st. magd.
Cent. 4. cap. 10.
and in the time of Eugenius to fly to Hetruria. He lived also under the
reign of Theodosius, whom he sharply reproved for the slaughter of the
innocent people of Thessalonica: and died in Theodor. li. 5 cap. 18.
the third year of the reign of Honorius, after he had governed the Church of
Millane 22. years.

Prudentius a man of Spain, a Lawyer at some times, and a warrior Prudentius
at other times in his young years. In his old age he writ of divine matters.
He lived under the reign of Valentinian the second, of Theodosius, and his
sons. He set forth his knowledge in books of Latin Poesy, albeit Greek
inscriptions be prefixed unto them, such as (...), which entreats of the
Hist. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
fight betwixt the spirit and the flesh: (...), which entreats of the works
to be done in the day time: (...), entreats of Divinity and divine things:
(...), entreats of Original sin, against Cerdon and Marcion, the Authors
of two beginnings: (...), a book containing the praises of victorious
Martyrs. In this book is frequent invocation of Saints express against holy
Scripture: (...), containing Psalm. 50. veise, 58.
Histories, both of old and new Testament. The verses, wherein he argues the
Heresy of Manicheans, who attributed unto CHRIST, not a true, but a
fantastical body made of air, are very judiciously conceived:

Restat ut aeriam pingas ab origin gentem.
Aerios proceres, Leuim, ^udam, Simeonem,
Aerium DAVID, magnorum corpora Regum
Aeria, atque ipsam foecundae virginis alvum
Aere fallaci, nebulisque and nube tumentem.
The Ecclesiastical writers, whom I have chiefly followed in this COMPEND,
make no mention of him.

Osius bishop of Co^duba, was a Confessor, in the Persecution of Dioclesian and
Maximianus. He was regarded by the Emp. Constantine, Osius.
for the marks of the rebuke of CHRIST. The Emp. employed him to stay the
schism in Egypt, betwixt Alexander Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7.
and Arrius. Likewise he sent him to the Bishops of the East, who differed in
opinion from the Bishops of the West. Anent the keeping of Easter day, he was
present at the Council of Nice, where he damned the Heresy of Arrius: And at
the Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 16.
Council of Sardica, he absolved Athanasius, Paulus, etc. Neither was he
terrified with the minassing letters of Constantius, but answered courageously,
that Athanasius was an innocent man, and that the Emperor did not well to
hearken to the calumnies of Ursatius and Valens, men who had by writ confessed
to Julius bishop of Rome, that the accusations intended against Theod. lib. 2.
cap. 19.
Athanasius, were but forged calumnies. And this they did of their own accord
freely, and not compelled. In his decreaped years (for he lived an hundredth
years) some weakness was found in him. At the Council of Syrmium, he was
compelled to be present in that assembly of Arrian Bishops, to whose wicked
constitutions (fearing torture and banishment, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 31.
from which he was lately reduced) he subscriued.

Ierom was borne in a town of Dalmatia, called Stridon, and Hieronymus.
was instructed in the Rudimentes of Learning at Rome. From Rome he went to
FRANCE, of purpose to increase his knowledge, and to diverse other places, and
he returned again to Ierom. epist. ad Ger^nt.
Rome, where he acquainted himself with honorable women, such as Marcella,
Sophronia, Principia, Paula, and Euftochium, to whom he expounded places of
holy SCRIPTURE, for he was admitted presbyter: He was counted worthy to
succeed to Damasus B. of Rome: his gifts were envied at Rome: therefore he
left Rome, and took his voyage toward Palestina. By the way he acquainted
himself with Epiphanius b. of Cyprus, with Nazian. b. in Constantinople, with
Didymus Doctor in the School of Alexandria, and sundry other men of Note and
Mark. In end he came to Judea, and made choice of the place of the LORDS
Nativity to be the place of his death. At Bethlehem, Paula a Noble woman (who
accompanied Ierom, and his brother Paulinianus, from Rome) upon her own
charges builded four Monastries. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. Cap. 10.
Ierom guided one Monastrie, wherein were a number of Monks. The other three,
whereinto there was companies of holy Virgins, she guided her self. Ierom
was a man of stern disposition, and more inclinable to a solitary and Monkish
life, then to fellowship and society. Neither Heliodorus in the Wilderness,
nor Ruffinus out of the Wilderness, could August. epist. 17.
keep inviolable friendship with him. The letters that passed betwixt August.
and Ierom declare, that Ierom knew not how great a victory it was in love,
in humility, and friendeship to overcome them, who seemed to contend against
him. Ierom Ierom. Aug. epist. 13. 14.
wanted not his own gross errors. Anent the creation he thought, that
Angels, Thrones, Dominations, were existant Ierom. anar. in tit. cap. 1. Ierom.
lib. 18 Comment. in (...). Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. Cap. 10.
before the world was created. In his books written against Iouinian, he
writes not reverently of Marriage, and he damneth the second Marriage. He
ended his life about the twelfth year of the reign of Honorius, in the year
of his age 91.

Ecclesiastical Writers have filled their Books with excessive commendations
of Heremites and Monks: of whom (GOD willing) I shall write in a particulare
TREATISE anent Monasticke life.

CHAP. III. Of Heretics.
OLD Heresies before mentioned, such as the Heresies of the Novatians,
Sabellians, and Manicheans, did more harm in this CENTURIE, then in the time
whereinto they were first propagated, as appears by the books and Sermons of
learned Fathers, seriously insisting to quench the flame of Heretical
doctrine, which was kindled before their time.

In this CENTURIE the plurality of Heretics did most mightily abound.
Meletius a bishop in Thebaida, was deposed by Peter bishop of Alexandria, (who
suffered martyrdom under Meletiani.
Dioclesian) because he was found to have sacrificed to Socrat. lib. 1 Cap.
6. Theodor. li. 1 cap. 8. August, de here is. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 9.
idols. After his deposition, he was seditious and factious, raising up
tumults in Thebaida, and practicing tyranny against the chair of Alexandria:
and his disciples were found to have communicated with the Arrians. The
Council of Nice suffered Meletius to enjoy the name of a bishop without power
of ordination.

In the year of our LORD 324. sprang up Arrius, a presbyter Arriani.
in Alexandria, who denied that the Son of GOD was begotten of the substance
of the FATHER, but that he was a creature, and made of things not existant:
and that there was a time, whereinto the Son was not. Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, dealt with him, to reclaim him from his Heretical opinions:
Theodor. lib. 1 cap. 4.
but his travel was spent in vain. Therefore Alexander was compelled to use
the last remedy, to depose and excommunicate Arrius, with his accomplices, to
wit, Achilles, Euzoivs, Aethales, Lucius, Sarmata, Julius, Menas, Arrius alter,
and Helladius. This excommunication had allowance by the Bishops of Thebaida,
Theod. ibid.
Pentapolis, Lybia, Syria, Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and many other
places. But Arrius, an headstrong Heretic, was incorrigible: Neither the
letters of the good Emp. Constantine, nor the travails of Osius bishop of
Corduba, could work any amendment in him. He labored to fortify himself
in his Heretical opinion, especially by the assistance of Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia, a perilous and deceitful man. Arrius was condemned by the Council
of Nice, and was banished by the Emperor Constantine. Albeit he was reduced
again from banishment by the means of Constantia, the Emp. sister, and of an
Arrian presbyter, whom she commended to the Emp. her brother when she was
concluding her life: Yet the LORD punished the Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 38.
insolent pride of this Heretic, with a shameful and vnquoth death, as has
been already declared. This heresy was propagated by Constantius, by Iustina,
and her son Valentinian the second, by the Emp. Valens, and by the kings of
Goths and Vandalles. The principal defenders of this Heresy were Eusebius
bishop of Nicomedia, Menophantes, bishop of Ephesus, Theogonius bishop of Nice,
Ursatius bishop of Sygdonia, and Valens bishop of Mursa, in upper Panonia,
Theonas b. in Marmarica, Secundus b. of Ptolemaida Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18.
in Egypt, Maris b. of Chalcedon, Narcissus b. in Cilicia, Theodorus b. of
Heraclea in Thracia, and Marcus b. of Irenopolis in Syria. In the number of
most impudent Arrian bishops, was Ishyras, the chief accus^r of Athanasius, to
whom the Arrians gave the wages of iniquity, and ordained him b. of Mareotis:
The Sozom. lib. 2 cap. 25.
ouer-throwing of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup, the burning
of the holy books, the slaughter of Arsenius, and many other accusations were
all forged against Athanasius by Ishyras, for hope of reward. Eulalius,
Euphronius, Placitus, Stephanus, Leontius, Spado, and Eudoxius, Bishops of
Antiochia: all these were defenders of the Arrian Heresy, with many others,
of whom I will have occasion to speak hereafter.

Albeit Anomai were a branch of the stock of the Arrians, Anomaei.
yet they differed from other Arrians in this, that they abhorred from the word
(...), which other Arrians embraced. The principal Authors of this Heresy
were Acatius, Eunomius, and Aetius, whereof it came to pass, that some called
them Ac^tiani, others Eunomiani, and some Aetiani. Acatius in the Council of
Sel^ucia manifested the Hypocrisy of his deceitful speeches, because in his
books he had called the Son of GOD (...), that is of like substance with the
FATHER: he was demanded in what sense he had so written? he answered, that the
Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Son of GOD was like unto the FATHER in will, but not in substance. Eunomius
bishop of Cyzicus in Bithynia, was the first inuenter of this miserable Heresy
of Anomaei, a man who delited in multitude of words, as many Heretics do.
Sozomen blames him for altering the custom of thrice dipping in Sozom. lib. 6
cap. 26.
water in Baptism. The people of Syzicus complained to the Emp. Constantius,
of the bad and reprobate opinion of Eunomius. The Emp. was offended against
Eudoxius bish. of Constantinople, who had placed him in Cyzicus. Hereof it came
to pass, that Eudoxius Theod. l^b. 2. cap. 29.
(who was of that same opinion himself, but durst not auow it) he sent secret
advertisement to Eunomius, to fly out of Cyzicus. Basilius Magnus in his five
books written against Eunomius, Basil. contr. Eunomium. Numb. 25. ver, 14. 15.
as it were filled with the spirit of Phineas, who with one spear killed
Ombri and Cosbi: even so Basilius with one pen, confounded both Eunomius, and
his Master Aetius. This Aetius was a Syrian, admitted to the office of a
Deacon by Leontius Spado: he spoke vnquoth things of the Trinity, and was
justly called an Atheist. The Emp. Constantius, albeit he loved other
Arrians, yet he disliked Anomei, and procured his deposition Theo. ^ib. 2.
cap. 28.
and excommunication, by the Bishops who came to Constantinople from Ariminum
and Seleucia. Eudoxius first Bishop of Germanitia, in the confines of Cilicia,
after Bishop of Antiochia, and last Bishop of Constantinople, a hunter for
pre-eminence of places. He was a favorer of the sect of Arrians called Anomei,
or (...): yet he had the heart of a beast, for neither would he Theod. lib. 2
cap. 25.
embrace the true Faith, neither durst he defend the Iye whereunto his heart
was inclined. But in the Council of Constantinople, holden after the Councils
of Ariminum and Seleucia, he transferred all the blame upon Actius, whom the
Emp. banished: so that it is a strange thing, that this error should have had
the name also from such a feeble patron as Eudoxius was, to be called Theod.
lib. 2. cap. 27.
the error of Eudoxiani.

Macedonius, rather by the authority of the Emp. Constantius, Macedoniani, or
(...).
then by the consent of the people, was made bishop of Constantinople. Paulus
lawful bishop of Constantinople, was banished to Cucusus, a town of Armenia,
and there he was strangled by the Arrians, also 3150. of the people were
slain and trodden under feet, at his violent entry. This bloody Tyrant denied
the divinity of the holy Ghost. He was deposed by the Emperors procurement,
because he durst presume at his own hand to transport the bones of the Emp.
Constantine from one Church S^rat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
to another. His followers were abhorred more then any other branch of the
Arrian Heresy, for their inconstancy. They Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 12.
sent Messengers to Liberius Bishop of Rome, and consented in all points to the
Nicene Faith: but afterward, like unto dogs, they returned to their vomit
again. He was damned, as a notable Heretic, by the second General
Council gathered at Constantinople, by the Emperor Theodosius, anno 386. He
died in a little Village near to Constantinople, and Eudoxius obtained his
place.

Photinus Bishop of Sirmium in Illyria, was the Disciple of Marcellus
Photiniani.
Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia: These two renewed both the Heresy of Sabellius
and Samosatenus, and augmented the blasphemous opinion of Samosatenus, with
this addition, That the Kingdom of CHRIST was not everlasting, but it had a
beginning, Socrat lib. 2. cap. 19.
when he was borne of the Virgin, and should have an end at the latter day.
This Heresy has the name from the disciple, and not from the master, in
regard that Marcellus continued not so obstinately in his error, as did Phot.
his disciple, but renounced his error, and was received into the fellowship of
the Church Hist. magd. Cent. 4. cap. 11.
in the Council of Sardica: but Photinus was deposed at the Council of
Sirmium, and banished by the Em. Constantius. Nevertheless, after his
deposition and banishment, he continued obstinately in his error, and wrote
books both in Latin and Greek, in defense of his Heresy: whereby his name
became infamous, and he was counted the author of this Heresy.

Audaus was a man of Syria, under the reign of Valentinian, and his brother
Valens: He published an error, That GOD Audaei, or Anthopomorphitae.
was like unto the similitude of a man's body. This error he conceived
through wrong understanding of the words of Scripture, wherein it is said, Let
us make man in our own Image, according to our likeness. With this error
many unlearned Egyptian Genes. 1. verse, 21.
Monks were entangled. They pretended great innocence and chastity in their
lives, and separated themselves from the society of the Church, covering their
impiety with this pretext, that they saw usurers and unclean persons
tolerated Theod. compend. heresium
in the Church.

About this time, says Theodoretus, that is, in the days of Valentinianus and
Valens, sprang up the Heresy of Messaliani. Albeit Messaliani.
this name be vnquoth, yet the Greek names given unto this Heresy are more
significatiue: they were called (...), because they counted prayer the only
exercise necessary to the children of GOD, even as if a man could talk with
GOD by prayer, before he has first heard GOD talking with him by the preaching
of the Word.

Likewise they were called (...), that is, men ravished in the spirit, after
long continuance in prayer. When they were transported, and out of their wits,
then they supposed, that the Theodor lib. 4 ^p. 11.
holy spirit was sensibly infused into them, whereby their bodies were made
free of all perturbations, and their souls were auerted from all inclination
to evil, in such sort, that they had no need of fasting to subdue their
bodies, nor of Doctrine to restrain the disordered affections of their souls.
This pestilent Heresy was ouerspred in many places: but it was mightily
suppressed by Letoius B. of Meletina, Amphilochius B. of Iconium in Lycaonia,
and Flaviaenus B. of Antiochia, who with great dexterity drew out a Confession
out of the mouth of Adelphius, an Theod. ibid.
aged man, and a propagator of this Heresy in Edessa. This Heresy, albeit it
had many patrones, such as Dadoes, Sabas, Ad^lphius, Hermas, Simeones, yet from
none of them it received the name, but rather from the actions and passions
whereunto they inclined.

Apollinaris bishop of Laodicea in Syria, gloried in the quickenesse of his
ingine, and delited to make contradiction to every Appollinaristae,
thing that any man could speak: and so it came to pass (as Ruffinus
writes) Heresim ex contentione generauit, that is to say, Through contention
he procreated an Heresy: affirming that Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 20.
in the dispensation of CHRIST'S Incarnation, he assumed the body of a man
only, but not the soul of a man, because his divinity supplied the place of
his soul. And when he was argued by evident places of SCRIPTURE, that CHRIST
in his humane nature was a perfect man, having not only a body, but also the
soul of a man: as when he said, His soul was heavy unto the death: lest he
should have seemed to be utterly convinced Mark, 14 verse, 34.
and overcome: he confessed that CHRIST'S body was quickened with a natural
life: but the divinity of CHRIST was in place of a reasonable soul. This
Heresy was damned in Councils conueened at Rome, Alexandria, and
Constantinople. He augmented the schism at Antiochia, where there had been
already three factions, to wit, Eustatiani, Meletiani, and Pauliniani. Now
Apollinaris dwelling in Laodicea a town of Syria, near Theod. lib. 5. cap. 3.
approaching to Antiochia: he was the author of the fourth faction. In the
days of Julian he compiled histories of Scripture, in Greek Poesy. In the
days of Valentinian and Gratian, he defended his Heresy. In the days of the
Emp. Theodosius he concluded Ierom. in Catal. Theod. lib. 5 cap. 4. Sozom. lib.
6 cap. 25.
his life. His son in name, learning, and bad use of excellent gifts, was
like unto his father. Vitalius presbyter in Antiochia was a serious defender of
the Heresy of Apollinaris, in so much, that the followers of Apollinaris were
called Vitaliani.

Donatus was a Bishop in Numidia, who contended with unsupportable hatred
against Cecilianus B. of Carthage, challenging him, that he had received
ordination from Foelix Altungensis, August. epist. 152
who was proditor: that is, who in time of persecution had delivered the book
of holy Scripture to be brunt: or, as others say, because he admitted to an
Ecclesiastical office, a Deacon, who had committed the like faule. The cause
of Cecilianus was oftagitat before the Council of Carthage, before Miltiades
B, of Rome, before the Council of Arles, and by the Emp. Coustantine: but the
Donatistes at all times succumbed in probation. Therefore they were enraged,
because they could not accomplish their wicked designs against Cecilianus:
and they fell from the unity of the Church. Inucterate schisms often times
turn to Heresies. So the Donatistes in end were defenders of Heretical
opinions: namely, that the Catholic Church was no where else to be found, but
only in that corner of Afric, whereinto they themselves dwelt: and that
Baptisine was not effectual, except it had been ministered by one of their
society. Of all the branches of this Heresy, Circumcelliones was the most
reprobate branch: a people cruel and savage, not only against others, but
also against themselves, throwing themselves headlonges August. d^ hrres. ad
qued vult D. ur^.
from high places, or casting themselves in fire and water: and this sort of
death they count^d Mar^yrdome. The diversity of names wherewith this Heresy
was pointed out, clearly declares. that the Donatistes wanted not a great
number of favorers: for they were called Parmeniani, Rogatistae, Cirtenses,
and Maximianistae. Against this Heresy, and the Heresy of the Pelagians,
August. B. of Hippo contended with mighty grace, as likewise against the
Heresy of the Manicheans, whereinto he had been nursed himself.

Collyridiani were a sort of superstitious people, who worshipped the Virgin
Marie, the mother of our LORD, with divine Collyridiani.
adoration, and with baking little pasties (which in the Greek language are
called (...)) which they offered to the Virgin Marie, as to the Queen of
Heaven. Epiphanius counts them Heretics, because the Virgin Marie, albeit
she be a blessed Epipban. contra hereses.
woman, yet is she not GOD.

Many late Heresies are nothing else, but a renewing of old and decayed
Heresies. Such was the Heresy of Priscillianus, a man Priscillianistae.
of Noble birth in Spain, very eloquent, rich, temperate, with great show of
humility, who easily insinuated himself in the favor of the people. In his
youth he was inclined to Magical Arts, and renewed the filthy Heresy of
Gnostici, who disallowed Hist. magd. Cent. 4 cap. 11.
Marriage, and commended fornication. Some bishops of Spain were entangled
with this Heresy: such as Iustantius, Salvianus, and Helpidius, whom Adygimus
Bishop of Corduba damned in a Council gathered at Caesar-augusta. This was
done in the days of the Emp. Gratianus and Valentinian. The great City of
refuge to Heretics, was to address themselves to the B. of Rome, and to
lean under his shadow: But Damasus, who was bishop of Rome at this time, would
not admit these Heretics to his presence: Neither would Ambrose B. of
Millane, to whom they ad dressed next, in any wise accept of them: when al
other means failed them, last of al with buddes and bribes they solicited the
Emp. cubiculers, and were sent back again to enjoy their own places.
Nevertheless, GOD suffered not Priscillianus to escape punishment, for he was
convict of sorcery, and was punished to the death, after the death of
Valentinian the second, whether by Maximus an usurper of the Imperial
Soueranitie, or by Theodosius, I am not certain.

Lucifer was bishop of Calaris in Sardinia. He was present at the Luciferiani
Council of Millan, and was banished by Constantius, because he would not
consent to the deposition of Athanasius. He was reduced from banishment by the
Em. Julian. He visited Antiochia, Sozom. lib 5. cap. 13.
a town miferably distracted with Schisms, and by ordaining Paulinus B. of
Antiochia, he rather augmented then paired the scisme: he perceived that this
his fact was disproued by Eusebius. b. of Vercellis, and many others, therefore he
and his followers, did not communicate with such as disproued the ordination of
Paulinus. This seems rather to be rekoned in the catalogue of schisms, then
of heresies: and Theod. disprouing Lucifer, says, that he made Theod. compend.
heresium.
faith to be (...), but he says not (...), that is, a weapon of contentions,
but not a weapon of heresy.

These who supposed, that after the Nativity of the LORD Antidicomarianitae.
the Virgin Marie companied with her husband Joseph, and did bear children to
him, were called Antidicomarianitae. In this opinion was Helvidius, a man more
curious then wise. The opinion August. d^ here is.
of the Fathers of the Church, not repugnant to Scripture, was this, That like
as no man did lie in the sepulcher wherein Christ was buried before him, Even
so in the womb wherein he was conceived, no man was conceived after him: so
the Fathers took the words of the Apostolic symbol, (...), as i^ it had
been said, (...), that is, born of Mary a perpetual Virgin. In holy scriptures
by the brethren of our LORD is meaned the kinsmen of the LORD according to the
flesh, to which exposition the consent of Ancient and Neotericke writers for
the most part aggreeth.

Augustine cites out of Philaster a sort of Heretics, called Metangis.
monitae.
Metangismonitae, whose heresy sounded to this, That the SON is in the
FATHER, according to the similitude of a little vessel comprehended within the
compass of a greater vessel: (...) in the Greek Language signifies a
vessel, and (...) signifies the entering of one vessel within another, which
in our language cannot be expressed by one word, as it is in the Greek.

From Seleucus and Hermias this heresy had the name: where Seleuciani or
Hermiani.
they dwelt, or in what Emperors days this Heresy was propagated, August.
makes no mention: their opinions were most abominable: namely, that the Mass,
whereof GOD created the elements, was coeternall with him: and that the Angels,
and not GOD, created the souls of men: that CHRIST in his ascension unclothed
himself of the flesh of man, and left it in the globe of the Sun. They
received not baptism by water. They denied the resurrection of the dead,
supposing that by new generations, one succeeding to another, that is performed
which in Scripture is written concerning the resurrection.

The rest of the Heresies of this age, were all obscure, and had few followers,
such as Proclianitae, who denied that CHRIST was come in the flesh: Patriciani,
who affirmed, that the body Proclianitae Patriciani. Ascitae.
of man was formed by the Devil, and not by GOD: Ascitae, who carried about
with them new vessels, to represent, that they were vessels filled with the
new wine of the Gospel: Patalorynchitae, Patalorinchitae, or (...). Aquarii.
foolish men, who counted it religion, to stop their breath with their fingers,
and to utter no intelligible speech: Aquarii, who in stead of wine received
water in the holy Sacrament. The beginning of this error seems to have been
in the days of Cyprian. Coluthiani denied, that any evil, either of sin or
punishment, Coluthiani. Flosiani.
came of GOD. Floriani, who by the contrary affirmed, that GOD created
creatures in an evil estate. The 8. Heresies which Philaster commemorates
without any name, either taken from the Author, or from the heresy it self,
Augustine scarcely will reacken them into the roll of Heresies.

CHAP. IIII. Of Councils.
COUNCILS may be divided in General, National, or Provincial, and
particulare Councils. General were called Oecomenik Councils ((...) in the
Greek language signifies the World) because from all quarters of the World
whereinto CHRIST was preached commissioners were sent to these Councils, and
they were gathered by the authority of the Emperor. National or provincial
Councils were such as were gathered by the authority of the Emperor in one
nation with asfistance of other near approaching nations for suppressing of
Heresies, desyding of questions, pacifying of schisms, and appointing Canons
and constitutions for decent order to be kept in the Church. The third sort
of Councils were particular Councils, by Bullinger called (...), or (...). Such
as the Councils of Gangra, Neocaesaria, and many others, gathered usually by
Patriarchs, and Bishops in a corner of a country, but for the like causes as
national Councils were assembled. Let no man expect a recital of particular
Councils, except at such times as some matter of great moment enforces me to
speak of them.

Ancyra is a town of Galatia. In this town were assembled The Coun cill of
Ancyra. Tom. 1. Council.
Bishops of diverse provinces about the year of our Lord 308. as is supposed.
The principal cause of their meeting was to constitute a form of
Ecclesiastical discipline, according to which, they, who either willingly or
unwillingly had sacrificed to idols in time of persecution, should be received
into the bosom of the Church again, when they were found penitent. There were
many ranks of persons, who had defiled themselves with Heathnicke Idolatry:
such as Libellatici, Thurificati, Sacrificati, and Proditores. The Council of
An^yra took order chiefly with those who were called Thurificati and
Sacrificati, that is, with them, who either had casten up incense upon
Idolatrous Altars, or else had eaten of meats sacrificed to Idols: to whom it
was enjoined to testify the r repentance, a long time before they were
received to the communion of GODS people, some one year, some two years,
others three or four years, some five or six years, and above, according to
the heaviness of their transgression. In this Council it was ordained, that
Deacons, who in time of their ordination did protest, that they had not the
gift of continency, but were disposed to marry, if they married, they should
remain in their Ministry: but they who in time of imposition of hands by
their silence had professed continency, if afterward they married, they
should be removed from their Ministry. Also it was ordained, that
Chorepiscopi (these were Country Bishops, in the Latin language called
Vicarit-Episcoporum) These, I say, were commanded to abstain Canon. 13
from ordination of Elders and Deacons, and from usurping of domination over
the preaching Elders, who were in Cities. Likewise it was ordained, that
whosoever did abstain from Canon. 14
eating of flesh, as from a creature in itself unclean, he should be deprived
of his dignity. This Council was subscribed by 18. Bisshops. Tom. 1. Council.


In the year of our LORD 330. and in the 20. year of the reign of
Constantine, as Eus^bius reckons (others refer it to The general council
of Nice.
the 333. year of our LORD, for there is great diversity in this counting)
The Council of Nice in Bithynia was gathered not by Silvester, nor by Julius,
but by the authority of the Emperor. The name of the town answered to the
success of the E^seb. de vita Const^t. lib. 3.
Council, for (...) in the Greek language signifies victory: and when the
verity encountered with the lie in this Council, the verity prevailed and
got the victory. The matter entreated in the Council, was concerning the
opinion of Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, who denied that the SON of GOD
was consubstantiall with the FATHER, but affirmed there was a time whereinto
the SON was not, and that he was created of things not existant. This
opinion was so vnquoth and abominable to the Fathers conueened in the Council
of Nice, that they utterly damned and anathematized the opinion of Arrius.
Only 17. Bishops adhered to his blasphemous opinion. The Emp. liked well the
determination of the Council, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and threatened to punish them with banishment, who did refuse to subscribe the
determination of the Council: for they had concluded, that the SON of GOD
was (...), that is, consubstantiall with the FATHER. Of the number of 17. who
were favorers of Arrius, only two, to wit, Secundus a Bishop of Ptolemaida in
Egypt, and Theonas bishop of Marmarica, adhered Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 16.
to Arrius until the end of the Council, with a few more, whom the Fathers
conueened at Nice, delivered unto Satan, and Theod lib. 1. Cap. 7.
the Emp. banished them: the rest for fear of punishment subscribed to the
deposition of Arrius with their hands, but not Socr^ lib. 1. cap. 14.
with their hearts: such as Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, Theogonius of Nice,
Menophantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Narcissus of Neronias,
otherwise called Irenopolis of Cilicia: These (I say) and some others,
subscribed the sum of Faith set down by the Nicene Council, and the
deposition of Arrius.

Anent the controversy of keeping the festiuitie of Easter day, a conclusion
was taken, that it should be kept upon the LORDS day, and not upon the 14.
day of the first month of Exodus 12. verse, 2.
the Jews called Nisan. And this was done for keeping of unity and peace in
the Church: for it was expedient, that that thing, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
which was uniuersally done, should also be uniformely done, for avoiding of
schisms in the Church. Nevertheless Socrates grants, that it is but an
ancient custom, not authorized by any Apostolic commandment. Socrt. lib. 5.
cap. 22.


Anent Marriage many were in the opinion, that Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who
were married before their ordination, should in time to come abstain from the
company of their wives. But Paphnutius a B. in a town of Thebaida, a chaste
man, who never companied with a woman, entreated the Council, that they should
abstain from making such an ordinance, because Socra^. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Marriage is honorable, and the cohabitation of a man with his married wife,
is chastity. Likewise it was a difficil matter to be performed, and it opened a
door to unchaste living. Yet Paphnutius inclined too much to this opinion,
That Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who were unmarried, should abstain from
Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Marriage. The Council would make no constitution anent such matters, but
remitted marriage as a thing indifferent to every man's free arbitriment.

The Canons of the Nicene Council pertaining to matters of discipline, in
number 22. (read them in the history of Ruffin.) Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
The appointing of three Patriarchs, one in Rome, another in Alexandria, the
third in Antiochia, with power to conuocate within their own bounds
particulare Councils, for timous suppressing of Heretics: It was like unto a
fair morning, presenting unto the world the countenance of a fair day, but
at Even, the face of the Heaven is covered with black clouds, troubling the
earth with the tempest of changed wether. Even so, these Patriarchs, for the
most part, became in end the chief propagators of notable Heresies, as the
history following, GOD willing shall declare.

The National Council of Tyrus was gathered by the commandment of the Emp.
Constantine, in the 30. year of his reign. The council of Tyrus. Eusebius. lib.
4. de vita Constant. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Eusebius by ouer-passing with silence a due commemoration of the malice and
falsehood of the Arrians against Athanasius, gives occasion to Socrates to
suspect, that Eusebius Pamphili was not a sound follower of the Nicene
Council. To this National Council conueened threescore Bishops, from EGYPT,
LYRIA, ASIA, and EUROPE. The most part of them were Arrians, who had sold
themselves to iniquity, of purpose, with faise accusations to oppress the
innocent servant of CHRIST Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Athanasius. The crim^s laid unto his charge, were fornication, the sl^ughter
of Arsenius, and cutting off of his hand, the overthrowing Theodor. lib. 1 cap.
29.
of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup, and the burning of the holy
volumes. No assembly was so full of partialitic, confusion clamor, and
unrighteous dealing, as this assembly at Tyrus: in so much that Paphnutius a B.
in Thebaida, arose, and left the Council of ungodly men, and drew with him
Maximus B. of Jerusalem, fearing lest his simplicity should have been
circumueened by the subtlety of deceitful Arrians.

How Athanasius fled to the Emp. and declared the unrighteous proceedings of
the Council of Tyrus, it has been declared already. In this assembly
Potamion B. of Heraclia, a man full of spiritual liberty finding Eusebius
Pamphili sitting as a Judge, and Athanasius standing, outbraided Eusebius, as a
man who in the persecution of Dioclesian was enclosed in that same prison Hist.
Magd. Cent 4. Cap. 10.
with himself: but Eusebius escaped out of prison without the marks of the
rebuke of CHRIST, which Potamian and other faithful Confessors could not get
done. In like manner, Athanasius refused to compeare in Caesarea Palestinae,
where Eusebius Theod lib. 1. cap. 27.
was Bishop, as a place suspect for favor carried to Arrians. All these things
brought the name of Eusebius. Pamphili in some disliking. The issue of the
Council of Tyrus was this: the Arrians in his absence deposed him, and amongst
the rest Arsenius was one of them, who subscribed the deposition of Athanasius
with that same hand that the Arrians had alleged was cut off by Socrat. lib.
1 Cap. 32.
Athanasius: so effronted are Heretics, defenders of a false and lying
doctrine. The Emp. Constantine commanded the bishops assembled at Tyrus, to
address to Constantinople: but when they came thither, they durst make no
mention of the fornication of Athanasius, of the hand of Arsenius, of the
Table, Cup, and books above mentioned: but they forged new accusations
Theod. li. 1. cap. 30. Theod. lib. 1 cap. 35.
against him, whereunto the Emp. gave too hasty credit, and banished
Athanasius to Triere. Immediately after the Council of Tyrus many bishops were
assembled at Jerusalem, for the dedication of the Temple, which the Emp.
Constantine had builded Euse. lib. 4. de. vita Constant.
at the place of the LORDS sepulcher.

Anent the Council of Antiochia, wherein the Arrians deposed Eustatius, and
the Council of Arles, wherein Cecilianus was absolved from the accusation of
the Donatists, no further discourse is needful then is contained in the
history of the lives of these two Bishops.

Gangra is a town of Paphlagonia. In this town were assembled certain
Fathers, to the number of 16. about the year of The Coun cil of Gangra.
our LORD 324. The occasion of their meeting was the Heretic Eustatius, who
admiring the Monasticke life, or (as others affirm) favoring the Heresy of
Encratitae, and the Manicheans, he spoke against Marriage, against eating of
flesh, and he damned the public Congregations of GODS people in Temples: and
said, a man could not be saved, except he forsook all his poss^ssions, Tom.
(...). Council.
and renounced the wo^lde after the form of monkish doing. These opinions were
damned in the Council of Gangra. The subscriptions of the Fathers of this
Council after their Canons, are worthy to be remarked. These things (say
they) have we subscribed, not vituperating them, who according to Scripture
chooses unto themselves an holy purpose of a continent life: but them only,
who abuses the purpose of their mind to pride, extolling themselves against
the simpler sort: Yea, and damn and cut off all those, who contrary to
Scripture and Eccl^siasticall rules, bring in new Commandments. But we admire
humble Virginity, and we approve continency that is undertaken with chastity
and Religion: And we embrace the renounciation of seculare business, with
humility: And we honor the chaste band of Marriage: And we despise not riches
joined with righteousness, and good works: And we commend a simple and course
apparel, used for covering the body without Hypocrisy. Likewise we reject
loos and dissolute g^rments: And we honor the houses of GOD, and assemblies
that are in them, as holy and profitable, Not debarring men from exercises of
piety in their own private houses. But places builded in the name of the
LORD, we honor, and Cong^egations assembled in the same places for the common
utilitie we approve: And good works, which are done to poor brethren, even
above men's ability, according to the Ecclesiastical traditions, we bless
them: And we wish all things to be celebrated in the Church, according to holy
Scriptures, and the ordinances of the Apostles.

In the time of the reign of Constantine in Eliberis, a town of Spain, were
assembled 19. Bishops, and of preaching Elders 36. The council of Eliberis.
The end of their meeting was to reform horrible abuses, both in Religion and
manners, which in time of the ten Persecutions had prevailed in Spain: And
now in time of peace such enormities and festered manners co^lde hard^ly be
amended. Many Ecclesiastical Canons were made in this Synod, to the number
of 81. Whereof we shall rehearse but a few, and such as clearly points out
the principal end of their meeting.

They ordained, that Heathnicke sacrificing Priests (called Canon 4.
of old Flamines) if they were content to abstain from sacrificing to Idols,
and to learn the grounds of Christian Religion, after three years
repentance, they should be admitted to baptism.

Likewise they ordained, that Christian Virgins should not Canon 15.
be given in marriage to Pagans, lest in the flou^e of their youth they should
be entangled with spiritual whoredom.

In like manner, that Bishops should receive no reward from Canon 2^.
men that did not communicate with the Church.

They ordained, that nothing that is worshipped, should be Canon 36.
pictured on the wall.

And that in private houses no Idols should be found: And incase the masters
of houses were afraid of the violence of Canon 41.
their s^ruantes, at least, they should keep themselves pure and clean: which
if they did not, they should be counted strangers from the fellowship of the
Church.

And that if any man happen to be slain, in the action of Canon 60.
breaking down images, his name shall not be enrolled in the catalogue of
Martyrs, because it is not written in the history of the Gospel, that the
Apostles used any such form of reformation: whereby they sig^isie, that by
wholesome doctrine images should be caste^ out of the hearts of me^, rather then
broken with popular violence and with the tumultuary attempts of private men.
Any judicious man may perceive by these Canons both the time when, and the
cause wherefore this Council was assembled.

They who count the first Council of Carthage, to be that Council whereinto
Cyprian, with advise of many other bishops The first Council of Carthage. Tom.
1. Concill.
of Numidia, Lybia, and other parts of Afric, ordained men who were baptized
by Heretics, to be rebaptized again: they commit a great ouer-sight to
reckon the first Council of Carthage to be holden under the reign of
Constantine, whereas it is certainly known, that Cyprian was martyred, in the
days of Valeriane the eight persecuting Emperor. But the first Hi^. magd.
Cont. 4. cap. 9.
Council of Carthage, that was kept in CONSTANTINES days, was that Council
whereinto the Donatistes condemned Caecil^anus Bishop of Carthage, whose
innocence afterward was tried by many Judges. In it there was no matter of
great importance concluded, and therefore I ouer-passe it with few words, as
an assembly of little account. All these Councils above mentioned were
assembled in the days of CONSTANTINE the Great. Now follows Councils
gathered in the days of his sons.

The cause pretended for the gathering of the Council of A^t ochi^, in the
days of Constantius the son of Constantine, The first Council of Antiochia
holden by Arrians under the reign of Constantius Socra^. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 5. Hist. Magd. Centur. 4. cap. 9.
was the dedication of the Church of Antiochia: which albeit C^nstantine had
builded, yet five years after his death, and in the seventeenth year after
the foundation of this Temple was laid, CONSTANTIUS his son finished, and
perfected the work. And under pretense of dedication of this Temple (as said
is) this assembly of Antiochia was gathered, ANNO 344. but indeed of purpose
to supplant the true Faith. To this Assembly resorted many Bishops, to the
number of 90. But Maximus Bishop of JERUSALEM, and ^ulius Bish^p of Rome,
neither came they to the Council, neither sent they any me^enger in their
name, fearing as the truth was, that they were gathered for evil, and ^ot for
good. At this time Placitus, the s^ccessour of Euphronius, gou^rned Antiochia.
Now when they were met together, many accus^tions were heaped up against
Athanasius: First, that he had accepted his place again, without advise of
other Bishops: Secondly, because at the time of his r^turning back again to
ALEXANDRIA, there fell out great commotion amongst the people, and some were
slain, others were contumeliouslie beaten, and violently drawn before justice
seats. Mention also was made of the decrete of the Council of Tyrus, against
Athanasius. It was an easy matter for the Arrians to imprint into the vlcerate
mind of Constantius, an hatred against Athanasius. In this Council they set
down diverse sums of Faith: Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 5.
first secretly cou^ting the venom of their Heresi^, but afterward, as it were
repenting, they manifested themselves more clearly in their own colors. After
this Council followed terrible earthquakes in the East, wherewith many towns
were shaken, especially the town of Antiochia, with continual earthquakes was
shaken for the space of a whole year. The principal H^st. mag. Cent. 4, cap. 9
design of the Council was to eject Athanasius out of his chair, and to
alter the sum of Faith set down in the Nicen^ Council: as evidently
appeared, by sending of Syrianus to destroy Athanasius, and to place Gregorius
in his room: but Athanasius escaped the danger by the great providence of GOD,
and fled to Julius Bishop of Rome: and the Arrians displaced again Gregorius,
and appointed Georgius a man of Cappadocia, and mo^e fit for their purpose, to
be bishop of Alexandria.

The favor that Julius bishop of Rome showed to Atha^asius Other two Councils
holden in Antiochia by the Arriaus.
b. of Alexandria, Paulus b. of Constantinople, Asclepas b. of Gaz^, and Lucius
b. of Adrionopolis, was the cause moving the Arri^ to have so frequent meetings
in Antiochia: Very sharp l^tters passed betwixt Julius and the Oriental
bishops: Julius blamed them, because they had both rashly and unrighteously
deposed the forenamed bishops. They on the other part expostulated with
Julius, because he had received to his f^llowship men deposed Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 15.
by them, whereas none of the East Church had admitted Novatus to their
communion, whom the bis^op of Rome had excommunicated.

After the issue of three year, another Council was conueened in Antiochia,
about the year of our LORD 348. whereinto S^crat lib. 2. cap. 19.
the Arrians set forth a new sum of their Faith in very ample and prolixe
manner, and different from all other forms s^t down before: the copy whereof
they sent to the bishops of Hist. magd.
Italy by Eudoxius b. of Germanicia, and Martyrius, and Macedonius: but the
bishops of Italy would not receive it, contenting themselves with the sum
of Faith set down in the Nicen^ Council.

In the y^ere of our LORD 351. by the commandment of Constantius, and his
brother Constans, a great National Council The council of Sardica.
was gathered in Sardica, a town of Illyricum, of old D^cia. Many Bishops of
the West, to the number of three hundredth, resorted to this assembly, but from
the East only 76. They who Soc^at. lib. 2. cap. 20.
came from the Eastern parts, would not vouchsafe to be present in the
Council, except Protogenes b. of Saraica, and Osius b. of Corduba, had
separated from their fellowship Paulus b. of Constantinople, and Athanasius b.
of Alexandria. But the cause of their absenting themselves from the Council
indeed, was this (as Theo. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Theodoretus prudently records) because the forgers of false accusations
against the men of GOD, whose cause was appointed to be judged in this
Council, they durst not abide the trial of honest judges, and men of vnsuspect
credit. The Council finding that the Arrians convicted in conscience, durst
not compeare to accuse Paulus and Athanasius (whom notwithstanding they had
deposed in the Councils of Tyrus and Antiochia) proceed to the trial of their
cause: and find^th all the accusations of the Arrians against Paulus,
Athanasius, Asclepas, and the rest, to be but a mass of forged calumnies and
lies: Arsenius was found to be alive, whom the Arrians alleged Athanasius
had slain: As concerning the ouer-throwing of the holy Table, and breaking of
the holy Cup, by Macarius (whom Athanasius had employed, and therefore the
blame was laid upon him) it was found to be a notable lie: because when
Macarius entered into the Church of Mareota (where this fact was alleged to
be done) (...) were present in the Church And such kind of persons were not
permitted to be present at the celebration Theod. ibid.
of di^ine mysteries. Ishyras also, who was the principal forger of all the
forementioned calumnies, was found to have been tied to the bed by
infirmity, at that time, when Macarius was alleged to have done these
things. And finally, it was found, that ^shyras had received a Bishopric,
as the wages of iniquity from the Arr^ans, before he had been admitted
presbyter in any Church. Also the supplicant bills of Paulus, Asclepas,
Marcellus. etc were read tried, and examined, and they were all found honest
and upright men, and they were all recommended by the letters of the Council
of ^ardica, to their own flocke^.

On the other part, the Bishops, whom the Arrians had intruded in the places of
the forementioned brethren, they deposed them, and abhorred their memory:
such as Gregorius in Alexandria, Basilius in Ancyra, and Quintianus in Gaza: of
whom they decearned, that they were not worthy of the name of common
Christians, let be to be called bishops: commanding all people, to forsake
their fellowship, and neither to send letters to them, (...). ibid.
nor to receive letters from them. The like sentence they pronounced against
Theodorus of H^raclea, Narcissus of Neronias, Acacius of Caesarea Palestinae,
Stephanus of Antiochia, Ursatius of Sigidun in Mysia, Valens of Myrsain
Pannomia, Menophantus of Ephesus, and Georgius of Laodicea, principal patrons
of the Arrian Heresy.

The Arrians on the other part assembled themselves in Philippopolis, a town
of Thracia, and there they damned of new again Paulus and Athanasius. Likewise
they damned Julius B. of Ro^, Osius b. of Corduba, Protogenes b of Sardica,
Maximinus b. of Trie^, Sozom. lib. 3 cap. 11. and 12
and many others, whom they cursed also, because they had admitted to their
fellowship those Bishops whom they had deposed. Sozomen^s is in that opinion,
that the Council of Philippopolis preceeded the Council of Sardica. From 35.
Provinces did Bishops resort unto the Council of Sardica. From this time
forward, there was added diversity of affection, unto diversity Athanas.
^pist. ad s^litar. vitam a^entes. Th^d. lib. 2 cap. 8.
of opinion: and these who dw^lt in the East, did not communicate with them who
dwelt in the West. Some Arrian Bishops dwelt in the West, such as Auxentius b.
of Millan, and Ursatius and Valens: But by the vigilant travels of the b. of
Rome, and other godly Bishops of the West, it came to pass, that these
S^minaries of errors did not prevail much in the W^sterne parts. This is
that Council, whereinto Julius B. of Rome, for his good carriage and good
deseruings, was appointed to be Judge of Appellations, when the like case fell
out, that righteous men were Canon, 4.
oppressed with the unrighteous de^ling of Heretics. But remember, that this
is a constitution of the Council of Sardica, and not of the Nicene Council:
And this was a privilege both persona'l and temporal, for extraordinary
causes conferred to Julius: but not to be extended to all his successors, nor
yet to continue at all times.

In the year of our LORD 356, and five years after the The Coun cill of
Sirmium.
Council of Sardica, by the commandment of the Emp. Constantius a Council
was gathered in Sirmium, a town of Illyria, (Bullinger calls it a town of
Panno^ia) Photinus b^ of Sirmium had renewed the Heresies of Sabellius and
Samosatenus. A disputation Bullinger de C^tiliis. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29.
was instituted bitwixt Basilius b. of Ancyra, an Arrian Heretic, and
Photinus a Sabellian Heretic: in which disputation Photinus was thought to be
overcome, and was damned by the Council as an Heretic, and banished by the
Emperor. In this Council they set down sums of Faith, one in Greek, and
two in Latin, whereinto albeit they absteined from the word (...):
nevertheless they gave great glory Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 30.
to the Son of GOD. But in end they repented, and by the Emperors
authority would have recalled back again the coppies of the sums of Faith
set forth at Sir^ium: But the mandates of the Emperor commanding in most
rigorous form to deliver back again the coppies that were pas^ abroad,
could not bring to pass, that that thing which was once diu^lgated, should be
again suppressed. The weakness of Osius b. of Corduba kythed in this
Council, has been touched in the history of his life.

After that the Emperor Constans was slain by Magnentius, the whole
Souereignitie both of the East and West, was in the The Coun cill of Millan.
hands of Constantius alone. The Arrians moved him to assemble a Council at
Millan, partly for ratification of the sentence pronounced against Athanasius
in Tyrus, and partly for subversion of the Nicene Faith. The Occidentail
Bishops to Theod. lib. 2. cap. 15.
the number of 300. at the Emperors command assembled at Millan. But neither
would they ratify the deposition of Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 36
Athanasius, nor yet alter the sum of Faith. And some of them with liberty
and freedom accused the Emperor of vnr^ghteous Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 9.
dealing. For this cause many worthy Bishops were banished, such as Liberius
bishop of Rome, Paulinus bishop of Triere, Dionysius bi^op of Alba, Lucifer
bishop of Cala^ in Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Sardinia, Eusebius bishop of Vercollis in Liguria. If in this Council Osius
bishop of Corduba was banished, as Theodoretus records, it would appear
that the Council of Millan preceeded the Council of Sirmium, because that
Osius immediately after he was reduced from banishment, was compelled to
Sozom. lib. 4. Cap. 6.
address to the Council of Sirmium. But I have followed the order of
Ecclesiastical Writers.

In the year of our LORD 363. and in the 22. year of the reign of
Constantiu^, the Arrians having a great vantage of the The Council of
Ariminum. Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 39. Theo. lib. 2. cap. 26.
flexible mind of Constantius, moved him to appoint a place wherein a general
Council should be gathered, for confirmation of their Faith. Whether this
place was the town of Nicomedia, or Nice, always it was shaken with
earthquake, and the GOD of Heaven hindered the purposes of their minds.

The next course was, that two National Councils should be conueened, one at
Ariminum in Italy, as a meet place for the Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37.
Bishops of the West to conueene into, and another in Sele^ of Isauria, as a
meet place for assembling of the Oriental Bisshops. To the Council of
Ariminum more then 400. Bishops So^on. lib. 4 Cap. 17.
did resort. In this National Council compeared Ur^atius and Valens, with
Germanus, Auxentius, and Caius, and Demophilus, desiring that the words (...)
and (...), as words not found in Scripture, and grounds of unsupportable
contention in the Church, should be cancelled, and rased out of the sum of
Faith: and that the Son of GOD should be called (...), that is, of like
substance with his Father. The fathers conuecned at Ariminum, altogether
disliked this proposition of Ursatius, Theodor. lib. 2 cap. 19.
and Valens, and adhered for the most part of them closely to the Nicene Faith,
and excluded from the fellowship of the Church Ursatius and Valens, with their
accomplices above mentioned as ^om. lib. 4 cap. 18.
the letter of the Council, written to the Emperor, clearelie bears. With
the letter the Council sent twenty Ambassadors, chosen and selected men, who
should give further instruction to the Emperor anent the matter of Faith. But
Ursatius and Valens preueened the Ambassadors of the Council, and by
sinistrous informations hindered them from access to the Emperor: only their
letter was read, whereunto the Emperor returned a differring answer, bearing,
that for the present, he was busied with weighty affairs of his kingdom^ but
when he So^om. lib. 4 Cap. 19.
should find any braithing time, he should hearken unto them. The Council
sent the second time to the Emp. desiring they might have liberty before the
winter season to return to their own flocks: And herewithall they assured
the Emp. that in the matter of the Faith they would adhere to that which was
comprehended in their former letter. To this second message no answer was
returned. Therefore the Bishops wearied with long attendance, returned cuery
man to his own flock: the Sozom. ibid.
Emp. counted this dissolution of the Council, without warrande of his
authority, to be a contempt of his Soueranitie: Therefore he gave charge to
Valens to publish the sum of of the Arrian Faith read in Ariminum, albeit it
was both disapproued and rejected: with power also to Ursatius and Valens, to
^ject those bishops out of their places, who would not subscribe to the Arrian
Faith, and to ordeine others in their rowmes. Ursatius and Valens being
strengthened with the Emp. commandment, not only troubled the Churches of the
West: but also went to Nica, a town in Thracia, where they gathered a number
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37.
of Bishops of their own faction, and approved the sum of Faith read by
Arrians in Ariminum (being first translated into the Grieke language) and this
they called the Ni^ene Faith, deceauing themselves with vain hopes, as if men
had been so senseless, as to be altogether deceived by the similitude of the
words, Nica in Thracia, and Nice in Bithynia, Mor^ouer Athanasius was as yet
alive, who could have discovered both the blasphemy of the Arrians at Sirmium,
and the falsehood of the Arrians at Nica: for at Sirmium in the first Session
of the Council it was written by the Clarke of the Council, Present
Constantio Sozom. lib. 4. cap 17.
semp^rno; and Magno Augusto, Consulibus Eusebio and Hypatio. Lo says
Athanasius, writing to his friends, the Arrians will not call the Son of GOD
everlasting, but they say there was a time, whereinto he was not: but they call
the Emp. Constantius, being a mortal man, everlasting Emperor.

Selencia is a town of Isauria, or Cilicia, from whence Paul and Barnabas
sailed to Cypr^s. Isauria lies betwixt Lycaonia and Cilicia, The council of
Seleucia. Act. 13. verse. 4. Socrat lib. 2. cap. 39. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 22.
and in an ample signification it comprehends Cilicia. In this town
conucened 160. Bishops of the East, in the month of December, of that same
year of our LORD whereinto the Council of Ariminum was assembled. Leonas one
of the Princes of the Emp. count, and Lucius, otherwise called Lauritius,
Captain of the bands of soldiers in Isauria, were app^inted to attend the
peace of the assembly, and that all things should be done decently, and in
order. The Emperor gave commandment, that the matter of Faith should be
first entreated: but afterward he gave commandment, that the lives Socrat.
lib. 2 cap. 39.
of them who were to be accused, should first be examined: Whereupon arose
contention in the assembly: some urging the matter of Faith to be first
entreated: others craving that the lives of such as were accused or deposed,
should be first examined: and both parties grounded themselves upon the
warrande of the Emperors letters. The principal ringleaders of the one
faction were Acacius bishop of Caesarea Palestinae, Georgius bishop of
Alexandria, Uranius of Tyrus, Eudoxius Socrat. ibid.
of Antiochia, and their followers exceeded not the number of two and thirty.
On the other side were Georgius bishop of Laodicea in Syria, Sophronius of
Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia, and Eleusius of Cyzicus: and the greatest number
of the Council followed the opinion of these Bishops. So it came to pass,
that the most part thought it expedient, that the matter of Faith should be
first entreated. After this the Council was of new again divided into three
factions. Acacius, and his accomplices, thought meet, that the form of Faith
should be altered. The most part were in a contrary opinion, that the
sum of the Nicene Faith should be kept, only the word (...) should be
left out. Silvanus bishop of Tarsus was in the third opinion, that the sum
of Faith compiled in ANTIOCHIA, at the dedication of the Temple, should be
kept. Plurality of voices prevailed, that the Son of GOD should neither be
called (...), nor yet (...), but rather (...), that is, like unto his Father,
because in Scripture he is called the image of the invisible GOD. And they
consented to excommunicate all those, who called the Sonee of GOD (...), that
is, unlike unto the Father. Now Acacius, and his accomplices, who were indeed
Anomaei, would have seemed to accord with the rest of the Council: But when
it was demanded of them, in what sense they counted the SON alike unto the
FATHER? They answered, Socrat. lib. 2. ^ap. 4.
that he was like in will, but not in substance. After that much disputation
and little aggreement had been, Leonas a secret favorer of Acacius dissolved
the assembly. Nevertheless, Sozom lib. 4. cap. 22.
the Fathers of the Council conueened, to judge the cause of Cyrillus Bishop
of JERUSALEM (whom the Acacians had deposed) and warned the Acacians to be
pre^ent, but they would not compeare. Therefore the Council proceeded to the
deposition of Georgius bishop of Alexandria, Acacius bishop of Caesarea,
Uranius bishop of Tyrus, Patrophylus bishop of Schythopolis, and Eudoxius
bishop of Antiochia, in whose place they substituted Avianus a presbyter in
Antiochia, others call him Soz^. ibid.
Adrianus. The Acacians laid hands on Avianus, and delivered him into the
hands of Leonas and Lauritius, and they banished him. The Council protested
against Leonas and Lauritius, and the Acacians, that they had violated the
Decrete of the Council: and without further delay, they address to
Constantinoplc, to give information to the Emperor. But the Acacians prevented
the rest, and misinformed the Emperor, and accused the Council, and persuaded
him to reject the sum of Faith aggreed upon in Sele^cia.

The wrath of the Emperor against the Fathers of the Council of Seleucia,
made the rest to be dispersed: only the Acacians A Council of the Acacians at
Constan tinople.
remained still in Constantinople, and they gathered together fifty Bishops,
out of Bithynia and other near adjacent places. In this Synod they confirmed
the sum of Faith read by Ursatius and Valens in Ariminum. It is judiciously
observed by Socrates, that after the Council of Nice the Arrians in the
multiplied Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 41.
conceits of their wavering minds, set forth nine diverse sums of Faith, to
wit, In the dedication of the Church of Antiochi^ two forms. The third by
those who adhered to Narcissus, was exhibited to Constantine in FRANCE. The
fourth was sent by Eudoxius to Italy. In Sirmium three forms were indicted,
whereof one was read in Ariminum, with noting the names of the Consuls, in
whose time it was written. The eight was the sum of Faith set forth in the
Council of Seleucia. The ninth was the sum of Faith set down in
Constantinople, with this addition, that the words (...) should be silenced
when Preachers spoke of GOD. Thus we see, that there is no end of wandering,
when men have once forsaken the narrow path of the ^rueth of GOD.

The Emperor Constantius, and the rest of the Arrians, were like unto a
troubled sca, that cannot take rest: yet another The fourth Council of
Antiochia, gathered by Constantius.
Council must be gathered in Antiochia, for abjuring both the word (...), and
the word (...), so that in time to come no man shall call the Son of GOD
consubstantiall with the Father, nor yet of a different substance from the
Father. The Bishops conueened thought expedient, before they entreated
concerning the Faith, that the chair of Antiochia, vacant at Theod. lib. 2.
cap. 31.
that time without a Bishop, should first be provided: Choice was made of
Meletius, some time bishop of S^bastia, in Arm^nia. He received ordination by
Arrians, who subscribed also to his admission, and their hand-writs were
delivered into the custody of Eusebius Samosatenus. But when Meletius
disappointed the expectation of the Arrians, they procured his banishment, and
that Euzious should be placed in his stead. Likewise Eusebius Theod. lib. 2
cap. 32.
Samosatenus for no minassings and threatenings of the Emp. would deliver back
again the subs^riptions of the Arrians: so that the Emp. both commended and
admired the magnanimous courage of Eusebius. This Council was holden in the
25. year of the reign of Constantius. In it the Arrians could not perfect
their intended purpose anent a new sum of faith, which would have made out
the tenth form of faith indicted by them, because Constantius got knowledge of
the seditious attempts of Julian, and he lest the Council to preueene the
interprises of Julian, but he fell sick by the way, and died at Cilicia.

Under the reign of Julian and Iouinian some particulare Councils were
assembled, such as a Council in Alexandria, gathered by Hist. magd.
Athanasius and Eusebius Vercellensis, for damning old Heresies, and
confirming the Nicene Faith. Another in Palestina, for ordaining Sozom. lib. 5
cap. 3.
a bishop in Maiuma. Another in Antiochia, by the Acacians, under the reign of
Iouinian. These wandering stars, accustomed to accommodate themselves to
times, places, and persons, to Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 25.
gain savor at the Emperors hands, they subscribed the Nicene Faith. But I
set forward to the rest.

Laodicea is the Metrapolitane town of Ph^ygia, and one of the seven Churches
of Asia, to whom the Apostle Ihon, when he The council of Laodicea. Apocal. 3.
was banished in Pathmos for the word of GOD, did write his Epistles. This
description I have premitted, to distinguish Laodicea of Syria, a city near
approaching to Antiochiae, and whereof frequent mention is made in the
Ecclesiastical History, from Laodicea of Asia. In this town Laodicea of Asia a
Synod was gathered, after the death of Iovinian, about the year of our LORD
368. Nothing was determined in this Council concerning Hist. Magd.
matters of Faith: but only constitutions concerning Ecclesiastical policy
were made in number 59. In this assembly Gratian. distinct. 16
the worshipping of Angels is damned, as horrible idolatry, and a forsaking of
CHRIST. And the books of holy Canonicke Scripture which are to be read in time
of holy Conuocations of Canon 35.
people, are particularly reckoned out, both of old and new Testament. And in
this catalogue of Canonicke books, no mention Canon 59.
is made of the books of the Machabees, of Ecclesiasticus, and other Apocreeph
books.

Under the reign of the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, and about the year
of our LORD 370. With advice of both the A Council in Illyricum.
Emperors a Council was gathered in Illyricum, wherein the Nicene Faith had
confirmation and allowance. The Emp. Valens was not as yet infected with the
poison of the Arrian heresy. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 8. 9.


Lampsacum is a town situated about the narrow passages of Hellesp^ntus. The
Macedonian Heretics sought liberty from The council of La^psacum.
the Emp. Valens, to meet in this town, who granted their petition the more
willingly, because he supposed, that they had accorded in opinion with Acacius
and Eudoxius: but they ratified Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sozom lib 6. cap. 7.
the Council set forth at Seleucia, and damned the Council holden at
Constantinople by the Acacians. The Emp. Valens being d^ceiued of his
expectation, commanded them to be banished, and their Churches to be given to
the favorers of the opinion of Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 11. and 12.
Eudoxius. This dash constrained the Macedonians to take a new course, and to
aggree with Liberi^s b. of Rome. But these Chame^ions, when they had changed
many colors, they could never be white, that is, sincere and upright in
Religion.

Under the Emp. Valentinian in the West, Damasus b. of Rome, The council of
Rome Theod. lib. 2. cap. 22. Sozom. lib 6. cap. 23.
gathered a Council in Rome, wherein he confirmed the Nicene Faith, and damned
Auxentius b. of Millan, with Ursatius, Valens, and Caius. Likewise he damned
Apollinaris, and his disciple Timotheus.

In the year of our LORD 383. or as Bullinger reckons, 385. in the third
year of the reign of THEODOSIUS, a The second General Council.
General Council was gathered at Constantinople, consisting of 150. Bishops,
of whom 36. were entangled with the Heresy of Macedonius, who called the Holy
Spirit a creature, a minister, Theod. lib. 5 ^ap. 8.
and servant, but not consubstantiall with the Father and the Son. In this
Council the Macedonian Heretics were lovingly admonished to forsake their
error, and to embrace the true Faith, and that so much the more, because they
had once already sent messengers to Liberius, and professed the true Faith. But
they continued obstinately in their error, and departed from the Council. The
Heresy of Macedonius was damned, the Ni^en Faith confirmed, with amplification
of that part of the Symbol which concerned the Holy Spirit, in this manner; I
believe in the Holy Spirit our LORD, giver of lise, who proceeds from the
Father, and with the Father, and the Son, is to be worshipped, and
glorisied. They ordained Nectarius b. of Constantinople, and that
Constantinople should have the prerogative of honor next to Rome. Great care
was had of Provinces, that they should T^od. ibid.
not of new again be infected with Heresies. For this cause the name of
Patriarchs in the Council of Nice appropriated to a few, in this General
Council is communicated to many. To Nectarius Megapolis and Thracia was
alloted: ^ontus to Helledius, Cappadocia to Gregorius Nyssenus, Meletina and
Armenia to T^od. ibid.
Otreius. Amphilochius attended upon Iconium and Lycaonia, Optimus upon
An^iochia and Pisidia, Timotheus upon the Churches of Aegyt. Laodicea was
recommended to Pelagius, Tarsus to Di^dorus, and Antiochia to Meletius, who was
present at the Council, and ended his life in Constantinople. To other Bishops
a care Sozom. lib. 7 ^p. 7. 8. 9.
and solicitude of their own bounds was committed, with this caveat, that no
man should invade the bounds belonging to another, but if necessity so
required, Synodes should be assembled, and every one being desired, should
mutuallie assist his neighbor.

The great affairs of the Church, and the care of their brethren Another
Council at Constan^nople. T^od. li. 5. Cap. 9.
in the West, compelled them to meet again in Constantinople, where they
wrote a Synodicke letter to Damasus bishop of Rome, to Ambrose, B^itto,
Valerianus, Acholius, Anemius, Basilius, and to the rest of the Bishops
conueened at Rome, Wherein they declare the manifold troubles they had
sustained by Heretics: and now alb^it in the mercy of GOD they were ejected
out of the sheepe-folds, yet like unto ravening wolves they were lurking in
woods, seeking opportunity to de^our the sheep of CHRIST. They excuse their
absence, because the infirmity of their Churches newly recovered from the
hands of Heretics, could not permit many of their number to journey to
Rome. Always they sent their beloved brethren Cyriacus, Eusebius, and
Priscianus, to countenance the assembly at Rome. In matters of Discipline they
recommended unto them the Canons of the Council of Nice: namely, that
Ecclesiastical Theod. ibid.
honors should be conferred to persons worthy, and that with the special
advice and consent of the Bisshops of that same Province, with assistance of
their confining neighbors, if need required. After this manner was Nectarius
Bishop of CONSTANTINOPLE, Flavianus Bishop of ANTIOCHIA, and Cyrillus Bishop of
JERUSALEM, ordained. Here mark, that the consent of the Bishop of Rome was
not necessary to the ordination of the Bishops of the East. And the usurped
authority of the Bishop of Rome smells of Novelty, and not of Antiquity.
This Synodicke letter sent from Constantinople, would seem to import, that
the Council which Damasus gathered at Rome, was assembled in the days of
Theodosius, or else that he had gathered two assemblies in Rome at diverse
times, and yet for one purpose.

Godly Emperors and Kinge^, such as Constantine, Theodofius, and David, were
very careful of the unity of the Church, The third Council, ho^den at
Constantinople, under the reign of Theodosius. 2. Sam. 5 Psalm, 122
that it might be like unto a compact City, as Hierusal^m was when the toure
of Iebus was conquised, then the people worshipped one GOD, were obedient to
one Law, and subject only to one Sou^reigne. Theodosius in the fifth year of
his reign, c^ring for the peace of the Church, conueened a great National
Council at Constantinople, not only of H^mousians, but also of Arrians,
Eunomians, and Macedonians, hoping that by mutual conference possibly they
might in end accord. The good Emp. consulted with Nectarius Bishop of
CONSTANTINOPLE, Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 10.
N^ctarius with Agelius a Bishop of the Novatians, Agelius with Sis^nius, an
eloquent man, and a mighty Teacher, and a reader in his Church. This man
considering, that by contentious disputations, schisms were increased, but not
quenched, gave Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12.
this advice to Nectarius, that he should counsel the Emperor to demand of
Heretics, in what account they had the holy Fathers, who preceeded their
time. The Heretics at the first spoke reverently of the Fathers: but when
they were demanded, if in matters of Faith they would give credit to the
testimony of the Fathers, the Her^tiques were divided amongst themselves:
Therefore the Emperor rent in pieces the sums of the Arrian, Eunomian, and
Mac^donian faith, and ordained the Homousian Faith only to have place.

The second Council of Carthage was assembled under the reign of Theodosius,
near unto the time of the General Council The second Council of Carthage.
holden in CONSTANTINOPLE. In it, first the sum of the Nicene Faith is
confirmed. The continency of Bishops, Elders, and Deacons is recommended, with
abstinence even Tom. 1. Council.
from matrimonial society: so early began men to be wis^r then GOD: But in
the twelfth Canon of the third Council of Carthage, it may be perceived, that
this constitution (as d^sagreeable from GODS word) was not regarded, because
Bishops in AFRIC married, and had sons and daughters: and these are
inhibite to marry with Infideles and Heretics in the Canon fore-saide. The
making of Chrisme, and con^ecrating of holy Virgins, is ordained only to
belong to Bishops. The Canons of this Council, for the most (...), tend to
this, to advance the authority of their own Bishops, fore-smelling (as
appears) the usurpation of pre-eminence in the Bishops beyond sea.

The third Council of Carthage was assembled in the year of our LORD 399.
Aurelius Bishop of Cart^age seems to The third Council of Carthage.
have been Moderatour of the Council. AUGUSTINE Bishop of Hippo was present.
Many good constitutions were accorded upon in this Council: as namely, that
the Sacraments Canon 6^
should not be ministered to the dead.

That the sons and daughters of Bishops, and others in spiritual offices,
should not be given in marriage to Pagans, Canon 12
Heretics, or Schismatiques.

That men in spiritual offices should not be entangled with seculate
business, according to the precept of the Apostle, Canon 15
2. Tim. 2. verse, 4.

That men of the Clergy should practice no kind of usurie. Canon 16


That no man shall be ordained Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, Canon 18
before he have brought all persons of his own family to the profession of
Christian Religion.

That Readers, who are come to perfect years, shall either marry, or else
profess continency. Canon 19


That in the ministration of the Sacrament, or Sacrifice, (to wit,
Eucharisticke) nothing should be offered, except bread Canon 24
and wine mixed with water, of the fruits of the Corns and Grapes.

That the Bishop of Rome should be called the Bishop of the Canon 40
first seat, but not the high Priest, nor the Prince of Priests.

That nothing, except holy Canonicke Scripture, should be read in the
Churches, under the name of holy books. Canon 47


About the year of our LORD 401. under the reign of Honorius, The fourth
Council of Carthage.
was assembled again a great national Council in Carthage, of 214. Bishops.
Augustine Bishop of Hippo was also present at this Council. Many Canons were
set down in this Council, almost equal with the number of conueened
Bisshops.

That persons married, for reverence of the bl^ssing pronounced to the
marriage, should not company together the Canon 1^
first night after their marriage.

That the Bishop should have his dwelling place near unto the Church, his
house-holde-stuffe should be vncostly, his Canon 14 and 15
fare should be course, and vndelicate, and that he should conquiese
authority unto himself by fidelity and uprightness of an holy conversation.

That a Bishop should not spend time in reading the books Canon 16
of Pagans: the books of Heretics if necessity required he might read.

That a Bishop entangle not himself deeply with household business, to the
end he may attend upon reading, Prayer, and Canon 20
Preaching.

That a Bishop admit no man unto a spiritual office, without Canon 22
advice of the Clergy, and consent of the people.

That a Bishop without advice of his Clergy, pronounce no sentence, else it
shall have no force, except they confirm it. Canon 23


That a Bishop sitting, shall not suffer a presbyter to stand. Canon 34


That an assembly of Heretics conueened together, shall Canon 71
not be called Concilium, but Conciliabulum.

That he who communicates with an Heretic, shall be excommunicate, whether
he be of the number of the Laikes, Canon 73
or of the Clergy.

That such as refuse to give unto the Church, the oblations of defunct persons,
shall be excommunicate, as murderers of Canon 95
the poor. Here mark what is meaned by Oblationes Defanctorum, not
Soule-masses, said for the defunct, but the charity, which they have left in
testamentall legacy to the poor.

That no woman shall presume to baptize. Cano^ 100


TREATISES, BELONGING TO THE fourth CENTURIE.
A TREATISE, Of Invocation of Saints.
IT is more easy in this TREATISE to disapproue the doctrine of Invocation of
Saints, then accurately to point out the minute of time whereinto this abuse
sprang up: for the inuious man, who sowed tares in the husbandry of GOD, he
did it while Matthew. 13
men were asleep. And no good Christian, how vigilant soever he be, can be
at one, and the self same time both sleeping and waking. Nevertheless, albeit
the sowing time be unknown to us, the time whereinto the blade springs up,
and manifests it self unto the sight of men, may be known: And therefore I
have referred this Treatise unto the fourth CENTURIE. It is true, that Origene
about the year of our LORD 240. like as he disputed curiously of all things
without any certainty of sacred Scripture, yea even of plurality of worlds: so
in like manner he disputed of the charity and affection that good Christians
departed this life, might possibly bear to Origin. homil. 3. in cant.
the members of the MILITANT CHURCH of CHRIST. And he thought it not
inconvenient to suppose, that they had a care of our salvation, and supported
us with their prayers, Nevertheless he spoke doub^somely, Ego sic arbitrior,
that is, I suppose it is so: but he durst not with full assurance affirm any
such thing.

In the third CENTURIE also we read of a commemoration of the names of holy
Martyrs, in time of ministration of the holy Sacrament, but neither of purpose
to pray for them, who were already possessed into their rest, nor of purpose to
request them to pray for us: for such gross error was not yet admitted into
the bosom of the Church: But rather of purpose by such a commemoration, (...)
animate the godly to follow the foote-steps of those men in well-doing, whose
names were thought worthy at solemn times to be commemorated in the Church.

The Rhethoricall liberty of Basilius Magnus and Nazia^nus, brought invocation
of Saints in the mouths of all the ^asil. in 400 Martyr.
people: for it is their custom, after they have commended the patient
suffering of Martyrs, in end they desire to be supported by the prayers of
the holy Martyrs. These glorious Orators learned not this lesson in the
books of holy Scripture: but rather in the school of Libanius, whose frequent
incalling upon (...) in his declamations, accustomed Basili^s and Nazi^zenus to
call upon the Martyrs, to the end that (...) and (...) of the Gentiles might
be forgotten, and the holy Martyrs, by whose examples men might be led into
the foote-steps of virtue and godliness, might be remembered. Always seeing
these learned Fathers had no warrant in Scripture for invocation of Saints,
they are compelled to speak doubtsomely (...), N^zianZ. in ^audem Gorgonie.
Idem orat. in sunere patris. Idem orat. 1. in (...).
that is, as I suppose. And again (...), that is, if it be not too much
bolden esse so to speak. And again, (...), that is, if there be any sense, to
wit, in those that are dead. If they had followed the certainty of Scripture,
what needed such doubtsome and staggering speeches. When a tall Cedar falls,
many little trees are bruised by the fall of it: and Similitude.
when worthy men do fall into an error, it is offensive to many. The
dolorous examples of Jacob, David, Solomon, and the plurality of their wives,
contrary to the first institution of GOD, Gene^. 2.
proves this to be true. Helcana the father of Samuel was not 1. Sam. 1
free of this fault. And when the Apostle Paul writes of the gifts that are
requisite in a bishop, he would have him to be 1. Tim. 3 verse, 2.
the husband of one wife: which exhortation had been unnecessary, except the
preposterous following of the faults of holy Fathers had been so uniuersally
ouer-spread, that scarce the Pastors themselves were free of the contagion of
this disease. But the GOD of Heaven has permitted this to be for our trial,
even to try whether we love the LORD our GOD with all our heart, or no: for
if we love the LORD with all our heart, we will never prefer men to GOD, nor
men's examples, to GODS Commandments, how holy and godly so ever they have
been. But now to return to these two learned Fathers, of whom I began to
speak: Some excuse this weakness, by the liberty of Rhethoricall
ornaments. And indeed, incase a lap of this transparent-couering be not
spread over the speeches of Nazianzenus, who prefers the paine^ull trau^ls of
Basilius, to the travels of the Apostle Paul, who filled the Monodia in ^asil.
v^.
world with the preaching of the Gospel, from Judea to Ilyricum, If (I say)
this form of speaking be not excused by Rhetho^icall ornaments, and namely
the figure Hyperbole, no Christian man could gladly lend his ear to such
speeches.

But now to leave the sandy ground of men's speeches, and to convert our selves
to the doctrine of divine Scriptures, as to a sure foundation, whereupon if we
lean, we shall not be deceived. The LORD says in his word, Call upon me^ in
the day of thy Psalm. 50 verse, 15.
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. From this
ground of holy Scripture let our Treatise arise, wherein, GOD willing first we
shall consider the purpose of the Prophet: next we shall declare, that Prayer
is a part of spiritual worship, only belonging to GOD: thirdly, that JESUS
CHRIST is the only mediator of our intercession: and last, that prayers to
Angels, to the blessed Virgin the mother of our LORD, and to the Saints
departed, has no ground in Scripture, and this custom was disliked by many
of the ancient Fathers.

Now the purpose of the Prophet in the fifty Psalm is manifest, namely this,
to convict Hypocrites, who contenting themselves with outward sacrifices,
neglected the spiritual worship of GOD, wherein GOD has principal delight, as
CHRIST says, GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship him, ^oan; 4 verse, 24.
must worship him in spirit and truth. But Hypocrites will needs present unto
GOD chafe in stead of Corn, and dross in stead of Gold, and an outward
scroofe of external worship in stead of the very substance of his spiritual
service. To draw them from this gross imagination, he brings in GOD himself,
speaking from his holy Sanctuary, and declaring, that outward sacrifices have
been often times intermitted, without any reproof of them who being compelled
by necessity, and not willingly, left off the offering of sacrifices. In
Egypt the Jews could not offer such beasts, as the Egyptians worshipped,
else they would have Exodus 8 verse, 26
stoned them to death. In Babylon they had not an Altar, whereupon they could
offer sacrifices to GOD lawfully. And at some times, when both Alter and
sacrifices were at hand, yet David complains, that by violence he was
debarred from the P^lm, 42 and 84
Courts of the LORD. All these times GOD did not reprove his people, for
omitting of external sacrifices, because they were constrained by necessity
to intermit such outward exercises. In the mean time they worshipped GOD in
spirit and truth, and it lay not in the power of their hateful enemies to
hinder them from worshipping GOD spiritually.

Secondly, the Prophet brings in the LORD, declaring, that he had no pleasure
in bloody sacrifices, because he neither eats flesh, nor drinks blood: and
in case he delited in such things, he would not require them at men's hands,
seeing that all the fowls in the Mountains, and all the beasts in the
Forest are the LORDS, and he may use them according to his own will and
blessed pleasure. But the LORD did institute such kind of sacrifices to last
for a time, as shadows of things Hebr. 10 verse, 1
to come, but they could never sanctify the comers the reunto. Therefore if
they be separated from CHRIST, to whom they led the people, as Types and
Figures of his everlasting sacrifice, the LORD had no kind of regard of them.
True it is, that Satan has a delight in bloody sacrifices, even in so far, as
they are bloody, and a destruction of the creatures of GOD, as the sacrifices
in the valley of Ben-hinnon do testify, and the sacrifices offered to Dia^a
in Taurica chersonesus, and the bloody tribute paid by the Athenians to Minos
King of Candie, by the express advice and counsel of Apollo, as Chrysostom
clearelie Ch^sost. (...) ^pist, Pauli, ^d Tit. cap. (...). ^il. 5
affirms. And this declares that the devil, who was a murderer from the
beginning, has a delight in bloody sacrifices. But God delited not in such
sacrifices, except only in so far as they were types and figures, leading to
the sacrifice of Christ. Yea, the sacrifices of the Law were like unto the fire
set upon the top of the marble tower of Pharos, for the welfare of ships, and
to direct them unto the right harbor of Alexandria: and Similitude.
like unto the fire set up upon the vttermoste wall of JERUSALEM, on the North
side, called by Cosmographers, Turris furnorum: This served to direct the
foote-steps of them, who in the night season were journeying to the holy City,
that they should not aberre from the right entry of the gates of JERUSALEM.
Notwithstanding children sat about these fires and warmed themselves, and
knew none other use, wherefore they were appointed, save only to warm those,
who were acolde in winter nights: even so carnal Jews reposed upon
sacrifices, but marked not the right end wherefore they were appointed by God.

But the Prophet leads a carnal people from external sacrifices, unto
spiritual exercises: and namely, unto prayer and thanksgiving: and
consequently to the obedience of faith, the very undoubted ground of prayer,
and thanksgiving: for in these exercises consist deeper points of the worship
of God, then in outward sacrifices, whether we look to God, or to our selves:
when we look to God, he is a spirit, and consequently he deliteth in
spiritual service: and when we look unto our selves, we have an earthly
body, and a spiritual soul, and if we present unto God the service of the
most base part of our person, and not the best part, then we fall under the
curse threatened by Malachie, who says, Cursed be the deceiuer, which has
Malac. 1 verse, 14
in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the LORD a corrupt
thing. This ground being first laid, that the principal purpose where ^t the
Prophet aims, is not unknown, it is the more e^sie to step to^ to the words.

The Prophet bringes in the Lord, saying, Call upon me, in the dry of thy
trouble, etc, This presupponeth, that we shall be exercised with manifold
troubles, as our master CHRIST JESUS was crowned with thorns, before he was
crowned with glory: yea, and that we shall be so dashed with the vehement
Matthew. 27 verse, 29
tempest of troubles, that except we be well taught in the School of GOD,
we shall not know what hand to turn us unto: as the ship-man did, who sailed
with Jonas, every man prayed to his own GOD: only Jonas, who was taught in
the Jonas, 1
right School, directed his prayers to the living GOD, who made the Heaven and
the Earth, and was heard when he prayed out of the Whales belly. Now seeing
that GOD inuiteth us Jonas, 2
to be his Disciples, and he will teach us, to whom and in what manner we
should pray in time of our troubles: let us lend our ear to our great
School-maister, and not be ashamed to open our e^re and to bind up our mouth
with silence, when the LORD speaks, and count all the speeches of Fathers,
that repugne unto this great Oracle of GOD, to be like unto ears of corn
withered, thin, and blasted with the East wind, wherein there is no
nourishing food. Similitud^.


In the second part of this Treatise, it is to be proved, that Prayer is a
spiritual sacrifice, only to be offered to GOD, and to none other, neither
in Heaven, nor in earth, for three principal reasons. First, in Scripture we
are taught, to pray to him only, in whom we trust, and consequently to pray
only to GOD. The Apostle Paul says, But how shall they call on Romans 10
verse, 14.
him, in whom they have not bel^eued? Yea, and the Prophet Jeremy says,
Cursed be he that trusts in man, and makes flesh his ari^e, and with-dr
weth his heart from the LORD. GOD is the just Ierem. 17 verse, 5
proprietare and owner of our souls: for he has bought and purchased them
with his own blood: and the LORD will part Act. 20 verse, 28
stakes with no man, neither can he admit a corriual in points of his honor:
as the natural mother could not abide to see her son divided, because he
appertained totally and wholly 1. Reg. 3 verse, 26 Isai. 42 verse, 8 Act. 5
verse, 4
unto her self: so can not GOD abide, that his glory be given unto another, or
yet that any part of that thing that is once dedicated to GOD should be
converted to another use.

In holy Scripture we read of three most abominable Altars, to wit, of the
A^tar of Damascus, and the Altar of Bethel, and 2. Reg. 16 verse, 10
the Altar at Athens to the unknown GOD. The Altar of Damascus was abominable,
because it was builded to the worship of a false god. The Altar of Bethel was
abominable, because on it the true GOD was worshipped in a forbidden manner. 2.
Reg. 23. verse, 15
And the Altar of Athens to the unknown GOD was abominable, because they
neither knew whom they worshipped, Act. 17 verse, 23
nor yet the right manner of his worshipping. Therefore in the matter of the
worshipping of GOD, let us set our compass right, lest a little aberration
procure a great ship-wracke: and in the matter of Prayer let us call upon him
only, in whom we trust, as we are taught by the holy Apostle, And let us
offer 1. Pet. 2. verse, 5
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to GOD through JESUS CHRIST.

The second argument, whereby I prove, that our prayers should be made only
to GOD, is this: We should pray only to him, who is Omnipotent, and can
support us in all our distresses: ergo, we ought to pray only to GOD. The
antecedent of this argument is evident, by the latter part of that short prayer
indicted by CHRIST to his Disciples, For thine is the Matthew. 6 verse, 13
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. In that short form of
perfect prayer the first words leads us to a consideration of the love of GOD
toward us, who is content to be our Father in JESUS CHRIST. In the last words
his power is described to be infinite, such as becomes him, who is King of
Heaven and Earth: who like as he has made all things, so likewise has he
an absolute Souereignitie over all things, both in Heaven and in Earth. Now
that Omnipotency is an attribute only belonging to the divine nature, the
very Gentiles could not deny it, who attributed the word (...) only to God.
And it is certain, that all the Angels of Heaven could not have supported the
disasterous estate of man after his Genes, 3
fall, if God himself had not put hand to work, who only knew the way how
his justice and mercy could kiss one another, in the person of the Mediator.
Therefore seeing God only is Omnipotent, and none but he, what fools are we
to put our trust under the shadow of the bramble, as the Sichemites Iud. 9
verse, 15
did, and not to dwell in the secret of the most High, and abide in the
shadow of the Almighty? I do no wrong to the Angels in Heaven, when I compare
them to brambles, in comparison Psalm. 91 verse, 1
of the eternal God: their power is finite and bounded, their provident care
over us has a beginning, namely, the time of their employment, whereinto GOD
appointed them to attend upon us: but the power of GOD is infinite, and in his
provident Psalm. 34 verse, 7
care he appointed a kingdom for us before the foundation of the world was
laid. Let us therefore trust under this Mat^h. 25 verse, 34
shadow of the Almighty, and call upon him, in whom we trust.

Thirdly, it may be proved, that we should pray to GOD only, and to none
other, because their is neither commandment, nor example, nor promise, to be
heard in Scripture, except that prayers be made to the Creator only, and not
unto the creatures of GOD. And in this argument I find that some learned
Papists give over reasoning in the contrary, and they render reasons wherefore
there is no example in the old or new Testament, of Invocation of Saints:
namely this, that in the old Testament, the-Patriarchs and Prophets, who
departed this life, went not presently to Heaven, and had not the fruition of
the presence of GOD incontinent: but they went to Limbus patrum, where their
souls remained until CHRIST died, and arose again from death, and then he
carried their souls to Heaven. And this is the cause (say they) wherefore
there is no example found in the old Testament of Invocation of Saints.
Likewise, they say concerning the new Testament, that if the Apostles had set
down any precept concerning Invocation of Saints, it would have seemed unto
the people, that they were desirous that this honor should be done unto
themselves after their death. These are the foolish conjectures of Eccius.
Nevertheless the places that Papists cite out of Scripture to prove invocation
of Saints, declare with what conscience a great number of them entrea^e this
argument.

In like manner the factes and words of ancient Fathers are miserably abused.
When Papists read in the Epistles of Augustine, that the Emperor went unto
the tomb of the Apostle Augu^. epi^. 42
Peter, sometime a fisher, and laid aside his Imperial Diadem, and humbly
bowed his knees, and prayed at the sepulcher of P^ter, they clap their hands,
and shout for joy, as if their cause were won. But such transparent visardes
will blind no man's eyes, except only the eyes of simple ignorant people, and
the eyes of those who are wilfully blinded, because the praying at the
sepulcher of Peter, will not prove, that the Emperor prayed unto Peter, but
only to GOD. And this custom was the more tolerable, because Christians, for
the space of three hundredth years, were accustomed to hear GODS word
preached, to receive the Sacraments, yea, and to pray in such places,
whereinto Martyrs had glorified GOD by patient suffering of death for CHRIST'S
sake. In all these actions they worshipped GOD, whose word they heard
preached in that place, whose blessed Sacraments they received also in that
place, and they bowed their knees, and prayed to GOD, and not to the Martyrs
in that place: yea, and when the persecution ceased, and Temples were builded,
there was a reverent commemoration of the names of the Martyrs, without Augu^.
d^ ciuttate D^i, lib. 22. c^p. 10
any invocation and praying unto them, as Augustine expressly declares.

Now let this ground be deeply settled and rooted in our hearts, that GOD
is the only Fountain and giver of all good gifts, who also knows all our
miseries, and is Omnipotent, and can support them at such time as his Majesty
knows to be expedient: For the vision of GOD (as says the Haba^. 2 verse, 3
Prophet) has the own appointed time, and at the last it shall speak, and
not lie: though it tarry, Wait, for it shall surely come, and shall not stay.
And so much the more let us with patient expectation, awaite upon the support,
that comes from the throne of the grace of GOD, because the LORD never
comes to us with an empty hand, and never visits us out of season, as
earthly Physicians do often times: but even when he finds us lying in our
graves, and rotting in the stink of a tab^rnacle forsaken by the ghost, who
was wont to dwell into it, then can he raise us out of graves, as he did
LAZARUS. John, 11 verse. 43, 44


This ground being deeply fixed in our hearts, I proceed to the n^xt
head, to declare, that no man can approach near to GOD without a MEDIATOR:
and that CHRIST is the only MEDIATOR, both of our Redemption, and also of our
Intercession, and none other, except he only. As concerning the first
assertion, that we have need of a MEDIATOR, there is no man so void of
understanding, who will deny it. Like as in the fabric of the world, fire
and water are elements of so discrepant qualities, that the Lord would not set
them contiguouslie Similitude.
together, lest the one should have comsumed the other. Therefore the Lord in
his unspeakable wisdom, has set an element of a mid nature betwixt them, to
wit, the Air: In the vppermoste part of it, not abhorring from the qualities
of the fire, and in the lower region of it conforming to the qualities of the
water: Even so there can be no fellowship between the holy God and sinful
man, without a Mediator. And it was well said by Joshua, Ye cannot serve the
Lord, for he is an holy God, he will not pardon your iniquity, nor your sins.
Therefore necessity drives Iosu 2, 24 verse, 19
us in the Treatise of Invocation to speak of the Mediator.

I will not pain my self to prove the thing that is not denied: Papists
themselves grant two things: First, that Christ is the only Mediator of our
redemption: Secondly, that Christ is the only Mediator of intercession betwixt
God and us. But herewithall they affirm that the Saints are mediators betwixt
Christ and us. Of that which is fully granted, that Christ is the only Mediator
of our redemption, I infer according to the grounds of holy Scripture, that
Christ is also the only Mediator of intercession: For these two are
unseparably lincked together, and he who has the one honor has both. In the
Epist. to the H^brues it is said, that Christ is the only Mediator of our
redemption: and hereof it is inferred, that he is the only Mediator of our
intercession: the words of the Apostle are these, speaking of Christ, But this
man, because he indure^h for ever, has an everlasting Priesthood. In these
words Christ is set down as the only Hebr, 7 verse, 24
Mediator of our redemption. Now mark that which follows as a necessary
consequence upon the forementioned ground, Wherefore he is able also
perfectly to save them, that come to GOD by ibid, ver. 25
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Here Christ is
pronounced to be the only Mediator of our intercession: and this conclusion
is gathered upon this ground, because he has saved us by his everlasting
sacrifice, which is as much as to say, because he is the Mediator of our
redemption. Again holy Scripture will inuert this order, and set intercession
in the first place, and upon this ground, that Christ is the only Mediator of
our intercession, will conclude that Christ is also the only Mediator of our
redemption. Mark the words of the holy John, 1 cap. 2 verse, 1, 2
Apostle, My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the Just, and
he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the Whole World. In these words Christ is first called our
Advocate: and hereof is inferred, that he is our propitiation, which is all
one, as if he had said, CHRIST is the only Mediator of our redemption.

In the Law of Moses the high Priest was only but a type of the true Mediator
of intercession: yet while he was presenting the Levit. 16 verse, 17
blood of the sacrifice of propitiation into the most holy place, all the
people stood without, and neither Priest nor people remained within the court,
where the Altar of brunt offering was, until the high Priest came forth out
of the most holy place. Now seeing our Lord Jesus has offered a sacrifice for
our sins, and has carried the blood of the ever lasting Covenant unto the most
holy place, that is, unto Heaven, and is actually performing the office of our
great Advocate, and making intercession for us let no man presume to step to
the Alt^r, and to take upon him to be a Mediator of redemption or
intercession: our high Priest is doing that work in his own person, tarry
until he come forth out of the most holy place, and then there shall be no
more disputation anent Mediators of interc^ssion. Augustine utterly excludes
Peter and Paul from this honor, August. contra Parm^nianum, lib 2. Ephesians. 6
verse, 19
to be counted Mediators of our intercession, because like as they prayed for
others, even so in like manner they craved that others should make
supplications to God for them. But he who is Mediator of intercession, he
prays for us, and has no need that any man should pray for him. In like
manner, Ch^ysostome 1, Timo, (...) verse, 5
writing upon these words of the Apostle, For there is one GOD, and one
Mediator of GOD and man, the man CHRIST JESUS. plainly affirms that the
Mediator of our intercession must be partaker both of the divine and humane
nature: And consequently there is no Mediator of intercession, except
Chrysos^om, i^ 1. Tim^ cap, 2 bomil. 7
Christ only, who is both God and man. In like manner speaking of the
Canan^tisb woman, he says, that she went not to Peter, nor to James, nor to
^ohn, but she went directly to Christ, bringing with her repentance as an
advocate: and being moved with unspeakable admiration of the goodness of
Christ, he says, O admirandares! sursum tremor, and Deorsum fiducia, miserere
C^rysost. exvarii^ in Matthew. lo^is ^il. 16
mei, non opus habeo mediatore: that is, O admirable thing! there is trembling
above, and confidence below, have mercy upon me, I have no need of a
mediator, to wit, betwixt Christ and me. Thus we see, that when ancient
Fathers spoke of a mediator of intercession, they spoke of a mediator betwixt
God and us, and not betwixt Christ and us.

But now let us take up out of grounds of holy Scripture a true description of
the mediator of intercession: Out of two principal places of Scripture the
description shall be grounded. In the Gospel of Matthew it is said, This is my
Well-beloued Son, in whom I am Well pleased. And in the Epistle of Peter we
are Matthew. 3 verse, 17 1. Pet. 2 verse, 5
warned, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God, through Jesus
Christ. Of these two places of Scripture I gather a description of a mediator
of intercession, in this manner: He for whose sake only our persons are in
favor with God, and for whose merits only our prayers are acceptable to God,
he is the only mediator of our intercession: But so it is, that in Christ
only God is pleased with our persons, and for his sake only God accepts
our prayers, ergo, Christ is the only mediator of our intercession.

The similitude that is used by Papists in stead of an argument, is to be
discussed. Like as subjectes should not step rudely to the King, but by
mediate persons, who are in favor and credit, present their suits unto his
Highness: Eu^n so (say they) we should not be so bold as to present our
prayers to Christ at the first instant, without the intercession of Saints. To
this similitude Origin himself (albeit the first inuenter of the seminary of
this error) he answers by another similitude: (...). (...). (...).
That like as the shadow does follow the body in most absolute manner, so
that if the body be moved, the shadow also moves: and if the body rest, the
shadow also rests: Even so, if 2 man can be in favor with the eternal God,
then shall he also be in friendship with all the creatures of God. And this
agrees well with the words of holy Scripture. That the stones in the field
shall be in league with us, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace
Job, 5 verse, 23
with us, to wit, when we are reconciled to our GOD. To this same similitude
both used of old by some, and rejected by the learned, S. Ambrose gives this
answer, writing upon the words of P^l, They served the creature, forsaking the
Creator, who is Romans 1. verse 25
blessed for ever. Upon these words he writes, that men who have neglected
praying to GOD, they defend themselves with a miserable excuse, saying, that
by Saints they may have access to GOD, like as by noble Courteours access
unto the King is purchased: but go toe (says he) is any man so foolish,
Ambros. i^ epis^ ad Roman^ cap. (...)
or so unmindful of his own safety, that he dare give unto the fore-saide
noble Courteour that honor, which is due to the King: for if any man be found
trafficking about such business, he will be justly condemned of treason. Yet
these men count them not guilty, who give the honor due to GOD, unto a
creature, and forsaking GOD, they worship their own fellowseruantes, as if
there were any greater service that could be exhibited to GOD (to wit, then
Invocation of his blessed NAME) For this cause, says he, men procure access
to the King by Nobles and Tribunes, because the King is but a man, and knows
not to whom he should concredite the affairs of the kingdom, but to
purchase the favor of GOD, to whom nothing is unknown (because he knows
the deseruinges of all men) there is no need of suffragantes, but of a deuote
Ambros. da Isaac. and anima.
mind. And in his book written of Isaac and the soul, he writes of CHRIST
very holily, and according to Scripture. CHRIST is o^r mouth, by whom we talk
with the Father, he is our eye, by whom we see the Father, he is our right
hand, by whom we offer our selves unto the Father, who if he intercide not
for us, neither we nor the Saints have any thing to do with GOD. Albeit it may
be sufficiently prou^d, that even Ambrose himself was somewhat entangled with
the error uniuersally ouer-spred amongst the common people: for they were so
fond upon Invocation of Saints, that learned Preachers yielded somewhat to
the madness of an ^uill disposed people, as Aaron did to the carnal I^wes,
when they worshipped Exodus 32
the golden Calfe. Nevertheless, any man who reads the forementioned places
of Ambrose, may perceive, that in heart and mind he disliked the Invocation of
Saints.

The more particularly that we descend into this argument^ the truth shall
be the more clearly manifested: Let us therefore search out whether or no it
was counted lawful of old to pray to the Angels, to worship the Virgin
Marie, and to in^ocate the Saints. In holy Scripture we find, that under
color of humility, some did worship the Angels, and pray unto them. But the
holy Apostle Paul, who was taught immediately by CHRIST, calls this form of
devotion rashness, and the Collo^s. 2 verse, 18
conceit of an heart puffed up with a fleshly mind. There is no pride
comparable to the pride of a fool, he will speak of things he never saw
nor heard, and of things whereof he can render no reason. The Angel who
revealed great mysteries Apocal. 19 (...), 10 ibid, cap. ^2 verse, 8. 9
to the Apostle John, would not be content to be worshipped by him, but
rebuked him at two diverse times, for presuming to worship him and said at both
times he should worship GOD. And the Council of Laodicea damned the worshipping
of Angels, as Council. Laodi^. n. (...). 32 verse, 31 Philip. 2 verse, 10
Idolatry, and a forsaking of CHRIST. The Angel who blessed Iaakob was not
one of the ministering Spirits, but the great Angel of the Covenant of GOD,
even CHRIST JESUS, to whom all knee should be bowed.

Concerning the adoration of the blessed Virgin the mother of our LORD, it is
grounded upon the fabulous narrat^on of her assumption written by Nicephorus,
whereunto the less credit (...). lib. 15 (...). 14
is to be given, because in it the glory only due to CHRIST is given to the
Virgin Marie: namely, that her body saw no corruption. Always she died, and
was buried in the valley of P^al. 16 verse, 10
Iosaphat, and she did not bear the chastisement of our transgressions, as
her Son CHRIST JESUS did. How then Act. 2 verse, 29 30. 31
could she die, if she had been free both of original and actual sin, as
Papists affirm? ^uvenalis Bishop of ^rusalem, is said to have made narration
of the assumption of the bles^ed Virgin to Pulcheria Empress and wife of the
Emperor Martianus, at that time when the General Council of Chalcedon was
ass^mbled. But there are so many circumstances, derogating credit^ to that
alleged history of the assumption of the Virgin Marie, that it is hard for a
Christian to lean upon such uncertain and doubtsome grounds. First the
writer of it is Nicephorus, the father of many fables. Secondly, the reporter
of it was Iuvenal^s, Patriarch of Jerusalem, an Eutychian Heretic, until
the fear of the authority of the General Council compelled him to revoke
his error. Thirdly, in what place and to whom made Iuvenalis this narration:
namely, in the chamber secretly to P^lcheria: not in the General Council
openly, where many learned Fathers, well acquainted with holy Scriptures, were
present, who could have controlled him, and declared, that amongst those who
died, one only, to wit, the holy One of GOD, has that privilege not to see
corruption. Epiphanius, for causes Epiphan. c^tra her^ses.
known to himself (for he had heard this narration long before the days of
Iuvenalis) stands not upon the refutation of the assumption of the blessed
Virgin: but he utterly damneth the Collyridians as Heretics, who worshipped
the Virgin Marie. And in the matter of worshipping he compares her to the
fruit of the forbidden tree: It was a fair fruit, but herewith a fruit
forbidden to be eaten: So was the mother of our LORD, a blessed woman above
all women, yet was she not GOD, and consequently not to be worshipped. So
that Epiphanius passes by the ground of the argument: giving, and not granting
that the tradition of her assumption were true, yet this consequence can not
follow, that she should be adored and worshipped. In like manner Ambrose
says, that the Virgin Marie was the Temple of GOD, but not the GOD of the
Temple. In Ambros^ de spirit. lib. 3 cap. 12
which words, like as he allows the worshipping of the holy Ghost, so in
like manner he disalloweth the worshipping of the Virgin Marie. The Book of
August. De assumptione beatae Mariae V^rginis, together with a Sermon of his In
festo assumpt^onis beatae Mariae, are known to be supposititious: and Censura
Lovani^nsis in the frontispice of that book, prefixeth this superscription,
NON EST AUGUSTINI.

The honorable titles and styles given unto the Virgin Marie by
Ecclesiastical Writers, is another ground whereupon they do lean, who
vvorshippeth the mother of our LORD: she is called (...): that is to say, The
mother of GOD, our Lady, undefiled, complete holy, a perpetual Virgin,
unspotted, Paradise, a living Altar, the mountain ouer-shadowed by the holy
Spirit. All these honorable styles (I say) were given unto her in the
writings of ancient Fathers, not of purpose to Deifie the blessed Virgin, nor
to bring in plurality of Gods, but to magnify the work of the LORDS
Incarnation. Methodus is so prodigal in his styles, that he calls her
(...), that is, the bread of life, attributing to her the honor due to John.
6. 35.
CHRIST only. It were better done to abst^ine from words of superlatiue
honors, belonging only to CHRIST, then after they are uttered, to be
compelled by tolerable interpretations to lenifie the absurditi^ of vncompetent
speeches. The bl^ssed Virgin while she was conversant with mortal men
directed such as came to her self, to go to her Son, and to depend upon his
blessed will and pl^asure, saying unto the servants, Ionh, 2. 5.
Whatsoever he says unto you, do it: much more now when she dwells in
celestial mansions, it is her will that we should depend upon JESUS CHRIST her
son, and her Savior, her son and her GOD, her son and the creator of her
body, whereinto he was content to be conceived by the Holy Ghost.

As concerning the Invocation of other Saints, Papists rejoice in the
multitude of Fathers, who invoke Saints, not only Orators, such as Basilius
and NaZianZenus: and Poets, such as Prudentius, who prayed unto S. Laurence,
Vincentius, the Virgin Agnes, the Martyr Cassianus, S. Cyprian, S. Foelix, and
the Martyrs called Calaguritani, Spanish Martyrs, and Vascones, as appears,
but also many others were entangled with this error: of whom I may justly say
that thing which our master CHRIST spoke of the Samaritanes, who worshipped
GOD upon mount Garizim, Ye worship that which ye know not: in which words
John, 4. 22
CHRIST declares, that whatsoever worship is exhibited (...) GOD, without the
warrant of his own commandment, it is naught: And in that point, the Fathers
who prayed unto Saints, they also worshipped that which they knew not: For
like as the Sun when he rises, and spreads his Similitude.
be^mes throughout the world, then the light of the Stars give place to the
glorious light of the Sun: even so, all the writings of Fathers must needs
give place unto the written word of GOD, whereinto we are commanded to call
only upon GOD in the day of our trouble: and there is neither Psa 50. 15.
commandment, promise, nor example in Scripture, to warrant the doctrine of
Invocation of Saints, as has been already declared.

Now the authors of the doctrine of Invocation of Saints, if they would search
out the first original of it, they have cause to be ashamed: for it came not
from the Apostles, but from the Gentiles. No man, who has read the Dialogues
of Plato, can be ignorant, that upon consideration of the dissimilitude Plato
dialog. Symposion. Idem de legib. lib. 4.
that is betwixt mortal men, and the immortal GOD, he imagined some
mid-creatures, whose endeavor was this, to carry the prayers and sacrifices of
men to GOD: and again, to carry the commandementes and oracles of GOD to men:
these mediate persons he calls them (...) and (...), of whom he says,
that they are (...), that is, betwixt GOD and mortal man (to wit, mediators)
No such doctrine is contained in holy Scripture: Yea, and ancient Fathers, who
attribute too much unto Martyrs, in calling them (...), thas is, helpers,
physicians, GODS friends and beloved servants, yet they abhorred from the
words of Plato, to call them (...), and (...): for Theodoretus says, (...),
that Theodore^ ad Graecos inside. les sermon. 8.
is, Let us not be so mad. Yet Papists rush forward to this excess of
madness, not only to call the Saints departed Intercessors, but also
mediators of intercession, which is Plato his error, viuely expressed in the
words above mentioned. (...).

To conclude the question of Invocation of Saints, it is not unlike to the
controversy that was betwixt Iphtah and the king Judge. 11.
of Ammon, for the lands lying betwixt the Rivers Arnon, Jordan, and Iabbok:
by one apparent right the king of Ammon claimed that these lands should be
restored unto the Ammonites, to whom of old they did belong: but Iphtah refused
to give over the possession of these lands, wherein the Reubenites and Gaaites
dwelt, and that for three great reasons: First, they received these lands out
of the hands of their GOD, by whose express commandment and warrant MOSES
faught against Numb. 22.
Sihon king of Hesbon: Secondly, since the days of MOSES until the days of
the gouernament of IPHTAH, that is, the space of three hundredth years the
people of Israel peaceably possessed those lands. And thirdly, even in the
days of Moses these lands were taken out of the hands of the Amorites, who
were possessors of them at that time, and not from the Ammonites. For the like
reasons (I say) we cannot agree to the doctrine of Invocation of Saints. First,
because we have received a perfect form of prayer out of our LORDS hands,
wherein we are taught to pray only to our Heavenly Father, and not M^h. 6
to Saints. Secondly, because the Church for the space of three hundredth years
after the LORDS ascension, used no other form of prayer then this, to pray to
GOD alone through JESUS CHRIST. Thirdly, if Papists will needs make any
controversy in this matter, let them controuert with CHRIST'S Apostles, who
have left unto their true successors this form of prayer, which we now use:
and such new and young school-maisters as Papists are, we cannot admit.
Against the second of the three preceding reasons, if they object, that in
the days of Cyprian the Christian Virgin, whom Cyprian before his conversion
pursued, with Magical arts laboring to circumueene her, Nazi^. in ^udem Cypr.
she prayed for help to the Virgin Marie, as Nazianzenus writes. To this I
answer, that this narration which Nazianzenus has found in some Apocryph
book, is rejected by the learned as an uncertain thing: whereof Ierom writing
of the conversion of Cyprian, makes no mention. Secondly, this form of prayer
(...). (...). (...).
that a weak and timorous Virgin used, was no liturgy nor form of prayer
used amongst Christian people in their holy assemblies: and that thing which
any one person does of infirmity and weakness, is not to be counted an
ancient doctrine in the Church.

Seeing the Apostle warns us to abstain from all appearance of evil, at
least Papists in their Invocation of Saints 1 Thessalonians. 5 verse, 22
should have absteined from forms of speaking used in prayers made unto the
eternal GOD, lest they should seem to give the glory only due to the Creator,
to the creatures. But in the matter of Invocation of Saints, they have set
themselves forward with such impetuous speate, that they cannot abstain from
the honorable styles given to GOD, but these also must be given to the
Saints. The Prophet David calls the LORD his Rock, his Fortress, his
Strength, his Shield, the Horn of his Salvation, Psalm. 18. (...)
and his Refuge. And in another Psalm, GOD is our hope and help, and ^rength,
in troubles ready to be found. Are not all these (...). 46. (...)
honorable styles, and many more attributed to the Saints in the ordinary
prayers of the R^ane Church? Is not the Virgin Marie called the Queen of
Heaven? the provident governor of Heavenly and Earthly powers? the mother of
mercy? obteiner of pardon? mediatrix to Godward? restorer of the Di^ 7. de
(...). (...) (...). 3.
grace to be hoped for? the mother of the militant Church? the advocate of the
world? Such precious ointment as this, is more meet to be poured out upon the
feet of CHRIST, then upon the head of the Virgin Marie: but a prodigal
waster neither regards what he gives, nor to whom: they are but one step
from calling the Virgin Marie directly eternal GOD, for they put the
government of Heavenly and Earthly Isai. 9. 6.
things upon her shoulder: they call her Queen of Heaven, and the prince of
peace. What remains to be said, but one word, that she is almighty GOD, and
this style also will be necessarily inferred upon the preceding honorable
titles attributed to her.

The honorable style of an Advocate, Bellarmine is the bolder to attribute
unto the Virgin Marie, because that Ireneus writes, Et sicut ill^ seducta est
ut effugeret DEVM, sic h^c suasa est ^bedire DEO, uti Virginis Euae Virgo Maria
fieret advocata: that is, (...) lib. 5 (...). (...)
and like as she (to wit, Eva) was seduced to depart from GOD, even so this
woman (to wit, the Virgin Marie) was persuaded to obey GOD, to the end, that
the Virgin Marie might be an advocate for the Virgin Eva. I am certain that
Bellarmine understood not the meaning of Ireneus better then he understood the
sense and meaning of his own words. In the words immediately (...) ibid.
preceding Ireneus, declares, that like as sin came in by disobedience in
eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree, even so righteousness came in by
him who manifested his obedience in another tree, that is, in suffering death
upon the Cross. What need had Be^larmine to wreast the words of Ireneus,
after he had set down so clear a commentary of his own words? for he
calls the Vi^gine Marie an advocate, in respect of her blessed birth, who by
his obedience satisfied for the sin that Romans 5. 18
Adam brought in by his disobedience. Now it is true, that superstition is like
unto the Feau^r called Hectica, in the beginning hardly discerned, but easy to
be cured: and in end easily discerned, but not easily cured. Even so it was
hard to know what Similitude.
would be the issue of the disputation of Origin, when he disputed concerning
the affection that Saints departed carried toward the members of the Militant
CHURCH of GOD: but it was easy to stay the course of this error, when he who
was the first author of it durst not auow it, but in secret disputations said
that possibly such a thing might be. But in our days the Fever is grown to
such an height, that it is easier to discern the error, then to find out a
way to correct it.

What is then to be done at this time, where into error has prevailed so
far, and of so long time, that it is like unto a Gangrene, daily becoming
worse and worse, so that it is apparently a remediless evil? shall we cease
from damning superstition, and let the people pray as they list? It is better
to follow the example of the holy Prophet Helias, albeit Idolatry 1. Reg. 18
was universally ouer-spred in the kingdom of Israel, yet he reproved the
people for halting between two opinions: and he bowed his knees to GOD, and
prayed, that the LORD would send fire from Heaven to burn the sacrifice, and
to seal up in the hearts of the people, that the GOD who made the Heaven and
the Earth, was the only true GOD, and only to be worshipped. Even so, beside
reproving of superstitious Invocation of Saints, which also I have done,
according to the measure of my knowledge, in this Treatise, I pray to the
eternal GOD, that he would send from the Heaven, the divine flame of his
celestial love, to the end that the fleshly conceits of men's hearts may be
brunt up, and that they may be fully persuaded, that the LORD, who made the
Heaven and the Earth, is he alone, to whom spiritual sacrifices are to be
offered, and that through JESUS CHRIST, to whom with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be praise and glory, now and ever,

AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the authority of COUNCILS.
IN the first three hundredth years of our LORD, Councils were few in number,
and very obscure, and few of them had great authority, except the Council
holden in JERUSALEM, Act. 15
by the Apostles: yet was the first age after CHRIST the golden age, whether
we consider doctrine or manners: in doctrine more sincere, in manners more
unreprovable then any age after following, in so much, that all the
accusations forged against their doctrine and conversation, were but calumnies
and lies. The banquets of Thyestes, and the chambring of Oedipus, perpetually
objected to the Christians of the primitive Church, what were they but,
cauillations, in things whereof they had no understanding? They knew not what
the spiritual eating of the flesh of CHRIST did mean, neither knew they how
necessary it was for Christians to keep holy assemblies in the night time,
when they had not liberty to do it in the day time. And they spoke evil of
things they could not, nor would not comprehend, as the Gracians and Romans
counted the Hebrews Barbarians, because they had no regard to understand their
language. But out of all question, the first age was the golden age of the
world, after it was renewed by the coming of CHRIST: in doing of good more
willing, in suffering of evil more patient then any age that followed the
first 300. years of our LORD: And that thing where into the primitive Church
seems to be inferior to posteriour times, to wit, in number and splendour of
Councils, in that same point it has a prerogative, such as Judah, had over
Israel: there were more altars in Israel then in Judah, but that one altar in
Jerusalem was better then all their altars. And the Council holden in
Jerusalem, by the Apostles, in the days of the Emperor Claudius, was better
then all the Councils either General or National, that ever were gathered
since those days.

Now before I speak in particular of the necessity of Councils, of their
authority, of the abuse of Councils, and power to conuocate them, and who
should have vote in Councils, somewhat is to be premitted concerning the name
given unto G^nerall or National assemblies. Gratianus busieth himself in
many Gratian dist^ct. 15
vnnec^ssarie things, and in this also, to secke out the Etymology of the
Latin word Concilium: and he deduceth it from the word Cilium, called in the
Greek language (...), that is, the eye lid, and the compound word Concilium
signifies the company of men, who agree in one mind, as the eye liddes do,
when they cover the eyes, they cover both together, and when they open again
to give place unto the sight of the eyes, they open both at once. And so
Gratianus thinks, that Concilium Council. Carthag. 4. Canon 71
is Coelus consentientium, that is, a company of men, who agree in one mind.
The fourth Council of Garthage requires, beside consent and agreement in one
mind, a consent to the verity and truth of GOD: therefore they say, that the
assembly of Heretics should not be called Concilium, but Conciliabulum. But
in acurate seeking out of Etymologies scarce can Plato himself in his Dialogue
called Cratylus, escape the blame of curiosity: Plato Dial. Cratyl.
the Greek word (...) is plainer, and is borrowed by the Latinists, who
usually call a Council Synodus, and it is used in this sense to betoken a
meeting of men in spitituall offices, for timous suppressing of corruptions,
either in Doctrine or manners, springing up into the Church.

The necessity of Counc^ls may be proved by these arguments following: First,
those ordinary means which the Prophets 1.
and Apostles, who had their callin^ and gifts immediately from GOD, did use for
suppressing of false doctrine and corrupt manners, should of necessity continue
in the Church: But so it is, that conuentions and assemblies was one of these
ordinary means, ergo, they should continue in the Church. The second part of
the argument is proved by the example of the great assembly gathered at Silo
in the days of Joshua, to suppress the Joshua, 22
apparent defection of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasses,
from the true worship of GOD, as seemed unto them. And this Assembly had
allowance of GOD, forasmuch as it was ordered with wisdom: the glory of GOD
was only respected, and the end of it was peace in ISRAEL.

Next the great assembly of the ten tribes at mount Carmell, procured by
Helias the Prophet, but gathered by the commandment of Achab the king of
Israel, declares, that assemblies 1. Reg. 18
of Churchmen and others of chief authority, was an ordinary mean to
reform abuses in Religion: albeit no reformation followed after this
assembly, yet the enemies of the true Religion were convicted in their
consciences, false teachers were disgraced and punished, and the zeal of
Helias toward the glory of GOD had allowance by a miracle of fire from Heaven.

In like manner Samuel by gathering a great assembly of all Israel 1. Sam. 7
at Mizpah, procured a reformation, both in Religion and manners amongst them:
David, in transporting the Arc to the 2. Sam. 6
city of David: Solomon, in the dedication of the Temple; both 1. Reg. 8
used the support of holy assemblies gathered to that effect.

And in the new Testament the Apostles, Elders, and Deacons met together in an
holy assembly at Jerusalem, and timouslie Act. 15
suppressed the doctrine of false teachers, who affirmed, that the Gentiles
could not be saved by faith in CHRIST only, except they had also been
circumcised, and kept the law of Moses. All these examples, and many more,
contained in holy Scripture, teach us, that the meeting of holy assemblies,
was an ordinary mean to suppress corruption in doctrine and manners, and to
advance the kingdom of GOD.

Secondly, that thing which godly Emperors did for the suppressing of
Heresies, following the examples of the Prophets 2.
and Apostles (especially when no better means could be found out) is
necessarily to be observed. But so it is, that the godly Emperors
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian the third, and Theodosius the second the
son of Arcadius, and Martianus conuocated Councils for suppressing of the
Heresies of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches: and no better means
could be found out, neither as yet can be found out, for suppressing of
Heresies: Therefore the custom of conuocating Councils at times requisite, is
necessarily to be observed.

Other arguments, albeit they have not so necessary a consecution as the
former, notwithstanding they prove, that lawful 3.
Councils are a terror to the kingdom of the Devil, and that (...). lib. 5
(...). ^8
the instruments of Satan, such as Julian the Apostate (who permitted no
Councils to be assembled in time of his government) are haters of free and
lawful conuocated assemblies. And incase good men fortuned to be assembled
together, by any occasion, as it happened in the Councils of Millan and
Ariminum, in the days of the Emperor Constantius, the endeavors of the
Emperor sometimes to circumueene, at other times to terrify, or to weary the
honest minds of upright men, plainly testified, that he was afraid of the
sentence definitive of a lawful Council. Therefore let us think with our
heart, and say with our mouth, that lawful assemblies are necessary for the
furtherance of the Kingdom of GOD.

Concerning the authority of Councils (which is the principal subject of this
Treatise) there are three diverse opinions. Some with excessive praises advance
Councils, and count them equal to holy Scripture: namely, the four first
General Councils, The Council of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Gratia^us, di^tinct. 15
Chalcedon: and they compare them unto the four Euangels, and to the four
Rivers of Paradise. Others do vilipende Councils, and strive against them, for
every light cause, as the Gr^g. lib. 1 r^est. epi. 24
Arrians did against the Council of Nice, for that one word (...), because it
was not found in Scripture. The third opinion is of those, who neither will
vilipende Councils, nor equal them to sacred Scripture, because holy
Scripture is absolutely, and without all contradiction, to be bel^eued: but
Councils may be cor^ected one by another, as namely, National Councils, by
General Councils, and anterior General Councils, by posterior, at such times
as things that were hidden from the understanding of men before, are brought
to a more manifest light and notorious knowledge. Augu^. d^ Baptist. contr.
Dona^. lib. 2 ^ap. (...)
And in this opinion is that holy Father AUGUSTINE, in his books written
against the Donatists.

Now they who were in the first opinion, to wit, that the first four General
Councils were equal unto the writings of the four Evangelists, every one of
them leaned upon an unsure and deceitful ground, and so it came to pass, that
they were both deceived themselves, and likewise they deceived others: For
Gratianus was the bolder so to speak, because Pope Gregory had spoken the
^ame before him: and Pope Gregory spoke so, because he had a resolution in
his own mind, to be obedient to the acts of the Council of Nice. O, but
after him there comes in a succession of Popes, who will not be content to
be ruled with the Canons of the Council of Nice, albeit they spoke as
Gregory spoke, yet they did not as Gregory did: for they usurped Ru^in. lib.
(...) ^ap. 6
jurisdiction above all the rest of the Patriarchs, express contrary to the
Canons of the Council of Nice, wherein it is Canon 6.
statuted and ordained, that the Bishop of Alexandria should attend upon the
Churches of Egypt, and the Bishop of Rome should attend upon the town of
Rome, and the suburbicarie Churches, according to the custom ob^erued of old.
What is this else, but a mocking of the world, in word to ^ay, that the 4. first
General Councils are like unto the 4. Evangelists, and in deed manifestly to
transgress the ordinances of the Council of Nice? Are not the Bishops of Rome
in this case like unto Theophilus B* of Alexandria, when a great number of
Monks came from Socrat. lib. (...) cap. 7
the Wilderness of Nitria to Alexandria, of purpose to slay him? Theophilus
met them, and with pleasant words mitigated their wrath: for he s^id unto
them, Brethren, I see your faces, as the face of God. This he said, not because
he had a good liking of them, but rather to be free of their danger. So does
Gelatius, and other Bishops of Rome, speak reuerent^y of the Council of Nice,
to the end, that the sixth Canon foresaid, which they have so manifestly
transgressed, may be ouer-passed with the more favorable pardoning of the
transgressors, because they speak good of the Council. If this be a good
form of dealing, let the wise Reade^ judge. The Hypocrites also will praise
the Lawgiuer, to wit, the eternal GOD, but they will not be obedient unto his
Law: yea, they will take his Holy Covenant in their mouths, yet they hate to
be reformed. But the Roman Bisshops Psalm. 50 ver. 16. 1^
should do well, either to brag less of the Nicene Council, or else to be
more obedient unto the acts thereof. Moreover if the 4. first General Councils
be like unto the 4. books of the Euang^l, then is it as great a sin to
falsify the acts of the Coun. of Nice, as to falsify the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, according to S. Ma^hew. But so it is, that the Bishops of Rome for
desire of pre-eminence, falsified the acts of the Council of Nice, alleging
an act of that Council whereby the Bishops of Rome were ordained to be Judges
of appellation, whenever any man did appeal from his own ordinary Bishop,
then should his cause be judg^d by the Bishop of Rome. But when all the
principal Registers were sighted by the Council of Carth^ge, no such
constitution was found in the Canons of the Council of Nice (for it was but
an act of the Council of Sardica, and that Council. Sardie.
both temporal and personal, as we have before declared.) Therefore the sixth
Council of Carthage ordained such persons Council. Carthag. 6
to be excommunicated, as should at any time hereafter appeal from their
own ordinary Bishop, to any Bishop beyond sea, meaning inspeciall of the
Bishop of Rome, because the question agitat in the late Councils of Carthage
was concerning his authority.

The second opinion concerning the authority of Councils, is the opinion of
Heretics, who altogether vilipend the author^tie of good Councils, albeit
they have weyed men's opinions in the just balance of the holy Scripture only,
and have rejected no doctrine, but that only, which being weyed in that most
perfect balance, is found light, Concerning these men, it is superfluous to
speak much, they are like unto dogs, whose friendship goes by acquaintance,
and is not ordered by reason, and therefore if a friend come to the house, he
barketh at Similitude.
him, because he has not seen him before: but incase he see a thief, and
prodigal waster of all the substance of his masters house, he will not bark
against him, if so be he be familiarlie acquainted with him: even so notable
Heretics, they rail against the truth of GOD, evidently proved by
Scriptu^e, and confirmed by authority of Councils, only because they are
well acquainted with the lie, and they are strangers from the truth of GOD.

The third opinion is best of all the rest, forasmuch as by it neither are
Councils vilipended, nor yet honored out of measure: but they are regarded in
so far as they speak that thing which GOD has spoken in his sacred
Scriptures before them. No greater honor did the Council of all Councils
conu^ened at Jerusalem, desire, wherein the Apostles were present, who were
Act. 15
taught in all truth by the holy Spirit, yet did they not pr^tende Ioh. 14 ^6
the war^and of the Spirit, without the warrant of the writt^n word of GOD: and
therefore their ordinances were worthy to be obeyed, because the warrant of
the Holy Spirit, and the warrant of the Holy Scripture and Apostolic
autho^itie, all concurring together, gave a full grace to the Council of
Hierus^lem. For this cause, in the famous Council of Nice, all their
constitutions have not a like reverence: the sentence pronounced against
Arrius, was well confirmed by testimonies of hol^e Scripture: but in appointing
Patriarchs, in attributing unto them jurisdiction, and power to conuocate
Councils within their own bounds, for timous suppressing of Heresies, they
bring no testimony of Scripture, but in stead of Scripture they set down
(...), that is, Let ancient customs have place. The Council of Nice in this
point did as Joshua did, who (...) a covenant with the Gibeoni^es, but consulted
not Joshua, 9
with them (...) of the LORD: Even so the Coun^ill of Nice in (...) ^o great
pre^eminence to a few men, they consulted not with Holy Scripture, which
warn^th Pastors to feed the flock of GOD, which ^ependeth upon them. And the
issue declared, that 1. (...). 5. (...)
G^D gave not such a blessing to the constituting of Patriarch^s, as he gave
to the condemnatour sentence pronounced against A^rius: For whereas they
imagined, that these Patriarchs (...) great authority, should timously
gather Synodes, and suppress H^reticall doctrine: it fell ou^ by the contrary,
that the Patriarchs were the chief Here^iques themselves, and chief
defenders of Heresy, such as Macedonius and Nestorius, Patriarchs of
Constantino^le, both damned for Heresy, the one in the Counci^l of
Constantinople, the other in the Council of Ephesus: In like manner Honorius
Patriarch of Rome, Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria, Macarius Patriarch of
Antiochia, with Sergius Pyrhu^ and Paulus, Pa^riarches of Constantinople, were
al condemned of Heresy, in the sixth General Council holden at
Constantino^le, ANNO 681.

O^ this that I have already spoken, it is evident, that the best way whereby
General or National Councils may maintain t^eir authority, and be
reverently regarded, is this, if in all t^eir determinations they set before
them the books of Holy Scripture, and conform all their definitive sentences
to the wisdom which they have learned out of the volume of those holy books,
following the example of the Church of Antiochia, who remitted the decision of
hard questions, wherewith they Act. ^5
were troubled, to the mouths of the Apostles of JESUS CHRIST. And seeing we
have not the Prophets and Apostles personally present in our time, the next is
to have recourse unto the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, whereby the
LORD speaks now to us, as he spoke of old time by the personal presence
of the Prophets and Apostles to our Fathers. And it is certain, that these of
Antiochia went up unto Jerusalem, not for any prerogative the town had, but
because the Apostles were in Jerusalem. And wheresoever we see the
Apostolic doctrine vnuiolably observed, in that place let us seek resolution
of all our doubts: and if the Apostolic doctrine be departed from Jerusalem
it self, it is but a den of thieves, as CHRIST says, Matthew. 21. 13. and if
it be departed from Rome, then is Rome it self spiritual Babylon, it is an
habitation of Devils, and the Hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird, and the constitutions that come from Rome are not
Apoc. 18. 2
to be regarded.

Notwithstanding of this, the Councils that has casten the Apostolic
doctrine behind their back, they have guarded themselves with another kind of
armor, and they endeavor to have credit and reverence by the multitude of
Princes, people, and learned Doctors, assenting to the determinations of their
Councils, and by the multitude of Anathemaes (more in number then those that
were pronounced out of mount Eball) whereby they deliver to the Devil, and
that in most prodigal form, all Deuteronomy. 27
those that will not assent unto their Decretes By these means (I say) and
such like, they purchase authority, reverence, and credit to their late
Councils. Nevertheless there is one curse in Holy Scripture, more to be
feared then all the curses of the Council of Trent, namely that which Paul
pronounces in these words, But though that we, or an Angel from Heaven,
preach Gal. 1. 8
unto you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. And like as Aarons rod devoured the Serpents of the Sorcerers of
Egypt, albeit in number they were many, even so this one curse swalloweth up
all their curses pronounced against innocent people, because they will not
depart in a jot Exodus 7. 1^
from the rule of wholesome and Apostolic doctrine. In like manner it is said
by Moses, Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law, to do
them. Consequently, blessed are they, who Deu. 27. verse, 26
firmly adhereth unto the Law of GOD. And by no authority of Princes,
Nations, Councils, or Doctors, will be withdrawn from the Law of GOD. And
this BULLINGER has wisely observed in these words, Tametsi caeat totus hic
mundus, minime tamen potest creatura qu^quam contra verbum creator is Bu^ing.
(...) Concil^.
statuere, neque decreta DEI aeterni abrogare. Neque valet hic eruditio, aut
multitudo, aut sanctitas, aut ulla denique authoritas, nam loquente DOMINO DEO
universorum, merito conticescit omni^ caro. SAMUEL certe dicebat, loquere
DOMINE, quoniam audit servus tu^s: that is, albeit all the university of this
world should be assembled together, yet the creature can ordain nothing
against the word of the Creator: neither can they abrogate the Decretes of the
Eternal GOD, neither can learning, multitude, holiness, or any kind of
authority avail in this matter: for when the GOD of all creatures speaks,
then justly all flesh should keep silence. SAMUEL indeed said, Speak,
LORD, for thy servant hears. Likewise 1. Sam. 3 verse, 10
he brings in a worthy sentence, of PANORMITANE, a famous Iurist, saying,
that greater credit should be given to a Laike-man, speaking the truth
according to Holy Scripture, then to a whole General Council, speaking a lie
contrary to Scripture.

Moreover, albeit there were worthy Assemblies holden in SILO, MISPAH, and
CARMEL, in the days of the Prophets, yet the Prophets are very sparing to use
arguments taken from the authority of these Assemblies: but the Prophets
lead the people continually to the Law of GOD, as to the right ground and
Fountain of all lawful Councils: so that their ordinary speech is this: This
says the LORD, and not, this says the Assembly gathered at MISPAH, SILO,
or CARMEL: they were so far from equalling Councils to the Law of GOD, that
whenever they did desire reformation of the people, then they laid before
them the Law of GOD, but not the authority of Councils, whose authority is
nothing else but borrowed from the Law of GOD: and therefore whosoever aduanc^th
C^uncils so high, that they would equal Councils to Holy Scripture, in my
opinion, they are not well acquainted with the Scriptures of GOD. In the new
Testament mention is made how Paul and Silas, visiting the Churches where Paul
and Barnabas had preached before, they delivered them the Decrees to keep,
ordained of the Apostles and Elders, Act. 16. 4
which were at Jerusalem. Here mention is made of the Decrees of a most
worthy Council, but heerewith remember two things: First, the Decrees of
such a Council, whereinto many Apostles were present, who were taught in all
truth by the Holy Spirit, according to the prediction of CHRIST. Secondly,
Paul and Silas were not now planting Churches in Asia the less, but they were
wa^ing and visiting the Churches already planted: and no man denies, but the
authority of good Councils is profitable to confirm men in the truth of GOD.
But it is the doctrine of the Holy Scripture of GOD, that begets Faith in
the souls of men. Therefore let the Holy Scriptures of GOD have the first and
principal honor, and no man will be offended, that good Councils be regarded
in their own rank.

In the next head let us speak of the abuses of Councils, they are manifold:
But the first and principal abuse of Councils, I think to be this, when the
very end wherefore they were wont to be gathered is inuerted. Of old Councils
were gathered to suppress Heresies and Schisms: But when they are gathered to
maintain Heretical doctrine, or to strengthen the hands of Schismatiques,
directly or indirectly, this is a great abuse of Councils. Like as the Council
of Ariminum was assembled for confirmation of the Arrian Heresy, and the
second Council of Ephesus gave allowance to the error of Eutyches. The
Councils of Tyrus and Millan indirectly in laboring to suppress Athanasius,
were in very deed supplanting the true Faith which Athanasius professed.
There is infinite difference betwixt Nimrod and Nehemiah, and betwixt Babel and
Jerusalem. In Genes. 11
the re-edifying of Jerusalem there was a purpose to glorify Nehem. 2
GOD: but in building Babell there was a far contrary intention.

Secondly, Councils are abused, when they take liberty to statute and ordain
any thing repugnant to the Holy Scriptures of GOD, whether it be in forbidding
to do that thing which the Scripture licentiateth to be done, or in allowing
things disallowed in Holy Scripture. This abuse began very early, even in the
famous Council of Nice, wherein they forbid men, who are converted to
Christian Religion, and are baptized in the Name of CHRIST, to return again
to the warre-fare, as if these two things were repugnant to be a warrior and
a Christian. Did not David, Iosaphat, and Josias, fight the battles of the
LORD? and in so doing, they made not defection from the Covenant of GOD. Was
not Cornelius both a Centurion and Act. 10
a Christian? And John Baptist, when he was demanded of the Soldiers, what
they should do, did he command them to forsake their calling? and not rather
to use it aright, that is, to do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and to be Luc. 3. 14
content with their wages. And was it lawful to militate under the banner of
Augustus and Tiberius? And shall it be found unlawful to fight under the
banner of Constantine, a most Christian Emperor? In my judgment this was too
much liberty, that the Council of Nice took unto themselves, to disallowe
any calling that in Holy Scripture is not disallowed, except only the abuse
of it. And of old the Jews made no Conscience to fight under the banner of
Alexander the Great, whom he honored also with (...), that is, with equal
honor and freedom of Burgeship with the Graecians, in the principal town
Josephus, Antiqu. lib. 11 cap. 8
of Egypt, called Alexandria, builded by himself. But this constitution of
the Council of Nice might be excused, because all things that are lawful
are not also expedient, and possibly they 1. Cor. 9
have seen at that time great danger to Christian men's salvation in warre-fare
(unknown to us) and therefore they took boldness to forbid Christians to go
to warrefare. But many other Councils, both National and (called by the
Roman Church) general, have allowed things expressly forbidd^n in the
written word of GOD, such as adoration of Images, and the sapramacie of the
Bishop of Rome, not only over all Pastors, but also a souereignitie in civil
things, over the Emperor, and Princes of the earth, which is an insufferable
disorder, to make the tail the head, and the head the tail. In particular I
speak of the Councils holden at Rome, by Gregorius the second, and Gregorius
the third, and Stephanus the third: and the second Council of Nice, holden
in the seventh year of the Empress Irene, with the consent and procuration of
Adrian Bishop of Rome, ANNO 790. The unhappy General Council of Vienne,
ass^mbled by Clemens the fifth, ANNO 1311. whereinto it is statuted and
ordained, that the Emperor shall give his oath of alleadgeance to the Pope, to
whom he is no less inferior, then the Moon is infinitely inferior unto the
splendour of the Sun. Can any thing be spoken more repugnant to the second
precept of the first Table, and the first precept of the second Table, then
the Decretes of the Councils foresaid.

Therefore let every Christian man think of Councils as they think of Rivers
of water, which are very profitable so long as they hold themselves within the
compass of their own accustomed banks: but if they swell and by vntimous
inundation Similitude.
ouer-flowe their own accustomed bounds, then are they very hurtful to the
near adjacent fields. Enen so Councils that take liberty to allow any thing
disallowed in Holy Scripture, are very pernicius and hurtful.

Thirdly, Councils are miserably abused, when they are blamed unjustly and
without a cause. The Arrians most unjustly blamed the Council of Nice, for
the word (...), because this word is not found in Scripture: Nevertheless the
matter it self expressed by this word is manifestly contained in Scripture: as
namely, when the Apostie John says, There are three which bear^ record in
Heaven, the FATHER, the WORD, and the Holy Io^n. 5. 7
GHOST: and these three are one. but the Arrians who blamed the Coun. most
wrongfully, said, there was a time wherein the Son was not existant: and that
Deuilish opinion neither in word, nor in matter, is to be found in Scripture.

Moreover, Councils are abused, when as their authority is impared not with
solid reasons, taken out of the Scrip^ures of GOD, but rather with the railing
speeches of contentious men* like as a number of Heretics called Acephali,
with tumultuarie murmuring and crying out against the Council of Chalcedon,
dispersed themselves here and there, and left not off their ungodly courses,
until a new Heresy of the Monothelites, an ungracious budde of the rotten and
cutted-downe stock of the Heresy of Eutyches did arise. But no man aught to
contend against Councils, with pride of a contentious mind, but rather with
humility of a modest mind search out, whether their Ordinances be agreeable
to the book of GOD, or not.

Finally, Councils are abused, when they who are assembled together are
transported with incertainetie of doubtful opinions, so that albeit they be
met together, to settle others in the certainetie of the true Faith, yet they
themselves are so wavering minded, that they can never be at rest. Like as the
Arrians, not content with the sum of Faith set down at Nice, assembled
themselves many times, and set down 9. diverse forms of Faith, as Socrates
records: yet could they never agree upon Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 4^
one certain form of Faith, which they would not alter. Likew^se in the
affairs of Discipline, so great discrepance of opinion was found, that
neither Council agreede with Council, nor Bishop with Bishop, nor yet Bishops
with Councils.

The Council of Ancyra thought expedient for order taking with those who had
sacrificed unto Idols in time of persecution, Council. A^cyr. an^ 308
that unto Bishops should be adjoined Chorepiscopi, that is, Country Bishops,
or Landward Bishops, to whom they gave not power to ordain Elders and Deacons,
but only Readers, and Subdeacons. Damasus Bishop of Rome could not agree to
this subordinate order of Bishops called Chorepiscopi. The Councils Gratian.
^stinct. 98
of Neocaesarea and Antiochia, liked of this form of gouernament. Other
Councils in not making mention of this name declared their misliking: so that
this abuse likewise of diversity of Hist. Mag^ Cent. 4 Cap. 6
opinions (frequently altered) both in Doctrine and Discipline, impaired much
the authority of Councils.

Before I declare who has power to conuocate General and National Councils,
something is to be premitted concerning the assemblies upon the LORDS holy
Sabboths. These assemblies of all other were counted most holy: in so much,
that when the Princes of the people of Israel were to conueene with Moses,
Numb. 10 verse, 3. 4
to consult concerning matters of civil gouernament, they were warned so to do
by the blowing of one of the silver trumpets only: but when both the silver
trumpets did blow, then the people were warned to conueene at the door of the
Tabernacle, for the exercise of divine service, which as it was of all
Conuentions most holy, so in like manner it was foresignisied in most solemn
manner. These holy meetinges were warranded by the LORDS express commandment,
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, etc. And in the new Testament,
Christians having E^o. 20. 9
received power to meet together in CHRIST'S Name, with promise that CHRIST
would be amongst them, they conueened secretly, to the hearing of the word,
and ministration of the Sacraments, albeit they were most straitely inhibited
so to do, by the Edictes of persecuting Tyrants: and these who were
comprehended and put to death for their conuentions and profession, they died
Holy Martyrs, how soever the Pagans did put them to death as traitors, because
they disobeyed the Emperors commandment, both in their conuentions and
profession. Yet this ground being once laid, that they died Holy Martyrs, it
will follow that Christians have power to conucene, to hear the word preached
(especially upon the LORDS day) albeit all the Princes of the world would
forbid them to meet. And this liberty granted by CHRIST, and sealed up by the
blood of innumerable martyrs, Confirmed also by the laws of Christian Princes,
ever since the reign of Constantine, it will continue unto the blessed
appearance of the LORD JESUS, to judge the world, albeit all the enemies of the
Gospel of CHRIST should grind their teeth, and fret against this liberty.

These fore-saide weekly conuentions are necessary at all times, and in all
ages, even albeit there were no H^retique nor Scismatique in the world, to
divert people from the truth of GOD, because even the best of us all is but
like unto a barren husbandry, that has need continually to be dressed, and
labored, and watered with the streams of the rivers of the Sanctuary Psalm.
46.
of our GOD, lest we wither in the barrenness of a corrupt nature. But
Councils General or National are not necessary at all times, but only when
the peace of the Church is troubled with Heresy and Schism, or an uniuersall
ouer-spreading scab of corrupt manners: and at such times it is meet that
Pastors acquaint the supreme Magistrate with the danger, who has not need at
all times to conuocate a Council, except the malady that he would rem^die be
unsupportable. After this wise form of dealing did Constantine send Osius
Bishop of Corduba Socrat. lib. 1 cap. 7
to Egypt, to see if by his travels the Heresy and Schism springing up in
Alexandria, could be timously suppressed: but when the good Emperor saw that
this Gangrene daily increased, then there was no remedy, but to gather a
General Council for suppressing of Heresy, and for keeping of intestine
peace into the Church of CHRIST.

Now to prove that National and General Councils ought to be gathered by
Monarchs and Princes: In the old Testament the great Conuentions at Carmell,
Silo, and Mizpeh, were assembled by Princes: and the assembly conueened at
Mizpeh 1. Sam. 10 verse, 17
by Samuel, he gathered it, as a civil Governor of the land, and not in so
far as he was a Prophet, for as yet Saul was not allowed by the people to
be king. The Conuention appointed at Gilgal, was with the express consent and
allowance of King 1. Sam. 12 verse, 3
Saul, who was also personally present at that Assembly. In the new Testament
the assembly of the Apostles at Jerusalem, albeit it was gathered without the
knowledge and allowance of the Emperor Cluadius, in whose time it was
assembled: Yet the Apostles had such extraordinary warrandes of the Spirit,
such extraordinary gifts, and their painful travels fell in such an
extraordinary time, when there was no Christian Magistrate favoring the
Gospel, that he who furnished unto them courage to preach without liberty
granted unto them by Princes, furnished also courage and grace unto them to
meet at Jerusalem, for the well of the Church, without the foreknowledge
Act. 15
and allowance of the Emperor Claudius. But things done extraordinarily,
lean unto their own extraordinary warrandes, and are no impediment to us to
proceed, and to speak of things that are ordinary.

And it is to be noted, that even during the time of the 10. Persecutions,
Christians neglected not to seek the support of Emperors against Heretics,
when it could be obtained, as clearelie appears by the ninth Persecuting
Emperor Aurelian, who with his civil authority assisted the Synod of
Antiochia, against Eusebius. lib. 7 cap. 30
Samosatenus, as has been declared in the third CENTURIE, and the Church had
craved the support of the Emperors authority to that effect.

From the days of the Emperor Constanti^e, until the year of our LORD 1215.
the Emperors were in use to conuocate Councils. But Innocentius the third, to
whose tuterie Frederick the second was recommended, by his father Henry the
sixth, more like to the successor of Judas, then the successor of Peter, made
Otto Duke of Saxon Emperor in prejudice of Frederick, until the spirit of
dissension fell betwixt Otto and Pope Innocentius the third. Then was Otto
excommunicated, and the Empire was given to Frederick the second, to whom it
rightly belonged. Notwithstanding Pope Innocentius took upon him boldness to
conuocate the General Council of Lateran wherein Popish Transsubstantiation
did get allowance) the like whereof no Pope preceding his time ever persumed
to do.

Now I demand of these, who defend the Popish Religion, and herewithall
continually brag of Antiquity, whether or no this be an ancient custom,
that the Bishops of Rome should conuocate General Councils? The History is so
evident and clear, that he who is not altogether effronted, will grant, that
it was not an ancient custom, that the Bishop of Rome should conuocate
General Councils, and no Pope did it before Innocentius the third. Gratianus
according to his foolish and flattering (...). 17
form of writing, brings in the testimony of Julius the first, affirming
that no Council is or shall be firm and sure without the allowance of the
chair of Rome. What shall we then say of the Council of H^erusalem, holden
by the Apostles Act. 1 (...)
before there was any Bishop of Rome to give allowance unto it?
Notwithstanding, even Pope Julius himself, when he writes to the Bishops
gathered in the Council of Antiochia, he blames them with many faults, yet
he charge them not with this, that they had assembled themselves together
without license obtained from him, but rather for this, that they had not
required him, or his messengers, to be present at their assembly, Whereby it is
evident, that it was not an ancient custom, that the Bishop of Rome should
conuocate all General and National (...) lib. 2 (...). 17
Councils.

With the like arrogancy the Bishops of Rome took upon themselves to be
Moderators of Councils, from thee year of our LORD 1215. until our days. And
this is another novelty, which the Roman Bishop could not bring in, until
he had trodden the Emperors authority under foot. In the Council of Nice
Eustatius Bishop of Antiochia was Moderator. In the second General Council
holden at Constantinople, Gregorius Bishop of the great Town at that time was
President. In the third Coun. conueened at Ephesus, Cyrillus bishop of
Alexandria was Moderator. In the fourth conueened at Chalcedon in Bithinia,
Lucentius, Pascasianus, and Bonifacius, messengers sent from Leo Bishop of
Rome, had the presidencie. This is the first time whereinto the B. of Rome,
either in his own person, or by his Agent, moderated any General Council:
And at this time who can say that the Counc. of Chalcedon was assembled by the
commandment of Leo B. of Rome? When as in the very frontespice of the Council
it is written, Ex Decreto piissimorum and fidelissimorum Imperatorum
Valentiniani and Martiani, etc. Moreover Council. Chalcedon, act 1
it is evident by reading the Epistles of Leo, that he intraited for this
favor at the Emperors hand, that the General Council might have been
conueened in Italy, which he needed not to have done if by his own authority
he had power to conuocate General Councils. It is well observed by that worthy
and learned writer of France, Philip Morney that Baronius for excessive desire
he has to prove that Leo had power to assemble General Philip. Morney
mystiniquis.
Councils, he changes the Orthographie of the Latin language, and in stead of
Consilium Synodi Generalis indiximus, he cites Concisilium Synodi Generalis
injuximus. It is true, that Leo B. of Rome gave advice and counsel both to
Theodosius, and to Martianus, to gather a General Council, but he had no
power to appoint and command that it should be kept. But this power belonged
to the Emperor. Baronius will not prove his purpose so easily, as by stealing
in the letter C, in place of the letter S. The fi^t General Council was
assembled in Constantinople, by the commandment of the Emperor Justinian, and
not by the commandment of Vigilius B. of Rome, neither was Vigilius Moderator
in this Council, but Eutychius B. of Constantinople governed the Assembly.

The sixth General Council was assembled by the commandment of the Emperor
Constantinus Pogonatus, and was perfected by the commandment of Iustinianus
the second his son. Sergius Bishop of Rome, did not appoint this Council to
be kept, neither would he give allowance to the determinations of this
Council, because in it the constitutions of the Roman Church concerning
prohibition of Marriage, were disallowed: Notwithstanding his Agent, who was
present in Constantinople, and compeared in his name, gave consent, and
subscribed the Acts of the sixth General Council, but stolide (says Platina)
that is, foolishly, writing with flattering style pleasant things to Platin. de
vit. Pontif.
the Bishops of Rome.

For d^cision of the question concerning worshipping of Images 3. great
Councils were gathered, one by Constantinus Copronymus, at Constantinople:
another by the Empress Irene, at Nice: the third by the Emperor Carolus
Magnus, at Francf^ra: which of them soever shall be found the seuenrh
General Council, always none of these three was gathered by the commandment
of the Bishop of Rome, neither was he Moderator in any of them.

The eight General Council was assembled by the commandment of Basilius
Emperor of Constantinople: but the Ambassadors of the Bishop of Rome, Hadrian
the second, had the gouernament of the assembly: and they began early to
manifest the portraict of their tyrannous gouernament. No man was admitted to
give vote in the General Council, save he only, who would cons^nt and
subscribe to the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. Adoration of Images did get
full allowance in this Council: and this was a fore-running messenger of the
tyranny that followed hereafter, from the 1215. year of our LORD, until our
time. Now the Bishop of Rome conuocateth General Councils, governs them by
himself, or his substitute, and makes ordinances flatly repugnant to the
written word of GOD. No cause is so impious and ungodly, that ever wanted an
advocate: but this I repeat again, that he is very impudent, who dare
affirm, that the Bishop of Rome of old time did conuocate General Councils,
and was Moderator in them.

By conference with persons of the Roman Religion, I understand, that they
will not give full credit to any Assembly, but to such a one, as is lawfully
conuocated, holden, and lawfully ended. They count it lawfully conuocated, when
the Bishop of ROME by his Edict has gathered it: lawfully holden, when the
Bishop of ROME, or else his substitute, is Moderator of the Assembly: and
lawfully ended, when he, who is Moderator, continues in his office until the
end of the assembly. Such deep instructions Papists of our Nation have
received from their teachers: and alas, an ignorant person is soon shooueled
out of the way, but cursed be he, that make^h the blind to go out Deuteronomy. 27
verse, 18
of the way: and all the people shall say, So be it. Are not these Doctors of
lies ashamed, at some times to commend the first four General Councils, with
excessive praises, and again to give such instructions to their disciples, as
shall make the first four General Councils to be of no account, because none
of them was conuocated by the Edict of the Bishop of ROME, but by the
commandment of the Emperors, CONSTANTINE, THEODOSIUS, VALENTINIAN, and
MARTIANUS. Moreover, in none of these four was the Bishop of ROME, or yet his
substitute, Moderator, except only in the Council of CHALCEDON. Who can give
credit to such teachers, who in one word build, and in another word destroy
that same thing which they have builded. The Apostle PAUL says (...): Gal. 2.
18
that is, For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my
self a trespasser. And when they have found out new distinctions, by these
distinctions, the contradiction of their late Councils are the more
inexcusable. The Council of BASIL, g^thered by EUGENIUS the fourth, ANNO 1431.
wherein it is decearned, that the B. of ROME shall be subject to the General
Council, as a child to his mother, And the Council of FLORENCE, gathered by
the self same Bis. ANNO 1439. wherein the contrary is decearned, yet were
both these Coun. according to their own description lawfully conuocated,
holden, and ended: and yet are they flat contrary one to another, in a
fundamental point of Popish faith, for it leans not upon scripture only, but
also upon the authority of General Councils, and of the B. of ROME.

Before I speak of the last head, it is to be considered, that in gathering
of Councils diverse respects have been had, some times to the people, some
times to the Pastors, and at some times also regard has been had to good men,
who have been unjustly accused. Regard was had to the people, when Councils
were conueened in those self same places whereinto the pestilent venom of
Heretical doctrine was chiefly ouerspred: For Novatus was damned at Rome,
Samosatenus at Amiochia, Artemon in Bostra of Arabia, Eustatius in Gangra of
Paphlagonia, and Arrius at the first in a particular Synod holden at
Alexandria. In a^l these Councils regard was had to the people, that heresy
might die as the grasse-hoppers die, to wit, in the fields whereinto they have
been bread, and be buried as the frogs of Egypt were buried, to wit, in
the river from Exodus 8.
whence they came when they ouer-couered the land. At other times great
regard was had to Pastors, especially in assembling General Councils, that
the place of meeting might be commodious, whereinto the Preachers of Asia,
Europe, and Lybia, either by sea or land might most conveniently resort: and
without all question this was the cause wherefore all the General Councils
preceding the woeful Council of Lateran were assembled, either in Bithynia,
Ionia, or Thracia, places whereinto Europe and Asia does most nearly
confine, and the Navigations is most easy to the Bishops of Egypt,
Pentapolis, Lybia, and Mauritania. Some times a regard was had to innocent men,
that they might resort to such places whereinto their cause might have been
tried, without partiality, as Sardica a town of Illyrium was appointed for
the trial of Paulus, Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas: For it is no reason,
that honest men should be journeyed to places whereinto the force of armor
is more to be feared, then the force of their aduersari^s arguments.

The last head had been unnecessary to be entreated, if that the ambition of
the Bishops of the Roman Church had not compelled men to seek out this
question to the very ground: for who can doubt but Bishops, Elders, Deacons,
and wise and learned men, having commission from their own Churches, should
be present at Councils, and vote according to the word of GOD, in such things
as shall happen to be proponed in the Council. Nevertheless the ambition of
Bishops, fearing lest by plurality of votes matters should frame otherwise
then liked themselves best, they began to make distinction betwixt consultatiue
and definitive votes, minding thereby to appropriate unto themselves only
definitive votes, and the rest of the Council, albeit Elders, Deacons,
Doctors, and learned men, furnished with commission, their vote should only
be consultatiue, and should not be numbered amongst the votes whereupon the
definitive sentence should arise. This question was reasoned in the General
Council of Basil, ^ssembled ANNO 1431. And recourse was had to Scripture, as
the true ground whereby controuerted questions should be decided, and there
it was found in the definitive sentence of the Council of Jerusalem, (...),
etc. that is, Act. 15 verse, 28
For it seemed good to the Holy GHOST, and to us. Now this demonstratiue word
(...) sends us to the preface and superscription prefixed to the Epistle,
wherein it is written, (...): Ibi. ver. 23
that is, The Apostles, and the Elders, and the Brethren, unto the Brethren,
who are of the Gentiles in Antiochia, and in Syria, and Cilicia, send
grecting. In these words it is manifest, that the Elders and Brethren, who
came to JERUSALEM, furnished with commission, gave such votes, whereupon the
definitive sentence of the Council did arise.

But seeing that the Bishops of the Roman Church have presumed to set
themselves so far forward, as if they should be the only actors and do^rs
of matters entreated in Councils, it were not amiss, if reason can afforde so
much, even to set them a soote abacke. Now therefore I affirm, that when any
Council, either General or National is conueened, whereinto the question
concerning the supremacy of the B. of Rome is disputed, In such a Council (I
say) no Popish B. should have vote, neither definitive nor consultatiue,
because he comes not to the Counc. as a free man, to vote according to the
light of his conscience, but he comes as a bond-slaue to the Bish. of Rome,
anticipated and preoccupied in the very time of his admission to his
Bishopric, and bound by an oath to defend the supremacy of the Pope,
together with the ordinances of the late General Councils. What to do has
such a bonde-slaue to vote in a free Council? except he be first loosed from
the bands of his oath, most vnrighteouslie conceived and ma^e: so that it is
not possible for them to vote as free men in any Council, until that oath
(made to the Antichrist, and not to CHRIST) be abjured, abrenounced, and
utterly undone.

Now to conclude, It were a wise course in all things that we presume to
do, at least to set such a patron before our eyes, which without all
contradiction is perfect: and let us endeavor to approach so near as possible
is, to the similitude of that patron, to the end that our doings be not
altogether evil and reproueable. And if the men of our age would set before
their eyes the perfect patron of the Holy and Blessed Council of JERUSALEM,
no doubt but the people of Act, 15
GOD should receive greater comfort of their meetinges, then hitherto they
have received: But let the LORD work this in his own time, To whom be praise
for ever,

AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Monasticke life.
THE original of the Monasticke life is referred by some men to Helias, by
others to John Sozo^* lib. 1 cap. 12 Act. 2. 44
Baptist: some refer it to those who were in company with the Apostles, and
had all things common: Others refer it to the Essenes, a sect of the Jews,
of whose customs Josephus accurately Joseph. Antiquit. li. 18 cap. 2
writes. And indeed the similitude of the manners of the Monks and the
Essenes converted to Christian Religion, agrees in many points: for they had
all things common, they labored with their hands, and were men accustomed with
long abstinence from meat and drink. Eusebius reserreth the beginning of the
Monasticke form of living, to the auditors of the Evangelist Mark in
Alexandria: for a number of them inclined Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 17
their minds to the contemplation of divine mysteries, and separated themselves
from the company of the multitude who dwelt in towns, and they had their
habitation in the wilderness, about the lake Maria, or Maris. This place was
called the Wilderness of Nitria. Eusebius confirms this opinion by the
testimony of Philo. Finally, some refer it to the time of the Philo de vie^
comtempla^.
ten Persecutions, at what time many fled to the Mountains, to the
Wilderness, and to solitary places, wherein they contracted such a custom and
habit of solitary living, that even Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 12
in time of peace, and when Persecutions were ended, they continued still
living in the Wilderness.

Whatsoever was the original of the Monasticke life, it is certain, there was
a greater show then substance of Religion in it: 1, Tim, 4. 8
for bodily exercises they profit little, and the not sparing the body, is
counted by the Apostle (...), that is, a voluntary Colloss. 2 verse, 23
Religion, which men have invented to themselves, and GOD has not commanded
it. True it is, that men do well if they subdue their bodies, as Paul did, to
bring it in subjection, lest by any means, when he had preached to others, he
himself should 1. Cor. 9 verse 27
be reproved. And as true it is on the other part, that incase men repose upon
these outward exercises, as things in themselves meritorious, and refer
them not unto the right end, as Paul did: yea, and if they join not with
abstinence from meat, an abstinence also from sin, the LORD regards not
the outward affliction of the body, as the Prophet Isai clearly declares in
these words, ^s it such a fasting that I have chosen, that a man should
afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head, as a bulrush, and to
lie down in sacke-cloth and ashes? Will thou call this a fasting, or an
acceptable day to the LORD?

In the very original ground of the Monasticke life, I see this infirmity,
That men imagined by changing of place to be free of the snares of the Devil:
But it is otherwise, Adam was tempted in Paradise, and CHRIST was tempted in
the Wilderness, Genes. 3 Matthew. 4
and Satan is ready to spread his net both in the prison and in the palace,
and by changing of place we cannot be free from his malice. In the Epistle
written by Basilius Magnus to Gregorius, this is illustrate by the fit
similitude of a man who saileth Epist. Basil. ad Gregor.
in a ship, and finds himself to be sick, and secretly in his own mind
blames the greatness of the vessel whereinto he saileth: but when he
steppeth down into the little bote, that accompanies the ship, his sickness
continues, and is not abated, whereby he is compelled to come to a
consideration of the Similitude.
right cause of his sickness, that it is neither the great vessel, nor the
little vessel, that is the cause of his grieuance, but rather the corrupt
humors that lurk within his own body. Even so the permutation of place will
not make us free of the tentations of the Devil, as some men imagined. And
like as the consolations of GOD are not tied to any certain place, for Moses
in Exodus 24
Arabia, and upon Mount Horeb was delited with the sight of GOD, and in Pisga,
with the long expected sight of Deuteronomy. 34
the promised land: and the Apostle John in the Isle of Pathmos saw many
comfortable reuclations: even so the perilous snares Apocal. 1
of Satan are spread out every where, no less then the consolations of GOD are.

The Monks of old were not all of one rank, for some of them were called
Coenohitae, or Conventuales. Others were called Anchoritae. The conuentuall
Monks, albeit they were separated Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 23
from the fellowship of the common people, yet they had a fellowship amongst
themselves, and some of them dwelt in the Wilderness: such as the Conuentuall
Monks of Egypt dwelt in the Wilderness of Nitria and Schethis: but the
Conuentuall Monks of Syria, Persia, Armenia, and other places, not so Sozom.
lib. 6 cap. 34
near approaching to the Equinoctial line as those of Egypt were, they dwelt
in Towns and Villages, because the inclemencie of alterable weather permitted
them not to dwell in the Wilderness, as the Monks of Egypt did.
Notwithstanding, some of the Conuentuall Monks of that part of Syria which is
called Interamnis, or Mesopotamia, as it were striving against nature,
ouer-went the Monks of Egypt, in that which the Apostle calls (...), that
is, a not sparing of the Colloss. (...)
body: for the Monks of Egypt dwelt in little Cottages, and ate some
quantity of bread, after long abstinence: but the Monks fore-saide had their
remaining upon the Mountains, and were covered with no roof of any shop or
lodge defending them against the injury of the weather, except only with the
roof of Heaven: and they ate no bread, but only refreshed their hungry bodies
with the roots of herbs, which they houcked out of the ground: and for this
kind of pasturing the people called them Greges. Of this rank of conuentual
monks about Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 33
Nisibis and Mount Sigeron were the monks following, famous and much renowned,
to wit, Batthaeus, Eusebius, Barges, Abbos, and Lazarus (who afterward was
ordained a Bishop) and Abdaleos, Zenon, and Hetrodorus an old man, of whom
Sozomen in the place Sozom. ibid.
above specified makes particular mention. To all these Conuentuall Monks,
wheresoever they dwelt, this was common, that they were divided into Conuentes,
and every Convent was governed by one Governor, whom they reverenced, as
children reverence their father.

The Anachorites were Monks who dwelt in the Wilderness severally, and by
themselves, not deliting in fellowship, as the Conuentual monks did. Ruffin.
makes the more reverend record of the Anachorites, or Eremites of Egypt,
because he visited them, and Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 8
had the honor to be blessed by imposition of their hands, such as two
Eremites bearing the name of Macarius, Isidorus, Pambus, Moses, Benjamin,
Scyron, Helias, Paulus in Apeliote, Paulus in Focis, Poemen, and Joseph in
Pispiri, of whom there are large treatises in the Ecclesi^sticall History.
Some of the Anachorites were so rude Euagr. lib. 1. cap 21
and i^mane, that they bowed their faces to the ground, and ate (...) and
herbs, as beasts do: and if they had seen another m^n, they fled from him,
and hid themselves, as if they had no b^ne procreated of the race of mankind.
The brethren of (...), of whom Plutarch writes, are to be set by, as Plutarch.
in (...). A^ton.
unworthy of any further remembrance: And the common people justly called them
Armenta, that is, Cattle. There was yet another rank of Eremites called
Circulatores, who after long abstinence from all kind of delicate pleasures,
they left the wild^rnesse, and came to towns, sat in tabernes, resorted to
stoue-ho^ses, and yet were not entangled with any kind of desire of earthly
pleasures, as dead men to the world: but when Euagr lib. 1 cap. 21
occasion of prayer was offered unto them, the ^ldest and weakest of them did
pluck up his heart, and with vigore and courage did perform that Holy
s^ruice. Euagrius commending these Circulatores, with exces^iue praises,
borrows a similitude from Plato whereby he would declare, that as a man who
has unclothed himself of his upper garments, and in end has Similitude.
cast off his shirt also, this man is naked indeed: even so these
Circulatores, after they had forsaken all carnal delites, in end they
forsook also (...), that is, vain glory, which is like unto the shirt of a
man, and the last of all garments casten off. The similitude is very good, if
it had been rightly applied, but I cannot see how it can be rightly applied
to these Circulatores, who needed not to have come to towns, as to stages and
theaters, to make oftentation of their abstinence, if they had not been
covetous of vain glory.

The orders of Monks that sprang up after the three hundredth year of our
LORD, were like unto roots planted in an Orchard, which spread out in many
branches, such as the Basilidians, Ambr^sians, the Augustine Monks,
Hieronymian^, Gr^gorians, and Benedictines. But the Augustines and Benedictines
were beyond the rest. The order called Grandimontenses, the Orders of
Premonstratenses, in the low countries of Germany, near to Le^dium, of
Guilelmitae in Aquitania, Milites D. Jacobi, and Calatrinenses in Spain: All
these followed the rules of the Augustine Monks. But the Orders of the
Cluniacenses in France, of the shadowed valley, who dwelt in Italy, and upon
the Apenneine of Cistertienses in Burgundy, of Bernard^ines, Coelestines, of
Justinians, of Mount Oliue^, of Humiliati, and diverse others: all these were
branches of the order of S. Benedict. And this diversity of names was imposed
to Monks living under the rules of Augustine and Benedict, partly to declare
the places wherein, and partly the persons by whom the dissolute conversation
of the Monks of these two orders was reduced to the strickt abstinence of
their first institution. Many other Orders I have of purpose ouer-passed with
silence, because the number is exceeding great only of the Charterous Monks,
of the Franciscans and Dominicans, and of the unhappy order of the Layolites
and a few more we shall speak hereafter, GOD willing.

Now to keep some order in this Treatise, I shall first declare (GOD willing)
the means whereby the Monasticke form of living was increased, magnified and
admired, even beyond all measure. Secondly, of the degrees of the decay of
their fame, which insued soon after the excessive commendation of that state.
And thirdly, the vild and insufferable abuses of the Mon^sticke life of late
days, whereby Monks are become a heavy and loath some burden, ouer-charging
the world, and like unto the offensive Locustes, who even when they have flowne
away they leave behind them such detriment and loss to parts whereinto they
have been, that of a long time they cannot be forgotten again. First, the
Monastries of old were called (...), or places of honesty, whereinto all
lasciviousness, wantonness, and riote was abhorred, as it was wont to be
detested i^ Selga, a town of Pisidia, in so far that the Apostle Paul
himself Romans 13 verse, 13
abhors not from the word (...), whereby he betokens wantonness.
Likewise they were called (...), for their solitary living, (...) and (...),
for their meditation and continual holy exercises. In these places men were
well brought up, and were furnished with knowledge, and were meet to stop the
mouths of Heretics, who in the fourth CENTURIE did abound. In these places
were continual exercises of Prayer, Reading, Meditation, and abstinence from
all kind of delicate pleasures. And men brought up in Monasteries were meet to
undertake the weighty charge of Pastors and Bishops. Epiphanius from his youth
was brought up in the Monastries both of Palestina and Egypt. And Nazianzenus
drew with him Sozom. l^b. 6 cap. 3 2
Basilius Magnus to the Wilderness, where they laid aside all the books of
Gracian Philosophers, and searched out the mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD,
out of the books of Holy Ruffin. lib. 2 cap. 9
Scripture, and very diligently read the books of ancient Fathers, who before
their time had written Commentaries upon divine Scripture: so were they both
well prepared for great emploimentes, by thirteen years continual exercise
of reading in the Wilderness. Barses, Eulogius, Lazarus, Leo, and Prapidius of
Monks in Syria and Persia, were made Bishops. And this Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 34
was the first honor of Monastries, that in them, as it were in Colleges of
Learning, men were well exercised, and prepared for the Pastoral office.

Secondly, the great gifts of GOD that appeared in some of them, who professed
the Monasticke life, brought this kind of living in wonderful great admiration
amongst the people, especially the gift of working of miraculous works. In
this point like as I am not altogether incredulous, to doubt of every miracle
which GOD wrought by the hands of Monks, so likewise will I not be so
childish credulous, as to believe every thing that Ecclesiastical Writers do
record of them, as namely, the thirty years silence of THEONAS, conjoined
with a Prophetical gift. GOD suffered not ZACHARIAS the Sozom. lib. 6 ^p. 28
father of JOHN BAPTIST (albeit justly punished with dumnesse Luc. 1. 22
for his incrudelitie) to be so long silent, seeing the talentes of GOD are
given to be occupied, and not to be hidden in the ground.

The miracle of Apelles an Egyptian Monk, who brunt the Devil in the face
with an hot iron, who appeared unto him in the similitude of a beautiful
woman, and tempted him to ungodly lust: is it not a childish fable, and
repugnant also to Scripture, wherein the weapons are described wherewith we
should fight against spiritual wickedness, and all are pieces of (...). 6
spiritual armor only?

The miraculous transporting of Ammus over a broocke, to the end he should
not draw off his own hose, and see his Socrat. lib. 4 cap. 23
own naked legs, is not agreeable to the end that GOD has in working of
miracles: namely, to confirm the weakness of Faith, but not to foster vain
conceits in men's hearts. Was it a fault of CHRIST'S Disciples to see their
own naked Ioh. 13. 5
legs, when our LORD JESUS washed them?

The superstition of the Monk Dorotheus, hating sleep as he hated the
Devil, when as our Master JESUS CHRIST abhorred not from refreshing his own
body with natural rest. The multiplied number of prayers which PAULUS in
Pherma Sozom. lib. 6 cap. 29
as a daily task offered to GOD, numbering his prayers by the like number of
three hundredth stones put in his bosom, and after every prayer casting out a
stone, until his bosom was emptied of all the three hundredth little stones
laid up in his bosom. This devotion is much praised by Sozomenus, and out of
question it is the first ground of Popish beads. The vow Sozom. ibid.
of P^, when he went to the Wilderness of Egypt, that he should never see
any of his own kindred in the face again, and his endeavor to perform his
vow by closing his eyes, and permitting his sister to satisfy her mind,
which longed for a sight of him, but he would not once open his eye liddes to
see his sister, lest he should break his vow by so doing. All these things
and many more are recorded by Ecclesiastical Writers, and that not without a
Note of high commendation: So that the report of their Miracles, of their
extraordinary abstinence from lawful refreshments, of their long continuance
in prayer, brought the people to a wonderful admiration of the Monasticke life.

The third mean whereby the fame and renown of monks was mightily augmented,
was their good carriage in their conversation, for a long time: They were
temperate, chaste, obedient to their superiors, full of charity, given to
Prayer, Reading, Meditation, and hearing of godly Exhortations: With manual
labors also they gained food and raiment to themselves, and that which
superabounded, was bestowed to the support of the poor their policy was
commendable: the convent was divided by tens, and every ten Monks had a Decanus
to atte^d upon them, August. d^ ^morib. Eccl, Cathol^
so called because he attended upon the company of ten Monks: from them he
received the work they had wrought with their hands, and sold it in the towns
of Egypt, and bought food and raime^t to the Monks, and the rest was bestowed
on the poor, so that sometimes Ships were hired to transport to Christian
people (whom they heard of to be indigent) support from the Monks of Nuria and
Schethis. Moreover, the glorious name given of old to Hethnicke Philosophers,
now was transferred to the Monks: for the Emperor Valens had slame all the
Philosophers in the East for their curiosity, in seeking out by the tripode
^oZom. lib. 6 cap. 35
of Apollo the name of him who should succeed to the Emperor Valens: so that
both the common people and Ecclesiastical Writers, conferred the glorious name
of Philosophers unto the Monks only.

The Monks being thus advanced by the wind of populare applause, and mounted
up upon the benches of high estimation, their number also was daily augmented:
so that in the Wilderness of Nitria were found fifty several companies of
Monks, and in every company three thousand and above, who were all subject to
one Governor, as many sons to one Father, August. de ^iorib. Eccl. Cathol.
These companies make out the number of an hundredth and fifty thousand Monks,
all dwelling in one Wilderness of Nitria, over and beside other Egyptian
Monks, who had their remaining in the Wilderness of Schethis, where the
Conuents of Monks subject to one common Father, consisted of the number of
five hundredth Monks. And like as in the Country of Arabia foelix at the
noone-tide of the day innumerable flying Serpents are found bizzing about the
Aromaticke trees, not in respect of a delight they have in the sap of those
trees, but in Similitude.
respect of the delight they have in the warmenesse of an hot day^ even so the
applause of the people encouraged many to embrace the Monasticke life, rather
then a deli^e in the st^ickt abstinence of a solitary life.

Finally, ancient Fathers commended the Monasticke life ou^ Au^ust. de morib.
Eccl. Cathoi.
of all me^sure, Augustine calleth^, Excellens fast g^m sanct^, that is, the
exc^lent eminency of (...): And Basilius. Magnus was earnest in building
Monasteries in Pontus, and sedulous in writing books called Ascetica,
containing Precepts of c^elie and manerly living, to be practiced by Monks:
le^om inuerted Bi^il. Ascetica.
the ancient order, and of a presbyter became a Monk, in a Monastery builded
at Bethlehem, when as before the Monasticke life had been a preparation to the
Minis^rie: Yea, and the Monasticke life was so highly praised and admired,
through the great commendations, that learned Fathers gave unto it, that in
end it was a proverb in the mouths of the people, Malus August. Aurel.
Epist. LXXVI.
Monachus, bonus Clericus, that is, an evil Monk, a good Clergy man, where
in the worst of the Coruent of Monks was equalled to the best of the Ministry.
Augustine was offended at this proverb: notwithstanding it was the Fathers
themselves, such as Augustine, Epiphanius, Basilius, Ambrose, and Ierom, who
rooted this opinion in the peoples hearts, that Monachatus was excellens
fastigium sanctitatis, as has been declared.

Now if comparison should be made betwixt the Monks of the Convent, and the
principal members of the Clergy, what shall we say of Epiphanius Bishop of
Cyprus, Basilius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Nazianzenus Bishop of
Constantinople, Dioscorus Bishop of Hermopol^, Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica,
and innumerable more of the like rank, who of Monks became Bisshops? Were
they more perfect when they lurcked in the Wilderness, and cared for their
own souls only, or when they were made Bishops, and cared for the souls of
many people, bought with the precious ransom of the blood of CHRIST; Dare any
man say, that by undertaking the office of a Bishop they abased themselves, and
stepped down to a lower degree of perfection, then the former, which they had
during their remaining in the Wilderness? Has the proverb Ab Equis ad
Asinos, that is, from Horses to Asses, any place in this exchange of their
estate? Yea, what shall we say of Narcissus Bishop of Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 9
Jerusalem, who left his Pastoral office, and fled to the Wilderness and in
his old age returned again to Jerusalem? Does any (...). (...) Writer count
his going to the Wilde^nesse a mounting to a degree of further ^fection? and
not rather a piece of i^becillitic and weakness in him, who could not
patiently endure when ^alse testimony was borne against him?

Concerning the place of Scripture, wherein it is said, If ^hou Mat. ^9. 21
would be perfect, go, and sell all thou ha^, and give it unto the poor, and
the shall have treasure in Heaven: This was spoken to a rich man, and to an
Hypocrite puffed up with a conceit of his own rightecus^es, and for discovery
of his hypocrisy a particular commandment is given to him only, and not
generally appertaining to all Christians: Like as another commandment was
given to ABRAHAM, in particulare, and not generally appertaining to all men, to
offer up his son ISAAC a sacrifice to Genes, 2^
GOD: And CHRIST in that place, is not describing the perfection of a man, but
he is discovering the false conceit of an Hypocrites heart, glorying in the
perfect righteousness of the Law. CHRIST will let the world see, that for
all his bragging, yet he loved his riches better then he loved GOD, and
consequently he knew not so much as the General sum of the Law, which
warns men to love GOD above all things.

In the next head the decay of the fame and glory of the Monasticke life is to
be declared, which ensued soon after the excessive comme^dation of it, and
that through manifold defections Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 11
both in doctrine and manners, that fell out amongst Monks: First they became
both inuentors and propagators of Heresies: Aud^i, otherwise called
Anthropomorp^itae, who supposed GOD Theod. comp. (...).
to be fashioned according to the similitude of a man, with head, arms,
legs, feet, and other members, proportionallie The^oros. li. 4. cap. 10
agreeing to the similitude of a man's body. These Heretics (I say) first
sprang up in the Wilderness of Nitria. Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia in
Armenia, albeit he was not a Monk, yet he was an admirer of the Monasticke
life, and afterward was condemned as an obstinate Heretic, in the Council
of Ancyra. Marathonius, who had been a Thesaurer in the days of Council. Ancyr.
the Emperor Constantius, and furnished money to the Emperors Soldiers, in
end became rich, and by advise of Eustachius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia,
he builded a Monastrie in Constantinople, Sozom. lib. 4 cap. 27
where he propagated the Heresy of Macedonius, which had been quenched in
Constantinople if Maratbonius under Theod. lib. 4 cap. 11
pretense of Religion had not propagated it. Moreover the Heresy of Messaliani
and Euchytae, did so ouer-spreade in Monastries, that Letoi^s Bishop of
Meletina found no better mean to suppress this Heresy, then by driving the
Monks out of their Cloisters, and setting the Monastries on fire. Likewise
Amphiloc^ius Bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, and Flavianus Bishop of Antiochia,
with great fightings and wressing hardly could get these Heretics in their
bounds discovered and subdued. And Eutyches, whose error like a Canker-worme
so long time molested the Church of GOD, was he not an Abbot in
Constantinople^ Poly^ also a ridiculous Monk, obstinately defended the Heresy
of the Monoth^tes in the fixed General Council, Council. G^neral. 6
and offered to confirm that doctrine with a miraculous work: but with shame
and confusion he succumbed, and was curs^d by the Council. Moreover Monks
were the chief defenders of the adoration of Images. And in the second Council
of Nue worshipping of Images is proved by a confabulation betwixt the Devil
and a Monk, and by another foolish dialogue Damascen. de Imaginibus.
betwixt a Monk and his Abbot. This was the first great dash that the
Monastic^e life got, that many of them were found rather propagators of
Heresy, then defenders of the truth.

Corruption of manners amongst the Monks, began at disobedience to their
superiors. Of old the Convent was very obedient to their Governor (who some
time was called Prepositus, afterward Archimandrita, and last Abbas) and the
Governor was obedient to the Bishop, and the Bishop to the Emperor and his
Deputies. Nevertheless under the reign of the Emperor A^cadius, the Monks
of Egypt went forth out of their Socrat. lib. 6 cap. 7
Monastries, and came to Alexandria, of purpose to slay their Bishop
Theophilus^ which thing also they had performed, if so be that by subtilty of
flattring words he had not mitigated their anger, as is a^eadie declared. In
like manner the Monks of Nitria, to the number of 500. came out of the
wilderness to Alexandria not against their B. Cyrillus, but against Orestes
the deputy Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 14
of the Emper. Theodosius, whom they both outbraided and wounded: And the
Monk Ammonius, who wounded the deputy, was deservedly punished to the death
for his seditious attempt: yet was he commended by Cyrillus, and counted a
martyr, but with the great disliking of good Christians, who hated seditious
enterprises against lawful Magistrates. Also the seditious Monks of
CONSTANTINOPLE, whose insolency Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 9
John Chrysostom (...) to correct, they slandered him as a senere angri^,
fi^ce, and proud man, and opened the first door to his trouble: so that his
hateful enemies both in Court and Church, were encouraged by their means to
procure his deposition, banishment, and death. Likewise, the Monks of Nova
Laura in JERUSALEM, who for Heretical opinions were driven out of their
Monastries by their own Bishop Eustochius, they became very seditious, and
stirred up horrible contention, betwixt Theodorus Ascidas Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, and Eustochius Bishop of JERUSALEM. No contention ha^ been more
pernicious in the Church of CHRIST, then this (Th^odorus being in great favor
with the Emperor Iusti^an) if the fifth General Council had not staide Euagr.
lib. 4 cap. 38
all the attemptes of Theodorus, by comdemning the Heretical opinions of
Origin, which both the monks of Nova Laura, and Theodorus As^das did
maintain. Finally, the monks became so contentious and seditious, that not
only they contended against their superiors, but also they contended amongst
themselves with unsupportable hatred, and even in the wilderness of ^tria,
Socrat. lib, 6 cap. 7
where their great fame and commendation did spring up, in that same place the
fame and beauty of the Monasticke life did fade and wither.

Beside Heresy and contention, other corruptions of manners stained and defaced
the glory of the Monasticke life: namely, an inclination to idleness,
abstinence from manual labors, and heaping up of riches, which they gathered
of the sweat of other men's labors. And this appears clearly by the
writings of August. de opere Mona^rum, cap. 23
Augustine, who not only testifies, that the monks of his days so did, but
also they defended, that it was lawful to them to be idle, because CHRIST
Says in the Gospel, (...), the fowls of Heaven, for they sow not, neither
reap, neither carry into Matthew. 6 verse, 26
the barnes, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much better
then they? Against whose idlen^sse Augustine most sharply enueieth, saying,
that by the example of the fowls of Heaven they could learn idlen^sse, but
they would not imitate the fowls of Heaven in carrying nothing into the
barnes, but they would lay up in barnes and provision houses those riches which
other men with painful travels gained and brought unto them. And he is so
stomached against them, that he says, Quis fer at homines contumaces, ut
gemina illeccbra corrumpantur, and dissolutalice^tia vacationis, and
falsonomine sanctitatis? that is, who can suffer contumacious men, entangled
with double corruption, both with the dissolute liberty of vacance fro^labour,
and with the false conceit also of holiness?

From the six hundredth year of our LORD, until our days, Monastries began
again to be in great account in the sight of the world not for the exercises
of reading, praying, meditation, laborious working in a lawful calling, and
charity, which were the ornaments of the monks of old, but for the splendour
of costly buildinges, like unto the Palaces of Princes, magnificent Churches,
plurality of Relics, great revenues daily increased by the liberality of
Princes: and this new beauty was like unto the fairding of an old woman, when
natural beauty is Similitude^
spen^, then must she be decked with pictured colors, invented by the art of
man: and this kind of beauty rauisheth the senses of such as are simple and
ignorant. And it is a wonderful thing to consider how the hearts of men were
transported with this new show of holiness: in so far, that some Kings
thought it to be an holyer thing to enter into a Monastrie, than to sit in
their Royal Thrones, and to gonerne in Justice and Righteousness the affairs
of their Kingdom. Bamba^ King of Goths (which nation reigned in Spain)
resigned the title of his Royal authouritie to Euringus, and entered into a
Mon^erie. S^bbus King of the Oriental Saxons, left his Kingdom, and entered
into a Monastery: and to the end that it might seem that GOD gave allowance
unto this superstition, false Beda lib. 4 cap. 11
miracles were invented to grace this fact of sebbus: for the tomb whereinto
his body was laid, being ^n length an hand br^ shorter then his corpse, was
miraculously enlarged, and lengthened to the just proportion of his dead body:
so that in the seventh CENTURIE, and about the days of Pope Vitalia^s, it was
a proverb in the mouths of the people, that three adm rabble thing s feil out
in their age: First, innumerable Abbaci^s were builded: Secondly, the heads of
King were Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. Cap. 6
shaven, and they entered into Monastries: Thirdly, that whoredom wa^
canonized, that is, notable ^arlots were counted Saints. So with the
increasing number of Monast^ies, superstition, false miracles, and a lewd
conversation in like manner daily increased In the eight CENTURIE Rachis King of
Lom-bardis Platina, da vita Ponti^.
entered into the Abbacie called Cassinerse in Italy, and his brother
Aistulphus governed the affairs of the Kingdom, in the days of Pope
Zachari^, Caralomannus the elder brother of Pipinus King of France, was first
in the Monastery builded upon the Mount Sarapte, afterward in the Monastery
called Cassin^nse (whether voluntarily or against his will I dispute not) and
Hist. Magd. Cent. 8 cap. 10
he ended his life in the Monastery of Vienne in France, being transported
thither against his heart by the violence of his brother Pipinus. In the ninth
and tenth CENTURIES, the Bilshops of Rome finding, that their estate was
mightily advanced by Abbacies and Nunneries, they also on the other part
endeavored to advance the Monasticke life, in so far that Kings and Princes
were allured to profef^ themselves to be of the order of Monks, with
dispensation not the less to them from the Bishop of Rome (under whose
souereignity all high powers began Hist. Magd. Cent. 9 cap. 7
to stoop) to govern their own Kingdoms, providing always, that with
liberal gifts they had enriched the chair of Rome: So it came to pass, that
the world saw a rare and vnquoth Aruulphus, lib. 5 cap. 30
spectacle, to wit, Kingly Monks, and Monks Kings.

Yea, and Kings were so bewitched with seducing speeches, that they who would
not abase their Royal estate with participation of Monkish orders, yet they
thought it was so holy and meritorious a turn to build Monasteries, that by so
doing, they might merit forgiveness of heinous sins, As Edgarus king of
England, a man contaminated with many vild spots of sin, such as adultery,
murder, tyranny, and an a^tender upon three notable harlots: yet because he
was accustomed every year to build an Abbacy, this holy fact abolished the
remembrance of all his faults, and made him worthy after his death to have
his name, together with the name of W^frida an holy Nun (and yet the Kings
whore) and the name of her daughter Ed^ha, whom she did bear to the King, All
their names (I say) were counted Bal^us, Cent. 2. script. Britan.
worthy to be enrolled in the Catalogue of Saints, Caziminus King of Poll,
being driven from his Kingdom, entered into a Monastery of France, in the
days of Benedict the ninth: and the Polo^ian Ambassadors, who came to France,
to entrait their king to return again to his Kingdom, and were fore grieved
at his Hist. Magd. Cent. 11 cap. 6
negative an were: Yet by the means of Pope Benedict the ninth (at whose
hands all things might have be^ne obtained for money) they obtained their
King again, with liberty to him to marry, and to procreate children. If
Monasticke vows be lawful, the loosing of the bands of Monasticke vows for
money was not lawful. This Bened^ctus the ninth is he of whom Platina writes,
that after his death his effigy appeared unto a c^rtaine man, horrible and
monstrous, more like the similitu^e Platina de vita Po^tif.
of a Beast, then of a man, which betokened the beastly conversation of this
unhappy Pope in his lifetime. The examples of late days, that are recent in
all men's memory, of Lords, Earls, Dukes, Ladies, yea, and of the Emperor
Charles the fifth in his old days, who entered into Monastries and Nunneries,
whether to lead, or to conclude their lifetime, I pass over with silence.
This was the glory of Monks, since the six hundredth year of our LORD until
our days, that Kings, Monarchs, Popes, and mighty men in the world
magnified their estate by repairing old Monasteries, building new Abbacies,
and bestowing great revenues and rents upon them: and some times, as said is,
entering themselves into Monastries, either to lead, or to end their lives.

Monasteries also of late days became places of imprisonment, especially of
Noble persons, dejected from their anteriour dignities: so that Pope
Christophorus himself in the days of the Emperor LODOVICUS the third,
being dejected from his Papal dignity, was thrust into a Monastery: Unicum
(...) refugium, as says Platina, that is, the only refuge Platina, de vita
Pontif.
of men who were in calamity. Constantine the son of the Emperor Leo,
thrust his brethren into a Monastery, rendri g^vnto them a just recompense of
the like inhumanitie that they Hist. Magd. Cent. 10 Cap. 6
had practiced against their own father. Likewise Monastries became places
whereinto men entered, to sorrow for bypast offenses, imagining that by the
strickt observation of the rules of the Monasticke life, they might obtain
forgiveness of sins at the hands of GOD. Paulus Cyprius Bishop of
CONSTANTINOPLE before the second Council of NICE, entered into a Monastery,
and lamented for that he had consented to the abolishing of Images, in the
Council assembled by CONSTANTINUS COPRONYMUS.

This PAULUS CYPRIUS was a man of a base, timorous, and feeble spirit, who
never knew what the Godly sorrow, described by the Apostle PAUL, did mean,
which causes repentance to salvation, not to be repented, for he had great
need to have repented: this his repentance and his sorrow was not (...),
whereof Paul speaks, 2. Corint. 7.

This bastard glory above specified, whereof Monks rejoiced, when the first
ornaments were lost, did rather belong to the Conuentuall Monks, than to the
Anachorites. We read not of Kings, who delited to exchange their Kingdoms
with the solitary living by themselves apart in the Wilderness, except
Suatacopius King of Moravia, who being overcome in Aeneas Silv. Hist. B^hem.
cap. 13
battle by the Emperor Arnulphus, he went to the Wilderness, wherein he
continued until the day of his death, eating herbs, and drinking water with
greater contentment of mind then he lived before in the pleasures of his
Kingdom. As concerning ^saphat King of India, of whom Damascene writes,
Damascen. Historia.
that he forsook his Kingdom, and went to the Wilderness, and exercised
himself continually in reading and praying, for the space of five and thirty
years, it is but a fabulous narration, and the writer of it cannot cite so
much as one approved Author for confirmation of his alleged History: But the
purpose of Damascene is to confirm a lying narration with lying miracles,
wrought at the sepulchers of Ios^phat, some time King of India, and Barlaam an
Eremite, whose bones he alleges were transported by King Baracbias out of
the Wilderness, into the Country of India: but I leave Damascene lying, and I
proceed.

Under the shadow and color of all this counterfeit glory above mentioned,
from the six hundredth year of our LORD, until our own time, horrible
abominations has been hatched, so far surpassing the defections preceding
the six and seventh hundredth year of our LORD as the darkness of the winter
night goes beyond the darkness of the summer night. Beside the doctrine of
Images, where of Monks were the principal authors: yea, and Paulus Cyprius,
before he could procure the gathering of the second Council of Nice entered
into a Monastrie, as it were into the shop and office house of Satan, and with
his vntimous sorrowing moved the Empress Jrene to gather the Council
fore-saide. But beside this (I say) Monks were the first forgers of the
doctrine of Transsubstantiation: for Damascene expre^ely writes, (...): that
is, the very Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood of the LORD.
And again Damascen. d^ Orthohox. fid. ^b. 4. cap. 14
he says, (...): that is, the Bread and the Wine are not a figure of the
Body and Blood of CHRIST, but the very Dei-fied Body of our LORD. This
error was received, dispersed, and propagated, the more willingly in
Monastries, because it was forged by the brain of a Monk. Likewise the
doctrine of the merit of men's works, cuen such works as are superstitious,
and not commanded in the Law of GOD: This doctrine (I say) as a banner
displaide against the merits of the sufferings of CHRIST, it was chiefly
spread out in Monastries, wherein the grand our of great and legible letters
made their opinion known to the world, ORDO SERVAT US DUCIT AD VIT AM, that
is, The keeping of order (to wit, Monasticke rules) leads to life. Other
points of erroneous and corrapt doctrine, where of they are not the first
inuenters, they are the principal propagators of them: as namely, prayer for
the dead, and the opinion of purgatory: these errors invented of old, had
died out long ago as the fires of Aetna and Vesuvius have done, if that the
fables of Monks (daily renewed) had not been like unto fuel, intertaining
the flame of foolish opinions.

The vilde and unchaste conversation of the Monks, from the six hundredth
year of our LORD, until our time, he who undertakes to describe it,
undertakes an ^nnecessarie work, as they did who of old commended H^rcules,
whom no man did (...): even so they, who presume to describe the unchastity of
Monastries and Nunneries, they spend time in vain to prou^ that thin^, which
no man can deny: yea, and their own speeches cont^ine a confession o^ the
Guiltines, of unchaste living. When any of their number is d^prehended in
whoredo^e and adu^rie, they do not aggre g^ the fault as a shame and dishonou^
done unto their holy Order. but rather extenu^e the horror of sin, saving,
it is better to be a secret whore-monger, than an open Heretic. The
commendation that the Poet Nigellus gives to the Nuns of the Gilbertine
order, in our neighbor Country, is but slender: namely this, that when they
were aged they left off bearing of children. This Order began in ENGLAND, ANNO
1140.

The Monks and Nuns of our own Country, where they were best known, they
were worst liked: and ^hey might have suffered a trial of any persons, except
of neighbors, and such as knew them well. In other Countries, albeit the
turpitude of an unchaste life was covered with less transparent vailes,
always GOD is like unto himself, and he hates the workers Psalm. 5. 6
of iniquity. Let S. Adonei a Monk of Row^m be an examplarie type of the
manners of many others, when he fell over the bridge in the night time, and
drowned in the water of Seane, the good and evil Angels strove for his soul,
because it was to be doubted, whether his foote-steps led to the Church, or to
Hist. Magd. Cent. 10 cap. 6
his harlot: And in end the decision of this controversy, was referred to
RICHARD Duke of Normandy. It appears by this fable, invented by Normand
Monks, that their purpose was not only to excuse the villainy of Adonei, and
to count him a Saint, but also to encourage themselves to lasciviousness,
because the good Angels would strive for the soul of a villane, who was cled
with an holy Monkish habit, and at last the decision of the controversy must
be referred to some mortal man: not unlike unto Paris, who was more
fauourabiie inclined to Venus, then he was either to I^no, or Minerva.

Now it is time to speak of the multiplied number of the orders of Monks, not
to make a perfect reher^all of them, but to let the Reader understand, that the
woride groned under the charge of an importable burden, which neither were
they willing to shake off, nor able to bear it. Over and beside the multiplied
number of the branches of the Augustine and Benedictine Orders, above
specified, other Orders also sprang up, such as the order of the Charterus
Monks, where of Br^ a man bo ne i^ Colne was the author, ANNO 1080. It is
rumored that a certain man in Paris died, who was renowned for the honesty of
an unreprovable life: notwithstanding after his death, in audience of the
people, who were assembled to perform the last funeral duty to him, he
sat up in the bire, and uttered terrible words, that he was accused, and in
the righteous judgment of GOD condemned. Bruno was present, and heard these
tragical words, and said unto the people, If so be that this man be
condemned, it is not possible that any man can be saved, except he renounce
the world: And so being accompanied with a few followers, he went into a
Wilderness, ne^re to Gratianopolis, and was the author of a new Order of the
Charterus Monks, whose continual abstinence from flesh, unmannerly silence,
and purging with fire the footesteps of women, was in their opinion a
renouncing of the world. If this be true, the people of Aethiopia called
(...), have renounced the world, and are nearer to the Kingdom of GOD, then
the Charterus Monks.

By the like Diabolical invention the Order of Catherina de Senis was found
out, ANNO 1455. The marks of CHRIST'S sufferinges, the spousing Ring she
received from CHRIST, with four precious Pearls of inestimable value, the
emptying her body of her own heart, to the end the heart of CHRIST might be
thrust in place of it, What are all these forgeries, but as the filthy
exhalation of a stirred mire of uncleanness? yet are these fables published
to the world, in that book laden with lies, called Chronica Chronicorum: yea,
and this woman was canonized by Pope Pius the second, ANNO 1470. And the Order
of S. Catherene was received amongst other holy orders. Hospitalarii,
Templarii, Teutonici gladiatores, are reckoned amongst orders of Monks, yet
was their emploiment more in desending Christians from the injury of Infidels,
then in reading, praying, or any other spirituail exercises. What became of
these Templarii, after they were dispersed throughout EUROPE, and whether they
were justly or unjustly cut off all at one time, by the ordinance of Clemens
the fifth, in the Council of Vienne, I omit to speak: but whether they had
been guilty or innocent, it was but small clemency in Pope Clem. to give out
a sentence of death against so many, before they were warned, heard, and
sufficiently convicted of faults laid unto their charge.

The Orders of Carmel^es, who dwelt upon Mount Carmell, 1. Reg. 18 42
where Helias prayed, and of Camaldinenses, Ioannites, the Order of white
Monks, of the holy Trinity, of S. Clara, of Penitentiers and scourgers of
themselves, of Crosse-bearers, and Starrebearers, of Minimes, and of Bonehomes,
of Penitent sisters, of Saccit, of Bethlehemites, of the servants of Marie, of
Georgians, and many more. This multiplication of Orders declares, that there
was greater care amongst late Monks, to find out some dissimilitude of habit
and ceremonies amongst themselves, then to conform themselves to the
similitude of CHRIST.

The Orders of the Franciscans and Dominicans, ouerspred the world, about the
1200. year of our LORD: Their number in short time was mightily increased: so
that the Francis^ans rejoiced, that there were found of their Order in diverse
Nations two thousand, one hundredth, fourscore and six Monasteries. And the
Dominicans numbered four thousand, one hundredth and forty six Monasteries
in EUROPE, all professing their Order, as Creccelius, sometime an Augustine
Monk, reckons. These were like unto the Frogs of EGYPT, whose number made
them to be fearful: And like unto the Exodus 8. 6
Grasse-hopp^rs of EGYPT, which ate the residue that remained, Ibid. 10. 5
and escaped from the Hail, These were like unto Mothes in a garment, like
Myce in a barn, like Caterpillars amongst corn, and roust in metals, so
offensive unto the world, that the people groned for the oppression of begging
Friars, The Dominicans followed the rules of the Augustine Monks: and this is
the cause wherefore Crecc^lius, of whom we spoke before, reckons not the
Dominicans as one of the principal stocks and roots, from which other Orders
as branches did proceed. Both these Orders of Franciscans and Dominicans, had
their allowance and confirmation from Innocentius the third, who dreamed that
the Church of Laterane was bowing and inclining to fall, and that saint Francis
and saint Dominicke set to their shoulders, to uphold the decaying Church of
Laterane. What wonder is it, that these Orders teach a doctrine of lies and
dreams, whose confirmation could not be obtained, until Pope Innocentius
the third dreamed that these two did uphold the Church of Laterane. In the
Sermones of the begging Friars saint Francis is extolled with excessive
praises, as if by long fasting, earnest prayers, and deep meditations, he had
been counted worthy to see Celestial visions, and to be marked in hands,
feet, and side, with the marks of the sufferinges of CHRIST. Notwithstanding
of all these Hyperbolicke praises, in the very beginning of his devotion, he
began at theft, and stole money from his father, and gave it to a Priest, to
help the reparation of the Church of saint Damian. And for this cause his
father took him, and did beat him with many stripes. In so far, that they
who do plead saint Francis cause, deny Hist. Magd. Cent. 13 Cap. 10
not, that he took away his fathers money, neither do they deny, that for
this cause he was chastised by his father, but they call the foresaid
chastilement persecution.

The Monks and Friars of the Order of Saint DOMINICKE do attribute unto him,
both in his lifetime and after his death, the working of so many and so great
miracles, as if it were their purpose not only to prefer him unto saint
FRANCIS, but also to equali him to CHRIST, and to his Apostles. Notwithstanding
his greatest devotion was in beating himself thrice ^uerie night with an iron
chain, partly Hist. Magd. ibidem.
for his own sins, partly for the sins of other men who were alive, and
partly for the sins of those who were in purgatory. This fact (I say) was
as foolish and derogatorie to the honor due to CHRIST, and to the merits of
his sufferinges, as any thing that was done by that notable fool saint
FRANCIS.

The latest Orders, such as the Iacobines and Capuscings, are but branches of
the Francis^ane and Dominicane Orders, and are famous, as Erostratus was,
rather for evil, then for good. The lapuscings are fine Trumpetters, to
proclaim warre-fare against the City of GOD: And the Iacobines are soldiers
of Satan, to put hand to work, and to fight against the Heaven, in not
sparing the Anointed of GOD, and him who was anointed with that Celestial oil
that came from above, as they themselves and others of their Religion do
affirm.

Concerning the Jesuits, who may more properly be called Layolites then
Jesuits, because they walk rather in the foote-steps of Layola, the author of
their sect, then in the footesteps of JESUS, who never taught any man to follow
the way of Cain, as they do: But Layola was a soldier, and delited Epist.
Jude
in shedding of blood. Of them (I say) I am in doubt whether to call them an
Order or not: for the old Aenigma is revived in them, Vir, non vir, percussit,
non percussit, lapide, non lapide, avem, non avem, super arbore, non arbore.
Even so the Layolites may be called an order, and not an ordere, because they
will not be bound unto a certain habit, as a distinguishing note, separating
them from other Orders, lest by their habit they should be discovered, and
made known to Princes, against whose estate they traffic with most
treasonable attemptes: neither will they contain themselves within their own
bounds, as if they would counterfeit the Apostles, but with a preposterous
counterfeiting called by the Gracians (...). The Apostles were the Ambassadors
of CHRIST, the Jesuits are the ambassadors of the antichrist, the Apostles
endeavored to set up the Throne of CHRIST, by preaching the death of CHRIST,
the Jesuits endeavor to repair the loss of the antichrist, with the
slaughter of Christian Princes. O generation of Vipers the brood already
conceived in their venomous breasts, will be their destruction, as it is the
destruction of the feminine Vipers: but I leave a description of their bloody
attemptes to others, who have better knowledge of the profundities of Satan,
more clearly manifested in them then it was of old in the ten persecuting
Emperors.

To all these forementioned Orders, one thing is common, that they are all
obliged and bound by vows of chastity, poverty and obedience, every one to the
atte^dance of his own order: the Layolites have added the vow of temperancie,
without which custody it is hard to keep chastity: the vow of chastity is
good, providing that Matrimonial chastity be included under the generality of
the word Chastity, seeing that Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed
undefiled. But the vow of Virginal Hebr. 13. 4
chastity, is the sacrifice of fools, as if a man would vow to be a
Preacher, before he were persuaded that GOD had vouchsafed upon him the gift
of preaching: Even so it is a foolish thing to any man to bind himself by a
solemn vow to Virginal chastity, before he be fully persuaded, that GOD
has vouchsafed upon him that rare gift.

Under pretense of the vow of poverty, a number of Monks, especially Abbots,
Channons, and Capitulare Monks, as it were Bishops chief Counselors, have
heaped up infinite riches, and in pomp, wealth, civil pre-eminence and
splendour of worldly magnificence have ouer-went Earls, Lords, and Barons, in
many Countries: and in the mean time they were but a nest of idle bellies,
keeping for a fashion seven Canonical hours, which they spent in reading and
singing (oftener by their substitutes, then by themselves) as if they had been
called Canonici, for keeping Canonical hours, and not for st^dying holy
Canonicke Scripture, to the end they might be able to interpret it to the
utility of others.

Concerning the vow of obedience kept in all Orders, but more stricktly
amongst the Layolites, then all the rest, The commandment of GOD should have
been observed, whereinto Mumb. 30 verse, 4. 5
the authority of the father must be regarded, in such sort, that if he
ratify not the vow of his young daughter, remaining as yet in his house, then
her vow is undone, and cannot stand: Even so the vows that mortal men do
make in earth, if they be not ratified by the allowance of our Heavenly
Father, they are undone, and cannot consist and stand. Notwithstanding the
commanders amongst the Layolites, will try the obedience of their disciples in
matters dishonest, uncomely, ungodly, and deuilish such as to walter themselves
into a filthy mire, if so it please the commander to enjoine and to violate
the commandment of the Phis^ion, in rubbing that thing outwardly upon the
body which the Physician commanded to be eaten by the diseased person, and in
drinking that liquor of oil wherewith the Physician appointed the body to be
anointed. Also in commanding their disciples to kill Christian Princes. Has
GOD kept silence in his blessed word, and by his taciturnitie given a secret
allowance to such ungodly commandementes? Read the Scriptures of GOD,
whereinto he forbids to touch the Anointed of the LORD: but they have
touched the Anointed Psalm. 105 verse, 15
of the LORD, even betwixt the Porch and the Altar, not ashamed to defile their
holy sacrament of auricular confession, with treasonable consultations against
the Anointed of the LORD.

To conclude, The Orders of Monks from appearance of commendable beginninges,
have degenerated so far, that they who seemed to be Stars fixed in Heaven,
and shining with the splendour of Celestial light, in end they are become
busybodies, practisers of treasons, under color of late invented sacraments,
whom the LORD in his own time with the tempest of his wrath will scatter as
dust, and no man shall be able to gather them again.

FINIS.
CENTVRIE V.
CHAP I OF EMPEROVRS.
Arcadius, and Honorius.
THE good Emperor Theodosius left behind him two sons, Arcadius to govern
the East parts, and Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 23
Honorius the West. Arcadius reigned 14. years: He was a meek and godly
Emperor, but not courageous as his father had been. His simplicity was abused
by Eudoxia his wife, Ruffinus his chief Counselor, and Gania his chief
Captain. Eudoxia was offended at the freedom that Chrysostom used in
reproving of sin: And by the means of Theophilus B. of Alexandria procured
his deposition. Theophilus had gathered a Synod at the oak of Chalcedon:
because Chrysostom being warned, refused to compeare, they convict him of
contumacie, and deposed him: after deposition followed banishment, from which
the affectioned minds of the people toward their Pastor constrained the
Emperor to reduce him again: yet Eudoxia continued in her malice, and
procured by the means of Theophilus, his second deposition and banishment,
with commandment to journey his weak body with excessive travails from place
to place until he concluded his life. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 28.


Reffinus stirred up Alaricus King of the Goths to fight against Arcadius,
secretly presuming to the kingdom, but his tree sonable interprises being
espied, he was slain, and his head and right hand were hung up upon the port
of Constantinople.

Gama of a simple soldier was made general commander of Arcadius his army:
he waxed insolent and proud, affected the Kingdom, being in blood a stranger,
of the Nation of the Goths, in religion an Arrian. He craved a petition of
the Emperor, that he might have one of the Churches of Constantinople
whereinto he might serve GOD according to his Th^od lib. 5. cap. 32
own form: but this petition by the prudent advise of Chrysostom given to
the Emperor, was rejected, and the pride of Gaina for a time was something
abated.

Honorius reigned in the West, a'l the days of his brother Arcadius, and 15.
year after his death. The whole time of his government was very troublesome.
Gildo his lieuetenant in Hist. Magd. cont. 5. cap. 3
Afric usurped the dominion of Afric, and Maseelzer his brother, who at the
first detested treasonable interprises in his brother, yet afterward followed
his brothers footsteps, and received the just deserved reward of his
inconstancy, for he was slain by his own soldiers. In like manner Stilico
the Emperors father in law (for Honorius married his daughter) and the
Emperors chief Counselor, presumed to draw the Kingdom to Eucherius his
son, and stirred up the Uandales, Burgundians, Almans, and diuerso others to
invade the Kingdom of France, to the end that Honorius being ouercharged with
the multitude of unsupportable businesses, might permit Stilics to set forward
to the designs of his own heart. About this time Rhadagisus a S^ythian
accompanied with an army of two hundredth Funct. chron.
thousand Goths, came to Italy. And the help of Valdinus and Sarus captains
of the Hunnes and Goths being obtained, Rhadagisus was suddenly surprised,
himself was taken and strangled, many were slain, the most part were sold,
whereupon followed incredible cheapnesse of servants, so that flocks of
servants were sold for one piece of gold in Italy.

The next great trouble came by Alaricus King of the Western Goths, who
invaded Italy, and camped about Ravenna, with whom Honorius entered into a
capitulation, and promised to him and his retinue a dwelling place in France.
The Goths Compend. T^d. catalog. Caesarum.
matched toward their appointed dwelling place: But Stilico the Emperors
father in law followed after them, and set upon them at unawares, when they
suspected none evil, and slew a great number of them. By this the Emperor
clearly perceived the treason of Stilico, and caused him and his son to be
slain, but to his own great hurt, he appointed no general co^mander of the
army in his place. Alaricus and his army were enraged, partly by their loss,
and partly by remembrance of the covenant made with them, and incontinent
violated: Therefore they turned back again, and invaded Italy with all their
might, and besieged Rome two years, and took it in the year of our LORD 410,
or as some reckone 412. In the mids of burning, slaying, Platin. in vita Zosimi
1
robbing and militare outrage, some favor was shown by the express
commandment of Alaricus to such as fled to Christian Zozom. lib. 9 cap. 9
Churches for safety of their lives. Alaricus led his army from Rome, and was
purposed to sail to Afric, there to settle his abode, but being driven
back with tempestuous winds, he wintred in Consentia where he ended his
life. Alaricus in his lifetime had given in marriage Placidia the sister of
Honorius to Ataulphus his nearest kinsman, and Ataulphus after the death of
Functii chronic.
Alaricus reigned over the Goths. The Goths under the conduct of Ataulphus
retarned back again to Rome. Placidia through her intercession purchased
great well to the town of Rome: the Goths abstained from burning, and
shedding of blood, and addressed themselves toward France and Spain.

Theodosius 2. and Valentinian 3.
AFter Arcadius reigned his son Theodosius the second 42. years. His uncle
Honorius governed in the West: After whose death the whole government perteined
to Yheodosius, who associated unto himself Valentinian the third, the son of
Placidia his fathers sister. Theodosius in godliness was like unto his
grandfather, in collecting a great labrarie of good books, nothing inferior
to Ptolemaus Philadelphus. In collecting in one short sum the laws of kings
and princes: he tread a path whereinto Justinian walked, following Theodosius
example, and benefited all men desirous of learning. His house was like unto a
sanctuary for exercises of reading of holy Scripture, and deuote Socrat. lib.
7. cap. 22 Idem lib. 7. cap. 42. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3
prayers. He was of a meek and tractable nature almost beyond measure: his
facility in subscribing unread letters was corrected by the prudent advise of
his sister Pulcheria. In these two Emperors time the estate was mightily
crossed and troubled by strangers. By the procurement of Bonifacius deputy of
Afric, the Vandales under the conduct of Gensericus their King came into
Afric, took the town of Carthage, and other principal towns and settled
their abode in that country. Valentinian 3. Emperor of the West was compelled
to bind up a covenant with the Vandales, and to assign unto them a limited
bounds in Afric for their dwelling place.

The Vandales were partly Pagans and partly Arrians, whereby it came to pass
that the true Church in Afric was persecuted with no less inhumanitie, and
barbarous cruelty by Gensericus King of the Vandales, than it was in the days
of the Emperor Dioclesiane. Attila King of the Hunnes encombred the Roman
empire with greater troubles. Theodosius Emperor of the East bought peace with
payment of a yearly tribute of gold to Attila. Valentinian the third by the
means of Aetius his chief Counselor allured Theodoricus King of the Western
Goths to take his part. The parties fought in the fields called Catalaunici a
great fight, whereinto a hundredth and fourscore thousand men were slain. And
Theodoricus King of the Goths in this battle lost his life. Attila was
compelled to flee. Thrasimundus the son of Theodoricus was very willing to
pursue Attila, for desire he had to revenge his fathers slaughter, but he was
stayed by Aetius. This counsel seems to be the occasion of his death: for
Valentinian commanded to cut off Aetius. Attila finding that the Roman army
was destitute of the conduct of so wise a governor, as Aetius was, he took
courage again, and in great rage set himself against Italy, took the towns
of Aquileia, Ticinum and Millane, sacked and ruined them, and set himself
directly against Rome, of intention to have used the like cruelty also against
it. But Leo bishop of Rome went forth, and with gentle words so mitigated his
mind, that he left sieging of the town of Rome. Soon after this Attila died,
the terror of the world, and the whip wherewith GOD scourged many nations.

Valentinian the third, after he had reigned in whole 30. years, was cut off
for the slaughter of Aetius. Maximus usurped the Kingdom, and violently took
unto himself Endoxia the relict of Valentinian: but she was relieved again by
Gensericus King of Vandales, who led an army to Rome, and spoiled the town,
relieved Eudoxia, and carried her and her daughters to Afric, and gave
Honoricus his son in marriage unto her eldest daughter. Maximus was cut in
pieces by the people, and his body was cast into Tyber. From this time forth
the Empire utterly decayed in the West, until the days of Carolus Magnus,
Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 16
so that Auitus, Richimex, Maioranus, Severus, Anthemius, Olybrius, Glycerius,
Nepos, Orestes, and his son Augustulus, they continued so short time, and
governed so vnprosperously, that their names may be left out of the roll of
Emperors.

Now to return again to Theodosius Emperor in the East, a King beloved of
GOD, in so much that by prayer he obtained of GOD a wonderful deliverance to
Ardaburius captain of his army. When his uncle had ended his life, Ardaburius
was sent against a tyrant John, who did usurp the Kingdom in the West. The
ship whereinto Ardaburius sailed by tempest of weather was driven to Rauenna,
where the tyrant John took him prisoner. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 23
Aspar the captains son, being conducted by an Angel of GOD (as Socrates
writtteth) entered into Rauenna, by the passage of the loch, which was never
found dried up before that time: the ports of the town were patent, so that
Aspar and his army entered into the town, slew the tyrant John, and relieved
Ardaburius his father. This miraculous deliverance is thought to be the fruit
of the effectual prayers of the godly Emperor. His death was procured by a
fall from his horse, after which he was diseased, and died: an Emperor
worthy of everlasting remembrance.

Martianus.
MARTIANVS by the means of Pulcheria the sister of Theodosius was advanced to
the Kingdom, with whom Valentinian the third, of whom I have already
spoken, reigned 4. years. Martianus, albeit he obtained the government
Catalog. Caesaru(...)m
in a time most troublesome, when the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, and Herulis had
disquieted the estate of the Roman empire out of measure, yet by the
providence of GOD the short time of his government was peaceable, for he
reigned not fully Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 8
7. year, and he left behind him great grief in the hearts of the people,
because a government so good and godly endured so short time. Anent the
council of Chalcedon assembled by him, it is to be referred unto the own
place.

Leo.
AFTER Martianus succeeded Leo, and governed 17. years. He was godly and
peaceable, not unlike to Martianus his predecessor. He interponed his
authority to suppress those who proudly despised the council of Chalcedon,
and obstinatly maintained the heresy of Eutyches. Notwithstanding the madness
and rage of Eutychian heretics began in his time, immediately after the report
of the death of Martianus. Procerius B. of Alexandria was cruelly slain by
them in the Church, Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 8
harled through the streets, and with beastly cruelty they chewed the intrals
of his body, having before ordained Timotheus to be their bishop. The Emperor
banished Timotheus being first foreseen, that not only Leo bishop of Rome,
but also all other bishops of chief account, damned the ordination of
Timotheus. The terrible earthquake which destroyed a part of Idem cap. 12 and
13.
Antiochia, and the more terrible fire which wasted a great part of
Constantinople, were fore-running tokens of the great desolation that should
ensue by the detestable heresy of Eutyches.

Zeno.
THE Emperor Leo left his Kingdom to his nephew the son of Zeno called Leo,
but he fell sick and died, when he had scarce reigned 1. year. So his father
Zeno had the imperial soueraignitie 17 years: he was of a bad religion,
dissolute in manners, intemperate, effeminate, and hated of all men. Therefore
Basiliscus conspired against him, and Zeno fled. Basiliscus Evagr. lib. 3. cap.
3.
was a persecuter of the true faith, damned by his encyclicke letters the
Council of Chalcedon: restored Eutychian bishops to their places again: such
as Timotheus Arideus to Alexandria, Petrus Cnapheus to Antiochia, Paulus to
Ephesus: five hundredth preachers were found, who subscribed Basiliscus Idem
lib. 3. cap. 5
letters, and cursed the council of Chalcedon. So great a plague it is, either
to have ignorant Pastors, who know not the truth of GOD, or cowardly teachers,
who will suffer no rebuke for the known truth of GOD. Zeno returned to his
Kingdom again within 2 years: he banished Basiliscus to Cappadocia, where
Idem cap. 8 and 11
he was slain with his wife and children. He abolished the encyclicke letters
of Basiliscus, and eiected Petrus Cnapheus out of Antiochia, and Paulus out of
Ephesus. Timotheus of Alexandria was old, infirm, and near to the last period
of his life, else also he had been eiected out of Alexandria: for Zeno, not for
love of the true faith, but for hatred of the name of Basiliscus endeavored to
undo all that he had done.

Under the reign of Zeno came Odoacer assisted with people of Pannonia called
Rugi, Turcilingi, and Heruli, and invaded Italy, and slew Orestes at Papia,
and compelled his son Augustulus, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3
to denude himself of imperial honors: so that the Roman empire, as it
began in the person of Augustus Caesar, so likewise it ended in the person of
Augustulus the son of Orestes. Odoacer would not usurp the glorious title of
an Emperor, but called himself King of Italy, and reigned 14, years. Zeno
on the other part stirred up Theodoricus King of Goths to expel Odoacer out
of Italy. Theodoricus encountered with him diverse times, and prevailed. In end
he besieged him in Ravenna, until a covenant of peace was bound up betwixt
them, but it lasted short time: for Theodoricus under pretense of friendship,
called Odoacer and his sons to a banquet, and caused them cruelly to be slain.
Afterward he reigned himself alone in Italic 33, years. he reedified the
towns in Italy which by violence of wars had been wasted and made desolate,
and was well beloved of the people: and albeit in religion he was an Arrian,
yet he abstained from persecution of those who professed the true faith.

The Eutychian persecution is already begun, but the Arrian persecution is not
as yet ended. Hunnericus son of Gensericus H^st. Magd. ibid.
King of Vandales, was an Arrian persecuter so unmerciful, that in Afric
where his dominion was, he had neither compassion on sex or age: he banished
at one time five thousand professors of the true faith. And such as were
infirm and weak, and could neither travel by foot nor horse, he commanded
cords to be knit to their legs, and to traile them through the rough places
of the wilderness, and by such merciles dealing, the death of many innocent
people was procured: but the LORD suffered not this cruelty to be unpunished:
for the LORD plagued the Vandales with famine, and pest, and Hunnericus was so
long tormented with venomous biles, that in end he was consumed with vermin,
and in great misery ended his most wretched life.

In this Centurie studying to brevitie, I have ouerpassed some remarkable
things, such as the deceitful practices of the wise men of Persia, to divert
the affection of their King Isdige^des from the love he carried to Maruthas
bishop in Mesopotamia, and Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Ambassador of Theodosius 2. This history is set down at length by Socrates.
In like manner the calamity of the Jews who dwelt in the Islle of Candie, and
were piteously abused by a deceiving fellow, who called himself Moses, and
promised to lead them through the Mediterran sea, to their own land, as Moses
led the people of Israel through the read sea: this calamity read in the 7.
book of the ecclesiastical history of Socrates. chap. 38. The Jews were
commanded to cast themselves into the sea, and to swim unto a rock: but they
were drowned in the sea. and dashed upon the hard rock, and by the means of
Christian fishers some (...). (...).
few escaped. This history is referred unto the 434. year of our LORD: so
that it sell forth under the reign of Theodosius 2. The miraculous conucrsion
of the Burgundians to the faith of CHRIST about the same time I have of purpose
ouerpassed, willing to be short, and to give a view of the history to those
who are desirous to read

CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors.
Patriarchs of Rome.
AFTER Siricius succeeded Anastatius, and governed the Church of Rome 3.
years. About the year of our LORD 401. he entered into his office, Anastatius.
Socrar lib. 7. cap. 9. Platina d^ vitis pontif. Innoce^tius 1. Socrat lib. 7.
cap. 9.
under the reign of Honorius. He made a constitution, that men should not sit,
but stand when the gospel was read. After him succeeded Innocentius, and
continued in his office 15. years: he was an aduersare to the Novatians, and
Pelagians, and was friendly to John Chrysostom, whose deposition Eudoxia the
Emperors wife had procured. Innocentius sent to Honorius, and Arcadius 5.
Bishops, and two Presbiters, to procure the appointment of a general council,
whereinto the cause of Chrysostom might be examined: for he counted the
gathering of an aecumenicke Council the only remedy Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 26
whereby the vehement tempest of so great commotions as followed the deposition
and banishment of Chrysostom, could be settled: but the aduersares of
Chrysostom procured the messengers Ibid. cap. 28.
of Innocentius to be ignominiously entreated, and sent back again. Here let
the judicious Reader mark that the power of conuocating general Councills
appertained to the Emperor, and not unto the bishop of Rome. In this man's time
(according to mine opinion) the Roman Church began to swell in pride, and to
usurp jurisdiction over other Churches, having no better ground than a
personal and temporal act of the Council of Sardica.

Zosimus the successor of Innocentius continued not above the Zosimus. Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 11.
space of a year and 5. months in office, or 2. years, as Socrates writteth.
To him Platina ascribes this constitution, that no servant should be assumed
into the clergy, but he lamenteth, that not only servants, but also the
sons of strange women, and flagitious persons, were admitted to spiritual
offices to the great detriment of the Church. He sent Faustinus a B. to the
Council of Carthage, with 2. presbyters of the Roman Church to crave that no
matter of moment and importance should be Platin de ^it. Zosimi.
done without advise of the Roman Bishop. He pretended an act of the Council
of Nice alloting this great dignity to the (...)
Roman chair: but after diligent search of the principal registers (...)
Hist. Magd. cen. 5. cap. 10
no such act was found. I expected that Onuphrius now should have compeared,
and in so maine a point said some thing to the cause, which with tooth and
nail he defends, but in his annotations I see nothing except a diversity of
counting of years, for in his reakoning Zosimus continued 3. years, 4. months.

To Zosimus succeeded Bonifacius 1. and governed 3. years. At his election
there was a schisine in Rome. Some elected Bonifacius, Bonifacius 1.
others Eulalius to be their bishop. The Emperor Honorius banished them both
from Rome, but after 7. months Bonifacius was Socra lib. 7 cap. 11
restored, and was B. of Rome: at this time they were bishops of Rome, to
whom the Emperor gave allowance, but they were not Emperors, to whom the B.
of Rome gave allowance.

After Bonifacius, Coelestinus governed the Church of Rome, 8, years, 10.
months, 17. days. He was an aduersare to the Novatians, Coelestinus 1. Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 11
Pelagians, and to Nestorius and his adherents. Socrates takes him up right,
that he was bitter against the Novatians, for desire of pre-eminence. In
Constantinople they who professed the true faith, had liberty to conueene,
albeit in matters of discipline their opinion was not sound: but Coelestinus
silenced Rusticola the bishop of the Nouatians for desire to have all bishops
stouping under his soueraignitie. Mark the words of Socrates in the Latin
translation bearing these words: Romano Episcopatu Socrat. ibid.
iam olim perinde at que Alexandrino ultra sacerdotii limits ad externum
dominatum progresso: that is, the bishopric of Rome, even of old, having
stepped beyond the limits of priesthood to an external domination, as the
bishopric of Alexandria had done before. Pelagius had propagated his heresy
in the Isle of Britain. But Coelestinus hindered the propagation of a wicked
heresy, by sending Germanus to the Brittones, and Palladius to the Scots.
Coelestinus more impudently than his predecessors, Innocentius, Zosimus, and
Bonifacius, urged a submission of the Churches Hist. Magd. (...). 5 cap. 10
of Carthage unto the Roman chair, and that they should accept in favor
Appiarius whom they had excommunicated for his appellation from his own
bishop to the bishop of Rome: but the fathers of the 6. Council of Carthage
would neither absolve Appiarius before his repentance were known, neither
would they stoup under the jurisdiction of the Roman Church.

To Coelestinus succeeded Sixtus 3, and continued in office 8 years, Xystus or
Sixtus.
19. days. He was accused of the crime of Adulterieby Bassus: but Sixtus was
found innocent, and Bassus was found a calumniator and a false accuser:
therefore he was banished by the Emperor Platina de vitis pontif.
Valentinian 3. and his goods were appointed to go to the use of the Church.
Bassus after his banishment desired to be received again in favor with
Sixtus, but his petition was rejected as if he had sinned against the holy
Ghost. Notwithstanding the flatterers of the chair of Rome writteth that
Sixtus buried Hist. Magd. cen. 5. ca. 1^
Bassus his accuser with his own hands, which seems to be repugnant to his
unmerciful form of dealing in his lifetime.

After Sixtus Leo a deacon in Rome, and absent out of the town, Leo.
was chosen to be bishop of Rome, and ruled 21. years, 1. month, 13. days: he
stirred up the Emp. Theodosius 2. to appoint a Council Platina de vit. pontif.
for suppressing the error of Eutyches, wherinto it was rather confirmed than
suppressed by the craft of Dioscorus B. of Alexandria, whereof I shall speak
hereafter, GOD willing, and how Eutyches was condemned in the Council of
Chalcedon under the reign of Martianus. His wisdom and eloquence in
mitigating the fury of Attila has been handled in the preceding history.
Amongst Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10
his constitutions none is more louable then his constitution against ambitious
men, who presumes continually to high places. He ordained that they should be
deprived both of the higher, and the lower place: of the lower place for their
pride, because they had proudly despised it: of the higher, because they had
auaritiously suited it. In discipline nothing is better than to bear down
those place-mongers, whereby it comes to pass, that prerogative of place is
preferred to prerogative of gift, Followed Hilarious and continued 7. year, 3.
months, Hilarious 1. Simplicius.
10. days. To whom succeeded Simplicius, and continued 15. years 1, month. 7.
days. Felix 3. was the successor of Simplicius, and Foelix. 3.
continued 8. years, 11. months, 17. days. He governed the Church of Rome in
the time of the Emperor Zeno, and in the time, when Odoacer and Theodoricus
contended for the superiority of Italy: he was nothing inferior to his
antecessors in Platina de vit. Pentis.
zeal to advance the supremacy of the Roman chair: for he excommunicated
Acatius B. of Constantinople, because he craved not his advise in receiving
Petrus Moggus in favor, like as he had craved his advise at the first when he
excommunicated him. This Petrus Moggus was an Eutychian heretic, and was
justly excommunicated by Acatius, who used the advice of Foelix B. of Rome, in
excommunicating him. But when Petrus Moggus testified his repentance by his
supplicant bill, containing Hist. Magd. cent 5. cap. 10
the recantation of his error, Acatius absolved him. This grieved the proud
stomach of Foelix, because his advise was not craved in all things. Therefore
he excommunicated Acatius, as said is. Acatius little regarding the pride of
the Roman bishop, gave to Foelix an hard meeting: for he both excommunicated
Foelix, and razed his name out of the roll of Bishops. Ambition was the first
great cancker-worme that consumed and defaced the beauty of the Church of Rome.

Gelasius the successor of Foelix, an Africane borne, ruled 4. Gelasius 1
years, 8. months, 17. days. The estate of Italy was so troubled by the
incursions of barbarous people, that the manners of the people were altogether
dissolute (for he ministered in the last years of Theodoricus King of Italy)
therefore he endeavored to establish discipline in the Church: he claimed
superiority over all Churches more manifestly than any of his Hist. Magd.
cent. 8. cap. 10
predecessors had done, for he affirmed that the Church of Rome should judge
all Churches, and should be judged by no Church, and that the right of
Apellation to the bishop of Rome from all parts in the world, was not a
supposititious act of the Nicene Council, as the 6. Council of Carthage had
determined, but that it was autentique, and a Right given by them in deed to
the Roman Church: neither would he be reconciled with the Oriental bishops
in any case, except they would first allow the excommunication of Acatius, and
raze his name out of the roll of Bishops Platina writteth that he did
excommunicate Platin. de (...). Pontif.
the Emperor Anastatius a favorer of the Eutychian heresy, but this example
once begun, was practiced in most prodigal manner by the bishops of Rome
against Emperors, who maintained no heresy.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
JOHN CHRYSOSTOM succeeded to Nectarius in the John Chrysostom.
days of Arcadius, and Honorius: he had been an helper to Flavianus B. of
Antiochia, from whence he was transported by the authority of the Emperor
Arcadius, and ordained bishop Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 27
of Constantinople, sore against the hearts of the people of Antiochia. In
Oratrie he had profited in the school of Libanius, in Philosophy in the
school of Andragathius beyond his fellows. Zozom. lib. 8 cap. 2
His liberty in reproouing of sin both in Court and Clergy, procured
against him the hatred of Eudoxia the Empress, and the hatred of the Clergy,
who could not suffer their corrupt manners to be reformed. Theophilus B. of
Alexandria was opposed to Chrysostom from the very first time of his
ordination: for he endeavored to have Isidorus a Monk brought up in the
wilderness of Schethis, and afterward a Presbyter in Alexandria to be seated in
Constantinople: but when his plotted course failed, he became an enemy to
Chrysostom, and gladly embraced all occasions, whereby he might procure his
deposition: how he was unjustly deposed, banished, and iourneyed to death by
the malice of Eudoxia, and Theophilus it has been sufficiently declared in
the preceding history. Other things (Godwilling) shall be handled in the
description of the life of Theophilus. Chrysostom governed the Church of
Constantinople 7. years. Chytr. chron.


After Chrysostom, Arsatius the brother of Nectarius an aged Arsatius.
man (for he was fourscore year old) ministered in Constantinople scarce 2.
years.

Atticus the successor of Arsatius ministered 21. years, He Atticus.
was admitted to this office in time of the minority of Theodosius 2. at what
time Antbemius his counselor (a man in wisdom Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 1, 2.
Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 27. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 34 Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 4.
inferior to none who lived in his time) governed the affairs of the
Kingdom. Atticus was not unlearned, he was godly and prudent: he insert the
name of Chrysostom into the roll of Bishops, and in the public Liturgy
made an honorable commemoration of his name, and persuaded Cyrillus B. of
Alexandria to do the like. Socrates affirms that GOD by his ministry
wrought miraculous works, and that a lewe sick of the palsy was baptized by
him in the Name of JESUS, and immediately after Baptism was healed from his
disease. In staying the progress of superstition, whereinto people, even at
this time were inclined, he kythed himself prudent: for some of the people of
Constantinople resorted to the sepulcher of Sabbatius to pray, and to do some
worship to the defunct: but Atticus Hist. Magd cent 5. cap. 10
caused his body in the night season to be raised, and to be buried in another
place unknown to the foresaid superstitious people, and so they left off their
resorting to the sepulcher of Sabbatius.

Sisinnius after Atticus ministered 2. years. Nestorius followed him in office,
but his name is to be read in the catalogue of Sisinnius.
heretics. Next to Nestorius was Maximianus, who continued not above 2.
years, and 5. months. To whom succeeded Proclus, Maximianus. Proclus.
and continued 12 years.

Flauianus after Proclus ministered in the days of Theodosius the second, a
faithful man in his calling, but scarcely did he Flauianus.
compleet 2. years in his ministry. He deposed and excommunicated Eutyches an
Abbot in Constantinople, the author of a pernicious heresy. He was cruelly
tramped under foot in the second Council of Ephesus called (...), that is, a
council of brigandrie, Dioscorus B. of Alexandria, in that Council favored
the opinion of Eutyches, and by tumultuare dealing, so oppressed Euagr. lib. 1.
cap. 10
Flavianus, that he procured his death, They who attribute too much to the
authority of Councills, let them fasten their eyes upon this Council, and
learn, that pos^ ly Councils may err, and that Patriarchs, such as Dioscorus
was, may err even in matters of faith.

To Flauianus succeeded Anatolius, and governed 8. years. And after him
Gennadius 13. years. Acatius the successor of Gennadius Anatolius.
ministered 17. years under the Emperor Zeno. He gave Gennadius Acatius.
a good proof of his constancy in the true faith, at that time when
Basiliscus (who drove Zeno from his Kingdom) condemned the Council of
Chalcedon, and compelled bishops to subscribe to the error of Eutyches. The
great dissension that fell out betwixt him and the Roman bishops, for Petrus
Moggus B. of Alexandria, and Petrus Cnapheus B. of Antiochia, it was not for
communicating with them before they renounced their error, as some learned men
do affirm, but for plain emulatio^, such as was of old betwixt Pompeius and
Caesar, the one could not Functii comment. in chronol.
abide a companion, the other could not abide a superior. The Roman Church
manifestly co^tended for superiority: the Church of Constantinople on the other
part perceiving what advantage the Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 1^
Roman bishops took of this, that their counsel was craved, they left off the
doing of it. And this moved the proud stomach of Gelasius (after the death of
Acatius) to brast out in these arrogant G^lasius in epift. ad Dardan. 11.
words, that the Church of Rome had power to judge of all other Churches, but
no Church had power to judge of the Church of Rome, yea, and Platina a late
writer groundeth the supremacy of the bishop of Rome upon this, that Acatius
B. of Constantinople Platin. de vit. Simplicii
wrote unto him, to damn the heretical opinion of Petrus Moggus B. of
Alexandria: albeit the faith of PETER was grounded Matthew. 16.
upon a sure rock, yet the supremacy of the Roman bishops is grounded only
upon such sandy ground, as Platina and other flatterers of the Roman chair
do cast out in their writings.

After Acatius succeeded Phrauitas. otherwise called Flauitas Phrauitas.
and continued scarce 4. month: some think that GOD in wrath shortened his
days, because that by unlawful means he attained Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap.
10
to that dignity to be B. of Constantinople. The Synodicke letter of Petrus
Moggus B. of Alexandria written to Flauitas, and pondered by his successor
Euphemius, wherein Petrus Moggus accurseth the Council of Chalcedon, it will
clearly prove inconstancy in Petrus Moggus, but not a fault in Acatius: for
many Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 23.
are like unto dogs, who return unto their vomit again, and this blame must
rest in the bosom of fickle and unconstant men, and not in the bosom of
honest men who are deceived by them.

Euphemius succeeded to Flauitas, and ministered under the reign Euphemius
of Zeno and Anastatius, and would not compleet the ceremonies of the
inauguratio^n of Anastatius until the time that by his oath Hist. Magd. cent.
4. cap. 10.
and hand writ, he promised to be a desender of the true faith and of the
acts of the Council of Chalcedon. This hand-writ Anastatius craved to be
delivered back again to him, which when he could not obtain, Euphemius was
compelled to fly for safety of his life. When he pondered the Synodicke
letter of Petrus Moggus, he abhorred his name, and inserted again the name of
Foelix B. of Rome into the catalogue of bishops, which was razed and cancelled
by Acatius one of his predecessors.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
THEOPHILUS ministered in Alexandria in the dayess of Theodosius, and of his
sons Arcadius and Honorius, a man Theophilus.
both reproouable in his life, and inconstant in his faith. He sent Isidorus a
Monk to Rome, there to lurk secretly, and to expect the event of the battle
that was to be foughten betwixt Theodosius and Maximus, and to congratulate the
victor. When he returned from Rome he endeavored to promote him to the
bishopric of Constantinople: but John Chrysostom was preferred to him. After
this, he can not keep friendship with Isidorus, whom he intended once to
have preferred, but upon a light occasion cast him off, and excommunicated him,
because Isidorus would not deliver to him the money left in testementall
legacy to be distributed to the poor. This money which Theoplnlus sister had
left to the use foresaid, Theophilus craved that it might be put in his
hands, to be employed to building and repairing of Churches: but Isidorus
answered, that the money Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 12.
put in his custody should be bestowed according to the will of the defunct.
And that it was a work more acceptable to GOD to support the poor, who were
the living temples of GOD, then to build old and ruinous walls. Therefore
Theophilus hated, and excommunicated Isidorus: for this cause Isidorus left
Alexandria, and addressed himself to the wilderness of Schethis, where he
complained to Ammonius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and Enthymius called Longifratres
of the injury that Theophilus had Sozom. ibid.
done unto him, who entreated Theophilus to receive Isidorus in favor again,
and to admit him to his communion: but Theophilus gave unto them an evil
reward for their travails, for he hated them, and finding that there was
diverse opinions amongst the Monks of Nitria and Schethis, he put fuel to the
fire, to the end that diversity of affection might be added to diversity of
Opinion: a man in all his courses malicious and deceatfull. Longi fratres fled
to Constantinople to complain to the Emperor Arcadius of the malitiousnes of
Theophilus, and they were humanely and courteously received by Chrysostom, but
not admitted to the participation of the holy mysteries, until their cause had
been first judged. To the rest of the Monks who dwelt in Nitria and Schethis
the malice of Theophilus was not unknown. And 500. of them (especially such as
were Anthropomorphite) came from the wilderness of N^ia, of intention to have
slain Theophilus, but he met them, and with gentle and flattering Socrat. lib.
6. cap. 7.
words lenified their anger, for he said unto them: Brethren, I see your faces
as the face of GOD. They took his words in this sense, as if he had said, that
GOD was fashioned according to the liken^sse of a man's body. Therefore they
desir^d him to abjure the doctrine of Origin, which thing he willingly did, for
he hated the books of Origin: and so he escaped the danger. The next pract^se
of his malice was against John Chrysostom B. of Constantinople, whom he hated,
because he had received and courteously entreated Isidorus, and Longi fratres,
who came to Constantinople, of intention to accus^ him. In this matter he dealt
deceitfully like unto a crastie fox lying in wait, until he found occasion
to set on. First, he reconciled himself to Epiphanius bishop of Salamin in
Cyprus, and moou^d him to gather a Council in Cyprus for damning the books of
Origin, and to w^ite to John Chrys^stome, that he should do the like in his
bounds: but Chrysostom took little regard of the Council of Epiphanius, other
things were more necessare than to trouble the memorial of a man that was dead
long ago. Theophilus was glad to have this vantage, that Epiphanius a man of
great account was on his side, and so soon as he found that Eudoxia the
Emperor A^cadius wife with courteours and some of the Clergy were incensed
against Chrysostom, he was in readiness as a firebrand of Satan to execute all
evil turns. So the man of GOD (as has been declared) was deposed, banished,
and unjustly put to death by Eudoxia and Theophtlus two chief procurers of it.

^yrillus the nephew of Theophtlus of his brothers side, succeeded Cyrillus.
to Theophtlus, and ministered 32. years: a man learned, zealou^ an lactiue:
his ministration was under the reigns of Theodo^s 2, and Ualentinian 3. He was
an aduerfare to here^ques, in his days, especially to Nestorius B. of
Constantinople. who denied the personal union of the divine and humane Nature
in CHRIST, whose opinion as heretical, was damned in the Council of Ephesas.
Cyrillus carried some greater pomp and majesty than became the preachers of
the humility of CHRIST'S cross. For he revenged the injury that the Jews had
done unto Christians in the night time, by setting upon their Synagogues,
slaying a great number of them, banishing others, and distributing their
substance as a prey to the multitude that followed (...). lib. 7: cap. 13.
him. The Jews had dwelt in Alexandria from the days of Alexander the great
to that time, but now by fury of Cyrillus they were vtte^ly undone and
scattered. Orestes the deputy of Theodosius 2. was in the town, to whom
Cy^illus would not complain of the injury done by the Jews against
Christians, but at his own hand usurping the office of the civil Magistate
he set upon the Jews, slew, scattered and spoiled them, as has been above
mentioned. This was the ground of unsupportable discord betwixt Orestes and
Cyrillus, in so much, that 500. Monks of Nitria came out of the wilderness to
Alexandria,, to support (...). lib. 7. cap. 14.
Cyrillus their bishop: One of them called Ammonius wounded the governor
Orestes, and when he was taken and punished unto the death, Cyrillus called him
a Martyr, buried him in the Church, changed his name, and called him (...),
that is, admirable. The Roman bishops claimed to a superiority over their
brethrene, but Cyrillus B. of Alexandria plainly pretended to a superiority
over civil Magistrates. This moved Socrates writing of Coeles^inus 1, to say,
that the bishops of Rome and Alexandria had stepped beyond the limits of
priesthood, to the affectation of an external domination. The bishops of Rome
kept (...). lib. 7. (...). 1 1
their own pride, and borrowed from Alexandria a proud usurpation of
domination over civil Magistrates: but the wise providence and provident
wisdom of our GOD would have the mouths of the bishops of Rome opned to
condemn that civil domination which their successors afterward most proudly
usurped. Mark what Gelasius writes, that before the coming (...).
of CHRIST some persons, such as Melchisedeck, were both Kings and Priests.
This (says he) Satan imitating in his members would have Pagan Emperors to be
called Pontisicesmaximi, and Imperatores: but when he came who was indeed both
King and Priest, (to wit) CHRIST, neither did the King take upon him the
priestly dignity, neither the priest the kingly authority.

Dioscorus, who succeeded to Cyrillus, his name is to be read in the catalogue
of heretics, but Proterius was the true successor, Prote^ius.
in regard he kept the faith, but he was cruelly flaine by the Hest. Magd.
cent. 5. cap. 10
favorers of Dioscorus, immediately after the death of the Empetour Martianus.

Timotheus Salophaciolus ministered in Alexandria 23 years, 6, Timotheus
Salophaciolus. Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 1 1
months, in the days of Zeno and Basihscus, Albeit Basihscus advanced another
Timotheus, furnamed Aelurus to be B. of Alexandria, yet when Zeno was restored
to his soueraignitie again Salophaciolus received his place again.

After Timotheus Salophaciolus followed Ioannes Tabennesiota whom the Emp. Zeno
justly hated for his perjury: for he came Io annes Tabennesiotu. Hist. Magd.
cen. 5. ca. 10
ambassador to the Emperor and craved, that when their B. was dead, the
Church of Alexandria might have liberty to choose their own bishop: the Emp.
suspected that he was ambitiously suting the place to himself, and therefore
did bind him with an oath, that when the place should happen to vaike, he
should make no moyen to possess himself into that rowme: but he did the
contrare and accepted the place: therefore the Emp. Zen^ banished him: he fled
to Foelix B. of Rome, who being misinformed by Ioannes Tabennesiota made him to
think, that he was persecuted for the true faith, as Athanasius was, who fled
to Julius bishop of Rome: but the Emperors letter assured him of the
contrary, that he was banished for perjury. Petrus Moggus who followed, is
to be reckoned in an other catalogue.

Patriarchs of Antiochia.
To Flavianus in Antiochia succeeded Porphyrius, whose ordination Porphyrius
Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9
was more secret than becomes the ordination of bishops to be, in absence of
the people, when they were deliting themselves with the sight of stage plays
in Daphue. He consented to the deposition of John Chrysostom. No Man whom I
have read, makes reverent record of him, except Theodoretus, who possibly does
not examine him narrowly, but for the dignity Theodorot. lib. 5. cap. 35
of his place lets him pass with a note of commendation.

After Porphyrius succeeded Alexander, a man much commended by Theod. for
eloquence, but more for peace: for he was Alexandr
not only an instrument to quiet the estate of his own Church of Antiochia,
but also to quiet the estate of other Churches, and he was the first who
inserted the name of John Chrysostom into the catalogue of holy bishops, and
pe^swaded others to do the same. Theodotus was his successor 4. years, of
whom little is Theodotus. Ioa^nes G^mmaticas.
written.

To Theodotus succeeded Ioannes Gram^aticus and ministered 18. year. In his
time the Council of Ephesus was assembled by Theodosius 2. and Valentinian 3.
In it there was a pitiful distraction betwixt John B of Antiochia and Cyrillus
B. of Alexandria for a light c^se. Not because John B. of Antiochia favored
the her^sie of N^storius: but in r^spect he thought Cyrillus too hasty in
giving out a definitiu. sentence before the full number of his brethren were
assembled together. This dissension was afterward reconcil^d, and Ioannes sent
to Cyrillus Paulus Emisenus, and craved his f^iendship, and was reconciled with
him.

Domnus the successor of I^annes was an unconstant man. He Domnus.
consented to the deposition of Eutyches. and afterward in the Council called
(...) he consented to the reposition of Euty^hes. He received a just
recompense of his inconstancy: for the second Council of Ephesus deposed him,
and ordained Maximus B. of Antiochia

Maximns was admitted B. of Antiochia by the second Council Maximu^
of Ephesus. H^e was present at the Council of Chalcedon, whereinto albeit the
second Council of Ephesus was damned as heretical, and all the acts of it
were abrogated, yet they gave allowance to the deposition of Domnus. and to the
admission (...). lib. 2. cap ultim^.
of Maximus, which thing came to pass by this occasion, Leo B, of Rome had
received Maximus to his communion before the Council of Chalcedon (albeit he
had received ordination from an heretical Council) and the ambassadors of
Leo were (...). Magd. (...). 5. ^ap. 10.
pr^sidents in the Council of Chalcedon: therefore they ouerpassed lightly,
and with allowance any fact that was done by the B. of Rome. But all the world
was set in business, when Acatius received in favor Petrus Moggus, because it
was done without foreknowledge of the Bishop of Rome.

To Maximus succeeded Martyrius, who being absent at Martyrius.
Constantmople for necessar affairs of his own Church, Petrus Gnapheus stale
away the hearts of the people from him, so that at his returning he was
compelled to leave Antiochia, with this goodnight, Theo^ (...) lib. 1.
I forsake a disobedient Clergy, arebellious people, and a defiled Church,
reserving unto my self the dignity of Priesthood.

Petrus Gnapheus for his deserts is worthy to be reakoned in Petrus Gnapheus.
the roll of heretics. First, he supplanted Martyrius by vnhon^st means in
the days of the Emperor Leo. Secondly he ordained a clause to be added to
that part of the Liturgy, which is called trisagios, sanctus Deus, sanctus
fortis, sanctus immortalis. To this (I say) he added, qui crucifi^us est pro
nobis, which Hi^. Mag^. ^nt. 5. cap. 10
form of speaking (albeit (...) may tolerate it to be spoken) was said by him
in an heretical sense, as if the divinity had suffered pain. Thirdly he
attributed divine honors unto the Virgin MARIE, and ordained that her name
should be in called upon in the public prayers' of the Church. He was
banished by the Emperor Leo, and restored by Basiliscus: he damned the
Council of Chaloedon, and was banished the second time by the Emperor Zeno,
and excommunicate by F^lix B. of Rome, and Acatius B. of Constantinople.
Stephanus succeeded Stephanus.
in his rowme, and was incontinent made out of the way by the faction of
Gnapheus. Calandion succeeded to Stephanus, and he Calandion
likewise was banished by the Emperor Zeno. In end Petrus Gnapheus subscribed
the henoticke letters of Zeno (these were letters containing a sum of the
true faith, an approbation of godly Councils, and a protestation of unity with
godly Bishops) (...) in the greek language signifies unitive or coniunctiue,
and henoticke letters were letters to procure peace and union in the Church. By
these means Gnapheus obtained his place again, and is reakoned in the
Catalogue of Bishops only for the subscription of the Emperors henoticke
letters.

Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
To Cyrillus succeeded Ioannes Nepos. After him Polythronius ministered in
Jerusalem. He was often accused, and oftentimes Ioannes Nepos. Polythronius.
absolved. His chief accusation was this, that he counted himself the supreme
bishop of all bishops. Sixtus 3. B. of Rome was serious in this turn, because
he thought that the apple of his eye was touched when supremacy was spoken
of. Therefore he sent 8. ambassadors to Jerusalem: a Conncill of 70. bishops
was gathered, and Polyth^onius was found innocent. Notwithstanding he was
convict of some other faults, nam^ly that he refused to consecrate a Church
until 10. pounds of gold were paid unto him: for this cause he was ordained
to dwell without the town, a Vicar to supply his room, and a portion to be
allotted to him for his sustentation. This portion appointed for his
sustentation, when he saw the people of Jerusalem pinched with famine, he
sold it, and supported their necessity, and was for his loving affection to
his flock, restored to his office again.

To him succeeded Iuvenalis, whose inconstancy GOD iusily punished. He was
present at the first Council of Ephesus, and consented Iuvenalis.
to the excommunication of Nestorius. He was present likewise at the second
Council of Ephesus, and consented to the restitution of Eutyches. He was
deposed in the Council of (...). lib. (...). cap. 10.
Chalcedon, and received in favor again after humble confession of his fault.
This is that famous author, whom the Roman Church cites for the fable of the
Assumption of the Virgin MARIE. When he returned to Jerusalem, a number of
turbulent Monks arose up against him, and desired him to accurse the Council
of Chalcedon, which when he refused to do, they chused another bishop called
Theodosius: but the Emperor Martianus commandment was strait to fetch
Theodosius alive unto him: therefore he fled, and Juvenalis returned again
unto his place. The names of Anastatius and Martyrius who followed Iuvenalis,
for their assenting to Basiliscus, and to Petrus Gnapheus Ana^tatius. Mattyrius.
are not worthy to be insert in this catalogue.

Of other Pastors and Doctors.
THeodoritus was B. of Cyrus a town in Syria, whose builder seems to have
been Cyrus King of Persia, a man of excellent learning, lived under the
Emperors, Theodosius 2. Valentinian Theodoritus.
3. and Martianus. He had the oversight of eighty parishes lying within his
ample diocie. He is bold to affirm in a cerraine Epistle written to Leo bishop
of Rome, that by his travails a thousand souls within his bounds were
reclaimed from the heresy of Marcion. He fell into many lamentable troubles.
The ground of all was the extraordinare love he carried toward his own
Patriarch John B. of Antiochia. For like as he accompanied him to the Council
of Ephesus, so likewise he concurred with him in the deposition of Cyrillus B.
of Alexandria, and Memnon B. of Ephesus: but the Council gathered at Ephesus
took trial in the cause of Cyrillus and Memnon, and absolved them, and damned
John B. of Antiochia, and his accomplices, Theodoritus was one of the number. The
second trouble followed upon the neck of the first: for by instigation of his
patriarch John he wrote against the 12 heads or 12. theses of Cyrillus written
against Nestorius, wherein he mistaketh the doctrine of Cyrillus, as if he had
fallen into the error of Apollinaris: but after that Cyrillus wrote a
declaration of his own meaning, it was found that both Cyrillus and
Theodoritus professed one faith, and they were reconciled. Nevertheless
Theodoritus was damned in the second Council of Ephesus for writting against
Cyrillus, neither being cited, accused nor convict of any fault. Theodoritus
complained to Leo B. of Rome, of the outrage of Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria,
who had damned him in a Council before he was heard. Leo absolved him, and
the Council of Chalcedon, after he had pronounced Anathema against the
errors of Nestorius and Eutyches, they in like manner absolved him. And finally
after his death in the 5, general Council, his writings against the 12.
heads of Cyrillus were damned. All these troubles proceeded from one and the
selfsame ground, to wit, upon the extraordinary love he carried toward his
patriarch John. This one thing laid aside, he was nothing inferior to the most
wise, acurate, and learned writers of the ancient time. In the first of his
learned dialogues called (...), he proves that the Word became flesh without
Theod. dialogi 1. cap. 8.
changing of the divine Nature into the humane Nature, or the humane Nature
into the divine. Even as in the Sacrament of the Supper of the LORD the bread
becomes the body of the LORD, not by changing the substance of it, but by
assuming by grace an other use than it had, the very symbol obtains the name
of the thing represented by the symbol. When Papists do read the dialogues of
Theodoritus, let them leave off to brag of the antiquity of the doctrine of
Transsubstantiation, and take them to the Monk Damascene the first author of
their (...): he continued at least 30 years in his ministry, and ended his
life as is supponed, under the reign of Leo the first.

Augustine in his young years was infected with the error of Augustinus.
the Manicheans. His mother Monica watered her face many times with tears, in
her prayers begging at GOD his conuersione to the truth. GOD heard her
prayers: he was sent to Millan to be a teacher of Rhetoric, by the preaching
of Ambrose B. of Millan, and the deuote behavior of the people in singing
Psalms to the praise of GOD, the like whereof Augustine had never seen in any
place before: for men in earth praising GOD with ardent affection seemed to
represent the Angels of heaven, who incessantly praise GOD with vnsp^akable
delight, Also with the reading of the life of Antonius the heremite, he was
wonderfully moved, and beg^n to dislike his former conversation, which he had
spent in worldly ple^sures, and went unto a quiet garden, accompanied with
Alipius: with many tears he bewa^led the insolency of his bypast
conversation, wishing the time to be now come, whereinto without farther delay
his soul should be watered with the dew of the converting grace of GOD. And as
he August. (...) lib. 8. cap. 12.
was pouring out the grief of his wounded heart to GOD with a flood of tears,
he heard a voice saying unto him toll and lege, and again, toll and lege,
that is to say, take up and read, take up and read. At the first heating, he
took it to have been the voice of boys or maids speaking in their play such
words one to another: but when he looked about, and could see no body, he knew
it to be a celestial admonition warning him to take up the book of holy
Scriptu^e (which he had in the garden with him) and read. Now the first place
that fe^l in his hands after the opening of the book was this: Not in
gluttony, nor drunckennes, nor in chambering, nor wantonness, nor in strife
or envying: but put on the Romans 13. ver. 13, 14
Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought of the flesh, to fulfill the l^stes
thereof. At the reading whereof he was so fully resolved to forsake the
vanities of the world, and to become a Christian that immediately thereafter he
was baptized by Ambrose B. of Millan, with his compenion Alipius, and his son
Adeodatus. After this he returned to Afric, and was coadiutor to Valerius B
of Hippe, as Chrys^stome was to Flauianus in Antiochia: and after them also
with extraordinary gifts of knowledge: but the writers of this time,
especially Evagrius who concludes his history with the death of Mauritius,
brings in many famous men in this Centurie, gifted with power to work
miraculous works, But when I consider the end of these miraculous works,
they are brought in, either to confirm the sanctimonie of the monasticke life,
the adoration of the Gross, or some other gross superstition. Zosymas a Monk
is commended by him for his prophetical foreknowledge of the ruin of
Antiochia, and for the miracle of the Lion, who slew the Ass that carried his
victualing to Caesarea, and likewise the Lion by his mandate was compelled to
bear that same burden which the Ass had borne to the ports of Caesarea. No
man is so senseless, or ignorant, but may perceive that this lying miracle is
brought in, to the confirmation Evagr lib. 4. cap. 26.
of the excellency of the monastic life The miracle of Thomas B of Apamea,
tends to the adoration of the tree of the Cross. The miracle of the fire
that came out of Barsaunphius shop Idem lib. 4. cap. 33.
at Gaza, and consumed the most part of them who were in company with
Eustochius B of Jerusalem, is a notable lie, and tends only to confirm
superstitition. The miracle of the Image of the virgin MARIE, detesting
Anatolius an hypocrite, an Idolater, and a sorcerer, and yet insinuating
himself in familiar acquaintance with Gregorius B. of Antiochia in the days
of the Emperor Tiberius, any man may perceive that this miracle is forged,
Idem lib. 5. cap. 18. Idem lib. 6. cap. 22.
not so much for detestation of hypocrisy, Idolatry, and sorcerie, as for
worshipping the Image of the Virgin with a deuote mind. The miracle of
Simeones who in his youth miraculously tamed a Pard, and fastened his girdle
about the neck thereof, and brought it like a catte into the Monastery and
afterward lived upon the tops of pillars, and mountains, sed with branches
of trees 68. years: this fable whereunto it tends all men do see. And
finally the golden Cross sent by Idem lib. 6. cap. 21.
Cosroes to Sergiopolis tends not only to the invocation of Saints, but
also to put our trust and confidence in them, as the last words of the Epistle
of Cosroes, and his wife Sira, clearly proporteth. No we let the judicious
Reader pardone me in pre^ermitting many things written by others, lest I
should weary them by filling their ears with fables and lies

CHAP. III. Of Heresies.
IN this and the next Centurie, I find that the error of Eutyches is like unto
a root of bitterness, which budding out with new branches, not seen before,
but fostered with the venomous sap of the old root that seemed to be
abolished, did mightily perturbe the Church. The error of the Monothelites was
but a branch of the error of Eutyches, but this belongs to the seventh
Centurie. In this Centurie a great number of people, especially of Monks,
favoring the heresy of Eutyches spoke against the Council of Chalcedone,
these were called (...), because they had no principal head upon Acephali.
whom they depended and they were ante^iour to Anthimus, or Anthimius B. of
Constantinople, and to Theodosius B. of Alexandria, and Severus B. of
Antiochia: therefore they were not called Anthimians, Theodosians, or Severues,
but indeed they might have been called Eutychians: always the vulgar name
given unto them was (...).

Another branch, which sprang up from the root of Eutyches (...).
heresy was the error of those who supponed that the flesh of CHRIST was
void of all kind of humane infirmity, expressly contradicting holy
Scriptures, which attributes to the body of CHRIST hunger and wearines, and
other infirmities, which Matthew. 4. Joan. 4.
he voluntarily accepted for our sakes. And where it is said, that the LORD
JESUS did eat and drink. To this they answered, that he seemed to eat and
drink as he did after his ^esurrection, but he had no necessity of eating
and drinking, but the verity of his death stops the mouths of these
heretics: for CHRIST was content to taste of all our infirmities, death it
self not except, that we might know he will be a merciful Heb. 5. verse, 2.
high Priest, because he has tasted of our infirmities, and can have
compassion of those who are in trouble. In this opinion was the Emperor
Justinian in his old days, whose vices did almost equal his virtues,
especially in comporting so much with Theodora the Empress, to the great
advancement of the error of Eutyches, and hinderance of the Gospel.

In this Centurie the defenders of the books of Origenc, such Originist^.
as Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia, and the Monks of Nova Laura,
whom Eustochius B. of Jerusalem eiected out of their monasteries were counted
heretics, as will be declared hereafter (Godwilling in the head of Councills.

Finally, there were some heretics, who durst derogate (...)
perfection of knowledge to the Son of GOD in his divine Nature: these were
called Agnoitae, whom I leave as buried in the dust, and according to their
name, never worthy to have been known in the world.

CHAP. IIII. Of Councills.
THE schism that fell out in the election of Symmachus The council of R^venna.
was the cause of the gathering of the Council of Rauenna. Laurentius was his
competitour. In this Council it was found that Symmachus was first ordained,
and that the most part both of Clergy and people adher^d to him: therefore he
was declared to be bishop of Rome and Lanrentius was ordained bishop of Nuceria.

The multiplied number of Councills in Symmachus time, all Six Councils holden
at Rome in Symmach^ time.
conueened by the authority of Theodoricus King of Goths, who reigned in
Italy. All this number of Councills (I say) was assembled for matters of little
importance, except the fourth and fifth Council, whereinto a lible of
accusations was given in against Symmachus, but he compeared not before the
Council to answer, yet was he absolved by the most part of the Council
(being his own favorers) chiefly for this reason, because they thought that
the high Pricst should be judged by no man, but his doings should be examined
only before the Trihunall of GOD. Mark how this matter goes: the bishops
Hi^ Magd. ^nt 6. ^ap. 9
of Rome are lying under the feet of the Goths, neither have they liberty to
assemble themselves together, except that license be sought, and obtained from
Theodori^us King of Goths. Not withstanding supremacy that great Idol,
whereat they aimed continually, runs so high in their heads, that the
flatterers of the bishop of Rome would absolve him, as a man whose actions came
not under the judicature of mortal men. His accusers protested in write, that
if the successors of PETER should b^e judged by no man, then with the ^est of
the priui'edges of their chair, they had also a p^iuiledge to sin, and to
do what they pleased.

The Councils of Spain called Ilerdensc, and Val^ntinum, assembled The
councils in Spain^ ^alled Ilerdense and (...)
in Valentia are very obscure Councils. In the one ^ight bishops were
present: in the other six bishops. Many new and superstitious Canons were
made in these assemblies, and farther I see nothing. In the first called
Ilerdense a prohibition of marriage in time of Lent, and three weeks before the
sestiuitie of John the Bap^st, and betwixt the days of the Aduent of our LORD,
and the days called Epiphania. In the other Councillit was appointed, that in
the ordinary service the Gospel should be read after the Epistle. partly in
respect that all the people of GOD have entresse to hear the wholesome
precepts of their Savior, and partly, in respect that by such hearing, some
were found to be converted to the faith, where of it may be perceived, that
the Gospel was read unto the people into a know^e and intelligible language,
else it could not work faith in the hearts of the hearers.

In the twentieth year of the reign of the Emperor Anaslatius The council
of Sid^
a national Council was assembled at Sidon of eighty bishops, by the
procurement of Xen^as B. of Hierapolis, for undoing the Council of Chalcedone.
The Emperor had al eadie banished Euphemius, and Macedonius bishops of
Constantinople, Yet he found that Flavianus B. of Antiochia, and Helias bishop
of Jerusalem altogether disliked and reproved his proceedings, neither could
they admit the law of oblinion, called in the Greek language (...), which
the Emperor would have brought in, to pacify controversies in the Church, as
civil controversies, at some times have been pacifi^d: for this cause the
Emperor Aanastatius set himself directly against the truth of GOD, and
gathered this Council, to undo the authority of the Council of Chalcedone.
Flavianus, and Helias would not be present at this ungodly Council, whereinto
they damned the Council of Chalcedone, yet they abstained from damning
Flavianus, and Helias, for a time. Nevertheless by continual accusations of
these two bishops, as if they had been mockers of all the Emperors doings,
they procured their banishment, as has been declared in the preceding
history.

In the 22. year of the reign of Anasta^us, and under the reign of Clodoueus
King of France, conueened 32. bishops in the The first Council of Aurelia.
town of Aur^lia, of purpose to settle some order in Ecclesiastical
discipline, which through injury of time, and irruption of barbarous people
into the country of France, had been brought to great dissolution and
misorder. The Canons of this Council are coincident for the most part, with
the Canons of all other Councils.

The two former Councils assembled in Spain, namely Ilerdense, The Co^cill of
Gerunda and Casaraugusta
and Valentinum, were under the reign of Theodoricus. Now these two Gerundense
and Casaraugustanum are ce^ebrated under the same King, to wit, Theodo^us of
the nation of the Goths reigning in Spain. In Gerunda seven bishops
conueened, made Ecclesiastical constitutrons, chiefly anent Baptism, that
Catechumeni should be baptized on Pas^he day, and at Pentecoste, when most
s^lemne conuentions of people were gathered. They who were under inf^mitie and
sickness, might be baptized Canon 4.
at any time, and the infant, which was likely to die, mightlee Canon, 5.
baptized that same day where into it was borne. In Caesaraugusta elenen
bishops seem to have been conueened. They forbid Canon, 2.
fasting upon the LORDS day, for supersution, or for respect of times, or for
persuasion. It would appear that this Council had a desire to abolish the
rites and customs of the Matichean heretics, who were accust^med to fast
upon the Lords day.

In the days of Hormisda by the mandate of Theodoricus King The Cou^cill of
Rome
of Goths reigning in Italy, a Council was assembled at Rome upon this
occasion. It was thought meet by the Emperor Anastatius, Theodoricus King of
Italy and many others, that a Council should be conueened at Heraclea for
deciding controversies in religion. Many bishops resorted to Heraclea above the
number of 200, but Anastatius suffered no Council to be holden, thereby
incurring the great blame of inconstancy, and carelessenesse in seeking out
the truth: for this cause Theodoricus willed Hormisda bishop of Rome to gather
a Council at Rome, whereinto the error of Eutyches is damned of new again,
and ambassad ours are ordained to be sent to Anastatius the Emperor, and to
the bishop of Constantinople, to divert them, if possible were from the error
of Eutyches, but how in humanely the ambassadors were entreated, it has
been declared in the description of the life of Hormisda.

Under the reign of the Emperor Justinius a Synod was gathered The Cou^cil of
Constantinople Hist. Magd. cont. 6 cap. 9
in Constantinople by Ioannes Cappadox. Many grievous accusations were given in
against Severus B. of Antiochia, such as sacrilegious spoiling of Temples,
under pretense of eschewing causes of Idolatry, he took away the golden doves
that hung above the fontes, and the altars, and h^e uttered many blasphemous
speeches against the Council of Chalcedone. Ioannes Cappadox, albeit he was
of a bad religion himself, yet the authority of the Emperor, and consent of
the Council procured that Severus should be damned of heresy, whom the
Emperor also banished, and (as some affirm) punished him also by commanding
that his blasphemous tongue should be cut out. In like manner the Monks of
Apamea in a Council conueened The Synod of Syriasecund*
in Syriasecunda accused Severus of bloody cruelty, and oppression, in
besieging of Monastries slaying the Monks, and spoiling their goods. The like
accusation was given in against Peter B. of Apamea, which accusations being
sufficiently proved by vnsuspect witnesses this Council damned Severus, and
Petrus B. of Apamea.

In the fifth year of King Abnaricus was the second Council of Toledo
conueened, partly for renewing the ancient constitutions The second Council of
Toledo.
of the Church, and partly for making new constitutions belonging to
Ecclesiastical discipline. It was ordained that children whom their parents
had dedicated to the Church, they should not be admitted to the office of a
Subdeacon, until they were 18. years of age, neither to the office of Deacon,
before they were 25. years old, and at the beginning of their admission to the
office of a Subdeacon, namely when they ^re full 18. years old (and not
before that time) they should be presented before the Clergy, and people to
make an open declaration, whether they were of purpose to lead a continent
life, or to marie, and these who protested they had not the gift Canon. 1.
of continency, are tolerated by the first Canon of the second Council of
Toledo to marry.

In the year of our LORD 551, and in the 24. year of the The 5. general
council holden at Constantinople.
reign of the Emperor Justinian, was a general Council assembled at
Constantinople. The principal causes of this meeting are expressly set down by
Evagrius lib. 4. cap. 38. First in re^pect of the controversy betwixt
Eustochius B. of Jerusalem, and Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia.
Eustochius cast out the Monks of Nova Laura, who obstinately defended the
errors of Origin. Theodorus Ascidas assisted them, and said, that Eustochius
B. of Jerusalem had dealt cruelly, and inhumanely with his brethren, to pacify
this controversy was this Council conueened: Also great disputation was in
the Church anent the books of Origin, of Theodorus B. of Mopsuesta, and some
writings of Theodoritus B. of Cyrus, and Ibas B. of Edessa: this was the second
cause of this great conuention to put an end unto these contentious
disputations. At this time MENAS was bishop of Constantinople, but he ended
his life in the very time of the general Council. The first question moved
in the Council was this: Whether or no men who were dead, and had ended their
course, might lawfully be cursed and excommunicated. To this EVTYCHIVS (a man
before this time of no great account) answered: That (...) as JOSIAS not only
punished Idolatrous Priests who were 2. Reg 23. verse. 16.
alive, but also opened the graves of them who were dead, to dishonor them
after their death, who had dishonored GOD in their lifetime: even so the
memorialls of men might be accursed after their death, who had harmed Christ's
Church in their lifetime. This was thought by the Fathers of the Council to be
pertinently spoken, and when his answer came to the ears Evag. lib. 4. cap. 38.
of the Emperor Justinian, he appointed that he should be or deined bishop
of Constantinople, for Menas died suddenly in time of the Council. Vigilius B.
of Rome was in Constantinople in time of this Council, but would not be
present at the Council, lest the dignity of the Roman chair should be
impaired, if the Patriarch of Constantinople had been equalled with him in
honor, for Eutychius after Menas, was moderator of the Council. The general
conuention took thi^ effect, That the writings of Theodorus B. of Mopsuesta
were utterly condemned, and the replies of Theodoretus to the 12. heads of
Cyrilus, together with the letter of Ibas written to Maris a Persian were
damned. Finally the errors of Origin were damned, and Theodorus Ascidas,
together with the Monks of Nova Laura, who defended the errors of Origin, all
were excommunicated, and the 4. preceding general Councils were confirmed
with full allowance. The Council of Mopsuesta immediately following, tended
only to this, to know when the name of Theodorus sometime B. of Mopsuesta a
town of Cilicia, was razed out of the roll called sacra dipiycha. And the
ancients both of Clergy and people, assured the Emperor Justinian that the
name of Theodorus was razed out of the roll of holy bishops before their time.

Under the reign of Childebertus King of France, were frequent The second,
third, fourth and fifth Councils of Aurelia.
meetings of Bishops in Aurelia a town of France commonly called Orleans. Many
superstitious constitutions were hatched amongst them, especially anent
prohibition of marriage, for this doctrine of Devils had now gotten great upper
hand in the West. The verse of Homer may be written in the frontispice of
these Councills (...): that is, It is a shame to tarry long, and to return
empty. If they met so often, some fruits worthy of their meeting should have
been brought out to the world, but it is a wearisome thing to travel a long
time in the wilderness of Arabia, albeit in it there be large fields, yet it
is a barren ground, and the pain of wearisome traveling is not recompensed
with the delight of any refreshment that can be had there. This I write, not to
hinder any man from the reading of these Councils also: for some good things
are to be found in them, but to wish that the short time we have to live in
this world should not be unfruitfully spent.

In the second Council simonie is damned, and the receiving Canon, 4.
of money for admitting a man to a spiritual office is utterly detested.

In the third Council perjury is abhorred in a man Canon 8.
having a spiritual calling, but softly punished by 2. years excluding of him
from the communion.

In the fourth Council, it is ordained that in the offering of Canon, 4.
the holy Calice, nothing shall be presented, except wine only, unmixed with
water, because it is a sacrilegious thing to transgress the holy mandate and
institution of our Savior CHRIST.

In the fifth Council it is condescended, that no man shall Canon 10.
be ordained bishop, without consent of King, Clergy and people, according to
the ancient constitutions of the Church, and that no spiritual office shall be
bought by money.

The heap of constitutions anent the keeping of Pasche day and Lent, anent the
prohibition of marriage betwixt Christians and unconverted Jews, anent servants
not to be admitted to Ecclesiastical orders, anent assemblies to be at the
least yearly conuocated by bishops, anent Ecclesiastical rents not to be
dilapidated. The nature of a short Compend cannot permit me to insist in such
things.

Under the reign of Theodobertus King of France, the Fathers who were present
at the Council, of Aurelia, conueened also The council of (...).
in the Council of (...) and ordained that no man should presume to the office
of a bishop by the favor of m^n (...), but by the merits of an honest and
(...).

That the dead body of a bishop in time of (...) not be covered with the pall,
otherwise called Opertor^ (...) corporis which covered the Altar, lest the
honor done to the body, should be a polluting of the Altar with many other
constitutions, which of purpose I ouerpasse with silence

Under the reign of Aribertus King of France, a Council was The council of
Tours. Canon 5.
assembled at Tours. In this Council it was ordained, that the Clergy and
people in every Congregation should provide support for their own poor, and
not permit them to wander to uncouth places: for indeed this custom of
wandering has brought in Atheism amongst the poor, when they leave their
own Congregation, they leauealso their own Pastor, who attended upon their
conversation, and they fall into the snare of the devil.

It was also statute and ordained, that a bishop should count Canon 13.
his wife as his sister, and that he should no manner of way company with her,
and for this cause he should have Presbyters, and Deacons so familiarly
conversant with him, that they might bear testimony of his honest behavior,
to wit, that he never companied with his wife. The Romanists who count the
prohibition of marriage to be the soul of their religion, could not ouerpasse
this Canon without a censure Now let us hear what Censura says. Intellige
hunc Canonem uixta usum Orientalis ecclesia, in qua co^iugatus promovebatur
adsacerdotium: that is, Understand this Canon according to the custom of the
Oriental Church, wherein a married man was promoted to the Priesthood: well
excused. The bishops of Rowen, Burges, Tours, etc. are conueened in the town
of Tours, to prescribe rules to the Oriental Church, or at least rules unto
their own bishops to live after the form of the Oriental Church, which never
came in their mind to do, as may evidently be known by the sixth general
Council,

Moreover, it was statute, and ordained, that no Priest, or Monk should
receive in bed with him another Priest or Monk, Canon 15.
to the end they might be so vnreproouable, that they would abstain from all
appearance of evil.

In this Council was set down very strict prohibitions, that no man should
oppress the Church, and convert unto his own use Canon, 25.
any thing duly belonging to them, lest he incurrethemalediction of Judas who
was a thief, and kept the bag and converted to his own use a part of that
money which belonged to the poor.

In the Council holden at Paris, order was taken concerning The council of
Paris.
admitting of bishops to their offices that no man should be admitted bishop,
without the full consent of Clergy and people, and that no man should presume
by favor of Princes only, without the consents foresaid, to become bishop
in any place.

Recaredus King of Spain, and of the descent of the Goths, who The third
Council of (...).
were miserably insected with the Arrian heresy, assen bled 2 Council of 62.
bishops at Toledo, where he renounced the Ar^ heresy, and embraced the true
faith, and the whole nation of the West Goths in Spain did the like, about
the yeeee of our LORD 585. Hist. Magd. (...). 6. cap. 9 A Council at
Constantinople.


Under the reign of Mauritius a Council was assembled at Constantinople, for
trying of the cause of Gregorius B of Antiochia, whom Asterius Deputy in the
East had accused of incest: but Gregorius was declared to be innocent, and his
accuser was scourged with rods, and was banished. In this Council the name
of Oecumenick bishop was attributed to John Patriarch of Constantinople.

The first Council of Matiscon was assembled about the time Three Councils at
Matis^. Canon. 8.
of Pelagius 2, as the second Tome of Councills records. In it commandment
was given, that no man of the Clergy should cite another man having a
spiritual office before a seculare judge.

And that a bishop or Presbyter should not entangle himself Canon 11.
with carnal lust, after he is promoted to so high dignity, but the woman
who before was his wife, now let her be his sister, and let the husband be
changed into a brother. Mark how subtly Satan under pretense of lothing
matrimonial chastity, is bringing in, all kind of uncleanness into the
Church.

The second Council of Matiscon was conueened in the 24. year of the reign of
Gunthrannus king of France. In it complaint was made, that Baptism was
ministered usually upon ^ry holy day, insomuch, that upon Pasche day, scarce
were two or Canon 3.
three found to be presented to Baptism This they ordained to be amended, and
that no man (except upon occasion of infirmity) presume to present his child
to Baptism, but to attend upon the festival days prescribed of old, that
is, Pasche and Whitsonday.

Also it was statute and ordained, that the Sacrament of the altar should be
ministered before any communicant person had Canon 6.
tasted of meat or drink.

That no person who flees to the Church as to a city of refuge, be drawn
back again by violence, from the bosom of Canon 8.
the Chuch, or be harmed into that holy place.

That a bishop must not be attached before a secular judge. Canon 9.


That the houses of bishops shall be kept holy with exercises Canon 13.
of prayers and singing of Psalms, and shall not be defiled with the barking
of dogs, and muting of hankes.

That seculare men shall do reucrence to those who are of Canon 15.
the Clergy, even unto the lowest degree of them, in such sort that if the
secular man do meet any of the Clergy walking on foot, he shall honor him
by uncovering his head: but if the seculare man be riding on horseback, and
the Clergy man on foot, then the secular man shall light down from his
horse, and shall do reverence to the Church man: this age smells of
Antichristian pride.

In the third Council at Matiscon there is nothing to be read but a contentious
disputation betwixt two bishops, Palladius and Bertramus, and foolish questions
scarce worthy to be disputed in Gra^mer schools, Whether or no a woman may be
called homo. A Council at Rome.


In the year of our Lord 595, and in the 13. year of the reign of the Emp.
Mauritius, Gregorius 1. bishop of Rome assembled a Council at Rome of 24.
bishops, 34. presbyters, whereinto first of all he confirmed the first four
general Councills.

He ordained that at the celebration of the Mass there should be less singing
and more reading of Psalms and Gospel, because weak people transported with
the delight of a sweet and delicate voice, marked not how men of a lewd life
drew near unto the Altar of GOD.

He ordained also that laicke boys should not be cubiculars to the bishops of
Rome, but that Presbyters, Deacons, or Monks should be witnesses of the
honesty of their secret conversation

And that the bear whereinto the body of the B. of Rome is brought forth to
be buried shall not be oue. spread with any coue^ing above the bear.

That for ordination of men in spiritual offices, no reward shall be craved.
For like as the bishop should not sell the imposition of his hands, even so the
minister or notare should not sell his voice and pen. If he who is ordained,
voluntarlly gives any thing as a testimony of his thankfulness, this is not
forbidden to be received.

Gregorius standing before the place where the body of S. PETER is buried,
pronounced many Anathems, whereinto the rest of the assembly with uniform
consent, said, Amen. Amongst the rest, the Presbyter or Deacon, who marries a
wise is delivered to the devil, and a man who marieth his own spir^tuall
sister (whom in our language, we call his gossope) he is likewise delivered
to an evil Heard to be kept. Albeit Gregorius be not counted the worst
amongst the bishops of Rome, yet when he follows not the certain rule of
the written word of GOD, he is wandering in the mist as boldly as others did
before him.

The Councills which I have ouerpassed with silence, such as Gradense,
Bracearense, Lateranense, Lugdunense, Pictaviense, Metense: lest I should over
charge a little book with an unnecessary burden, or trouble the reader with
reading of superstitious rites, damning of old heresies, and of every
contentious disputation, more duly belonging to civil judges than to
spiritual conuentions, I reserre mine excuse in this to the wisdom of the
judicious Reader.

TREATISES BELONGING TO THE sixth CENTVRIE.
A TREATISE Of the worshipping of Images.
IN the first 300. year of our LORD, Images were not admitted into places of
adoration. In the fourth, fifth, and sixth Centurie, they are admitted into
temples, yet for the most part without opinion, that they should be worshipped,
as the letter of Gregorius the first written to Serenus bishop of Marseill
clea^ely declares. Now it is time to contend against Images, when they are
come in such credit, that they are set up in temples and places of adoration.

And first (Godwilling) I shall entreat of the words of (...) and (...), what
difference is betwuixt them, and the words (...), and (...) what differences
are betwixt these three words, lest Idolaters should be left lurking under
the sconses of words: when they are denuded of all other ouerlapping couerings,
then will they lurk under the shadow of an ambiguous word, as a Fox straightly
persued, will lurk under the shadow of a fairne. In the second room, I intend
to speak of the Images of the Gentiles. In the third room, of the Images of
the Jews, and last of all, of the Images of them who bear the name of
Christians.

First, concerning the names of (...), and (...). I affirm that the principal
defenders of worshipping of Images of old, put no difference betwixt these two
words: for Damascene, comparing Images to music instruments, he says, That
like Damas^. oration^ 3. pro Ima^.
as the captive Jews had instruments of music to praise GOD, so in like
manner the Babylonians had instruments of music to praise their gods. In like
manner, says he, the Pagans had (...), whereby they honored their gods, and
Christians also have (...) whereby they do honor to the true God, and his
Saints: and to bring in a more ancient testimony, Clemens Alexandrinus takes
(...), and (...) for one and the selfsame thing. Strom. lib. 6.


Concerning the words (...) and (...). First understand that the word ^perdulia
invented for the adoration to be done to the virgin MARIE is not a word used
by any approved Author, who writes in the Greek language the scholastic
Doctors, who had already lost the purity of the Latin language, when they
speak uncouth Greek, they expone themselves to the derision of all learned
men. They who are acquainted with scripture language know there is no
difference betwixt the words (...), and (...). In one verse the service of GOD,
and the service of an Idol, are both called (...) Lue. 16. verse. 13. Gal. 4.
verse. 8.
. In like manner the worship done to the Gentile gods is called (...) in these
words, (...): that is, Ye served them. who indeed were not gods. The
generality of the word (...) extended both to the service of God and man, no
man is ignora^ of it who is acquainted with the Greek language yea and a
servile girl may in proper language be called (...). The Council of
Frankford, I grant, puts a difference betwixt Idols and Images, yet in such
wise that they forbid adoration of Images, and they count Images worshipped to
be Idols. The G^ntiles liked Idolatry the better, because it was a b^ood
invented by the imaginations of their own he^rts, according as the Apostle
speaks, They became vain^ in Romans 1. 21
their own cogit^tions.

The Images of the Gentiles are damned by the Prophet HABACCVK in these words:
What profits the Image? for the maker Habac. 2 verse. 18.
of it has made it an Image. and a teacher of lies, though he that made it
trust ther^s, when he makes dumb Idols. The Prophet damneth the Images of
the Gentiles for many causes. First, because they are profitable for nothing,
they cannot benefit their friend, neither can they noy their enemies, yea, and
they cannot help themselves, when they are hewed down with Persian Isai. 46
axes, and the massy lumpes of their gold, is laid upon the backs of
Camells, groaning under the heavy burden, because they can make no support to
themselves.

The Gentiles contended with no less obstinacy of incorrigible minds, than
the Papists in our days do, that their images were profitable for some good
use, albeit there was no divinity in them, because they led them to a
rememberance of their gods: but Augustine affirms the contrary, that Images
lead not people unto their gods, but rather from their gods. In August. psalm.
113 others real^on 115.
witness whereof, when the Image of the Sun was placed in the temple, albeit
the Sun it self did shine clearly at the window, yet the Pagans turned their
backs to the Sun, and their faces toward the Image of the Sun: so were
they not led to the worshipping of their gods, but rather from their
worshipping by Images.

The substance of their Images was gold, silver, wood, stone, or some other
corruptible matter, the form was fashiomed according to the pleasure of the
craftesman, who made them. For the most part the gods of the Gentiles had the
similitude of men, and for this cause the portrature of Jupiter fashioned by an
artificer in Lybia, was as far different from the portrature of Jupiter
formed by an European craftesman, as the men of Lybia in color, hair,
grandeur of lips, and amplenesse of breathing parts they are different from
the men of Europe: so were the gods of Lybia black in color, with curling
hair, and the gods in Europe had the color, hair, and proportion of European
men. Better it had been to have renewed men according to the likeness of GOD,
than to have fashioned their gods according to the likeness of men, yea and
greater vanity than this was in forming their gods, at sometime the similitude
of a man was mixed with the similitue of a beast, to furnish out the effigy of
their gods. Jupiter Amminius was formed with the body of a man, but with the
head of a Ram. Dagon whom the Philistims worshipped, had the similitude of a
man in the uppermost parts, but the similitude of a fish in the lower parts
of his body. And Pan the god of shepherds was pictured with horns in his
head, with the seete of goats, and rough in all i^ body, as if he had been
ouerlapped with the skin of an unshorn Ram. They became vain in their
imaginations and their foolish heart Romans 1. verse. 21.
was full of darkness. Yea, as the Prophet speaks, the makers of them were
like unto them: that is, senseless, blind and dead hearted, and so were the
worshippers of them. Psalm. 115.


Against the Gentiles who were Idola^ers, a woe is pronounced H^ba. (...) verse.
11.
by the Prophet, in these words, Woe be to him that says to the wood, awake,
and to the dumb stone, arise up, etc. Let us take diligent attendance to these
words, because GOD has spoken them by the mouth of his Prophet. The Gentiles
excused their Idolatry, so did the Jews theirs, and the Papists will seem
to honor GOD and his Saints in their Images, but le^ all fl sh be dumb and
silent, and hear what the LORD speaks from his Sanctuary, Woe be to him,
that says to wood, awake. The Pagans, Jews and Papists are like unto
Adoniiah, Ioab, and Abiathar. These were all banque^ting together, and every
one of them strengthened another in their foolish course and they all said with
one cons^nt, God save King Adonniah. But there was another kind of conference
1. R^g. 1.
in the chamber of King DAVID, which did undo all their conferences and
appointed that SOLOMON should reign: ^n so notwithstanding of all the fool sh
excuses wherewith Gentiles Jews and Papists excuse their Idolatry, GOD is
like unto hi^elfe, and he (...) a w^e against it.

The ^stes think (...) fully s^tisfied both GOD and good men, when they grant
there is no di^initie in the Image, and in substance it is a corruptible thing,
and the portrature of it is fashioned by the hand of the Craftsmen. Did not the
Gen^les as much? Did not Plato count the Images of most precious substance,
most unprofitable to the people? Did not Fabius Maximus despis the Idols of
Tarentum as angry Images against their own people, who depended upon them?
Did not the Poet grant, that it lay in the artificers hand, either to make a
bench, or a god of the wild fig tree, that came into his hands, the verses are
vulgarly known, and in all men's mouths.

Olim truncus eram ficulinus inutile lignum:
Cum faber incertus scamnum, faceretne Priapum
Maluit esse Deum. --
Yea and Marcus Varro, whose testimony August. cites lib. 4. de Civitate Dei,
he said, Qui primi civitatibus simulachr a invexerunt, and metum dempserant,
and errorem addiderunt: that is to say, The first in bringers of images into
cities, they emptied cities of the fear of GOD, and filled them with error.
If a short description of some vanity of images could exonere men from the
blame of Idolatry, then might the Gentiles also be freed from the vile
imputation of Idolatry.

The Idolatry of the Jews fraughted not only with vanity, but also with
unthankfulness, and a contempt of the law of GOD proclaimed from mount Sinai,
does lead us unto a deeper consideration of the vileness of Idolatry. The
golden Calfe, which they worshipped in the wilderness, and the staire of
Remphan, declare, that the nature of man is so prone and bent to Idolatry,
that we are bent to follow the sins of those people, who has been most
hateful enemies unto us. The Exodus 32. Acts 7. verse. 43.
Egyptians were grievous oppressors of GODS people, nevertheless the Jews
followed their Idolatry, in worshipping the Calfe. On the other part the
Moabites and Ammanites hired Balaam Numb. 32. verse. 24. M c. 6. verse 5. Amos 5.
verse. 25.
to curse them. Notwithstanding of all this, they took up in the wilnernesse
the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of Rempham, figures which they made to
worship them. It is an unsupportable mischief, and a remeadilesse malady
lurking in our corrupt nature, when we are bent to follow the sins of people
who hate us, and wishes all kind of harm to us both in soul and body, so
that learned men upon great considerations had called Idolatry (...), or the
mad bentnesse upon Idols.

When the Apostle PAVL is making a particulare enumeration 1. Cor. 10 verse. 7,
8, 9, 10.
of the sins which the Jews committed in the wilderness, namely, Idolatry,
fornication, tempting of Christ, and murmuring, remember that Idolatry is set
in the first place, as the very fountain of all apostacy and defection from
GOD. For like as in a matrimonial contract betwixt man and woman, when the
principal head of the contract is broken, and a woman has given her
affection and body to anotherman, all the rest of the points of the contract
which are subordinate to this, will easily be dissolved: even so, if Idolatry
once take place in our hearts, so that we give the glory of God to creatures,
all other defection will easily ensue and follow. Therefore in the days of
Joshua, when the people were zealous for the glory Iosu. 22.
of God, they could not abide any kind of appearance of defection from the
true worship of God: but alas it fares with zeal, as it does with a tear
that is soon dried up, so does the zeal to the glory of God hastily euanish
from amongst the children of men.

Moreover it is diligently to be marked, that the Lord is very strict and
precise in the matter of his worshipping, not only forbidding to worship the
gods of the Canaanites, but also forbidding to worship the true God after the
form of the^ bad Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 4.
worshipping, but only according to the rule of his own blessed Commandment.
And for this cause the ten Tribes of Israel, because they worshipped not God in
Jerusalem, but offered sacrifices upon the altars of Bethel Gilgal, and
B^sheba, they are counted of God as profane Aethiopians, and people who were
Amos 9. verse. 7.
strangers from the covenant of God. Therefore in the matter of divine worship,
let these two rules continually be set before our eyes. First to worship God
alanerly, and not his creatures, secondly, to worship him according to the
r^le of his own Commandment alanerly.

Finally, amongst the rest of the unhappy manners of the nation of the Jews,
it is to be noted, that when outward Idolatry seemed to be forsaken amongst
them, so that they were content rather to sacrifice their lives, than to suffer
the Images of the Roman Emperors to be set up in their Temple, At this
Ios^ph. de bell. Iuduc. lib. 2.
same time (I say) they were defiled with inward Idolatry, which is most
abominable of all other Idolatries. For the Idol of all Idols is this, when a
man makes an Idol of himself, preferring himself to God. and his own will
to the Commandment of God, and his own wisdom to the misdome of God
manisested to the world by his own dear Son Jesus Christ, but so it is,
that the nation of the Jews, at that same time when they fo sooke the
worshipping of Idols made with men's hands, they forsook also the Shepherd
of their souls even the true MESSIAH, and preferred a murderer to him.
Whereof this con^lusion may b^e justly inferred, that Idolatry is not rightly
fortaken, except all idols both outward and inward be laid aside.

Many w^rnings the people of the Jews got, to beware of Idolat^ie, yea the
LORD threatened them, that incace they would provoke the LORD to anger by
things that were not Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 21.
Gods, (...) LORD also would provoke them to ange^ by a people that was not a
people. But when no warning could avail, the LORD cast them off into a
reprobate mind, and received the G^ntiles to be his peculiar people. But at
our very first entry we have this warning to be humble and obedient, lest he
who spared not the natural branches, how much less will he spare Romans 11.
verse. 21.
us, if we make defection.

In the last head, I have to entreat concerning the Images of the Roman
Church, which in the sixth Centurie were received into places of adoration, yea,
and a little after were adored, and worshipped and finally, the adoration of
Images got allowance in general Councills. Now seeing I am not entreating of
Images made for ornament, or for memory of civil actions, but only of
adoration, and the in-bringing of them into places of adoration. Let us
remember that the Apostles were faithful dispensators of those things, which
they received from CHRIST, whether it was for the feeding of the bodies, or of
the souls of CHRIST'S people, when they received barlie loaves blessed by Joan.
6.
CHRIST'S mouth, and miraculously multiplied, they distributed unto the people
that same bread, and none other, which they received out of Christ's hands. In
like manner they were faithful dispensato^s of that spiritual food, which they
received from CHRIST to feed the souls of his people unto eternal life. Now
we never read, that CHRIST taught his Apostles by pictures and images in the
knowledge of his eternal truth, neither that the Apostles taught any others
to know GOD, and to follow the virtuous footsteps of the Saints, by presenting
dum be images unto their sight: therefore this form of teaching smells of
novelty, and came not from CHRIST and his Apostles: for the Apostles received
commandment from CHRIST to preach his Matt. 28.
word, and to minister his S^cramentes, but not to present dumb images to the
sight of the people, justly called by the Prophet HABACCVK doctors of lies.
Habac. 2 verse. 18.


Secondly, places of holy Scripture, both in the Old and New Testament, do so
manisestly damn adoration of images, that the most obstinate desenders of
worshipping of Images were compelled to leave Scripture, and take them to the
authority of unwritten traditions, and Damascene expressly calls the Damas^.
orat. 2. pro Imagini^.
worshipping of images (...), he forgets not to remember the brazen
Serpent, and the Cherubims, as the Papists of our days do continually, yet
his conscience compelled him to acknowledge, that these similitudes were made
for signification, and not for imitation or adoration, else how could he fly
from Scripture to the naked warrant of unwritten tradition. I know the lie is
no less repugnant to it self, than it is unto the truth, and all the
shifting business of Damascene, to shroud the adoration of images, under some
testimonies of Scripture are undone by that plain confession, that it is an
unwritten tradition, else he would have said, it was (...), that is, both a
written and unwritten tradition. The fables of Damascene, whereby he would
prove the adoration of images are in absurdity beyond the fabils of Poets,
even in their metamorphosis. For who can abide to read the hunting of Placidas,
and the speaking of the beast that was hunted with a cross betwixt his horns,
shining in brightness Damascen, orat. 3 pro Imagini^.
far beyond the splendour of the Sun, with such vanities and lies must the
infirmity of a false doctrine be supported. But John Patriarch of Jerusalem,
who writteth Damascenes life, he writes that Damascens hand was cut off by
the Prince of the Saracens, and was miraculon^y restored and healed again by
invocation of the image of the Virgin MARIE. It is not likely, that Damascene
who writes the miracle of Placidas hunting, for confirmation of worshipping of
images, that he could have pretermitted so great a miracle wrought for the
restitution of a member of his own body, obtained by worshipping of an image,
if it had been a miracle wrought indeed.

But now to leave Damascene, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the writer of the
history of Damascenes life, who has added unto the multiplied number of
Damascenes lies, an heap laid above, to the end that his 3. orations pro
Imagin^bus may be like unto a measure full, and ouerrunning And to convert me
to Councils, wherein as in victual houses and in barnes, all store of
Arguments are laid up that can serve for the apparent allowance of Images. I
superside at this time to speak much of the Council gathered by Constantius
Copronymus at Constantinople An. 755. whereinto 338. bishops utterly damned
the adoration of Images, and the setting of them up in places where GOD was
worshipped, and that for three principal causes. First, because the making and
bowing down to Images is expressly forbiden in Scripture, and namely in the 2.
Commandment of the Decalogue. Secondly, because the picturing of CHRIST (who
is both God and man) and representing of him by a similitude is a dividing of
his two natures (so far as in us lseth) because his divine nature cannot be
pictured, and his humane nature should not be separated from his divine nature.
Thirdly, because the writings of holy and ancient farhers, damned the
worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Nazianzenus, chrysostomus,
Athanasius, Amphilochius, Theodorus bishop of Ancyra, and Eusebius Pamphili,
whose grave sentences all damning adoration of Images, are most worthy to be
read.

In the rest of this Treatise, I shall set down (Godwilling) two opposite
Councills, the one allowing the adoration of Images, the other disallowing it.
The second Council of Nice under the Empress Irene ann. 789. gave full
allowance to the adoration of Images, out of Asia, and Gracia, and some other
parts: with the ambassadors of Adrian bishop of Rome, were assembled 350.
bishops. On the other part, under the reign of Carolus Magnus Emperor of
the West, ann. 794. a great Council was assembled at Francford de maine,
wherein the adoration of Images was utterly disallowed, and the arguments
alleged in the second Council of Nice for adoration of Images, are clearly
refuted in presence of Charles King of France and Emperor of the West, and
Theophilactus and Stephanus ambassadors of the bishop of Rome. In these two
opposite Councills, let the judicious Reader mark the great providence of GOD,
who has appointed, that there should be contradiction to the lying doctrine,
so that they who love the truth of GOD have no need to follow a false
doctrine, in regard there is no man that dare gainesay it. For I dare say, to
the commendation of the Council of Francsord, that the Ibides of Egypt were
never more ready to deuou^e the flying Serpents of Arabia, so that they would
not suffer them to light in the coasts of Egypt, than the Council of
Francford was ready to vndoc all the foolish arguments of the second Council
of Nice, proouing the adoration of Images.

Before I set these Councills in opposite terms of contradiction, the one to
the other, the preludie of the Council is worthy to be marked. Adrian bishop
of Rome sent a letter to the second Council of Nice fraughted with lies, and
affirming that the Emperor Constantine was a leper, that he endeavored to
cure his disease by shedding of innocent babes blood, that PETER and PAVL
appeared to him in a vision by night, and bade him go, and be baptized by
SILVESTER, Huseb de vi^ Constant. lib. 4.
and his disease should be healed, and that in remembrance of this benefit
CONSTANTINE builded Churches in Rome, and adorned them with the Images of PETER
and PAVL. The grounds of this letter contains a mass of impudent lies.
CONSTANTINE was not a leper, but a man gifted in soul, beautiful in body, and
furnished with great gifts both of soul and body, and meet for great works,
as EVSEBIVS witne^eth, who lived in CONSTANTINES time, and was familiarly
acquainted with him. Neither was he baptized by SILVESTER in Rome, but by
EVSEBIVS in Nicomedia. For SILVESTER and MARCUS his successor were both dead,
before that CONSTANTINE was baptized. The rest of his letter is like unto the
sandy ground and fabulous narration whereupon it is grounded.

The arguments of the second Council of Nice proving adoration of Images may
be distributed into four rancks. Some are taken out of Scripture, others out
of Fathers, the third rank from common reason, the fourth from miracles. If I
propound their arguments into an intelligible order, and likewise the answers
to them, I do a benefit to the Reader.

The Cherubims, and the brazen Serpent were made by Gods commandment, and the
Cherubimes were seated in the place 1 Argument.
of adoration: ergo Images may be brought into the places of adoration.

There is a threefolde difference betwixt Images set up in 1. Answer.
Churches to be worshipped, and the Cherubimes in the Temple. First, the
Cherubimes are made by the express commandment of GOD, but the images set up
in Temples, are made express contrare to the Commandment of GOD Secondly, the
Cherubimes and brazen Serpent were represntations of divine mysteries. Thirdly,
neither the Cherubimes nor brazen Serpent were made for adoration as images
are, that are set up in Temples. If any man be not fully resolved with these
answers, let him understand that the Lawgiver has absolute authority, to
make exceptions from his own Law, but it is not lawful to others, without
warrant of GODS commandment to do the like. Example in ABRAHAM who had a
warrant to kill his own son^e. The people of Israel had a warrant to borrow
from the Egyptians vessels of silver and gold. and costly Genesis 22. verse. 2.
Exodus 12. verse 35, 36 Exodus 31. verse. 7.
raiment, and Moses had a warrant to make Cherubimes and a brazen Serpent: but
those things are not lawful to others, who want the like warrant.

The next Argument borrowed from Scripture is this. JACOB 2. Argument
worshipped the top of JOSEPH'S staff, therefore it is lawful to worship
Images.

The Council of Francford answers to this Argument. that like as there is no
such words in the Hebrew text (...) the 2. Answer.
words of the Apost. in the Epistle to the (...) cap (...) verse 21, contains
no such thing, where it is said, (...), that is, he worshipped leaningaboue
(...). (...). in genes. 162.
the top of his scepter, but he worshipped not his Scepter. And Augustine in
his questions upon Genesis affirms, that he worshipped GOD, and not the
staff of JOSEPH.

The third Argument taken out of Scripture is out of the book of the Psalms:
O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house. 3. Argument.
Of this they concluded, that images should be loved and worshipped, seeing
they are the beauty and ornament of GODS house.

To this argument it is answered by the Council of Francford, that this
argument is grounded upon a wrong interpretation of 3. Answer.
Sc^ipture, for by the house of GOD, is not meant a material Temple, and the
ornament of GODS house, is not Images, but spiritual virtues. Many other
places of Scripture are filthily abused, but I will have some regard to the
Reade^, that he be not wear^ed in reading an heap of frivolous arguments.

Many arguments are taken out of the writings of Fathers to 1 Argument out of
Fathers.
prove the adoration of Images but these following are the chief and
principal. First they say, that Basilius Mag us affirms that the honor done
to the Image, redoundeth to him whose image it is.

This he peaketh of Christ, who is the Image of the invisible 1. Answer.
God, Coloss. 1. verse. 5. And who is the brightness of his glory, and the
engraven form of his person. Heb. 1. verse 3. buth e is not speaking of Images
formed by the hands of men.

The testimony of Gregorius Nyss^nus is cited, who writes that 2. Argument.
when he passed by the image of Abraham viuely pictured, with the knife drawn,
ready to kill his son, he could not abstain from shedding of tears.

This argument is counted frivolous: albeir Gregorius Nysserus 2. Answer.
wept, ye^ he bowed not his knee to worship the im^ge of Ab a^an. Moreover the
Council of Franckford alleged that the books of Gregorius Nyssenus were not
extant.

Amongst arguments taken from natural reason, to prove 1. Argument ta: en
from common reason.
adoration of Images this is the chief. The Emperors Image is honored,
therefore the Image of Christ should be honored.

To this argument the Council of Francford; (...) this answer, 1. Answer.
that GOD is not like unto a morteli King locally circumscribed, so that when
he is in one place, he cannot be at that same self time in another place.
Therefore to intertaine a (...) rence in the peoples hearts toward their
Prince, this Custom of honoring the Kings image was found out. But God who is
every where present, and whom no place can contain, he is not to be sought in
Images, neither was that form of worshipping, either commanded or allowed by
GOD.

The argument invented of later days, to prove adoration 2. Argument,
of Images, is sophistical: the dishonor done to the Image of CHRIST,
redoundeth to himself: (...) the honor done to the Image of Christ,
redoundeth also to Christ, and is an honoring of Christ himself. The
antecedent is proved by the fact of Julian the apostate, in breaking in pieces
the Image of Christ in Caesarea Philippi, Sozom. lib. 5 ^ap. 21.


To this it may be answered, that the breaking down of the 2. Answer.
brazen Image in Casarea Philippi, was not a dishonouring of Christ in respect
of the fact, that Julian did, but in respect of the intention of the doer: but
when this is proved, the consequent will not follow. For albeit an evil
intention be eneugh to bring a man within the compass of such as dishonor
Christ, yet a good intention is not eneugh to prove, that we are honourers of
Christ, but our actions also must be ruled according to the commandments of
Christ: and therefore they who have only an intention to honor Christ, but in
the mean time violateth his commandments, by worshipping him into an Image,
shall never be counted honourers of Christ.

The fourth rank of arguments is taken from miracles An argument from
miracles. Answer.
wrought by Images. This argument is weak and faulty in all sides. The
antecedent is false, as shall be declared hereafter. But suppone that miracles
had been wrought in Images, or by images, it follows not that they should be
worshipped. In the wilderness God cured his people miraculously, by looking to
the brazen Serpent, yet it was not lawful to worship the brazen Serpent, and
when the people worshipped it, HEZEKIAS brake it in pieces, and called it
N^hustan. In like manner, GOD wrought a notable miracle by the ministry of PAVL
and BARNABAS at Acts 14.
Lystra, yet would they not suffer the people to worship them, and the coming
of the Antichrist is foretold to be mighty by lying wonders, yet is not the
Antichrist to be worshipped. Therefore this argument is of no force, albeit it
were true that miracles had been wrought by Images.

But let us examine the antecedent of this argument, they say, that miracles
have been wrought by Images: For confirmation of this, they bring in the viue
similitude of Christ's face printed into a cloth, and by Christ his application
of the cloth to his blessed face with his own hands, which portrature of his
face he delivered to the painter of King Agbarus to be carried to him, because
the painter dazzled with the splendore of CHRIST'S face could not paint his
similitude. Now (say they) the very effigy of CHRIST'S face miraculously by
touching only stamped in the clothe, declares that GOD works miracles both
in Images, and by Images. I answer this fable of Agbarus painter was not heard
before the 700. year of our LORD Damascen^ de orthodox^ side, lib. 4. Eusebius.
lib. 1. cap. 13.
that Damascene makes mention of it. The Apostles and Evangelists make no
mention of any such thing, neither yet Eusebius who had convenient time to
write of this miracle of the Painter, (if any such thing had been true) when
he writes of the letter of King Agbarus sent to CHRIST, and CHRIST'S answer
returned again to him.

The miracle of the Image of CHRIST crucified by the Jews in Berythus a town
of Syria, out of the pierced side whereof, flowed blood and water in great
abundance, and this blood mixed with water had a medicinal virtue to cure all
diseases. The writing of this miracle is ascribed to Athanasius, but the very
style, ditement and phrase of writing declares, that it is a book
supposicitious, and not belonging to Athanasius. Like as many other books
given out under the name of Athanasius are supposititious and false, and
Erasmus that learned man who was never satisfied with reading, yet he wearied
in reading the supposititious works of Athanasius, making an end of reading of
them with this proucrbe (...), that is to say, enough of accornes, meaning,
that he might spend the time better than in reading v^profitable and
unnecessary books.

The miracle of the Image of the Virgin MARIE, and the candle set before her
Image by an Heremite, who went in pilgrimage a far journey, and when he
returned again, after the issue of three months, (others say six months)
the candle was still burning, and not consumed in all this time. This miracle
has the right shape of a fable: for all circumstances of time, place, and
persons are obscured, neither is it declared in what year of the LORD this
miracle was wrought, nor in what place of the world the Image was, neither is
the name of the Heremite expressed, nor the name of the place whereinto he
iourncyed. Only the writer of this miracle is said to be Dionysuis Asca^onita
presbyter, some obscure fellow doubtless^, or the fai^ed name of some author,
for his name is unknown to the learned.

The second Council of Nice, which gave such full allowance to ado^ation of
Images, it began evil, and it ended worse: for it began at the fables
contained in Adrians letter, but it ended at a dialogue betwixt the devil, and
a certain monk, whom Satan sorbade to wo^ship the image of our Lady: but
his foolish Abbot Theodorus said unto him, that it was a less sin to haunt
all the baudie houses in the town every day, than to leave off worshipping of
the Image of our Lady one day. The Apostle PAVL never used the testimony of
the devil, to prove himself to be the servant of GOD, albeit the woman
possessed with a spirit of divination cried after PAVL and SILAS that they
we^e the servants of the most high GOD: and in my opinion A^ts 16. verse. 17.
the arguments taken from the testimony of Satan should be eschewed, for GOD
has not appointed him to be our teacher.

Now let us consider the multiplied honors of images hatched in the second
Council of Nice under this one word adoration of Images. This adoration
stands in decking of them, kn^eling unto them, saying of prayers before them,
censing, lighting of candles, vows, offerings, sestuall days, salutations,
building of Churches, and altars. All these honors were done both to the
image, and to the Saint represented by the image. The decking of images is
damned by the Prophet HOSEA, and it is indeed a spoiling of the poor, who
have need of such Hos. 2.
support as is bestowed in vain upon images, who have no need of ornaments and
clothing. Under the bowing of the knee, all Idolatry is comprehended. Prayer
should be conceived without 1. Reg. 19. verse. 18.
wrath and doubting: but so it is, he who prays before an image cannot be
free of doubting, because he has no promise to be heard. Cersing was a part of
the ceremonial law^ very (...). Tim. 2
badly transferred from the living GOD to senseless images. Candles Exodus 30.
verse. 19. Exodus 29. verse. 29.
lighted before images declare that the Saints represented by those im^ges were
the lights of the world, but it is a vain thing to forsake the light of their
wholesome doctrines and to honor them by lighting candles before their images.
Salutations of images are no less ridiculous than the salutations wherewith S.
Francis saluted the knee, as his sisters, for humilities sake. As concerning
vows, building of Temples, setting up of altars, and festuall days, to the
honor of images, it is too great honor done unto them, with some slip of
memory in them who do it: for in one word, they say, there is no divinity in
images, and immediately after they do such honor unto them, ^. Reg. 11.
as SOLOMON when he stood, did to GOD, and when he fell, did to Astaroth,
Chemosse and Moloch.

Before I make an end of this Treatise, it may be demanded, How could the
worshipping of images get place at that time when Emperors and Councils with
all their might contended in the contrary, that images should not be
worshipped. The Emperors Philippicus, Leo Isaurus, Constantinus, Copronymus,
and Leo his son, were all seriously bent to suppress the worshipping of
images, and in the West, Carolus Magnus King of France and Emperor, was
present in the Council of Francford, where the worshipping of images was
damned To this I answer, that the authority of the bishop of Rome was at this
time so increased, that they durst encounter with the Emperors of the East,
who were far distant from them. Constantine B. of Rome razed out of Charters,
the name of the Emperor Philippicus. Gregorius 2. did excommunicate Leo
Isaurus, and forbade to pay tribute unto him. Gregorius 3. in contempt of Leo
gathered a Council, and ordained the worshipping of images. As concerning
Carolus Magnus who was proclaimed Emperor by the special mandate of the
chair of Rome, the question is greater, How could the bishops of Rome
tolerate, that worshipping of images should be damned by a Council gathere^
by this new Emperor whom they had authorized by their ow^e trau^ls. To this
Ianswere, that the bishops of Rome did as the ancient Romans August. de (...).
(...). 5. cap. 12
did, of whom Augustine writes, Multas cupiditat^s (...) ingen^ cupiditate
presserunt, that is to say, Many desires they Pr^ed down for the excessive
desire they had of one thing, to wit, of soucraignitie and domination: even so,
the great desire the Roma^e bishops had firmly to keep in their (...) that
great territory of land in Italy, called Exerchatus Rav^nnae, which Pipinus
King of France reft from the Emperor of the East, and gave it to the chair of
Rome, for the excessive desire (I say) which they had to keep this rich prey,
they would not contend with Carolus Magnus, but after his death, they could not
suffer his posterity to take such a doing against the worshipping of Images,
as Carolus Magnus had done. Insomuch, that in the days of the reign of
Ludouicus Pius, it was hard to the Emperor to protect Claudius Taurinensis
against the chaufing malice of the bishops of Italy who hated him, because he
cast out Images out of his Church in Turin, yea, and Claudius Taurinensis
directly impugned the adoration of Images by a book written by him upon that
subject, whereunto none answer was given during his lifetime, but after his
death many were found like barking dogs railing against his blessed
memorial, and that so much the more, because in his book he rubbed quickly
upon the surfeiting pleasures of the Roman Church, who were better content to
worship the Cross of Christ, because that was easy to be done, than to
bear the Cross of Christ, because that was a laborious work, and painful
to the flesh, yet did Christ command us to bear his Cross, but not to worship
it.

Finally, it is to be noted, that the defection of some men of great account,
was a stumbling block to many others. Paulus Cyprius B. of Constantinople,
left his charge, entered into a Monastrie, and lamented that he had consented to
the abolishing of Images. Gregorius B of Neocesarea, one of the chief
disallowers of Images in the Council holden at Constantinople, gave in his
supplicant bill in the second Council of Nice, confessed his error, and
subscribed to the decree of that unhappy Council, by whose example the
bishops of Nice, Hierapolis, of the Isles of Rhodes, and Carpathus were moved
to do the like. Let this be a warning to them who are in eminent places, that
they fall not from the truth of GOD, lest by their fall they procure a great
ruining and desolation to the house of GOD. The LORD keep us from defection,
to whom be praise, and glory for ever.

AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Satisfaction and Indulgences.
SATISFACTION of old, was public repentance made for grievous faults, such
as, murder, adultery, apostasy. And this public humiliation made in sight
of the people with fasting, tears, baseness of apparel and such other
tokens of an humbled mind, with a sense of sorrow for bypast offenses, it was
called satisfactio, as Augustine writes quia satisfiebat Ecclesi^, that is,
because the Church was satisfied, yea and the slander August. Enchirid. 65.
was removed. This humiliation foresaid in the Greek Church was called
(...), or a punishment, because it was inflicted Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16.
as a punishment in Church discipline, to terrify others from committing the
like offenses. Now seeing this Ecclesiastical discipline was very rigorous,
and endured many years, as Council. Nicen. canon ^12
the Canons of Councils clearly declare, It pleased the Church upon weighty
considerations to relent somewhat of the severitie of the first prescribed
discipline, yea and the people of^ times entreated the Pastor by earnest
requests, that the time of public repentance might be shortened, because they
saw great tokens of unfeigned repentance in the offender. This dispensation with
the rigor of old discipline was called indulgentia, but in Popery, which was
beginning in this Centurie to have great upper hand, the abuse of these two
words, has utterly undone the ancient purity of religion and discipline.

The word satisfaction, which of old was referred to the people, now in Popery
is referred to God in this manner. They teach the people that the sins
committed before Baptism are abolished in Baptism, but sins committed after
Baptism, we must obtain pardon for them by our own satisfactions, namely by
fasting, praying, almesdeedes, pilgrimages, and such other works done by our
selves, And to ma^e this doctrine the more plausible unto the people, they
bring in the similitude of a man sailing in a ship, if he fall out of it into
the sea, the ship (say they) goes away without recovery, and incace he find
not another vessel to support his distressed estate, and to bring him to land,
he must needs perish and drown: even so (say they) if after baptism we
commit any transgression, we must either be supported by our own
satisfactions, else we must perish in our sins. No similitude can be more
repugnant to Scripture than this. For albeit there be many vessels, whereinto
men's bodies may be preserved from the danger of drowning yet is there not many
vessels whereinto our souls can be saved from damnation, but ^ee are saved
only by our spiritual Baptism, whereby the filth of our souls is washen
away in the 1. Pet. 3. verse. 21.
blood of Christ. And like as God commanded not NOE to make two arkes, but one
alanerly for the safety of a few: so has GOD appointed only one way for
safety of our soales, so that if we sin after Baptism we must have refuge
to the sweet promises of remissiion of sins made to us in Baptism.

In what sense indulgentia was taken of old, I have already declared In the
Roman Church Indulgences and Pardones, are a dispensation of the merits of
Christ and his Saints, to the utility of sinners. This presupponeth that the
merits of Christ and his Saints are put in the custody of the bishop of
Rome, and that his treasures can keep them Concerning the merits of CHRIST,
they say, that there was such precious virtue in his blood, that one drop of
it was sufficient to rede^me all the world, now (say they) what shall become of
all the rest of his blood which he shed in great abundance? shall all this
precious blood be lost? and where can it be better kept than in the treasures
of CHRIST'S Vicar, to be dispensated to the utility of sinners when need
requires. To this vain assertion of Papists I answer, that the LORD never
dealt sparingly, neither with our bodies nor souls. The LORD has provided
greater abundance of air for the refreshment of our bodies, than all the
breathing senses of men and beasts is able to draw in. The LORD rained down
MANNA from heaven in greater plenty, than might have sufficed the people of
the Jews in the wilderness: even so when the LORD is content to shed great
abundance of his precious blood, he has done it to set forth the great riches
of his mercy toward our souls, but not to make a mortal man a dispensator of
one drop of his blessed blood.

Nothing is more repugnant to holy Scripture, contained in the old and new
Testament, than this, that the dispensation and application of Christ's blood
should be committed unto a mortal man.

In the old Testament the high Priest who entered once in the year into the
most holy place, sprinkled the blood of the Leuit. 16. verse. 14.
sacrifice with his own fingers upon the Arc even so, the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, which Christ carried up to heaven, is sprinkled on the
Saints of God on the earth, but by whom only by the fingers of our high Priest
the Lord Jesus. In the new Testament we see, that albeit many things were
committed to the dispensation of the holy Apostles, yet some things were
reserved to the Lords own dispensation allanerly. Christ gave power to his
disciples to wish peace to every house which received them, but the
dispensation, and application of this peace Christ reserved unto himself,
because he alone, and Matt. 10.
not his disciples knew who was the true Child of peace. In like manner, power
of preaching the Gospel was committed to the Apostles, but the conferring of
the gift of faith, which is wrought by hearing, belongs only to CHRIST'S,
even so, the preaching of salvation by the merits of CHRIST'S Ephesians. 2.
blood is committed to many, but the application of that precious blood to the
safety of our souls, is only proper to Christ himself, who shed that
blessed blood for our salvation.

The merits of the Saints also, that is, the works of supererogation are
thought to enter into the Popes treasury, and to be at his dispensation. Of
this we have spoken somewhat already. But what presumption is this, that they
dare mix together the blood of the Saints, and Christ's blood, and the merits
of Saints with the merit of Christ, and cast all in ore heap, and treasure.
The verses of Praxilla, a Poetesse of Scycion were abhorred by the Gentiles,
because in her verses she brought in Adonis matching Cucumbers and Aples with
the sun, yet is it a more tolerable thing, to match an earthly creature, with
a heavenly creature, than to match creatures with the Creator, who is blessed
for ever.

After that this opinion of Indulgences and Pardons in a new and Roman sense
once took place, it is a wonderful thing to hear what progress it made from
evil to worse. Some thought that by Pardones might be obtained a relief from
temporal punishments, or at least a permutation of eternal punishments into
temporal: but others running as it were to the supe^latiue excess of all
spiritual madness, affirmed that by virtue of Popes (...) men were absolved
both from fault and punishment, a^ (...) Pardones were called Plenissima
Indulgentiae. Of this sort was the Pardone that BONIFACIVS the eight proclaimed
to such as would come to Rome in time of his appointed Iubile, and visit the
Church of Lateran, ann. 1399.

Of this, which I have already spoken, it is evident, that the Papists in the
words of Satisfaction and Indulgences deceive both themselves, and others: for
what avails it to keep the ancient words used in the primitive Church, and
to use them into a new sense unknown to Fathers, who spoke of Satisfaction
and Indulgences. Did not the Athenians of old wear the badge of the golden
Grasshopper, in token they were not extraneers, but they were inhabitants in
that land whereinto both their predecessors and themselves were borne, but
when they were conquessed by the Romans, and their golden liberty was lost,
what auailed the badge of the golden Grasshopper? Even so when substance of
ancient words is lost, what avails it to talk of Satisfaction and
Indulgences, as ancient things.

In the rest of this Treatise (God willing) I shall declare the absurdity of
Popish Satisfactions and Indulgences. The Council of Trent in the 12. Canon
deoperibus Satisfactionis they write. If any man says that the whole
punishment, and fault is continually remitted by GOD, and that the
Satisfaction of penitent persons, is no other thing but faith, whereby they
apprehend that CHRIST has satisfied for them, let him be accursed. This
Council. Trident. de satisfact. necessit. Canon 12.
Act of the Council of Trent in all the parts of it, is flatly repugant to the
Scriptures of God. There we are taught that in Satisfaction two things are
principally required. First a perfect obedience to the Law of GOD. Secondly a
perfect sacrifice for the sin committed by man: both these things are to be
found in CHRIST alone, who by his obedience has abolished the sinnewhich came
in by the disobedience Romans (...). verse. 18. Heb. 10. verse. 14.
of ADAM, and by one oblation has consecrated for ever them who are
sanctified. Now to pronounce a curse against all them who leanes unto the
obedience and sacrifice of CHRIST as unto their only Satisfaction to the
Justice of GOD, is all one as if they would pronounce a curse against all the
true disciples of CHRIST, who believes according as they are taught in the holy
Scriptures of GOD.

If at any time ancient Fathers speak roundly in this matter, it is ourparte
to do that favor to them, which is done to all men, to wit, to give them
liberty to interpret the meaning of their own words. So when AMBROSE
writteth that Ambros. in Luc. 22. ser^. 46.
tears washes away sins, he declares in what sense he spoke this, to wit,
not to count the tears of PETER to be a satisfaction for his threefolde
denial, but rather, that his tears was a testimony that he was one of the
Elect, for whose sins CHRIST had satisfied. The words of S. AMBROSE are
these: Legi quidem Petri lachrymas, sed satisfactionem non lego: that is to
say, I have read of the tears of PETER, but of his satisfaction I read not.

The Romanists in our days are like unto men, who have benetrauelled upon the
Sea, and in end they arrive to the harberie, and when they set their foot on
shore, they think that the ground is running about them in a circulare
revolution, This is nothing else but the conceates of their troubled brains:
even so, when Papists reads in holy Scripture many exhortations to Fasting,
Prayer, Almesdeedes: they imagine that Scripture is speaking of Satisfactions
for sin. But holy Scripture is like unto the solid globe of the earth, which
is not under a continual agitation, but is ever like unto it self, and sendes
us continually in the matter of Satisfaction, to Heb. 10. verse. 14.
that one oblation, which has consecrated for ever them who are sanctified.
Yea, the false teachers of our days are like unto the Edomites, who were more
cruel than the Babylonians, who contented themselves with slaying of some and
carrying of others captives, and setting the town on fire, Psalm. 137. verse. 7.
but the children of Ed^m c^ied out, that the very foundations of the city
should be razed, to the end it should never be a city again: even so, they
who sends us to our own satisfactions, they would undo our s^luation from the
very ground, as if Christ had been manifested in our nature in vain, to make
satisfaction for our sins, for which we must make satisfaction in our own
persons, and by our own works our selves.

The principal argument, whereby they endeavor to prove humane satisfactions
by Scripture is in the words of the counsel of DANIEL given to NABVCHADNESER.
Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward Daniel. 4.
verse. 24.
the poor: Lo, let there be an healing of thine error. What is contained in
this most wholesome counsel of DANIEL but an exhortation to leave off the
course of doing evil, and to do good, to the end, that the change of his
conversation might be a testimony that GOD had forgiven him his sins, and
accepted him in favor? The like wholesome counsel the Apost. PAVL gives to
them who had sometimes been thieves Let him that stole, steal no more: but let
him rather labor, and work Ephesians. 4. verse. 28.
with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may have to give unto him
that needs: Is there anything here but an exhortation to desist from wonted
ungodliness, and to lead a new and holy conversation? but the Apostle is
speaking nothing of humane satisfactions, yea, that the holy Spirit, who filled
his mind with celestial knowledge, sanctified also his memory, that he
should speak nothing repugnant unto that he writes unto the Hebrews. (...)
that is, By one oblation he has consecrated for ever them who are sanctified.
And the Apostle JOHN writing to 1. Joan. 2. verse. 1.
to them who were already baptized, and counted the children of GOD, he says,
My babes, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not: and if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just. So that
this new Theology of our own satisfactions for faults committed after
Baptism came not from CHRIST, and his Apostles, but it is an inucntion of the
brain of man.

Likewise Christ in holy Scripture is called the Lamb of God Joan. 1. verse. 36.
who takes away the sins of the world. It is great oblivion in men to
magnify the finger which pointed out Christ so much, as to count it
incorruptible, that the fire has no power to burn it, and it is an holy
relic in the Roman Church, and on the other part, to be so forgetful of
the golden sentence which he uttered at the pointing forth of his finger,
namely, that CHRIST was the Lamb of GOD, that is, the only propitiatory
sacrifice for our sins, for that Lamb which was offered in the morning and
the evening, in the old TESTAMENT did not represent our satisfactions, but
only the propitiatory sacrifice, which CHRIST offered upon the Cross for our
sins. The doctrine of Augustine agreeing with Scripture was this. That CHRIST
takes away our sins three manner of ways, First, by forgiving the sins we
have committed. Secondly, by supporting us with his grace, that we should not
commit the like in time to come, and thirdly, by bringing us unto eternal
life, where we shall be free from committing of sin.

Finally, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles anent the doctrine of
Satisfaction points out CHRIST alanerly, by whom we obtain forgiveness of
our sins, as the Apostle PETER speaks to CORNELIUS in these words. To him
also give all the Prophets witness, that through his Acts 10. verse. 43.
Name all that beleene in him shall receive remission of sins. If this be
the sum of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apo^es, they who contend so
seriously to prove men's satisfactions for faults committed after Baptism,
they strive against the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

As concerning the word Indulgentia what it did signify of old in the
primitive Church, I have already declared: to wit, a mitigation of the strict
discipline used against great offenders: but this matter will be better
understood, if it be deduced from the very first ground. In time of the ten
great persecutions many were found weak, who fell away from the open
profession of the truth, and sacrificed to Idols. The daily increasing number
of back-sliders from the truth, compelle^ the Church to enter into a deep
consideration how this defection might be stayed. Novatus was in this
opinion, that they who made defection in the time of the ten persecutions,
should not be admitted again to the fellowship of the Church albeit they did
repent. This opinion was too rigorous and repugnant to Scripture. Others
thought it more expedient to institute Sermons to be preached at solemn
times, such as Natalitia Martyru^, whereby the great commendation of the
constant Faith and sufferings of the Martyrs even unto the death might make
these timorous backsliders ashamed of their defection: and on the other part,
if any of them craved to be received again into the bosom of the Church,
that they should testify their repentance by public Satisfaction so many
years as was prescribed unto them by Church discipline, the mitigation of the
rigor of this discipline was called Indulgentia. In our days it is taken in
another sense, for an absolution from fault and punishment, at the least from
one of them, and a dispensation of the merits of CHRIST, and his Saints, to
offenders. This abuse of ancient words to the novelty of a new fact unknown
to Fathers makes Popish Religion justly suspect to such as considers their
aberration from antiquity, albeit they brag of it continually: in so much
that it may be said of them which Philip King of Maccdone spoke of a Judge,
who dyed his hair, that he who was false in a matter of hair, would ncuer be
true in a matter of Judgment: so the miserable abuse of the word Indulgentia
prognosticateth horrible abuse in the matter it self.

If any man demand how does this Treatise of Indulgences belong unto this
Centurie, seeing that Indulgences, and Pardones against which I write, were not
as yet in use in the Roman Church, yea we read not of Plenissimae Indulgentiae
a poena and a culpa before the 1200. year of our Lord. To this I answer, that
in this Centurie they were opening a passage to that which after followed. As
Julian the Apostate, when he cutted a parcel sozom. lib. 6 cap. 1.
of ground, he opened a passage to Euphrates to run into Tigris, and so
procured that his ships should arrive at Ctesiphon a town situated upon
Tigris, and not upon Euphrates: even so in this Centurie the bishops of Rome
were enlarging the power of their keys, which power they extended so amply,
that they durst excommunicate Emperors at their pleasure, and the posterity
following them, finding the power to be ample, they took upon them authority
to absolve in earth from fault and pain persons whom GOD promised not to
absolve in heaven, because they were not penitent.

The two greatest absurdities in late Pardones are these: First an absolution
from fault and punishment under another condition than is contained in the
written word of GOD. For there it is expressly written: When the wicked turns
away from Ezekiel chap. 18. ver^. 17.
his wickedness, that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and
right, he shall save his soul alive. But the Pardone of Pope BONIFACIVS the
eight contains a full absolution from fault and punishment, upon condition
that men travel to Rome in time of Iubile, and visit the Church of Lateran.
If an Officer to whom the Kings letters are concredite, did proclaim his
Highness letters, another way than they were first conceived, and stamped with
the Kings signet, he would be counted a false messenger, and would be
removed from his office, but he who dare presume to alter the message of the
great King, and to promise forgiveness to him, to whom GOD has not promised
it in his own written word, he is a false teacher, Promising liberue to
others, when as himself is a 2. Pet. 2. verse. 19.
servant of corruption, as the Apostle speaks.

Before this great sin was amended, another greater sin was added unto it,
and Pardones were sold for money, by which doing the bishops of Rome ceased
from being the successors of SIMON PETER, and became successors of SIMON
MAGVS. The Apostle commends Acts 8. verse. 20.
in the Corinthians (before they absolved the incestuous Adulterer) godly
sorrow, care, a clearing of themselves, 2. Cor. 7. verse. 11.
holy indignation, fear, zeal and punishment. amongst other things he
commends in them an earnest desire, to wit, of the conversion of him who had
fallen into an heinous transgression. The word (...) used by the Apostle is
not (...), that is to say, an earnest desire of money, but rather an carnest
desire of the repentance of him who had offended.

The horrible abuse of Pardones, sold for money were known to all Nations in
Europe, especially to the Country of Germany, to whom Pardones were sent
both for sins bypast, and for sins to come, with Ticelius an eloquent
Orator, but Pardones at that time were come to the height, and could consist no
longer, and since that time they give no price. I am the shorter in this
Treatise, lest I should hinder any man from reading the learned writings of
Chcmnicius de Indulgentiis, who has accurately written the beginning,
progress and ripeness of this filthy error of Popish Pardones.

A TREATISE Of a great heap of Errors which kithed in the sixth Centurie.
SEEING the time was now at hand, whereinto the Antichrist should exalt
himself against all that is 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 4.
called God, or that is worshipped, and that he should sit as God in the Temple
of God, showing himself that he is God. The LORD punishing the contempt of
his everlasting Truth, suffered a departing from many points of Faith to fall
out, as Tapestrie of errors hung up in the Temple to welcome the Antichrist.

The sign of the Cross is now filthily abused. In the first Of Crossing.
300. year of our LORD, and a little after, the Pagans so abhorred the doctrine
of the Cross, and that Salvation should be offered to all men in the suffering
of one man, that they persecuted this doctrine with unspeakable cruelty. The
Christians on the other part, in word, deed and gesture adhered so fast unto
the doctrine of salvation, which comes by the sufferings of CHRIST, that by
crossing of themselves, they would avow besore the World that they were
Christians: this was of old a piece of external profession, but they
attributed no virtue to the sign of the Cross to save them from enill:
insomuch that S. Augustine in a certain place speaking of thieves, who would
go out by night to steal, they would guard themselves by the sign of the
Cross, which sign, banished not the power of the Devil from them, but rather
sealed up the power of Satan within them: but in this Centurie Crossing was in
use, with opinion that by virtue of that sign made in the are, evil was
banished from men, and good things were procured to them.

The superstition of Pilgrimages began in the days of Constantine, O^
Pilgrimages.
and Gregorius Nyssenus damned the conceates of men, who imagined that GOD
would give a reward in the World to come to works which he has not
commanded to be done in this World: but in this Centurie this superstition
mightily increased, in so far, that men traveled to the sepulchers of the
Saints with intention to obtain health both of soul and Hi^. Magd. (...),
6, cap, 6
body in those places. This resorting unto the sepulchers of the Saints
fostred not only inuoca^ion of Saints, but also a confidence in them, that
they could support all troubles both of soul and body, whereinto any person
had fallen, insomuch that in the fist Centurie, and before the time of the
fullness of all corruption, Atticus bishop of Constantinople was compelled to
raise the body of Sabbatius out of his grave by night, and to bury him into a
secret place unknown unto the people to slay their superstition of inuocating
Saints, and confidence in them who were departed. Hi^. Magd. (...). 5. cap.
10. Of Liturgies in strange languages. 1. Cor. 14. verse. 18, 19


The doctrine of the Apostle PAVL wishing all chinges to be done unto
edification, and his own example, who albeit he was furnished with more
languages than all the Corinthians, yet he had rather speak five words with
understanding, that he might instruct others, than ten thousand into a strange
tongue This doctrine (I say) and example of PAVL banished from the Church a
long time Liturgies into a strange language, albeit the Latin Church borrowed
from the Hebrewe Liturgy Allell^. iah, and from the Greek Liturgy Kyrie
eleison, yet the Liturgy, and service of the Church continued into an
intelligible language amongst Gods people. The vain assertion of the Romanc
Church is, that the Liturgy was conceived in Latin language in Numidia about
the four hundredth of our Lord. It is easily answered, that at this time the
Africans were under the dominion of the Romans, and learned their language, in
such sort, that they were not more familiarly acquainted with the Africane
speech, than they were with the Latin tongue. To this Augustine bears
witness, that with difficulty he learned the Greek language, but with great
facility he learned the Latin language, Inter blandimenta nutricum, and ioca
arridentium, and latitias alludentium, that is to say, Amongst the flattering
speech; of Nourses, and amongst (...). lib. 1 cap. 14.
the sportes of them who arsided one to another, and amongst the solaces of
them who were deliting one another: so that in Augustines time, if the Latin
Liturgy had place, it was was all one, as if the Africane Liturgy had been
in use, because that both were alike intelligible, Now these who by such
places would prove that service may be said into an uncouth language, not
only they flatly gainesay the doctrine of PAVL, but also they abuse the
testimonies of ancient times in most miserable manner. After the time that one
man was made universal Bishop of all the Church, then comes in that deuilish
imagination, that for settling unity into the Church, the Liturgy must be
only in the Latin language in Europe.

In the Council called Valentinum (because it was assembled in Valentia, a
town of Spai^e) it was ordained that the Gospel should be read after the
Epistle, in respect that by such reading some were found to be converted to
the faith. This behooued to be reading of the Gospel in a known tongue: so
that the custom of reading Liturgies into an unknown tongue did not hastily
take place.

Oblationes defunctorum of old were legacies left by defunct persons for
sustentation of the poor, these obla^ions they who did not thankfully pay,
were counted murthe^ers of the poor, and were separated from the fellowship of
the Church, but now all things tending to a lamentab^e decay in stead of
Oblationes defunctorum, oblationes pro defunctis, creepes in into the Church.
Gr^gorius the first learned not this doctrine in holy Scripture, but from the
narration of Foelix bishop of Centumcellae in Hetrruia, as I have already
written in the History of his life. It is a wearisomething to read the Hist.
Magd. c^nt. 6. cap. 5
foolish fables of miraculous works, confirming this head of Popish doctrine.

At this time also, as Gregorius the first witnesses in his Homilies
Visitations of the sick
upon the Gospel, when men of vnreproouable life were sick, many came to
visit them, not so much to help them in their agony, to fight a good fight,
and happily to conclude their course, as to recommend their own souls to the
castodie of them, whom they supponed to have led an honest life. This is a
great novelty unknown to sacred Scripture, Ecclesiastes cap. 12. veis. 7.
to recommend our souls to the custody of any person whatsumeuer, except
only to GOD the Father of Spirits.

Relics of Saints were excessiuelie honored, insomuch Relics of Saints.
that Giegorius the first sends pieces of the chain wherewith S. PETER was
bound in time of his martyredome to di^erse persons, with promise that this
piece of his chain being hung about their necks by the intercession of PETER
should purchase unto them absolution from their sins. Hist. Magd. cent. 6.
cap 6 Of Necessity of Baptism. John 3. verse. 5.


The wrong understanding of the words of Christ: Verily, vcrely I say unto
thee, except that a man be borne of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, was the occasion that both August, in the 4. Centurie, and
Chrysostom in the 5. Centurie thought that they who died without Baptism were
in the estate of those who are condemned, howbeit the want of Circumcision 40.
years in the wilderness, not upon contempt, but only upon necessity,
because they knew not what time the cloud would remove, was not prejudicial
unto the souls of the Infants all this time: yea and if they had circumcised
their children, and had not permitted them to rest after the wound, their
children had died in the Wilderness. Many faults are laid to their charge, such
as Idolatry, Fornication, murmuring, etc. Why is not this ^. Cor. 10
fault also laid to their charge, that they circumcised not their children in
the Wilderness? Doubtless the Apostle in this point has seen them to be
faultlesse and that they despised not the Sacrament of the Covenant of GOD, but
they were hindered by^ the necessity of their iourneying to circumcise their
children. Joshua 5. verse. 2.
This intermission of the Sacrament was helped at Gilgal, and the Camp
removed not until the time they who were circumcised were whole. This
history might have taught both Augustine and Chrysostom, to understand that
the Covenant of GOD is not annulled when the holy Sacrament is neither
neglected nor contemned, but children are preueened by death, before they can
be presented to the holy Sacrament, Notwithstanding these same Fathers were
compelled to make exceptions from their own rigorous sentence: for they who
gave their lives for the testimony of CHRIST, before they were baptized in
CHRIST'S Name, the forementioned Fathers were compelled to say, that their
Martyrdom supplied the want of Baptism, and that they were baptized in their
own blood. Moreover Ambrose who was more ancient, than either Augustine or
Chrysostom, writing of Valentinian the second, who was slain before he was
baptized, he says of him, that as Lazarus rested in the bosom of ABRAHAM,
even so the Emperor Valent^nian (...). de obitu Valent. Imperateris.
rested in the bosom of JACOB. But now to leave speaking of ancient Fathers,
who were compelled both to correct other men's opinions, and to make exceptions
from their own opinions. In this Centurie whatsoever was incommodiouslie spoken
by ancient Fathers, it is not amended, but made worse by their suffrage and
vote, all bypast sini es are said to be pardoned Exodus 14. Gregor. lib. 9.
induct. 4. epist. 39.
in Baptism, as Pharao was drowned in the red Sea, but no word of comfort to
them, who being hindered by necessity are preueened by death before they be
baptized. The simple form of baptizing in water, in the Name of the Father,
Son and holy Ghost was long ag^e perue^ted, and men added oil unto the
institution of CHRIST, wherewith diue^se parts of the body of him who was
baptized was anointed: but in this Centurie none amendment of preceding
errors, but a continual progress to further superstition.

Albeit it came to pass by the providence of GOD, that the holy Supper
continued ministered unto the people in both Abuse of the Sac^ament of the
Supper^
forms, and the holy Cup was not withdrawn from the people by no
Ecclesiastical ordinance before the Council of Consiance, ann. 1414.
Notwithstanding the holy Supper was abused, in making it both a Sacrament
distributed to the living and likewise a sacrifice offered for the quick and
the dead, especially for those who were alleged to beto^mented in Purgatory,
Surely this was a beginning of the dishaunting of the Lords holy Sacrament:
for the people being once informed that there was as great berefite redounding
to their souls, by seeing the sac^ifice celebrated, and far l^sse hazard and
danger, than to communicate of the Sac^ament of CHRIST his body and blood the
ignorant people were gladly con^ent to be often present at the sacrifice, but
they lothed the frequent (...) of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Communion.

Finally in this Centurie, good things were abused, evil ma'ad^es were
increased, desection from the Faith was mightily advanced, all things tended
unto a lamentable decay, and I conclude this second book of the Arrian, and
Eutychian persecution, with this exhortation, to beware of the beginnings of
Apostacy: for albeit the shadows of the Evening do not utterly spoil us of
light, yet within a short time after our eyes are so dimmed with multiplied
and thickened shadows, that we stagger and we know not where we are walking.
The Lord of his unspeakable favor, continue with us and our posterity the
light of his everlasting truth.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the 4. Centurie in the treatise of Co^ncills.

PAGE 126. LIN. 10. patron read pattern..

In the 5. Centurie, Chap. 1.

PAGE 5. LIN. 15. (...) read Rithimer.

In the Inscriptions of the Treatises.

PAGE 38. LIN. 3. Fourth read Fifth.

Ibidem in the treatise of man's Free Will.

PAGE 43. LIN. 28. (...). read (...).

In the treatise of Original sin.

PAGE 52. LIN. ^4. (...) read (...)

Ibidem, Cent. 5.

PAGE 56. LIN. 1 than read no^

Cent. 6. In the treatise of the worshipping of Images.

PAGE 42. LIN. 3. (...) read (...). PAGE 53. LIN. 3. knee read kine.

Ibidem in the treatise of Satisfaction,

PAGE 57. LIN. 20. Christ's read Christ.

Ibidem.

PAGE 60. LIN. 29. (...) read (...).

CENTVRIE VI.
CHAP I. OF EMPEROVRS.
Anastatius.
AFTER ZENO succeeded ANASTATIVS, and governed 27. years. He was a patron of
the heresy of Eutyches. He banished Euphemius B. of Constantinople, because
he would not redeliuer unto him that letter which he had subscribed before his
Coronation, wherein he was bound to attempt nothing against the true faith, and
na^ely against the Council of Chalccdone. In like manner he banished Macedonius
the successor of Euphemius for the same cause (for he had the custody of the
hand-write of Anastatius) and the Emperor gave secret Commandment to make him
out of the way at Gangra the place of his banishment. Xenoeas B. of Hierapolis,
a firebrand of Satan stirred up the Evagr. lib. 3. ^ap. 3.
Emperors mind to great rage, partly by gathering a Council at Sidon,
wherein they damned the acts of the Council of Chalcedon, and partly by
stirring up the Emperor to wrath against good men, such as were principal
defenders of the true faith: ^mely Flavianus B. of Antiochia and Helias B of
Jerusalem. The people of A^chia were very friendly to their Pastor, and finding
that a great number of Monks favoring Eutyches error, had assembl^d in the
town of Antiochia to compel Flavianus their bishop to accurse and abjure the
Council of Chalcedon: they set upon the Monks, and sl^we a number of them,
others leaped into the river of Orontes, where they found a meet burial for
seditious Monks. On the other part a great number of the Monks of Syria Caua,
came to support the troubled estate of Flavianus. For these things, as if he
had been a contentious E^agr. lib. 3. cap. 32.
man, he was banished, and Seuerus a notable Eutychian heretic was placed in
his room: this is he, of whom I have mentioned diverse times that Alamundarus
prince of Saracens deluded his messengers, and sent them back ashamed and
confounded. The next attempt was against Helias B. of Jerusalem, against whom
this quarrel was forged, that he would not subscribe the Synodicke letters of
Seuerus, and damn the Council of Chalcedone, and by the Emperors commandment
Olympius his captain came to Jerusalem, expelled Helias, and placed John a
familiar friend of Seuerus in his room. This John by the persuasion of Sabas a
Monk of Palestina forsook the fellowship of Severus, and was cast into prison
by Anastatius the Emperors captain: but when he was brought forth out of
prison again, he disappointed the expectation of Anastatius the captain: for
he openly avouched the four general Councills, and anathematised the
followers of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutyches. In doing whereof he
was mightily assisted both by the people, and the Monks: so that Anastatius the
Emperors captain fearing popular commotion, fled and returned again to the
Emperor, but Severus B. of Antiochia moved with wrath against Hist. Magd.
(...). 6 cap. 3.
the Monks of Syria, set upon them, and slew 300. of them, and gave their
carcases to the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, such mercy
was, and is to be found in headstrong heretics. In all this desolation the
courage of Cosmas B. of Epiphania, and Severianus Bishop of Arethusa is to be
admired, who wrote a book containing a sentence of deposition of Severus B. of
Antiochia, which book Aurelianus a deacon of Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 34.
Epiphania clad in a woman's apparel delivered unto him in Antiochia, and
afterward conveyed himself away secretly. The Emperor was highly offended
against Cosmas, and Severianus, and he wrote to Asiaticus governor of
Phoenitia, that he should eiect them out of their places: but when answer was
returned to the Emperor, that it could not be done without blood, the Emperor
left off further pursuing of them. Many counted Anastatius a peaceable
Emperor, because he would have settled controversies in the Church, as civil
controversies at some times are settled, namely by a law of oblivion, but
there is no capitulation betwixt darkness and light, but darkness must yield
unto the light of GOD. In Afric more than 900. were crowned with martyrdom
under the reign of Anastatius as the Magd. history records out of the first
book of Regino, de Anastatio. Platina writteth that he was slain with
thunder. Platin. de vit. Hermisd^


Justinus the elder.
AFTER Anastatius succeeded Justinius a godly Emperor, and governed nine
years, 3. days He restored the Bishops whom Anastatius had banished. He
banished also Arrian bishops, who were found within his dominions. Severus
bishop of Antiochia a vilde Eutychian heretic, and a bloody Fox, he
displaced, and caused him to be punished by cutting out his tongue, as some
affirm. Theodoricus Evagr. lib. 4 cap. 4.
King of Goths obtaining dominion in Italy, persecuted true Christians with
great hostility, and sent ambassadors to the Emperor Justinus to restore the
Arrian bishops whom he had banished: else he would pursue the bishops
who were in Ital^e with all kind of rigor. And because the ambassadors
returned not back again with such expedition as he expected, he put hand to
work, and slew two noble Senators, Symmachus, and Bo^tius. Likewise when the
ambassadors were returned, he cast in prison Ivannes Tuscus Bishop of Rome,
and his companions, whom he had before employed Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3.
to go in message to the Emperor Justinius. The bishop of Rome died in prison
for lack of sustentation, but the LORD suffered not this barbarous cruelty of
Theodoricus to be long unpunished: for the LORD struck him with madness of
mind, so that when he was sitting at table, and the head of a great fish was
set before him, he imagined it was the head of Symmachus, whom he had slain,
and was so stupefied with fear, that incontinent after he died. In the days
of this Emperor Justinius, was a terrible earthquake, the like whereof has not
been heard Euag. lib. 4. cap. 5.
at any time before, wherewith the town of Antiochia was shaken and utterly
ruined. With the earthquake, fire was mixed, consuming and resolving into ashes
the remnant of the town, which the earthquake had not cast down. In this
calamity Euphrasius B. of Antiochia perished. The good Emperor mourned for
the desolation of A^tiochia, and put on sackcloth on his body, and was in great
heaviness, whereof it is supponed that he contracted that disease whereof he
died. When he found his disease daily Chron. Funct.
increasing, he made choose of Justinian his sisters son to be his colleague,
who governed four month in coniunct authority with his uncle, and then
Iuslinus ended his course.

Justinianus.
AFTER the death of Justinius, Iustinianus his sisters son governed 38.
years. He would suffer no faith to be openly prosessed, except the faith
allowed in the four general Councills. Notwithstanding the Empress Theodora his
wife was a favorer Evagr. lib. 4. ^ap. 10.
of Eutyches heresy. This Emperor was bent to recover all that was lost by
his predecessors in Asia, Afric and Europe, and he had a good success
through the virtue and valor of his captains, especially Belisarius and
Narses Belisarius first sought against the Persians who had overcome not only
Mesopotamia, but also many parts of Syria, Antrochena and Caua. He overcame
them in battle, and compelled them to go back beyond Euphrates. Next he was
employed to fight against the Uandales in Afric, who possessed a great
bounds of the Roman dominion, ever since the days of Gensericus King of
Vandales. And it is to be marked that the time is now come, whereinto the LORD
will declare that the blood of his Saints is precious in his eyes. For since
the days of Dioclesian, that bloody persecuting Emperor, no race of people
persecuted GODS Saints with so barbarous cruelty as the Vandales did, for
zeal they had to the Arrian heresy, wherewith they were infected. After
Gensericus, Hunericus, and Amalaricus, and Trasimundus, who closed the doors
of the Temples of Christians, and banished their bishops to Sardinia.
Childericus would have showed some favor to Christians, and reduced their
bishops from banishment: for this cause the Vandales did slay him, and gave his
Kingdom to Gillimer. Now the LORD remembered the groans of his own prisoners,
and would not suffer the rod of the wicked perpetually to lie upon the lot of
the righteous. Belisarius fought against the Vandales prosperously, recovered
Carthage, and all the bounds pertaining to the Roman Empire possessed by the
Vandales. Also he took Gillimer their King, and carried him captive to
Constantinople. It is worthy of remembrance, that Justinian would not receive
into his treasure the vessels of gold, which the Emp. Titus (when he burnt
the Temple of Jerusalem) transported to Rome. These same vessels Gensericus
King of Vandales when he spoiled Rome transported Evagr. lib. 4, cap. 17.
to Carthage, and Belisarius after he had conquessed Carthage again he brought
them to Constantinople, but Justinian sent them to Jerusalem to be disponed
upon according to the wisdom of Christian bishops in those bounds. The third
warfare against the Goths, for recovering Italy out of their hands was
greatest of all the rest, and endured longest time, to wit, 18. years,
whereinto Belisarius and Mundus, and after them Narses all valiant captains
were employed. It was brought on upon this occasion, Idem lib. 4. cap. 19.
as Evagrius following Procopius (in whose time this warfare was intended) does
record. Amalasunta the daughter of Theodoricus Platin. de vit. Joan. 1.
had the government of Italy. Astalarichus her son before he came to
perfect age, died. Theodatus a kinseman of Theodoricus had the government by
the marriage of Amalasunta, but he Funct. chron.
rendered unto her evil for good and thrust her into prison, and slew her. In
Theodatus time came Belisarius to Italy to fight against the Goths, but
seeing Theodatus was more meet for philosophy than for warfare, he gave place
to Vitiges to have the government Belisarius recovered the Isle of Sicile, he
came to Rome, and the ports were opened to him, and he was gladly Ev^gr. lib.
4. cap. 21.
received: he took Vitiges King of the Goths, and carried him captive to
Canstantinople. Mundus another captain overcame the Goths in Dalmatia,
recovered the country to the Romans: but in the mids of his victory he was
slain through too hasty and furious persuing of his enemies, who had slain
his son. In absence of Belisarius (for the Emperor had sent for him to fight
against the Persians) the Goths choosed Theudebaldus, and after him Attaricus,
who continued but short time. Finally, Totilas was chosen to be their King,
who recovered again the town of Rome, and the most part of all the principal
towns of Italy. Belisarius, albeit he was sent back again to Italy, and
recovered Rome the second time, yet the Persian war continually was the cause
of reducing him back again from Italy. In end, Narses a valiant man was sent
to Italy, who overcame the Goths, drove them out of Italy, and brought it
again under the soueraignity of the Romans. What good recompense for great
service was rendered to Belisarius, and Narses, many writers have recorded, I
pass it over with silence. Narses moved with indignation against the Empress
Sophia the wise of Justinius the younger, the successor of Justinian, he sent
for the Longobards. who came out of Pannonia, and possessed themselves in that
part of Italy, which is unto this day called Lombardie.

It is one of Justinians chief praises, that he caused the great Ocean sea of
the Roman laws to be abridged into a short compend, and to be comprised
within the compass of 50. books, vulgarly called Pandectis or digestis, having
short titles prefixed unto Tom. 2. Con^il.
them, rather than prolixe and tedious commentaries subioyned unto them. Also
he gathered a general Council in Constantinople about the 14. year of his
reign, to pacify if possible were, the contentious disputations that were
moved anent the writings of Origin, T^eodorus and Ibas, but this I refer to
the own place.

Justinius the younger.
IVSTINVS was nephew to Justinian. He governed 16. years. He governed himself
alone 12. years, and with Tiberius, whom Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 23.
he associated 3. years, 11. months. All things succeeded vnprosperously in
his time. Alboinus King of the Longobards possessed himself and his people in
Italy. Cosroes King of Persia with his captain Adaarmanes took the town of
Apamia, and burnt it Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 10.
with fire, and the town of Circesium, and put garrisons into it, and miserably
wasted the bounds of the Roman dominions. When these things were reported to
Justinius, he who would credit no true information before, now he is stricken
with madness and astonishment of mind, being grieved for this, that the estate
of the Roman Empire should have decayed in his time, and through Idem lib. 5.
cap. 11, 12.
his default. For remedy whereof Tiberius a wise and valiant man, by the advice of Sophia was associate to Justinius, to govern the affairs of the
Kingdom, Evagrius describes at length the oration of Justinius to Tiberius,
when he clothed him with all Imperial ornaments, and how he exhorted him not
to bewitched with the splendore of those garments, as he had been, but with
vigilance and wisdom, to govern the estate of the Kingdom. This he spoke
after he was recovered of his disease, and in presence Evag. lib. 5. cap. 13.
of all the noble men of his Court so that they were compelled to shed
abundance of tears, when they heard at one time so clear a confession of his
own miscariage, and so prudent a counsel given to his associate.

Tiberius.
TIBERIUS reigned 3. years, 11. months in coniunct authority with IVSTINVS,
and after his death he reigned four years himself alone: so all the time of
his government was seven year, eleven months. In his time COSROES King of
Persia, was puffed up with such insolency, in regard of his former victories,
that he would not admit the ambassadors of TIBERIUS to his presence, but
commanded them to follow him to Caesarea of Cappadocia, there to receive their
answer, for he had taken Daras a town of Mesopotamia in the borders of the
Roman Empire, builded by the Emperor Anastatius, and called Daras, because
about this place Darius had his last overthrow by Alexander of Macedonia.
Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 37.
After the taking of Daras, he marched toward Armenia in the Summer time, and
from thence intended to address toward Caesarea Cappadocie, expecting none
encounter or resistance of the Roman army. But Tiberius had prepared a well
appointed army, consisting of more than an hundredth and fifty thousand men to
resist Cosroes, whose forces when Cosroes could Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 14, 15.
not match, he fled: and for very heart grief he died, and gave advise to
the Persians, not to make war against the Roman Empire in any time to come.
The estate of the Church was the more peaceable under his reign, because the
Vandales in Afric, and the Goths in Italy were already utterly subdued.
The Longobards, whom Narses brought out of Ponnonia to Italy, were the more
insolent to afflict Christians, because Tiberius was occupied in the Persian
warfare against Cosroes. The nation of the Goths had as yet full swey in
Spain, and they were miserably Hist. Magd. cen. 6 cap. 3.
addicted to the Arrian heresy, insomuch that Lemugildus King of Goths,
caused his own natural son Elmingildus to be slain, because he forsook the
Arrian faith. Also their number Matin. de vit. Gregor. 1
was augmented by returning of many Vandales to Spain, who had escaped the
hands of Belisarius.

Mauritius.
MAVRITIVS was captain of the army of TIBERIUS, to whom Tiberius gave his
daughter in marriage, with his kingdom: for he found himself sick unto the
death. He reigned 20. years, he fought against the Persians, and prospered
(...). lib. 5 cap. 22.
in that warfare: and after that peace was bound up amongst them. Chaianus King
of Auares, Hunnes, and Slauonians fought against him, and carried away many
captives and prisoners. In redeeming of the captives, Mauritius was too
niggard, whereby it came to pass, that Chaianus slew 12. thousand prisoners,
which might have been ransomed for a small sum of money. This oversight of
the Emperor not only stained other his noble virtues, but also purchased the
hatred of the soldiers against him, whereby it came to pass, that they set up
Phocas to be Emperor in his stead. Of this calamity it is thought that:
Mauritius was foreseen in his dream, and that he choosed (...). Funct. lib. 8.
rather to be punished in this world for his faults, than in the world to come.
Always he was brought in bands to Phocas, his wife, and five children were
cruelly slain in his own presence, and finally, bloody Phocas slew himself,
of whom it is reported, that when he saw his wife and children put to death,
he gave glory to GOD in his greatest calamity, and said, Just art thou, O
LORD, and righteous in all thy Judgments.

CHAP. II. Of Pastors and Doctors.
Patriarchs of Rome.
TO GELASIVS succeeded ANASTATIVS 2. and governed 1. year, 2. months, 24
days. He ministered in the Anastatius.
days of the Emperor Anastatius: he was hated of the Clergy, because he
admitted to his f^owship Photinus a deacon, whom Foelix and Gelasius had
excommunicated as a friend to Acatius B. of Constantinople. Platina writes of
him that he ended his life, as Arrius did, and that his bowels gushed Platina
de vitis pontif.
out, when he was doing his secret business. The very flatterers of the bishops
of Rome are compelled to say, that some of them were favorers of heretics,
and for that cause punished by God with extraordinare judgments: but I ground
no thing upon the words of Platina, but so much as makes against them, whom he
intends to flatter.

To Anastatius succeeded Symmachus in the days of the Emperor Anastatius, and
when Theodoricus King of Goths reigned Symmachus
in Italy great sedition was amongst the people at his election, the one part
of the Clergy and people choosing Symmachus, the other Laurentius to be B. of
Rome, but with common consent a Synod was appointed at Ravenna and there the
election of Symmachus was ratified. He continued in office 15. years, 6.
months, 22 days. Platin. de vit. Pontif. Hormisda.


Hormisda the successor of Symmachus ministered 9 years, 18. days, who by
commandment of Theodoricus king of Goths, and reigning in Italy gathered a
Council at Rome, and damned the error of Euty^hes of new again. Likewise
ambassadors were sent to the Emp. (...), and to John B. of Constantinople to
exhort them to forsake the wicked error of Eutyches, and to acknowledge two
natures in CHRIST, to wit, the divine and humane nature, but Anastatius
answered with proud words, Nosimperare volumus, nobis imperari nolumus: that
is. We will command, but we will not be commanded Likewise the bishop of
Constantinople puffed up in pride by the assistance of the Emp^rour despised the
Council of Hormisda. Moreover against the law of nations they dealt inhumanely
with the ambassadors of Hormisda, and thrust them into an old and lecking
ship, with strait Platin. de ^it. Pontif.
commandment that they should not arrive at any harberie in Graecia, but keep
a direct course toward Italy. Notwithstanding by the providence of GOD, the
snip arrived safely at the coasts of Italy. The error of the Mamcheans
begannne again to be ouerspred in Rome, but Hormisda took their books, and
burnt them in the porch of the Church called Constantiana.

John 1. governed the Church of Rome in the days of Justinius the elder, to
whom also he was sent ambass^dour by Theodoricus, Ioan^ 1.
to crave that the Arrian bishops, whom he had banished out of his dominions
might be restored to their places again, else the Catholic bishops of Italy
should expect all kind of rigor at his hands. The bishop John with many
reares persuaded the Emp. Justinius to condescend unto the petition of
The^doricus. Nevertheless when he returned back again to Italy, he was
cast in prison, where he ended his life, after he governed the Church of Rome
2. years, 8. months.

Foelix 4. the succ^ssor of John 1. continued in office 4. years, Foelix 4.
2. months, 13. days. He excommunicated Athanas^s Patriarch of Constantinople
for heresy, as Platina records. He ordained that Christians before their
departure out of this life should be anointed with oil. This custom is now
kept in the Roman Co^t. Funct. lib. 7.
Church, and is called the Sacrament of extreme unction.

To Foelix 4. succeeded Bonifacius 2, whom the Graecians called Bonifacius. 2.
Agathon, but both names sounds to one and the self same thing. The schism
that was among the people at his election ceased, by the death of his
competitor Di^scorus: he ministered 2 years, 2. days. In his time Eulalius B.
of Carthage, submitted himself unto the chair of Rome: whereupon Bonifacius
took occasion of insolent insulting, in so far, that he is not ashamed to writ
of Aurelius B. of Carthage, Augustine B. of Hippo, and of the rest of the
fathers, who were present at the 6. Council of Carthage, that through the
instigation of the devil they swelled in pride against the Roman Church, and
against his predecessors Bonifacius 1 and Coelestinus whom his predecessors
most justly had excommunicated: but now (says he) Eulalius has confessed the
fault of Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap 10.
Aurelius, and of the Council of Carthage, and submitted himself in humble
manner to the chair of Rome: therefore he and the Church of Carthage are
received again unto the peace and communion of the Roman Church. Mark here
how they who would impair a jot of that supremacy whereat the Church of Rome
aimed, were forthwith delivered to the devil, how holy, modest, and learned so
ever they had been and a vain, timorous and beastly body Eulalius is preferred
to Aurelius B. of Carthage, to Augustine B. of Hippo, and to a grave Council
of mo than 200, Fathers, only for this, that he submitted himself to the chair
of Rome. The time is now approaching, whereinto it will be clearly manifested,
that supremacy was the very aple of their eye, and touch that once, there is
nothing but curses to be thundered out of mount Tarpeius, even against
Augustine himself, and against reverent Councills.

John 2. was successor to Bonifacius: he ministered in the time of Ioannes 2.
the Emperor Justinian, 2. years, 4. months: he was called for his eloquance
Mercurius, or ^ntius Iovis.

Agapetus the successor of John 2. under the reign of Justinian, had scarcely
liberty to attend upon his own stock: for immediately Agapetus.
after he was ordained B of Rome, he was sent to the Emperor Justinian by
Theodatus King of the Goths, to pacify his wrath: for the Emperor intended
to make war against him, for the cruel slaughter of AMALASVNTA his wife:
this was an dishonest cause and an unseemly message to the B. of Rome to
undertake. It is affirmed by Historiographers, that Justinian secretly
solicited Agapetus to the error of Eutyches, and that Agapctus answered unto
him courageously, that he supponed he was sent to a most Christian Emperor,
but he found him to be Dioclesian. This liberty is thought to Platina de vit.
pontif.
have done good to Justinian, and that he embraced the true faith more
seriously than before, and deposed Anthemius B. of Constantinople, an Eutychian
heretic, and placed Menas a bishop professing the true faith in his room.
Always Agapetus died at Constantinople, after he had been chosen B. of Rome
11. months, 21. days, and his body was put into a chest of lead and
transported to Rome.

Siluerius the son of Hormisda, sometime B. of Rome, was successor to
Agapetus. Theodatus King of Goths compelled the Siluerius.
Clergy to subscribe to his election: he governed the Church of Rome at that
time when Justinian sent Belisarius to fight against Vitiges. Theodora the
Emperor Justinians wife, sent to Siluerius, desiring him, that he would
condescend to the restitution of Anthemius an Eutychian heretic, and to the
deposition of Menas B. of Constantinople. Siluersus refused to obey such
impious commandments. Therefore Theodora sends a commandment to Belisarius
to banish Siluerius, and to appoint Vigilius B. of Rome, who had promised to
fulfill her desires. Thus was Siluerius banished to the Isle of Pontia, after
he had ruled the Church of Rome one year, 5. months.

Vigilius succeeded to Siluerius, and ruled 17. years, 26. days. His entry
to this office is inexcusable: for by open force, secret Vigilius.
bribes, and promises to perform the impious desires of the Empress, he
obtained the chair of Rome: so that Onuphrius cannot find out an excuse for
his unlawful entry. Theodora the Empress urged him to perform his promise,
and to restore Anthemius. But Vigilius, as appeared, repenting of his great
temeritie and rashness, answered, that evil promises were not to be kept: for
this cause he was led away violently to Constantinople, and a cord was fastened
about his neck, and he was drawn through the streets, and cast into prison:
he endured all this contempt the more patiently, because he confessed, that
for his sr^nes he had deserved greater punishment at the hands of GOD than this
was. In end he was delivered out of prison by the earnest request of Narses
captain of Justinians army in Halie, (...) de ^is (...).
but he died by the way: and he whom so many cares could not destroy, the
sickness of the gravel destroyed him at Sicile, and his body was transported to
Rome, and buried there. But now let us consider the ineptitude of Baronius, who
keeps no measure in his history, but as the Poet speaks of a ship tossed
with a vehement tempest.

Tollimur in coelum sublato gurgite, and i^dem.
Subducta admanes imos descendimus unda.
When Baronius speaks of the entry of Vigilius, he calls him athiefe, a
brigand, a man who entered not by the door of the (...). (...). 7. (...). 538
sheepe-fold, a false bishop, an Antichrist: yet soon after he calls him the
Vicar of Christ as though by the cruelty whereby he drove his predecessor
Siluerius to death he was incontinent worthy of the name of the Vicar of
Christ. Albeit he restored not Anthemius, according to his impious paction
with Theodora, yet he wrote unto the heretics, Anthemius, Theodosius and
Severus, and confirmed their error by his secret missiue letters, as Morneus
in his book called Misterium iniquitatis, Proves. His carriage in the fifth
general Council, he being present in the town of Constantinople, shall be
declared, God willing in the own place, the cord that was lapped about his
neck, and drew him through the streets of Constantinople, could not draw out
of his proud stomach the conceate of supremacy: for he sent his opinion in
write to the Council, but would not be present to sit in a lower place than
Eutychius B. of Constantinople and moderator of the Council.

AFTER Vigilius succeeded Pelagius 1: he ruled the Church of Rome 11. years,
10 months, 28. days. In a very perilous time Pelagins. 1
this charge was committed to him, namely when the nation of the Goths had
chosen Totilas to be their King, who was a fierce and cruel man, and was
called for his fiercenes Flagellum Dei, that is, the scourge of GOD: he led a
great army from Taruisium through Italy, destroying and wasting the country
whithersoeuer he went, but he set his face chiefly against Campania. By the way
he addressed himself in the habit of a simple soldier to mount Cassinates
where was S. Benedict the father of Monks, not because he invented the
Monasticke life, but because the most part of Monks adhered to the form
invented by him: he was but lately sprung up in the days of the Emperor
Justinius the elder, and of Pope John the first, yet was his name in great
account, so that Totilas in a disguised habit went Platin. de vit. Joan. 1.
unto him, and conferred with him. Platina writes that S. Benedict knew him,
notwithstanding of his deep dissimulation, and with terrifying words dissuaded
him from using cruelty against Christians. The Counsel was good, but Totilas
was not obedient unto it. He was slain in battle by Nases near to Brixellum:
and Teias whom the Goths choosed in his rocme was slain in battle at
Nuceria: so the Kingdom of the Goths in Italic was utterly undone by the
valor of Narses. After the first coming of Theodoricus into Italy, they
reigned in Italy 72. years. Now their name, dominion, and all their might is
utterly quenched. Pelagius depended much upon the friendship of Narses. And
when Macedomus B. of Aquileia died, Honoratus B. of Millan ordained Paulinus to
be his successor. Pelagius B. of Rome grieved at this. Nevertheless he
compl^ineth not to Narses that Paulinus was made bishop of Aquileia without his
consent, but rather, because this was done without the foreknowledge of the
most noble Emperor Justinian, who like as he had delivered Istria and Venice
from the grievous bondage of Pelag. 1. Epist. 3.
Totilas, so likewise it became them to expect the Emperors answer, before
they had appointed a bishop in Aquileia. Mark the hypocrisy of the bishops of
Rome under color of obedience to the civil Magistrate secretly creeping to
their own soueraignity, the chief mark whereat they continually aimed.

John 3. succeeded to Pelagius, and governed 12. years, 11 months 26. days. In
the days of Justinius the younger, who was successor Ioannes 3.
to the Emp. Justinian, did he minister in the Roman Church, and at that time
when Alboinus King of Longobards came into Italy with a great army, with
their wives and children, and settled their abode in that part of Italy which
lies about the river Padus. The Empress Sophia had irritate Narses that
valiant captain with contumelious Platina de vit. Pon^f.
words, and he gave both to her and to the estate of the Empire this hard
meeting, that he possessed the Longobards in Italy, weauing a web unto her
(according as he promised) which she was not able all her time to undo again.
The Deputy of the Emp. of Constantinople, kept a part of Italy which was not
conquessed by the Lombards, and this was called Exarchatus Ravenna, and the B
of Rome with assistance of the country kept Rome free from the dominion of the
Lombards for a short ^ime. At this time did John 3. govern the Church of Rome.
He brought ^n new constitutions in the Church, that Chorepiscopi, otherwise
called Vicar^ Episcoporum should have no power at all of imposition H^st. Ma^d.
c^nt 6. cap. 10
of hands, which constitution he confirmed with a fool^sh reason, because none
of the 70. disciples whom Christ adjoined as helpers to the Apostles, had power
by imposition of hands, to co^fer the gift of the holy Spirit. Now the time is
come, when every man endeavors with some nouelty, and new toy, which has not
been heard before to go beyond his predecessors Benedictus 1.


Benedict 1. continued in his charge, 4. years 1. months 28 days. He had
great grief in his time, because the prevailing power of the Lombards
oppressed the country of Italy, and the town of Rome was sore pinched with
famine. The heart grief he conceived for the calamity of the country is
thought to have hastened his death. Nevertheless he had this comfort, that the
Emp. Tib^rius 2. in whose time he ministered, sent ships loadned with corns
from Egypt to support the distressed estate of the Romans. Tiberius was endued
with many good qualities and princely gifts, he was valiant, godly and
liberal, and the more bountiful he was to the poor, his riches so much the
more abounded: for Platina de vit. Pontif.
beside the treasures of Narses that were brought to him from Italy, when
Narses died, he found also in his own palace under a cross of marble (which
he commanded to be raised and not to be tread under feet any longer, but to be
set in a more honorable place) there I say, he found an infinite treasure of
silver and gold Finally when he overcame the Persians, such quantity of gold,
silver and precious things were achieved, as none of his predecessors had
obtained the like: so that the proverb, he who sows largely, shall reap
largely, had viue performance in the person of the noble Emperor Tiberius.

After Benedict succeeded Pelagius 2. and ministered under the Pelagius (...).
reigns of Tiberius and Mauritius 10. years, 12. months 10. days. He was
elected without the foreknowledge of the Emperor, contrare to the custom
observed in those days, but he excused himself to the Emperor Mauritius, by
sending Gregorius ambassador unto him, and declaring that the town of Rome
was besi^ged by Lombardis, so that no messenger could be sent from Rome to
Constantinople, to acquaint the Emperor with his election. The form of the
siege of Rome was this: The Emperor Mauritius had hired Sigibertus King of
France to make war against the Lombards, and to drive them out of Italy, but
his army was overthrown by Eucharis King of Lombards: with this victory the
Lombards were puffed up, and they besieged the town of Rome, they had also taken
it, if they had not been hindered by great inundation of waters. The inundation
of Tiber was extraordinary, it ouerflowed the walls of the town of Rome, and
brought with it a multitude of Serpents, which afterward putrefying, corrupted
the air, whereof arose a vehement pest in Rome, and Pelagius 2. in this
contagious sickness ended his life.

Gregorius 1. called Magnus succeeded to Pelagius 2, and ministered Gregor. 1.
13. years, 6. months, 10 days. He was chosen with consent of the Clergy,
and people, but he was unwilling to accept the office. And he wrote to the
Emperor Mauritius, that he should not assent neither to the desire of Clergy
nor people, but his letters were intercepted by the governor of the town
Platina de vit. Ponus.
of Rome, and rent in pieces. And other letters were written unto the Emperor,
requesting him to condescend, that Gregorius might have the office, whom both
Clergy and people had elected. The Emperor agreed willingly to his election,
for he had been acquainted with him in Constantinople, when he came
ambassador from Pelagius 2. to excuse his oversight in accepting the office of
the bishop of Rome before the Emperor was foreseen of that purpose. He
brought into the Roman Church the form of the Greek Letanies, and ordained
that in their prayers (...) should be nine times repeated. This prayer is
thought to have been uttered by multiplied repetitions in the days of the
Emperor Justinius, when Antiochia was terribly shaken with a vehement
earthquake, the few number that were alive, said, LORD have mercy, LORD have
mercy, which in Greek Kyrie Eleison, he borrowed also from the Liturgy of
the Jews Allelu-iah, and added these words unto the Latin service, Diesque
nostros in pace disponas, that is, in peace dispone our days. He was the first
that devised the style of Seruus servoram Dei, that is, the servant of the
servants of GOD: taking occasion (as appears) so to do, by the arrogant
attempt of John Patriarch of Constantinople called (...), or iciunator, who had
usurped the style of Oecumenick, or universal bishop to whom Pelagius 2. and
Gregorius 1. mightily opponed themselves, and called him the forerunner of the
Antichrist, who durst usurp Lib. 6. P^dies. 16. Epist. 30.
such an arrogant style. But mark now, I pray you, how far ambition
prevailed both in the chair of Constantinople, and in the chair of Rome. The
humility of Christ was now laid aside, notwithstanding of their humble
styles, servus servorum Dei, and the first occasion that was presented unto
them of usurpation of the style of universal bishop, it was greedily embraced.
First John called Ieiunator, Patriarch of Constantinople saw that the Imperial
seat was in Constantinople, and that the town of Rome was besieged by the
Lombards. Now he thought it was time to stir and to advance his own chair
above all chaires. And incontinent after Bonifacius 3. finding himself in
favor with the Emp. Phocas, gladly accepted that same pre-eminence in his own
person, which his predecessors had damned in the person of Ioannes Ieiunator:
so they were all for the most part a nest of ambitious Prelates, preaching the
humility of CHRIST, but hunting for the supremacy foretold of the Antichrist
Read the Epistles which Gregorius writes to Mauritius detesting, and abhorring
this supremacy whereat the Patriarch of Constantinople aimed. Amongst other
things, he says, Exclamare Gregor. lib. 4 Epist. 32.
compellor, ac dicere, O tempora o mores: ecce cuncta in Europae partibus,
barbarorum iurisunt tradita. Destructae urbes, euersa castra, depopulatae
prouinciae, nullus terram cultor inhabitat, and tamen sacerdotes, qui in
pavimento, and cinere flentes tacere debuerunt, vanitatis sibi nomina expetunt,
and novis ac prophanis vocabulis gloriantar: that is to say, I am compelled to
cry out, O times, O manners: behold, in all the parts of Europe, all things lie
under the reverence of barbarous people: towns are destroyed, castles are
overthrown, provinces are spoiled, no labourer inhabiteth the land.
Notwithstanding the Priests, who should lie in ashes upon the ground weeping,
they are seeking unto themselves n^n^s of vanity, and they glory in profane
styles. Now apply these words of Gregorius 1. to Bonifacius 3. and it shall
be found, that he embraced the name of vanity, and the glory of profane
styles, at that same time, when it became him better to be lying in sackecloth
and ashes, and to be mourning for the prevailing power of barbarous people, and
for the barbarous butcherie of Phocas the Emperor who conferred unto him that
eminent style to be called bishop of bishops. Gregorius flattering epistle
written to Phocas, after he had traitorously murdered his master Mauritius,
his wife and children, will be a perpetuail blot to the name of Gregorius: but
of this I have spoken in the treatise of supremacy. The constitution he made
anent prohibition Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10
of marriage, to men in spiritual offices, he was compelled in his own time to
abrogate again, because it was not only the occasion of uncleanness, but also
of secret murders of innocent babes, and whereas the Apost. PAVL said, It was
better to marie than to burn, Gregory was compelled to say, It was better to
marry than tomurder. The sending of the Monks, Augustine, Melito, and Ioannes
to Britanne, was not so much to conquesse them to Christian religion, which
they had embraced in the days of Lucius King of Brittons, and of Eleutherius
bishop of Rome, as has been declared in the second CENTVRIE cap. 2. as to
conquesse them unto the ceremonies and rites of the Roman service.

Gregorius was the first, of whom we read, that writes of sacrifices to be
offered for relieuing of souls tormented in Purgatory, and he leans upon
such ridiculous fables, which he heard of one Foelix B. of Centumcellae, as it
is a shame to rehearse them, but seeing they are not ashamed of lies, let the
dung of Hist. Magd. con. 6. cap. 10. Greg lib. 4. ^al. cap. 55.
their own inventions be cast into their own faces: he writes that a
Presbyter of Centumcellae went to the bath house to wash himself, where he
found a man uncouth and unknown to him, but very humble and seruiable, and
after he had served him sundry days, the Presbyter to requite his kindness,
brought unto him two consecrated hosts as a blessing and a reward to him who
had served him so duetifully, but the man with sad countenance, answered, This
bread is holy, and I am not worthy to eat it. I was sometime master and
proprietare of this house, but now for my sins I am appointed to this
servile occupation: if thou would do a benefit to me, offer them to the
Almighty GOD, as a sacrifice for my sins, and think that ye are heard of
GOD, when ye cannot find me in this place any longer. Surely Popish
Purgatory, and soul Masses are first grounded upon foolish fables, and
afterward confirmed by dreams of foolish Monks.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
EVPHEMIVS before he would anoint Anastatius to be Emperor, Euphemius
(who came to that honor, by Ariadne the wife of the Emperor Zeno, whom he
married) he craved a confession of his faith, with a promise sealed by his
hand-write that he should make no nouation in religion during his time. The
Theod lector. lib. 2.
Emperor craved his hand-write again, which seeing that Euphemius refused to
render back again, the Emperor procured his deposition, and banished him,
and placed Macedonius in his room.

To Euphemius succeeded Macedonius, to whose custody the hand-write foresaid
was committed by Euphemius: which when Macedonius. Hist Magd. cent. 6. cap. 10.
Timotheus.
he would not render, the Emperor banished him also, and commanded to slay
him at Gangra the place of his banishment.

To Macedonius succeeded Timotheus an unconstant man, and justly compared to
the narrow Firth that runs betwixt Baeotra and Calchis, which flows and
ebbeth seven times in 24. hours, so was this bishop wavering minded, and more
bent to please men, than to be approved of GOD. In witness where of I have
set down one example. The Abbot of the monastery called Studitum, refused to
be ordained by imposition of his hands: for he said, the hands of that
man, who has damned the Council of Chalcedone, shall not be laid upon me:
whereunto Timotheus answered, whosoever accuses, or damneth the Council of
Chalcedone, let him be accursed, and when this was reported to the Emperor
Anastatius, to eschew his indignation, he said the contrare, whosoever
accepts the Council of Chalcedone, and allows of it, let him be accursed.

John of Cappadocia is not worthy that his name should be insert in this
Catalogue, a proud, avaritious, and ambitious heretic, Ioaannes Cappadox
who could never behave himself duetifully, neither in a civil, nor in a
spiritual calling. He was first the Emperor Anastatius his Deputy, and was
deposed, for aspiring to an higher place. Next, he became Patriarch of
Constantinople, and aspired to the dignity of Oecumenicke and universal
bishop. It is true, that Ioannes (...) usurped the title of pre-eminence,
therefore this Ioannes Cappadox was laid aside as an Eutychian heretic, and
the great inuectiues against this usurped authority are chiefly set against
Ioannes Jeiunator. But mark how Pelagius 2. ere Gregorius tramped upon this
pride, with a proud mind, as Diogenes did upon the covering of Plato his bed,
he is not content to damn the decree of the Council of Constantinople, but
also he affirmed that it was not lawful to him to assemble T^. 2. Council.
a Council without liberty first obtained from the bishop of Rome, which
thing no man spoke before him: so Satan wrought mightily in them both, as he
does in the children of pride, and disobedience.

After him succeeded John called Scholasticus, and continued not above one
year. Evagrius calls him Ioannes Sirmiensis, lib. 4. Ioannes Scholasticus.
Epiphae^ius.
cap. 39.

To John succeeded Epiphaenius, in the days of Justinian, who blessed his
army which went to fight against the Vandales under the conduct of Belisarius:
he ministered 16. years, as Chytreus writes.

The name of Anthimus is worthy of the roll of obstinate Anthimus.
heretics. He was bishop of Trapezus, but by the means of Theodora the
Emperor Instinians wife, he was promoted to be bishop of Constantinople.
Theodora was too busy in Church affairs, and Sophia the wife of Justinius 2.
was too busy in civil affairs. The estate both of Church, and Kingdom had
been in better plight, if both of them had been less busy.

Anthimus being deposed and banished for herefie, succeeded Menas.
Menas, who kept the true faith, and governed the Church of Constantinople 16.
year. Evagrius reckons Basilides in the roll of bishops of Constantinople,
and Anthimus to be bishop of Lib. 4. (...). 9.
Alexandria.

To Menas suceeded Eutychius, of whom occasion will be Eutyc^ius.
offered to speak in the fifth general Council, wherein he disputed
iuditiously in the question, whether or not it was lawful to excommunicate
heretics after their death. His opinion anent the bodies of the Saints after
their resurrection, that they should be subtle, like unto the air and wind,
and not solid and palpable, was refuted by Gregorius I. who proved by the
example of CHRIST his body after his resurrection, that the bodies of the
Saints should not be like unto the air, and the wind: for CHRIST says,
Handle me, and see: for a spirit has not Luc. 24. verse. 39.
flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

After Eutychius followed John called (...), or Ieiunator: this Ioannes
Ieiunator.
name he obtained by the sobriety, and temperancie of his life.
Notwithstanding when his stomach was empty of meat, his heart was full of
pride, and he followed the footsteps of Joannes Cappadox, and would be called
universal bishop, against whom Gregorius 1. contended mightily, even as
Lactantius of old contended against the Pagans, impugning the error more
Gregor. 16. 4 Epist. 32. usque ad epist. 40. Cyriacus.
mightily, than solidly confirming the truth. It is supponed that he ministered
13. years, under the Emperor Mauritius. To whom succeeded Cyriacus.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
AFTER John called Tabennesiota, succeeded another John, who kept the true
faith, and was banished by Anastatius, because Ioannes.
he would not damn the Council of Chalcedone.

To John succeeded Theodosius an obstinate defender of the error Theodosius.
of Eutyches. He was familiarly acquainted with Severus of Antiochia, and
Anthimus of Constantinople, whereby the misery of these days may be easily
espied, whereinto three notable heretics governed principal towns, such as
Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia. He was so obstinate in his error,
that he was rather content to be banished under the reign of Justinian, than
to renounce his error.

After him succeeded Zoilus, and after him Appollinarius, who Zoilus.
Apollinarius.
was present at the fifth general Council. To whom succeeded Eulogius, and
after him Petrus, who ministered under the reign Eulogius, Petrus.
of Mauritius.

Patriarchs of Antiochia.
AFTER Palladius succeeded Flavianus, who suffered great troubles for the true
faith, namely by the cruel persecution Flavianus.
of the Emperor Anastatius, and the calumnies of Xenaeas B. of Hierapo^is (a
stranger indeed from the covenant of GOD, as his name imports) for he blamed
Flavianus most unjustly of the heresy of Nestorius, but when Flavianus both by
word and write had cleared himself of that calumny, the malice of Xenaeas
ceased not: for he brought with him to Antiochia a great number of Monks to
compel Flavianus to abjure the Council of Chalcedone. The town supported
their bishop against a rascal number of seditious and heretical Monks.
Notwithstanding the Emperor Anastatius infected with the heresy of Eu^yches,
counted Flavianus, who was most unjustly persecuted, to be the author of this
tumult, and banished him, and placed Severus in his room.

The Emperor Justinius the elder displaced Severus, and punished him, and
appointed Paulus to be bishop of Antiochia. Paulus.


To Paulus succeeded Euphrasius, who died in that fearful calamity Euphrasius
of the town of Antiochia, when it was shaken and overthrown with earthquake,
as Evagrius witnesses. Lib. 4. cap. 5


Euphraimius was a civil governor in the East parts, who Euphraimius.
pitied the decayed estate of the town of Antiochia, and furnished all
necessary things for the repairing of the town of Antiochia: for which cause
the people was so affectioned to him that they would have him to be their
bishop. So Euphraimius becomes bishop of Antiochia, or Theopolis, for at this
time it had both th^se names. Evagrius writes, that he undertook the charge
of the Apostolic chair, in which words, it is manifest, that Lib. 4. cap. 6
not only the chair of Rome, but also the chair of Antiochia was called the
Apostolic chair. The town of Antiochia at this time was taken by Cosroes
King of Persia, set on fire, and many of the people were cruelly slain.
Euphra^us their bishop Evag. lib. 4. cap. 24.
at this time left the town, a perilous example, except the people had been
in safety, and he only persecuted, yet he left behind him so much as might
redeem all the Church goods.

AFTER E^phraimius followed Domnius. And after him Anastatius. He ministered
under the Emperor Justinian, at what time the ^mperour fell into the error of
them, who said, that our Domnius. Anastatius.
LORD JESUS in his very conception adjoined unto his divine nat^e an immortal
body, which was subject to no humane infi^mities. Anastatius opponed himself
to the Emperors opinion, and the bishops followed Anastatius, and not the
Emperor: for this cause Justinian was purposed to have banished him, but he
escaped this trouble, by the Emperors death. Nevertheless h^e was banished by
Justinius the younger, for some alleged cause of dilapidation of
Church-gooods, and Gregorius was placed in his room.

Gregorius ministered in Antiochia 23. years under Justinus 2. Tiberius and
Mauritius: he was in great account with Mauritius, Gregorins.
to whom he foretold that he would be promoted to the Imperial dignity. And
Mauritius employed him in great and weighty business, such as in pacifying
the tumult of his army, which made insurrection against Germanus their
captain. Also he sent him ambassador to Cosroes King of Persia, who was
Evag. lib. 6. cap. 18.
astonished at the grace that was in his speeches. Notwithstanding he was accused
by Asterius a Deputy of the East, of the filthy sin of incest: but he
cleared his own innocence so evidently, that his accuser was with ignominy
scourged and banished. He died of the gowtes infirmity and after his death,
Anasiatius, whom Justinius banished for dilapidation of Church-goods, Euphemius
being yet alive, was restored to his own place again. To whom succeeded
Euphemius.

Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
AFTER MARTYRIVS succeeded HELIAS a fervent Helias.
defender of the true faith. Neither would he condescend to the banishment of
EVPHEMIVS bishop of Constantinople, nor to the admission of Severus to be
bishop of Antiochia: therefore the Emperor Anastatius banished him.

To him succeeded John, of whose politic dealing in circumueening Ioannes.
Anastatius the Emperors captain, I have sufficiently declared in the
preceding history.

To John succeeded Peter, and after him Macarius, and after Macarius Petrus.
Macarius. Eustochius
Eustochius, who impugned the books of Origin and drove out of his bounds the
Monks of Nova Laura, defenders of the opinions of Origin. Theodorus Ascidas B.
of Caesarea in Cappadocia, took this in an evil part. The Emperor Justinian
caused a general Council to be gathered at Constantinople, whereinto not
only the books of Origin were damned, but also Theodorus himself the defender
of them. This displeased the Emperor Justinian, because he loved Theodorus
dearly: therefore he procured that Eustochius B. of Jerusalem should be
removed, and Macarius restored again. After whom succeeded Ioannes, Neamus
and Isieius. Ioannes. Neamus. Isi^ius.


In this Centurie, whereas I pretermit the names of other Pastors and Doctors
in the Church, I have done it upon this consideration. I find in this Centurie,
that by the irruption of barbarous people, such as the Goths, Uandales,
Hunnes, Auares, Schythians, Lombards, youth was hindered from studies, many
memorable books were burnt, ancient languages were utterly spoiled, learning
was greatly diminished, flattery of prevailing powers increased, ambition in
the West, heresy in the East turned the estate of the Church vpside down, so
that scarcely could men of good gifts, and keeping integrity of faith, be
furnished unto the principal Apostolic chaires. Now after a manner the sun
is going down, the shadows wax great, the darkness approaches, the
Antichrist is at the door, worthy to be welcomed with darkness, and decay of
knowledge. What shall I now write of other Pastors and Doctors? shall I follow
the foolish conceates of Historiographers, in whose opinion the gift of
miracles increased, when the gift of knowledge decayed: but the contra^e is
known by Scripture, Act. 2.
that the holy Apostles, whom CHRIST induced with extraordinary gifts of
working miraculous works, he endued them the departure of Valerius: he was B.
of Hippo: his incessant travels in teaching GODS people, and in stopping the
mouths of Heretics and gainsayers of the truth of GOD, specially Donatists,
Pelagians and Manichean Heretics, his learned writings do testify. When he
had lived 76. years, he rested from his labors, before the Vandales had taken
the town of Hippo, which in time of Augustines sickness they had besieged.

In this Centurie flourished worthy preachers in France, such Bishops of
France.
as Eutherius B. of Lions. Saluianus B. of Marseill, who lived at that time
when the nation of the Goths oppressed France, and many began to doubt of
the providence of GOD, in respect that wicked men had so great vpper-hand.
Salvianus in his godly and learned books does declare that it is a just thing
with GOD to punish men, who knows their duty best with greatest punishments,
in respect that often times they are most negligent doers of it. Claudianus
Mammertus B. of Vienne is praised by Sidonius with excessive co^mendations, as
if all the graces of Ierom, Augustine, Basilius, Nazianzenus, and many other
fathers had been in corporated into his person. Hilarious first bishop of Arls,
and afterward (as appears) of Vienne, opponed himself directly to Leo B. of
Rome, and would acknowledge no jurisdiction, nor domination of the B. of Rome
over the Churches Leo ad Gal. Episcop. epist. 77. and epist. 89.
of France: for this cause Leo accused him as an usurper of supremacy, only
because he would not stoop under his feet: but H^larius came to Rome,
nothing regarding the anathems and cursings of the Roman bishop, and in his
face affirmed, that neither did CHRIST appoint Peter to be h^ad of the rest of
the Apostles, neither had the B. of Rome a soueraignitie over the Churches of
France. All the grandeur of Leo his speeches, who does talk of those few
words: Tues Petrus; and super hac petra, etc. that is, thou art PETER, and upon
this rock etc. as if Matthew. 16.
CHRIST had breathed upon him, and had bidden him receive the holy Spirit, so
confidently did he affirm that in these words was allotted a supremacy to
the bishops of Rome the successors of PETER. But this grandeur (I say) of his
proud conceats, and vain interpretation of Scripture made not men of
understanding incontinently to stoup under the feet of a proud Prelat.
Vincentius Lirinensis a mighty impugner of her^sies. PROSPER AQVITANICVS.
SIDONIVS Bishop in some part of Ouerme. MARTINUS TVRONENSIS is commended for
the Hist. Magd. co^t. (...) cap. 10
gift of many miraculous works that were wrought by his hands. He compared
virginity, marriage, and fornication to a meadow, a part where of was eaten by
the pastoring of beasts, another part was holled by the rudenes of wourting
swine, and the third part was untouched, but flourishing in the perfect growth
of grass near to mowing time. Fornication he compared to the part of the
meadow that was holled, and misfassioned with swine. Marriage to that part of the
meadow that was p^stored, so that the herbs had their roots, but wanted the
beauty of their flowers: but virginity is like unto that part of the meadow
that is untouched, flourishing with root, blade, flower, and all kind of
perfection. In counting marriage good, but virginity better, he follows the
doctrine of the holy Apostle PAVL. Reon gius B. of Rhemes, by whom Clodoueus
the 1. Cor. 7
first Christian king of France was baptized, and the whole country of France
was purged from Paganism and Arrianisme, whereby it was miserably polluted by
the Goths, and Vandales, was a man of great account.

Concerning Aurelius and the bishops of Carthage, Memnon, and the bishops of
Ephesus, some occasion will be offered to speak of them in the head of
Councils, neither will the nature of a Compend and brevity whereunto I study,
permit me to write of every worthy man of whom I read in this Centurie.

CHAP III. Of Heretics.
PELAGIV^, BRITO and his followers, IVLIANVS and Coelestius maintained damnable
heresies in the days of Arcadius and Honorius: their pernicious heresies may
be easily known by the learned writings of Augustine, who directly impugneth
the Pelagians, and by the Councils of Arausio in France, and Milevitanum in
Numidia, which damned the error of the Pelagians. They affirmed that men by
nature were able to fulfill the whole Law of GOD, howbeit more easily and
better if they were supported by the grace of GOD. They denied Original sin,
and said, the posterity of ADAM were sinners by imitation of ADAMS sin, but
had not received sin by carnal propagation. They said moreover, that children
had not need to be baptized for remission of sins, and that godly fathers in
Scripture, when they confessed their sins, they did it rather for example of
humility, than for necessity and guiltiness of sin. This pestilent heresy
was spread abroad in many places, but chiefly in the Isle of Britain, because
Pelagius being driven from Rome came to the Isle foresaid, and infected it with
his error, but by the diligent trauelles of Germanus Altisidorensis and
Palladius sent from Coelestinus B. of Rome, both England and Scotland were
freed from that error. Nestorius.


Nestorius B. of Constantinople lived in the days of Theodosius 2. He was an
eloquent man, but his head lacked brains when he spoke against the personal
union of the divine and humane Nature in CHRIST. He denied that the Virgin
MARIE could 6 Euagr. 1^. 1. cap. 7
becalled (...), or Deipara, that is, the mother of GOD, but only (...), that
is, the mother of CHRIST He was damned as an heretic in the Council of
Ephesus, and banished by the Emp. Theodosius, to the wilderness of Thebaida, and
was plagued by GOD with extraordinare judgments, as other heretics had been
before: for his blasphemous tongue was consumed with Euagr. ibid.
worms, and rotted in his mouth, and so he ended his wretched life most
miserably. Eutychiani


Eutyches was an abbot in Constantinople: he fell into an error far
different from the heresy of Nestorius: for Nestorius would not grant the
personal union of two natures in Christ, but Eutyches confounded the natures,
and would have the humane nature so swallowed up by the immensitie of the
divine nature Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 8.
in CHRIST, that there was not two natures in CHRIST, but one alanerly, to wit,
the divine nature. He was damned in the Council of Chalcedon, as will be decla
ed hereafter (Godwilling) This heresy much perturbed and troubled the Church
in respect of the fautors, and favorers thereof, both in policy and Church.
Chrysapbius a principal ruler in the Court of Theod^sius 2. Basiliscus and
Anastatius Emperors, were favorers of this heresy, and of bishops not a few,
such as D^scorus B of Alexandria, Timotheus Aelurus who entered into the chair
of Alexandria like unto a Wolf with shedding the blood of Proterius the true
shepherd, and Petrus Moggus B. of Alexandria, and Petrus Gnapheus B. of
Antiochia: all these maintained the heresy of Eutyches a long time. And now
appears the fruit of humane wisdom, who chused Patriarchs to s^ppresse
heresies and yet they are the principal maintainers of it. Like wise a
multitude of wicked men, specially Monks cried out against the decrees of the
Council of Chalcedon (which was assembled by the authority of the Emp.
Martianus) these were called (...), because they had no principal head upon
whom they depended: all these countenanced the heresy of Eutyches, whereby it
became the more pernicious to the Church.

It is to be understood that old heresies, such as the heresy of the
Manicheans, and the heresy of the Donatists sprung up of latter time, were in
vigor and strength as yet, whereby it came to to pass that Augustine is
compelled to write in his time against many Manicheans, such as Faustus,
Fortunatus, Felix, S^cundinus, and against Donatists, such as Gandentius,
Parmenianus, Emeritus, Ticonius: so that it is evident that the Church in this
Centurie, and in the former was chiefly perturbed with the multitude and
diversity of heresies.

CHAP. IIII. Of Councils.
COncerning Councils gathered in the days of Arcadius and Honorius by
Epiphanius in Cyprus, and Theophilus in Councils at Constanti^ople against John
Chryso^ome.
Alexandria, under pretense of damning the books of Origin, and in
Constantinople first and last by the malice of Eudoxia the Emperor Arcadius
wife, to procure the deposition of John Chrysostom B. of Constantinople, I
hope I have not need to make a new declaration of things which are amply
declared in the preceding history.

About the year of our Lord 419. a great number of bishops were assembled in
the town of C^thage, whose names are particularly The 5. Coun^l of ^age.
expressed in their Synodicke letter sent to Innocentins I B. of Rome. In this
assembly they damned the opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius (which has been
above rehearled) as heretical. August. epistol. 90. and 91.
The answer that Innocentius returned to the Council is intermixed with words
of swelling pride, as if no decree could be firm, until it had allowance of
the Roman chair: yet the fifth Council of Carthage had pronounced Anathema
against the opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius before they sent their letter
to Innocentius.

Amongst the canons of this Council the two last are to be remarked: namely
the 14. and 15. canon. The one declares that no Church was consecrated without
the relics of the Martyrs: the other declares that adoration of relics at
this Canon, 14. Canon, 15
time was the custom of Ethnickes: supplication is appointed to be made to the
Emperors, that relics which are found in Images, groves or trees, or such
other places should be abolished.

The first Council of Toledo in Spain was assembled under the The first
Council of Toledo.
reigns of Arcadius and Honorius: the year of our LORD wherein this Council
was gathered is much contrauerted: therefore I ouerpasse it, contenting my
self with some notice of the time of the Emperor in whose time the Council
was gathered. It seems to have been assembled for confirmation of the Nicene
Council, and refutation of some errors. The canons anent prohibition of
marriage to some persons are foolish and the Canon 17
admitting of a man to the communion, who wants a wife, and contenteth
himself with one concubine allanerly, is foolisher: so perilous a thing it is,
in a jot to depart from the certain rule of the written word of GOD.

Mileuitum is a town of Numidia: in it many bishops were The Council called
Mileuitanum
assembled under the reign of Arcadius, whose names are particularly expressed
in the letter sent from the Council to Innocentius B. of Rome, which letter is
insert in the Epistles of Augustine, Epist. 92. and 93.
together with the answer of Innocentius I. Two principal causes moved them
to assemble together. First, to finish the work they had begun in the fifth
Council of Carthage in condemning the heresies of Pelagius and Coelestius, by
whom as yet many were deceived and perverted from the true faith. Augustine B.
of Hippo was not only present, but also president. The opinions of Pelagius
and Coelcstius anent the power of man's nature not supported by the grace of
GOD, and the free will of man to do good of it self, is so solidly refuted,
and that by arguments taken out of holy Scripture alanerly, that it is to be
wished that other Councils had followed the example of this Council whereinto
Augustine was president. The other cause of the meeting of this Council was to
constitute canons anent ecclesiastical discipline, specially that no man
should make appellation from his own bishop to bishops beyond sea, but incace
his own bishop did him wrong, then he should appeal unto Canon 22,
an assembly of African bishops, but he who would needs appeal to bishops
beyond sea (meaning chiefly of the B. of Rome) let him be secluded from the
communion of all African bishops. The cause of Apiarius, and his B. Vrbanus
Siccensis seems already to be wakned, and the fathers of this Council
foresmelled that he was to appeal to the B. of Rome, like as he did indeed to
Zosymus the successor of Innocentius: and therefore likewise men in due time
they made this constitution. Innocentius received the Councils letter from a
brother named Julius, and approved the condemnatorie sentence pronounced
against Pelagius and Coelestius: but mark the words of Innocentius letter,
Frater, and Coepiscopus noster Julius dilectionis vestrae literas, quas ex
Milevitano cura fidei propensiore misistis, mihi inopinanter suggessit. that is
to say, Our brother and fellow bishop Julius brought unto me unawares your
brotherly letters, which ye sent unto me from the Council Mileuitanum, with a
care very bent for the faith. The word inopinanter declares that he received
their letter before he knew that any such Council was gathered, for the
bishops of Rome as yet took not upon them that authority to be the only
appointers of general and national Councills. P^lagius after this Council
compeared before a Council in Palestina, and seemed to renounce his errors,
but he spoke deceatfully as heretics are accustomed to do: but he set
forth nothing in writ to destroy the error he had builded, and to procure
the safety of them whom he had intan^led with the snares of deceatfull
August. Opist. 95.
errors, as the Epistle of Aurelius, Alipius, Augustinus, Euodius and
Posstdius written to Innocentius does declare. Obscure Councils I have both
ouerpassed with silence, and do mind Godwilling, to keep the like order in
time to come.

In the year of our LORD 420, and under the reigns of Honorius The sixth
Council of Cart^age Hist. Magd. (...). 5. cap. (...)
and Theodosius 2. a great national Council was assembled in Carthage: two
hundredth and seventeen bishops were present at this Council, and it continued
for the space of six years. Aurelius bishop of Carthage was moderator. Three
bishops of Rome, to wit, Z^symus, Bonifaecius 1. and Coelestinus endeavored
with all their might to persuade the Africane bishops that they were under the
soueraignitie and jurisdiction of the bishops of Rome: but all in vain as the
issue of this Council will prove. The ground of the great controversy betwixt
the bishops of Rome, and the 6 Council of Carthage, was Apiarius Presbyter
Si^censis, a wicked man, and justly excommunicate not only by his own bishop
Vrbanus, but also by a Synod of other near approaching bishops. He appealed
to Z^symus bishop of Rome, a city of refuge to all villainous men, as appeared
by the insolent form of his carriage toward his brethren in Afric: for before
he had heard the causes wherefore they had excommunicated this wicked man
Apiarius, he absolved him, and admitted him to his communion. Moreover
understanding that a Council was to be conueened in Carthage, he sent thither
ambassadors to plead the cause of Apiarius, to procure the excommunication of
Vrbanus, and incace this suc^eeded not, to desire that this question might be
remitted to the determination of the Roman bishop as undoubted judge of
appellations, according to an act of the Council of Nice. The Fathers of the
Council of Carthage answered with great modesty that they remembered no such
act to have been made in the Council of Nice. Always time is granted to the
B. of Rome to prove that such right belonged to him by an act of the Council
of Nice. Zosymus the first alleadger of this false act continued short time in
office: for he ended his course within the space of one year, and few months.
Bonifacius (...). lib. 7 cap. 11
the successor of Zosymus serioysly urging the same prerogative to be judges
in all causes of appellation, according to the act of the Council of Nice.
When all the acts were read both in the Latin and Gre^ke exemplares, and no
such act was found, the ambasadours of Bonifacius returned to him with this
answer, that the principal registers be^oued to be sighted, which were to be
found in Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia, and in the mean time no man
should be challenged for appealing to the bishop of Rome until this question
had an end by sighting of the authenticke registers. Cyrillus B of Alexandria,
and Atticus B. of Constantinople sent to the Council of Carthage, the just
copies of the acts of the Council of Nice: but no such act was found, as was
alleged by Zosymus and Bonifacius: and by this time Bonifacius also ended his
life: for he ministered not above Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11.
three years. The Epistle sent from the 6. Council of Carthage, declaring
that they found the act foresaid alleged by the ambassadors of the B. of
Rome to be supposititio us and false, this Epistle (I say) was directed to
Bonifacius: but seeing heehad ended his life, it came in the hands of
Coelestinus the successorof Bonifacius, who insisted by the same ambassadors
who were employed before, to wit, Faustinus a bishop, and Philippus, and
Asellus two presbyters, to have Apiarius received in favor, and the Africane
bishops to be subject to the bishop of Rome: but their trauelles were
bestowed in vain. The last period of this controversy was this, that Apiarius
despairing of help from the bishops of Rome, confessed his faults, and humbly
submitted himself to the Council of Carthage. And the Ambassadors of
Coelestinus returned with this answer, that the B. of Rome had none authority
over the bishops of Afric, but he Hist. Magd. (...). 5. cap. 9
who thought himself to be wronged, let him complain to a national
Council, and if the national Council also did him wrong, then let him
complain to the general Council, but none appellation to be made in time to
come from Afric to the bishops of Rome.

Under the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, and about the year of our LORD
400. The Donatists assembled themselves in a town of The council called (...).
Africa called Bagaia in frequent nu^bet: for they are counted 310 who were
present at this Council. The principal purpose of their meeting was for
deposition of Maximianus B. of Bagaia, who fell from their society, and drew
many others from their heresy: him they deposed and accursed. I have made
mention of this unhappy Council for two causes: first to declare the
incessant diligence of heretics in advancing a doctrine of lies, for it was a
strange thing, that for the deposition of one man, so many should assemble
themselves in one town: seldom were so many present at aecumenicke Councils,
as were at this conuention. Secondly to declare the effronted peartnes of
heretics, when they are met together, all that they do is ascribed to the
holy Spirit: for in their definitive sentence against Maximianus, they borrow
the words of the holy Apostles, Act 15.
Placuit Spiritui sancto qui in nobis est. that is, it has pleased the holy
Spirit, who is in us. Yet were they guided by Satan and not by the holy Spirit
in all the actions of this Council.

In the 8. year of the reign of Theodosius 2. was a general The first
Council of Ephesus general.
Council assembled in Ephesus against the heretic Nestorius bishop of
Constantinople, of whom Socrates writteth that the first ground of his heresy
was the speeches of a Presbyt^r in his Church called Anastatius, whom he had
in reverent account. This Anastatius upon a time teaching in the Church, said,
let no Socrat. lib. 7 cap. 32
man call the vi^gine MARIE the mother of GOD, whereupon ensued great trouble
in the Church, for they were assured of the divinity of CHRIST. And Nestorius
not willing that the man should be disesteemed whom he so much regarded: he
chopped oftin his Sermons upon the word (...), not willing to give unto the
blessed Virgin so great an honor. When the Council of Ephesus was assembled,
consisting of the number of 200. bishops and above, and Cyrillus B. of
Alexandria was appointed Moderator by the ordinance of the Emperors, who
commanded the Council to be gathered, Cyrillus began to embarke, and to
agitate the question, ere John Patriarch of A^tiochia, and his company could
be present at the Council At the first meeting Nestorius being present in the
town of Ephesus utterly spoiled his cause, and added to his former opinion
borrowed from Anastatius, that he thought it an indignity done to the only
begotten Son of GOD, to speak of (...) and (...), and the words (...), were
all reproachful Acta Synod Ephes^.
words to be spoken of the Son of GOD, that is, that he was nourished upon
milk, that he was borne of a maid, that he was two months, or three
months old all these words he counted to be reproachful words to be spoken
of the Son of GOD. The Fathers of the Council were all highly offended at
these words, and warned him to be personally present at the Council, but he
refused to compeare, until the time that John Patriarch of Antiochia, should
b^e present at the Council. Cyrillus B. of Alexandria, was a man prompt, and
sordward in all causes both good and bad, and he would not linger until the
coming of ^ohn Patriarch of Antiochia, and his company, but forthwith he
caused his books and writings to be examined, wherein it was clearly sound,
that he sa^e the Son of the Virgin MARIE was not God but only that God was
with him so he denied the personal union of the divine and humane Nature The
Fathers of the Council upon this ground damned Neslorius as an hereticque, and
Nestorius on the other So^at. lib. 7. cap. (...) 2.
part gathered the bishops of his own faction, and damned Cyrillus B. of
Alexandria, and Memnon B of E^hesus. After this John Patriarch of Antiochia
came to E^hesus, whose coming rather increased than diminished the schism:
for he was to angry against the precipitation and hastines of Cyrillus, that
he would not adioyne himself to the Council: hereupon followed mutual
excommunications: John Patriarch of Antiochia excommunicated Cyrillus, and
Memnon: and they on the other part excommunicated him, and his retinue who came
not to the Council: yet in the mercy of GOD this schism that fell out last
amongst good men was cured, and they were reconciled, and the heretic
Nestorius was banished to Oasis.

Before Theodosius 2. had ended his life, Flavianus bishop. of Constantinople
had gathered a particulare Council, and damned The 2. Council of Ephesus.
Eutyches an abbot of Constantinople, because he affirmed that in CHRIST after
the vnton of the divine and humane natures, there was no longer two natures,
but one allanerly composed of both the natures. This absurd Opinion Flavianus
damned as heretical. Notwithstanding Chrysaphius the chief governor of the
Emperors palace was a friend to Eutyches, and a favorer of his heresy. And
he procured at the Empe^cuts hands, that Eutyches cause should be judged in a
more frequent assembly to be gathered at Ephesus, and wherein Dioscorus B. of
Evagr. lib. 1. ^p. 9, 10
Alexandria should be moderator. In this assembly Dioseorus dealt imperiously,
like unto an headstrong heretic^e He called upon Eutyches, and required a
consession of his faith, which when he had given, not expecting the votes of
others, who were present, with clamor and outcrying he gave allowance unto it,
as if no more were requisite in a Council, except only the suffrage and vote
of the moderator. Likewise he suffered not the letters of Leo B. of Rome sent
to the Council to be read. Thirdly Hist. Magd. (...). 5. cap. 9
he absolved Eutyches, and 300. Monks all entangled with this heresy, whom
Flavianus had justly excommunicated: and last of all, he excommunicated
Flavianus, and caused him by the tumult of his factioners to be so rudely and
discourteously entreated, that he was trod under soot, and was so wounded, that
within three days after he ended his life: for this cause this Council was
called a Council of brigandrie.

The Council of Berytus in Phoenicia, whereinto the cause of Ibas B. of Edessa
(whom Dioscorus had deposed) was wakned and The council of ^erytus.
he was justified and absolved, I purposely pass by, because the controversy
against Ibas will be discussed in a greater assembly. And the Council called
Agathense in France, wherein albeit The Council called Agathen^.
there be a great number of Constitutions, yet nothing is more remarkable in it
than this, that they grant they had liberty to meet together by commandment
of Alaricus King of Goths, who at that time had soueraignitie in that part of
France called Gallia Narbonensis where the Council was gathered: so that in
all Countries, Councils both general and national were conueened by the
authority of Princes.

In the year of our LORD 454 and in the 3. year of the reign of the Emp.
Martianus a general Council was assembled at Chalcedon The general Council
of (...). Funst. chro^
a town of Bythinia lying directly over against Constantinople. Martianus the
Emperor was in person present at the Council, and of Bishops, and reverend
Fathers from all parts of the world six hundredth and thirty. The like
whereof happened not in any general Council preceding this Euagr. lib. 2. cap 4
time. The Patriarchs were all present at this Council either in proper
person, or by their ambassadors. Anatoli^. B. of Constantinople, Dioscorus B
of Alexandria, Maximus B. of Antiochia, (...) B. of Jerusalem: and in stead of
Leo B. of Rome his ambassadors Pascasianus a bishop, Lucentius, Bon^facius,
and Basilius Presbyters, with a Christian brother ^ulianus.

Martianus entreated all the Fathers of the Council to think that he gave his
presence to the convention, not for ostentation of his power or virtue, but
only for desire that the true faith should be confirmed and established, and
that by his authority all tumults of men disobedient to the Council, might b^e
^epressed. Above all craving of them, or rather charging and commanding them,
that they should decerne nothing repagnant to the acts of the Council of Nice.

The ambassadors of Leo B. of Rome craved that Dioscorus B. of Alexandria
should not sit in the Council as a judge, but that he should stand and answer
to things that were to be ob^ected Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 4.
unto him. Which petition being granted, E^sebius B. of Dorileum stood up and
accused him of three things. First, that he had been an adversary to the
true faith in absoluing Eu^yches a notable here ique in the second Council of
Ephesus: Secondly that he was a murderer of Flavianus B. of Constantinople a
constant defender of the true faith: and thirdly that he had done himself
wrong in deposing him without a cause, and herewith he desired his letter to be
read. The Council not only read his letter accusatorie, but also read all the
acts of the 2. Council of Ephesus and heard the reports of bishops, who were
present at that Council of Brigandrie, and had consented against their hearts
to the deposition of Flavianus, because Dioscorus had bands of soldiers sent
by Chrysaphius in name of the Emp. Theodosius 2. to compel simple men to obey
all his desires. All this being considered, together with his unmannerly
rudenes. who would not suffer the letter of Leo B. of Rome to be read in the
Council foresaid, and finally that he had most unjustly and unadvisedly
excommunicate Leo B. of Rome.

The Council of Chalc^on cited Dioscorus, the ground of this controversy, but
he compeared not: therefore he was damned as an heretic, together with
Eutyches and Juvenalis B. of Jerusalem, (...)
and it was ordained that men should believe that the natures of CHRIST, albeit
they were united, yet were they not confounded, as Eutyches heretically had
affirmed. Likewise all the acts of the second Council of Ephesus were
abrogated and rescinded, except the doposition of Domnus B. of Antiochia, and
substitution of Maximus in his place. Moreo^er Th^odoretus B. of Cyns, and Ibas
B. of Edessa, who had been unjustly deposed in the second Council of Ephesus,
were both restored to their places, after they had clearly damned the heresies
of Nestorius, and Eutyches. In the cause of Bassianus and Stephanus, who
contended both for the bishopric of Eph^sus, it was ordained that both of
them should be removed from that dignity, as men who by unlawful means had
aspired to ecclesiasticke offices, and a third person should have the office.
Finally, it was statute and ordained in this Council, that Anatolius B. of
Constantinople, and his successors should have the chief dignity next unto
the chair of Rome. It is to be marked that Prot^rius B. of Alexandria, to
whom the place of old belonged. albeit he was present in the Council, yet he
made none obstacle unto this ordinance: but the ambassadors of Leo B. of Rome
spoke against it, fearing lest the increasing magnificence of such an Imperial
town should in end bring Constantinople to the pre-eminence of the first
seat. Supremacy was long ago the very aple of their eye, and they could not
abide that afar off a diminution of this should be once pointed a^.
Nevertheless this ordinance had alowance of the Council notwithstanding of
the contradiction of the Roman ambassadors. In codice Romano Myster^
imquitatis.
says learned Morneus, all this action is lest out.

In the sixth Session of this Council the Emperor Martianus with Pulcheria the
Empress, were both present, and craved of the Council, that ordinances should
be made for restraining the filthy Iucre, and ambition of Monks and Clergy
men who entangled themselves with seculare business for desire of gain Canon
6.
and riches: whereupon followed this constitution, that men who have addicted
themselves either to the Monasticke life, or the Clergy, they should not be
promoted to other dignities, meaning, civil offices, because that is a
distraction of them from their calling.

TREATISES BELONGING TO THE fourth CENTVRIE.
A TREATISE Of man's Free Will.
SVCH is the corruption of man's nature, that we seek without our selves the
fountain of all evil, and within our selu^s the fountain of all good,
whereas good reason requires that we should transfer the cause of all
iniquity and infirmity upon our selves, as the forlorn son did, who blamed
no person of his poverty, nakedness, and contemptible estate except himself,
who had in most prodigal manner wasted his fathers goods: and on the other
part, we should seek the fountain of all good things in GOD. For like as all
waters have their beginning from the Occan Sea, and they power their waters
into the same: Even so all good gifts come from the Father of ligh^, and they
should be used to the advancement of his glory. No heresy in the fifth
Centurie advanced the freedom of man's free will with so excessive
commendations, as the her^sie of the Pelagians did, attributing unto it power
to fulf^l all the Command^ments of GOD, albert more easily and bett^r, be^ing
supported by the grace of God, than otherwise: but in so doing, as Aug^stine
writes, They did nothing else but hindered the work of their own salvation:
for nature being wounded sored, vexed, and the ability of it lost, it has
more need of a true confession, than of a false defense. But to the end that
we August. de (...) and gratia, cap. 53.
may be truly reconciled to our GOD, let us fix our eyes upon two things:
First upon our own indigence, and misery, and next, upon the abundance of the
Lords mercies and compas^ons: for the ^ense of misery only reduced not the
forlorn son unto Luc. 15.
his fathers house, but with it was joined a consideration of the goodness of
his father.

In this treatise when I endeavor to prove the imbecillitie of man's nature to
do good, I wish no man to open one of the eyes of his mind, and to close the
other: for the sight of our own misery without a consideration of the LORDS
mercy can work nothing in us but desperation.

In this question if Philosophy were laid aside, and our ears were patent to
the instruction contained in GODS holy Scriptures, doubtless we should know
GOD and our selves better than we do. But when both the teacher, and likewise
the auditors are accurate Philosophers, I can find few of the Craecian
bishops who can abstain from the word (...), which Signifies free will: for
desire they have to conquesse Philosophers to the Kingdom of GOD, they give
too much to nature, but holy Scripture is the true measuring line of the house
of GOD, whereunto if we firmly adhere, and comprehend the right meaning of it,
we shall not be deceived.

Now to keep some order in this Treatise, three things (God^lling, shall be
entreated, first what was the estate of man's will before his fall, secondly
what is the estate of man's will after his ^ll thirdly, what is the estate of
man's will after his regenerato^. As concerning the estate of man's free will
before his fall, no man makes question but ADAM had a free and bent
inclination to good: which inclination to good, notwithstanding it was well set,
and bently to good, yet it differs from the free will whereunto we shall be
restored at the blessed appearance of our Lord Jesus Christan this respect,
because the free will of man was in the custody of nature at the first
creation, but at the second appearance of CHRIT, yea, and after our
regeneration also it is into a surer custody, to wit, in the custody of
grace: therefore it comes to pass, that albeit a man fall from the first
estate of his creation, yet at the latter day he cannot fall, because his free
will is in a better custody than it was into before. Yea and after our
regeneration, albeit we have an inclination to fall, and to wander, and to
depart from our GOD, yet the mighty assistance of CHRIST, in whose hands the
custody of our free will is committed may suffer us to be moved, but not to
be removed from his eternal truth, and from our sure foundation.

Now before we leave speaking of the estate of our first creation, let us
remember, that remarkable sentence of AUGUSTINE, August. de natura and gratia,
cap. 34.
Sed quia nos creavit, it a simus grati, ut non simus, quia sanat, ingrat^ that
is, because he has created us, let us be so thankful, that we be not
unthankful, because he has healed us. The good estate whereinto GOD first
created us, should not impair the goodness of GOD in our regeneration, but
rather amplify and increase the same. Like as when GOD builded up the
Tabernacle of DAVID that was fallen, and made it large and ample by Act. 15.
verse. 16.
the calling of the Gentiles, no man had just occasion to extenuat the glory of
the second work in respect of the glory of the first work: even so let us so
talk of the estate of man's first creation, that we be not found unkind to
CHRIST for the work of our regeneration.

The estate of a man's free will after his fall, is not to be doubted of, if so
be our ears be not locked up from harkning to the voice of GOD, speaking to
us from his holy Sanctuary: for it is said in the book of the Psalms, that
The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that Psalm. 14. verse. 2, 3.
would understand and secke God: and in the next verse he says, All are gone
out of the way: all are corrupt, there is not one that does good, no not one.
In these two verses the corruption of man's nature after the fall, is utterly
damned, in so much that in our understanding there is nothing but horrible
darkness, and in our will and affections nothing but an inclination to evil.
Who dare now stand up and be a procutour for a sinful nature, corrupt in all
the faculties thereof, according to a definitive sentence pronounced by the
mouth of GOD from heaven? but what shall we say: gods. Inpiter Amminius was
formed with the body of a man, but with the head of a Ram. Dagon whom the
Philistims worshipped, had the similitude of a man in the uppermost parts, but
the similitude of a fish in the lower parts of his body. And Pan the god of
shepherds was pictured with horns in his head, with the feet of goats, and
rough in all his body, as if he had been ouerlapped with the skin of an
unshorn Ram. They became vain in their imaginations and their foolish heart
Romans 1. verse. 21.
was full of darkness. Y^a, as the Prophet speaks, the makers of them were
like unto them: that is, senseless, blind and dead hearted, and so were the
worshippers of them. P^al. 115.


Against the Gentiles who were Idolaters, a woe is pronounced Haba^. 2 verse. 11.
by the Prophet, in these words, Woe be to hun that says to the wood, awak^,
and to the dumb stone, arise up, etc. Let us take diligent at^endance to these
words, because GOD has spoken t^em by the mouth of his Prophet. The Gentiles
excused their Idolatry, so did the Jews theirs, and the P^pistes will seem
to honor GOD and his Saints in their Images, but le^ all flesh be dumb and
si^ent and hear what the LORD speaks from his S^nctuary, W^e be to him, that
says to wood, awak^. The Pagans, Jews and Papists a^e like unto Adon^iah,
loab, and (...). Th^se were all banque^ting together, and every one of them
streng hened another in their foolish course, and they all said with one
cons^nt, God save King Adon^ah. But there was another kind of conference 1.
Reg. 1.
in the chamber of King DAVID, which did undo all their conferences, and
appointed that SOLOMON should rei^ne: even so, notwithstanding of all the
fool^sh excuses wherewith Gentiles Jews and Papists excuse their Idolatry,
GOD is like unto himself, and he pronounces a w^e against it.

The Papists think that they hau fully s^tisfied both GOD and good men, when
they grant there is no di^inite in the Image, and in substance i^ is a
corruptible thing, and the portrature of it is fashioned by the hand of the
craftesmen. Did not the Gentiles as much? Did not Plato count the Images of
most precious substance, most unprofitable to the people? Did not Fabius
M^ximus despise the Idols of Tarentum as angry Images against their own
people, who depended upon them? Did not the Poet grant, that i^ lay in the
artificers hand, either to make a bench or a god of the wild fig tree, that
came into his hands, the verses are vulgarly known, and in all men's mouths.

Olim truncus eram ficulinus inutile lignum:
Cum faber incertus scamnum, faceretne Priapum
Maluit esse Deum. --
Yea and Marcus Varro, whose testimony August. cites lib. 4. de Civitate Dei,
he said, Qui primi civitatibus simulachra invexerunt, and metum dempserunt,
and errorem addiderunt: that is to say, The first in bringers of images into
cities, they emptied cities of the fear of GOD, and filled them with error.
If a short description of some vanity of images could exonere men from the
blame of Idolatry, then might the Gentiles also be freed from the vile
imputation of Idolatry.

The Idolatry of the Jews fraughted not only with vanity, but also with
unthankfulness, and a contempt of the law of GOD proclaimed from mount Sinai,
does lead us unto a deeper consideration of the vileness of Idolatry. The
golden Calfe, which they worshipped in the wilderness, and the star of
Remphan, declare, that the nature of man is so prone and bent to Idolatry,
that we are bent to follow the sins of those people, who has been most
hateful enemies unto us. The Exodus 32. Acts 7. verse. 43.
Egyptians were grievous oppressors of GODS people, nevertheless the Jews
followed their Idolatry, in worshipping the Calfe. On the other part the
Moabites and Ammonites hired Balaam Numb^ 2. verse. 24. M. c. 6. verse. 5. Amos
5. verse. 25.
to curse them. Notwithstanding of all this, they took up in the wilnernesse
the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of Rempham, figures which they made to
worship them. It is an unsupportable mischief, and a remeadilesse malady
lurking in our corrupt nature, when we are bent to follow the sins of people
who hate us, and wishes all kind of harm to us both in soul and body, so
that learned men upon great considerations had called Idolatry (...), or the
mad bentnesse upon Idols.

When the Apostle PAVL is making a particulare enumeration 1. Cor. 10 verse. 7,
8, 9, 10.
of the sins which the Jews committed in the wilderness, namely, Idolatry,
fornication, tempting of Christ, and murmuring, remember that Idolatry is set
in the first place, as the very fountain of all apostacy and defection from
GOD. For like as in a matrimonial contract betwixt man and woman, when the
principal head of the contract is broken, and a woman has given her
affection and body to another man, all the rest of the points of the contract
which are subordinate to this, will easily be dissolved: even so, if Idolatry
once take place in our hearts, so that we give the glory of God to creatures,
all other defection will easily ensue and follow. Therefore in the days of
Iosuae, when the people were zealous for the glory Iosu. ^2.
of God, they could not abide any kind of appearance of defection from the
true worship of God: but alas it fares with zeal, as it does with a tear
that is soon dried up, so does the zeal to the glory of God hastily euanish
from amongst the children of men.

Moreover it is diligently to be marked, that the Lord is very strict and
precise in the matter of his worshipping, not only forbidding to worship the
gods of the Canaamtes, but also forbidding to worship the true God after the
form of their bad Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 4.
worshipping, but only according to the rule of his own blessed Comm^ndement.
And for this cause the ten Tribes of Israel, because they worshipped not God in
Jerusalem, but offered sacrifices upon the altars of Bethel Gilgal, and
Be^sheba, they are counted of God as profane Aethiopians, and people who were
Amos 9. verse. 7.
strangers from the covenant of God. Therefore in the matter of divine worship,
let these two rules continually be set before our eyes. First to worship God
alanerly, and not his creatures, secondly, to worship him according to the
rule of his own Commandment alanerly.

Finally, amongst the rest of the unhappy manners of the nation of the Jews,
it is to be noted, that when outward Idolatry seemed to be forsaken amongst
them, so that they were content rather to sacrifice their lives, than to suffer
the Images of the Roman Emperors to be set up in their Temple, At this
Joseph. de bell. Iudaic. lib. 2.
same time (I say) they were defiled with inward Idolatry, which is most
abominable of all other Idolatries. For the Idol of all Idols is this, when a
man makes an Idol of himself, preferring himself to God and his own will to
the Commandment of God, and his own wisdom to the misdome of God manifested
to the world by his own dear Son Jesus Christ, but so it is, that the
nation of the Jews, at that same time when they forsook the worshipping of
Idols made with men's hands, they forsook also the Shepherd of their souls,
even the true MESSIAH, and pr^ferred a murderer to him. Whereof this
conclusion may b^e justly inferted, that Idolatry is not rightly forsaken,
except all idols both outward and inward be laid aside.

Many w^rnings the people of the Jews got, to beware of Idolat ie, yea, the
LORD threatened them, that incace they would prouo^e the LORD to anger by
things that were not Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 21.
Gods, the LORD also would provoke them to anger by a people that was not a
people. But when no warning could avail, the LORD cast them off into a
reprobate mind, and received the Gentiles to be his peculiar people. But at
our very first entry we have this warning to be humble and obedient, lest he
who spared not the natural branches, how much less will he spare Romans 11.
verse. 21.
us, if we make defection.

In the last head, I have to entreat concerning the Images of the Roman
Church, which in the sixth Centurie were received into places of adoration, yea,
and a little after were adored, and worshipped: and finally, the adoration of
Images got allowance in general Councills. Now seeing I am not entreating of
Images made for ornament, or for memory of civil actions, but only of
adoration, and the in-bringing of them into places of adoration. Let us
remember that the Apostles were faithful dispensators of those things, which
they received from CHRIST, whether it was for the feeding of the bodies, or of
the souls of CHRIST'S people, when they received barlie loaves blessed by Joan.
6.
CHRIST'S mouth, and miraculously multiplied, they distributed unto the people
that same bread, and none other, which they received out of Christ's hands. In
like manner they were faithful dispensato^s of that spiritual food, which they
received from CHRIST to feed the souls of his people unto eternal life. Now
we never read, that CHRIST taught his Apostles by pictures and images in the
knowledge of his eternal truth, neither that the Apostles taught any others
to know GOD, and to follow the virtuous footsteps of the Saints, by presenting
dum be images unto their sight: therefore this form of teaching smelle^h of
novelty, and came not from CHRIST and his Apostles: for the Apostles received
commandment from CHRIST to preach his Matt. 28.
word, and to minister his Sacraments, but not to present dumb images to the
sight of the people, justly called by the Prophet HABACCVK doctors of lies.
Habae. (...) ver^. 18.


Secondly, places of holy Scripture, both in the Old and New Testament, do so
manifestly damn adoration of images, that the most obstinate defenders of
worshipping of Images were compelled to leave Scripture, and take them to the
authority of unwritten traditions, and Damascene expressly calls the Damasc^.
orat. 2. pro Imagin^bus.
worshipping of images (...), he forgets not to remember the brazen
Serpent, and the Cherubims, as the Papists of our days do continually, yet
his conscience compelled him to acknowledge, that these similitudes were made
for signification, and not for imitation or adoration, else how could he fly
from Scripture to the naked warrant of unwritten tradition. I know the lie is
no less repugnant to it self, than it is unto the truth, and all the
shifting business of Damascene, to shroud the adoration of images, under some
testimonies of Scripture are undone by that plain confession, that it is an
unwritten tradition, else he would have said, it was (...) that is, both a
written and unwritten tradition. The fables of Damascene, whe^eby h^e would
prove the adoration of images are in absurdity beyond the fabils of Poets,
even in their metamorphosis. For who can abide to read the hunting of Placidas,
and the speaking of the beast that was hunted with a cross betwixt his horns,
shining in brightness Damascen. orat. 3 pro Imagini^us.
far beyond the splendour of the Sun, with such vanities and lies must the
infirmity of a false doctrine be supported But John Patriarch of I^rusalem,
who writteth Damascenes life, he writ^th that Damascens hand was cut off by
the Prince of the Saracens, and was miracu^sly restored and healed again by
invocation of the image of the Virgin MARIE. It is not likely, that Damascene
who writes the miracle of Placidas hunting, for confirmation of worshipping of
im^ges, that he could have pretermitted so great a miracle wrought for the
restitution of a member of his own body, obte^ed by worshipping of an image,
if it had been a miracle wrought indeed.

But now to leave Damascene, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the writer of the
history of Damascenes life, who has added unto the multiplied number of
Damascenes lies, an heap laid above, to the end that his 3. orations pro
Imaginibus may be like unto a measure full, and ouerrunning. And to convert me
to councils, wherein as in victual houses and in barnes, all store of
Arguments are laid up that can serve for the apparent allowance of Images. I
superside at this time to speak much of the Council gathered by Constantius
Copronymus at Constantinople An. 755. whereinto 338. bishops utterly damned
the adoration of Images, and the setting of them up in places where GOD was
worshipped, and that for three principal causes. First, because the making and
bowing down to Images is expressly forbiden in Scripture, and namely in the 2.
Commandment of the Decalogue. Secondly, because the picturing of CHRIST (who
is both God and man) and representing of him by a similitude is a dividing of
his two natures (so far as in us lies) because his divine nature cannot be
pictured, and his humane narure should not be separated from his divine nature.
Thirdly, because the writings of holy and ancient farhers, damned the
worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus,
Athanasius, Amphilochius, Theodorus bishop of Ancyra, and Eusebius Pamphili,
whose grave sentences all damning adoration of Images, are most worthy to be
read.

In the rest of this Treatise, I shall set down (Godwilling) two opposite
Councills, the one allowing the adoration of Images, the other disallowing it.
The second Council of Nice under the Empress Irene ann. 789. gave full
allowance to the adoration of Images, out of Asia, and Graecia, and some other
parts: with the ambassadors of Adrian bishop of Rome, were assembled 350.
bishops. On the other part, under the reign of Carolus Magnus Emperor of
the West, ann. 794. a great Council was assembled at Francford de maine,
wherein the adoration of Images was utterly disallowed, and the arguments
alleged in the second Council of Nice for adoration of Images, are clearly
refuted in presence of Charles King of France and Emperor of the West, and
Theophilactus and Stephanus ambassadors of the bishop of Rome. In these two
opposite Councills, let the judicious Reader mark the great providence of GOD,
who has appointed, that there should be contradiction to the lying doctrine,
so that they who love the truth of GOD have no need to follow a false
doctrine, in regard there is no man that dare gainesay it. For I dare say, to
the commendation of the Council of Francford, that the Ibides of Egypt were
never more ready to devour the flying Serpents of Arabia, so that they would
not suffer them to light in the coasts of Egypt, than the Council of
Francford was ready to undo all the foolish arguments of the second Council
of Nice, proouing the adoration of Images.

Before I set these Councills in opposite terms of contradiction, the one to
the other, the preludie of the Council is worthy to be marked. Adrian bishop
of Rome sent a letter to the second Council of Nice fraughted with lies, and
affirming that the Emperor Constantine was a leper, that he endeuour^d to
cure his disease by shedding of innocent babes blood, that PETER and PAVL
appeared to him in a vision by night, and bade him go, and be baptized by
SILVESTER, Huseb devi^ Constant. lib. 4.
and his disease should be healed, and that in remembrance of this benefit
CONSTANTINE builded Churches in Rome, and adorned them with the Images of PETER
and PAVL. The grounds of this letter contains a mass of impudent lies.
CONSTANTINE was not a leper, but a man gifted in soul, beautiful in body, and
furnished with great gifts both of soul and body, and meet for great works,
as EVSEBIVS witne^seth, who lived in CONSTANTINES time, and was familiarly
acquainted with him. Neither was he baptized by SILVESTER in Rome, but by
EVSEBIVS in Nicomedia. For SILVESTER and MARCUS his successor were both dead,
before that CONSTANTINE was baptized. The rest of his letter is like unto the
sandy ground and fabulous narration whereupon it is grounded.

The arguments of the second Council of Nice proving adoration of Images, may
be distributed into four rancks. Some are taken out of Scripture, others out
of Fathers, the third rank from common reason, the fourth from miracles. If I
propound their arguments into an intelligible order, and likewise the ^nsweres
to them, I do a benefit to the Reader.

The Cherubims, and the brazen Serpent were made by Gods commandment, and the
Cherubimes were seated in the place 1 Argument.
of adoration: ergo Images may be brought into the places of adoration.

There is a threefolde difference betwixt Images set up in Churches to be
worshipped, and the Cherubimes in the Temple. 1. Answer.
First, the Cherubimes are made by the express commandment of GOD, but the
images set up in Temples, are made express contrare to the Commandment of
GOD. Secondly, the Cherubimes and brazen Serpent were repres^ntations of divine
mysteries. Thirdly, neither the Cherubimes nor brazen Serpent were made for
adoration as images are, that are set up in Temples. If any man be not fully
resolved with these answers, let him understand that the Lawgiver has
absolute authority, to make exceptions from his own Law, but it is not
lawful to others, without warrant of GODS commandment to do the like.
Example in ABRAHAM who had a warrant to kill his own son The people of
Israel had a warrant to borrow from the Egyptians vessels of silver and gold,
and costly Genesis 22. verse. 2. Exodus 12. verse 35, 36 Exodus 31. verse. 7. 2.
Argument
raiment, and Moses had a warrant to make Che^ubimes and a brazen Serpent: but
those things are not lawful to others, who want the like warrant.

The next Argument borrowed from Scripture is this, IACO^ worshipped the top of
JOSEPH'S staff, therefore it is l^wfull to worship Images.

The Council of Francford answers to this Argument, that like as there is no
such words in the H^brew text, even so the 2. Answer.
words of the Apost. in the Epistle to the H^brewes cap 11 verse 21, contains
no such thing, where it is said, (...), that is he worshipped leaning above
August. quast. in genes. 162.
the top of hi^ scepter, but he worshipped not his Scepter. And Augustine in
his questions upon Genesis affirms, that he worshipped GOD, and not the
staff of JOSEPH.

The third Argument taken out of Scripture is out of the book of the Psalms:
O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house. 3. Argument.
Of this they concluded, that images should be loved and worshipped, seeing
they are the beauty and ornament of GODS house.

To this argument it is answered by the Council of Francford, that this
argument is grounded upon a wrong interpretation of 3. Answer.
Scripture, for by the house of GOD, is not meant a material Temple, and the
ornament of GODS house, is not Images, but spiritual virtues. Many other
places of Scripture are filthily abused, but I will have some regard to the
Reader, that he be not wearied in reading an heap of frivolous arguments.

Many arguments are taken out of the writings of Fathers, to prove the
adoration of Images. but these following are the 1 Argument out of Fathers.
chief and principal First they say, that B^silius Mag^us affirms that the
honor done to the Image, redounde^h to him whose image it is.

This he ^peaketh of Christ, who is the Im^ge of the invisible 1. Answer.
God, Coloss. 1. verse. 5. And who is the brightness of his glory, and the
engraven form of his person, Heb. 1. verse 3. but he^ is not speaking of Images
formed by the hands of men.

The testimony of Gregorius Nyssenus is cited, who writes that when he passed
by the image of Abraham viuely pictured, with 2. Argument.
the knife drawn, ready to kill his son, he could not abstain from
shedding of tears.

This argument is counted frivolous: albeit Gregorius Nyssenus 2. Answer.
wept, yet he bowed not his knee to worship the image of Abraham. Moreover the
Council of Franckford alleged that the books of Gregorius Nyssenus were not
extant.

Amongst argumen^es taken from natural reason, to prove adoration of Images
this is the chief. The Emperors Image is 1. Argument taken from common
reason. 1. Answer.
honored, therefore the Image of Christ should be honored.

To this argument the Council of Francford (...) this answer, that GOD is not
like unto a mortal King locally circumscribed so that when he is in one place,
he cannot be at that same self time in another place. Therefore to intertaine
a reu^rence in the peoples hearts toward their Prince, this custom of
honoring the Kings image was found out. But God who is every where present,
and whom no place can contain, he is not to be sought in Images, neither was
that form of worshipping, either commanded or allowed by GOD.

The argument invented of later days, to prove adoration 2. Argument,
of Images, is sophistical: the dishonor done to the Image of CHRIST,
redoundeth to himself: ^go the honor done to the Image of Christ, redoundeth
also to Christ, and is an honoring of Christ himself. The antecedent is
proved by the fact of Julian the apostate, in breaking in pieces the Image of
Christ in Caesarea Philippi. Sozom. lib. 5 cap. 21. 2. Answer.


To this it may be answered, that the breaking down of the brazen Image in
Caesarea Philipps, was not a dishonouring of Christ in respect of the fact,
that Julian did, but in respect of the intention of the doer: but when this is
proved, the consequent will not follow. For albeit an evil intention be eneugh
to bring a man within the compass of such as dishonor Christ, yet a good
intention is not eneugh to prove, that we are honourers of Christ, but our
actions also must be ruled according to the commandments of Christ: and
therefore they who have only an intention to honor Christ, but in the mean
time violateth his commandments, by worshipping him into an Image, shall never
be counted honourers of Christ.

The fourth rank of arguments is taken from miracles wrought by Images. This
argument is weak and faulty in all An argument from miracles. Answer.
sides. The antecedent is false, as shall be declared hereafter. But suppone
that miracles had been wrought in Images, or by images, it follows not that
they should be worshipped. In the wilderness God cured his people
miraculously, by looking to the brazen Serpent, yet it was not lawful to
worship the brazen Serpent, and when the people worshipped it, HEZEKIAS brake
it in pieces, and called it Nebustan. In like manner, GOD wrought a notable
miracle by the ministry of PAVL and BARNABAS at Acts 14.
Lystra, yet would they not suffer the people to worship them, and the coming
of the Antichrist is foretold to be mighty by lying wonders, yet is not the
Antichrist to be worshipped. Therefore this argument is of no force, albeit it
were true that miracles had been wrought by Images.

But let us examine the antecedent of this argument, they say, that miracles
have been wrought by Image; For confirmation of this, they bring in the viue
similitude of Christ's face printed into a cloth, and by Christ his application
of the cloth to his blessed face with his own hands, which portrature of his
face he delivered to the painter of King Agbarus to be carried to him, because
the painter dazzled with the splendore of CHRIST'S face could not paint his
similitude. Now (say they) the very effigy of CHRIST'S face miraculously by
touching only stamped in the clothe, declares that GOD works miracles both
in Images, and by Images. I answer this fable of Agbarus painter was not heard
before the 700, year of our LORD Damasce^. d^ (...) fide, lib. 4. Eusebius. lib.
1. cap. 13.
that Damascene makes mention of it. The Apostles and Evangelists make no
mention of any such thing, neither yet Eusebius who had convenient time to
write of this miracle of the Painter, (if any such thing had been true) when
he writes of the letter of King Agbarus sent to CHRIST, and CHRIST'S answer
returned again to him.

The miracle of the Image of CHRIST crucified by the Jews in Berythus a town
of Syria, out of the pierced side whereof, flowed blood and water in great
abundance, and this blood mixed with water had a medicinal virtue to cure all
diseases. The writing of this miracle is ascribed to Athanasius, but the very
style, ditement and phrase of writing declares, that it is a book
supposicitious, and not belonging to Athanasius. Like as many other books
given out under the name of Athanasius are supposititious and false, and
Erasmus that learned man who was never satisfied with reading, yet he wearied
in reading the supposititious works of Athanasius, making an end of reading of
them with this proverb (...), that is to say, enough of accornes, meaning,
that he might spend the time better than in reading unprofitable and
unnecessary books.

The miracle of the Image of the Virgin MARIE, and the candle set before her
Image by an Heremite, who went in pilgrimage a far journey, and when he
returned again, after the issue of three months, (others say six months)
the candle was still burning, and not consumed in all this time. This miracle
has the right shape of a sable: for all circumstances of time, place, and
persons are obscured, neither is it declared in what year of the LORD this
miracle was wrought, nor in what place of the world the Image was, neither is
the name of the Heremite expressed, nor the name of the place whereinto he
iourneyed. Only the writer of this miracle is said to be Dionysius Ascalonita
pres byter, some obscure fellow doubelesse, or the fained name of some author,
for his name is voknowne to the learned.

The second Council of Nice, which gave such full allowance to adoration of
Images, it began evil, and it ended worse: for it began at the fables
contained in Adrians letter, but it ended at a dialogue betwixt the devil, and
a certain monk, whom S^than forbade to wo^ship the image of our Lady: but
his foolish Abbot Theodorus said unto him, that it was a less sin to haunt
all the baudie houses in the town every day, than to leave off worshipping of
the Image of our Lady one day. The Apostle PAVL never used the testimony of
the devil, to prove himself to be the servant of GOD, albeit the woman
possessed with a spirit of divination cried after PAVL and SILAS that they
were the servants of the most high GOD: and in my opinion the arguments taken
from the testimony of Satan should Acts 16. verse. 17.
be eschewed, for GOD has not appointed him to be our teacher.

Now let us consider the multiplied honors of images hatched in the second
Council Of Nice under this one word adoration of Images. This adoration
stands in decking of them, kneeling unto them, saying of prayers before them,
censing, lighting of candles, vows, offerings, festuall days, salutations,
building of Churches, and altars. All these honors were done both to the
image, and to the Saint represented by the image. The decking of images is
damned by the Prophet HOSEA, and it is indeed a spoiling of the poor, who
have need of such Hos. 2.
support as is bestowed in vain upon images, who have no need of ornaments and
clothing. Under the bowing of the knee, all Idolatry is comprehended. Prayer
should be conceived without 1. Reg. 19. verse. 18.
wrath and doubting: but so it is, he who prays before an image cannot be
free of doubting, because he has no promise to be heard. Censing was a part of
the ceremonial law, very 1. Tim. 2
badly transferred from the living GOD to senseless images. Candles Exodus 30.
verse. 19. Exodus 25. verse. 29.
lighted before images declare that the Saints represented by those images were
the lights of the world, but it is a vain thing to forsake the light of their
wholesome doctrines, and to honor them by lighting candles before their
images. Salutations of images are no less ridiculous than the salutations
wherewith S. Francis saluted the knee, as his sisters, for humilities sake. As
concerning vows, building of Temples, setting up of (...), and festuall days,
to the honor of images, it is too great honor donevnto them, with some slip
of memory in them who do it: for in one word, they say, there is no divinity
in images, and immediately after they do such honor unto them, 1. Reg. 11.
as SOLOMON when he stood, did to GOD, and when he fell, did to. Astaroth,
Chemosse and Moloch.

Before I make an end of this Treatise, it may be demanded, How could the
worshipping of images get place at that time when Emperors and Councils with
all their might contended in the contrary, that images should not be
worshipped. The Emperors Philippicus, Leo lsaurus, Constantinus, Copronymus,
and Leo his son, were all seriously bent to suppress the worshipping of
images, and in the West, Carolus Magnus King of France and Emperor, was
present in the Council of Francsord, where the worshipping of images was
damned To this I answer, that the anthoritie of the bishop of Rome was at this
time so increased, that they durst encounter with the Emperors of the East,
who were far distant from them. Constantine B. of Rome razed out of Charters,
the name of the Emperor Philippicus, Gregorius 2. did excommunicate Leo
Isaurus, and forbade to pay tribute unto him. Gregorius 3. in conternpt of Leo
gathered a Council, and ordained the worshipping of images. As concerning
Carolus Magnas who was proclaimed Emperor by the special mandate of the
chair of Rome, the question is greater, How could the bishops of Rome
tolerate, that worshipping of images should be damned by a Council gathered
by this new Emperor whom they had authorized by their own travels. To this
Ianswere, that the bishops of Rome did as the ancient Romans August. de ciwit.
Deilib. 5. cap. 12
did, of whom Augustine writes, Mulcas cupiditates unius ingenti cupiditate
presserunt, that is to say, Many desires they pressed down for the excessive
desire they had of one thing, to wit, of soueraignitie and domination: even so,
the great desire the Roman bishops had firmly to keep in their possession
that great territory of land in Italy, called Exerchatus Ravinna, which
Pipinus King of France reft from the Emperor of the East, and gave it to the
chair of Rome, for the excessive desire (I say) which they had to keep this
rich prey, they would not contend with Carolus Magnus, but after his death,
they could not suffer his posterity to take such a doing against the
worshipping of Images, as Carolus Magnus had done. In so much, that in the
days of the reign of Ludouicus Pius, it was hard to the Emperor to protect
Claudius Taurinensis against the chaufing malice of the bishops of Italy who
hated him, because he cast out Images out of his Church in Turin, yea, and
Claudius Taurinensis directly impugned the adoration of Images by a book
written by him upon that subject, whereunto none answer was given during his
lifetime, but after his death many were found like barking dogs railing
against his blessed memorial, and that so much the more, because in his book
he rubbed quickly upon the surfeiting pleasures of the Roman Church, who were
better content to worship the Cross of Christ, because that was easy to be
done, than to bear the Cross of Christ, because that was a laborious work,
and painful to the flesh, yet did Christ command us to bear his Cross, but
not to worship it.

Finally, it is to be noted, that the defection of some men of great account,
was a stumbling block to many others. Paulus Cyprius B. of Constantinople,
left his charge, entered into a Monastrie, and lamented that he had consented to
the abolishing of Images. Gregorius B. of Neocesarea, one of the chief
disallowers of Images in the Council holden at Constantinople, gave in his
supplicant bill in the second Council of Nice, confessed his error, and
subscribed to the decree of that unhappy Council, by whose example the
bishops of Nice, Hierapolis, of the Isles of Rhodes, and Carpathus were moved
to do the like. Let this be a warning to them who are in eminent places, that
they fall not from the truth of GOD, lest by their fall they procure a great
ruining and desolation to the house of GOD. The LORD keep us from defection,
to whom be praise, and glory for ever.

AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Satisfaction and Indulgences.
SATISFACTION of old, was public repentance made for grievous faults, such
as, murder, adultery, apostasy. And this public humiliation made in sight
of the people with fasting, tears, baseness of apparel and such other
tokens of an humbled mind, with a sense of sorrow for bypast offenses, it was
called satisfactio, as Augustine writes, quia satisfiebat Ecclesiae, that is,
because the Church was satisfied, yea and the slander August. Enchirid. 65.
was removed. This humiliation foresaid in the Greek Church was called
(...), or a punishment, because it was inf^cted Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16.
as a punishment in Church discipline, to terrify others from committing the
like offenses. Now seeing this Ecclesiastical discipline was very rigorous,
and endured many years, as Council. Nicen. canon 12
the Canons of Councils clearly declare, It pleased the Church upon weighty
considerations to relent somewhat of the severitie of the first prescribed
discipline, yea and the people of^ times entreated the Pastor by earnest
requests, that the time of public repentance might be shortened, because they
saw great tokens of unfeigned repentance in the offender. This dispensation with
the rigor of old discipline was called indulgentia, but in Popery, which was
beginning in this Centurie to have great upper hand, the abuse of these two
words, has utterly undone the ancient purity of religion and discipline.

The word satisfaction, which of old was referred to the people, now in Popery
is referred to God in this manner. They teach the people that the sins
committed before Baptism are abolished in Baptism, but sins committed after
Baptism, we must obtain pardon for them by our own satisfactions, namely by
fasting, praying, almesdeedes, pilgrimages, and such other works done by our
selves. And to make this doctrine the more plausible unto the people, they
bring in the similitude of a man sailing in a ship, if he fall out of it into
the sea, the ship (say they) goes away without recovery, and incace he find
not another vessel to support his distressed estate, and to bring him to land,
he must needs perish and drown: even so (say they) if after baptism we
commit any transgression, we must either be supported by our own
satisfactions, else we must perish in our sins. No similitude can be more
repugnant to Scripture tha^ this. For albeit there be many vessels, whereinto
men's bodies may be preserved from the danger of drowning yet is there not many
vessels whereinto our souls can be saved from damnation, but ^ee are saved
only by our spiritual Baptism, whereby the filth of our souls is washen
away in the 1. Pet. 3. verse. 21.
blood of Christ. And like as God commanded not NOE to make two arkes, but one
alanerly for the safety of a few: so has GOD appointed only one way for
safety of our souls, so that if we sin after Baptism we must have refuge
to the sweet promises of remission of sins made to us in Baptism.

In what sense indulgentia was taken of old, I have already declared In the
Roman Church Indulgences and Pardones, are a dispensation of the merits of
Christ and his Saints, to the utility of sinn^rs. This presupponeth that the
merits of Christ and his Saints are put in the custody of the bishop of
Rome, and that his treasures can keep them. Concerning the merits of CHRIST,
they say, that there was such precious virtue in his blood, that one drop of
it was sufficient to redeem all the world, now (say they) what shall become of
all the rest of his blood which he sh^d in great abundance? shall all this
precious blood be lost? and where can it be better kept than in the treasures
of CHRIST'S Vicar, to be dispensated to the utility of sinners when need
requires. To this vain assertion of Papists I answer, that the LORD n^uer
dealt sparingly, neither with our bodies nor souls. The LORD has provided
greater abundance of air for the refreshment of our bodies, than all the
breathing senses of men and beasts is able to draw in. The LORD rained down
MANNA from heaven in greater plenty, than might have sufficed the people of
the Iewe^ in the wilderness: even so when the LORD is content to shed great
abundance of his precious blood, he has done it to set forth the great riches
of his mercy toward our souls, but not to make a mortal man a dispensator of
one drop of his blessed blood.

The chief questions betwixt us and the Roman Church anent Original sin
are two: First, whether or no concupiscence, which remains in the godly after
their baptism be in a proper acception called sin or not: for the Roman
Church says, that it is called sin by the Apostle, because it came of sin,
Romans 7.
and it tends to sin, but not because it is sin, is a proper acception.
And the Council of Trent pronounces an anathema against them, who think
otherwise than they have determined. Council Trident. (...) 5
The second controversy is, whether or no the natural concupiscence moving us
to evil, can be called a sin before we give the consent of our mind to it.
The Roman Church thinks it no sin until we yield the consent of our
hearts unto it. The third question anent sins committed before and after
baptism, what way they are remitted, because this question pertains more
properly to another treatise I shall oue^passe it at this time.

Now anent the first question, I affirm that the Apostle Paul Romans 7. verse. 7.
when he calls concupiscence sin, he calls it sin in a proper acception of
the word sin. Many names are given to sin in Scripture, which expresses what
it is properly, but especially these 3. names, (...) or (...). Concupiscence is
(...), that is, a transgression of the Law as the Apostle manifestlly
witnesses when he says: I had not known lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not lust: therefore concupiscence is sin in a proper acception. In
like manner concupiscence or original sin is called (...), that is, an
aberration, to wit, from the Law and Commandment of GOD: and in Romans 5. verse.
12.
expr^sse words, the Apostle speaking of Original sin says Wherefore as
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death went
over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned, etc. In this place
concupiscence is called (...), that is, an aberration from the Commandment of
GOD, and consequently a sin in a proper acception of the word sin.
Remember also that the Apostle is speaking of all men, yea and of himself also
in the estate whereinto he was presently, when he wrote this epistle, that is,
after he was baptized. Then let us mark the third word (...), which signifies
a snappering and a falling, to wit, from the Law and Commandment of GOD, and
this word also is attributed unto Original sin in these words, (...), that
is, through the offense of one man many be dead: Romans 5. verse. 15.
so that all these three words concurring in one, do declare that
concupiscence even after baptism in a proper sense is sin, because it is a
breaking of the Law, an aberration from the Law, and a falling from the Law.
Now the curses of the Council of Trent, which they cast out so prodigally
against us, are not worthy one fig, because they are not grounded in reason,
but are expressly repugnant to the written word of GOD.

The second question is this, whether or no is concupiscence a sin before we
yield the consent of our heart unto it. To this I answer, that if they
understood by concupiscence a bad inclination, it is sin even in infants, who
do not know what it is to consent either to good or evil: but if they mean
of the first motion or cogitation of sin presented unto the soul, apparently
this question belongs rather to actual than to original sin: but whether
it belongs to the root of sin, or to the branches of sin, I shall produce
three reasons wherefore the first motion of sin is sin, even before we yield
unto it the consent of our heart. First, because a consent is an indifferent
thing, called good or evil, according to the nature of that thing whereunto we
give our consent, and consequently, the consent is evil, because that motion
of sin whereunto we consented was evil, and if it had not been evil in it
self, the consent of our heart given unto it, had never been called evil.

Secondly, Fathers from whom Papists have learned this Theology, that in
them who are regenerated, concupiscence August. de (...) and concupiscentia,
lib. 1. cap. 23
is not to be counted a sin, until a man give the consent of his heart unto
it: these same Fathers (I say) after they had pierced deeper into this
question, they corrected themselves, as clearly appears by the words of
Augustine against Iul^anus Idem contra Julian. lib. 4. cap. 2.
a Pelagian, saying, Desiderium mali malum est, etiamsi ci non consentiatur,
donec co perveniamus, ubi nec habeatur: that is, the desire of evil is evil,
albeit consent be not given unto it, until we attain unto that estate,
whereinto we shall be free of it Thirdly, Epist. (...). cap. 1. ver. 15.
the Apostle JAMES when he damneth actual sin, he agreageth it by three
circumstances, to wit, by the conception of it, the birth of it, and the
punishment of it: the conception of it is by concupiscence, and this the
Apostle sets down as the first circumstance of the amplification of sin,
and not as a thing indifferent, until we give consent unto it, how beit it is
true that actual sin is not committed, until consent be given to
concupiscence, yet in it self it is a sin, and the conception and root of
sin, as the Apostle speaks.

It is no point of wisdom to extenuate or to obscure and hide our sins: for
GOD can set them all in order before our Psalm. 50. verse. 21
face, as the psalmist speaks, and if this be all the gain and advantage
we have by denying and obscuring a part of our sins, it were better to lay
all open before the great Physician of our souls, to the end that in due time
we may be cured by his medicinal plasters. Augustine makes rehearsal of
three medicinal cures, against concupiscence in these words. In corpore
Contra (...), lib. 5. cap. 6
mortis castiganda, in morte corporis resolvenda, in corporis resurrectione and
morte mortis sananda: that is, in the body of death it is to be chastised, in
the death of the body it is to be resolved, and in the resurrection and in the
death of death it is to be healed. Therefore let us not despare, because we
are heavily loadned with sin both original and actual, bu^let us have
esperance of healing, because we have a gracious and a loving Physician. He
restored PETER with a favorable look: he saved one of the crucified thieves,
with a merciful remembrance: he cured the woman that was diseased with a
bloody issue with one touching the Centurions servant with speaking one word.
Now he who is mighty to save, loose us in his own appointed time from all the
bands of our manifold sins, to whom be praise, and glory for ever.

AMEN.
A TREATISE Of Justification by faith only.
THE defenders of man's free will in all ages, have been also enemies to the
doctrine of grace: and therefore this treatise does adhere to the form^r with a
pertinent coherence. The order I mind to follow by the Lords assistance, in
this question, Whether we be justified only by faith, or partly by faith, and
partly by works, is this. First shortly to entreat a place of Scripture,
whereinto this question is clearly discussed. Next, to speak of the
difference of Justification, and Sanctification, and of the Law, and the
Gospel. And thirdly, to declare that we can not be saved, neither by our
own merits, nor by the merits of other men, but only by the merits of the
suffering of Christ.

The place of Scripture which I shall lay down for a ground is this. Behold
he that lif^eth up himself, his mind is not upright in Mabac. 2. verse. 4.
him, but the inst shall live by faith. The purpose of the Prophet in this
verse is to comfort GODS people who were to be transported captives and
prisoners to Babylon. The Prophet would exhort them with patient expectation to
wait upon their promised deliverance, whereby it should come to pass, that
they should be in better estate, than the Babylonians their enemies: for the
Babylonians rejoiced in their own strength, sacrificed unto their own net,
and leaned upon a staff that could not hold them up: but GODS people, albeit
afflicted for a time, if by faith they should take hold of the promise of GOD,
they should see in GODS appointed time a comfortableissue of all their troubles.

The Prophet in the word Behold, would reduce them to a consideration of
things they had seen with their eyes, and heard with their ears, to wit,
that their fathers who trusted more in the horses of Egypt, than in the quiet
rest of the promises Esaias 30. verse. 3.
of GOD, they found the help of Egypt to be their confufion. This one example
which they saw with their own eyes, might have taught them to lean at all
times upon the staff of GOD, and to forsake all vain confidence, either in
themselves or others. In the next words, he who is puf^ up in himself. The
Prophet expressly points out the persons of whom he is speaking, namely, of
them who leanes not unto their own strength Psalm. 4^.
or wisdom. Truly GODS people should be like unto mount Sion, fair in
situation, and the glory of the whole earth, yet not rejoicing in it self, but
in the goodness of GOD, who pleased to dwell in the palaces thereof, who laid
the foundations of it in the holy mountains, and who loved the gates of Sion
more Psalm. 87. verse. 1, 2
than all the habitations of JACOB. Let Caucasus, Olympus Parnassus and Atlas
rejoice in their bigness and height, but Sion rejoices in this, that it is
the mountain which GOD has chosen to be the place whereupon his holy
Sanctuary should be builded. So do the Elect of God rejoice in the Lords
goodness, but others are lift up in themselves, as the Prophet speaks.

In the words following, his heart is not upright in him, the Prophet
declares the inconvenience that follows upon the leaning to our own
strength, to wit, we are utterly disapointed of our expectation, and whereas
we looked for rest and tranquillity to our consciences, the contrare falls
out, that we are like unto men out of their right wits, wavering minded, and
so tossed with doubting, that they know not whar course to take, because their
mind is not solidly settled, nor upright within them. This is the just
Judgment of GOD, punishing the contempt of that quiet and peaceable harbery
that is to be found in the bosom of the compassions of GOD in his Son
CHRIST JESUS: they who despise this sure harbery, are worthy to be tossed with
mighty storms, and to be in hazard and ieopardie of their life's, as the
Centurion was, who despised Acts 27.
the wholesome counsel of PAVL at Candie.

Follows in the words of the Prophet, but the just man shall live by faith,
Like as they who lean upon their own strength can find no tranquillity and
rest unto their consciences: even so on the other part these who by constant
faith lean upon the promises of GOD, they shall find rest to their souls:
but the Prophet chooses rather to say, that the just man shall live by faith,
to declare, that by leaning to the sweet promises of GOD: word, we snall not
only find rest unto our souls, but also spiritual life, which is the
fountain of true rest and tranquillite: so are we in this case not unlike unto
Ephesians. 2. verse. 1. 1. Sa^. 9.
SAVL, who in seeking his fathers asses found a kingdom, and we in seeking of
rest we have found life the true fountain of our rest.

The last words of the verse. by his oene faith, are to be considered: for by
them we perceive, that the promises of GOD must be particularly applied to
our souls, and that we must not be wavering, and doubtsome in our faith, but
firm and stable, forasmuch as things necessary to the maintenance of this
present life, have also need to be particularly applied, such as food,
raiment and medicine: Even so in things necessary unto eternal life, our
souls have great need of particular application of comfort: we must have the
blood of the Lamb sprinkled upon the posts of our own houses, else can Exodus
12
we not be saved from the sword of the destroying Angel, we must also
receive the Angels of GOD under our own roof with LOT, else can we not be
saved from the flame of fire which destroys ungodly cities. And finally we
must Genesis 19.
be like unto the vessels of the LORDS tabernacle, which were all
particularly anointed with holy oil, in time of the dedication of the
Tabernacle, else we shall not be counted holy Exodus 40.
vessels in the house of our GOD.

But because the Apostle BAVL cites this place of Scripture to confirm, that
we are justified only by faith, consider how firm and suit this argument
stands, Galat. 3. verse. 11.
We are justified by that same thing, whereby our souls do live: but so it
is, that our souls do only live by faith: therefore we are justified by
faith only. The Apostle wisely considered, that no man could live spiritually,
except he had a fellowshippe with GOD. Again, there is no fellowshippe that
mortal and sinful men can have with GOD, without remission of sins. Neither
is there any remission of sins without (...) Mediator and Advocate. And 1.
Joan. 1. 1. Joan. 2. Joan. 3.
we can take no hold of this Mediator, except only by faith: so that by
faith we live, and by faith we are made just in the sight of GOD.

Then this place of Scripture teaches us, that it is faith only that leads
us unto CHRIST, in whom we find righteousness and life, but by a due and
competent order, to wit, by stripping us naked of all conceate of our own
strength and righteousness, to the end we may have the greater delight in the
salvation that is offered to us in CHRIST. Faith is not like unto a robber who
strippeth a mannaked without any purpose to clothe him with a better garment.
But faith does to us as the father of the forlorue son did to him, and as the
Angel Lue. 15. Zach. 3.
of GOD did to IEHOSVA the high Priest. Both these were unclothed of their
beggarly rayments, but only of purpose to clothe them with better apparel: so
does faith strippe us naked of all vain conceate of our own righteousness,
to the end it may lead us to the wardrope of GOD, there to be cladde with
the garment of the righteousness of CHRIST, which is able to cover our
nakedness, and to present us holy, blameless and undefiled before his father.

Before I leave the words of the Prophet HABACCVK, let us yet again ponder
the Emphaticke word Behold, for by seeing and hearing some good lessons may
be learned, Behold men who have leaned upon the staff of GOD in our own
time, how peaceably have they concluded their days, Luc. 2
with SIMEON rejoicing that they had scene the salvation of GOD. And on the
other side men who have leaned to their own righteousness (albeit only in a
part) what agony, and trouble of conscience have they found in their last
battle, until they have forsaken all confidence in their own merits, and
leaned only unto the merits of the passion of our sweet LORD and Savior
JESUS CHRIST.

The Papists in our COVNTRIE for the most part have been like unto the fishes
called Amphbia which can live both in the Sea and on the Land: but when any man
approaches near to do them harm, they trust more to the sca than to the
land: even so when the terrors of death begins to shake our country people,
then they leave confidence in their own merits, and betake themselves unto
the deep Ocean, sea of the mercies of GOD in JESUS CHRIST.

In the second head I promised to speak of the difference betwixt
Justification and Sanctification, and betwixt the righteousness Romans 4. Psalm. 32.
of the Law, and the Gospel. Our Justification is a free forgiveness of our
sins for CHRIST'S sake, and a free imputation of his righteousness to us. Our
Sanctification is an inherent Romans 8.
holiness begun in us by the operation of GODS Spirit, to be a testimony
that we are in CHRIST. The not observing of the difference betwixt these two
has been, and as yet is the ground of great errors. True it is, that these
two gifts are freely bestowed upon us at one and the selfsame time, yet are
they distinct in order of causes, because Justification is the ground, from
whence Sanctification as an effect does flow, And like as the stars called
Pleiades or Vergiliae, they do arise and manifest themselves unto the world
all at one time: yet are they distinct stars, and Electra is not Alcinoe, nor
Alcinoe Celeno, nor Celeno M^ia, And the like may be spoken of the other
t^ree, whose apparition, and disparition, albeit it be inseparable, yet are
they distinct stars: Even so Justification and Sanctification are inseparably
linked together, yet are they two distinct gifts of GOD. I will use yet
another similitude for declaration of the same purpose. If a sword be laid
into the fire, until the metal thereof be fiery colored, this sword at one
time has two powers, one to cut, and another to burn, yet is not cutting
burning, nor burning cutting, but these two distinct powers are at one time
inseparably in one subject: Even so are we at one and the self same time both
justified and sanctified, yet are they still two different gifts of GOD.

Now the doctrine of Justification rightly taught is our cihefe encouragement
to Sanctification, and on the other part the doctrine of Sanctification
rightly taught, gives unto us the greatest assurance of our Justification. A
man who is assured, that his sins are freely forgiven, that he is beloved of
GOD in CHRIST, yea and that he has put on CHRIST, as the Romans 13.
Apostle speaks, he may with courage, and gladness address himselse to lead
an holy life, being fully persuaded, that GOD will accept of his willing
obedience, albeit it can not be perfect in all points, so long as we dwell
into this sinsull tabernacle. And on the other side, when the spirit of
sanctification works in our members, it is a token that we are incorporated
into the stock of CHRIST by true faith. For like as the spirit of man
quickneth no member that is cut off from his body, even so the spirit of
CHRIST works not true sanctification in any person who is not made a member
of Christ's body by true justifying faith. For this cause the Roman Church
blames us undeservedly, as though by teaching that we are justified only by
faith, we had impaired the zeal of the people in doing of good works. To this
I answer, that more credit is to be given to the holy Apost. PAVL, who was
taught in all truth immediately by Christ himself, nor to the calumnies of the
adversaries of the doctrine of grace: for the Apostle exhorting the Romans to
agodly conversation, he says, I beseech you, brethren sor the mercies Romans 12.
verse. 1
of God, that ye offer up your bodies an holy, lively and acceptable sacrifice
to God: and what mercies are those, I pray you, whereof the Apostle speaks,
but the mercies whereof he has entreated in the former part of that Epistle,
to wit, GOD has freely elected us, he has freely instified us, he has freely
sanctified us, and he shall freely in his appointed time glorify us. Now in
regard of all these mercies, let us endeavor to lead a holy conversation, as
it becomes them who are partakers of so great mercies. This holy exhortation
could not have been drawn from a more pithie, more persuasiue and moving
ground. Therefore we will walk in the footsteps of the holy Apostles, and
continue still exhorting the people to lead an holy conversation in regard of
the rich mercies of GOD in CHRIST, who has freely elected them to eternal
life, and freely justified them by faith in CHRIST alanerly.

Whereas they object that experience it self testifies, that people are not
now so bent and ready to do good, as when the Roman doctrine was sounded in
their cares, that we are justified partly by faith, and partly by works. If by
good works theymeane works of superstition, such as leaning in their legacies
rents to sacrificing Priests for saying of soul Masses, we are glad that by
the preaching of the Gospel superstition is somewhat abated, like as the great
d^luge of waters began by degrees to be diminished in the days of NOE, Genesis
8.
and that by means of the wind, which the LORD sent forth to blow upon the
waters. But if they mean by good works, such works as GOD has commanded in
his holy law, then I answer, that the faults of some people are not to be
imputed to the doctrine of the Gospel, but to the corruption of man's nature,
continually repining against the known truth of GOD. Like as when RACHEL left
her fathers house, and followed Genesis ^1.
JACOB her husband, and the ca^ling of GOD, and in the mean time she stale
her fathers Idols, and with them polluted the house of JACOB. Now who shall
bear the blame of this fault? whether the holy calling of GOD, or JACOB the
preacher of the LORDS calling to his wives, or RACHEL, who followed not the
calling of GOD aright? Here I know every man will lay the blame upon RACHEL,
because she left in outward appearance her fathers house, yet she left not the
corrupt manners of her fathers house. In like manner in our days, the feastred
manners of the people, are not to be imputed to the Gospel, neither to the
true preachers of it: but to the corrupt nature of man taking occasion by the
Law to work all kind of iniquity. Romans 7. verse. 8.
And in like manner taking occasion by the Gospel to be more bent to evil
doing than ever it was before: but let true Christians mark, that albeit the
doctrine of Justification by faith only, were a thousand ways abused, yet
because it is the holy Apostolic doctrine, and necessare unto eternal life,
it must needs be preached, and believed of all the true disciples of CHRIST.

The Law and the Gospel go not so in hands together, as Justification and
Sanctification does: but rather by the great providence of GOD the one stands
over against the other, and either of them points out the finger to the
other. The Law is a paedagogue to CHRIST, and points out the finger to ^alat.
3.
the Gospel, that in it we may find CHRIST, and in CHRIST Salvation. The
Gospel on the other part points out the finger to the Law, not to find in
keeping of it salvation (which we have already found in CHRIST) but to testify
our thankfulness to GOD, who has freely forgiven us in CHRIST his son: for
what better testimony of thankfulness can we render to GOD, than a voluntare
obedience to his holy Commandments, according as CHRIST says, If any man love
me, he will I^. 14^ verse. 23.
keep my Commandments, and my Father will love him, and we will come and
dwell with him.

It may be demanded, Can not the righteousness of the Law, and the Gospel be
mixed together in the matter of our Justification? the Apostle PAVL gives a
negative answer unto this question, that like as one woman cannot lawfully
have two Romans (...).
husbands at one time, but when the first husband is dead, she may be lawfully
coupled to another, who is living: Even so we cannot adhere to the righteousness
of faith in CHRIST, until we give over the righteousness of the Law, because in
the matter of Justification the Law is unto us like a dead husband, of whom we
can receive no comfort: so dead is our nature, that the Law cannot quicken it,
but we must be coupled to CHRIST as unto a living husband, who by the
righteousness of faith shall bestow upon us that comfort, which the Law could
not afford unto us. And in this Allegory, let us consider, that the Law is
called the first husband, not because it was anterior to the Gospel (for the
Apostle PAVL proves the contrare in his Epistle to the Galatians) but because
a man naturally seeks first help in his own Galat. 3. verse. 17.
works, and seeks not help in CHRIST, until the time he be utterly
denuded of all hope of the righteousness of the Law, that is, of the
righteousness of his own works.

Surely ignorance is the mother of many errors, and they who seek
righteousness in the Law, they are ignorant in many things. First, they know
not the right end, wherefore the Law Galat. 3. verse. 19. Romans 7. verse. 14.
Levit. 18. verse. 5.
was given, to wit, for transgression, that is, to manifest it, but not to wipe
it away. Secondly, they know not the nature of the Law, that it is spiritual,
to the perfection whereof carnal men cannot attain. Thirdly, they are
ignorant of the strict condition of the legal Covenant, which binds us unto a
full obedience of all things commanded in the Law. Fourthly, they are ignorant
of the peril that insueth upon the seeking of the righteousnesss of the Law,
that they cannot submit themselves to Romans 10. verse. 3.
the righteousness of GOD. When all these inconveniences do follow upon
secking justification by the Law, or by works, it were a wise course to seek
righteousness where it may be found, that is to say, in faith, which coupleth us
to CHRIST, whom the father 1. Cor. 1. verse. 30.
has given unto us to be our wisdom, our justification, our sanctification,
and our redemption: and let it not be said, that the fishers of Busphorus
Tracius in seeking fish, are wiser than we in seeki^g the salvation of our
souls. For they spread not out their nets in the shallow coast of Chalcedone,
where no fish can be found, but in the deep coast of Byzantium, where
abundance of fih are to be found: Even so, if we be wise, let us seek
salvation where it may be found.

In the third head it is to be declared, that neither in our own works,
neither in other men's works (CHRITTS works only excepted) can a saving power
be found to work our salvation. Our works are considered two manner of ways.
First, as they are before our regeneration altogether sinful, and no man does
affirm that such works can save us, either in whole or in part, Secondly, as
they are after our regeneration, and of these works much is spoken, namely,
that Christ's death is so meritorious, that by virtue of it he has purchased a
power to our works after regeneration, that they might merit good things at
the hands of GOD. To this I will return such an answer as Alamundarus prince
of Saracens returned to the Eutychian Heretics sent by Seuerus to persuade
him to their opinion. To whom he replied, that strange tythings were lately
come unto his ears, namely, that GABRIEL the Angel of GOD was dead. When they
answered, that was impossible, and repugnant to reasoun, that an Angel should
die. Then the Prince subioyned, that like as they would not r^ceaue his
information, because it was repugnant to reason: even so he would not receive
their instructions, because they neither agreed with Scripture, nor yet with
good reason. In like manner I say to Papists, that their naked assertions not
confirmed by testimonies of holy Scripture, are nothing to us, but we may lay
them aside with as great liberty, as they are prodigal in allcadging them.

We will answer to such arguments as seem to be countenanced with some
appearance of Scripture. Now they say that the word (...) frequently used in
Scripture imports the merit of our good works, because GOD vouchsafes upon
them a reward. To this I answer, that if Scripture be conserred with
Scripture, that same thing, which in one place is called (...), that is a
reward, in another place it is called (...) that is, an heritage, in these
words, Come ye blessed Matthew. 25. verse. 34.
of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundations of
the world. When that thing, which properly is an inheritance is called a
reward, it is spoken metaphorically, in respect it is given in the end of the
world, as an hire is given to a feruant in the end of the day.

The second argument proouing the merit of men's works, and consequently
Justification by works in a part, is this, that some men in Scripture are
called worthy, as when it is said to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Thou
have a few names yet in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they
shall walk Apoe. 3. verse. 4.
with me in white, for they are worthy. To this I answer the godly are called
worthy, not in themselves, but in Christ, who has made them Kings, and
Priests unto GOD. In Apoe. 4. verse. 12.
themselves they are called unworthy, as when it is said, No man was found
wortbie to open and to read the book. And in another place it is said, that
the afflictions of this present Aooc. 5. verse. 4
time are not Wortlne of the glory that it to be showed unto us. Now it is
known, that patient suffering of evil for Christ's Romans 8. verse. 18.
sake, is a degree of greater obedience, than willing doing of good, and if the
suffering of the Saints be not worthy of the glory that is to be reueiled,
how much less can our doings be worthy of that glorious inheritance.

The third argument is taken from the nature of a conditional covenant bound
up betwixt two parties, which do import that condition should be kept: but
so it is, that GOD has couenanted with such as live a godly life, that they
shall dwell in the holy mountain of God: therefore by virtue of this Covenant
men who ieades a good life, are worthy to dwell Psalm. 25.
in heaven.

To this I answer, that this covenant foresaid, is either Legal or
Evangelical: if it be Legal, we cannot fulfill the condition thereof, because
the Law requires a perfect obedience, which we cannot attain unto. If it be
an Evangelical covenant, the Mediator of the new covenant JESUS Christ is
present at the covenant making: for whose sake I grant, that GOD promises unto
us a dwelling place in heaven, and for his sake also he performs his promise,
and gives unto us a resting place in his holy Mountain, and in all this have
we no cause to rejoice in our selves, but in the mercies of our GOD. Concerning
our satisfactions, whereby the Roman Church says, That sins committed after
baptism should be pardoned. This belongs to another Treatise of Indulgences,
and satisfactions, for the present I ouerpasse this point of men's merits with
silence.

The Roman Church that Mistress of error has not only learned us to lean
upon our own merits, but also to lean upon the merits of other men, such as
holy Prophets, Apost^es, and Martyrs, because some of them have not only
fulfilled the Commandments of GOD, but also have done more than the Law of GOD
commanded. For example, the Law of GOD forbids to commit adultery,
fornication, and all kind of uncleanness: but many of the Apostles, Prophets
and Martyrs, Exodus 20.
not only abstained from all kind of whordome, but also from marriage, and such
works are called in the Roman Church, works of supererogation: these do
come into the treasure of the Bishop of Rome as the Vicar of Christ, and he is
a dispensator of them, to such as have need. O deepenesse of errors forged by
Satan, and repugnant unto it self. If abstinence from marriage be a work of
supererogation, then either must marriage, even in men having a spiritual
calling, be counted a thing lawful and agreeable to GODS holy Law, or else the
abstinence from it cannot be called a work of supererogation. I grant that
some fathers counted abstinence from marriage a work of Evangelicall
perfection, like as the selling of all their possessions, and distributing them
to the poor, but it entered not in their hearts to call such works of
Evangelicall perfection, works of supererogation, to be sent to the treasure
of the bishop of Rome, that he might be a dispensator of them to such as had
need.

But now suppone that any such works had been in the Saints of GOD, how
can they be imperted, and communicated to others? Can the oil of the wise
Virgins be Matthew. 25.
distributed to the foolish Virgins? It cannot be, because it cannot suffice
them both. Likewise when we compeare Romans 3. verse. 14.
before the judge of the world, we must compeare clad with the innocence of
CHRIST, and not with the merits of his Saints: for the Apostle says, Put on
the Lord Jesus, but he says not, Put on the merits of the Saints.
Moreover, we must be acceptable as the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs
were acceptable, but so it is, that they 1 Joan. 2. verse. 1.
were acceptable to GOD only in Christ, as the Apostle says, If any man
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just. Here none
exception is made of Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Apos. 14.
but all must be acceptable to GOD for Christ's sake allanerly. Finally, the
holymen of God when they die, they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. If the souls of the holy fathers do go to heaven, to the bosom
of ABRAHAM, to the paradise of GOD, how can we think that their works do
go to the treasure of the bishop of Rome, except they would say, that the
souls of all the holy fathers are gone to the treasure of the bishop of Rome
also, and their works and merits following them, are altogether lighted in his
treasure. But lest I should anticipate the treatise of Indulgences, I refer
all farther discourse unto the own place. Entreating the Lord Jesus of his
unspeakable favor, to remove the mistie cloud of ignorance from our souls,
that our hearts be not transported from the love of the Creator, to the love
of the creatures: but that we may seek salvation in Christ, in whom only it
may be found: to whom be praise for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.
A SHORT COMPEND, of the grouth of the ROMAN ANTICHRIST, Comprised in the VII.
VIII. and IX. CENTURIES.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADDED TREATISES, CLEARLY declaring the novelty of POPISH
RELIGION.

EDINBVRGH, PRINTED BY ANDRO HEART, ANNO 1616.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, VIRTUOUS, AND ELECT LADY, LADY MARIE, COUNTESS OF MAR:
P. S. wishes grace, mercy, and eternal felicity.
Whatsoever thing I have hitherto written (Most noble Lady) concerning
controversies of Religion, it is of that nature, that incase no further were
added, it would be the more easily comported with: for many of the Roman
Church, condiscende unto this, that worshipping of Images is not necessarily
required, nor an essential point of Christian Religion: Neither can they find
one example in all the Book of God of Invocation of Saints: Purgatory is an
opinion, whereinto they themselves much differ: and they talk of it sometimes
with derision and mocking words. Read the History of Thuanus, what was thought
Histor. Thuan. li. 3
of the soul of Francis the first, P. Castellanus was in one opinion, the
Doctors of Sorbone in another, Mendosa as a courtesant in the third opinion,
assuring himself, that if king Francis soul went to Purgatory, it stayed not
long there, because it was never his custom in his life time to stay long in
one place. But now (Madam) the course of the History has led me so far
forward, that I must touch the very apple of their eye, and enter into their
most holy place, and declare, that their service, which they count most holy,
is but vile abomination in the sight of GOD: And their doctrine concerning the
Vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, and the holiness of the Mass, and
the plurality of their Sacraments added to Baptism, and the Lords Supper, is
but like wind: And we are warned by the Apostle Paul, that we should no more
be children, wavering and carrie^ about with every wind of doctrine: for
false Ephesians. 4. 14
doctrine is justly compared to wind in the baddest quality of it: Sometimes
it is eastern, cold, stormy, and withering, so that the ears of corn
(blasted with the eastern wind) are counted thin, and empty ears: Even so,
false doctrine exicateth and dries up that appearance of sap and Genes. 41
grace that seemed to be amongst people.

The Roman Church in our days bring up their disciples, as the harlots of
Heliopolis in Phaenitia brought up their children before the days of the good
Emperor Constantine. These children afore-saide knew not their Fathers, for
they were strangers: and the Harlots of Heliopolis had liberty to prostitute
themselves to the lust of strangers: so it came to pass, if children had been
procreated in this libidinus copulation, the stranger was gone, and the
procreated child depended only upon the mother, for he knew not his father:
Even so, in the subsequent Centuries, the Roman Church disacquaint their
children with the voice of God, sounding in Holy Scripture. It is now enough to
believe as the Roman Church (the mother of all Churches) believes: and the
chair of Rome, in matters of Faith, it cannot err. But we must depend upon
the voice of God our Heavenly Father, who has begotten us by the incorruptible
seed of His word, who 1. Pet. 1. and 2
has also fostered us with the sincere and reasonable milk of His word, who
has anointed us with the Balm of Gilead, Ierem. 8. 22
who makes glad His own city, even with the waters of His own Sanctuary.
The loud sounding trumpet Psalm. 46. 5
of vain and railing words, we leave to the adversaries of the truth: for
that is their armor, wherewith they fight against the Gospel of Christ. Yet
let them understand, that God has hanged up a thousand shields in the tower of
David, eue^ all the targats of the strong men. Cant. 4. 4
Thus leaning upon the strength of the armor of God, I set forward to the
History and Treatises, beseeching the Lord of His unspeakable favor and grace
to bless your Ladyship, and all your Noble house for ever,

Amen.
Your Lad. humble servant PAT. SIMSON.

A CATALOGUE OF ALL THE TREATISES contained in the nine CENTVRIES.
CENTVRIE I.
Of Antiquity. Heresy. The foundation of the Church.

CENT. II.
Of Scripture and Tradition. The doctrine of Devils. Succession.

CENT. III.
Of Purgatory and prayer for the dead. The reliquikes of Saints. The
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.

CENT. IIII.
Of Invocation of Saints. The authority of Councels. The Monasticke Life.

CENT. V.
Of Man's free will. Original sin. Justification only by faith.

CENTVRIE VI.
Of Worshipping of Images. Pardons and indulgences. Diverse errors that crept
in in this Centurie.

CENT. VII.
Of The universal Bishop. The Antichrist. The Sacrifice of the Mass.

CENT. VIII.
Of Trans-substantiation. The Sacrament of Penance. The Sacrament of
Confirmation.

CENT. IX.
Of The Sacrament of extreamevnction. The Sacrament of orders. The Sacrament of
Matrimony.

TO THE READER.
LIke as in the Tabernacle of GOD all things were holy, and that thing that was
within the veil, and hidden from the eyes of the people, was most holy. In
the Court there was an Altar of brass: in the Sanctuary there was an altar of
gold: but in the most holy place, there was an holy Oracle, sounding the
blessed will of God from above the propitiatory: To the which Oracle neither
the brazen Altar nor the golden Altar could be compared: yea, both heaven and
earth is not worthy to be compared unto the Oracle, and word of the Lord.
Even so (good Christian Reader) understand, that when the history leads you
to a consideration of the mystery of iniquity: then you shall see a beginning,
and a progress of ungodliness, until in end the Antichrist is permitted to
sit in the temple of God, and to extol himself against all that is called
God, or is worshipped. 2. These. 2. 4
And when ye read this horrible defection of the visible Church, let not your
heart be troubled: this was fore-spoken by the Apostle, and this be^ued to
come to pass. So that thou may see the great power of the wrath of God,
punishing the contempt of His truth, and His holy Covenant. Albeit we be
filthy beasts, nothing regarding that precious treasure of the L^es Covenant:
yet the Lord is unchangeable, and like unto Himself, and He counts more of
the worthiness of His holy Covenant, than of the pomp and glory of all the
kingdoms of the world: Whom like as He destroyed in the days of Noah with a
flood of waters, because they prefirred Genes, 6
the concupiscence of their flesh to the religion of God: Even so, in the last
age of the world, He suffered the hearts of men to be ouer-whelmed with the
floods of horrible ignorance, because they reverenced not as became them the
holy Covenant of the Almighty God. Let us learn to reverence our God, even
when He is clothed with His red garments, and when He casts all Nations like
grapes into the Wine Press of His wrath. The ^ai. 63.
Lord vouchsafe upon us such measure of grace out of His rich treasure, as may
teach us to reverence not only the works of His mercy, but also the works
of His justice, at the Angels did, who cried, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Hosts, even at that time when a sentence of induration and reprobation was
going forth from the Tribunal of God, against the unthankful Jews. God
teach us our duty in all things,

AMEN.
P. S.

CENTVRIE VII.
CHAP. I. OF EMPERORS.
PHOCAS.
THE Heresy of EVTYCHES continued in this CENTVRIE from the beginning to the
end thereof: countenanced by the Emperors, such as Heraclius and Constans.
Neuerth^lesse I have cut off the Eutychtan Persecution at the end of the VI.
Centurie because Heraclius, albeit he favored the error of the Monothelites
(a branch of Eutyches hercsy) notwithstanding he was so employed with wars
against the Auares in the West, and the Persians and Saracenes in the East,
that he had not a vacant time to persecute them who professed another faith.
And Constans began to persecute, but was incontinentinterrupted by new occasion
of sea-warre-fare against the Saracenes, wherein also he was overcome. For
this cause I have referred the Eutychian persecution rather to the former
Centurie than to this. Moreover, in this Ce^tury the vniuct sall Bish. and ye
Antichrist begins to spring up: so that all ye rest of the History must be
spent in three heads: First, in declaring The grouth of the Antichrist, in the
VII. VIII. and IX. Centuries: Secondly, in declaring his tyranny, and
prevailing power over the Roman Emperors, and Monarchs of the world, in the
X. XI. and XII. Centuries: And finally, in declaring his discovery, and his
battle against the Saints, especially against those who discovered him: and
this shall be done (God willing) from the XIII. Centurie until our own time.
In the History I am compelled to be short, because it may be read in many
Authors, Chronol gies, and Compendes: and place must be given to Treatises to
be lengthened, when the History by a brief co^memoration may be susficientlie
known.

Phocas, aft^r the cruel slaughter of his master Mauritius, was proclaimed to
be Emperor by the Roman soldiers, in the year of our Lord 604: and he
reigned eight years: in cruelty, drunkenness, lechery, he surpassed beyond
all men, and justly was called The calamity of the Roman Empire: nothing
succceded prosperously with this parricide: Cosroes on the East side. the
Auares on the West, the Slauonians on the North side, inuading Dalmatia, and
Ag^lulphus king of Lumbardis in Italy, adding unto his dominion Mantua,
Cremona, and Vulturnia: all these at one time weakened the Roman Empire, so
far that it could never attain again to the former strength and splendour
that it was wont to have. Great strise had been betwixt ye chaires of Rome and
(...). for supremacy. The Patriarch of Consta^^no. thought it due to him,
because (...) was the seat of the Empire. Platina in vita Bonif. 3
The Patriarch of Rome on the other part, said, that Constantino^le was but a
Colonie of Rome, and tha the Grecians themselves in they Let^ers called the
Emperor (...). To this controversy Phocas put an end and ordained Bonifacius
the third to be called Universal (...): and the Church of Rome to be head of
all other Churches. This dignity the Roman Church begged (as Platina
grants) and not without great contention; obtained (...) the hands of
Phocas. This is that style, which Gregorius the first counted Antichristian in
the person of Ioannes (...), Patriarch of Constantinople. In end Priscus his
own son in law, Heraclianus, the father of He^aclius the Emperor, and
Phocius, whose wife Phocas had vnhonestlie abused, conspired against him, and
ouer-came him, and brought him to Heraclius, who commanded his head, feet, and
secret members to be cut off, and the stumpe of his body was given to the
soldiers to be burnt with fire.

HERACLIUS.
AFter Phocas reigned Heraclius thirty years. Cosroes king of Persia had
mightily prevailed, and had conquered Syria, Paulus diaconus, li. 18. rerum
Roman.
Phenicta, and Palestina, and had taken Jerusalem, and Zacharias the Bishop
thereof, and the Holy Cross and had given many thousands of Christians to
the jews to be slain. Neither would he accept any conditions of peace with
Heraclius, except he would condescend to forsake the worshipping of Christ,
and worship the Sun as the Persians did. For this cause Heraclius was
compelled to make peace with the A^ares on his West side, and to lead his
Army to Asia against the Persians, which endured the space of six years,
wherein he prevailed against Cosroes, and recovered all the Provinces which
Cosroes had taken from the Roman Empire. Finally, Cosroes was taken, cast in
prison, and Hist. Magd Cent. 7. (...). 3
cruelly slain by his own son Siroes, because he had preferred Medarses
his younger son to Siroes his elder brother. This Siroes made a covenant of
peace with Heraclius, and delivered unto him Zacharias Bishop of Jerusalem,
with the Holy Cross and the prisoners whom his father had carried captive.
And so Heraclius in the seventh year returned back again to Constantinople
with great triumph. After this the Emperor being circumuened by Pyrrhus
Bishop of Constantinople, and Cyrus Bishop of Alex^dria fell into the Heresy
of the Monothelites: And to this fault he added other faults, such as incest,
for he married his own sisters daughter: and he was given to curious Arts,
and to seek out the event of things by judicial Astrology: and was
admonished by the Astrologians to beware of ye circumcised people. Heracl^us
only deemed, that the lowes should trouble him but it was the Saracenes, in
whom this prophecy had performance: for in his time began the Monarchy of
the Saracenes, and the blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet. The Saracenes were
people dwelling in Arabia, the posterity of Hagar, and not of Sara: These
faught under ye banner of Heraclius in his 6. years warrefare Platina in vita
Seuerini 1.
against ye Persians: when they craved the wages of their service, in st^ad of
money they received co^tumelious words and were called (...) by ye Em.
treasurer. This co^tumely did so irritate them, that they choosed Mahomet to be
their captain anno 623, invaded Damasc^s and took it and within few years
conquered Syria, Phenicta, Palestina, and Egypt: And not content with this,
they invaded ye king^ome of the Persians, and subdued it and cut off the kings
seed. The blasphemous Alcaro^ and alsurca of Mahomet, which he said he received
from heaven, was a doctrine of lies co^taining a mixture of ye re^igio^ of ye
Jews, Paga^s and Christians: to ye making whereof co^curred Sergius a Nestorian
her^ke and John of Antiochia, an Arria^ (...), and some Iwes. Mahomet also
ordained. yt all people whom ye Saracenes could conquer, should be compelled
by fire and sword, and all kind of violence, to receive the doctrine contai^ed
in these books. Heraclius perceiving ye sudden and great increase of ye
dominion of the Sarac^nes gathered a gr at army, and faught against them but he
was ou^r-come in battle and lost 150. thousand me^ of his army. And when he
renewed his forces again to fight against the Sarac^nes he found that 52.
thousand of his army died in one night suddenly as those did who were slain by
ye Angel of God in the army of Senache^b. Heraclius was so discouraged with
the calamity of his a^mie, that he contracted sickness and died. Isai. 37. 36


CONSTANTINUS and HERACLEONAS.
After the death of Heraclius reigned his son Constantine, 4. months, and was
made out of the way, by poison given unto him by Martina his fathers second
wife, to ye end that Heracleonas her son might re^gn. But God suffered not this
wickedness to be vnpu^ished: for Martina and Heraclconas were taken by ye
Senators of Constantinople and her tongue was cut out. and his nose cut off,
lest either her fla^ering speeches, or his beauty and comlines should have
moved ye people to compassion: and they were both banished.

About this time the Saracenes had taken Caesarea in Palestina after they had
besieged it seven years: and they slew in it seven thousand Christians.

CONSTANS.
AFter the banishment of Martina, and Heracl^onas her son, reigned Constans ye
son of Consta^rine, 27. years: in religion he followed the footsteps of
Heraclius, and was infected with the heresy of the Monoth^lites, and
persecuted Martinus 1. bish. of Rome, because he had gathered a Synod in Rome,
and damned ye heresy of ye Monothelues: whom also he caused to be brought in
bands to Consiantinople, cut out his tongue, and cut off his right hand, and
banished him Hist. Magd. C^. 7. c. 3
to Cherson^sus in Pontus, where he ended his life. He faught also against ye
Saracenes in sea-warre-fare, and was overcome by them, like as interpreters of
dreams had fore-tol le him: for he dreamed, that he was dwelling in
Thessalonica, and the interpreters said it portended no good, but that others
should overcome him as if the word Thessalonica did import (...), that is,
render victory to another. Constans was s^aine by one of his own servants as
he was washing himself in the bathe-houses of Siracuse.

CONSTANTINUS POGONATUS.
Constans being sl^ine in Sicile, ye army in those pa^ts appointed. Mezentius,
a man of incomparable beauty, to be Emp. but Constantinus, the eldest son of
Constans, sailed to Sicile with a great navy, slew Mezentius and the
murderers of his father, and recovered his fathers dominion to himself. He
was called Pogonatus, because his face was not bare and void of hai^e when he
returned from Sicile, as it was when he sailed thith^r from Byzans, but his
face was rough and covered with hair. He had 2. brethren, whom the people
reverenced with equal honor as they did him: therefore he disfigurated their
faces by cutting off their nose, and re^gned himself alone 17. years. In
religion he was not like unto his predicessors, who had bin favorers of
heretics, but he assembled a general Counsel at Constantinople, vulgarly
called, the Chron. Funct.
sixth O^cumenick Council, whereinto the heresy of the Monothelites was
utterly damned, as in the own place shall be declared God willing. Likewise,
the estate of the Emp. was more peaceab'e than it had been in time of his
predic^ssors for the Saracens were compelled to seek conditions of peace from
him, and to offer yee^ely paimen^ of 3000. pound weight of gold unto him, with
Hist, Magd. Cent. 7. ca. 3
other trib^tes of horse, seru^nts, and prisoners.

IUSTINIANUS the second, LEO NTIUS, and ABSIMARUS.
AFter the death of Constantine, reigned his son Justinian the second,
sixteen years, to wit, ten years before his banishment, and six years
after his banishment: His government was cruel and bloody, by persuasion of
Stephanus, and Theodo^us, whose counsel he followed, even till the purpose of
exstirpation of all the Citizens of Constantino^le. But Leontius, a man of
noble birth, pitying the City, took Justinian the Emperor, cut off his nose
and banished him to Chersonesus ponti, where he remained in great misery
ten years. Ste^hanus, and Theodorus his bad counsell^rs received a condign
punishment, for they were burnt quick in the belly of an hot brazen bull.

After this banishment of Justinian the second, Leontius reigned three years.
The fl^xible minds of unconstant people, and sould^ers, choosed Absimarus to
be their Emperor, who dealt with Leontius as he had dealt with Justinian,
and cut off his nose, and thrust him into a Monastery, where he remained
seven years, to wit, all the time of Absimarus government.

In end, Justinian, after ten years banishment, recovered his Emper^all
dignity again, by the help of Terbellis Prince of Bulgaria. He caused
Leontius, and Absimarus to be brought unto him, whom he tramped under his
feet and after commanded that they should be beheaded. The cruelty tha^ he
used against the Citizens of Constantinople, and against the ^habitants of
Che^sonesus Ponti, is almost unspeakable. He was hated of all men. Philippicus
conspired against him, and he was slain by one named Elias, his own (...).

CHAP. II. OF POPES, BISHOPS, PASTORS, AND DOCTORS.
AFTER Sabinianus succeeded Bonifacius the third, and continued only nine
month in his Bonifacius the third.
Popedom: finding opportunity of time, by the disliking that the Emperor
Phocas had of the Patriarch of Constantinople, Bonifacius insinuated himself
in the favor of the Emperor, and obtained at his hands, that the Church of
Rome should be called the supreme head of all other Churches.

To him succeeded Bonifacius the fourth, and governed six years, eight
months, and thirteen days: He obtained from Bonifacius the fourth. Platina
in vita Bon. 4.
Phocas a Temple (of old builded to the honor of all the gods of the
Gentiles, called Pantheon) this he purged from the abominations of Heathen
people, and dedicated it to the Virgin Marie, and the Saints. Likewise, he
instituted a Festival day, to be kept in honor of all the Saints, in which
day the Bishop of Rome himself should say Mass. Thus we see at what time the
Bishop of Rome usurped government over all Churches. At this same time the
chair of Rome fell away from the worshipping
of the living God, to the worshipping of dead creatures. H^e esteemed much of
the Monastike life, and gave unto the Funct. comment. in chron. lib. 8
Monks equal honor with the Clergy, in privilege of pr^aching, ministering
the Sacraments, binding and loosing etc. so were the Monks associated into the
tribe of the Pri^sts.

After him succeeded Theodatus, otherwise called Deus dedit, Theodatus
and governed three years, and three days: He made an ordinance, that no man
should marry the woman, to whom, or
with whom he had been witness in Baptism, because this was counted
Spiritual consanguinitie. This was an undoubted note of the Antichrist, to
make laws in the matter of marriage not L^uit. 18
agr^eable to the law of God. Many do write, that he cured a leprous man
with a kiss: But from this time forward let us beware to give hasty credit
to miracles, which are brought in for none other cause, but on^ie to confirm a
lying doctrine: and in holy Scripture they are called (...), that is, miracles
of lies. 2. These. 2. 9


To him succeeded B^nifacius the fifth, and ruled five years and ten months:
he made a constitution, that no man who ran Bonifacius the fifth.
for safe^e to a religious place, should be drawn out of it by violence, how
grievous soever his offense had been: A law Antichristian indeed, and much
impairing the authority of the civil Magistrate.

Honorius the first succeeded to Bonifacius the fifth, and ruled 12. years, 11.
months, and 17. days: he was insected with the Honorius the first.
heresy of the Monothelites, and was damned in the sixth general Council
assembled in the days of the Emperor Constantinus Pogenatus, and has been
touched in the Treatise of succession.

To him succeeded Seuerinus the first, and continued 1. year, 9. months, and
11. days: He was confirmed in his Popedom Seuerinus the first.
by Isacius Exarche of Italy: for at that time, the election of the Clergy,
and consent of the people, was not much set by. Isacius also spoiled the
treasures of the Church of Laterane, being offended with this that the Church
treasures were so rich, and that Platina in vita Seuerini
they bestowed nothing to the support of Soldiers who were in great neces^itie.

After him followed Pope John the fourth, who exceeded not the space of one
year, one month, and nineteen days in his John the fourth.
government.

Theodoretus the successor of John the fourth, was the son of Theodorus
Bishop of Jerusalem. If the Roman Church so much Theodoretus.
detested Marriage in the persons of men in a spiritual calling, how came it
to pass that they admitted Theodoretus to be Pope, who was the son of a
married Bishop? H^e ^uled 6. yeer^s, 5. months, and 18. days. He
excommunicated Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople for the heresy of the
Monoth^lites: but after the death of the Emperor Heraclius, Pyrrhus returned
from Afrike, where he had remained a space in banishment, he came to Rome,
recanted his error, and was absolved from excommunication: but like unto a
dog he returned again to his vomit, and was excommunicate of new again by
Theodoretus: but Pyr^hus was slain by the Senators of Constantinople before
he was possessed into his former dignity, as partaker of the vile Platina in
vit. Theod.
treason intended by Martina and Heracleonas her son against Constantine the
son of the Emperor Heraclius.

After him succeeded Pope Martinus, and governed 6. years, Martinus.
1. month, and 26. days: he sent Ambassadors to Paulus Patriarch of
Constantinople, exhorting him to forsake the error of ye Monothelites: but he
misused the messengers the more confidentlie, because he saw ye Emp. Constans
altogether addicted unto the heresy of ye Monothelites. Martinus on ye other
part, assembled a Council at Rome of 150. bishops, wherein he renewed the
excommunication of Syrus B. of Alexandria, Sergius and Pyrrhus bishops of
Constantinople: likewise, he excommunicated Paulus bishop of Constantinople,
for ye error of ye Monothelites. The Emp. Conslans highly offended against
Martinus, sent first Olympius the Exarche of Italy, either to take Pope
Martinus prisoner, or else to kill him: but his attempts were frustrate not
without a miraculous work of God, as Platina records. And afterward he s^nt
Theodorus Calliopas, who under pretense of friendship came to salute the Pope,
and cast him in bands, and sent him to Constantinople, where Constans the Emp.
caused his tongue to be cut out, and his r^ght hand cut off and banished him to
Che^souesus Po^ti. The chair of Rome was vacant for the space of fourteen
months, because they had no certainty of the time of the death of Pope Hist.
Magd. (...). 7. cap. 10. Eugenius the first. Comm. in Func. chro. lib 8.
Martinus.

Next unto him, Eugenius the first was chosen Pope, and governed two years,
and nine months: He was the first that made an ordinance, that bishops
should have prison-houses for correcting the enormitie and contumacie of the
Clergy: so that by degrees bishops are encrouching upon the authority of the
civil Magistrate.

After him succeeded Vitalianus the 1. he continued 14. years, Vitalianus the
first.
and 6. months in the Popedom: to ye singing of Psalms in the Church by viue
voice, he added Organes. This was not an ancient custom in the Christian
Church, but a novelty invented by Vitalianus.

Next after Vitalianus followed Adeodatus, and ruled four years, two months
and five days: of a Monk he was made Adeodatus.
Pope. In his time there was terrible apparitions in Heaven: a great Comete
continuing for the space of three months, terrible thunders, the like whereof
had not been heard in any prec^eding time: great abundance of rain, fastening
the corns to the ground, so that they grew again, and in some places of
Italy came to maturitie and ripeness: Great incursions of Turks and
Saracenes, who spoiled the Isle of Sicile. In all these calamities (says
Platina) Adeodatus multiplied supplications for the preventing the
fore-signified wrath to come. If repentance and abolishing of horrible
Idolatry, which had now taken deep root, had been joined with prayers, the
Lord might have been the more easily entreated.

Donus or Domnus, his successor, ruled five years, and ten days: he reduced
the Church of Rauenna, after long reluctation, to the Donus. Platina in vit.
Doni. 1.
obedience of the chair of Rome. It is to be noted, that all the time they
were not subject to the Bishop of Rome, they were called by the Romans (...),
so bent were they to vindicate all declining from their authority with
opprobrious names of
Heresies imposed to the decliners thereof.

Ag^ho, successor to Donus, ruled 2. years, 6. months, and Agatho.
15. days: of whom Platina writes, that he cured a leprous man with a kiss,
as Pope Deus dedit had done before. In his time Constantinus Pogonatus
Emperor, gathered the sixth general Council at Constantinople, wherein the
heresy of the Monothelites was condemned, and Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia,
for his obstinate perseuering in that error, was excommunicate: and
Theophanius, some time an Abbot, was placed in his rowne. But this I remit unto
the own place. The epistle of Agatho written to the 6. general Council, is
full of Antichristian pride, wherein he aff^meth, that the chair of Rome
never erred, and that it cannot err: that every soul, that is to be saved,
must profess the Roman traditions, and all the constitutions of the Roman
Church are to be received as if they had been delivered by the divine voice of
Peter. Likewise, he damned the marriage of men Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10.
in spiritual calling: he commends the Mass impudentlie alleging a writing
of Chrysostom concerning the Mass, whereas in all the writings of
Chrysostom this word of the Mass is not to be found.

After Agatho, succeeded Leo the second, who continued only ten months,
and seventeen days: He was the first author Leo the second.
of the kissing of the Pax.

To him succeeded Benedictus the second, and ruled 10. months, and 12. days
only. In his days Constantinus Pogonatus Benedictus the second.
Emperor, ordained, that in time to come, the consent of the Emperor, and
Exarche of Italy, should not be expected, but he whom the Clergy and people
did elect, should forthwith be counted the Vicare of Christ. In so doing the
Emp. very unadvisedly put an hurtful weapon into the Popes hand. whereby the
estate of the Empire was encombered, and hurt afterward.

Ioannes the fifth, his successor, continued not above one year John the fifth.
Conon the first.
and nine days.

And Conon the first, the successor of John the fifth, ended his course after
the issue of eleven months, and three days.

After the death of Conon the election of the Pope was like to be decided by
weapons, rather than by suffrages and votes: some favored Theodorus, others
promoued Paschalis: and neither of the parties would yield to the other. In
end, the people thought expedient to reject them both, and to choose some third
person Sergius the first.
to the Popedom: So they elected Sergius the first, and carried him upon their
shoulders to the Church of Laterane. In his time Justinian the second gathered
a Council at Constantinople, to perfect and finish the work which his father
had begun. Sergius refused to subscribe the Acts of the sixth general
Council, albeit his Ambassador, who was present at the Council, had Platina
de vita Sergii.
subscribed them. Of the consecrated Hostie, he ordained one part to be put
into the Chalice, to represent the body of Christ, which was risen from death:
another part to be eaten, to represent the body of Christ walking upon the
earth: the third part, to be laid upon the Altar until the end of the
Mass, to represent the body of Christ lying in the Sepulcher. He gou^rned
thirteen years, eight months, and 24. days.

COncerning the Patriarchs of Constantinople, in this Centurie Patriarchs of
Co^stantinop. Alexandria Antiochia and Jerusalem
little mention is made of them, because for the most part, they kept not the
right Faith, but were entangled with heresy. After Cyriacus, Thomas, and
Ioannes, and constantinus, succeeded, whose faith (as unspotted with any blame
of heresy) has an honest testimony in Church rolls, called Sacra diptytha.
Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, were miserably infected with the heresy of the
Monothelites. Pyrrhus once recanted his heresy, and was absolved from
excommunication by pope Theodorus: but he returned incontinent again as a dog
to his vomit. Pope Theodorus when he excommunicated him the second time, used
a new and insolent form of doing, the like whereof was never heard at any time
before: for he infused some drops of ye consecrated cup into Hist. Magd. Cent.
7. c. 9
ink, and writ a sentence of cursing against Pyrrhus. Paulus also obtained at
the hands of the Em. Constans, edicts to be affixed in diverse places, whereby
all men should be compelled to subscribe the error of ye Monothelites. After
them Petrus and Theodorus, albeit they maintained not ye forementioned heresy
with so high and proud attempts as others had done, yet they were addicted
unto it. Georgius, successor to Thcodorus, in the 6. general Council, had
defended ye error of ye Monoth but when he was clearly refuted by testimonies
of Scripture, and by places cited out of ye Fathers, he yielded, and embraced
the true faith. Callyni^us ministered under ye reign of Justinian 2. who
demolished a Church near approaching to his palace, and builded an house of
presence, wherein ye people might cherish ye Em. Callinycus was compelled to
consecrate the house by prayer: but in regard he was enforced against his heart
to pray, he made his prayer short, in this manner, Giorie be to God, who
patiently comporteth with us, both now, and for ever, Am^n. For this cause
Justinian hated Callynichus, and when he returned back again from his 10.
years banishment, he caused ye eyes of Callyn. to be put out, and sent him to
Rome, there to remain in banishment.

IN Alexandria, before the Saracenes (under the conduct of Mahomet) conquered
ye country of Egypt, few of note and mark were to be found in that chair.
After Eulogius Ioannes scribo continued in office only 2. years. After him
Ioannes Eleemosynarius is highly commended for his liberality toward the
poor. Cyrus his successor was an her^tique, following the error of the
Monothelues. He paid tribute to the Saracenes but when the Em. Heraclius
wearied of the payment of tribute, then all the country Paulus Dia^onus, ti.
18 rerum Romans
of Egypt was possessed by the Saracenes: which incursion of the Mahumetans,
albeit it cutted not off the personal succession of the patriarchs of
Alexandria, yet it obscureth the clear notice of their succession unto us, who
are far distant from them.

IN Antiochia Anastasius Sinaita is found to have been bishop of Antiochia, in
the days of the Emperor Phocas: He obtained this name to be called Sinaita
because he had macerated himself with long fasting, and with hard exercises
of an heremiticall life upon mount Sina, anno 610. he was slain in a
seditious
commotion, stirred up by the Jews, who dwelt at Antiochia, who slew many
other Christians: but they uttered great cruelty, joined with vile
inhumanitie, against Anastasius, in whose mouth they cast the very excrements
of his own body, as the MAGDEBVRG history records, citing the testimony
of Nicephotus lib. 18. cap. 44. and 45
Nicephorus. After him another of that same name called likewise Anastatius,
succeeded, and was B. of Antiochia: he was a Syrian, a man of a subtle spirit,
who circumuened ye Em. Heraclius: for at ye Em. command he subscribed the
decrees of ye Council of Chalcedon, only simulately, and for desire of
preferment: but after he had subscribed, that two natures personally united
were to be acknowledged in Christ, he demanded of ye Em. what he thought of the
will and operation of Christ, whether was two wills and operations in Christ,
or one will, and one operation only? The Em. troubled with ye nou^lty of the
question, consulted with Sergius B. of Constantinople, who returned this
answer to the Em. that one will and one operation was to be acknowledged in
Christ. The Em. Heraclius being circumuened by false and deceitful teachers,
was ashamed to forsake that opinion, which he had once condiscended unto. So
this heresy of the Monothelites took deep root in the East, until ye time
that God punishing ye contempt of his truth, suffered ye Saracenes, with their
blasphemous Mahometon doctrine to be universally ouer-spred in the East. To
Anastatius succeeded Macarius, a most obstinate defender of the heresy of ye
Monothelites: for the which cause he was both excommunicated and deposed in the
sixth general Council, and Theophanius, an Abbor in Sicile, was made bishop of
Antiochia. After him are reckoned Petrus, Thomas, and Ioannes, without any
further discourse, except a bare commemoration of their names.

THE Church of Jerusalem in this age was pitifully defaced, as lying nearest
to the incursions of strong enemies, both Persians and Sa^cenes. Zacharias
Bishop of Jerusalem was carried captive by Cosroes king of Persia, and remained
a prisoner for the space of fourteen years. In end he was restored to his
former dignity, at that time when the Emperor Heraclius overcame Cosroes in
warre-fare, and recovered the Cross of Christ again, which the Persians had
spoiled, and taken out of Jerusalem. This came to pass in the year of our
Lord 624.

To Zacharias succeeded Sophronius, of a Monk: He was made Patriarch of
^erusalem: He lacked not his own commendation in the sixth general Counce^l,
as one who kept the true Faith inuiolablie NOTA.
: He was present in Jerusalem when Haumar Prince of Saracenes entered into the
Town and Temple: and he was a beholder of the last desolation of the Church in
that Town.

OF OTHER PASTORS AND DOCTORS.
IN this CENTVRIE there is great scarsitie of learned men, yet that which was
inlacking in l^arning it must be supplied one way or other: Some were
politic, others (in the opinion of ignorant people) were so deuote and holy,
that miracles were wrought by their hands, and at their sepulchers: namely,
lying miracles, advancing the kingdom of the Antichrist. The most remarkable
Bishops of Rauenna in this CENTVRIE were Theodorus, Reparatus, and Foelix, all
of contrary dispositions, and so flat opposite one to another as possible
could be. Theodorus was te^rible, and covetous: and when he saw that he was
despised by the people and Clergy, being (...) of revenge, he betrayed the
liberty of the Church of Rauenna, Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10.
in the days of Pope Donus. Reparatus being ignorant of that which ^eodorus
had done, and finding the Church of Rauenna subjected to the chair of Rome,
for v^rie heart grief incontinent he ended his life. Foel^x refused to pay
unto Pope Constantine the sum of money which he demanded as a testimony of
subjection. For this cause Pope Constant^e desired support from the Emperor
Justinian the second, for subduing the Bish. of Rauenna. Foelix on the other
part, hearing, that the Emperors army was approaching to Rauenna for the cause
aforesaid, he instigated the people to fight for the liberty of their Church:
Both the armies faught with martial courage: In end, the Emperors army
prevailed, the Town of Rauenna was taken, many were slain, others were
carried captive to Constantinople, the eyes of Foelix were put out, the rest
were banished to Bithynia, What can be found in this history, but pride on
the one part, ambiciouslie seeking superiority: and on the other part policy,
sometimes yielding sometimes despairing, and sometimes with bellicous
hardiness presuming to plead a spiritual cause with weapons of a corporal
warre-fare.

In this CENTVRIE many miracles are attributed to persons whom the people
counted to be deuote.

Ioannes, Bishop of Bergomum in Lombardie, was a man of so great reverent
account, that Princes were wont, by rising out of their Thrones, to do honor
unto him. It happened upon Platina in vita Joan. 5
a time, that he reproved Ivnipertvs king of LOMBARDIS freely and sharply,
in time of a banquet. IVNIPERTVS willing to be revenged of him, provided, that
he should be sent home upon a strong, fierce, and lofty horse, which was
accustomed to cast the ryders, and to tear and lacerate them: But when the
bishop of BERGOMVM was mounted upon him, he left his fierceness, and carried
him peaceably and calmelie unto his own house.

IOANNES AGNVS, bishop of WTRECHT, in whose hand a piece of dry timber budded
and flourished, yet was he NOTA.
an idiote and an unlearned man.

REMACLVS bishop of the same Town, and borne in Bour^ of FRANCE, left his
Episcopal office, and went to the W^ldernesse, where he led an Heremiticall
life, defending his insolent fact by the example of MOSES, ABRAHAM, HELIAS,
HELISEVS, and CHRIST hims^lse, who were all found to have been in the
Wilderness. But if he had been a man of de^pe understanding, he might have
alleged more pertinentlie the example of NARCISSUS bishop of JERUSALEM, who in
going to the Wilderness, for sooke his Episcopal office for a time, than the
example of CHRIST, who went unto the Wilderness to enter into the holy office
of Preaching, after preparation of fasting, praying, and fighting with
spiritual armor against the prince of Darkness. Notwithstanding, Matthew 4
he is thought both in his life time, and also after his leath, to have
wrought miracles. Platina in vita Joan. 4


In AVSTVME a Town of FRANCE, called in Latin Augustodunum, LEODEGARIVS is
thought to have retained his voice, and the benefit of distinct speaking after
that his tongue was cut out, and that many miraculous works were NOTA.
wrought after his death, if credit can be given to VINCENTIVS.

The miracles of ANDOENVS bishop of ROWEN, who also writ a book of the
miraculous deliverance of the soul of DAGOBERTVS King of FRANCE, and an
infinite number of other lying miracles, all confirming superstition, of
purpose I leave them as fables superaboundant in the writings of VINCENTIVS.

Concerning ISIDORVS HISPALENSIS, occasion will be offered to speak of him in
the sixth Council of Tolido.

The vain disputation concerning the diversity of the keeping of EASTER day
in SCOTLAND and ENGLAND, betwixt COLMANNVS and WVILFRIDVS, it is as unnecessary
to be written, as it was unnecessary with heat and contention to have been
disputed.

CHAP. III. OF HERESIES.
IN this age, partly through the malice of Satan, and partly through the
power of the wrath of GOD, punishing the contempt of his truth, Heresies did
mightily abound: for the heresy of Arrius began to revive again, and many
of the Kings of Lombardis were addicted unto it: in special, Tlatina in vita
Joan. 4.
Rhotaris, the son of Arioaldus, who appointed, that in every Town of
Lombardie there should be two Bishops, having equal authority, the one a
Catholic bishop, the other an Arrian. In Scotland and England the heresy of
Pelagius was renewed, as Bed^ testifies. The Monks of Syria propagated the
heresy of Nestorius, as Platina records in the life of Donus the first. The
heresies of Seueritae, Aphartodotitae, Momphysitae, Acephali, Theopafcitae,
Iacobitae, Armenii, all were Eutychian heretics, differing one from another
in some ceremonies, in absurdity of speeches, in authors whom they
principally admired and followed, in places where the heresy chiefelie
increased, and in their carriage, Likewise Staurolatrae were Eutychian
heretics: but the worshipping of the Cross was a note distinguishing them
from other heretics of their own opinion. Priscillianistae were heretics
who borrowed absurd opinions from Samosatenus and Photinus, from Cerdon and
Marcion, and from the Manicheans: but all these ancient erroures were
sufficiently refuted in ancient times.

The heresy of the Monothelites, was a branch of the heresy of Monothelitae.
^tyches, by a secret^ and crafty connoye, insinuating it self in credit
again after it was condemned in the Council of Chalcedon. The authors of this
heresy were Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, Patriarchs of Constantinople, and
Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria, Petrus bishop
of Nicomedia, with many others They denied not directly the two natures of
CHRIST personally united: but only they affirmed, that after the union of the
two natures, there was only one will and one ope^tion in CHRIST: Whereas the
holy Scriptures attribute unto CHRIST, as He is man. the action of sleeping:
and to CHRIST, in respect of His divine nature, the action of compescing and
calming the rage and stormy tempest of blowing winds, and swelling Seas. This
heresy was damned in the sixth general Council, as we shall hear (God
willing) in the own place.

CHAP. IIII. OF COVNCELS.
IN the year of our LORD 607. and under the reign of the Emp^rour Phocas, a
Council was assembled at Rome, of s^uentie and two Bishops, thirty
Presbyters, and three De^cons. In this A Council holden at Rome by Bomfacius
the third. Platina in vit. Bonif. 3.
Council the priui^edge of supremacy given by Phoca^ to the Roman Church,
was published. Likewise, it was ordained, under pain of cursing, That during
the lifetime of a Bishop no man should talk of the election of another, That
no man by largition of money should purchase unto himself a spiritual office,
and, That no man should consult concerning the election of another Bishop or
Pope before three days were expired, after the death of the detunct: and that
the Bish. should be elected by (...) Clergy and people, and their election
should be ratified by the Magistrate of the city, and the Pope: by these
words, volu^us and jub^mus, that is, We will, and we command: otherwise the
election shall be void, and of none effect. Another Assembly holden at Rome,
by Bonifacius the 4. NOTA.


Bonifacius the fourth gathered another Assembly in the eight (that is, in the
last) year of the reigre of Phocas: wherein he gave power to Monks to
preach, to minister the Sacraments, to hear confessions, to bind and loose:
and as^ociated them in equal authority with the Clergy.

Bracara or Braecara, vulgarly called Braga, is a town in ^ortugall. In the
year of our Lord 610. and under the reign of Gundemarus, The first Council
of B^acara counted the second by Caranza. Canon 1.
king of Goths, reigning at that time in the country of Spain, assembled
some Bishops of Gallicia, Lusitania, and of the Province called Lucensis of
old. It was ordained, That every Bishop should visit the Churches of his
Diosie, and see that Baptism was duly ministered, and that Catechumeni
twenty days before their baptism should resort to the purifications of
Exotcismes, and should be instructed in the knowledge of the Apostolic
Symbol, and that the people should be exhorted to beware of Idolatry,
Adultery, Murder, Pe^jurie, and all other deadly sins.

That Bishops should not lift up the third part of (...) oblations of the
people, but that it should remain in (...) paroche Church, Canon ^.
for furnishing light and for repairing the fabrike of the Church: and that the
Bishop should compel none of the Clergy to attend upon him in servile
works.

That bishops, for ordination of the Clergy, should receive no rewards.
Canon 3.


That neither a little balm, nor yet the price thereof, should be exacted
from the people for their baptism, in any time to Canon 4
come, lest they should seem (with Simon Magus) to sell the gift of God for
money.

That bishops, before the dedication of Churches, shall see a Canon 5.
charter containing a sufficient maintenance for them who shall serve in the
Church, and for a substantial furniture of lights thereunto.

A Church builded for gain, and contribution of the people, Canon 6.
redounding to the vantage of the builder, shall not be consecrated.

Parents, who are poor and present their children to baptism, if they offer
any thing voluntarily, it shall be accepted: but Canon 7.
they shall not be compelled to pay any thing, neither shall a pledge be
required from them, lest poor people fearing this, with-holde their children
from baptism.

If any of the Clergy be accused of fornication, let the accuser prove his
accusation by 2. or 3. witnesses, according to the Canon 8.
precept of the Apostle, cls let the accuser be excommunicate.

That M^trapolitane Bishops shall signify to others of the Canon 9.
Clergy the time of theobseruation of Easter, or Pashe day: and the Clergy,
after the reading of the Gospel, shall in like manner intima^e the day unto
the people.

That whosoever tastes meat or drink before he consecrate the oblation of
the Altar, shall be deposed from his office. Canon 10.


In the year of our Lord 613. assembled in a Town of France called
Altissidorum, otherwise, Antissidorum, vulgarly, The Counsel of Altissidorum.
Auxerre, a number of Abbots and Presbyters, with one bishop, and three
deacons. In this Council they damned sorcerie, and the seeking of consultation
at sorcerers, in the first, third, fourth and fifth Canons: Whereby it
appears, that sorcerie has been in frequent use in France. Many
superstitious constitutions were set down in this Synod, concerning the
number of Masses, prohibition of tasting meat before Mass, concerning
burial, prohibition of baptism before the festiuitie of Easter day, except
upon necessity, and fear of approaching death, prohibition of Matrimonial
copulation with their own wives, to presbyters and deacons after their blessing
and consecration, with prohibition of marriage also to the widows of the
defunct presbyters, deacons, or subdeacons: this was a yoke of Antichristian
subjection indeed. Brother and sisters children are forbidden to marry. Canon
31


It is not lawful for a presbyter to sit in judgment when any man is
condemned to death. Canon 34


It is not lawful for a Clergy man to cite another of the Clergy before a
secular Judge. Canon 35


It is not lawful for a woman with a naked hand to touch the Canon 36
holy Eucharist.

It is not lawful to take refreshment of meat with an excommunicate person.
Canon 38


If any of the Clergy receive an excommunicate man, without the knowledge of
him who has excommunicated him, he shall Canon 39
receive the like sentence, that is, he shall likewise be excommunicated.

It is not lawful for a presbyter in banqueting time to sing or dance. Canon 40


Many Canons, to the number of 45. were concluded in this Council: but I have
determined not to ouer-lade a little book with commemoration of an heap of
unprofitable, unnecessary, and superstitious Canons.

In the year of our Lord 364. and in the 24. year of the reign of the Emp.
Heraclius, a Council was gathered in Hispalis The counsel of Hispalis, under
Sisebutus.
a town of Spain, vulgarly called Civil la grand. It was gathered by
Isidorus B. of Hispalis, at the command of king Sisebutus, who was both present
and President in this Council. For two principal causes was this Synod
conueened: namely, for suppressing the heresy of (...), which was a branch of
the heresy of Eutyches: secondly, for decision of questions which arose
amongst bishops concerning the marches and bounds of their diocesis, with some
other Ecclesiastical causes. They had 13. Sessions or meetinges, as is
declared, 2. Tom. Concill.

In the first action Theodulphus bishop of Malaca, complained, that by injury
of wars, an ancient paroch Church was separated 1.
from his town, and possessed by others. It was concluded, that he should be
repossessed again into his ancient priueledges, and that prescriptio^ of time
should have no place, if it were known that hostility and warre-fare had hurt
a man in his rights.

In the second Session, the controversy betwixt Fulgentius, bishop of
Astigita, and Honorius, bishop of Corduba, concerning 2.
the marches of their dioceses, was debated: and men were chosen to visit the
bounds, and to decide the controversy.

In the third Session compeared Cambra, bishop of Italica, a Town of the
province of Spain, of old called Baetica: he complained 3.
against one of his Clergy, named Passandus, yt he being brought up from his
infancy in ye Church of Italica, yet had fled without any just cause to
Corduba. It was ordained, that whosoever fled from his own Church unto
another, should be sent back again, and should be thrust into a Monastery,
and should be deuested of his honor for a time, to the end, that ye
sharpness of Discipline might correct the licencious liberty of vaging and
wandering.

In the 4. Session, it was complained, yt some were consecrated to be Levites
in ye Church of Astigita, who had married widows: 4.
This ordination was annulled: and it was ordained, that none of these Levites
should be promoted to the honor of a Deacon.

In the fifth Session, a Deacon of the Church of Agabra, complained of the
ordination of three persons in that Church: one 5.
was ordained to be Presbyter, and two to be ^euites. The bishop, being
blind, laid his hands upon them, but one of the Presbyters pronounced the
blessing: Now the Presbyter who had pronounced the blessing, was dead before
the Council of Hispalis, therefore they remitted him to his own judge:
but the three persons afore-saide admitted to Church-offices, they deposed
them from their offices, as persons unlawfully admitted.

In the sixth Session, it was found, that Fragitanus, a presbyter 6.
of the Church of Corduba, was most vnjustlie both deposed and banished by his
bishop. For remedy, that the like mis-order should have no place in time to
come, it was statuted and ordained, That a bishop, without advise of his
Synod, should
not presume to depose a presbyter.

In the seventh Session, Chore-episcopi and Presbyters are 7.
debarred from the high priueledges of the Episcopal office: namely, from the
consecration of presbyters, of holy Virgins, Churches and Alt^rs from laying
hand upon men converted from heresy, and conferring unto them the holy
Spirit, from making of Chrisme, and signating with it the foreheads of them
who are baptized, from absoluing publikelie in time of Mass any penitent
person, and sending testimonials to foraine parts, called Formatae epistolae:
and finally, from baptizing, consecrating the Sacrament, blessing the people,
and teaching them, receiving penitentes when the bishop was present. Now the
ground of all these prohibitions is not brought out of holy Scripture, but
from the authority of the Apostolic
chair. Early began the Antich^ist to establish an Hierarchy in the
Church, which neither Christ, nor His Apostles, had commanded.

The eight Session entreated concerning Helisens, a servant, whom the bishop
of Agabra had set at liberty, and he on the 8.
other part abused his liberty, so far, that he pr^sumed by Magical Arts
to cut off the bishop, who had been so beneficial unto him: he was ordained
to be redacted again to his former servile estate, that he might learn
obedience to his superiors by the heavy yoke of servile subjection.

In the ninth Session, it is forbidden, that bishops should have Leke-men to
be masters of their house, but oneli^ some 9.
of their own Clergy should be dispensators of their householde affairs,
because it is written, Thou shall not plowe with an Ox and an Ass together.
By the way mark, that nothing was so Deuteronomy. 22. 10
miserably abused at this time as testimonies of holy Scripture.

In the tenth Session, the Monasteries lately builded in the B^tike province
were allowed, and confirmed. 10.


In the eleu^nth Session, the Monasteries of Virgins are recomme^ded to the
ouer-sight of the Abbot governing the Monastery 11.
of Monks, with caueates, that all appearance of evil should be prouidentlie
eschewed.

In the twelfth Session, one professing the heresy of Acephali 12.
compeared, who denied the distinction of two natures in Christ, and affirmed,
that the divinity of Christ did suffer upon the Cross: but he was seriously
dealt withal, and convicted by testimonies of holy Scripture and Fathers, so
that he renounced his heretical opinion, and embraced the true Faith, and the
whole Council gave praise and thanks unto God for his conversion.

I^ the thirteenth Session, there is a prolixe refutation of the opinion of
those who supponed, that the two natures of Christ 13.
were confounded, and that the divinity suffered. Isidorus seems to be the
compiler of this Treatise, against Ac^phali, given in to the Counc^ll of
Hispalis: and many do think, that he collected into one volume the Councels
that preceeded his Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10.
time: for he was a man more learned than his fellows in his days.

IN the year of our Lord 639. and under the reign of Sisenan^, The 4.
Council of Toledo.
king of (...), by the kings commandment, more than 70. bishops and p^esbyters
were conuened in the town of (...) upon occasion of diversity of Ceremonies
and Discipline in the country of Spain.

First they set down a short confession of the true Faith, which they ordained
to be embraced and kept. Canon 1.


Secondly, that there should be an uniform order of praying, singing of
Psalms, solemnities of Masses, Euen-song-seruice, Canon 2.
throughout all Spain and Gallicia, like as they all professed one Faith, and
dwelt in one kingdom, lest diversity of ceremonies and rites should offend
ignorant people, and make them to think that there was a schism in the Church.

It was statuted and ordained, That at least once in the year, provincial
Councels should be assembled: and incase any controversy Canon 3.
should fall out in matters of Faith, a general Council of all the provinces
of Spain should be assembled. Here let the judicious Reader mark, that in
process of time almost all things are subject to alteration and Councels, of
old called National, now abusiuelie begin to be called General. The order
of incomming of bishops to the Council, and sitting in the first place, and
of the presbyters after them, and sitting in a place behind the bishops: and
of deacons, who should stand in presence of bishops and presbyters, is
described at length in the third canon.

That the festiuitie of Easter, or Pashe day, should be kept Canon 4.
upon the day of Christ's resurrection.

Concerning the diversity of rites used in baptism, some Canon 5.
using the ceremony of thrice dipping in water, others one dipping only, It
was thought most expedient to be content with one dipping, because the Trinity
is so viuely represented in the names of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
that there is no necessity by three dippinges in water to represent the
Trinity: and for eschewing all appearance of schism, and lest Christians
should seem to assent unto heretics who divide the Trinity: For all these
causes it was expedient to keep uniformity in the ceremonies of Baptism.

It was statuted and ordained, That upon friday immediately preceding Easter
day, the doctrine of the suffering of Christ, of Canon 6.
repentance, and remission of sins, should be clearly taught unto the people,
to ye end, that they being purged by remission of sins, might ye more worthily
celebrate ye feast of ye Lords resurrection, and receive the holy Sacrament of
the Lords body and blood.

The custom of putting an end unto the fasting of Lent, upon friday at nine a
clock, is damned, because in the day of Canon 7
the Lords suffering the Sun was covered with darkness, and the elements
were troubled: and for honor of the Lords suffering that day should be spent
in fasting, mourning, and abstinence: and he who spends any part of that
day in banqueting, let him be debarred from the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood on Pashe day.

That the Tapers and Torches, which shined in the Church in the night
preceding the day of the resurrection should be Canon 8
solemnly blessed, to ye end, that the mystery of ye holy resurrection might be
expected with consecrated lights. Such voluntary service invented by the brain
of man, had great sway at this time.


That in the daily Church-seruice the Lords prayer (vulgarly Canon 9
called Pater noster) should be rehearsed, because it is usually called Oration
quotidiana, that is, a daily prayer.

That Alleluiah be not sung in time of Lent, because it is a Canon 10
time of mourning, and humiliation, until the days of resurrection be
celebrated, which is a time of joye and gladness.


That after the Epistle a part of the Gospel should be Canon 11
read.

That Hymns and spiritual songs, not contained in holy Canon 12
Scripture, may be sung in the Church.

The song of the three children shall be sung in all the Churches of Spain and
Gallicia. Canon 13


In the end of Spiritual songs it shall not be simply said, Glory to the
Father, and to the Son, etc. but, Glory and honor Canon 14
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the H. Spirit to the end, that hymns
sung in earth. may be correspondent to the song of
Elders in Heaven, (...), Apocal. 4. 11.

In Responsories, if it be a matter of gladness, the end shall Canon 15
be, Gloria, etc. and if it be a matter of sadness, the end shall be,
Principium, etc.

The book of the APOCALYPSE of Saint John, is declared to be a book of
Canonicke Scripture, and to be preached Canon 16
in open audience of the CHVRCH betwixt EASTER and WHITSONDAY.

It is forbidden, that the holy Communion should be celebrated immediately
after the saying of the Lords Prayer: but let Canon 17
the blessing be first given, and then let the Priests and Levites
communicate before the Altar, the Clergy within the Quiere, and the people
without the Quiere.

No man shall be promoted to the honor of Priesthood, who is infamous, who
has been baptized in heresy, who has Canon 18
gelded himself, who has married the second wife, or a widow, who has had
concubines, who is in a servile condition, who is unknown, Neophycus, or a
Laike, who is given to warre-fare, or an attender in Court, who is unlearned,
or has not attained to the age of thirty years, who has not proceeded to
honor by ascending degrees, who by ambition, or bribes, has presumed to
honor, who has been elected by his predicessor, who has not been elected
by the Clergy and people of his own city: He who is approved, shall be
consecrated on the Lords day, by all the comprouinciall bishops, at least by
three of them.

Let Levites be of the age of 25. years before their admission, and
presbyters of 30. Canon 19


Let bishops be unreprovable, according to the precept of the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 3. Canon 20


Let bishops not only have the testimony of a good conscience in the sight of
God, but also the testimony of an unreprovable Canon 21
conversation amongst men.

Presbyters and Levites, whom infirmity of old age permits not to abide in
their secret chambers: yet let them have Canon 22
witnesses of their honest conversation in their shoppes, and remaining places.

Youthhood is prone and bent to evil: therefore let them who are young, be all
brought up in one conclaue, under the instruction Canon 23
and government of some well approved Senior. But they who shall be found
lascivious and incor^igible, let them be thrust into a Monastery, to the end,
that stricter discipline may correct the proud minds of insolent youths.

Seeing that ignorance is the mother of all errors, it becomes presbyters,
who have undertaken the office of teaching, Canon 24
continually to meditate upon holy Scripture, according to the words of the
Apostle, T^ke h^ede to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, 1. Tim. 4. for by
meditation of holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church, men are made able
to instruct others in knowledge, and in precepts of good manners.

Presbyters shall receive from their own bishops an official book, to the
end, that through ignorance they do nothing Canon 25
amiss, neither in celebration of the Sacraments, nor in their Letanies, nor
in their form of coming to Councels.

When presbyters and deacons are admitted to their offices, they must vow
chastity, and bind themselves to their bishops, Canon 26
to lead a continent life: and after such profession, let them retain the
discipline of an holy life.

A bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who shall happen to be unjustly deposed if
they be found innocent by the trial of the Synod, Canon 27
let them be restored to their former dignities before the Altar, by the hands
of bishops in this manner, If he be a bishop, let him be restored to his
Orarium, with Staff and Ring: If he be a presbyter, to his Orarium and
Planeta: If he be a deacon, to his Orarium and Alba: If he be a subdeacon,
to his Plate and Chalice: and other orders let them receive in their
restitution that which was given unto them in their ordination.

If any of the Clergy be found to have consulted with diuiners Canon 28
and sorcerers, let him be deposed from his dignity, and be thrust into a
Monastery, to make continual penance for his sacril^dge.

Churchmen, who dwell in the borders co^fining to a nation Canon 29
that is under hostility with their own country, let them neither receive
from the enemies of the country, nor direct any secret message unto the
enemies.

If any Churchman sit in judgment, or be judge in a sentence Canon 30
of blood, let him be deprived of his dignity in ye Church.

Let bishops have a care of such as are oppressed, to reprove Canon 31
the mighty men who oppress them: and if the word of wholesome reproof
profit nothing, let them complain to the king, to the end, that by regal
authority impiety may be subdued.

Seeing avarice is the root of all evil, let bishops so govern their
dioceses, that they spoil them not of their rightes: but according to the
determination of anteriour Councels, let Canon 32
them have the third part of Oblations, Tithes, Tributes and Corns: the rest
let it remain unto the Paroches free, and untouched.

That thing which one bishop possesses, without interpellation, for the space
of thirty years, let no man in that same Canon 33
Province be heard in an action of repetition: But as concerning them who dwell
in diucrse Provinces, the case stands otherwise, lest while Dioceses are
defended, the bounds of Provinces be confounded.

A Church newly builded, shall appertain unto that bishop, in whose diosie
it is known that spiritual conuentions Canon 34
have been kept.

A Bishop shall visit yeerelie all the paroches of his diosie: and incase he
been impeded by infirmity, or by weighty business, Canon 35
he shall appoint faithful Presbyters and Deacons, to take inspection of the
fabric of the Churches, and of their rentes.

Whatsoever reward a Prelate promises to a man who vnder-taketh any work
tending to the utility of the Church, let Canon 36
him faithfully perform his promise.

Seeing that a part of Church-rentes is bestowed upon sustentation of
strangers, and of poor and indigent people, if Canon 37
it shall happen at any time, those persons, or their children, to be
indigent, who have doted anierent to the Church, let them render a just
deserved retribution to their bene-factors, in sustaining them, to whose
benevolence they are addoted.

The Deacons are decerned to be inferior to Presbyters. Canon 38


Let the Levites be content to be clothed with their ORARIVM only upon
their left shoulder, and not upon their right Canon 39
shoulder: and let it neither be beautified with colors, nor with gold:
PLATINA in the life of ZOSINVS, calls it LINOSTIMA.

Let Clergymen have the vpper-moste part of their heads bare and shaven, and
the lower-part rounded, not following Canon 40
the example of the Readers of GALLICIA, who did shave onehe a little of the
vpper-moste-part of the hair of their head: conforming themselves, in so
doing, to the custom of NOTA.
some Heretics, which dishonor is to be removed from the Churches of Spain.

No strange women shall cohabite with Churchmen, only Canon 41
their mother, or sister, or her daughter, or fathers sister, may dwell with
them, amongst which persons the bands of nature permits not to suspect any
sin, according to the constitutions of ancient Fathers.

Some of the Clergy, who are not married, are entangled with the forbidden
lust of strange women, let the bishop separate Canon 42
them, sell the women, and redact the men infected with their lust, for a
space, unto penance.

If a man of the Clergy marry a wife, or a widow, or a deuorced Canon 43
woman, or an harlot, without advise of his bishop, let the bishop separate
them again.

Clergymen, who have clothed themselves with armor Canon 44
voluntarily, and have gone to warre-fare, let them be deposed from their
office, and be thrust into a Monastery, there to remain all the days of
their life.

Churchmen, who are found spoiling the sepulchers of persons Canon 45
departed, let them be deposed, and be subject unto three years penance.

By the commandment of king Sisenandus, Churchmen are eximed from all public
indictio^s and labors, to ye end with greater Canon 46
liberty they may attend upon spiritual service.

Let bishops have some of their own Clergy to be rulers of their
house-holde-affaires, according as the Council of Chalcedon Canon 47
has ordained.

A man is made a monk either by his parents devotion, or by his own
profession: but whether he be embarked into the Monastike Canon 48 NOTA.
life, the one way or the other, there is no regresse again unto a seculare
estate.

Persons of the Clergy, who are desirous to enter into a Monasteri^, and to
lead a comtemplatiue life, let not their bishops Canon 49
hinder the purpose of their mind because they have intention NOTA.
to enter into a better trade of living.

Bishops have power to constitute Abbots, to govern Monasteries, Canon 50
and to correct enormities that shall happen to fall out amongst them, but not
to redact them to servile offices, nor to convert the rents of the Abacie to
their own use, as a possession duly belonging to themselves.

The Monks who leave their Monastery, return again to a secular life, and
marry wives, let them be brought back again Canon 51
to their own Monastery, there to do penance, and to lament for their
bypast sins.

Religious men, who wander up and down in a nation, and are neither members of
the Clergy, nor Monks of any Monastery, Canon 52
let the bishop restrain their licentious liberty, and appoint them either to
serve in the Clergy, or in a Monastery, except such as through infirmity or
age, have gotten an exemption.

They who have confessed the committing of any deadly Canon 53
sin, cannot be promoted to Ecclesiastical honors.

Secular men, who in receiving their penance have been Canon 54
content to be shaven, and to put on a religious habit, if they revolt
again, and will needs become Laikes and be incorrigible, then let them be
counted apostates, and excommunicate from the fellowship of the Church.

Widows, who have put on a religious habit, and vowed chastity, if they
marry, they have damnation, according to the Canon 55
words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. (...). 12.

Jews are not to be compelled to receive the Christian faith: but these who
already by constraint have received it in the Canon 56
days of the noble king Sisebutus, seeing they have been already partakers
of our Sacraments, let them be compelled to persevere, lest the Name of the
Lord Jesus be blasphemed, and
the faith, which they have embraced, be counted vile and contemptible.

They who receive bribes and rewards from the Jews, to cloak their
ungodliness, and to foster them in their infidelity, Canon 57
let them be accursed, and counted strangers from the Church of Christ.

Jews, after their conversion to the Christian faith if they be found to have
circumcised their sons or servants: by the commandment of the most
religious king S^senandus it is ordained, Canon 58 and 59
That the circumcised children of the Jews, shall be separated from the
fellowship of their parents, and the s^ruants shall be set at liberty, for
the injury done unto their body by circumcision.

Jews, who are punished to the death for any contempt done Canon 60
by them against CHRIST after their baptism this punishment shall not prejudge
their children from right to enjoye their goods, if they be faithful, because
it is written, The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezech.
18. 20.

Let not Jews, after their conversion, haunt the company of other
superstitious Jews, as yet addicted to the abolished law Canon 61
of ceremonies, lest they be perucrted: if they transgress this ordinance,
such of them as have professed Christianity, shall be given in service to
Christians, others shall be appointed to be publicly scourged.

Jews, who have married Christian women, if they will not embrace Christian
religion, let them be separated from their wives Canon 62
company, and let the children be brought up in the faith of their Christian
mothers.

Jews, who have once professed Christian faith, and have sliden back again
from it, shall not be admitted witnesses before a Canon 63
Judge, albeit they profess themselves to be Christians, because like as
their faith is suspected, so in like manner their humane testimony is to be
doubted of.

Let no Jew be preferred to any public office. Canon 64


Let no Jew presume to buy a Christian servant, which if he do, the servant
shall be taken from him, and shall be set at Canon 65
liberty.

Bishops, who have not benefited the Church by any proper donation of their
own goods, they should not empouerish Canon 66
their Church, by setting at liberty Church servants, which thing if he
presume to do, his successor shall reduce those servants again to the
possession of the Church, whom iniquity, without any just right has absolved.

A Bishop, who sets a servant at liberty, having first by Canon 67
permutation set another of the like worth, and merit in his place, shall
deny liberty to the fore-saide servant, either to accuse, or to bear
witness against the Church whereinto he was a servant, else he shall forfeit
his liberty, and be reduced to his former servile condition in that same
Church, which he would have harmed, and in the mean time the permutation
afore-saide shall stand firm and stable.

He who has augmented Church-rentes, either by conferring, or acquiring some
augmentation unto it, has some liberty Canon 68
to set Church-seruantes at liberty, providing always, they abide under the
patrocinie of the Church.

Because the patronage of the Church never dies, let those servants, whom the
Church has set at liberty, and their posterity, Canon 69 and 70. and 71.
be obedient unto the Church, and depend upon their patrocinie. If they be
unthankful, let their liberty be forfeite, and let the Church defend them
from all insolency and wrong.

Servants, who are set at so full liberty, that their patrones have kept no
band of subjection over their heads, if they be unspotted, Canon 72 and 73
and unreprovable, they may be promoted to Ecclesiastical offices. But it is
unseemly, that any man shall be received into a spiritual office, who is
bound unto the servile subjection of an earthly master.

In end, earnest supplications are ordained to be made to Canon 74
God, for preservation of king Sisenandus, and the nation of the Goths: and
many Anathems are pronounced against them who shall presume to violate the oath
of alledgeance made to the king. In end the Acts of this Council are
subscribed by Isidorus, bishop of Hispal^, and other seventy bishops.

IN the first year of Chintilla, king of the Goths, and about the time of the
reign of the Emperor Heracleon, conueened The fifth Council of Toledo.
with Eugenius, bishop of Toledo, other twenty bishops. In this Council
nothing was entreated, except a mandate was given concerning the yearly
Letanies that should be made three days immediately following the Ides of
December, and if the Lords day interueened, then these 3. days Letanies should
be differred, until the beginning of ye next week. In these 3. days pardon
for sins should be humbly begged at the hands of God with tears. The rest of
the ordinances of this Council appoint supplications to be made to God for
preservation of the king and his children: and that they shall be accursed,
who dare presume to suite the kingly authority, without the consent of the
whole country of SPAIN, and the Nobility of the nation of the GOTHS: and
that no man shall rail upon the king, or lie in wait for his life,

IN the year of our Lord 652. or as others reckon 650. Pope Martinus gathered
a Council at Rome, of more than 100. The counsel of Rome in the days of Pope
Martine.
Bishops. The error of the Monothelites, obstinately defended by Paulus,
bishop of Constantinople, was the occasion of this Council, together with the
impious edict of the Emperor Constans, set out in favors of the heresy of
the Monothelites. In this Council, over and besides an ample confession of
faith, many decrees and constitutions were made, all tending to damn those
who denied either the Trinity, or the divine unity in the divine nature, or
the manifestation of the second person of the Trinity, and his suffering in
the flesh, or the perpetual virginity of the Lords mother, or the two
natiuities of Christ, one before all times, and another in time by the
operation of the holy Spirit, or the conformity of Christ to us in all
things, sin excepted, or the distinction of the two natures after the
ineffable unity, or the distinction of wills, and operations in Christ. In
like manner, all were damned who made opposition to the five preceding
general Councels. In particular, Theodorus of Pharatrita, Cyrus of Alexandria,
Sergius Pyrrhus, and Paulus bishops of Constantinople, were damned, as patrones
and obstinate defenders of the heresy of the Monothelites. There is more
fr^quent mention of Fathers, than of Scriptures in this Counc^ll, a perilous
example to the posterity.

IN the year of our Lord 653. and in the third year of Chintill^, King of
Goths in Spain, the 6. Council of Toledo was assembled, The 6. Counc^ll of
Toledo.
of 52. bishops, Eugenius b. of Toledo being president. The occasion seems to
have been the renouation of old heresies, and contradiction to preceding
Councels. After a confession of the Faith, Letanies are ordained to be said, as
was appointed yeerelie Canon 2
for preservation of the King.

It was ordained, by the aduis^ of the Council, with consent of the King and
his Nobles, That no man should be tolerated to Canon 3
dwell in ye kingdom of Spain, who did not profess ye true Catholic faith
and yt kings in all time to come before they were placed in their royal seat,
should be bound by ye obligation of a solemn
oath, to interpone their authority yt this act might be obeyed: Otherwise,
let the King, refusing to put this act in execution, be counted accursed, and
be a faggot of the flames of everlasting fire. What Fe^dinandus, king of
Spain, did, in driving out of his dominions, the Jews, and the Saracenes,
some allege, that it was done upon the ground of this act: but now it is not
a fit time to examine that question.

No man shall presume, by Simonie, or largition of money, to atteine to
Ecclesiastical offices. Canon 4


If any of the Clergy obtain a pension, out of the Church rentes, let him
possess it under the title of Praecaria, lest by long Canon 5
possession the Church rents be diminished.

If any person be clothed with a religious habit, which he has voluntarily
accepted, if afterward he forsake it, let him be Canon 6
excommunicated, if he return not again unto his order.

The seventh Canon is a renewing of the 54. Canon of the 4. Council of Toledo.
Canon 7


A married man, who voweth chastity in time of sickness, if he recover
health, and have not the gift of continency, let him Canon 8
cohabite again with his wife: but if she die, he is debarred from the
second marriage, which notwithstanding is permitted to the wife if she have
not vowed. This Canon is not set down
by precept and commandment, but permissiuely through indulgence, and a
consideration of humane infirmity.

Servants, whom the Church has set at liberty, when one Prelate dies, and
another succeeds, they are bound to renew Canon 9
the charters of their land which they possess, else their charters shall be
void, and of none effect, if they be not renewed within the space of a year
next after the election of the new Prelate.

The children of them whom the Church has set at liberty, if their parents
bring them up in learning they shall be brought Canon 10
up in that same Church from which their liberty did arise, and shall serve
the Bishop of that Church, always without prejudice of their liberty.

Let no man, upon occasion of an accusation, be punished, unless his accuser
be presented: and incase he be a vile and Canon 11
infamous person, let no sentence be given out upon the ground of such
accusation, except into an action of treason against the life of the King.

He who has committed heinous offenses, and fearing punishment, flees to the
enemies of his country for refuge, let Canon 12
him be excommunicated.

Let young men honor them who are in great credit and Canon 13
favor with Princes: And let Seniors lovingly cherish the younger sort, and
present unto them profitable examples of a good conversation.

The 14. and 15. Can. entreat of the reward due to them who are found
faithful servants to the King, in whatsoever estate, Canon 14 and 15
especially in the Church: and that rentes and lands bestowed upon the Church,
shall abide firmly in their possession without reuocation.

In the 16. 17. 18. and 19. Canons, there is a commemoration of the bountiful
kindness of king Chintilla toward the Church, Canon 16 17. 18. and 19.
aprouision, that no Churchman should be allured by no deceitful persuasion,
to take a course against the King: A protestation before God, his Angels,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and whole Church, That no man should enterprise
any attempt against the King and his Noble estate: And they who shall presume
to do in the contrary, are appointed to eternal damnation. In end, prayers
are made to God to give a good success to their meeting: and thanks are given
to the King, by whose authority they were assembled. So it is manifest, that
by the authority of Princes National Assemblies were conueened at this time.

IN the year of our Lord 662. as Functius reckons, and in The 7. Council of
Toledo.
the 6. year of Chindasuvindus, king of Spain, the 7. Council of Toledo was
assembled, consisting of 4. Archbishops, 30. bisshops, and a great number of
presbyters, and me engers from them who could not be present. The occasion of
this meeting was Theodisclus bishop of Hispal^s, a Grecian borne: He had
corrupted the books of Isidorus, and dispersed many errors in his Church: and
he contended for supremacy with the bishop of Toledo. In this Council
Theodisclus was removed from his office. The prioritie of dignity was
conferred to the bishop of Toledo.

In the second Tom of Councels, 6. Canons are referred to this meeting: First
Laikes, and men also in spiritual office, are forbid Canon 1
den to attempt any thing against the estate of their country, either by
sedition or treason.

Secondly, it is statuted and ordained, That incase any man, Canon 2
ministering the Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper, be hindered by any
superuenient sickness, that another shall be ready to finish the work which
he has begun.

Thirdly, That the presbyters, and the whole Clergy, shall be present at the
funeral of a bishop. Canon 3


Fourthly, it is forbidden, that bishops in their visitation should extorse or
oppress the Churches which they visit. Canon 4


Fifthly, That men enclosed into a Monastery, should first receive Canon 5
instruction in their Monasteries, before they presume to teach others.

Sixthly, a commandment is given, That the bishops in near adjacent places,
should be obedient to the bishop of Toledo, Canon 6
and at his commandment they should compeare into the town of Toledo.

CAbillonum, vulgarly called Chalon, is a town in Burgunnie, not far
distant from Matiscone. In this town, by the The counsel of Cabillonum.
commandment of Clodoucus king of France, conueened 44 bisshops. Gandericus
bishop of Lions was President, and Landilenus bishop of Vienne. Theodorus
bishop of Arls, because he refused to compeare before the Council, was
suspended from his office, until the next Council.

In this Synod the Canons of the Council of Nice had great allowance. It was
forbidden, that two bishops should be ordained in one town: That no man
should sell a Christian servant to a Jew: And, that two Abbots should not be
chosen to govern one Monastery: That no laboring of the ground, or other
secular work, should be done on the Lords day: with many other canons,
coincident with ye Canons of other Councels.

IN the days of the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus, and under the Popedom of
Agatho, a Council was gathered at A Council at Rome.
Rome, about the question of the wills and operations of Christ: wherein it
was decerned, by the suffrages of 125. Bisshops of Italy, France, Lombardie,
of the nation of the Goths, of Britanes, and Sclauonians, That two wills and
two operations were to be acknowledged in Christ: And the opinions of
Theodorus, Cyrus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, defenders of the heresy of the
Monothelites was damned. The vaunting words of the letter of Agatho, written
to the sixth general Council, wherein he braggeth, that the bishops of Rome
never erred in matters of Faith, I lay them aside at this time, for they are
false, and untrue, as I have already proved, and shall prove hereafter,
if it please the Lord.

IN the year of our Lord 671. and in the fifth year of Recesuvindus King of
Goths, the eight Council of Toledo was The 8. Council of Toledo.
conuened.

To this Assemblic resorted two and fifty bishops: Great disputation was in
this Council, concerning perjurie. In end, it was resolved, That no
necessity binds a man to perform an unlawful oath: For Herod and Iphtah
sinned in making unlawful oaths, but they sinned more grieuouslie in
performing unlawful oaths.

Marriage is utterly forbidden to Bishops: and places of Canon 4. 5 6. and 7.
SCRIPTVRE are miserably abused to confirm this interdiction of marriage. Be
ye holy, as I am holy, 1. Pet. 1. 16. And in another place, Mortify your
members which are on the earth, Coloss. 3. 5. Miserable ignorance in this age
counts marriage to be (...), that is, uncleanness, a member of the body
of sin, which the Apostle commands to mortify. Yea, and the subdeacons,
who pleaded for retaining of their wives, in regard that in their admission no
such condition was required of them, are in most severe manner interdited from
the company of their wives, or else to be thrust into a Monastery, to suffer
penance until the last period of their lives.

Unlearned men are not to be admitted to the celebration Canon 8
of divine mysteries, especially such as are not well acquainted with the
Psalter.

Eating of flesh is forbidden in Lent, for three principal causes: First,
Because the forty days of Lent are the tithes Canon 9.
of all the days of the year, and the tithes should be consecr^ted to GOD:
Secondly, because that CHRIST, by fasting forty days, expiated the sins
of mankind: Thirdly, because it is convenient, that a man, made of the 4.
elements, for breaking the ten precepts of the decalogue, should afflict his
body four times ten days. Behold the firm arguments whereupon the
doctrine of devils in prohibition of meats do lean, 1. Tim. 4.


In the 10. Canon, the virtues wherewith the king shall be indewed, who shall
be chosen to reign in Spain, are rehearsed. Canon 10


In the last Canon, the ordinances of preceding Councels are to be obeyed:
and the Jews are to be dealt with according to Canon 11 and 12.
the acts of the 4. Council of Toledo. Can. 56. 57. 58. 59. and 60. etc.

IN the year of our Lord 673. and in the 7. year of the reign of Rocesuindus
king of the Goths, by the commandment of The 9. Council of Toledo.
the King, 16 bishops conueened in Toledo, and made these ordinances following:

First, That founders of Churches, and bestowers of rentes Canon 1
upon the Church, and their posterity should have a sollicitous care, that
Church rents be not abused, which misorder if it shall happen to fall out, let
complaint be made to the bishop, to the Metropolitan, or to the king of the
country.

Founders of Churches, during their lifetime, have power to appoint men who
shall attend upon the fabric of the Church Canon 2
or Monastery which is builded, that it decay not.

If any Churchman bestow any part of Church-rent, under the color of
prestation, let the cause be clearly contained in Canon 3
an evidence, or else it shall be void.

Let the goods of the defunct administrator of the Church affairs, be equally
divided betwixt his heirs and the Church. Canon 4


If a bishop build a Monastery, let him not bestow abcue the Canon 5
fifty part of the rent of his prelacie in the charges of building: and incase
he build a paroche Church, for honor of his burial place, let him not bestow
above the hundredth part of his rent for charges of building.

To the bishop belongs the third part of rent of every paroch Church in his
diosie, and whether he leave that third part Canon 6
to the Church it self, out of which it is vp-lifted, or to any other Church,
his gift shall stand firm without reuocation.

Let no man, under pretense of propinquitie, and because he Canon 7
is heir intromet with the goods of the defunct bishop, without the
foreknowledge and consent of the Metropolitan, and incase the Metropolitan
depart this life, let no intromission with his goods be made, without the
foreknowledge of his successor, lest by fraud and deceit the Church be
damnified.

If any man, ministering in a Church-office, alienate a part of Church rentes,
the supputation of time shall begin to be reckoned Canon 8
from the hour of his death, and not from the time wherein the charter was
subscribed: and so after his death let the prescription run on.

The ninth Canon measures the commodity which a bishop shall receive, who
has taken pains to bury another bishop. Canon 9


Children, procreated by bishops, presbyters, deacons, etc. shall not only be
deprived of the heritage sometime belonging Canon 10
to their parents: but also they shall be mancipated to perpetual service of
those Churches whereinto their fathers served. Let the Reader mark, that there
is greater business in Councels to procure obedience to one antichristian
precept, concerning prohibition
of marriage, than to all the ten Commandementes of Gods holy law.

Let not a servant be accepted to serve in the Ministry of the Church, before
he be first set at liberty. Canon 11


When servants are set at liberty, let the supputation of time Canon 12
begin at the death of him, who set them at liberty, and not at the time
when the charter was made.

Servants, set at liberty, shall neither marry a woman of the Canon 13 14.
15. and 16
Roman, nor of the Goths blood: and they shall be subject to the Church that
set them at liberty: and if necessity compel them to sell lands, let the
land be first offered for a competent price to one who ministers in that
Church, from which their liberty did arise.

I^wes, who are baptized, shall in time of solemn feasts attend upon the
bishop of the parts where their dwelling is, to Canon 17
the end, that he may bear testimony of the integrity of their faith. If
this commandment be transgressed, the bishop shall ordain the Jew either to
be scourged, or to be subject to such ^bstinence as he thinks most fit.

In end thanks being rendered to God for their meeting, and for the unity
of their judgementes: and supplications being made to God for the weal of the
King Recesuvindus, in soul and body, the Council was dissolved.

IN the eight year of the reign of Recesuvindus king of Goths assembled in
Toledo 21. bishops: They decerned concerning The 10. Council of Toledo.
the Feasts of the Nativity of our Lord, and of the Lords mother, at what
times they should be kept. Punishments are appointed for men of the Clergy,
and Monks, who are not found loyal and duetifull to the King, and the
country: That men unmeet for spiritual offices, should not be intruded into
the Church, neither for propinquitie of blood, nor for hope of lucre and gain:
That widows, professing a religious order, shall receive an habit convenient
for that order: And that women, who depart again from their professed order,
shall be punished: That parents shall not render their children to religious
orders before they be eighteen years of age. Finally, Protamius bishop of
Bracara, being convict of adultery, was removed from his office, and
Fructuosus was placed in his rowme.

IN the 7. year of the reign of Bamba King of Goths, 19. bishops, and 7.
Abbots were assembled in Toledo, by the The 11. Council of Toledo.
Kings commandment, Quiricus bishop of Toledo being President. In the
beginning, after a protestation of a decent order to be kept in their Assembly,
that no tumult nor contentious disputation, nor indecent laughter should
disturb the comely modesty of their assembly. They set down a prolixe
conf^ssion of Faith, and Canons belonging to Ecclesiastical discipline in the
form following:

1. That bishops should be well acquainted with Scriptures, and apt to teach.
2. That Metropolitan bishops should ^rie how the Pastors of their diosie
increase in knowledge. 3. That the form of singing used in the Metropolitan
Church, shall be like wise used in other inferior Churches. 4. That persons
who have discorded, shall not stand at the Altar, until the time they be
reconciled again. 5. That Churchmen shall not judge in actions of blood. 6.
That bishops should not give sentence before a sufficient trial of the cause.
7. Bishops, who commit adultery or murder, shall be deposed, and
excommunicated, beside the punishment to be inflicted by the secular Judge. 8.
No reward shall be taken for ministration of the Sacraments. 9. Bishops,
before their ordination, shall give their oath that they have not acquired that
dignity by rewards, either given, or to be given, 10. He who is to be
preferred to any Ecclesiastical office, let him first swear that he shall
continue constantly in the true Catholic faith, and that he shall be obedient
to Eccl siasticall Canons. 11. Let no man refuse to receive the Sacrament of
the Supper when it is offered by him who has a l^wfull calling to ministrate
it. 12. Absolution should be pronounced when peril of death impendeth albeit
complete satisfaction be not made. 13. The holy Sacrifice shall not be
ministered by persons possessed with devils, or transported with passions of
madness. 14. He who ministers at the Altar shall have others concurring with
him, to the end, that if he be suddenly oppressed with any infirmity, the
other as^stant brother may supply his place. 15. Councels are ordained yearly
to be kept.

IF order of time be not precisely kept in commemoration of the Councels of
Bracara and Toledo let no man ma^uell some regard must be had to the memory of
the Reader: and it is not The 2. Council of Brac.
meet that the Councels of Toledo, being many in number, and so frequently
conueened one following upon the neck of another (except the 11. Council
conu^ened 12. years after the 10.) should be miserably disioyned: if such
things be not comported with, by the favorable Reader, it will be hard to
abridge this head of Councels to the contentment of a learned Reader.

This Council of Bracara, by Caranza is called the first Council of Bracara:
In it many old opinions of the Prisc^llianistes, and Manicheans, concerning
prohibition of Marriage and meats, are damned, together with the heresies of
Samosatenus, Photinus, Cerdon, and Marcion. Canons set forth in this Council
are so coincident with the Canons of other Councels, that there is no
necessity to make rehearsal of them.

In the 30. can. of this Council it is ordained, That no poesy shall be sung
in the Church except the psalter of the old Testament.


IN the 4. year of Bambas, king of Goths, 8. bishops were assembled in Braga.
In the beginning of the Council, for confession The 3. Council of Brac.
of their faith, they made a new rehearsal of ye sum of the Nicene faith.
After this, they set down 8. ordinances in manner following: 1. That all
superstitious opinions being rejected, bread and wine mixed with water, only
should be offered in the Sacrifice, and not the liquor of milk, nor pure
unmixed wine, nor bread dipped in wine. H^ere mark, that the giving of unmixed
wine to the people in the Sacrament or Sacrifice,
is called superstition: such bitter fruits do ensue upon magnifying the
traditions of men, that Christ's own institution is called superstition. 2.
That vessels, dedicated to God, be not abused, and employed to seculare and
humane uses. 3. A Presbyter, when he says Mass, let him be clothed with
his Orarium on both his shoulders, and be signated on his breast with the sign
of the Cross. 4. Let no person of the Clergy cohabite with women, no not with
their own sisters, without witnesses of their conversation. 5. Upon Festival
days, relics enclosed in an arc, shall be borne upon the shoulders of the
Levites, as the Ark of GOD in the old Testament was accustomed to be borne,
1. Chron. 15. 15. and not about the neck of a bishop: and incase ye bishop
will needs carry them himself, then shall he walk on foot with the rest of
the people, and not be carried in a coach by his deacons. Here mark how men's
traditions are equalled to the commandment
of God. 6. Presbyters, Abbots, and Levites, for the dignity of their calling,
shall not be punished with stripes by the bishop, lest in dispersoning the
principal members of his own body, he bring himself into contempt of his
subjectes. 7. Let no honor be sold for promise of rewards. 8. Let governors
of Churches have a greater regard to the weal of ye Church, than to their own
particular affairs. In end, thanks is given to God and to ye king, for their
meeting, and they subscribe the forenamed ordinances. Here mark, that in the
country of Spain the king still keeps in his own hand power of conuocating
Councels. The 6. general counsel holden at Constantinople


IN the year of our Lord 681. and in the 12. year of the reign of
Constantinus Pogonatus, a general Council was assembled at Constantinople, by
the authority of the Emperor, and not by the commandment of Pope Donus, nor
Agatho his successor, nor of Leo 2. the successor of Agatho, as the Diuall
letter of Constantine, directed to Pope Donus, and received, and obeyed by Pope
Agatho, clearly testifies. As for the number of bishops co^uened, there is an
infinite discrepance betwixt ye authors, who make rehearsal of their number:
the least number reckoned is 150. The question discussed in this Assembly, was
about the wills and actions of Christ. Macarius, patriarch of Antiochia, and
Stephanus his disciple, partinaciously defended the error of the Monoth^lites:
confirming also their opinion by the testimony of Honorius, sometime bishop of
Rome, whose letters written to Sergius, sometime bishop of Constantinople,
being read in the open audience of the Council, made it clearly known, that he
also was infected with the error of the Monothelites. For this cause, Honorius
b. of Rome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus bishops of Constantinople, Cyrus b. of
Alexandria, and Macarius b. of Antiochia, were all excommunicated: likewise
Polychronius, a ridiculous Monk, and his accomplices, were excommunicated, and
with great shame and ignominy rejected from the fellowship of the Church: For
he offered to prove the opinion of the Monothelites to be the truth of God,
by writing the sum of that opinion in a paper, and ouer-spreading it upon a
beer wherein a dead man was laid, he put the Council in hope, that he
should raise the dead man to life again: but after trial, he was found to
be a lying and a deceitful fellow, and he likewise was excommunicated.

This Council made no Canons and Constitutions concerning Church discipline,
as other Councels had done before: For this cause Justinian the second, the
son of Pogonatus, gathered these same Fathers who had been in the preceding
Counc^ll, to perfect the work which they had begun.

They made many Constitutions, but two in special, which displeased the
Roman Church: First, they annulled the doctrine of the Church of Rome
concerning prohibition of Marriage to men in spiritual offices: Secondly, they
ordained the Patriarch of Constantinople, to be in equal authority with the
Pope of Rome. These Constitutions and Canons Pope Sergius refused to subscribe,
albeit his ambassadoures in his name had subscribed them in Constantinople.

BAmbas, King of Goths, resigned the title of his Royal authority to
Euringius, and he was content to be shaven and enter The 12. Council of
Toledo.
into a Monastery. In the first year of the reign of Euringius 33. bishops,
with some abbots, and 13. noble men of Court, conuecned at Toledo. The King,
amongst many other things, protested, that he was content, that whatsoever
thing in his laws seemed repagnant to reason, it should be corrected by the
prudent
advise of this Council. The Fathers of this Council, for confession of
faith, adhered unto the Council of Nice. After this, the hand-writinges and
seals of Bambas, and the nobles of his Court, and the testimony of I^lianus,
Archbishop of Toledo, are presented: whereby it was known, that Bambas had
resigned his government in favor of Euringius, willing them to choose him to
be his successor. So it came to pass, that Euringius was solemnly proclaimed
to be King, and the people were assoyled from the oath of alleadgeance made to
Bambas, and were astricted to the obedience of King Euringius.

In this Council it was forbidden, that new bishoprics should be erected in
villages: and the bishop of Emerita begged pardon for this, that he had
ordained a bishop in a certain village, being comp^lled so to do by the
commandment of King Bambas. They who stand at the Altar, and sacrifices, are
commanded to eat of the sacrifice as often as they offer it. The
acts, made in preceding Councels, against the Jews, were renewed and
amplified in this Council: and thanks was given to God, and the King, for
their meeting.

Other Councels of Toledo, under the reigns of Euringius, and Egita, seeing of
them there is little written worthy of commemoration, I ouer-passe with
silence.

TREATISES, Belonging to the seventh CENTVRIE.
A TREATISE, Of the Uniuersall Bishop.
AMBITION is a reproueable fault in all men especially in men who are Preachers
of the humility of Christ: Yea, and the time wherein ambition got the greatest
vpper-hande in the Church, was the time wherein the Antichrist sat in the
Temple of God, extolling himself against all thing that is called God. When I
read the confession of Augustine, I find no fault that he damneth in himself
(before his conversion) more vehemently, than the fault Augustine. Confess. Lib.
6. cap. 6
of ambition, and desire of vain glory: comparing his own estate with the
estate of a beggar whom he saw at Millane overcome with wine. In some things
he was like unto that beggar, in other things he was vnlikethee was like in
this, that the beggar was both miserable and he rejoiced in his misery: the
like Augustine says of himself, that he likewise was miserable. and delited
in his misery: but the difference stood in three things: The beggar was
drunken with wine, but Augustine was drunken with a desire of vain glory:
Secondly, the money wherewith the beggar had bought the wine wherewith he was
overcome, he had gotten it by begging: but the vain glory wherewith
Augustine was overcome, he had gained it by flattery and lies: Thirdly, the
drunken beggar, when he had slept a short time, his drunkenness departed from
him: but the desire of vain glory was daily augmented in Augustine, until
the time came that God would renew him according to his own likeness, When
this vile sin defiled the chair of Constantinople, and the chair of Rome,
greater desolation followed than was under the reign of Honorius, when the
town of Rome was set on fire: or under the reign of Arcadius, when
Constantinole was shaken with earthquake.

The short Treatise which I set forth concerning the supremacy of the B. of
Rome, in the 3. Centurie, was to declare, that the foresaid supremacy was not
countenanced with such antiquity as the Remane Church do brag of: but now is
the due time, and proper place, to speak more largely of the magnifick style
of ye Uniuersall bishop.

In this Treatise, God willing, I shall declare, that the honorable title of
Uniuersall Bishop is only due to Christ: Secondly, that the bishops of Rome
sought this preferment unhonestly: and when they had obtained it, they fsed it
more vnhonestile and tyrannously: and thirdly, that he who usurps this honor
due to Christ only, may justly be called the Antichrist: Not that I have
intention to confound these two Treatises of the Uniuersall bishop, and of the
Antichrist, but only to make the one a prerparation to the other.

Now the Great and Uniuersall Bisoph of our fowls, as holy Scripture
describes him, is he only who has broken down the partition wall, and who
has made both Jew and Gemile one House-holde and family of God, and he who
has made them both Ephesians. 2. 14
both one Sheep-folde, like as there is but one great Shepherd, Joan. 10. 26
and he who gives his life for his Sheep, and who knows them all by their
names, and who gives unto them all eternal life. This Ibid. verse. 3 11. and 28
description points out unto us no man except Jesus Christ, the Son of God
only. The B. of Rome is so far from conferring eternal life unto all the
Sheep of God, that he knows not them all by their names: yea, further than
this, no bishop of Rome ever knew all the Sheep of God in the town of Rome by
their names: how much less could they know all the Sheep of God dispersed upon
the face of the whole world?

It may be objected, that like as Christ conferreth his own names unto his
servants, whom he has appointed to gath^r his Sheep to his Sheepe-folde: so
in like manner, without sacrilege and robbery they may accept the names of
Christ: as Matthew. 5. 14
namely Christ, he calls his disciples the Lights of the world, yet it is
perfectly known, that Christ only is the true Light, who Joan. 1. 9
lightneth every man, who comes into the world. To this I answer, That it
is the labor of curious and idle men, to dispute upon names, when as in
substance and matter there is no disagreement. No man does offend when the
Apostles are called lights, because they are neither equalled nor matched with
Christ, but only the liberality of Christ is commended, who out of ye plenitude
of his light bestows a portion upon his servants, to conserve light in the
house of God. But when the B. of Rome is called Uniuersall Bishop, so many
other prerogatives are linked with this title, that he is equalled with Christ:
as namely, That he is a lawgiuer, he cannot err in matters of faith, he may
dispense with the law of God, he may correct ye very testamentall legacy of
Christ, and ordain the holy Sacrament of ye Supper to be otherwise administered
than the institution of Christ bears. Now is ye question not of words only,
(which often times being lenified and mollified by ye dulcenesse of tolerable
interpretations, are ouer-passed for the peace of the Church) but the question
betwixt us and the Roman Church is of matter and substance, and of the very
honor only belonging to Christ. If it had been ye purpose of Christ to make
mortal man on earth his Vicare he had done to yt person as Pharo did to
Joseph, that is, he had plucked ye ring from his own finger, and put it upon ye
finger of his Vicare, so that ye sight of Genesis 41. 42
Christ's ring (that is, of power to co^fer eternal life to all Christ's Sheep)
had been an undoubted token, that Christ had indeed constituted him his Vicare
on earth.

As touching the Apostle Peter, to whom the feeding of Christ's Sheep was
recommended, it is to be considered, that Peter in th^se words, Feed my
Sheep, was not preferred to the rest of the Joan. 21.
Apostles: yea, rather, it was a great benefit to Peter to be restored to the
dignity of his Apostleship, from which he had fallen by his three-folde
denial of Christ, and to be made equal again with the rest of his brethren.
But the Roman Church can never hear a word of Christ spoken to Peter, but it
sounds in their ears, as if Christ were breathing the superiority of Peter
over the rest of the Apostles. So did Pope Leo, the first with the grandour of
his speeches, so often iterate that one sentence, Tu es Petrus, and super hac
petra, etc. that is, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock Matthew. 16
I will build my Church: as if the whole world should have stowped at the
roaring of him who was a Lion only by name. Nevertheless, whatsoever Leo
speaks in the loftiness of his partial conceits, the opinions of the
ancient Fathers have ouer-swayed the conceits of Leo: And we are fully
persuaded, that Christ recommended the feeding of his sheep to all his
Apostles, as well as he did to Peter.

Then let the name of the high Bishop, and great Shepherd of our souls, only
remain with Christ, who is only worthy of such high dignity: For like as
many comforters came out of Jerusalem, to comfort the two sisters, Martha and
Marie, who lamented for the death of their brother Lazarus, yet there was but
only one great comforter, to wit, Jesus Christ, who could raise Lazarus out of
the grave, and restore him to life again: I^an. 11
Even so, there are many bishops, but there is only one great and universal
Bishop, who can confer eternal life to all that believe in him. Let this
royal garment be laid up in the Kings wardrope, and let none other man
honor his own body with it: Let this oil of consecration be kept in the
Lords Sanctuary, and let not the flesh of a stranger be anointed with it: Let
this inaccessible dignity remain as a fixed star in heaven, whereunto Exo.
30. 33
no mortal man can reach his hand: Let the death, resurrection, ascension, and
glorious sitting of Christ in heaven, at the right hand of his Father, budding
forth better fruit than the rod of Aaron did, testify, that this honor of
the great Bishop of our souls belongs only to Christ: And finally, Let him
who only is called the King of kings, the Lord of lords, the Prince of
Prophets, be counted also the Bishop of all bishops, who is worthy to be
glorified for ever, AMEN.

Upon the neck of this Treatise, if the next Treatise, concerning the
Antichrist, be subjoyned, let no man marvel: For in my opinion, when the Popes
hyrelinges cast themselves down at his feet, they testify, that they will
be subject unto him, as to the only Vicare of Christ upon earth, as to the
Uniuersall bishop of the Church, as to him that cannot err in the Decrees of
Doctrine concerning Faith, and finally, as to whom only it is lawful, as he
lists himself, to determine of Religion, and Christian Discipline: So that
these outward submissions of the body, do then appertain to Idolatry, when
they are testimonies, that the mind attributes more unto a creature than is
meet: But the misery of all miseries is this, that as it were by hereditarie
succession, every man, who is seated in the chair of Rome, shall also have
right to govern the affairs of the whole Church how beit they be not good
common Christians, let be good Bishops: and by the testimony of their own
writers they be ambitious, auaritious, contentious, and libidinous monsters.

Surely, before we should confer the glory of CHRIST to such vile persons,
it were better that men should sacrifice their life for the honor of CHRIST:
For even the LACEDAEMONIANS, when they were commanded to render their children,
answered to the MACEDONIANS, Si grauiora morte imperatis, mori volumus: that
is, If ye command things more grievous than death, we will choose rather
to die, to wit, than to obey such commandments: And the very Ass of Balaam
is set down unto us as an example of striving against the unlawful Numb. 22
commandments of unlawful prelates, because the sword of the Angel of GOD
is more terrible than the staff of Balaam: And albeit with Balaams Ass we
were thrice beaten with the staff, yet it is better to remember the bypast
euilles which we have suffered, than with the rich glutton to be tormented
not only with the sense of present pain, but also with the Luke 16
remembrance of bypast pleasures, which we have most unrighteously abused.

The Roman Church, after the six hundredth year of our Lord, had the wisdom
of dogs, who are wiser in senting than in barking: for they knew that ambition
was ambition, and that very few climbed up to the papale dignity by virtue,
but rather by procuration, friendship, bribes, and other unlawful means, but
few durst bark against their doings, as dogs will not bark against men
with whom they are familarly acquainted: yea and men, whom neceslitie of the
extraordinary lewd conversation of P^pes, compelled at some times to bark.
Onuphrius the Advocate of all cuill causes, is ready with snurling words to
reprove the reprehenders of them, and by impudent denial of the verity of the
history, to blind-folde the eyes of the simple and ignorant Reader.

Now is the way of righteousness made rough and difficill, and the broad way
is smoothe and easy, and many walk therein: But whenever it pleases God,
to exercise the faith of his Saints with difficill times, it is not to move
them to forsake a good course, but rather to be well shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace. Indeed incase the course of ungodliness Ephesians. 6
be made rough and difficill, then the Lord has set thorny hedges in our way,
to the end that we may rep^nt, and return to our own husband again, from
whom we have wandered. And Hose. 2
happy is he, who can discern the way, and the cause wherefore the Lord has
made it either rough or smoothe.

Now is the time come, wherein Churchmen are become like unto carnal Jews,
who loathed MANNA, and the waters of the spiritual Rock, and the cloud of
God, and the holy Tabernacle: yea, and the fleshpots of Egypt are laid in
balance with all the treasures of the goodness of God, bestowed upon a
carnal people: Even so, Churchmen at Rome, after the six hundredth year of
our Lord, began to loathe the humility of Christ, the patient suffering of the
Apostles, the riches of faith, and other spiritual treasures, which were the
glorious ornaments of the Primitive Church, whereunto are preferred the riches
and honors Nazian. orat 38. in Chr^sti natiuita^.
of this world, justly called by Nazianzenus, (...), that is, Precious dungue.

IN the second head of this TREATISE, it follows to be declared, that the
bishops of Rome sought this dignity of Papal supremacy unhonestly, and used
it tyrannously and impiouslie, after they had obtained it. Concerning the
seeking of it, Philip Morney, that Phoenix of FRANCE (from whom I am not a
shamed L^b myster. iniquitat^s.
to borrow many things in this TREATISE) he proves, by the testimonies of
Paulus Diaconus, Freculfus, Regino, Anastatius, Hermannus Contractus, Marianus
Scotus, Sabellicus, Blondus, Pomponius Laetus, Platina, Author compilationis
Chronologicae, and Otho Episcopus Frisingensis, that Bonifacius the third
begged at the hands of the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be
called the head of all other Churches. He who sought this supremacy was a
flatterer: he at whose hands it was sought, was a traitor, a parricide, and
the vile excrement of all governors: and the time wherein he sought it, was at
that time wherein the words of Gregory the first, uttered against Ioannes
(...), bishop of Constantinople, were in recent remembrance, to wit, That
whosoever did usurp such a magnificke style to be called Uniuersall Bishop,
he was the forerunner of the Antichrist. But seeing the time was now come
wherein the purpurate Harlot was to sit upon the City of seven Mountains; in
her first entry she lays aside all shamefastness and modesty, she wipeth
her mouth, and says, she has committed none iniquity: ambition so blinds
her eyes, that inconstancy is counted no fault, and taking deep root in her
heart, hides from the eyes of her mind the sight of heaven, and all heavenly
virtues, such as humility, modesty, constancy, and uprightness of a siable
and vnwauering heart.

The pre-eminence that God licenciateth to be sought over brethren, is like to
the pre-eminence of Moses over the Elders: he ascended higher upon the
mountain of God than they did: and when he came down again from the
mountain of God, his face shined with greater splendour of celestial glory,
than Exo. 34. 29
the faces of others did. Would God Pastors could strive to attain to such
pre-eminence: for the striving for prerogative of places, has bred many
unnecessary and unfruitful contentions Naz. orat. 13 post reditu^.
in the Church, as an ancient Father has well marked.

This supremacy aforesaid so unhonestly sought, was used tyrannously and
unrighteously. Pope Bonifacius the fourth dedicated the Temple called Pantheon,
wherein all the Gentile gods were worshipped: this Temple, I say, he dedicated
to the Virgin Marie, and to all the Martyrs, rather changing, than correcting,
the vile abomination of Idolatry. Honorius the first, in the sixth general
Council, was found to have been an Eutychian heretic, The Popes, Martinus
the first, and Eugenius the first, Vitalianus, and Adeodatus, were so puffed up
in pride, that they counted the Bishops of R^uenna heretics, only for this,
because they received not their ordination from the Bishops of Rome, and were
not subject to their authority: And this heresy they called (...). Pope
Sergius 1. obstinately refused to subscribe the decrees of the sixth general
Council, partly because in it the doctrine and laws of prohibition of
marriage to men in spiritual functions, was damned, and partly also, because
the Bishop of Constantinople was equalled in honor with the bishop of Rome.
Constantinus the first, and Gregorius the second, were the first open, and
auowed traitors against the Emperors: the one of them rased the name of the
Emperor Philippic^s out of charters: the other assoyled the subjects of Italy
from the oath of all edgeance to the Emperor Leo Isaurus, because these two
Emperors d^tested the worshipping of Images. What villainy was in Pope
Stephanus the third, who persuaded CAROLVS MAGNUS, king of FRANCE, to
repudiate his wife BERTHA, the daughter of DESIDERIVS king of LOMBARDIS?
abusing in most impudent manner the words of holy Scripture, What fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? 2. Cori^t. chap. 6. verse. 14. In that place the Apostle is giving
counsel to Christians, who are disposed to marry, not to couple themselves in
matrimonial band with infideles: but the counsel of the Apostle, to them who
are already married, even with infideles, is this, If any brother have a wife,
that believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not for sake
her, 1. Cor. 7. 12. So that albeit Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius, had been
an infidel, she being willing to cohabite with her husband, there was no
reason to repudiate her. But now the bishops of Rome are become wiser than the
Apostles of Christ and they bid repudiat the wife, with whom the Apostle Paul
in express words bids a Christian man cohabite. It is more intolerable
that Suphanus the third calls Bertha an infidel: was she not baptized in the
name of Christ was not her father Desiderius, and before him Aistulphus,
partakers of the Lords holy Sacraments? was not Rachis, the brother of
Aislulphus, so devout, according to the superstitious form at that time,
commended in the Roman Church, that he forsook his kingdom, and entered
into a Monastery, there to lead his life? But the bishops of Rome are become
so prodigal of their reproachful speeches, that all persons are counted
Infideles, who follow not absolutely all the conceits of their changeable
minds. Pope Adrian the first, with advise of a great Council, ordained, that
no man should be consecrated bishop of Rome, before he had received
investment by staff and ring, by the Emperor: but Gregorius 7. by the
contrary, cursed them who received inuestment from the Emperor, anno 1073.
These two popes speak contradictory things, yet they must be counted holy
Fathers, who cannot err. Pope Leo the third, took upon him boldness to
change the Empire, and to proclaim Charles the Great, king of FRANCE, to be
Emperor in the West. And Baronius, the most in^pt expounder of Scriptures, of
any learned men of late days, defends this doing of L^o, by a place of
Scripture, The most High bears rule Baron. tom. 9. ann. 800. art. 6. 7. 8.
over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will, Dan. 4. 22. Daniel
in that place speaks of the Eternal GOD, who indeed is most high, and
gives the kingdoms of the world to whom he pleases: but Baronius applies
this to the bishop of Rome, as if he were most high, and had the kingdoms of
the world at his own dispensation, to give them to whom he pleased: So said
the Devil of himself, (Luke 4. 6.) but he lied, for he had no such power:
and Baronius, attributing this power unto the Pope, lies as impudentlie as the
Devil did. sergius the second, with his brother Benedictus, for gaining vanta
e unto themselves, were not ashamed to sell bishoprics, and to prefer men
to spiritual offices: not for the worthiness of their gifts, but for the
weight of their numbered money: and so the chair of ROME was filthilie spotted
with simonic. Yea, it came to pass, that the prid^, and simonicall avarice of
the bishops of ROME brangled their late usurped authority: so that AVGVIBERTVS
bishop of MILLANE, with allowance of many bishops of ITALY disclaimed the
authority of the bishop Anastat. in Serg. 2. Morneus mist. iniqu.
of ROME, and with great difficulty after the issue of two hundredth years,
was the chair of MILLANE reduced again to the obedience of the bishop of
ROME, in the days of Pope Stephanus the ninth.

It grieved the bishops of ROME, that they were bound by the constitution of
Adrian the first, to have the allowance of the Emperor to their election: and
therefore by degrees they endeavored to shake off that yoke of bondage.
Stephanus ye fourth was elected without the foreknowledge of Ludovicus 'Pius:
but he pacified the Emperors wrath by his coming to FRANCE. Pascalis the
first, in like manner, was chosen bishop of Rome, without the foreknowledge of
the Emperor. Nevertheless, by his letters sent to the Emperor Ludouicus, he
excused himself, and ratified the constitution of Adrian. In like manner, Leo
the fourth, following the example of his predecessors, was admitted without the
foreknowledge of Lotharius: he likewise excused himself to the Emperors
son Ludouicus, pretending that the sudden incursion of the Saracenes was ye
cause moving the people to precipitate his election, and hindering himself to
make due advertisement to the Emperor Lotharius, in whose time he was elected.
But the issue after following declared, that all these excuses were nothing
else, but a seeking of occasions how to shake off the yoke of the Emperors
subjection. Was not the chair of Rome abused, the world mocked, and the
Christianity exponed to the derision of Heathen people, when Pope Ihonne the
eight, of the feminine sex sat in the Apostolic chair, taking the greater
liberty to play the Harlot, because she had an uncontrolled pre-eminence?
Onuphrius, in counting this to be a fable, rather than a true History, is not
unlike to ye Philosopher, who denied, that the Heaven was under a continual
motion, and turned about by a circulare revolution: So does Onuphrius take
liberty to brangle the credit of all ancient Histories. Philip Morney notably
discovers the falsehood, and shifting excuses of Onuphrius, who alleges,
that this fable of a feminine Pope sprang up by occasion of a libidinous Pope,
called Ioannes, the twelft, who had three notable Harlots attending his lust,
namely, Ioanna, Raineria, and Stephania: Now (says Onuph.) all things being
ordered according to ye pleasure of Ioa^na, as if she had bin Pope, of this
proceeded ye rumor of a feminine pope. But Philip Mor. citing ye testimony of
Lintprandus, proves, that ye co^cubines of Joa^nes 12. were Raineria and
Stephania, but no mention is made of Ioanna, as one of ye Popes concubines, but
only of one named Anna, ye Popes nice, not his concubine: so that Onuphrius, in
proving the History of the feminine Pope to be a fable, he is found
himself to be fabulous, and an inuenter of lies.

Nicolaus the first, suffered Lodouik the second, the son of Lotharius, to
go on foot, and to lead his bridle while as the Pope was riding on
horseback: which proud fact, Platina cannot excuse better, than to count
Nicolaus so venerable a man, that he was accounted of all men as a god. In like
manner, he compelled Lotharius, prince of Loraine, and brother to Jews 2. to
forsake his new married wife, Valdrada, and to adhere again unto his first
wife named Thiethberga, under pain of cursing. This is the first time wherein
the bishop of Rome durst take boldness to threaten the princes of FRANCE with
his cursinges. So the bishop of Rome, who fished in all muddy waters, partly by
the intestine discord of the posterity of Charles the Great, and partly by
their faults, he increased his own estate mightily: so that he became like
unto a mighty Hunter, who goes to the Forest of intention to pursue one
beast only, nevertheless his dogs do no sooner bark, but all the beasts
in the Forest are agaste, and with fear and trembling look when they shall
be pursued. This is that Pope whom ye Roman Church has honored with the
reverend name of the third Helias: but he was unlike unto the first Helias,
and more unlike unto the second Helias, to wit, unto John Baptist: The first
Helias girded up his loins, and ran before Achab, until he came to Jzreel:
But Pope Nicolaus suffered 1. Reg. 18. 46
the Emp. to go on foot, and to lead his horse by the bridle: The second
Helias came to prepare the way of the Lord: but pope Nicolaus, whom they call
the third Helias, prepared a way to his successors, and to the standing of the
popedom, because he was like unto a City of refuge unto all men, who
appealed from their own ordinary Judges, willing once fully to possess the
chair of Rome into that privilege to be Judges of all appellations.

Adrian the second, by those same means, increased his papal authority, by
which Bonifacius the third had first grounded the popedom, namely by
flattering of a notable parricide Basilius Emperor of the East, who had
traitorously slain the Emperor Michael, who had made him associate with
himself in government. This Emp. Basilius so highly advanced Adrian, that in
the eight general Council, assembled in Constantinople, for deposition of
Photius, and restitution of Ignatius, no man was permitted to have ingresse to
the Council, except he who first subscribed to the supremacy of the bishop
of Rome. Morecuer, the Emperor Basilius procured, that the Bulgarians should
be subject to the Pope of Rome, and not to the Patriarch of Constantinople. How
beit this ordinance, violently extorted, contrary both to equity and
custom, could not continue long.

After Adrian succeeded pope shonne the ninth, who restored Photius, at the
desire of Basilius Emperor of the East. This inconstancy of pope Ihonne the
ninth, who restored Photius, whom his predecessor, Adrian the second, had
deposed, furnishes occasion to Baronius, to affirm, that this is the pope,
who was supposed to have been of the foeminine sex, in respect of the
inconstancy of his flexible and effeminate mind: and so much the more,
because that pope Ihonne the ninth not only restored Photius to his place
again, but also ramuersing his affection again, he cursed Photius, because
he had gathered a Council at Constantinople of 380. bishops, wherein he
annulled the decrees of the preceding Council, vulgarly called the eight
General Council. Moreover, it was ordained in this Council conueened by
Photius, that the pope of Rome should accept no man into his fellowship, whom
the patriarch of Constantinople had excommunicated: by this decree cutting off
all appellations from Constantinople to Rome. This fact so grieved the pope,
that he cursed Photius, whom before he had restored to his office again.
Here I leave Baronius and Onuphrius, reckoning one against another concerning
the feminine pope: Baronius says, it was pope Ihonne the ninth, whose
inconstancy gave occasion to the rumoured opinion of the feminine pope:
Onuphrius says, it was the inconstancy of a libidinous pope Ihonne the
twelft, following all the desires of an harlot: but if either of them had
written truly, it had been more competent in such a sense to have said,
that there had been many femenine popes, rather than one only.

The barbarous cruelty of Stephanus the sixth (other reckon Stephanus the
seventh) against Formosus, Whose dead body he raised Platin. in ^ita Steph. 6
out of his sepulcher, and cut off his consecrating fingers, and cast them into
Tiber: Is there any fact of unnatural inhumanitie practiced amongst the
Indianes and Aethiopians, comparable to this? Onuphrius counts this History
also to be a fable, as if his impudent denial of every dishonest fact, done
by the bisshops of Rome, were able to derogat^ credit to all ancient
Histories. But what shall be thought of the opposite decrees of Councels
gathered by Formosus and Stephanus, no less repugnant one unto another, than
light is unto darkness? Shall it be thought that these opposite Councels were
indicted by the holy Spirit, as if the holy Spirit could be repugnant unto
himself?

From the 900. year of our Lord, until the 1000. year, the bishops of Rome
were so far degenerate from the manners of their ancient predecessors, that
whereas the ancient bishops of Rome, attending the holy exercises of prayer
and exhortation, contemned dignities offered unto them: now by ambition and
bribes they strive for the Popedom: and when they have gotten it, as cruel
tyrants, they contend, with hateful malice, every one against the fame of
another: and laying aside divine worship, they follow the lusts of their own
hearts, the more securely, because their is no man to restrain their
inordinate desires. This Platina writes of them in the life of Sergius the
third. Plati. in vit. Sergii 3.
The most part of them were like unto Monsters, whose nativity, like as it
breeds sorrow in the hearts of their very parents: so in like manner it is
some mitigation of their hearts grief, when the Monster hastily dies. This
second comfort God g^ue unto the world. Few of these ambitious, auaritious, and
libidinous Monsters continued long in the popedom. I will not anticipate the
History, but shortly I hope thus far has been declared, that the Roman
Church sought this pre-eminence unhonestly, and abused it vilely by simonie,
idolatry, heres^ treason, tyranny, schism, and all kind of inhumanitie,
which one of them could practice against another: And that they have casten
behind their back that holy form of preparation for entering into
spiritual functions used of old, to wit, that their spiritual senses were
well exercised with seeing of Heavenly sightes, with hearing of Angelical
hymns, with feeling the opetatiue virtue of the coal taking from the Altar of
God, and Isai. 6.
touching their lips, and so being well prepared and furnished with
celestial grace, they entered into spiritual callings, assisted with the
grace of God, that comes from above. But now the preparation is turned to
riches and money, where with if a man be well surnished, albeit he were like
unto Ioannes the thirteenth, that is, a man who is perjure, the very child of
the d^uill, the brother of Judas, and a man whose name will remain in
perpetual execration: yet such a man furnished, as said is, with riches and
money, may be promoted to the popedom. Now is leven eaten in time of the
passover and he who calls himself the Vicare of Christ, he climbeth to
that office by the leven of sin. And truly, like as the types and figures of
good things, cannot equal in goodness the things that are figurated by
them: even so, the figures of evil things were not so much to be abhorred as
the evil things themselves represented by types and figures. He who commanded
to purge the old leven, to the end, that we might be an holy lump, has
utterly forbidden us 1. Cot. 5. 7
to enter into holy callings by vile and dishonest means.

NOw follows the third head of this TREATISE, as a preparation to the
TREATISE following, to prove that the chair wherein the Uniuersall Bishop
sits, is the chair of the Antichrist, which I prove by this argument, The
chair that extolleth it self above Christ, is the chair of the Antichrist:
but so it is, that the chair wherein the Uniuersall Bishop sits, extolleth
it self above Christ, Ergo, it is the chair of the Antichrist. The first part
of the argument is proved by the words of the 2. These. 2. 4
Apostle, writing to the Thessalonians: The second part of the argument I
prove by this reason, That chair which takes upon it power to dispense
against the law of God, extolleth it self above Christ: but so it is, the
chair of the Uniuersall Bishop arrogateth power to dispense against the law
of God: as namely, in the matter of Marriage, licentiating a man to marry his
brothers wife, and others to marry women of their nearest consanguinitie:
Ergo, the chair of the Uniuersall Bishop is the chair of the Antichrist.
Here let us remember, that no law can be dispensed withal, but either by
the same authority, by which it is made, or by a greater: But the law of God
is manifestly annulled in many points, corrected, and dispensations given
against it by the chair of ROME, as shall be declared hereafter, GOD
willing: what can be said of it then, but that it is become the seat of the
Antichrist?

Concerning the style of the Antichrist, which I mind to attribute to the
bishop of Rome, especially since the year of our Lord 666. I admonish the
Reader, that he be not deceived with the generality of the word Antichrist:
which albeit it may be attributed to Infideles, Heretics, and to all them who
obstinately 1. Joan. 2. 18 and 22. 1. Joan. 4. 3
contend against the doctrine of the person or office of Christ: yet does
this name most properly belong to the principal ringleaders and authors of
that great defection from the faith, fore-tolde by the Apostle Paul, 1. Tim. 4.
For like as Dent. 18. 13 Apocal. 2. and ^. Malac. 3. 1
when Moses in Holy Scripture is called a Prophet, and faithful Pastors are
called Angels, this hinders not Christ from being called the Great Prophet,
and the Angel of the Covenant: Even so, when Heretics, who gainsay the
divinity of Christ, or verity of His humane nature, are called Antichrists,
this hinders not, but the chair which has chiefly blinded the world with
errors, and has poisoned kings and people with the cup of Nazianz. Cygnea
Carmin.
her fornications, to be called the seat of the Antichrist. Nazianzenus in a
general sense, counts Arrius, whom he points out by the style of a recent
Apostate, and Nestorius, by whose opinion the natures of Christ were divided,
to be Antichrists. But Chrysostom, in a proper sense, supposes him to be
Antichrist, who should tread under foot the Roman Empire: like as the
Romans had subdued the kingdom of the Macedonians, Chrysostom. 2. Epist. These.
2. Homil. 4.
and ^he Macedonians had subdued the kingdom of the Persians, and the Persians
had undone the kingdom of the Babylonians: Even so (says Chrysostom) the
Antichrist shall undo the dominion of the Romans: and in end, the Antichrist
shall be 2. These. 2. 8
consumed by the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and shall be abolished with the
brightness of His coming.

Many things are written of the Antichrist, who deceaueth people in error, so
that they misknowe the Antichrist when he is come, no less than the nation of
the jews misknew CHRIST Iren. cont. Valent. li. 5.
when He was manifested in the flesh. They write, that he should be of the
Tribe of DAN, that he should be borne in BABYLON, and he should be
brought up in CORASIM and BETHSAIDA, that SATAN should ouer-shaddowe his
mother, and poss^sse her, that he should re-edifie the Temple of HIERVSALEM
and that the people of the JEWS should adher^ unto him. But all these opinions
are grounded partly upon a wrong interpr^tation of Scripture, and many of
them are sh^owded ^alselie under the name of AUGUSTINE, Bishop of HIPPO: but
it is known that RABANVS, Archbishop of MENTZ, was the compiler of that
foolish TREATISE, De Antichristo, whereinto the forementioned opinions are
contained, and not AUGUSTINE. More-ouer, they Censura Lovan.
say, that the Antichrist should be one particulare man, opposite to Christ,
whose continuance in fighting against the Saints should not exceed the space
of three years and an half.

But what madness is it to refer the secret beginning, the open tyranny,
the revelation and destruction of the Antichrist to the person of one singular
man, which is a work working from the days of the Apostles, until the second
coming of Christ: The argument whereby some Papists would make it to s^eme
probable, that the Antichrist is one singular man only, is taken from the
force of the prepositiue article, (...). A childish argument indeed, as who
would say, that it were not lawful to pray in any chamber, except in one
on^lie, in respect of the prepositiue article set before (...), in these
words, (...): that is, Enter into thy Matthew. 6. 6
chamber. The time of the continuance of the Antichrists persecution, three
years and an half, is borrowed from Augustine, who supposes, that the horn
which shall speak words against August. de ciuitate Dei lib. 20. ca, 22 Danie.
7. 25
the most High, and who shall change times and laws, as things given unto
his hands, vntilla time and times, and the dividing of a time: by this horn,
I say, Augustine supposes the Antichrist to be presented: how beit others
more judiciously have referred this prophecy to Antiochus Epiphanes, who
blasphemed God, changed Sabbo^hs and Festival days, yea, and by his impious
laws, presumed to abrogate the law of the Almighty God: and immediately
after such presumptuous attempts, 1. Match. 1. cap. 6. verse. ^6.
God shortened his days, for within the space of three years, and some few
days, he ended his life in most miserable manner.

They have no better ground to affirm that the Antichrist shall be of the
Tribe of Dan, than this, Because the Tribe of Dan is not reckoned amongst the
rest of the Tribes, Apocal. 7. yet this was not done to exclude this Tribe from
the saving mark of Christ, but to give place to the Tribe of Leui, and not to
exceed the number of twelve Tribes: for Holy Scripture, which commends the
faith of Barak of the Tribe of Nephtali, and Gideon of the Tribe of Manasse,
and Iphtah of the Tribe of Gad, commends also the faith of Samson of the
Tribe of Dan, Hebr. cap. 2. verse. 11.

One thing I cannot pass by: The inuenters of such fables, that the Antichrist
should be of the Tribe of Dan, borne in Babylon, etc. in some things have
ouer-seene themselves miserably: namely, when they affirm, that the
Antichrist shall build the Temple of Jerusalem, and shall sit there in the
Temple of God, and the nation of the Jews shall adhere unto him, and
immediately after this, the end of the world shall come, and Christ shall
destroy the Antichrist by the Spirit of his mouth. Roman. 11. 26. and 31 32
Here mark the great contradiction that is betwixt the prophecy of Paul,
concerning the conversion of the Jews, before the second coming of Christ,
and the foolish opinion of Papists: Paul says, that the Jews shall be
converted to the true faith before the Great day of the LORDS second
appearance: but Papists say, that the Jews shall be adhering to the
Antichrist, when Christ shall come to judge the world, and to destroy the
Antichrist, by the brightness of his coming. These two opinions cannot both
consist: therefore, let the fable invented by men fall, that place may be
given to the truth of God, who is blessed for evermore,

AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Antichrist.
CONTROVERSIES in civil matters, are not all of like moment: therefore it was
ordained by the counsel of Iethro, that great matters should be brought to
Moses, and that inferior Magistrates should judge in small causes. But in
controversies Exo. 18. 22
of religion, all causes, both great and small, are to be brought unto the
mouth of Christ, our true Moses, who will speak from his Sanctuary unto us,
and give unto us resolution of all our doubts out of His blessed word. In
this TREATISE especially, let us run to the month of Christ, speaking by his
Apostle Paul, and uttering a notable prephesie concerning the coming of the
Antichrist in the words following:

Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except
there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be d^sclosed, 2 Thessalonians. 2 verse. 3.
even the son of perdition,

Who is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of verse. 4.
God, showing himself that he is God.

Remember ye not, that when I was with you I told you these things? verse. 5.


And now ye know what withholds, that he might be revealed, in his
time. verse. 6.


For the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he, who now
withholds, shall let, tell he be taken out of the way. verse. 7.


And then shall the wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the Spirit of His mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming.
verse. 8.


Even him whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, verse. 9.
and signs, and lying wonders.

And in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness amongst them that perish,
verse. 10.
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

And therefore, God shall send to them strong delusion, that they shall verse.
11.
beleeuelies:

That all they might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had verse. 12.
pleasure in unrighteousness.

The occasion moving the Apostle to embarke into this Pr^pheticall prediction,
concerning the coming of the Antichrist, was this, Because some in
Thessalonica spoke of the second coming of Christ, that it was near
approaching, and even at hand. The Apostle on the other part would assure the
Thessalonians, that before the coming of that Great day, there should first be
a defection from the true faith and that the Antichrist should be disclosed. It
is not the purpose of the Apostle to dissuade any man from remembering the
terror of that Great day, wherein the very Elements shall melt: and if so
be, what manner of men 2. Pe^. 3. 11. 12.
aught we to be in holy conversation, looking for and hastening unto ye coming
of the day of our Lord: yea, and the oblivion of the second coming of Christ
is the principal ground of the security of the evil servant. But the
Apostle, led by the conduct Matthew. 24.
of the Holy Spirit, foreseeing that two things were needful to be
remembered, to wit, the second coming of the Lord Jesus, and the preceding
coming of the Antichrist: he would have them so to remember the one, that
they should not forget the other, lest whilst we run fast to the mark,
without marking the perilles that are in the way, we fall into the snares of
the Devil. Our master Christ, when he corrected the foolish precipitation of
the sons of Zebedeus, who would Mark, 10. 38
have sitten at the right and left hand of Christ in His kingdom before they
had been baptized with his baptism, and before they had drunken of the cup
of the sufferings of Christ: he disswadeth them not from continual fastening
their eyes upon the glory of Christ's Kingdom, but rather so to look unto
the mark, that they ouer-leape not the way leading to the mark. God has
ind^edep: epared a kingdom for us, but by Act. 14. 22
many tribulations we must enter into that kingdom.

The apostasy whereof the apostle prophecieth, is not a desection in manners
only, but also a departing from the faith, as is clearlie witnessed in another
place, in those words, Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, etc. Defection in manners is so usual
a thing, that 1. Tim. 4. 1
where the word of God is preached in most powerful manner, there also
corruption in manners does abound, arguing the evil inclination of our
nature, which takes occasion, by the commandment, and works in us all kind
of concupiscence: so that the corruption of our nature is like unto a gutter of
water, Roman. 7. 8
the passage whereof is hindered: it gorgeth, swells, and sets forward
its own accustomed way more impetuously than ever it did before. But the
Apostle is speaking of a deeper mystery, and of a thing more rarely
contingent, to wit, of an apostasy from the faith. This is the sharpest of all
punishments, which GOD inflicted upon mankind for the contempt of his truth,
to cast off a people into a reprobate mind, whether we look to the actions
of God, who rejects, or to the miseries of them, who are rejected. The
actions of God, who rejects, are set down by the Prophet Zachary, The Lord
will not feed that people, yea, he will break his shepherds staff, to wit,
the staff called Zach. 11
beautiful, and the staff called bands. The miseries of them, who are
rejected, are set down by the Prophet Esai, in these words, Ye shall hear
indeed, but ye shall not understand: ye shall plainly Isai. 6. 9. 10
see, and not perceive: make the heart of this people fat, etc. So it comes
to pass, when this heavy judgment is inflicted, there is no comfort to be
found, neither in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath: When we look up
unto God, he will feed us no longer: when we look down to our selves, we
receive no comfort by the external ministry of the word, it is to us the
savor of death: yea, and we are in so desolate a case, as the Prophet
speaks, That that dies, let it die: and that that perishes, let it perish:
and let the remnant every one eat the flesh of another. Of Zach. 11. 9
this unsupportable and remediless evil, that there should be a defection
from the faith, neither could the Church of the Jews of old, nor the visible
Church of late ever be content patiently to hear, because it seemed to be
repugnant to the everlasting covenant of God, made with Abraham and his seed.
Nevertheless, that same blessed mouth, which made the covenant with Abraham
and his seed, fore-tolde also, that they should be cast off into a reprobate
sense, and that the Great Shephearde would feed them no longer. Now both these
things being uttered by the blessed mouth of God, it is certain, that there is
infallible truth in both: and it is better, and more agreeable with the honor
of God, to search out what way both these things can consist without
impeachment one of another, than so to talk of the covenant, that we should
gainsay the prophecy of the defection of the Church of the Jews. And the
Apostle Paul has wisely observed, that the covenant of God is not annulled by
the defection of the most part of the I^wes, in respect that a remnant Romans 11.
5
are saved through the election of grace. The Roman Church in like manner,
casts up, that God has promised, that the Matthew. 16
gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. And the same God, by the
mouth of his holy Apostle has fore-tolde, that there should be a defection
from the Faith. Both these 2 Thessalonians. 2
Prophesies must be true, neither does the apostasy of the great multitude
presuppose, that the Church of Christ is perished, or the promise of God made
of none effect, but in the midst of this apostasy a remnant are saved,
according to the election of grace. Joseph, in the years of famine, was
provident, Genes. 47
and kept corn asore-hand, both for food to men and beasts, and for seed to
the ground: But Christ is more provident in the years of horrible apostasy
from the faith, to keep aforehand a saved hand-full, as seed for the
propagation of the Church. Wherefore, let no man conclude of the long lasting
apostasy of the Jews, or yet of the Popish Church, that the covenant of God
is of none effect, and that the Church is perished.

The Antichrist, of whom the Apostle speakeeh, is not one particular man,
opposite to the kingdom of Christ, as many do think: but rather a kingdom,
having forerunners, having a growth, and hinderers of the growth, having
aduancers, admirers, worshippers, followers, discouerers, against whom wars
are intended, y^a, long lasting wars, until this kingdom be drunken with
the blood of the Saints: and finally, for this kingdom God has ordained a
fall, whereat all her followers shall be sad, and lament for her sudden and
unexpected desolation: but the Saints in Heaven shall rejoice. All these
things cannot be done in one man's age. Therefore, I take the word
Antichrist, for a kingdom opposite to the Kingdom of Christ: he is called
the man of sin emphaticklie, because in multitude, ripeness, and superlatiue
excess of all kind of sins and abominations, this kingdom goes beyond
all other king^omes, lewder in manners, more corrupt in doctrine, more
blasphemous in opinion, more deceitful in carriage, more proud in attemptes,
even against them who are in authority, than any society of people has
been before: setting their mouths against the Heaven, commanding the Angels
of God to carry souls to Heaven, because their armor was crossed, their
feet were in the way, leading to the Holy Land, their intention was to fight
against the Saracenes. This did Pope Clemens the sixth, in his Bull given to the
crossed soldiers. Now, whether their souls have been purged by faith in the
fountain of Christ's blood or not, it is no matter, it is enough that they
died in that journey, the Ang^ls must be obedient to the Roman Antichrist, to
carry their souls forthwith to Heaven after their death. Notwithstanding of
all this, the man of sin must be counted so complete and perfect, that he
cannot err in matters of faith, and to be in such high pre-eminence, that
albeit he carry innumerable souls headlongs to Hell, no man Gratian.
distinct. 40. cap. 6
should demand of him wherefore he did so. Yea, and further horrible sins,
such as promise breaking to Infideles and Heretics, and vile treasons against
Christian Princes, have open allowance in the kingdom of the Roman
Antichrist: and therefore he may justly be called the man of sin.

Moreover, the Antichrist is called the child of perdition, in two respects,
to wit, actiuely, and passiuely: actiuely, because he is a ringleader to
those who walk in the way of perdition: passiuely, because he is ordained for
destruction, and to be consumed by the breath of the mouth of Christ. In both
these respects Judas seems to have been the type of the Antichrist: first
he was a ringleader to the band of soldiers which came from the High Priest,
and the Rulers, to take Christ: secondly, he was appointed to destruction, and
of him Christ said Surely, the Son of man goes his way as it is written of
him, but woe be unto Mat. 26. 24
that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that
man, if he had never been borne. Now the Antichrist represented by Judas, he
is also (...), that is, the child of destruction, for both the forementioned
respects: he leads men to destruction, and he is ordained to be consumed by
the glorious appearance of Christ. How the Roman Antichrist leads men
headlonges to destruction, I might prove by many examples, but for the present
I shall content me with the example of one age, and of one nation in this age
(to wit, in the seventh CENTVRIE) absolutely led by the counsel of the
Roman Antichrist: The nation of the Goths domining in Spain, they forsook
the impious Heresy of the Arrians, whereunto they were miserably addicted, in
the days of Richaredus: After Richaredus days, they followed the Roman
chair so absolutely, that in the Councels conuened by the authority of
Sesiuandus, Chintilla, Chindasuvindus, Recesuvindus, and Bambas, whatsoever was
allowed by the Roman Church, had allowance by them: and whatsoever the Roman
Church disallowed. that was in like manner disallowed by them in the Councels
of Toledo, Bracara, and Hispalis. Yea, and in following the R^mane Church, they
were so officious, that albeit in bidding and forbidding, they exceeded not the
precepts of the Roman Church: yet in aggreadging the punishments of them who
transgressed the ordinances which they borrowed from the Roman chair, they
ouer-went the severity of the Roman discipline.

In the ninth Council of Toledo, marriage of men in spiritual callings is
detested in Spain, as it was in Italy: but the children Conc. Tolet. 9. can.
10.
procreated by Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, etc. were ordained to be more
severely punished in Spain, than they were in Italy: for in Italy we read
of Theodoretus, that he was the son of Theodorus, bishop of Jerusalem, yet was
he admitted to the Popedom, and was successor to Pope Ihonne the fourth: but
in Spain the children of bishops were not only deprived of the heritage
^ppertaining to their parents, but also were mancip^ted to perpetual service,
as slaves and servants who are bought with money. In like manner, in the
fourth Council of Toledo, gathered Conc. Tol. 4. can. 4.
by Sesinandus, they are superstitious out of measure even beyond the Roman
Church in doxologies, when Gloria Patri is sung, they ordained, that to Gloria,
Honor should be added, with intermination of punishment to them who should say,
Gloria Patri, and Filio, without this addition, Gloria, and Honor, Patri and
Filio: in so doing, damning the very perfect form of prayer indicted by our
Lord to his Disciples, the doxologie whereof is this, For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the glory, for ever, Amen: Matt. 6. 13
without mention of the word Honor. In a word, the Goths riegning in
Spain, the more officious they were in following absolutely all the customs
of the Roman Antichrist, the nearer they were to eternal destruction, because
he is justly called the man of sin, and the child of destruction. Now it
is to be marked, that these two names of the Antichrist, to wit, the man of
sin, and the child of perdition, they go conjunctly together, because when
sin is near, destruction also is at hand, except sin by repentance be
abolished: And ye Prophet pronounces a woe against them that put far away
the evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity. More-ouer, the Apostle
fore-telleth, that Amos 6. 3
the Antichrist shall be disclosed, or reueiled: that is, how soever he shall
mask himself with the vizards of holy titles, that he is the Vicare of Christ
on earth, and the successor of Peter, and to him is concredite the care of all
the sheep of Christ, dispersed in the whole world: Nevertheless, he shall be
stripped naked, and all these masks shall be plucked from his face, and he
shall be known to be an adversary to Christ, and an abuser of Christ's
people. Now consider, that this prophecy presupposes, that the Antichrist
should be unknown for a long space, and in end, should be discovered. If it
shall be demanded, how could the Antichrist be unknown, who lurked not in a
corner, but sat in ye Temple of God, and had power of government of
Church-affaires? To this I answer, That in time of the darkness of the night
a foe is hardly discerned from a friend: and the smoke of the bottomless pit,
whereby both the sun and the air were darkened, Apocal. 9. 2
might easily have dimmed the sight of simple people, so that they could not
discern the insolent pride of the Antichrist, usurping the honor only due to
Christ. The means of the discovery of the Antichrist, I remit unto the 8.
verse, and I proceed to the next verse. In the 4. verse of the chap. the
Apostle c^lleth the Antichrist an adversary, to wit, to God: and he subjoyne^h
the reason, because be exalts himself against every thing that is called
God, or that is worshipped. First let us mark, that the Antichrist is pointed
out by one of the names of the Devil, to wit, that he is an adversary, to
God, to his word, and to his Saints, yea, an adversary in the superlatiue
degree, because he usurps the honor only due to Christ. Mortal Princes
count all subjectes, who are disobedient to their laws, to be their
adversaries: but if any man usurp the title of the Kingdom, the King will
count him his corriuall, and principal adversary: Even so, amongst all the
adversaries of Christ, he is counted his principal enemy, who enricheth
himself with the honor due to Christ only. Howsoever he call himself the
servant of the servants of God, yet indeed he usurps upon himself higher
honor than is due unto a mortal man, and therefore is called an adversary to
God: for the Lord will judge the world according to his Gospel, as the Apostle
speaks, Roman. 2. 16. and not according to our conceits.

The two principal points of the honor of Christ, are Faith and Obedience.
The Roman Antichrist, for to move ignorant people to put their trust in him,
as the Vicare of Christ in earth, takes upon him power to open the gates of
Paradise to whom he pleases, as an absolute commander of Heave, and to deliver
to the Devil and send to Hell, by his anathemes and cursinges, whom he
pleases, as absolute commander of Hell, and to loose prisoned souls out of
purgatory, as absolute commander of purgatory, and to distribute the
kingdoms of the earth at his pleas^re, as if the earth were his, and he had
power to confer all the glory of the dominions of the world to whom
he^pleaseth. All this is done to move people to put their trust in him, as said
is. The other principal point of ye honor of Christ, is absolute Obedience to
his blessed will, without disputation, doubting, or resoning in ye contrary, as
Abraham ye father of ye faithful did, Ge^. 22. The like obedience the Romans
Antich. demands to all his laws and ordinan^es, even to such as are
repugnant to the law of God, as namely, to invocation of Saints, worshipping
of images, etc. therefore he is justly counted the principal adversary of
Christ.

The Antichrist is said to exalt himself against all that is called God, or is
worshipped, because he takes upon him to dispense against the law of GOD,
which argues, that he arrogateth unto himself authority above the
lawe-maker: for no law (as I have declared already) can be dispensed
withal, but either by the same authority by which it is made, or by a greater.
Against Christ's Kingly, Priestlie, and Prophetical offices, he aduaunceth
himself, in abrogating the institution of Christ concerning the receiving of
the blessed Sacrament of the Supper, under both forms of bread and wine. In
prohibition of marri^ge and meats, and in setting up a new propitiatory
sacrifice in the Church, as it were protesting the insufficiency of the
sacrifice of Christ once offered. Let us in this point mark the degrees of the
defection of the visible Church, not unlike unto the decaying estate of a
diseased man: First, his natural sap and moisture decays: Secondly,
corrupt humors do abound: Thirdly, his blood is inflamed, and perilous fevers
seazing upon his body, do threaten death: Even so in the Church, when holy
exercises of prayer and preaching are intermitted, this is a biginning of
evil: Next, when superstitions, rites, and ceremonies, serving to no
profitable use, do abound in the Church, (as vicious humors in the body)
then is the defection increased: But when the visible Church admits another
Lawgiver than Christ, and stoupeth under the yoke of his obedience, then is
the defection from the faith come unto a ripeness, and the Antichrist then
siueth in the Temple of God. showing himself that he is God: and if the Lord
had not kept unto himself a remnant by his gracious election, the visible
Church had been like unto Sodom and Gomorrha.

In the 5. verse, he says, Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I
told you these things? This verse is not superfluously casten in, to admonish
the Thessalonians, that the coming of the Antichrist was a matter of great
moment, and tending to the hurt of many men's souls: therefore it was
needful, that timous premonition should be made unto the Saints, to eschew
the danger to come. This is the Lords customable dealing, in matters grave,
weighty, and serious, to give aduertisementes proportionallie agreeing with
the nature of the thing fore-tolde. But what shall we speak of the lethargy
and security of the world? we never read that men were so sluggishe, and
ouer-laide with so deep security, as when they were forewarned of great
things to come: as if the loud sound of the trumpet of God served to none
other use, but only to lull men into a heavy sleep. The deluge of waters,
the first coming of Christ, the destruction of Jerusalem, the coming of the
Antichrist, and the great tempest of the wrath of God, that shall be reueiled
at Christ's second appearance: all these things (I say) have been fore-tolde:
but the contempt of the warnings of God, have procured, and will procure, the
heavy weight of Gods indignation. We read of Christ's Disciples, that when
they saw their master walking upon the waters, they supposed he had been a
spirit, or (...), that is, a fantasy, and delusion: this they did only at
one time, in f^are and weakness; but the wicked at all times, and in the
obstinacy of their unbelieving hearts, call both the promises and
threatninges of GOD (...), that is, fantasies and delusions. For this cause,
the Apostle, both by word and writ, inculcateth this proph^sie of the coming
of the Antichrist, into the ears of the Thessalonians, to the end they should
not lightly regard the fore-warnings of God, as the sonnes-in-law of Lot did
in Sodom.

Now follow the 6. and 7. verses, with the beginning of the 8. verse, And now
ye know what withholds, that he might beercueiled in his own time: for the
mystery of iniquity does already work: only he, who now withholds
shall let, till he be taken out of the way: and then shall the wicked man be
reueiled.

The natural order requires, that in these words three things should be
entreated: First, how the mystery of iniquity began to work in Paul's
days: Secondly, who is this, that should be a let and hinderance to the
Antichrist: And thirdly, when was it, that he was made out of the way, so
that he could hinder the Antichrist no longer. The mystery of iniquity began
to work even in the days of Paul, because some Heretics sprang up at that
time, who denied the divinity of Christ, such as Ebion, and Cerinthus, these
appertained to the kingdom of the Antichrist, because they were his
forerunners, beginning with entising speeches to seduce men from the truth of
God. And what was wanting in them, except power, and uncontrolled authority,
to bring to a full ripeness the work of defection, already begun. So
Heresies, and the doctrine of lies, is the very first foundation of the
kingdom of the Antichrist. And like as an Eagle, that builds her nest in the
face of a steepie rock, the first stick that she carries to her nest,
belongs to the mass thereof: Even so, without all controversy, the
Heretics, who prepared a way to the kingdom of the Antichrist, they are
members of the body of his kingdom. If any man shall object, that the chair
of Rome damned the old Heresies of Ebion, Cerynthus, and of the Manichies, and
therefore such men cannot be justly reckoned to appertain to his kingdom,
whom he separated from his fellowship, by detesting their opinions: To this I
answer, That like as the gold, and silver, the brass, and iron, and likewise
the claye of the great image, which Nebuchadneser saw^ in his vision, had no
agreement one with another, yet in this Danie. 2. 32 33
they agreede, to constitute one stately image, opposite unto the little stone
hewne out of the rock without hands: even so, heresies are repugnant one unto
another, yet all belong unto the kingdom of darkness, and to the throne of
the Antichrist, set up against the glorious throne of the kingdom of Christ:
Yea, and these Heretics, who impugned the true doctrine of the person of
Christ, they brake the ice, as it were, and gave example to others, to impugn
the doctrine of his office also.

In the second place, by him that lets, Chrysostom understands Chrysostom.
homil. 4. in 2. These. cap. 2
the Roman Empire, which consisting into its own integrity, with
undiminished and vnbrangled authority, the Roman Antichrist durst not attempt
high things, and things far surmounting the modest carriage of subjects. And
here by the way it is to be marked, that like as the Apostle by him who
lets and hinders, understands not one particulare Emperor only, but an
Empire, wherein one Emperor succeeds to another: Even so, by him that is
let, he understands not one particulare man, but the estate of an usurped
kingdom, wherein likewise one succeeds to another. But now let us see how
the Roman Emperor, so long as he consisted in his own full strength, did
hinder the attemptes of the Antichrist: First, no man was admitted bishop of
Rome a long time, without the consent of the Emperor: Secondly, inuestment of
bishops, by staff and ring, being likewise in the Emperors hands, the
excessive pride of the Roman bishops (even after they were called Uniuersall
Bishops) was mightily borne down: Thirdly, so long as Emperors kept in their
own hand the power of conuocating General and National Councels, the bishops
of Rome all this while acknowledged Roman Emperors for their sovereign
lords: But when the Emperors were bereaved of all their forementioned
rightes, as Palinurus, by storm of weather, was cast out of the ship, and the
rudder, by violence of the tempest, was washen out of his hands, then all
things were turned up side down, as we shall hear (God willing) in the
subsequent words, wherein he prophesies, that he who lets should be taken
out of the way, that is, the Roman Empire shall be utterly weakened, so that
it cannot make resistance against the Antichrist, but it stoupeth under his
might, adoreth him as the Vicare of Christ, who cannot err and as a god on
earth, is content to be crowned by him, and to make the oathe of alleadgeance
to the Pope. In what base estate are the Emperors of late days? how is their
gold turned into dross? and the might of their dominion into servile
subjection unto the Antichrist? as was shortly comprised in these verses,

ROMA tibi serui fuerant domini dominorum:
Seruorum serui nunc tibi sunt domini.
Is not the Roman Empire so far deuested of their ancient glory, that
whereas their predecessors wanted nothing of the dominion of the habitable
continent known in their time, except a little part in the East, now it has
no commandment, except in a little part of the West?

But it may be demanded, How can the bishops of Rome be blamed, as
ouer-throwers of the glory of the Roman Empire? seeing it was the Saracenes
who undid the Empire of the East, and the Goths, Vandales, Lombardis, Hunnes,
Auares, Danes, and Normandis, weakened the Empire of the West: To this I
answer, That the Bishops of Rome were like unto a lowse tooth, and a wrested
foot, and were deceitful friends, both to the Emperors of the East, and of
the West, rendering unto them evil for good. Did not the Emperor Justinian
deliver them from the tyranny of the Goths? Did not Tiberius the second
support them very kindly, when they were sore pinched with famine, and
oppressed by the Lombards? But what recompense rendered the bishops of Rome to
the Emperors of the East, when they found their estate to be weak? Even such
as the Edo^ites rendered to Gods people in the day of their trouble, of whom
the Prophet speaks, Thou should not once have looked on their affliction
in the day of their destruction, nor have laid hands on their substance in
the day of Obad. 13
their destruction: Even so, the bishops of Rome should not so much as have
laid their hands upon the substance of the Emperors of the East, who had
dealt so kindly and friendly with them. Nevertheless, the first occasion that
they found to enrich themselves with the possessions of the Emperors of the
East, they ouer-passed it not, but took the gift of Exarchatus Rauennae, and
Pentapolis in Italy, which duly belonged to the Emperor of the East: These
dominions, I say, they took by the gift of Pipinus, king of France (who was
prodigal in bestowing unto the chair of Rome other men's possessions) and they
possess the dominions afore-saide, with their towns, villages, and
territories, even until this day. On the other part, Carolus Magnus, Emperor
of the West, was friendly to the chair of Rome, and made them free of the
molestation of the Lombards. Notwithstanding, after his death, and the death of
Ludouicus Pius his son, when cruel hostility fell out amongst the children
of Ludouicus Pius, to wit, Lotharius, Jews, and Charles, whereby the puissance
of France was weakened, and the Danes and Normans got the more easily place in
France. What was the carriage of Sergius the second, bishop of Rome, at this
time? Platina writes, that he sent Gregorius, Archbishop of Rauenna, to
reconcile these brethren, who contended one against another, with insupportable
hatred: but the tragedy of Ludouicus Pius house, declared, that the bishops of
Rome were little grieved, when the estate of Emperors houses decayed
providing, their own estate did increase. And I remit to the course of the
History, what friendship the posterity of Carolus Magnus, and his son
Ludouicus Pius, found at the hands of the bishop of Rome, for all their
bountiful kindness toward that unthankful chair. Always, remember the
words of Solomon, He that ewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart
from his house, Proverb. 17. 13.

What shall I speak of the Imperial authority, when it came amongst the
Germans? Otto the first, a worthy Emperor, what fidelity found he in Pope
Ihonne the thirteenth, whom Onuphrius calls Ihonne the twelft: He assisted
Berengarius, and his son Albertus, against the Emperor Otto, nothing
regarding his oath of alleadgeance made to the contrary: And albeit every
Emperor was not so magnanimous as Otto, and every Pope was not so beastly as
Pope Ihonne the thirteen: yet when one of the best Emperors, and one of the
worst Popes were matched together, we may easily perceive whereat the Popes
aimed continually, to wit, at the undoing of the dominion of the Emperor.

By the way let us mark diverse affections striving in Onuphrius, as they did
of old in Medea, when she killed her own child, to wit, anger and motherly
affection contended one against another in her: but anger got the vpper-hand,
and the child was killed: Even so in Onuphrius, a desire to cover the
turpitude of the Roman chair, contendeth with a necessity to report the
truth of the History, and truth gets the vpper-hand at this time, and he
leaves the defense of this vile beast.

The valiant courage of the Emperor Hendrie the fourth, counted no less
fortunate in warre-fare, than Julius Caesar was in old times: and the gallant
spirits of Frederick the first and second, could not mende this matter: the
curses of the Antichrist so terrified the world, that they forgot their duty
to their sovereign lords, and suffered them to be trodden under the feet of
the Antichrist.

In the 8. verse follows the prophecy of the discovery and destruction of
the Antichrist: concerning his discovery, three things are to be considered:
First, who shall be discovered: Secondly, when shall he be discovered: and
thirdly, the mean^s of his discovery. The Antichrist is he who shall be
discovered, to whom the Apostle attributes a new name, and calls him that
wicked man Is he not pointed out already with a sufficient number of odious
names? He is called the Antichrist an adversary Apoc. 20. 10 and 14. 9 and
17. 5
to God, the man of sin, the child of perdition: and in other places, the
false prophet, the beast that is worshipped, great Babylon the mother of
whoredoms: which style, albeit they transfe^re it unto the Roman chair, when
the ten persecu^ing Emperors compelled men to worship heathen gods: yet the
holy Scripture refers it to that whore, who braggeth that she is married,
(to wit, to Christ) and she is not a widow, Apocal. cap. 18. verse 7. And
this agrees better with the chair of Rome, wherein Popes do sit, than with
the chair of Rome when persecuting Emperors sat into it.

Besides all these odious names, the Apostle adds another hateful name, and
calls him (...), that is, that lawless man, who will be subject to no law,
neither divine nor humane, but he will be above all laws: he will judge all
men, and be judged of no man: what regard he has of the law of GOD, it
may be known by this, That the breaking of the Popes law is counted a
greater sin, than the breaking of the Law of GOD: for in matters of
marriage, and meats, if the Popes law be transgressed, foorth-with a man is
counted an Heretic: But when the Law of GOD is broken, for a small sum of
money, a pardon may be purchased: Yea, further I am bold to say, that the
most discrepant Idiomes of the GREEK language, such as the ATTICKE and
IONICKE Idiomes, they differ not so far, as the laws of CHRIST and
ANTICHRIST differ one from another. Albeit the Atticke Dialect delights in
contractions, and the Ionicke in resolutions, yet notwithstanding one, and the
self same thing, in substance and matter, may be uttered in both these
discrepant Idiomes. But the Laws of CHRIST and Antichrist, are so opposite in
matter and substance, that they cannot both consist and stand: namely, when
the Law of CHRIST bids, allows, and approoueth: and the law of the
Antichrist, in that same subject, forbids, disalloweth, and disapprooueth.
The Law of GOD (Exodus 20.) counts worshippers of Images, haters of GOD: The
law of the Antichrist counts them good Catholics. The law of CHRIST, in
the doctrine of Faith, Invocation, and Mediation, sends us only to the
Creator: The law of the Antichrist, sends us to the creatures also: so that
the Antichrist is justly called (...), or a lawless man, in respect he will
not be obedient to the Laws of CHRIST.

Concerning humane and civil ordinances: He who dare assoyle subjectes from
the oathe of alleadgeance to their sovereign lords, he undoes all civil
government, policy, and laws from the very foundation. I superceede to
write further in this point.

In the second place, let us consider the time, wherein the Antichrist shall
be reueiled, pointed out in these words, (...): that is, and then shall the
wicked man be reueiled: which words being relative to that which
immediately passed before, imports, that the Antichrist should be reueiled
at that same time, when the mighty Monarchy of the Romans was trodden under
his feet. Then it seemed, that all the nations of the world should adore and
worship the beast continually, and that the tongues of men should have been
locked up in silence: so that no man ever should take boldness to speak one
word against the whore of Babylon: yea, and the Holy Apostle describes the
great security of the mother of whoredoms, saying in his heart, I sit, being
a Queen, and am not a widow, and shall see no mourning, Apocal. 18. 7. At this
same time the unchangeable decree of the Almighty God appointed, that this
wicked one should first be reueiled, and afterward should be destroyed. Wherein
it is to be noted, with what patient expectation we should attend upon the
times and seasons, wherein it should please the Lord to perform his own
works: for like as Christ thought it more expedient, and more te^ding to the
advancement of His own glory, to raise Lazarus out of his grave, (Joan. 11.)
rather than out of the bed of his infirmity: Even so, the Lord thought meet
to suffer the Antichrist to mount up unto the top of all his desired
prehemine^ce, and then the Lord put hand to work, both to discover, and to
destroy him, to the further manifestation of his own unspeakable power and
wisdom.

In the third place, the means are to be considered, whereby the Antich.
should be discovered, namely, by ye sincere preaching of the Gospel, by ye
mouths of men, holy and zealous, (Apoc. 11. 3) and in gifts not unlike unto
Henoch and Helias. Now seeing the man of sin is to be discovered by ye sincere
preaching of the Gospel, let us consider what benefit redoundeth to us by the
true and sincere preaching of the Gospel of CHRIST: it is like unto the light
of the day, which manifests every thing in its own colors: The thing
that is beautiful, is seen to be be beautiful, and the thing that is evil
favored, is seen to be such as it is: where of the madness of some
Heretics, such as Gnostici and M^nichet, is clearly perceived: who rejected
the Scriptures of God, because in them is contained a commemoration of the
faults of the Patriarchs. Shall the light be despised, because it manifests
both beauty and desormitie, both strength and debilitie, both the perfection
of a complete body, and the imperfection of a dismembered and mutilate body?
In like manner, the Holy Scriptures are to be had in the more reverend
regard, when they describe every thing in their own colors, and manifests
on the one part the riches of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and on the
other part the falsehood, subtlety, hypocrisy, and pride of the Antichrist,
to the end, that Gods people may eschew the Antichrist, and rejoice in the
sweet salvation of Christ Jesus.

This discovery of the Antichrist, in some weak measure, began about the
year of our Lord 1300. at what time, learned men, fearing the tyranny of the
Emperor of the Turks, fled to Italy, and restored the Grieke and Latin
languages to their own purity. This vindicating of languages, from the gross
barbaritie of those times, opened a door of knowledge, and a desire of
reading, with a judicious consideration of that which was read, whether or not
it were a suppositious work. More-ouer, God anointed the eyes of many learned
men, with the eye-salue of understanding whose sight increasing by degrees, in
end manifested to the world, that the chair of Rome was the seat of the
Antichrist. Marsilius Patavinus. in his book called Defensor Pacis, writes,
that the Clergy of Rome is a den of thi^ues, and that the doctrine of the
Pope is not to be followed, because it leads unto eternal death. Franciscus
Petrarcha, a man famously learned, calls Rome the whore of Babylon, the
School, and mother of error, the temple of Heresy, the nest of treachery,
growing and increasing by the oppression of others. This same Author (about the
year of our Lord 1350.) writes to one of Petrarch. Epist. 19
his friends. Let none evil desire entangle thee, that thou should dress
thy self again, to those Princes of darkness, etc. To what purpose would
thou go thither? That thou might see good men borne down, and evil men
advanced? Eagles creeping, and Asses flying? Foxes in chariots, and Ravens in
castles, and Doves in the dung^? W^lues to be free, and Lambs to be in
bands? Finally, Christ to be b^nished, and Beelzebub to be judge? To these
spectacles am I called backc again, I will not hearken, neither do I agree
with them, nor they with me. O cruel and wicked sect of men, loving no-bodie
but themselves, and that altogether preposterously, and wickedly! Who shall
relieve the oppressed woilde, and the afflicted town? Who shall reform the
enormitie of manners? Who shall collect the dispersed sheep? Who shall reprove
errontous Pastors? Who shall reduce and bring them back again unto their own
chaires? Shall there be none end of licentiousness and sin? Has the
Spirit in vain threatened by the Prophet, These things have thou done, and I
held ^y tongue, therefore thou thoughtest, that I was like unto thee. John
Wiklef, a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, affirmed, that whatsoever the Pope
and his Cardinals command, which cannot be deduced clearly out of Scriptures,
this same is to be counted Heretical, and not to be obeyed. These few
witnesses of God, holy like unto Hanoch, the seventh from Adam, and zealous
like unto Helias, by the example of their courageous zeal, and zealous
courage, incited a greater number of Holy men in Germany, Switserland, France,
Britanie, and Poll, to be witnesses to the truth of God: whose number, albeit
it was as contemptible in the eyes of Roman Prelates, as the number of the
army of Alexander of Macedo was in the eyes of Darius, king of Persia.
Notwithstanding, by these witnesses of God, the Antichrist has been
discovered, the city of spiritual Babylon has been shaken, the head of the
beast has been wounded, and all his Physicians have much ado to cure his
wound again.

But let us proceed to that which follows in the end of the 8. verse:
namely, that the Antichrist should not only be reueiled, but also should be
consumed by the Spirit of the mouth of Christ: whereof it may be perceived,
that the Lord will not abolish the kingdom of the Antichrist, as he did
abolish other Monarchies of the Babylonians. Persians, Grecians, and Romans:
but he keeps the kingdom of the Antichrist aforehand to be consumed by
the tempest of his own wrath. This argues the great indignation of God
against the kingdom of the Antichrist wherein he finds might joined
withslight, so that the Lord will draw out against him his great and mighty
sword, wherewith he visits Leuiathan, that piercing Serpent, and Leuiathan,
that crooked Serpent, and he slays the Dragon that Isai. 27. 1
is in the Sea, for all his might, the wrath of God shall be reueiled against
him from Heaven, because he has withheld Romans 1. 18
the truth in unrighteousness. Whatsoever shall be done against this mother of
whoredoms in this world, is nothing else, but an earnest-pennie of that
unspeakable wrath of God, that shall seize upon the kingdom of the Antichrist
at the latter day. More-ouer, the equity of the justice of God is to be
noted in this, that God rendereth unto the Antichrist such punishment, as does
most proportionallie agree with the nature of his fault: for by the Anathemes
and Curses of his mouth, he subdued the mighty Monarchs of the earth: so
shall Christ pronounce a Curse against him, by the power whereof he shall be
sent unto Matthew. 25
the furnace of everlasting punishment.

Now it might have been objected, How could it come to pass, that ever the
Antichrist should have obtained so great place in the Temple of God? To this
objection the Apostle returns a foure-folde answer: First, it came to pass
by the mighty operation of the Devil: Secondly, by lying miracles: Thirdly,
by the deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness: And fourthly, by the incredulity
of men who would not believe the truth of God: therefore the Lord suffered
them to be deluded with errors: These four causes are set down in the 9. 10.
11. and 12. verses, whereof when we have spoken a little, GOD willing, we
shall conclude this Treatise.

The first cause of the prevailing power of the Antichrist, is the mighty
operation of Satan, concurring with him, who is to be considered two manner
of ways, sometimes as bound, at other times as lowse and set at liberty: he
is a perilous enemy at all Apoc. 20
times, even when he is bound, in respect of our childish simplicity: we are
like unto babes, who through curiosity at sometime will come within the reach
of a bound Lion, and will be harmed by the means. But when Satan is set at
liberty, then has he a mighty operation, even so great, that albeit light
be offered unto men, yet they love darkness better than the light of God. If
ever Satan was set at ample liberty, (who is ever, for Iean. 3. 19
the Elects sake, somewhat restrained) he was set at greatest liberty, when
the Roman Antichrist had greatest pre-eminence: for at that time the smoke of
the bottomless pit so ouercouered all things with darkness, that men saw
neither Heaven nor Hell, nor yet themselves: The Heaven was darkened, because
Apocal. 9. 2
men sought an entry into it another way, than by the blood of the
everlasting Covenant of God, by the worthiness whereof the most Holy place is
made patent to us, and none other way: And Hell was darkened, because men lived
in a deep Hebr. 9
security, as if they had made a covenant with Death and Hell: Isai. 28. 18
the Popes pardon, and the fulfilling of the penance enjoined by the Priest,
was counted a complete armoure to save them against the fiery indignation of
Gods wrath: Yea and men saw not themselves, but in seeking to establish their
own righteousness, they were not subject to the righteousness of God. Now it
is our duty, with all our hearts, to bless the King of Heaven, Romans 10. 3
who has begun to cast Satan into bands again: for experience of our
wavering minds declares, that if Satan were set at liberty again, it were
an easy thing to transport us headlonges to all kind of errors.

The second cause of the prevailing power of the Antichrist, is signs and
lying wonders: in the Grieke language (...), signifies, miracles, confirming a
lying doctrine. All the miracles of the Antichrist, are either false miracles,
wherein nothing is wrought above nature, nor contrary to nature, or else the
end of his miracles is the confirmation of a false doctrine. The Roman Church
braggeth much of miracles, as if the power of working miraculous works were a
gift continually to remain, and an undoubted token of the true Church of God:
Howbeit Holy Scripture attributes to false Teachers, who intise people to
worship strange gods, power to work signs and wonders. Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2
Socrates also, in his Ecclesiastical History, writes of Eusebius Emisenus,
an Arrian Heretic, under the reign of Constantius, Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 9
who had the gift of working miracles. And Platina writes of miracles wrought
at the sepulcher of Rhotaris, king of Lombardis, Platina in vita Joan. 4
an Arrian prince. Yea, and the Apostle Paul says, if I had all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I were nothing. 1. Cor. 13. 2
Now what wisdom is it to count working of miracles one of the principal
notes of the true Church of Christ. which is found also in the kingdom of the
Antichrist, and amongst Heretics, and amongst them who in the sight of God
are counted nothing? if we taught a doctrine, either in substance or form,
different from the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, it were good reason,
that we should confirm it with new miracles. But if we teach no doctrine,
except the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, then is that ancient doctrine
already sufficiently confirmed by ancient miracles wrought by Christ, and his
Apostles. Now let us set forward to the purpose, and let us speak of the
false miracles, whereby the kingdom of the Antichrist was advanced, and that
through the mighty operation of Satan: for like as Achab is said to have
consented to the death of Naboth, because the letters which procured his death,
were sealed with his ring: Even so, Satan liked well the advancement of the
Antichrist, because he set himself to work, by many lying miracles, to advance
the kingdom of the Antichrist. Before the 600. year of our Lord when the way
was preparing for the Uniuersall Bishop, was not the worshipping of the Cross
confirmed in Apamea, by the fi^e which shined about Thomas, bishop there, and
burned him not. The town of Edessa, was thought to be saved Euagr. lib. 4
cap. 26
by the picture of Christ dipped in water: which picture was alleged to have
been sent to King Agbarus. The town of Sergiopolis Idem, lib. 4 cap. 27
to have been s^ued by the relics of the martyr Sergius. But after the 600.
year of our Lord, false miracles were so Idem, lib. 4 ^p. 28
multiplied, that it would be tedious to read ye shortest abridgement of them
that could be compiled. The miracles wrought by the relics of Saint Oswald,
King of ENGLAND, written by Beda. The miracles wrought by the relics of John
Baptist, written by Sigebertus: and of S. Sebastian, written by Paulus
Diaconus. The miracles of the popes, Deus dedit, and pope Agatho, written by
Platina. The miracles of S. Dionyse, S. Maurice, and S. Martine, who
miraculously delivered the soul of Dagoberius, King of France, out of the
hands of evil spirits, written also by Platina. The miracle of Immas, a
captive and a prisoner in ENGLAND, whom no bands could bind, because his
brother, being a Priest and supposing that Immas had been slain in the
battle, and that his soul had been in purgatory, he made prayers to GOD,
and said Mass often times, for relief of his brothers soul: the benefit
whereof, as Beda supposes, redounded to the weal of Immas soul and body. O
foolish fable! and yet thought worthy, by master Brestow, by a new
co^memoration thereof, to be kept in continual remembrance. To be short, the
Legendes, Portuses, Festiuals, Promptuaries, Sermones, and other books of the
Roman Church, which are all stuffed so full, that nothing almost is thought
to be sufficiently proved, that is not confirmed by a number of false and
frivolous miracles: all these, I say, clearly prove, in what account false
miracles were, and are, in the kingdom of the Antichrist. Every man, who is a
judicious Reader, may consider, that I leave this point, not for l^cke of
abundance of matter, but for fear to offend the Reader with superfluity of
miracles unworthy to be rehearsed.

The third cause of the prevailing power of the Antichrist, is set down^ in
the 10. verse, in these words, In all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness
amongst them that perish. In which words the Apostle points out unto us
three things: First, that the mark and butte, whereat the Antichrist
shoots, is unrighteous: Secondly, the means, whereby he endeavors to
attain unto his intended purpose, are deceitful: and thirdly, that the
deceitfulness of the Antichrist shall not hurt the elect of God, but only
them that perish. The principal butte, and end whereat they aimed
continually, was superiority and pre-eminence above their brethren. The
deceitful means, whereby they attained to that pre-eminence, were flattery
lies, and f^lse accusations of good men. They flattered the Emperors, Phocas
and Basilius: They falsified the acts of the Council of Nice, for excessive
desire to be counted judges of appellations: They accused the bishops of
Rauenna, most falsely, of the He^esie of (...): And not content with
superiority over their brethren, they aimed continually at the honor due to
Christ, that is, to be law-giuers in the Church of God. This was a matter of
greater difficulty to be brought to pass: for albeit a man may climb up
unto the top of the highest mountain in the world, yet can he not reach
his hand above the Sun and Moon, and the glistering lights of the
firmament: Even so, when all the Bishops in the world are casten under the
feet of the Bishops of ROME, how dare they presume with sacrilegious
boldness, to make themselves companions to CHRIST, and to be Lawe-giuers in
the Church? By deceivable means also this unrighteousness behooued to be
brought to pass: for a false opinion was settled in the hearts of the people,
That in matters of Faith the Bishop of ROME could not err: So ignorant
people, bewitched with vain hopes, without all due examination, received all
their ordinances, how repugnant soever they were to the ordinances of CHRIST.

The last cause wherefore the ANTICHRIST shall prevail so mightily, is the
power of the wrath of GOD, justly punishing the contempt of His truth in the
world. The contempt of mercy deserves punishment, and the contempt of great
mercy deserves great punishment. Now it is certain, that amongst all the
rich treasures of the mercy of GOD, CHRIST is the greatest, with whom, and
for whose sake, all other things are given, as the Apostle PAVL speaks, in
the eight Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, and the thirty and two verse.
And seeing CHRIST is manifested to the world by the preaching of the Gospel,
the contempt thereof is an utter rejecting of CHRIST. And what wonder is it
that GOD suffer them to be deluded with errors, who will not belecue the
truth of His word?

The strong delusions, or efficacy of error, as the GREEKS word sounds,
(...), is rather to be referred to the ostentation of signs and wonders, than
to the power of the doctrine that shall be under the ANTICHRIST: for it is
said, (In the Gospel according to Saint MATTHEW, in the twentle and fourth
Chapter, and the twenty and fourth verse thereof) There shall arise false
christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that
if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect.

The minds of people in all ages have been mightily transported with signs
and wonders, in so much, that the GENTILES firmly believed, that there was a
divine power in IVPPITER, because the LORD permitted the Devil to raise a
mighty storm of wind, and to ouer-blowe with sand the army of CAMBYSES,
which went to PENTAPOLIS, of purpose to spoil the Temple of IVPPITER,
AMMONIVS. Herodot. in Thaleia.
The GRECIANS likewise believed, that there was divinity in APOLLO, because
GOD permitted the Devil to shake the mountain of PARNASSVS, and to destroy a
great number of the army of ZERXES, who came to spoil Herodot. in Ourania.
the Temple of DELPHVS. Heathen people were ravished with admiration of works
which seemed miraculous: But Christians, to whom the written word of GOD
belongs, they should regard no miracle, which leads them from the form
of true worshipping, set down in the written word of GOD, (DEVTRONOM. CHAP.
XIII.) for all such miracles are called by the Apostle, (...), that is,
miracles of falsehood, or miracles confirming a false doctrine.

Now blessed be our GOD, who by the breath of His own mouth has begun to
remove the mistie cloud of horrible darkness, and who has made the beams
of His truth to shine upon us. And the LORD establishe our souls with His
saving Grace, unto the end, and in the end,

Amen.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
THE soul of the Antichrists kingdom is the Mass, which being abolished,
the Antichrists kingdom cannot consist. Now, therefore, it follows by due
order, that I should speak of the Sacrifice of the Mass, keeping this
method: first to search out if it be an ancient Service in the Church of God:
secondly, to search out the definition of the Mass: and thirdly, to declare
the absurdities of the Mass.

To prove the Mass to be an ancient Sacrifice, used and approved in the
Primitive Church, they allege the liturgy of Saint James, the books of
Abdias, bishop of Babylon, the books of Martialis, bishop of Bordeaux, and one
of the seventy Antiqui^.
Disciples, the books of Clement and of Saint Dionyse, the liturgies of
Basil and Chrysostom, a book found in Verona, a town of Ital^e, set forth
under the name of Amph^lochius, bishop of Iconium, the head city of Lycaonia,
which describes the life and miracles of Saint Basil. But now it is time to
be ashamed of their supposititious books and legendes of lies, wherewith they
were accustomed to deceive simple people. These books, for the most part, are
so unknown to Antiquity, that there is no mention made of them in ancient
Authors. The liturgy of Chrysostom is a book falsely shrouded under his
name, because in that liturgy there is a prayer conceived for the prosperity
and welfare of Nicolaus the first, universal bishop. And it is known, that
Nicolaus the first was not borne three hundredth year and more after the death
of Chrysostom. And in the book set forth under the name of Amphilochius, a
description of the life of Thomas Bekket, bishop of Canterbury, is set down,
who was at least seven hundredth years posteriour to the days of A^philochius.
Such legendes of lies do very well agree with the kingdom of the Antichrist.

Moreover, the form of Church Discipline used of old, will prove, that there
was no such Church-seruice as the Mass: for these who had committed great
sins, by the strict discipline Hist. trip^t. lib. 9. ed. 35
of the Church, were debarred, some from hearing of Sermons, others from the
Prayers, and some from the Communion: but we read of no man, for the space of
five hundredth years, who was debarred from the sight of the Sacrifice of the
Mass, because there was no such Service in the Church for the space
aforesaid. For mine own part, I found nothing in the History, that once
seemed to countenance the Popish Mass, before the six hundredth year of our
Lord, at what time the bishop of Centum-celle made a fabulous narration, to
Gregory the first, of a man tormented in purgatory, who requested a
Churchman to offer to God consecrated hosties for his relief out of pains:
but this fable cannot prove the Mass to be an ancient Churchseruice.

Chrysostom clearly declares the form of approaching to dinine mysteries in
his time, After Sermon a deacon stood up, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Hebr. cap. 9
Homil. 17
and cried with a loud voice, (...), that is, Holy things do appertain unto
holy persons: by which words he inuiteth holy men, and such as are duly
prepared, to draw near to the participation of holy mysteries, and others, who
in conscience sound not themselves purged from the filthiness of their sins,
he exhorts to single out themselves, and not to approach to the holy Table.
This he amplifieth by a dissimilitude of the Olympiak plays, and the holy
Supper: In the Olympiak plays (says Chrysostom) an harolde stood up, and
after he had pointed out a man's name, who offered to give a proof of his
valor in the Olympiak exercises, then the harolde cried with a loud voice,
(...)? that is, Does ani^ body accuse this man? can any body accuse him of
theft, of lewd manners, of a base and servile condition, whereby he may be
found incapable of this high honor? But when a man is disposed to approach
unto the holy mysteries, the Church deacon calls not upon others to accuse
him but sends him to the secret parlour of of his own heart, to accuse
himself, and to try if he be absolved from his sin, and if he be
refreshed with the earnest-pennie of the Holy Spirit, and made rich in good
works. This was the form of communicating in Chrysostomes days. If there was
besides this form of communicating a sacrifice also, wherein a Priest stood
at the Altar, and he only did eat and drink, and the rest were only
spectators and beholders of the sacri^ce, then let them produce testimonies of
Scripture, or ancient Fathers, whereby it may be proved, that such form of
service was in use in the Church.

Master Harding, foolishly singing the triumph before the victory, cites a
place of Chrysostom, as a full and perfect confirmation of the Antiquity of
the Mass. Chrysostom, when he was a fellow laborer, with Flauianus, bishop
of Antiochia, he Chry^ost. ad pop. An^ioch. ho^il. 6.
complained of the slownesse of the people in approaching to the holy
Communion, in these words, I see, says he, great inequality of things
amongst you: At other times, When as for the most part ye are in clean life,
ye come not (to wit, to the Communion) but at Easter, though ye have done
something amiss, yet ye come: O what custom is this! O what presumption is
this! the daily sacrifice is offered in vain: We stand at the Altar for
naught, there is not one that will communicate. The very purpose whereat
Chrysostom aims, should make him ashamed to cite this place as a defense of
the Mass: for Ch^ysostome is reprehending the people for resorting at so few
times, and in so small companies, unto the holy Supper, when as of old the
people were wont to communicate every day, and therefore he calls the
Lords Supper a daily sacrifice.

The Papists are so far from reproouing the people for not communicating,
that they make provision only for one to eat and drink at the Altar, and not
for many: and they inuit not the people to communicate with them, but rather
by the novelty of their new invented religion, they distinguishe the Altar
from the Communion table, and the Sacrifice from the Sacrament, far contrary
to the custom of the Primitive Church, who by a Metaphore called the Sacrament
a Sacrifice, and by the like Metaphore called the Communion table an Altar. If
any man will rudely press the words of Chrysostom, express contrary to
his meaning, let him understand that the like form of speaking is used in Holy
Scripture, where it is said, And no Joan. ^. (...)
^an received his testimony, to wit, the testimony of Christ. The meaning is
not, that no body received the testimony of Christ, but that very few
received it: Even so, the meaning of the words of Chrysostom is, that very
few of the people did communicate. And this has been very judiciously marked
by Master JEWEL, that worthy Bishop, in his disputation against master
Harding.

To be short in this head of Antiquity of the Popish Mass. Their bragging of
Antiquity is not unlike to the Gibeonites shoos, which were old, and put on
of purpose to deceive: yet Iosu. 9. 12 14
were not their shoos so old, as the shoos of GODS people, which, by the
miraculous work of GOD, lasted forty years in the Wilderness, and were not
rent. GODS people might Deuteronomy. 1. 4
have bragged indeed, of ancient and vnrent shoos, but the deceitful
Gibeonites, they bragged, and deceived Gods people with antiquity falsely
pretended. Such is the antiquity of the mass, and no better.

Before I leave this head, I will admonish the Reader, not to be deceived
with old Latin transations of Grieke Authors. Socrates writes of the
favorers of Paulinus, that after he died Socrat. lib. (...) cap. 15
they communicated not with Flauianus, bishop of Antiochia, but they kept
Assemblies apart by themselves. Now the words of the Grieke language, (...),
is better translated this way, Separatim conuentus faciebant, than as some old
Latin Wolfangus Musculus.
interpreters translate the words, Separatim missarum celebrabant solennia,
howbeit the old interpreters by missarum solennia, understand nothing but
Ecclesiastical conuentions.

IN the second head we have the definition of the Mass, to be set down, and
to be examined. The Mass is called a sacrifice propitiatory, and unbloody,
wherein the Priest offers the body of the Son of God to the Father, under
the forms of bread and wine, and that without suffering for the sins of the
quick and the dead. From the word of Sacrifice ancient Fathers did not
abhor, but they called the Holy Sacrament a Sacrifice The Words Sacrifice.
of thanksgiving and a commemoratiue Sacrifice of the death of Christ the
words of Augustine are these, Hujus sacrifitii Augus. co^tr. faust Manich.
lib. 20 cap. 21
caro ante aduentum Christi, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur: in
passione per ipsam veritatem reddebatur: post ascensum Christi, per sacramentum
memoriae celebratur: that is to say, The flesh of this sacrifice was promised
by sacrifices of similitudes: In the suffering of Christ, it was in very deed
exhibited: and after the ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by a Sacrament
of His memorial. In these words Augustine distinguishes a sacrifice
prefiguratiue before Christ's coming, and a sacrifice commemoratiue after the
Lords ascension, from the sacrifice of Christ's body in verity, and actually
exhibited upon the cross; other sacrifices point out, as types and figures,
the great sacrifice of the body of Christ once offered upon the cross: but
they are not that self same sacrifice, except by a figurative manner of
speech. And like as the town Nicopolis was not the victory of Augustus Casar,
when he faught against Antonius Plutarch. in vita Anton.
and Cleopatra, but it was only a memorial of the victory: Even so, the
commemoratiue sacrifice of the new Testament, is not the true sacrifice of
Christ's body, but only a memorial of that blessed sacrifice.

Justinius Martyr had good occasion offered unto him to write of the sacrifices
of Christ's Church, because Paganes slaundered Christians, and called them
Atheistes, in regard they offered not bloody sacrifices, nor incense, unto
their God: to whom Justinius returned this answer, That Christians offered to
GOD such sacrifices as they knew to be most acceptable to Him, to Justinius
apologia 2.
wit, the sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving. And as concerning the
creatures of God, appointed for the sustentation of mankind, we keep them
(says he) for our own use, and for the sustentation of indigent people, but
we consume them not with fire. If there had been any corporal sacrifice in the
Church of the body of the Son of God, under the forms of bread and wine,
Justinius had occasion offered unto him to have spoken of it: but he knew no
such sacrifice in his time. Yea, and the sacrament of the Lords Supper is
called, by Justinius, a Sacrifice of Justin. dialo. cum Tryph. iudeo.
thanksgiving, who confidently affirms, that prayer and thanksgiving are the
only sacrifices perfect and acceptable to GOD, even at that time when the
Sacrament is ministered, which puts us in remembrance of the Lords
suffering. Testimonies out of the books of ancient Fathers should be cited
without fraud and deceit, and should not be wrested to another sense and
meaning, than they were spoken into by the Authors. And so the word Sacrifice
could offend no man, if it were spoken in such sense as ancient Fathers spoke
it.

The Roman Church should do well, so to remember the names that ancient
Fathers have given to the Sacrament, that they should not forget, that Holy
Scripture calls it a Communion 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17
of the body and blood of Christ. Then let it be such a sacrifice, wherein
many participates of one bread and one cup, and thereby seals up, that they
are all members of one mystical body of Jesus Christ: but not such a
sacrifice wherein the people stands gazing and looking, and the Priest alone
eats and drinks, and distributeth nothing unto the people. They answer,
that the Priest, who offers at the Altar, he communicates with others, who
do the like service in other places. This is but falsehoode, in reasoning
arising upon the deceitful handeling of one word having two significations:
The word Communion imports two things: First, a Communion in religion:
Secondly, a participation of ye Holy Supper in one place, and an eating of one
bread, and drinking of one cup: and in this second sense, it is taken by the
Apostle in the 10. Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians: in which
sense their private Mass cannot be called a Communion.

The second word of the definition of the Mass is propitiatory. This word
does signify a sacrifice purchasing remission of Propitiatory. Hebr. 9. 22
sins, as the Apostle witnesses. And this honor does only appertain to
the sacrifice of Christ, who is a propitiation for our sins, and the sins
of the whole world. This ground being 1. Joan. 2. 2
once laid, that Christ is the only person, in whom the Father is well pleased
with us: and Christ's sacrifice is the only means, whereby we are reconciled
to God.

In the second place, we shall consider, wherefore the word of propitiation was
in so frequent use in the old Testament. The Exodus 25. 21
golden coucring of the Arc was called the propitiatory: likewise the tenth
day of the seventh month, whereupon the High Priest entered once in the year
within the Veil, and into the most Holy place, it was called the day of
propitiation: and the Leui. 23. 27 Levit. 4. 20
sinne-offeringes were called propitiatory sacrifices. To this doubt the
Apostle answers, that the law having the shadow of Hebr. 10. 1
good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never, with
those sacrifices, which they offer year by year, continually sanctify the
comers thereunto. By these words it is evident, that the sinne-offering, and
the blood carried within the Veil, and the golden covering of the Arc, had no
power to purge the consciences of men from sin: only they were types and
figures representing Christ, in whom that was to be actuallie performed,
which was represented by those figures. And like as no prefiguration sacrifice
in a proper sense could be called propitiatory: Even so in like manner, no
commemoratiue sacrifice of Christ's death, can be called a propitiatory
sacrifice, except typically, and figuratively.

The words of Augustine, speaking of the sacrament of the Altar, in the
celebration whereof, there was a commemoration of the names of many men, who
were departed this life, presents to Papists some occasion of cauillation:
for they say, that Augustine thought the sacrament of the Altar to be a
propitiation: August. Enchirid. ad Laurentium Idem, de octo dulcitii quest.
for men who had been of a middle-ranke, that is, neither of the best, nor of
the worst sort of people. But they who are well acquainted with Augustines
writings will not be easily miscarried with such Amphthologies as lurk in
words. True it is, that AUGUSTINE calls the Sacrament a Sacrifice: but in
what sense? A commemoratiue Sacrifice, as has been declared already. And in
the like sense, he calls the Sacrament of the Altar propitiatio, because in
it there is a commemoration of the propitiatory sacrifice, which CHRIST
offered upon the Cross. His distinction of men, who are departed, in three
ranks, some have been very good men, others have been very badde men, the
third rank have neither been the best nor the worst sort of people, together
with his doubtsome opinion concerning the estate of weak Christians, who are
departed this life, presents no solid ground to any man to build his
argument upon the testimony of a doubting author.

The next word of the definition is unbloody. How repugnant this part of the
definition is unto the former part, Unbloodie
wherein it was called a propitiatory Sacrifice, GOD willing, I shall declare
in the last head, concerning the absurdities of the Mass.

For one special respect Papists should speak sparingly of their unbloody
hostie: for they have made it bloody by the cruel shedding of the blood of
many innocent people, whom they have persecuted to the death, massacred,
tormented with forms of new invented cruelty, circumueened by false and
deceitful promises: and they have excogitated horrible treasons, the like
whereof have not been heard since the foundation of the world: and these
villainies were hatched in their hateful hearts for the establishing of their
Idolatrous Mass. Vesperae siculae, may be called an unbloody Euen-song: and
the sacrifices offered to DIANA, in TAVRICA CHERSONESVS, may be called
unbloody sacrifices, with better reason than the Popish Mass can be called
an unbloody sacrifice, because the service done to DIANA, albeit it began
with the shedding of humane blood, yet it ended with the shedding of the
blood of beasts. But the cruelty of the Papists will make no such exchange,
because they walk in the way of Cain.

The next part of the definition is this: That in the Mass the Priest offers
the body of the Son of GOD to the Father. The Priest offers the body of
Christ.
No part of the definition is more intolerable, and more flatly opposite to
holy Sripture, than this part: for holy Scripture sets down CHRIST'S
body, as the only propitiatory sacrifice, and CHRIST himself, as the
only High Priest, who offered this sacrifice. And to transfer this Heb. 10.
^0 12
high honor only due to CHRIST, unto a sinful man, it is a thing
intolerable to true Christians, who are affectioned to the glory of JESUS
CHRIST their Master and Savior.

But incase a mortal and sinful man will take upon him such boldness, as to
offer the body of the Son of GOD in a sacrifice to the Father, let us
consider, by what warrande of the calling of GOD dare he presume so to do.
Papists affirm, that when CHRIST instituted the holy Supper, at one, and the
self same time, he instituted both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, and
consecrated his Apostles, and their successors, to be Priests of the new
Testament, to offer up the body of Christ, unto His FATHER, under the forms
of Bread and Wine: and these were the words whereby they were consecrated to
Lue. 12. 19.
this Priesthood, Do this in remembrance of me. The Apostle Paul understood
the meaning of the words of Christ better than the whole Council of Trent did:
and he expounds these words. (...), that is, Do this, referring them both
to Pastors and people: To Pastors, when he says, That which I delivered unto
you, 1. Cor. 11. 23 Ibid. ver. 25
I received of the Lord: to people, when he says, As ost as ye drink, drink
it in remembrance of me. Then the Pastors do this, when they minister the
Sacrament expressly according to the institution of Christ: and the people do
this, when they eat and drink at the Lords Table in remembrance of the Lords
death. But the Apostle Paul does not expound the words, (...), as the
Council of Trent has done. More-ouer, if CHRIST in these words, (...) that
is, Do this, he ordained his disciples to be Priests of the new Testament,
and to offer in sacrifice the body of Christ to his Father: then Christ, when
he ministered the holy Supper, he offered himself in a sacrifice to the
Father: (for he bids them do that same thing which he did) and
consequently he offered himself at two diverse times, and behooved to suffer
twice, as the Apostle testifies, which is an absurd Hebr. 9. 25 26
thing once to think such a thing.

Further, I may boldly affirm, that the Leuiticall sacrifices were not so
far different from the sacrifice of Christ, as the Mass is different from
it: The Leuiticall sacrifices differed in many things from the sacrifice of
Christ: as namely in the order of priesthood in the worthiness of the Priest,
in the excellency Heb. 7. 8. 9 10
of the sacrifice, in the preciousnesse of the Tabernacle, in the glory of the
Veil, and most Holy place, and finally, in the virtue of the blood that was
brought within the most Holy place: Notwithstanding of all these differences
betwixt the Leuiticall priesthood, and the priesthood of Christ: yet there was
some agreement betwixt them, namely this, that both of them were instituted by
God. But the sacrifice of the Mass, over and besides all other differences,
whereby it is distinguished from Christ's sacrifice, it is not the institution
of God, but a foolish invention of the brain of man. Under the forms of
bread and wine.


The next part of the definition that Christ's body is offered under the
accidents of bread and wine, agrees not well with the glory whereinto Christ
entered by his ascension: for like as the resurrection of Christ has glorious
priueledges, he being ra sed from death, death has no more dominion over him:
Even so, the Roman. 6. 9
ascension of Christ to Heaven has glorious priueledges: for he who ascended
to Heaven, he sits at the right hand of the power of God, and will come
again in the clouds of Heaven: and it repugneth Mat. 27. 64
as far to the glory of his ascension to appear again in a base
similitude, as it repugneth to the glory of his resurrection to die again.
But so it is, that the accidents of bread and wine are a base similitude to
the blessed and glorified body of Christ to put on: yea, and baser than the
shape of a servant, wherewith he was clothed before his ascension. Concerning
the sacrifice of Melchisedek, and their confident assertion, that in the
sacrifice of the Mass Christ is offered, without suffering, I remit these
questions unto the last head of this TREATISE.

The last part of the definition of the Mass contains, that For the sins
of the quick and the dead.
it is a sacrifice for the quick and the dead. If it be that self same
sacrifice which Christ offered upon the cross, not different from it in
substance, but only in form of offering, then behooued it to be of infinite
valor, as the sacrifice offered upon the cross was. But the multitude of
Masses said for the relieuing of one soul out of purgatory declares, that
there is not infinite and perfect valor in the sacrifice of the Mass: Ergo,
it is not that same sacrifice in substance which Christ offered upon the
cross: Even as a Physician, who adhibiteth a plaster unto a wound, having full
virtue to cure the wound by once applying it, he will not apply it the second
time, because the wound is perfectly healed by one sole application: Even so
if the Mass had perfect valor to save, as the sacrifice of Christ offered
upon the cross had, what need were it to say many Masses for the relief of
one sou'e out of purgatory?

More-ouer, if they offer a sacrifice for the dead, it is not for them who has
died in infidelity and mis-beliefe, for their souls are buried in Hell, and
there is no redemption out of that everlasting Luc. 16
prison: But they offer sacrifice for weak Christians, of whom
notwithstanding holy Scripture says, that they die in the Lord, they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them: so weak Apoc. 14. 13
Christians, when they die, their souls are not carried to purgatory, to be
tormented, but unto the place of rest, and refreshment, and retribution of all
the good things which they have done, like as the Lord has freely forgiven
them all evil which they did in their life time, because they have repented,
and believed in Christ their Savior.

The offering of sacrifice for the dead, do not only presuppone purgatory,
but also that some help may be procured by them who are alive, to shorte^ or
to mitigate the pains of them who are departed this life. This opinion also
repugneth to Holy Scripture, which admonishes us to seek the Lord in a time
when he may be found, that is, to seek the Lord in our life time, for it is
Psalm. 32. 6
vntimous seeking of the Lord after the soul be separated from the body. Some
men seek the Lord in a wrong place: some seek him in a wrong manner, and some
seek him in a wrong time, as the foolish Virgins did. But of all sort of
seekers of the Lord, they are most unfortunate, who seek him in a time when he
cannot be found, and when the door of his wedding chamber Mat. 25. 10
is shut and locked. For others, who have sought the Lord in wrong places, that
is, in the synagogue of Satan, where nothing was taught but a doctrine of
lies, and they have sought God in a wrong manner, inuocating Saints, and
worshipping Images: yet afterward, when they have received better instruction,
they have sought the Lord in a right place, and in a right manner, and have
found the Lord: but they who seek the Lord in a wrong time shall never find
him.

IN the last head of this Treatise, I promised to speak of the The absurdities
of the Mass. 1. Absurdity. The Canon of the mass
absurdities of the Mass, which albeit they be many in number, yet I shall
reduce them unto a few heads. First I begin at the blasphemous Canon of the
Mass, whereunto the Council of Trent has given such a glorious testimony,
that it is perfect, absolute, void of all error, and therefore not to be
changed, or abrogated. I call the Canon of the Mass, that rule which
prescribes what should be said or sung in the Popish liturgy or Mass. It
is not a work composed by one author, but rather a rapsodie patched up by many
authors, and especially by Popes. Celestinus devised the preamble or introit to
the Mass: Gregorius added kyrie eleson: Telesphorus, gloria in excelsis Deo:
Gelatius the first, Platina in vita Xifti 1.
the Collations: Pelagius, a commemoration of the dead: Leo the third added
incense: Innocentius the first, added the paxe: Sergius the first, ordained
agnus Dei to be sung: other parts and members of the Mass are assigned to
their several authors and inuentors. In it the Priest is commanded to bow
himself before the hostie, and say, I worship thee, I glorisie thee, I praise
thee. Can there be any Idolattie more monstrous than this? for like as GOD
has appointed some creatures to lead us to our God in so far as he is our
Creator: even so he has appointed other creatures to lead us to our God in so
far as he is our Redeamer. Now like as it is Idolatry to subsist in the Sun,
Moon, and stars, and to worship them, because they are but creatures,
leading us to the knowledge of God our Creator: Even so it is horrible
Idolatry, to worship the bread and wine in the Sacrament, because they are but
creatures, appointed by God to lead us to the knowledge of God our Redeamer.

More-ouer, in the Canon of the Mass, the Priest is commanded to pray such
prayers as import that He is a Mediator betwixt Christ and his Father: for he
beseeches GOD to receive the oblation which he offers, and in all things to
make it blessed: Now the oblation which he offers (as they affirm) is the
body of Christ. And shall a sinful Priest be a mediator betwixt Christ and
his Father? Here they forget the doctrine of Augustine, who says, that the
Mediator of Intercession prays for us, but no man prays for Him. And to the
end it might appear Augu. cont. Parmen. li 2 cap. 8
ye they are countenanced by antiquity, they insert some prayers used by holy
Fathers in time of celebration of divine mysteries, but by a deceitful
transposition of their words, they utterly pervert the right sense and
meaning of the words of the ancient Fathers: as namely, when Ambrose says,
Command thou these (to wit, oblations) to be carried by the hands of thine holy
Angel unto the Ambr. de Sacr. lib. 4 cap. 6.
high Altar in Heaven. Ambrose spoke of the bread and wine, that God would
vouchsafe upon those elements ye high honor, that they might represent unto us
ye blessed body and blood of Christ, which was like unto an elevation of ye
elements unto ye Heaven. But by a deceitful transposition of ye words of
Ambrose, and inserting them after the words of consecration, they ordain their
sinful Priest to pray for the body of the Son of God, which is a notable
abusing of the words of Ambrose.

Likewise, in the Canon of the Mass there is invocation of Saints, far
contrary to the ancient custom of the Church: who albeit they made a
reverend commemoration of the names of holy men, when they celebrated divine
mysteries, yet they inuocated them not, as Augustine clearly testifies,
saying, The names of Martyrs are commemorated in their own place and order,
as men of August. de ^iuitat. Dei, li. 22. ca. 10
God, yet are they not inuocated by the Priest who offers sacrifices.

The second absurdity of the Mass, consists in the very grounds thereof,
which I refer first to the superstition of some 2. Absurd. the grounds of the
mass
Christian people, who had a zeal to God, but not rightly ordered with
knowledge. Some Christian people were so superstitious, that they were not
content to eat the Communion bread at the holy Supper in the Church, but also
they carried a part of it home to their houses, and they ate it secretly in
their chambers. (...). C^la.
Of this the defenders of the Mass infers, If it was lawful for them to
communicate alone in their chamber, much more is it lawful for the Priest to
communicate alone in the Church. Upon such sandy ground is ye Popish Mass
builded. The second ground of the Mass is the timorous minds of simple people,
who being informed by their deceiving teachers, that they might have like
benefit, with less hazard and danger, by seeing of the sacrifice, as they had
by participation of the Sacrament. The people began to loathe the frequent
resorting to the holy Sacrament, and they came to see the sacrifice of the
Mass. Both these grounds of the Mass are abuses of ye Lords holy Supper. In
ye first ground, that which Christ commands to be presently eaten in
remembrance of him, a part thereof is reserved, to be eaten in ye chamber, Luc.
22. 19
contrary to Christ's institution, as is already declared. In the second ground,
ye Apostolic precept is neglected, which commands us to try our selves,
and so to eat and drink at the Lords table: 1. cor. 11. 22
but he forbids us not to approach to the Lords holy table, if we be duly
and rightly prepared: neither gives he allowance to this new form of
communicating, that the people shall stand only gazing and beholding, and shall
communicate by ye mouth of the Priest alone. They who brag of antiquity, and
follow new invented toys, they have no honor by their bragging.

The third absurdity of the Mass, consists in the rotten pillars, 3.
Absurd. the pillars of the mass
whereupon the Mass stands, to wit, Trans substantiation and Purgatory: for
incase the bread be not changed into the substance of Christ's body, the
priest cannot offer Christ's body to His Father. And incase there be no souls
tormented in Purgatory, how does the priest offer a sacrifice for the dead?
So it is manifest, that these are the two rotten pillars upholding the Mass. I
shall refute the doctrine of Transsubstantiation (GOD willing) in its own
place: for the present, I say, If there be Transsubstantiation in the holy
Sacrament, then is the spirit of man corporally fed, and the body of Christ
is eaten by many in the Sacrament, to whom he is not promised in the Word,
which is an absurd thing once to imagine it. And if such a place as Purgatory
had been, then Christ, who has reueiled unto us all Joan. 14. 2
things necessary to be known, he would have reueiled that mystery also
unto us. But Christ has told us of the pleasures of Heaven, and of the
terrors of Hell, but never a word of Purgatory. Mat. 10. 28
If a house, builded upon sandy ground, and leaning unto rotten pillars, can
stand, then possible the Mass also may consist and stand: if not, the Mass
also is in danger to fall.

The fourth absurdity of the Mass, is a vile abusing of places of holy
Scripture, for upholding the sacrifice of the Mass. In the 4. Absur. a vile
abusing of places of holy Scripture. Gen, 14. 18
old Testament, they confirm the sacrifice of the Mass, by the fact of
Melchisedek, who brought forth bread and wine to refresh the weary army of
Abraham: but not to offer these elements in a sacrifice to God. And the ancient
Fathers, who translate the Hebrew word (obtulit) in stead of (protulit) yet
their opinion is, that Melchisedek offered bread and wine to Abraham for his
refreshment, but not to God in a sacrifice. But suppose the words of Moses did
sound to that sense, that Melchisedek offered a sacrifice of bread and wine
unto God, What belongs that to the sacrifice of the Mass, wherein they say,
that bread and wine is not offered unto God, but the very body of Christ,
under the accidents of bread and wine? This was not the sacrifice of
Melchisedeck. Also, the words of the prophecy of Malachi are mis rably abused,
for confirmation of the sacrifice of the Mass whereas he says, For from the
rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same my Name is great among
the Gentiles, and in Malac. 1. 11
every place: ncense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for
my Name is great among the Heathen, says the LORD of hosts. The Prophet
expounds his own meaning so clearelie, that there is no need of any other
commentary for he is speaking of the calling of the Gentiles to the kingdom
of God, and under one point of the true worship of God: namely, invocation of
his blessed and glorious Name, he comprehends all other Tertul. contra
Marcio^. lib. 3. Chrysostom. orat. 2. aduers. Iudeo. Eusebius. de demonst. Euang.
li. 1. cap. 6 Justin. dial. cum Triph. Iudeo.
points of Gods worship, such as faith, obedience, and confession of God before
men. Tertullian, Eusebius, and Chrysostona, expound this pure sacrifice to be
prayer and thanksgiving unto GOD. Justinius Martyr, citing this place of
Malachi, affirms, that this prophecy was performed at that time, when
Grecians and Barbarians, Hamaxobii, and Nomades, and Scenitae, offered prayers
and thanksgiving unto GOD, the Father and Creator of all things, in the Name
of JESUS, who was crucified.

In the new Testament, besides the words of Christ spoken at the institution
of the holy Supper, where of I have spoken already, two other places are
mightily abused: First the place of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 8. verse.
3. For every high Priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices:
wherefore it is necessary, that this man have somewhat also to offer. What is
in this place, that countenanceth the sacrifice of the Mass? Like as every
priest was furnished with an offering: even so the High priest and Bishop of
our souls, CHRISTIESVS, he had an offering, to wit, his blessed body, which
he offered for our sins: But papists refer this place to an offering,
which every priest must offer presently, so long as he enjoys the honor of
his priesthood: and therefore (say they) seeing CHRIST offers no external
sacrifice in Heaven, he must do it in earth, by the sacrifice of the Mass:
But the very Grammar refuteth them, for the word (...), is a word of the
preterit, and not of the present tense, and imports, that CHRIST has
already offered a sacrifice for our sins, which has no need to be
iterated, because it has perpetual virtue to save them that believe. Another
place of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 13. verse. 10. they abuse, wherein
it is said, We have an altar, whereof they have no power to eat, who serve in
the tabernacle. Here (say they) mention is made of an altar: therefore in the
Church there must not only be a Communion table, but also an altar, in a
proper sense to offer CHRIST'S body upon it. To this I answer, That in the
new Testament, like as there is but one high priest, and one propitiatory
sacrifice: so in like manner, there is but one altar, even Jesus Christ, who is
in Heaven, and in whom our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable unto God, as
the Apostle Peter says, Be you made a spiritual house, an holy
priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto God, by Jesus
Christ. 1. Pet. chap. 2. verse. 5. Of this Altar, to wit, Christ, the Jews, who
were miserably addicted to the ceremonial law, they could not be partakers:
for by adhering to shadows, they neglected to embrace the verity,
represented by those shadows, after it was indeed exhibited unto the world.
In the book of the Revelation we read of an Altar in Heaven, under which the
souls of them who were slain for the word of GOD do repose: (Apocal. chap.
6. verse. 9.) This is not a material altar, because it is in Heaven: but this
Altar is Christ, under whose shadow the souls of the Godly find comfortable
refreshment. And Ireneus, in express words, says, Est ergo Altar in
Coelis: illue Iren. aduers. Valentin. lib. 4. ca. 34
enim preces nostrae diriguntur: that is, Therefore our Altar is in Heaven, for
thithertoe our prayers are directed. The Roman Church would deceive us in
this point, as Zebul of old deceived Gaal, the son of Ebed: when Gaal saw
men coming from the mountains, Zebul answered, The shaddowe of the mountains
seem men unto thee: (IVD. CHAP. IX. VERSE. XXXVI.) Even so, when holy Scripture
speak of Christ the true Altar, they would persuade us, that Scripture is
speaking of a material altar, such as is among them.

The fifth absurdity of the Mass, is a contradiction to it self. In the
description of the Mass there are two manifest contradictions: 5. Absurd.
contradiction to it self.
First it is called a sacrifice propitiatory, and unbloody: which two things
are so opposite, that they cannot consist together, because the Apostle (in the
ninth chap. to the Hebrews, and the 22. verse) says, Without shedding of
blood there is no remission of sins. Secondly they say, that in the Mass
the body of Christ is offered, without suffering: and these two things also are
so flat contradictorie one to another, that the Apostle continually joyneth
suffering with offering, in so much, that he says, If Christ had offered
himself often, he behooued also to have suffered often. Heb. chap. 9. verse.
25. and 26.

The sixth absurdity, is a foolish multiplication of unprofitable (...).
Absur. Foolish ceremonies multiplied in the mass
ceremonies, both before the Mass, and in the celebration thereof with
neglecting the essential rites of the Sacrament instituted by CHRIST himself,
such as breaking, distributing, eating, etc. for in their sacrifice, that which
they brake in three pieces, to represent the threefolde estate of Christ's
body, dead, buried, and risen again from death: (by the ordinance of Pope
Sergius the first) this bread (I say) which they break, they distribute not,
and the bread which they distribute in the Sacrament to the people, they break
it not. These essential rites being laid aside, they have invented many
unprofitable ceremonies: as namely, before the celebration of the Mass,
Vestmentes, Altars, Altar-clothes, Corporasses, Paxes, Torches and Candles, and
many other preparations. In the very action and celebration of the Mass, are
diverse hist^ionicall gestures of the Priest, to lift up his eyes and cast them
down again, to spread abroad his hands, and to close them again, to
warble with his fingers, to bow down, to bend up, to turn from the right
hand to the left, and from the left hand to the right, with many other
unnecessary ceremonies. All these they count ceremonies of signification,
representing viuelie the passion of CHRIST. But it appertains unto GOD, to
institute ceremonies of signification, who can seal up by them some inward
grace in men's hearts. The Church may content themselves with ceremonies of
order, as the Apostle writes, in his first Epistle to the CORINTHIANS, in the
fourteenth chapter, and fourtieth verse thereof, where he says, Let all
things be done honestly, and by order.

The seventh and last absurdity, is the unhappy consequences of the Mass:
Albeit they be many, yet at this time I reduce 7. Absur. The consequences of
the Mass.
them to three heads. First, prohibition of marriage to men in spiritual
offices, is a consequent of the Mass: for albeit in the Council of NICE this
matter was seriously v^ged, and JEROME, in the fury of his disoutation
against IOVINIAN, speaks not so reverently of marriage as became him: yet
this prohibition prevailed not fully, until the sacrifice of the Mass was
received and established: Then it was thought meet, that like as married
persons, for prayer and fasting, (I. CORINTH. CHAPTER VII. VERSE V.) should
abstain, for a short time, from matrimonial fellowship: In like manner,
these, who are called to a continual exercise of praying, and sacrificing,
they should also continually abstain from the bed of marriage. So that
prohibition of marriage, to men in spiritual offices, attended the Mass, as a
Page does his master. And Popes, such as SIRICIVS, CALIXTVS, GREGORIVS the
seventh, etc. did urge prohibition of marriage with no less vehemency, than
they did the establishing of the Mass.

The second consequence of the Mass, is a miserable abusing of the people of
GOD, because by this sacrifice, for the most part, the people were bereaved of
the preaching of the Word, and the ministration of the Sacraments, the very
ordinary means, whereby the Kingdom of GOD is builded amongst them: The
Word was seldom preached, and in very unfruitful manner, and mixed with
fables and lying miracles, borrowed out of legendes, not worthy to be read:
and the holy Sacraments were seldom ministered, and with filthy addition of
ceremonies, invented by the brain of man, to Baptism, and a sacrilegious
withholding from the people, the cup, in ministering unto them the holy
Supper: and so the fountains of living water were stopped, and cisternes were
opened, and the wholesome food of GODS people was turned into ashes: and in
stead of preaching GODS Word sincerely, all Church-seruice was turned into a
dumb guise of the Mass: and in reading of prayers and passages of Scripture,
into an unknown language: so the people, for fault of good instruction,
withered as grass, when it is not refreshed with dew and rain: Yea, and
SOLOMON says, Where there is no vision, the people decay, PROVE. 29. 18.

The third, and most venomous consequence of the Mass, is procession and
adoration: for hosties, consecrated in time of Mass, although not broken and
eaten, they are counted CHRIST'S body, and carried about in procession, and
worshipped. This was not the ancient custom of the Church: for the sacrament
consisting in the action and use thereof, so long as the blessing, and the
actions of breaking, distributing, and eating lasted, the bread was counted
holy, and represented the bl^ssed body of JESUS: but after these holy
actions were ended, the rest of the bread, that was not used in the Sacrament,
it was distributed to the poor: but it was not kept in boxes, to be carried
in procession, and to be adored and worshipped by ignorant people.

And of all things, that are deficient in Popery, I have of^ times observed,
that antiquity, whereof they principally brag, is most deficient and
lacking in them.

The ground of Popish procession, no doubt, was the sending of the Sacraments
to those who were sick and absent by some Justin. apol. 2.
necessity. But they read not in IVSTINVS, nor in any other ancient writer,
that people who met the deacon carrying the Eucharist to sick persons, fell
down upon their knees, and worshipped it. This abominable idolatry, more vile
than the idolatry of the Gentiles, was not of ancient time in use in the
Church.

Now the LORD, who has redeemed our souls from death, and who has called us
from darkness unto His marucilous love, establishe our souls in the truth of
GOD, through CHRIST JESUS our LORD,

AMEN.
FINIS.
THE VIII. CENTVRIE.
CHAP. I. OF EMPERORS.
PHILIPPICVS.
AFTER JUSTINIAN the second was slain, PHILIPPICVS reigned two years, and
nine months. Great dissension fell out betwixt the Emperor Philippicus and
Constantine Bishop of Rome, for razing (as appears) the pictures of Fathers,
who were present at the sixth General Council, which being pictured in the
Temple of Sophia, were abolished by the commandment of Philippicus.
Constantine Bishop of Rome declared the Emperor an heretic, and commanded,
that his name should be rased out of charters. This was the first great,
direct, and violent opposition, that the Bishops of Rome attempted against
noble Emperors. Philippicus was taken, and his eyes were put out by
Anastasius, otherwise called Artemius, his Secretary, who reigned in his stead.

ARTEMIVS.
ARTEMIVS, otherwise called Anastasius, reigned one year and three months:
he deposed Ihonne patriarch of Constantinople, who kept not the true faith:
and placed Germanus in his stead. He was taken by Theodosius, and sent
prisoner to Nice, and from thence to Thessalonica, where he was compelled to
renounce his Imperial dignity, and to be clothed with the habit of a Monk.

THEODOSIUS.
THEODOSIUS reigned scarce one year: and when he heard that Leo Isaurus,
governor in the East parts, was saluted Emperor by the army, he willingly
gave over his Imperial dignity, and lived a private and peaceable man.

LEO ISAVRVS.
LEO ISAVRVS reigned twenty four years: great commotions were in his time,
both in Church and policy: In Church-affaires, he was an hater of Images, and
burnt images made of wood, other images he melted, and misfashioned: against
whom Gregorius the second, puffed up with antichristian pride, he opponed
himselfen, ^t only allowing worshipping of images, but also forbidding to pay
tribute to the Emperor Leo. The Emperor on the other part irritated with the
proud attempts of Gregorius the second: he used indirect means to cut him
off: but the enterprises of his deputies Marinus, Paulus, Eutychius, and their
followers, succeeded vnprosperously. Moreover, the Bishop of Rome sought
support from the Lombardis, who had been at all times preceding enemies to
the chair of Rome: yet in Leo his days they were bound with the bishop of
Rome in a covenant of friendship, for none other cause, but this only, to
shake off the yoke of the Emperors obedience. And when the bishop of Rome saw
that the Emperor had great business in wars against the Saracens, he
thought it a sit occasion to draw the dominion of Italic unto his own
subjection: and Hist. Magd, Cent. 1. cap. 3.
therefore, with advise of his Clergy, he both excommunicated the Emperor,
as a destroyer of the images of the Saints, and disauthorised him of his
Imperial soueranitie, So early began the increasing grandour of the
Antichrist, to send forth the thuder-boltes of cursinges against the
anointed of the Lord. In this Emperors days the Saracenes passed over the
Straites, invaded the kingdom of Spain, slew Rodericus king of Goths, and
his son, and put an end to the kingdom of the Goths in Spain, after they
had reigned 346. years: and being incited by Eudo, Duke of Aquitania, they
marched toward France: but Platin. in vit. Greg. 2.
through the valor of Carolus Martellus, a man of noble birth in France, they
were so encountered, that three hundredth thousand, and threescore and ten
thousand Saracenes were slain, and the country of France was made free of the
fear of ye Saracens.

CONSTANTINVS COPRONYMVS.
AFTER LEO, his son CONSTANTINVS COPRONYMVS reigned 35. years: (Chytreus
reckons only 23. years) because he hated the worshipping of images, (which
error had taken deep root in this age) the writers of the history of this
time have dipped their pens in gall and wormwood to blaspheme the honorable
name of Consta^tinus: but whatsoever Paulus Diaconus, or zonaras have written
to his disgrace, his name will be in honorable account and regard in the
Church of CHRIST. The Senate, and the people, of Constantinople, addicted to
the worshipping of images, hated the Emperor, and were glad of the false
rumoured tithings of his death, when he went to fight against the Arabians,
and they chose Artabasdus to be Emperor in his stead. But Constantine
returned to Constantinople, besieged the town, and recovered his own kingdom
again. He gathered a General Council in Constantinople, anno 755. wherein
the worshipping of images was damned, as shall be declared (God willing) in
its own place. In this Emperors days were wars betwixt the kings of
Lombardis, and the Bishops of Rome: but the Roman Bishops begged the help of
Carolus Martellus against Luitprand, and the help of Pipinus against
Aistulphus, and the help of Carolus Magnus against Desiderius, all kings of
Lombardis: and so by continual imploring the help of the Nobles and Kings of
France, the Lombardes were utterly fubdued, the chair of Rome was enriched,
the reuenewe of the Emperor of the East was impaired, and a ground was laid
of the advancement of the kings of France to the Imperial dignity. In this
Emperors days the Turks, or Schythians, invaded the Armenians, and molested
the Saracenes, and some countries of Asia minor, in end they accorded with the
Saracenes: But this agreement could not be perfected without Platina in vit.
Steph. 2
condition, That the Turks in Persia should undergo the name of Saracenes,
hoping thereby that they would easily embrace the Mahometane religion, wherein
their exspectation was not frustrate.

In the year of our Lord 579. and in the 18. year of the reign of
Constantine, a wonderful thing fell out amongst the wise men of Persia, called
Magi, and Maurophori Persae: they persuaded both themselves, and others also,
That if any man would fell all that he had, and throw himself headlonges
from the walls of the cities, his soul should incontinent be tranfported
Funct. comment. lib. 8
to heaven. So prone and bent is the corrupt nature of man to lean upon vain
hopes, and to belceue promises which GOD has not made.

LEO the son of COPRONYMVS.
LEo the son of Constantinus Copronymus reigned 5. years: he followed the
foote-steps of his father in zeal against worshipping of images: and punished
the Grooms of his own chamber, such as James, Papias, Strateius, and
Theophanes, for worshipping of images. The superstitious writers of the
history of this time, such as Zonaras, and Paulus Diaconus, reckon the
aforesaid persons in the Catalogue of holy Confessors: But Christ, he will
never count them to be His martyrs, who fight obstinately against his truth,
even unto the death: neither will He count them to be His Confessors who
suffer justly inflicted punishment for contempt of the laws of Magistrates,
being agreeable to the law of God.

IRENE, and CONSTANTINVS her son.
AFter the death of Leo, reigned Irene his wife, with her son Constantine ten
years. Afterward Constantine deposed his mother from her authority, and
reigned alone 7. years. And Irene on ye other part, taking this indignity
done unto her grievously, she spoiled her son both of his eyes, and of his
Empire, cast him into prison, where he died for heart grief: and she reigned
again 4. years after her sons imprisonment: So all the years of the
reigns of Irene and her son, conjunctly and ^euerally, first and last, were
21. years. This Empress was superstitious, malicious, crafty, and
unfortunate. She was a superstitious defender of the worshipping of images. A
malicious and venomous hater of the name of Constantinus Copronymus, whose dead
body she commanded to be brought out of his grave, to be burnt with fire,
resolved into ashes, and to be casten into the sea. (albeit Constantine was her
own father in law) The mercies of the wicked Proverb. 12
are cruel. Her craft appeared in bringing her forces to Constantinople, in
the sixth year of her reign, under pretense of fighting against the Arabians,
and in disarming of them whom she knew to have been adversaries to worshipping
of images, and sending them in ships to the places from whence they came: For
before the days of Constantinus Copronymus, the town of Constantinople, by
famine and pestilence, being besieged 3. years by the Saracens, was miserably
dispeopled, so that 30000. of the people of Constantinople died. But
Copronymus, for repairing of that loss, sent Platina in vita Greg. 2
for strangers, and replenished the town with new inhabitants. These
strangers she sent back again, to the places from whence they came,
especially, because in populare commotion they had Funct. comment. in chron.
lib. 8
set themselves in arms, and minassed the Fathers conuened in Constantinople,
by Irene and her son, for allowance of adoration of images. She was
unfortunate, because the Empire of the East was so extenuate in her time, that
it was rather like unto a shaddowe, than unto an Empire. So that in the
subsequent history I will forget (after a manner) the Emperors of the East,
and make mention of the Emperors of the West. Now, Irene was deposed, and
banished, by Nicephorus, who reigned eight years after her banishment.

CHAP. II. Of Popes, Patriarchs, Pastors, and Doctors.
AFTER Pope SERGIVS succeeded IOANNES Jhonne the six^.
the sixth, and continued three years and three months. And after him Pope
Ioannes the seventh continued two years and seven months he lived in the
days of Justinian the Jhonne the seventh.
second, who sent Ambassadors unto him for procuring an union betwixt the
Churches of the East and the West, because they differed in opinions concerning
the Canons of the sixth General Council, wherein prohibition of marriage to
men in spiritual offices, was disalowed, and the Patriarch of Constantinople
was equalled in authority to the Patriarch of Rome. These Ambassadors
aforesaid returned from Pope Ihonne the seventh without any answer: which
proud carriage, or as others do think, a cowardly form of dealing all
writers do vituperate. And after him succeeded Sisinius, who continued not
above twenty days in his Popedom. Sisinius.


After Sisinius succeeded Constantine the first, and governed seven years, and
twenty days. His Popedom was under the Constantine the first.
reigns of Justinian the second, Philippicus, and Anastasius. The Emperor
Justinian supported him against Foelix bishop of Rauenna, who had refused to
pay to the bishop of Rome the sum of money imposed to him in time of his
ordination: so that Foelix was taken prisoner, by the Emperors Admiral, and
sent to Constantinople, where his eyes were put out, and he was banished to
Pontus. Against the Emperor Philippicus, he contended, as one having
authority to raze the name of the Emperor out of charters, as has been
already declared. This is the Pope who was made judge betwixt the bishops of
Ticinum and Millane, who contended for superiority: And Constantine eximed the
bishop of Ticinum from the jurisdiction of the bishop of Millan: but in such
way, as he should be subject to the Church of Rome. The Emperor Justinian the
second, sent for pope Constantine, who came to Constantinople, and from thence
went to Nicomedia, where he met with the Emperor, and the Emperor kissed his
feet. Mark the growing, and daily increasing pride of the Roman Antichrist.

After Constantine succeeded Gregorius the second, and continued sixteen
years, nine months, and eleven days. He lived under Gregorius the second.
the reign of the Emperor Leo Isaurus, whom he rashly excommunicated for
abolishing of images. Also he drew away from the obedience of the Emperor,
the countries of He speria, Aemilia, Liguria, and other parts of Italy,
forbidding them to pay tribute to the Emperor, express contrary to Christ's
commandment, Matthew. 22. 21. where He says, Give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's, etc. and this Christ spoke concerning paying of tribute.

Gregory the third governed ten years, eight months, and 24. days, and
followed the foote-steps of his predicessor, both Gregorius the third.
in advancing the doctrine of the worshipping of images, and in withdrawing
the people of Italy from the obedience of the Emperor. More-ouer, he gathered
a Council at Rome, wherein the worshipping of images had allowance. And the
Emperor Leo was both excommunicated, and likewise, so far as in him lay,
deprived of his Imperial dignity. So early did the beast of Rome, even in
civil matters, usurp authority over the Princes and Monarchs of the world.
In his days the town of Rome was besieged by Luitprand king of Lombardis. But
Carolus Martellus, a noble prince in France, being solicited by the letters
of Gregory, to support the distressed estate of the Church of Rome, he
persuaded Luitprand to desist from molesting and befieging the town of Rome.

After Gregory the third succeeded Zacharias the first, and continued ten
years, four months, and four days: In antichristian Zacharias the first.
pride he surpassed all his predecessors, distributing the kingdoms of the
world at his pleasure: For he procured, that Pipinus, the son of Carolus
Martellus (who was but a subject, and a ruler of the kings house) should be
anointed king of France, and that Childericus, the lawful successor of the
kingdom, Funct. comment. in chron. lib. 8
should have his head shaven, and be thrust into a Monastery. Likewise he
procured, that Carolomannus, the elder brother of Pipinus, should be a Monk of
the Order of Saint Benedict, in the Monastery of Cassinates. Rachis also,
king of Lombardes, after he had reigned four years, gave over his kingly
authority, and entered into a Monastery, and exhorted his wife and children to
do the like: and so his brother Aistulphus obtained the kingdom. Pipinus was
anointed king of France, by Bonifacius, at the commandment of pope
Zacharias, anno 750. or as Platina reckons, anno 753. What recompense of
reward Pipinus rendered to the chair of Rome, for this benevolence, or rather
this manifest iniquity of Zacharias, it will be declared in the description
of the life, government, and carriage of Stephanus the second, if the Lord
please.

AFTER ZACHARIAS succeeded STEPHANVS the second, and ruled five years, and one
month. In his time Aistulphus, Stephanus the second.
king of Lombardes besieged Rome, at two diverse times, and Stephanus implored
the aid and assistance of Pipinus king of France at both times. At the first
time Pipinus besieged. Aistulpbus in Papia the chief city of the residence of
the kings of Lombardes, and compelled him to restore to the chair of Rome all
the towns and lands which by violence he had reaued from them. But at his
second coming, he not only relieved Rome from the siege of the Lombardes,
but also bestowed upon the chair of Rome the dominions of Rauenna and
Penta-poles, appertaining to the Emperor of the East, and which they enjoyed
since the death of Narses 170. years. In so doing, there was Tlatina in vita
Step. 2
such bargaining betwixt the kings of France and the popes, as was of old
betwixt Herod and the Jews, he gratified them with the blood of Christ's
Apostles, and they gratified him on the Acts 12.
other part by giving to him the glory of God: Even so, Zacharias, bishop of
Rome, bestowed upon Pipinus the kingdom of France, which duly appertained to
another: and Pipinus again bestowed upon the chair of Rome the dominions of
Rauenna and Pentapolis, which duly appertained to the Emperor of the East.

It shall not be amiss to make a particulare rehearsal of the towns and
territories bestowed upon the Church of Rome, by the donation of Pipinus, but
not of Constantine, as they have rumoured most fabulously many years ago:
INPRIMIS, Rauenna, Bononia, Imola, Fauentia, Commaclum, Hadria, Pompilii Forum,
Leuii Foru^, Cesena, Bobium, Ferraria, Ficoclas, and Gabellum: all these towns
were under the dominion of Rauenna. And in Pentapolis, Ariminum, Pisaurum,
Concha, Fanum, Senogallia, Ancona, Auximum, Humanam, Aesium, Sempronii Forum,
Mons Feretri, Urbium, Balmense territorium, Callas, Luceolos, Eugubium,
together with the Castles and Lands appertaining to these towns, to wit, the
Provinces called in our time Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana, and of old
Aemilia, Flaminea, and Picenum. Thus we see what a rich reward the chair of
Rome obtained for their defection from the Emperors of the East, and their
favor toward the kings of France. Also, for further confirmation of
friendship betwixt the bishops of Rome, and the kings of France, pope Stephanus
the second procured, that he should be invited to be witness at the baptism
of the king of France his young son, at which time, as a man covetous of
vain glory, he suffered Pipinus, and Charles his son, to kiss his feet, and
to hold his stirrope, and to lead his horse by the bridle: and finally, he
was content to be mounted up, and carried upon the shoulders of men, leaving
behind him an example of stinking pride to the posterity after following.

After Stephanus the second, succeeded his brother Paulus the first, who
continued 10. years, and one month. In antichristian pride he was nothing
inferior to his predecessors, for he sent Paulus the first.
Ambassadors to the Emperor of the East Constantinus Copronymus, to exhort
him to restore again the images of the Saints, which he had demolished, with
intermination of cursing if he refused to be obedient to the popes counsel.
In his time Aistulphus king of Lombardes died, and Desiderius the last king of
Lombardes reigned in his stead.

Constantine the brother of Desiderius king of Lombardis succeeded Constantinus
the second.
to Paulus the first, a man admitted to the popedom before he had received
Ecclesiastical orders: therefore he was hated of the people of Rome, and
denuded of his papal dignity, after he had continued one year and one
month: some writers affirm, that his eyes were thrust out, and that he was
sent to a Monastery: others affirm, that he was burnt with fire, by the
hateful malice of the Romans.

To him succeeded Stephanus the third, who ruled 4. years, 5. months, and
27. days: he gathered a Council at Rome, Stephanus the third.
in the which 12. bishops of France, sent thither by Charles de Mame, were
present, with the bishops of Italy, who disauthorised Constantine his
predecessor, and annulled all his decrees. Likewise, they damned the 7.
General Council conuened in Constantinople by Constantinus Copronymus,
wherein the worshipping of images was disallowed. But in this Laterane Council
assembled by Stephanus the third, the worshipping of images gets allowance.
And it was thought, that God and the Saints were in deterior case, than
mortal Princes, incase that images might be made to represent mortal Princes,
but not to represent God and his Saints. It was rumoured in this popes time,
that Charles Platina in vita Steph. 3
king of France was of intention to marry Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius
king of Lombardes. Stephanus fearing lest this marriage should undo the
friendship lately contracted betwixt the bishops of Rome. and the kings of
France, dissuaded Charles from the marriage aforesaid, as if the marriage of a
woman of the kindred of the Lombardes, were a mixing of darkness with light,
and of Belial with CHRIST. And the minassing letter of Stephanus the third
prevailed so far at the hands of Charles the great, that he repudiated Bertha
the daughter of Desiderius, his lawful married wife, after he had cohabited
with her one year: and he married another woman named Hildegarde, of the
Dukerie of Sweue. These are the fruits of antichristian pride, to threaten the
torments of hell against the princes of the world for marriage, if so be they
foresee any damnage may redound to the chaite of Rome by the marriage of
princes.

After Stephanus the third, succeeded Adrian the first, and governed 23.
years, ten months, and seventeen da^es. In his days Charles the Great came
into Italy with an army, and banished Adrianus the first. Platina in vita
Adti. 1
Desiderius king of Lombardes, his wife, and children, to Lions in France, and
utterly suodued the kingdom of the Lombardes, which had continued in Italy
204. years. Now in the year of our Lord 776. this kingdom was abolished and
undone, by Charles the Great king of France, for the favor he carried toward
the chair of Rome. Likewise, he augmented the donation of his father Pipinus,
and he bestowed upon the Church of Rome the Isle of Corsica, and the places
interjacent betwixt Luca and Parma, with the Dukedomes of Spoleto and
Beneuento. This being Funct. comment in chronol li. (...)
done, Charles returned back again to France, carrying with him Bertha his
brothers wife, and her children, who came to Adrian bishop of Rome, hoping for
favor at his hands, and that he should have anointed her sons to be kings
of France, seeing Carolomannus their father was now dead but he delivered them
into the hands of Charles, and so Charles the Great reigned without exception,
as absolute commander of France. Irene the Empress of the East, during the
time of Adrians popedom, assembled a great Council at Nice in Bythinia, where
the adoration of images was allowed. In this Council the popes Ambassadors
were present, and his own letter was read in the Council: no man gave greater
allowance to the worshipping of images, than pope Adrian did, as shall be
declared (God willing) in the head of Councels. It is to be marked, that
Platina, writing of the death of Constantinus Copronymus, is compelled to bear
witness to the truth, and testify, that the opinion of the leprosy of
Constantine the Great was a notable fable, and that it sprang up by occasion of
the disease of Constantinus Copronymus, the father in law of the Empress Irene.

To Adrian succeeded Leo the third, and governed 21. years: he was hated by
Pascalis and Campulus, who lay in wait for him Leo the third.
at the Church of Saint Syluester, threw him down to ye ground, spoy led him
of his pontifical garments, beat him with many strokes, and finally, cast
him into prison and bands: but he escaped by the means of a cubiculare, named
Albinus, and lurked in the Vaticane until the time that Unigisius, duke of
Spoleto, conuoyed him safely unto his bounds. At this time Charles king of
France had wars against the Saxones. The bishop of Rome, who came to him to
complain of the injuries which he had received, was sent back again very
honorably, accompanied with the soldiers of Charles king of France: and with
promise that he should without delay address his journey toward Italy.
When Charles came to Italy, the popes enemies were so dashed with fear, that
they durst not appear to accuse him: and the Clergy of Rome thought meet,
that no man should judge of the Apostolic chair, but the bishop of Rome
should be his own judge. Leo took the book of the Gospel in his hands, and
swore, that he was innocent of all ye crimes objected against him: Hist. magd.
Cent. 8. c. 10
and so he was absolved: and Pascalis and Campulus, the friends of ye late
deceassed pope Adrian, were counted worthy of death: but pope Leo intercided
for safety of their lives: so they were banished to France. For this benefit,
Leo caused Charles to be declared Emperor of the West, and crowned him with
the Imperial Diadem. And from that time forwards, the custom began, that
Emperoures should receive their Coronation from the Bishop of ROME.
Notwithstanding of this, it was ordained, that no man should be elected
Bishop of ROME, without advice of the Emperor of the West, and without
receiving inuestment from him.

THE Patriarchs of Constantinople in this CENTVRIE, were Patriarchs of
Constantinople.
placed and displaced according to the changeable conceits of the Emperors.
Under the reign of Justinian the second, Cyrus was Patriarch, whom
Philippicus removed, and advanced one named Ihonne, who had fore-tolde, that he
should be made Emperor. This Ihonne was infected with the heresy of the
Monothelites, and was removed by Artemius, by whom Germanus was advanced to
the chair of Constantinople. Germanus continued until the reign of
Constantinus Copronymus: He was deposed and excommunicated by the General
Council assembled by Constantinus, because he allowed the worshipping of
images.

To him succeeded Anastasius, who albeit he disliked images, yet he was
unthankful to the Emperor, and favored the seditious attemptes of the
people of Constantinople, who advanced Artabasdus to the Imperial dignity.
More-ouer, he slandered the Emperor, as if he had spoken against the
divinity of Christ. He received a just recompense of his unthankfulness:
for he was deposed, and scourged, and set upon an Ass, with his face toward
the Asses tail, and made a ridiculous spectacle to the people.

After him, Constantine, a Monk, was made Patriarch, who at the first seemed
to damn images: but afterward he was found to be a maintainer and allower of
them. The Emp. banished him to Iberia, where he spoke contumeliouslie both of
the Emperor and of the Council holden at Constantinople: therefore he was
brought back again from banishment, and was beheaded, and his body was
trailed through the town with a cord, and casten into a pit, where the bodies
of male-factors were accustomed to be casten.

After him succeeded Nicetas, a man unlearned, and adua^ced by the Em. Constable.
Copron. for none other cause but only for his zeal against the worshipping of
images. After him succeeded Paulus Cyprius, who in the days of Constable. Copron.
damned the worshipping of images: but afterward repented: and under the reign
of Irene entered into a Monastery, and lamented, that he had consented to the
abolishing of images. The vain repentance of this timorous and superstitious
man, was the chief occasion of the convocation of the second Council of
Nice, by the Empress Irene. To him succeeded Tarasius, who was present at the
second Council of Nice, and gave allowance to the adoration of images.

The prevailing power of the Saracenes in Alexandria, Antiochia, and
Jerusalem, did so obscure the names of the Patriarchs of these cities, that I
have no remarkable thing to write of them in this CENTVRIE.

IN this declining age, wherein spiritual grace daily decayed, Of Pastors and
Doctors.
and nothing increased except an heap of earthly treasures, which God
permits to be powered into the bosoms of them who love the wages of
iniquity. Always, even at this time some men of good literature and learning
did manifest themselves unto the world, such as Bonifacius bishop of Mentz.
Damascene alearned Monk, Paulus Diaconus a learned writer of histories, and
Beda a man counted venerable in his time: yet all these were miserably infected
with the superstitions of their time, such as the opinion of Purgatory,
invocation of Saints, and worshipping of Images, and prohibition of Marriage.

Bonifacius was a man borne in ENGLAND, in a place near adjoining to EXCESTER:
he was familiarly acquainted with five popes, to wit, with pope Constantinus
the first, Gregorius the second, Gregorius the third, Zacharias the first,
and Stepanus the second: And by them he was advanced to many honors,
First, to be the Popes Legate in ENGLAND, GERMANY, and FRANCE, and afterward
to be Archbishop of Mentz. All his studies and travels tended to this, to
bring the people of ENGLAND, Germany, and France, to the subjection of the
Roman bishop, and to a conformity to the superstitions of the Roman Church.
In the name, and at the commandment of pope Zacharias, he disauthorised
Childericus king of France, thrust him into a Monastery, and anointed Pipinus,
the son of Carolus Martellus to be king of France. So zealous was he to
perform all the desires of the Roman bishops, by whom also his name was
changed: for he was first named Vinofridus, but the bishops of Rome, who
delited in his service, called him Bonifacius. After he had served the Roman
bishops in slavish subjection 36. years, he was slain by Pagans, because he
had anointed Pipinus king of France, and for hope they had to enrich themselves
by his coffers, in the which, when they had opened them, they found nothing,
except books, and relics of Saints, whereof they made no account. And his
body was buried in the Monastery of Fulda.

Damascene, a superstitious Monk, the disciple of Cosinas, lived Ioannes
Damascenus.
under the Emperors Leo and Constantinus Copronymus: he was a long time in
company of the Saracenes, and with the prince of Saracenes he went to the
sepulcher of Mahomet, and like unto a timorous body, worshipped the bones of
Mahomet, fearing to Hist. magd. Cent. 8. c. 10
have been put to death, if he had not done such homage. He was a patron of
worshipping of images, and was excommunicated in the General Council
assembled by Constantinus Copronymus. It is written by Ihonne patriarch of
Jerusalem, in the history of Damascens life, that the prince of Saracenes was
moved to indignation against him, by a deceitful letter, sent from the
Emperor Leo Isaurus, in the which Damascene was charged as a man willing to
have betrayed the town of Damascus into the hands of the Emperor Leo. Upon
this occasion (says Ihon patriarch of Jerusalem) the prince of Saracenes cut
off the hand of Damascene: and on the other part, Damascene, by humble kneeling
before the image of the Virgin Marie, was miraculouslie cured, and restored
again to the power of his hand. But this is like to the rest of Popish fables,
and lies: For Damascene writes many notable fables, for confirmation of
adoration of images. And incase a miracle had been wrought in his own person,
by prostrating himself before an image, Damaescene had no manner of way
ouer-passed with silence the memorial thereof. But we have to do with
adversaries, who are not ashamed of lies. Damascene was a dilligent reader of
the books of ancient Fathers, as appears by his four books, De Orthodoxa
Fide: but not so diligent a reader of holy Scripture, which is the ground of
manifold errors. His history of Iosophat, king of India, is known to be a
Monkish fable.

Paulus Diaconus, of the kindred of the Lombardes, became a Deacon in Aquileia:
he was carried captive into France, in the Paulus Diaconus.
days of Charles the Great, who besieged Papia, banished Desiderius, and made
an end of the kingdom of the Lombardes. Afterward he was accused of treason
and conspiracy against Charles king of France. His malicious and hateful
accusers were bent to have had his hands cut off, or his eyes put out: but K.
Charles pitying him for his learning, was content that he should be banished
to the I Will of Diomedes. From thence he fled, and came to Beneuentum, where
Arachis was dwelling, who had married Adelperga, the daughter of Desiderius. In
his palace it is thought he writ his six books, De rebus gestis
Longobardarum. After the death of Arachis he came to the Monastery called
Cassinense, where he ended his life.

Beda, a man borne and brought up in ENGLAND, was called venerable, and was in
great account in his time. Only he was Beda.
miserably entangled with deceitful antichristian errors, universally
ouerspred in his days, such as invocation of Saints, worshipping of
Relics, opinion of Purgatory, and of support that might be had by saying of
Masses. In writing, reading, and praying, he was a man of incessant pains.
Nothing is found in him more commendable, than his patient suffering of the
agonies immediately preceding his dissolution, with a desire to be Albertus
Gallus, with some learned me^ of Scotland, witnesses to the truth of God.
dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Albertus Gallus, a Bishop in some part of France, a learned and godly man,
opponed himself mightily to Bonifacius, the footegroome of the Roman
Antichrist, with whom concurred two Iearned men borne in Scotland, named
Clemens presbyter, and Samson, and offered to prove both by word and writing,
that Bonifacius was an author of lies, a troubler of the peace of Christians,
and a corrupter and deceiuer of the people. But pope zacharias excommunicated
them before they were heard in a lawful Assembly, and gave power to his
foote-groome Bonifacius, Hist. magd. Cent. 8. c. 10
to depose them, and procured at the hands of the king of France, that they
should be casten into prison, and bound with bands, as schismatiques, false
teachers, and sacrilegious men. Such reward men received, who were witnesses
to the truth of God, and reprehended any corruption of the Roman Church. In
like manner, Joannes Mailrosius, and Claudius Clemens, learned men of Scotland,
sent by king Acha^us, to Charles king of France, and the first professors of
learning, in the Academie founded by Charles the Great in Parise: these two
likewise were disliked of the Roman Church, because they could not assent to
all ye superstitions of that Church in this age so miserably deformed.

CHAP. III. OF HERETICS.
MANY were counted Heretics in this age, because they worshipped God
sincerely according to the rule of His own blessed word, and would not give
consent to the fond errors of the Roman Church. But some were counted
Heretics justly, and without all controversy, as Foeliciani.
namely, they who called Christ, in his humane nature, the adoptiue son of
God. This wicked heresy repugneth unto the Celestial Oracle, which the three
Apostles heard in the holy mountain, This is my well-beloved son, in whom I
am well pleased. Matthew. 17 2. Petr. 1
We are adopted in Christ, to be the sons of God. But Christ, even in his
manly nature, is the son of GOD by the excellent prerogative of personal
union with the divine nature. It is not certainly known, whether Elipandus
bishop of Hispalis, or another named Foelix, with whom some affirm, that
Elipandus consulted about this damnable opinion, was the author of this
damnable heresy.

CHAP. IIII. OF COUNCELS.
IN the year of our LORD 712. a Council was assembled at LONDON, where
'Bonifacius A Council at LONDON
was present, and Brithuvaldus the chief Prelate of ENGLAND, and the kings of
Saxons domining in ENGLAND were commanded under pain of cursing to be present
at this Council. The purposes intraited in this Council were two, to wit,
concerning the adoration of images, and prohibition of marriage to men in
spiritual offices. About worshipping of images no disputation was heard,
whether that form of service did agree with the written word of God, or not.
This was counted a sufficient warrande for bringing images into places of
Adoration, and for worshipping them (especially the image of the Virgin Marie)
that Eguvinus, a superstitious Monk in England, of the Order of S. Bennet, who
afterward was made a Bishop. He affirmed, that the Virgin Marie appeared
unto him in a dream, and declared, that it was her will that her image should
be set up in Churches and worshipped. These dreams once confirmed by the oath
of Eguvinus, and approved by Constantine bishop of Rome, and obtruded by
Bonifacius the Popes Legate, they were embraced in ENGLAND, with little
contradiction in such a corrupt time.

The other purpose entraited in this Council, was prohibition of marriage to
men in spiritual offices. This doctrine of the Roman Church was not received
without reluctation of the Clergy. Always, a ground was laid, whereupon
followed a building of the doctrine of Devils.

ABout the same time, that is, about the year of our LORD 712. it is supposed,
that the Emperor Philippicus gathared The Council of Constantinople under
Philippicus.
a Council at Constantinople, for undoing of the sixth General Council, in
the which the error of the Monothelues was condemned, and that he did this
according to a promise made to a monk named Ihonne, who fore-tolde him that
he should be made Emperor, and craved this promise of him, that when he
should be advanced to the Imperial dignity, he should undo the sixth
General Council. But the writers of this History do not make particular
mention of the Fathers who were present at this Council. The rest of the
History is clear. that Philippicus razed the pictures of the Fathers who had
been present at this Council, and were pictured in the Temple of Sophia: and
that on the other part, Pope Constantine the first not only caused the same
effigies to be pictured in the portch of the Church of Saint Peter at Rome,
but also procured that ye Emperors name should be rased out of Charters, and
that his effigy should not be engraven in any kind of coined metal. Also
it is clear, that Philippicus removed Cyrus from his office, and placed in his
rowme Ihonne, who fore-tolde him that he should be Emperor.

IN the year of our LORD 714. pope Gregorius the second A Council at Rome,
assembled by Gregovius the second. Sigebert. in Chron.
assembled a Council, in the which two bishops of Britanie, to wit, Sedulius,
and Fergustus, were present. It was ordained, that Masses should be
cel^brated publicly in Temples, which custom was not in use before. In the
second Tome of Councels, this Synod is referred to Gregorius the third. A
great number of the Canons of this Council do concern marriage, That no man
should take in marriage a woman who was the relict of a presbyter or a deacon,
or a nun, or his spiritual sister, or his brothers wife, or his niece, or
his mother in law, or daughter in law, or his near cosines, or a woman whom
by theft or rauishing he has led away. And that no man should consult with
inchaunters and sorcerers. And that no man should violate the mandates of the
Apostolic chair: no, not in a matter of an hair.

GREGORIVS the third, after he had received a mandate from the Emperor Leo,
concerning abolishing of images, A Council at Rome, assembled by Gregorius the
third.
he assembled a great Council at Rome, of 903. bishops: in the which the
Emperor Leo was excommunicated, and deprived of his Imperial dignity. Here
mark the tyranny and fierceness of the Antichrist, who gave such authority
to a Roman preacher, to dismount the Monarchs of the world from their royal
thrones? Yet Gregorius the third attempted such high matters, because the Em.
Leo had disallowed the worshipping of images. Likewise, by his instigation the
whole countr^y of Italy refused to pay tribute to the Em. Now is the banner of
the Antichrist displayed against the Emp. and this is a fore-running token of
the hateful inimirie which is to ensue betwixt the popes and the Emperors
which (God willing) shall be declared in i^s own time. Likewise, Anastatius
patriarch of Constantinople, was condemned and excommunicated in this Council.
To favor the Emperor, and to dislike the worshipping of Images, were two
irremissable sins, and meriting the great Anathems of the bishop of Rome.

IN the year of our LORD 742 and in time of the reign of Charles the Great,
and under the popedom of Zacharias ye first, A Council holden in France, ^y
Bonifacius Archbish^p of Mentz.
Bonifacius Archbishop of Mentz assembled a Council of the bishops pre^byters,
and Clergy of France for reformation of abuses in that country: or rather as
the truth is, to bring the country of France (as he had already brought
many parts of Germany) to a conformity with the superstitious rites of the
Roman Church. It is to be marked, that this National Council was assembled
by the mandate of king Charles, howsoever Bonifacius ordered the affairs of
the Council.

It was ordained, That Synodes should be kept yeerelie, and that Clergy men
should not put on armor, and go to warre-fare, except one or two bishops,
with their presbyters Canon 1.
and chaplens, to prescribe penance to them who should happen to confess
their sins: And that hunting and halking, and such idle pastimes should not
be used by the Clergy.

That every presbyter shall be ready to give account of his Canon 2
ministry to his own bishop in time of Lent, especially concerning his
ministration of Baptism, the sum of his Catholic Faith, the form of his
Prayers, and the order of his saying of Masses.

That none uncouth bishop or presbyter be admitted without Canon 3
the trial and allowance of a Synod.

That presbyters and deacons be not clothed as seculare Canon 4
men, with short cloakes: but with the habit of men who are in spiritual
offices: And that no woman cohabite in the house with them.

That every bishop have a care within his own bounds to Canon 5
abolish all Heathnicke superstitions.

IN the year of our LORD 755. and in the thirteenth The seventh General
counsel assembled at Constantinople.
year of the Empire of Constantinus Copronymus, a General Council of three
hundredth and thirty and eight bishops was assembled at Constantinople, by the
commandment of the Emperor. In this Council the worshipping of images was
damned, and the placing of them in Oratories and Temples, where the divine
Majesty is worshipped, was forbidden, as a custom borrowed from Pagans, who
had no hope of the resurrection, and therefore solaced themselves with pictured
similitudes of their friends, as if they had been bodily present with them.
Yea, for three principal causes they damned the worshipping of images: First,
because the worshipping of them is repugnant unto holy Scripture: Secondly,
because the divine and humane nature being vnseparablie united in CHRIST, and
the divine nature cannot be presented by an image: therefore it is not meet
to represent His manly nature by an image, lest we should seem to separare
the two natures in CHRIST. And thirdly, because the writings of ancient
Fathers do utterly condemn the worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius,
Eusebius, Gregorius Theologus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Chrysostomus, and
Theodorus bishop of Ancyra. It were a prolixt thing to make a rehearsal of the
sentences of all the forenamed Fathers: therefore, for breuities cause, I will
here only make choice of one place, which is this: Eusebius Pamphili, writing
to Constantia the Empress, who was desirous that the image of CHRIST should
be sent unto her, he returns unto her this answer: Because ye have
written unto me to send vuto you the image of CHRIST, I would gladly
understand what Histor. Magd. Cent. 8. Cap. 9.
image of CHRIST ye are inquiring for: whether it be that true and
unchangeable nature, bearing the charactor and engraven similitude of the
person of the Father? or if it be the image of the shape of a servant, which
CHRIST took upon him for our sakes? As concerning His divine nature, I hope
ye are not sollicitous to seek the image thereof, being sufficiently
instructed, that no man knows the Father, except the Son, and on the other
part, no man knows the Son, except the Father. But if ye desire the
similitude of man's nature, wherewith He cladde Himself for our sakes,
understand, that the splendour and shining brightness of His glory cannot be
represented with dead colsures, and shaddowed pictu^es: For even His Disciples
in the mountain were not able to abide the brightness of His shining face
(Matthew. Chap. 17. verse. 1. Mark. Chap. 9. verse. 2. Luke Chap. 9. verse. 28.)
how much less are we now able to abide the celestial splendour of His
glorified body?

In this Council Germanus bishop of Constantinople, G^orgius Cyprius, and
Damascene a Monk who were principal defenders of the worshipping of images,
were excommunicated.

In the Canons of this Council, which were nineteen in number, invocation of
Saints has allowance in the fisteenth and seventeenth Canon. So that in this
Council also is presented unto us a viue pattern of the weakness of Councels.
Like as in every sacrifice there was dungue, so likewise in every Council
there is found some note of infirmity and weakness. And it is a foolish
thing to adhere to all the ordinances of Councels, except they do agree in all
points with the written word of GOD.

IN the year of our LORD 788. and in the eight year of The second Council of
Nice.
the reign of Irene, and her son Constantine, a Council was assembled at
Nice in Bythinia, of three hundredth and fifty Bisshops. The A^hass dours of
Adrian the first, bishop of Rome, were present in this Assembly. Basilius
bishop of Ancyra, Theodorus, bishop of Myra, and Theodosius, bishop of Amorium,
offered to the Council their supplicant letters, confessing, that they had
sinned in condemning the worshipping of images in the Synod assembled by
Constantinus Copronymus. These reeds, shaken with the wind and unconstant
fools, were accepted in favor, as a preamble unto this malignant Council.
The epistle of Adrian, bishop of Rome, was openly read in the Council,
approving the worshipping of images. His letter was full of fables and lies,
such as the fable of the leprosy of Constantine, and of the shedding of the
blood of innocent babes to procure remedy against his sickness, and the
baptism of Constantine by Syluester, the miraculous restoring of the Emperor
to health after his baptism, and of the images of Peter and Paul, produced to
Constantine before his baptism. Such a Legend of lies no Council could have
heard read in their audience, if it had not been a time in the which the
mystery of iniquity was effectually working: For the history of the life of
Constantine, written by Eusebius, expresselie proves the contrary: to wit,
that Constantine was not leprous, but rather a man of a clean and unspotted
body: and that he was not baptized by Syluester in Rome, but by Eusebius in
Nicomedia. Notwithstanding, the letter of pope Adrian was accepted and allowed
by the Council. And it was ordained, That the images of CHRIST, of the blessed
Virgin Marie, and of the Saints, should not only be received into places
of Adoration, but also should be adored and worshipped: And the honor done
to the image, is thought to redounde to him (or her) who is repres^nted by the
image, according to the words of Basilius Magnus. But Basilius Magnus is
writing in that place of CHRIST, the Ba^l. contra Eunomium, lib. 1.
image of the invisible GOD, and not of images made with men's hands.

The Fathers of this Council, as it were bewitched by the delusions of the
Devil, were not ashamed to confirm the adoration of images, by lying
miracles, and by a foolish confabulation betwixt the Devil and a Monk, whom
Satan ceased not to tempt continually to the lust of uncleanness, and would
make none end of tempting him, except he would promise to desist from
worshipping the image of the Virgin Marie. But arguments taken from the
fables of Monks, and delusions of the Devil, are not to be hearkened unto,
in a matter expresselie repugnant to the written word of God.

IN the year of our LORD 794. CHARLES THE, GREAT, King of FRANCE, assembled a
great Council The Council of Frankford.
at FRANKFORD: partly in regard of the heretic Foelix, who called CHRIST
the adoptiue Son of GOD in his humane nature, and was condemned in a Council
assembled at RATISBONA, ANNO 742. but he was returned to his vomit again:
and therefore was of n^we again condemned, as a notable heretic, in the
Council of FRANKFORD partly also in respect of the great disputation that
arose every where concerning the worshipping of images, disallowed in the
Council of Constantinople, and allowed in the second Council os Nice.

Not only the bishops of France, but also of Germany and Lombardie, as
Provinces subdued to the King of France, were present at this Council.
Likewise, Pope Adrian sent his Ambassadors, Theophilactus and Stephanus, to
the Council. And Charles himself, King of France, was present in the Council
of Frankford. The Ambassadors of pope Adrian produced the acts of the second
Council of Nice, hoping that the Council of Frankford should have given
consent and allowance unto the same. But the Fathers of this Council
collationed the acts of the Council of Constantinople, with the acts of the
second Council of Nice. And they disallowed in the Council of Constantinople
the strict prohibition to picture images, either in Temples or other places.
And in the second Council of Nice they disallowed the Act of worshipping of
images, and of honoring them with garments, incense, candles, and kneeling
unto them: counting the afore-saide Act to be so impious, that the Council in
the which it was concluded, was neither worthy to be called Catholic nor
Oecumenicke. The arguments whereby the second Council of Nice endeavored to
approve the adoration of images, are all refuted in the Council of Frankford,
as I have declared already in a Treatise concerning worshipping of Images.

Concerning the argument taken from the authotitie of Epiphanius, who in his
book called Panarium, reckons not the worshippers of images in the roll of
Heretics: it is answered by the Council of FRANKFORD, that incase Epiphanius
had counted the haters of the worshippers of images Heretics, he had
likewise inferted their names in the catalogue of Heretics: but seeing he
has not so done, the Council of Nice had no just cause to triumph so much in
this frivolous argument, which makes more against them, that it makes for
them.

More-ouer, in the Council of FRANKFORD, the Epistle of Epiphanius, written to
Ihonne, bishop of Jerusalem, was read, wherein he disalloweth the very
inbringing of images into Churches: and this Epistle was translated out of
Grieke into the Latin language, by Ierom. The Epistle is worthy to be read.
Read it in the Magdeburg History, Cent. 8. Chap. 9.

TREATISES, Belonging to the VIII. CENTVRIE.
A TREATISE, Of Transsubstantiation.
SATAN is a vigilant enemy, setting himself in most opposite manner against
every thing that is a comfort and refreshment unto the sheepe-folde of God:
Now, the principal comforts of the sheep of God, are the pastures wherein
they feed, Psalm. 23
and the waters wherewith they are refreshed: Doubtless these two comforts are
the preaching of the word, and the ministration of the Lords holy Sacraments.
If Satan by any means can hinder the true preaching of the word, and Gene.
26. 18
the right ministration of the Sacraments, then his malice against Gods people
is descried, as the malice of the Philistimes of old against Isaac and his
cattle, was manifested, when they stopped with earth the fou^taines of water,
which Abraham had dug, and whereof the cattle of Isaac were accustomed to
drink. It cannot be sufficiently expressed in words, what malice Satan has
born against the true preaching of the word of God, and the right ministration
of the Sacraments. The sixth persecution of Ethnic Emperoures was so directly
set against the Preachers of Gods word, as the world might easily discern,
that the intention of Maximinus was to undo the sheepe-folde of God, for lack
of pastures, and of refreshing waters. For this cause let not our cogitations
be ravished with admiration, when we hear or read, that many questions have
been moved concerning the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If there were
not plenty of spiritual consolation to be received by the right participation
of this holy Sacrament, Satan had never busied himself so earnestly against
it, as if the throat of his kingdom were cut, if this Sacrament be rightly
ministered by the Preachers, and rightly received by the people.

Let the Christian Reader remember, that of old under the ten persecuting
Emperoures the receiving of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper was called
the banquet of Thyestes: This proceeded from none other ground, but from the
malice of the Devil, hating the Lords holy banquet: Secondly, the Manichean
heretics so perverted the Lords holy Sacrament, that Augustine (to whom their
secret mysteries were not unknown) was compelled to call their Communion
Execramentum, and not Sacramentum, that is, an execrable thing, and not a
Sacrament: Thirdly, the Donatists, in ministering the Lords Sacraments, were in
an opinion, That the Sacrament was only effectual, when it was ministered by
one of their own number. But seeing the malice of Satan is an infinite thing,
and has not a period wherein it ends. For defacing of the right use of the
holy Sacrament, Satan filled the heart of an heretical Monk called
Damascene, with a lewd opinion, to affirm, That the bread in the holy
Sacrament was transsubstantiate into the body of Christ, and that the wine was
transsubstantiate into His blood. Which opinion I may justly call a Novelty,
because it was neither in word nor writ heard before the seven hundredth year
of our Lord. But it is the custom of Papists to follow Novelties, and in the
mean time to brag of Antiquity. What abuses of the holy Sacrament followed
after the seven hundredth year of our Lord, God willing shall be declared in
its own time, for the present thus much I say, That upon a time I saw the
images of Cain and Abel, pictured by an unlearned painter, with such habit as
the Germans are appareled with in our days: These pictures made me not to
think that the Germane habit was in use in the days of Cain and Abel, but
rather that the painter was a foolish man, and destitute of understanding:
Even so, when I read the works of Damascene, albeit I was at that time but
young in years, yet I thought not that the opinion of Damascene was agreeable
to Apostolic doctrine, but rather that Damascene was a foolish and doting
Monk, and somewhat ambitious also, desiring to be counted the author of some
new opinion, which no man had maintained before him.

IN this TREATISE I shall first declare (God willing) what it is that they call
Transsubstantiation: secondly, how absurd an opinion it is: and thirdly, with
what reluctation it was insinuated into the bosom of the Latin Church, but
ever until this day was rejected of the Grieke Church. Now
Transsubstantiation (as they say) is an euanishing of the substance of bread
and wine after the words of consecration, and a substitution of the body and
blood of Christ, in place of the euanished substance of bread and wine, the
accidents of bread and wine always remaining without inherence into any
subject. Albeit the word Transsubstantiation seems to import a change of one
substance into another, and the most part of them define it to be a change
of the substance of bread into the substance of Christ's body: yet some of
them do forsee a great inconueniencie, if Transsubstantiation be defined to a
change of the substance of bread into the substance of Christ's body: namely
this, that Christ's body in heaven, cladde with a most glorious and celestial
brightness, and Christ's body in earth, ouershaddowed with the accidents of
bread and wine, shall not be counted one and the self same body, in respect
that the body of Christ that is in heaven was formed by the holy Spirit, of
the substance of the Virgin Marie, and the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
would be found to be made of the substance of bread. This is the cause
wherefore they who are more subtle than the rest, abstain from the gross
definition afore-saide. Howsoever, concerning the word Transsubstantiation, I
admonish the Reader, that (...), that is, an euanishing or disparition has no
affinity with Damascenes (...), which signifies a change of one thing unto
another thing that is better: so that there is no good agreement amongst
themselves concerning the signification of the word Transsubstantiation.

Concerning consecration of the elements, there are diverse opinions: The
Roman Church supposes, that the words of Consecration are these, (...), etc.
that is, Take, eat, this is my body. And again these words, (...), Mat. 26.
26
that is, Drink all of this, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for many for remission of Ibid. 27. 28
sins. But the Grecian Church thought that the blessing or consecration was
not only made by the words afore-saide, but also by prayer, as Justinius Martyr
calls the elements, (...), that is, The food, blessed by the Word of
Justin. apol. 2. pro Chri.
prayer. Let no man separate the things that CHRIST has conjoined together,
to wit, prayer, and the words of the holy institution, and we shall easily
accord about the consecration of the elements.

The time, in the which the elements are thought to be consecrated, is not the
time in the which these words, This is my body, etc. are begun to be
uttered, but rather when they are ended: So that the consecration is not an
action fashioned by parts, but wholly in one minute, and at once perfected,
when the words are ended. Albeit I agree to this opinion with full consent of
my mind: yet I could wish, that the Roman Church, who have avouched ye same,
would make no exception against their own doctrine. But when they speak of
the intention of the consecrating Priest (which is continually unknown to the
people) the people are left in a doubt whether they are partakers of Christ's
body or not. And this is not the form of the teaching of Christ, to leave the
people in a suspense and doubting, but to manifest clearly unto them the
mystery whereof they doubt, if so be it be necessary to be known: as
Christ manifested to his Disciples the parable of the sower and the, Matthew. 13.
seed, and of the husbandry and the tares, etc.

The first word of Consecration is the principal word impugning
Transsubstantiation: for the word (...) is a demonstratiue pronowne, and it
points out something: and Scripture conferred with Scripture, is the best
Commentary to declare what is pointed out by the word (...). The Apostle
Paul in his first 1. Cor. 11 26
Epistle to the Corinthians, expounds the word (...), by (...), that is, This
bread: and the second (...), he expounds it, (...), that is, This cup. So
we see that the substance of the elements in the Sacrament of the Supper, are
neither changed nor euanished: but remaining in their former substance, they
are honored with a great honor, to be made Sacraments of the Lords blessed
body and blood: but their substance is not changed, as said is.

The next words of consecration are these, (...), that is, is my body, The
bread is the Lords body, because it is the Sacrament of the Lords body: like
as the Sacrament of faith (to wit, August. ad Bonifac. epist. 32.
Baptism, says August. after a manner) is faith: even so the Sacrament of the
Lords body, after a manner, is the Lords body: the words, secundum quendam
modum, and quodammodo, that is to say, after some manner of way, so often repeted
by August. is forget by papists: insomuch, that they remember when August.
says, ferebatur Christus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum,
ait, hoc est corpus meum, that is, Christ was borne up in his own hands,
August. in Psalm. 23
when as delivering his own body, he says, This is my body: but they
forgette the expositorie words, in the which Augustine manifests his own
meaning, namely these, Accepit in manus suas, quod norunt fideles, and ipse se
portabat quodammodo cum diceret, hoc est corpus meu^: that is, He took into
his hands, as is known to the belieuers, and did bear after a manner,
himself in his own hands, when he said, This is my body. It is better in
singleness of heart to make a true rehearsal of the words of ancient fathers,
in that same sense ye they spoke, than with deceitful speeches to abuse the
simplicity of the Reader, who possibly will not take pains to search out in
what sense Augustine said, that Christ did bear himself in his own hands.

In like manner, Augustine, writing against Adimant, says, that the blood is
the life, even as Christ was the Rock. Now August. contr. Adimant.
the Apostle says not, Petra significabat Christum: but says, P^ra erat
Christus: quae rursus ne corporaliter acciperetur, spiritual^m illam vocat, id
est, spiritualiter intelligi docet: that is, the Apostle says not, the rock
signified Christ, but he says, the rock was Christ: which again, lest it
should be taken in a corporal sense, he calls it a spiritual rock:
tea^hing us, that we should spiritually understand it. Then if we fellow the
exposition of ancient Fathers, it cannot be inferred of these words, this is
my body, that the bread is transsubstantiated into the substance of Christ's
body, for such vain conceits never entered into their minds.

Papists do grant, that after consecration Saint Paul calls the
elements, bread and wine, because they have the show and shape of bread and
wine: as the brazen Serpent was called a Serpent, and Angels in Scripture are
called men, because they so appeared. But this is a frivolous shift, because ye
Apostle, when he speaks of bread and wine, after the words of consecration,
he 1. Cor. 11. 26
speaks expressly of bread that is eaten, and of wine that is drunken. This
cannot be the shape and accidents of the elements, but their very
substance. The Angels did not appear only in the shape of men, but also had
men's bodies indeed, so that their feet were washed, and they did eat and
drink with Abraham and Lot. The brazen Serpent was not in show, but in Genesis
18. 19
substance, and altogether of brass. These examples help not. An evil cause
has more need of a true confession, than of a false defense, as August.
writes: and Chrysostom. says most truly, that albeit a bitter root may send
forth sweet and pleasant fruits: yet a root of bitterness can never
produce sweet and Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. cap. 12 Homil. 31
pleasant fruits: warning us thereby, to beware of men who disseminate and
propagate erroures, and obstinately strive against the known truth of God.

The last words of the consecration are these, Do this in remembrance of me.
Mark the word (...): for albeit Christ only suffered but once, yet it is his
will that we should keep a continual remembrance of his death, because the
death of Christ is the fountain of our life. Now when we offer the Sacrifice
of thanksgiving unto God, in the holy Supper, because he has saved us by the
death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This Sacrifice which we offer,
differs from that which Christ offered upon the Cross, because that
Sacrifice was but only once offered, and was received into the most holy
place, as Chrysostom speaks, but this which we offer, is (...), and (...),
Chrysostom. In epist. ad Hebr. cap. 9 Homil. 17
sub. (...), that is, we offer in remembrane of his death: and this which we
offer is a type (to wit, commemoratiue) of that which he offered. But because
they hing by an hair, and if any ancient Father cast out one word (albeit it
were hyperbolically spoken) they fasten their gripes upon it, as if it made
altogether for them. Now Chrysostom says, This Sacrifice which we offer, is
one and the self same Sacrifice which Christ offered. Is it not good reason
he have liberty to expound the meaning of his own words? and so he does,
Our Sacrifice and Christ's Sacrifice is one, because we celebrate a remembrance
of that Sacrifice once offered upon the Cross, and of none other. But that
Sacrifice which Christ offered upon the Cross has no need to be reiterated
(says Chrysostom in that same Homily) because it is like unto a medicine,
which being once applied, has a perfect virtue to save us from all our
sins. Hitherto I have declared that the words of Consecration, if they be
expounded as ancient Fathers expounded them, they make nothing to prove the
doctrine of Transsubstantiation.

Now let us proceed further, to see how this definition of
Transsubstantiation agrees with the doctrine of the Apostles, and of other
ancient Fathers. The Scriptures of God neither acknowledge an euanishing of
the substance of bread and wine: neither yet a change of their substance into
the substance of Christ's body and blood. For as much as the Apostle Paul,
speaking of the sacred elements of the Lords Supper, at that time when they
seal up our conjunction with Christ, which is not before the blessing,
breaking, and distribution: but after these holy actions, the Apostle calls
the eating of the blessed bread (...), and the drinking of the blessed Cup,
1. Cor. 10. 16
(...), that is, a communion of the Lords body and blood: not excluding the
substance of the elements, but expressly pointing out the words (...), and
(...), that is, the bread and the cup.

The most ancient Fathers are most unacquainted with this Novelty of
Transsubstantiation: for they all in one voice for the space of 500. years,
do consent, that the substance of bread and wine remains in the Sacrament
after the words of Consecration, Just. apol. 2
albeit the use of the elements be changed Justinius Martyr says, that the
elements in the Sacrament of the Supper Ioann. 1. 14
are made the flesh and the blood of Jesus, in that same form that the
eternal word of God was made flesh: but so it is, that the substance of the
divine nature, neither euanished, nor yet was changed into the substance of
flesh: And in like manner, the bread is made the body of Christ, neither by the
euanishing of the substance thereof, nor yet by changing the substance thereof
into another substance.

In like manner, Ireneus, when he says, that the holy Eucharist consists of
things earthly, and of things celestial: by mentioning of earthly things, he
would declare, that the substance of Iren. contra Valent. lib. 4 cap. 34
the bread and wine remains after the consecration. And lest any man (by
shifting words) should say, that Ireneus means not by earthly things the
substance of bread and wine, but rather the accidents, he expresses his own
meaning, in the 32. chap. that he is speaking of the bread and the cup.

Ambrose, speaking of the operative virtue of the Lords word Ambros. de Sacr.
1. 4. c. 4
in the Sacrament, he says, that the elements remain that same thing which
they were, and they are changed into another thing, because the substance of
the elements remains, and their use is changed. Like as a regenerated man in
substance both of soul and body, is that same man that he was before, yet in
qualities and conditions there is a great change. And who can interpret the
words of Ambrose better than he himself does illustrate them by the
foresaid similitude?

Theodoretus, in his first Dialogue, says, that God has honored Theod. dia.
1. cap. 8
the elements in the Sacrament with the name of His body and blood: not by
changing of their nature, but by adding grace unto nature. And in his second
Dialogue he says, that after the words of consecration the elements remain
in their former Idem dial. 2 cap. 24
substance, shape, and form. The words of Theodoretus are not more effectual
to instruct us in the right judgment concerning the nature of the Sacrament,
than the very purpose whereat he aims in those his Dialogues: They are
written of purpose, to refute the heresy of Eutyches, who affirmed, that after
the divine nature assumed the humane nature, all became divinity, and there
was not two distinct natures in Christ, but one only. Theodoretus, for
refutation of this heresy, brings a comparison taken from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, in the which the bread in substance remaining bread, assumeth
a name and use that it had not before, by divine institution to be called the
body of the Lord* Even so the divine nature of Christ assumed the humane
nature without any change of the one nature into the other. Moreover, he
proves the verity of Christ's humane nature by this, That the elements in the
Sacrament of the Supper, are (...), that is, signs, types, and figures of the
body and blood of Christ. And incase he had not a true body, how could the
elements in the Sacrament be figures of his body?

These speeches of Theodoretus do import two things: First, that the
elements in the Sacrament of the Supper remain still in their own substance,
and their substance is neither changed, nor euanished: Secondly, that in the
holy Sacrament of the Supper, there are signs, not accidental, but the
elements in their own substance remaining, are signs of the body and blood
of Jesus Christ. And how these two things can agree with the doctrine of
Transsubstantiation, let the judicious Reader consider.

Augustine in like manner, is so far from imagining that the substance of the
bread is euanished, or turned into another substance, that he puts a
difference betwixt Sacramentum, and res August. in Joan. cap. 6. tract. 26
Sacramenti, counting the elements Sacramentum, and the body and blood of
Christ res sacramenti. Now concerning the elements, that is, the bread and the
wine, he affirms, that some do eat them unto salvation, others do eat
them unto damnation: but as concerning the body and blood of Christ, which
Augustine calls res sacramenti, in express terms, he says, No man
receives them but only to eternal life. Of this it is evident, that
Augustine calls that Sacramentum, which is eaten, either worthily or
unworthily, either to salvation or to damnation. And he is speaking of the
substance of bread and wine which can be eaten and drunke^, and not of
accidents, which no man can eat or drink. But wherefore do I spend time to
cite testimonies of Fathers, to prove, that after the words of blessing the
elements in the holy Supper, neither change their substance, nor yet does
their substance euanishe, when I have brought ten times more testimonies than
I have already done, I shall receive this answer returned unto me, That
whatsoever was the opinion of these Fathers, ye general Council of Lateran,
anno 1215. which was wiser than these forementioned Fathers, have taken a
deeper consideration into this matter, than these Fathers did: and they have
allowed the doctrine of Transsubstantiation. Howsoever, let me obtain this
favor at the hands of the Christian Reader, that he may consider, that they
who brag so much of Antiquity, are driven back to seek refuge in the
Novelty of late Councels.

THE latter part of their definition, wherein they say, that after consecration
the accidents of bread and wine, such as whiteness, roundnesse, and redness,
do remain in the Sacrament without inherence into any subject. In this part I
blame them again of Novelty. No ancient Father ever spoke of accidents
without a subject. And albeit M. Harding impude^tly cites the testimony of
Basilius Magnus, to prove, that accidents may subsist without a subject
because in the first days creation there was light, and this light had no
subsistence in any subject. This citing of the authority of an ancient Father,
express contrary to his own meaning and words, is an intolerable abusing of
the writings of Fathers. The words of Basilius are these, (as is well observed
by the learned Doctor JEWEL) (...), Basil. in Hexamer. Homil. 2
that is to say, The air was lightened, or rather, it had the whole light
wholly mingled with it self. He says not, that the light was an accident
without a subject, but he points out the subject wherinto it had inherence,
even before the creation of the Sun, to wit, the air.

But seeing they have refuge continually to the Omnipotent power of God, when
they utter points of new and absurd doctrine, and they say, that God by his
Omnipotent power can make that accidents shall subsist without a subject. To
this I answer, That our disputation with them is not about the power of God,
but about the will of God, in the matter of the Sacrament. And it is the will
of God in the Sacrament of the Supper, to lead us unto Christ, as the only
bread of life, by whom our souls are nourished unto eternal salvation. And
the Lord uses the external signs to lead us to the thing signified. What
are we, that we should despise the simplest means of the working of God? Not
only does the external signs lead us to Christ, but also the analogy and
similitude that is betwixt the bread and Christ's body, leads us to a
consideration of the nourishing virtue that is in Christ's body, to feed us
unto eternal life. But Papists by taking away the substance of bread and
wine, and leaving only naked accide^ts, in the which there is no nourishing
virtue, they undo the nature of a Sacrament, taking away the similitude
betwixt the sign and the thing signified, without the which Augustine
affirms, that a Sacrament cannot subsist: but let us hear Augustines own
words, Si enim sacramenta quandam August. ad Bonif. ep. 23
similitudinem earum rerum quarum sunt sacramenta non haberent, omnino
sacramenta non essent: that is, If sacraments had not some similitude with
those things, whereof they are sacraments, they could not be sacraments
Theod. dia. 2. cap. 24
at all. And Theodoretus in like manner says, (...): that is, The types must
needs have some similitude with the verity.

IN the second head of our TREATISE, the Absurdities of The first absurdity.
TRANSSVBSTANTIATION are to be considered. First this opinion repugneth to the
privilege alloted to the bles^ed body of Christ in holy Scripture, to wit
that the body of the holy one psalm. 16. 10
of God should not see corruption: but this substance which is in the Sacrament
after the words of consecration, it may putrify and rotte: therefore, it is
not the true body of Christ, otherwise than sacramentallie.

Secondly, this substance that remains in the Sacrament after The second
absurdity.
the words of consecration, is known to be capable of poison: for Emperors
Kings and Popes, have been poisoned by the consecrated hostie, such as the
Emperor Henry the seventh, and Pope Victor the third, was poisoned in the
Challice: therefore, it cannot be the real body of Christ, which f^edeth the
soul, and cannot empoyson the body, but it is called Christ's body
sacramentally. The third absurdity.


Thirdly, if Christ's body after the words of consecration be corporally
present in the Sacrament, then is it at one time both in heaven and in earth:
in heaven under a glorious similitude, and in earth invisible, and ouer-couered
with the accidents of bread and wine, which aggreeth not with the nature of a
true humane body, to be at one time in diverse places, whereof I shall speak
at greater length hereafter, God willing. Only at this time, I affirm, that
the Papists are vntimously serious to prove the corporal presence of Christ's
body in the sacrament, which position if it were granted, yet are they nothing
nearer to their purpose, neither are we put back in any thing whereunto we
shoot and aim: because if Christ were corporally present in the Sacrament, as
they speak, yet no virtue can be drawn out Marc. 5. 34
of him to the comfort of our souls, but only by spiritual touching by
faith, as appears in the woman diseased with the bloody issue.

The doctrine of Trans substantiation not only imports corporal presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament of the Supper, but The fourth absurdity.
also corporal manducation of the body of Christ which is common both to godly
and ungodly men: and this they deny not, only they say, that godly men eat
Christ's body worthily, and ungodly me^ eat Christ's body unworthily. But I
affirm, that if ungodly men eat the body of Christ corporally in ye holy
Supper, then is his body received in the sacrament by them to whom it is not
promised in the word, which is an absurd thing: For like as a seal affixed
to a charter, seals up nothing to him to whom the charter promi^eth nothing:
Even so the s^crament cannot seal up a fellowship with Christ to an
unbelieving man, because Gods promises are made only to the believers. They
will answer, True it is, ye vnbelecuers have no fellowship with Christ, no not
although they eat his body corporally, because they eat it unworthily. But to
this I answer, that this their doctrine is new, and unknown to antiquity:
For ancient Fathers acknowledge a worthy and unworthy eating of the Sacrament
of Christ's body, but not a worthy and unworthy eating of ye body of Christ, in
respect Augustine says, Res veroipsa cujus sacramentum est omni homini ad
vitam, nulls adexitium, quicunque ejus particeps fuerit: that August. in Joan.
6. Tract. 26.
is to say, But the matter of the Sacrament (to wit, CHRIST'S body) by eueric
man who is partaker thereof, is received to life, and by no man to destruction.
And this moves AUGUSTINE in another place to say, That IVDAS did eat the
bread of the Lord, but not the Lord himself, who is the true bread.

The doctrine of Transsubstantiation imports also accidents without a
subject, as has been touched in a part before in the definition of
Transsubstantiation. This is admirable, that the Scholasticke Doctors, who make
Aristotle to be Master Caruer The fist absurdity
of this most holy banquet, and who have acquainted themselves better with his
Precepts, than with the heavenly doctrine of the Apostles: yet in this point
they have forgotten even the doctrine of their Schoolmasters Aristotle, who
says, that accidents can have no subsistence, but into a subject: as if a
man be talking of blindness, he must also talk of eyes that are blinded:
and if he talk of deafness, he must also talk of the ear: and if he
talk of lamenesse, he must talk of some member of the body that is maimed:
and finally, if he talk of a disease, he must also talk of some body,
either of man or beast, that is diseased: and this he must do, either
expressly or covertly, because accidents have no subsistence, without a
subject. There can be nothing imagined more absurd, and more repugnant to
reason, than to talk of whiteness^, roundnesse and redness: and in the mean
time to say, there is nothing that is white, round, or read. The recourse
which they have to the Omnipotent power of God, who is able to make accidents
to subsist without a subject, declares, that they never rightly considered the
cause wherefore the Omnipotent power of GOD is mentioned in holy Scripture, to
wit, to be one of the strong pillars of our faith, which faith comes only
by hearing. Then let this order be kept: First let GOD speak in His own
word: Secondly, let us believe the word of GOD by faith: Thirdly, let the
assured pillars of the Omnipotent power and infal^ible truth of GOD uphold
our faith, as it did the faith of ABRAHAM. Romans 4. 21.


But let us not ground upon the Omnipotent power of GOD, in matters whereof
we have no assurance in His written word, as some of the wise men of PERSIA
did, who assured both themselves, and others, that incase they would
distribute all their goods to the poor, and throw themselves headlonges from
eminent places, then their souls should be transported immediately to
Heaven.

This madness fell out about the year of our LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST
759.

What was this leaning of theirs to the Omnipotent power of GOD, without
assurance of his word, but only the conceits of braine-sicke men. And so let
Papists talk what they please In this purpose, that God by his Omnipotent
power can make accidents to subsist without a subject. I will conclude that
the Omnipotent power of God is ordained to be a confirmation to our faith, and
not to be a city of refuge to foolish fables.

The doctrine of Transsubstantiation also imports, that the body of Christ at
one time may be in infinite places, which repugneth unto the nature of a true
body, which like as it is circumscribed, The sixth absurdity.
and may be seen, so likewise at one time it is only in one place, as
Augustine writes to Dardanus in these words, August. ^d Dardan. epist. 57
Toll spatia locorum corporibus, nusquam ^runt, nec ^runt: that is to say,
Take from bodies the rowmes of places, and they shall be no where, and
consequently they shall not be at all. And Theodoretus proves, that the body
of Christ is a true humane body, albeit it be glorified, even in the latter
day when he comes to judge the quick and the dead, because it shall be
seen, according as it is written, Matthew. 26 64. Ye shall see the son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven: and like as it may be seen, so likewise it
is circumscribed, and consequently it is in a place, and is not turned into his
divine nature, which is both (...), and (...): that is, it cannot be seen, and
it cannot be circumscribed, as the humane nature is. Theodoret. dial. 2. ca. 23
It is well remarked by that learned Preacher Du Moulin, that in the last
edition of S. Augustines works, at Parise, anno 1571. a notable place of the
foresaid epistle of Augustine to Dardanus, is utterly left out, by advice of
the Fathers, correctors of the writings of the Auncientes, namely this, Destrai
naturam humanam Christi si non detur ei certum spatium, quo more aliarum rerum
corporearum contineatur: that is, The humane nature of Christ is destroyed, if
a certain place be not attributed unto it, wherein it is contained according
to the custom of other corporal things. What credit is to be given unto
Popish Doctors, when they cite testimonies of ancient Fathers, after they are
deprehended, to be deceitful deprauers of their books?

Ancient Fathers, a long ^ime before the question of Transsubstantiation of the
substance of the elements in the holy Supper The seve^th absurdity
came in head, they were re^soning of the two natures in Christ, to wit, the
divine and humane nature, and that the one nature was not turned into the
other: they could not find a fitter similitude than that which is borrowed from
the Sacrament, as I have already declared. Always, they think, that if any
man shall imagine, that by virtue of these words, This is my body, the
substance of bread was changed into the substance of Christ's body (as many
do think even until this day) then in stead of one Transsubstantiation of
the substance of bread into the substance of Christ's body, there should be two
Transsubstantiations, and the substance of Christ's body should again be turned
into bread: for like as Christ, speaking of bread, says, This is my body:
Matthew. 26
even so Christ, speaking of his body, calls it corn of wheat, in these
words, Verily, I say unto you, except wheat corn fall into the ground, and
die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much Joan. 12. 24
fruit. If by virtue of the former words bread be changed into the substance
of Christ's body: then in like manner, by virtue of these words (for both are
spoken out of one blessed mouth) the Theodoret. dial. 1. ca. 8
body of Christ should be turned into the substance of corn of wheat. I grant
there is a difference betwixt a Sacrament and a metaphore: yet in neither of
them is there such virtue in the word (is) to change the substance of any thing.

IN the last head, let us consider with what strife and reluctation this
erroneous doctrine was intruced upon the Church. I hold the Monk Damascene to
be the first author thereof, who perceiving that his opinion was repugnant to
the doctrine Damase. de orthod. fide, lib. 4, ca. 14
of ancient Fathers, namely, to the doctrine of Basilius Magnus, who calls
the bread and the wine (...) that is, figures of the body and blood of Christ.
He forgeth a frivolous shift to excuse his contradiction to Basilius, because
(says he) Basilius calls them (...), before the words of the blessing,
but after the pronouncing of the words of the blessing, they are no longer
figures, but the very body and blood of Christ. It is hard to be a prolocutor
for an evil cause, for it is like unto a bulge in a wall, which falls, and
bruiseth him who would sustain it, which cannot sustain it self. It is
certain that the bread and wine are not types and figures of Christ's body
before the words of consecration: for it is after the words of blessing that
the elements receive this great honor, to be called Christ's body and blood,
that is, signs external, wherewith Christ's body and blood is spiritually
exhibited unto us. And therefore Saint Ambros. de Sacram. li. 4 cap. 4.
Ambrose calls the bread before the words of consecration panis usitatus,
that is, common bread: but it is after the words of consecration that they
receive this honor to bear the names of things represented by them, as
Theodoreius in express words writes, (...): that is, ^ee has honored the
visible signs with the appellation of his Theodoret. dialog. 1. cap. 8
body and blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace to nature. Which
place clearly proves, that the elements obtain not that great honor to be
called Christ's body, or types of his blessed body, until the time that by
divine grace they be consecrated to that holy use.

Mailrosius Scotus, lived under the reign of Charles the Great, about the
year of our Lord 800. and likewise RABANVS, Bishop of Mentz: these two had so
acquainted themselves with the doctrine of Augustine, that they could in no
manner of way give allowance to the doctrine of Transsubstantiation. And about
the year of our Lord 840. Carolus the second, the son of Ludouicus Pius, and
brother to Lotharius, and Ludouicus Germanicus, he writ to Bertramus, a
Presbyter, to have his resolution concerning the mystery of the Sacrament, and
after what manner of way the body and blood of Christ was present in the
Sacrament. To whom he returned this answer, That in the Sacrament of
Bertram. de corpore and sanguine Domini.
the holy Supper there were some things that were perceived with bodily
senses, other things were taken hold of only by faith: And the bread and
the wine were to us the body and blood of Christ, as MANNA, and the waters of
the spiritual rock were Christ's body and blood to the people of the Jews in
the wilderness. This opinion aggreeth well with the doctrine of Paul, that the
Fathers in the wilderness ate that same spiritual food which 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4
we eat: which they could not do by corporal manducation of Christ's flesh,
because as yet the word was not made flesh. So this opinion of
Transsubstantiation did no sooner put out its head, but as soon also
contradiction was made unto it.

About the year of our Lord 1020. Berengarius maintained the opinion of
Augustine, and other ancient Fathers: he was a presbyter of Angiers in
France, and denied the doctrine of Transsubstantiation, and the Roman Bishops
were co^mooued with great indignation, as appears by the number of Councels
assembled against one poor man, who durst presume to speak against the
opinion once embraced by the Roman Church. Leo the ninth gathered a Council at
Rome, in the which he condemned the opinion of Berengarius, and excommunicated
him, even before he was warned to be present at the Council, and before he
was heard. He assembled also another Council in Vercellis, about the year of
our Lord 1051. in the which Borengarius was not present: but Messengers who
came to plead his cause, were imprisoned, and casten into bands, and the book
of Ioannes Scotus Mailrosius, De Eucharistia, was condemned. By the way, if any
equity had been kept in these Councels, look by what reason they condemned
Ioannes Scotus, whose opinion Berengarius followed: by the like reason they
should have condemned Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, whose opinion Ioannes
Mailrosius followed. But the Roman Church cannot err. 'Another Council was
assembled by Pope Victor, the successor of Leo the ninth, in the which the
Decree of the Counsel of Vercellis was allowed. Yet all this could work no
contentment in their he^rtes, because the people of Angiers and Towrs, in
France, liked the doctrine of Augustine, Mailrosius, and Berengarius, about
the Sacrament of the Supper. Therefore, another Council was assembled at Rome,
by Pope Nicolaus the second, anno 1058. in the which Berengarius yielded to
the opinion of the Pope and his Council: and his weakness strengthened the
error already received in the Roman Church mightily.

But the number of them who abhorred this new found out doctrine, was
exceeding great: therefore the Roman Church, after the year of our Lord 1079,
and after the days of pope Gregory B^lling. de Council. li. 2
the seventh, put hand to work: And being now mighty and strong, they stirred
up Kings and Princes, to persecute with fire and sword, and all kind of
hostility, as heretics, all those that spoke against worshipping of Images,
and corporal presence and manducation of the body of Christ in the Sacrament
of the holy Supper.

So it is manifest, that this doctrine of Transsubstantiation was mightily
contradicted, until the days of pope Innocentius the third, who in the
Council of Laterane, anno 1215. gave full allowance thereunto. But when all
this is done, r^member that the universal and Catholic Church dwells not
in one country or city. When ye Roman Church was miserably infected with this
miserable scabbe of pestilent error, what consent gave the Churches of Asia,
and all the Grieke Churches? They ever dis^ssented from this doctrine, until
this day, as appears by the last Sessions of the Council of Florence, anno
1439. Therefore, let the Roman Church brag of Antiquity as they please, the
doctrine of Transsubstantiation shall never be found an ancient doctrine, but a
doctrine new, false, absurd, and borne out more by might of the prevailing
authority of men, than power of arguments grounded upon holy Scripture. God
teach them to return to the ancient truth, from which they have sliden: To
whom be praise and glory for ever,

Amen.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Penance.
IN this CENTVRIE it was a received custom to men to confess their sins
secretly to Presbyters, and to receive from them such form of injunctions as
they counted satisfactions for their faults, as appears clearly by the
Council gathered in France, anno 742. in the which Bonifacius, bishop of
Mentz was Moderator. In the first Canon of that Council it was statuted and
ordained, That no man of the Clergy should put on armor, and go to
warre-fare, except one or two bishops, with their presbyters and chaplens, to
prescribe penance unto them who should happen to confess their sins. By
this it is evident, that the custom of secret confession of sins to
presbyter poenitentiarius, which was excluded out of the Church in the days of
Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople: yet it returned again, and it was in use
in the VIII. CENTVRIE.

Now in the inseription of this TREATISE, I call it a Sacrament (as ye Roman
church in our days call it) not as though I were in the opinion that in this
age the number of seven Sacraments was received, for that is a Novelty, not
heard of before the 1200, year of our Lord: at which time the Scholasticke
Doctors, who perverted all Theology, would needs forge Sacraments in number
agreeing with the number of seven principal virtues, to wit, FAITH, HOPE,
CHARITY, JUSTICE, PERSEVERANCE, PRVDENCIE, and TEMPERANCE: So that Baptism
should answer to Faith, Confirmation to Hope, the holy Supper to Charity, the
Sacrament of Penance to Justice, extreme Unction. to Perseverance, the
Sacrament of Ordor to Prudencie, and the Sacrament of Marriage to Temperancie:
These were the idle speculations of Scholasticke Doctors, whereof the Roman
Church in our days are almost ashamed: because if the number of Sacraments be
numbered according to the number of principal virtues, who sees not that the
number of Sacraments in the old and new Testament must be equal, and
neither more nor August. de doctrina Christ. li. 3. cap. 9
fewer, to the end they may proportionally agree with the number of principal
virtues? But Augustino says, that our Sacraments are fewer in number, more
easy to be done, and more significatiuely expressing the grace of God, than
the Sacraments of the old Testament.

Seeing the principal purpose of my TREATISES is to manifest the Novelty of
Popish Religion, therefore in this TREATISE I affirm, that the number of seven
Sacraments was not mentioned by any Father preceding this time. Therefore the
Council of Trent, in the prodigality of their Anathems and Cursings against
all them who will acknowledge either more or fewer Conc. Trident. sess. 7. can.
1.
Sacraments of the new Testament than seven has pronounced very unadvisedly,
like as Aedipus slew his father Laius king of Thebans, in time of a sedition,
having no intention to slaye him: Even so, the Council of Trent, willing to
deliver us unto the Devil, they are not aware, that they have delivered
Justinius Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Ambrose Augustine, and many other
ancient Fathers, to the Devil, who never acknowledged the number of 7.
Sacraments, as the Council of Trent has done.

Now a good ord^r required, that a definition of the Sacrament of P^nnance
should be set down, and that we should search and inquire when it had a
beginning: and finally, inquire what are the parts thereof and what things are
necessarily required in it. First, concerning the definition of the Sacrament
of Penance, all learned writers, whom I have read, have justly blamed the
Scholasticke Doctors, for this, that they have confidently affirmed, that the
Sacraments are seven in number, yet have not set forth a definition, which
did agree with every one of the Sacraments, which they have added to Baptism
and to the Lords Supper.

Concerning the time, whereinto it had its beginning, they (...). Trident. sub
Iulio 3. sess. 4. cap. 1 Ioh. 20. 23
are more particular: namely, that it had a beginning after that Christ arose
from death, and breathed upon his Disciples, and said, R^ceiue the Holy Ghost,
whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. Before this time (say they) there
was no sacrament of Penance, neither in the old Testament, nor in the
Baptism of IHON, nor in the Preaching of CHRIST. when He preached the
doctrine of Repentance. And when the cause is demanded, wherefore there was no
Sacrament of Penance, when men confessed their sins with a contrite heart,
and were baptized Matthew. 3
by IHON, and brought forth the fruits of amendment of life? We can hear no
answer, except this, that men confessed their sins in general before they
were baptized of IHON: But in the Sacrament of Penance a particular confession
of sins is required. And in this they discover their own weakness: for in
the action of repentance, instituted by GOD, it is enough that all things be
present, which God requires: But in the Sacrament of Penance, instituted by
man, and not by God, if any thing be inlaking which humane cogitation has
found out, the doctrine of Ihon Baptist, the contrition, consession, and
satisfaction of the people, together with Ihon Baptists absolution all is
nothing. There is ye one new piece inlacking, which the Roman Church has
sowed to an old garment: and when that new clout is absent. which they have
imagined themselves, all is naught.

Now seeing that in the old Testament there are found m^nie testimonies of
true repentance, the heart, the mouth, and conversation, all witnessing, that
the penitent sinner was vn^ainedly converted unto God. How comes it to pass,
that the Roman Church ouer-giueth the old Testament, as a time whereinto the
Sacrament of Penance had no place, because it was not as yet instituted by
Christ? But they count it a Sacrament of the new Testament, instituted by
Christ, after his resurrection. The Apostle Paul is not so uncouth in his
speeches, who attributes Baptism to the Jews, and Circumcision to us (1.
Cor. 10. and Phil. 3.) in regard their Sacraments differed from our
Sacraments, rather in the sign, than in the thing signified. But the Roman
Church is so disgusted of the old Testament, that they cannot admit, that the
Sacrament of Penance had place at that time. Notwithstanding, whatsoever can
be spoken of the repentance of Marie Magdalene and Zaccheus in the new
Testament, the like may be spoken of the repentance of David in the old
Testament (2. Sam. 12. 13.) God mollified his heart, and it was pierced with a
deep sense of his sin: God lowsed his tongue, and he confessed his iniquity
against himself (Psalm. 32. 5.) he patiently endured the fatherly
chastisementes of GOD inflicted upon him for his sin: and the Prophet NATHAN
pronounced forgiveness from GOD. Here no man can deny, but true repentance is
found in DAVID, consisting in contrition of the heart, confession of the
mouth, satisfaction in his deeds, and absolution by the mouth of the Prophet:
And what more is requisite in Popish Penance? Yet because DAVID consessed his
sins unto GOD, and not to the Priest, and he patiently sustained the
chastisementes of GOD, but not the penance enjoined to him by the Priest. All
that DAVID did appertains nothing to the holy Sacrament of Penance, which
now is in use in the Roman Church.

The Roman Church, in this case, is not unlike unto an herd of cattle,
possessed a long time into a fold: if any uncouth beast enter in amongst them,
they will rudely put at it, because it Similitude
is uncouth and none of their fellowship: Even so, when we speak of ye
repentance of David, which has allowance in the holy Scripture of God, and of
the repentance of Miriam, whose satisfaction (I mean, to remove the slander
she gave to Gods people) it was prescribed by Gods own mouth, and the
repehtance of Jonas sealed up by a miraculous work of his deliverance from the
Whales belly. All this is nothing to them: for albeit here be found repentance
and absolution, yet (say they) not such as is found in the Sacrament of
Penance in the Roman Church. For in the old Testament, there is but a
prediction, that GOD will forgive their sins, providing that they repent. But
in their Sacrament, there is an actual conferring of remission of sins, ex
opere operato, to such as obey the injunctions of the Priest. What have we to
do with such foolish and babbling speeches, which are not grounded in
Scripture? For the Apostles, who preached repentance and remission of sins,
after Christ's ascension to heaven, they led the people expressly to the
promises Act. 3. 25 26
made to the Patriarchs and Prophets, concerning the coming of Christ, and of
remission of sins in him: hereby acknowledging no difference in substance
betwixt repentance under the old Testament and under the new Testament,
because both they and we are led to one fountain of the house of David,
there to be washen, and to be cleansed from all spotte of Zach. 13. 1
sin.

Truly the doctrine of repentance, taught in holy Scripture, declares, that
it is a work wrought in us by the Lord himself, according as Christ our Lord
witnesses, saying, No man comes Joan. 6. 44
unto me, except my Father, who sent me, draw him. The means whereby this
work is wrought in us, is by the fearful trumpet of the law, and by the
sweet promises of the Gospel. The instruments, which GOD uses in this work,
are the Prophets, Apostles, their successors. None of these things can be
denied: for the Apostle says, God was in Christ, and reconciled the World 2.
Cor. 5. 19. 20
unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them: and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation: no we then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you, through us: we pray you in Christ's sleade, to
beereconciled unto God. In these forementioned places of Scripture three
things are set down: First, God is counted the efficient worker of
repentance: Secondly, the promises of the Gospel (whereunto the terroures of
the law prepare an open door) are the means, alluring us to repentance:
Thirdly, the Ministers of the Word, are the instruments to carry the message
of reconciliation unto us. The very law it self, and the Gospel, cannot have
the honor due to God, who is the efficient worker of repentance, because both
law and Gospel was preached to reprobate Jews: but they were not converted by
repentance to the truth of God, in regard the Lord, who is the efficient
worker of repentance, wrought not inwardly in their hearts. As concerning the
Preachers of the doctrine of reconciliation, they receive their honor from
their Ambassadrie, and they give no honor unto it, except by accident, in
respect of the people, who carry the greater reverence to an holy message, when
they see the Ambassador who carrietith, to be an holy man. But now let us
consider God in the work of repentance as the Isai. 43. 12
head, the message of reconciliation as the stomach, the preachers of the
word, who carries this message, as the feet: whose feet, albeit they be
called beautiful, in regard of the sweet message which they carry, yet the
feet must neither have the honor of the head, nor of the stomach. But the
Roman church, by giving this honor to a priest, that he conferreth, exopere
operato, remission of sins to the person who confesses in particular all his
faults unto him, they give the honor of the head to the feet. Like as in all
their Religion their principal drift seems to be this, to lead the people
from the Creator, who is blessed for ever, to an excessive confidence in the
creatures of God.

The ground of the Sacrament of Penance is a conceit of satisfaction, which
men can make for their own sins committed after Baptism: as if the promise
of remission of sins made in Baptism did extend only to sins preceding
Baptism. What is this else, but directly to contradict the words of Christ
spoken to his Apostles. He who believes, and is baptized, shall be Mar. 16.
16
saved. Can any man be saved, by an absolution from a part of his sins, and
not from all his sins? This doctrine of the Roman Church, brings in Christ
as a Savior, and not a Savior, delivering us from the debt of bypast sins,
and setting us once without the prison door, but knowing assuredly that we
shall be thrust into the prison again, there to remain, until we satisfy
for our own sins committed after Baptism. And they make us to be our own
saviors, rather than Christ: for he who delivers a man from his last and
greatest trouble, is rather to be counted his deliverer, than he who delivered
him from his first trouble.

The particular things required in the Sacrament of Penance, they say, are
four, to wit, Contrition in the heart, Confession in the mouth, Satisfaction
in the deed, and Absolution of Contrition
the Priest. If these things were rightly conceived, in repentance, all these
things are necessarily required. But as they are in the Roman Church, all are
mere abominations, and displeasing unto God.

First, concerning the Contrition of the heart, the Psalmist speaks, The
sacrifices of God are a contrit^ spirit: a contrite, and a broken heart, O God,
thou will not despise. But in the Roman Church, psalm. 5 1. 17
when a Poenitentiare comes to his father Confessor, and discovers a sin,
not such as he has already committed, and for the which he is pierced with
sore displeasure, as David was: but rather he discovers to his father
Confessor, a treasonable attempt, which he is minded to practice, with
obstinate purpose, of an incorrigible heart: shall such a man be counted to
have a contrite and a broken heart? Yet, in our days, no man is more welcome
to a father Confessor, than such a man as discovers to him horrible treasons,
plotted against Noble Princes: Yea, and no confessions are more secretly buried
in the minds of father Confessors, than those confessions are. Is this a
contrite spirit, and a broken heart, wherein the Lord delights? Or can there
be a greater abuse of the doctrine of Contrition, than to count them contrite
in heart, who are bent obstinately to run forward in the course of
ungodliness?

Popish Contrition is not unlike unto the fighting of Marcus Crassus, both
father and son against the Parthians. Crassus the elder, in his Oration made
to encourage his army to fight valiantly, his voice failed him: Marcus Crassus,
his son, in his Plutarch. in vita Crass.
first out-going out of the house he stumbled: Both these things were counted
evil presages of the unprosperous success of the battle, which after
followed. And what esperance can we have of this new found out Sacrament of
Popish Penance, when as they judge so boldly of the first point thereof, that
is, of Contrition, counting traitors to be men of a contrite spirit, whom God
has appointed for the flames of everlasting burning, except they repent.

The form of Confession used in the Roman Church, has neither warrant nor
example in the Scripture of God, that any Confession.
person should be bound in particulare to confess all his secret sins to
the Priest. The place of Scripture vildly abused, Acknowledge Epist. Iam. cap.
5. verse. 16.
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed, etc. it should be expounded by another place of Scripture, wherein a
man, who has offended his neighbor, is commanded to confess his faults to
his neighbor, whom he has offended (Luke 17. 4) And it belongs nothing to
auricular confession, except Popish Priests would confess in particular all
their sins to the people, like as the people confesses all their secret
sins in particular to the Priests, And our Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
when he received a particular confession of secret sins from the Samaritan
woman, he sent away his Disciples to Samaria, to the end the weakness of a
poor Ihon, 5. 8
penitent sinner should not be troubled by a particular confession of secret
sins before them who knew not things which were done in secret. But let us
confess secret sins to God, who knows things that are done in secret. But
sins whereby the Church of God is openly slandered, let them also be openly
confessed.

Seeing that auricular confession has no testimony in Scripture, it follows
to search out by diligent examination, whether or no it had place after the
days of the Apostles in the first three hundredth years of our Lord. We read
of the first Christened Emperor Philippus, who slew Gordianus, and was slain
by the Emperor Decius, anno 250, that he was desirous about Easter time, to
be admitted unto the participation of the holy Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 34
Sacrament: but this benefit was refused unto him, until the time that he made
his public repentance, and until he stood in the place where (...) were
accustomed to stand. They were so called, because they were demanded
concerning the sins which they had committed, and the sense and feeling of
grief that God had wrought in their hearts for their preceding offenses.
This was not a secret and auricular confession, but an open confession of
public sins in sight and open audience of the people. So we see, that for the
space of two hundredth and fifty years after the Lords ascension, auricular
and secret confession of sins, to the Bishop or Presbyter, was unknown in
the Church.

Now if at any time open confession of sins should have ceased, and given
place to secret and auricular confession, it was in time of the ten
Persecutions, because that Christians were drawn continually before the
judgment seats of unbelieving Judges, from whom the weakness and faults of
Christians might have been obscured, if auricular confession had been in use
at that time. But the Fathers who lived in that age, were so careful to purge
the Church from slander, that they preferred the purity of the Church unto
their own lives.

True it is, that even before the ten Persecutions had an end, some good
Christians would consult with their Pastors, w^ether it was expedient to
confess their sins openly before the people, to the edification and good of
the Church, or secretly only to God? But this secret consulting with the
Pastor, what was most needful to be done, was not an auricular confession to
him of all secret sins, but rather an aduisement concerning some sins,
whether the sinner himself and the Church might receive greater benefit by
open confession before the people, or by secret confession to God only?

The words of Origin very pertinently cited by Chemnisius are these, Consider
circumspectly to whom thou should confess thy sin. Origin. in Psalm. 37.
Try first thy Physician: if he understand and foresee thy disease to be
such as should be confessed in the Congregation of the whole Church, and so be
cured whereby possibly others may be edified, and thou thy self may be easily
healed: then (says he) make haste to use the counsel of thy Physician.

If the custom of the Primitive Church were proponed in simplicity and
sincerity, it should be found, that the new toye of auricular confession
cannot be shrouded under the veil of great Antiquity.

Whatsoever a few men, wounded more deeply with a sense of sin, than
others, they did voluntarily in pouring out their sins in the bosom of their
Pastors, albeit they had neither sacrificed unto Idols, nor yet given up their
names in the Roman deputies rolls, promising conformity: but only they
confessed other faults of less moment to their Pastors, with dejected and
humbled minds, seeking comfort to their afflicted souls. This Cypr. Sermon 5.
de Lapsi^
is a matter rarely contingent, wherewith we are acquainted in our days, as
familiarly as Cyprian was in his time. Yet was there no mandate and Church
commandment, ordaining people so to do in Cyprians days. And people
likewise, who powers out the dolor of their wounded consciences for secret
sins in our bosom, they do it voluntarily, and vncoacted, hoping for some
mitigation of their grief through vnburthening of their heart by confession,
as Nazianzenus writes, (...) Nazianzen. Cygn, carmin. ad Epise.
: that is, It is some medicinal cure of heart grief to power out our words
into the very air.

After the three hundredth year of our Lord, and after the ten Persecutions
ceased, the discipline of making open repentance for open sins, continued in
the Church, as is evident by the Act of the Council of Nice, in the 11. Canon,
in the which a form of Public satisfaction is prescribed unto them who in
time of the Persecution of Licinius had sacrificed to Idols. But concerning a
particulare confession of secret sins to the Pastor, there is no mention in
the Council of Nice.

The History has declared, that auricular confession had place in the East
Churches, in the days of Nectarius bishop of Constantinople, whose Ministry
was under the reign of the Emperor Theodosius. Here two things are to be
noted: First that the discipline of the East and West Churches was different:
and in the West Church there remained a public confession of notorious and
public sins: in so much, that the Emperor Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 18
Theodosius himself confessed his fault openly, and in sight of the people at
Millane, for the slaughter of the innocent people of Thessalonica. Secondly, it
is to be marked, that Nectarius in abolishing the custom of auticular
confession, he acknowledged it to be but an humane, and not a divine
constitution: for who dare abolishe, either in doctrine, or discipline, the
constitutions and ordinances of God?

Lindanus, a man in the Latin Language more eloquent than godly, cannot suffer
that it shall be thought, that Nectarius abolished auriculare confession, but
rather, that he abolished the custom (then in use) that one should only be
Presbyter Poenitentiarius, to whom secret sins should be confessed: and
that in time to come, a man should make choice of any presbyter, whom he
pleased, to be his father Confessor, But let the history be judge. Socrates
says, that Eudaemon gave council to Nectarius, Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 19
to abrogate presbyter poenitentiarius, and to remit every man to the trial of
his own conscience, when he approached to the participation of holy mysteries.

Satisfaction in the Roman Church, is an obedience to the injunctions of the
Priest: by performance whereof, they are in hope Satisfaction
to obtain forgiveness at the hands of God, for sins committed after
Baptism. But besides the Nouel^y that is in Popish Satisfaction, it is also a
blasphemous opinion. It is a Nouelty because that ancient Fathers, when they
spoke of Satisfaction, meaned not of a satisfaction made to God, but of a
satisfaction made to the Church: Yea, and S. Augustine calls it, Satesfactio,
quiasatis Augustine. Enchyri. ad Laurent.
fiebat Ecclesiae: that is because the Church was satisfied. It is also a
blasphemous opinion, because the honor only due to the merits of Christ's
suffering, is attributed to the worthiness of men's satisfactions, such as
Fasting, Praying, distribution of Alms, going in Pilgrimage to holy places,
and such like offices. But the usurpation of the least of the honors
belonging only to CHRIST, is hornbletreason in the sight of God, CHRIST is a
propitiation for our sins, says the Apostle, 1. Ihon, chap. 2. verse. 2. If
any man do imagine, that he can make a satisfaction for his own sins, he
is blasphemous against the son of God. And like as Julian the Apostate, when
he suffered himself to be saluted by the Army (...), that is, Emperor:
CONSTANTIVS the Emperor, by that one word, understood the treasonable
attemptes of his aspiring mind. And let us be persuaded in our own Similitude
hearts, That incase any man imagine, that he can sati^fie for his own
sins, he is but a Traitor against the SON of GOD.

THe last head of Popish Penance, is Absolution, wherein three things do
concur, to wit, blasphemy, uncertainty Absolutio^
and foolishness. It is blasphemy to say, that any man can forgive finnes,
who is not Eternal GOD, (Mark 2. 7.) except in form of a Messenger,
executing GODS commandment in such manner as GOD has prescribed in his holy
word. It is great uncertainty to absolve men from the guiltiness of their
faults, but not from their punishment: insomuch, that if they be prevented by
death, before they have fulfilled the penance enjoined by the Priest, then
their souls must be tormented in Purgatory, until they have made full
satisfaction for their offenses. Then Popish Absolution, depending upon the
uncertainty of a man's life, cannot be a certain thing, but a miserable
excrutiation of poor souls, put in vain hope of absolution, and yet
uncertain whether they be absolved or not.

Now because they will needs refer the institution of the Sacrament of
Penance unto CHRIST, as the Author thereof, when He breathed upon His
Disciples, and said, Whose sins ye remitte, they are remitted, etc. (Ihon,
chapt. 20. verse 23.) Necessity constrains them to prove two things out of
the words of CHRIST, which they count essential in the Sacrament of Penance;
First, that CHRIST commanded a penitent sinner to make a particulare
rehearsal of his secret sins in the ear of the Priest: which thing CHRIST
never commanded. Secondly, that in the absolution of a penitent sinner,
CHRIST commanded to enjoyne unto him a satisfaction, whereby he might merit
at the hands of GOD forgiveness for sins committed after Baptism: which
thing CHRIST never commanded: yea, repugneth manifestly to the Holy
Scriptures of GOD, in the which it is said, With one offering has He
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, Hebr. chapt. 10. verse. 14. This
is not a single and upright dealing to refer the institution of the Sacrament
of Penance unto CHRIST, when as they cannot prove, that things most
essentiallie requisite in their Sacrament, has allowance from the mouth of
CHRIST.

I compare the Romanists in their doctrine of Penance to king Hezekias, not in
time of his zeal and vprightnes, but in time of his reproueable weakness: for
he showed unto the Ambassadors of Isai. 39. 2
the King of BABEL, the house of his treasures, his Silver, Gold, Spices, and
Precious Ointmentes, and all the house of his Armor. The Messengers of the
King of BABEL had no such commission from their Master, to view the Treasures,
Riches, and Armor of King HEZEKIAS: but only to present letters of
congratulation for the miraculous restitution of HEZEKIAS to health, and to
bring unto him a present from MERODACH BALADEN, King of BABEL. But HEZEKIAS,
King of IVDA, in his reprooueable weakness (as I have already spoken) let
the Ambassadoures see maine chinges, which they had no commission to see, to
the great harm and disaduantadge of his posterity: Even so, CHRIST sent out
His Apostles, and their true Successors, to preach the doctrine of repentance,
and remission of sins. But the ROMAN Church will let the Ambassadoures of
GOD see such things, as are not contained in their commission, to wit, a
particular confession of all secret sins, together with a satisfaction to
GOD for sins committed after Baptism, of which things no mention is made in
the written word of GOD.

Here I leave them, delighting in their Novelties, which have no ground from
the mouth of CHRIST, nor from the doctrine of His Apostles.

Yea, they are like unto the frogs of the I Will of SERIPHVS, one of the Isles
called CYCLADES, in the which the Frogs set up their heads in the Months
of March and April, but they utter no sounding voice. as the Frogs in
Similitude
other places do: Even so, the ROMAN Church holds up their heads, as if
they would prove, that CHRIST instituted this Sacrament, but they faint in the
probation.

A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
IN the Sacrament of Confirmation, there is a glorious show of a sign, and a
spiritual thing signified. The outward sign is Chrisme, that is, Oil, mixed
with some mixture of Baulme, which being signated with the sign of the
Cross, upon the forehead of him who is confirmed, in the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: they say, that with this outward sign is conferred
the seuen-folde grace of the holy Spirit. And this Sacrament they extol above
the Sacrament of Baptism, because the grace of God which is begun in us by
Baptism, is perfected by the Sacrament of Confirmation: Yea, and a Priest, or
Deacon of the Church, may baptize: but the Sacrament of Confirmation must only
be ministrated by a Bishop.

Very early did Popish bishops provide, that they should not be altogether
idle: for they began to loath the office of preaching and baptizing: and lest
they should seem to be idle bellies, they reserved some easy exercise to
themselves, to wit, the making of Chrisme, and anointing the people therewith.

To all this is added a Rhetorical discourse, That the people of Israel,
after they had passed through the red Sea, they entered into a Wilderness, in
the which they had a great combat with many troubles, before they could enter
into their rest. And in like manner, after that we are baptized, we have a
great fight with many adversaries and troubles, before we can enter into the
rest of God. All this is true, but what is inferred upon this? If the Apostle
Paul were our instructor, he would bid us put on the complete armor of God,
to the end that we might withstand Ephesians. 6
spiritual wickedness, and eat the blessed bread, and drink the cup of
blessing, to the end that being corroborated by 1. Cor. 10
the strength of the Sacraments ordained by God, we might fight a good fight,
and finishe our journey with joye. This is the Apostolic doctrine. But
Papists will correct the Apostolic doctrine in all points, and they will have
a Christian to be corroborated by Chrisme and ye sacrament of confirmation, to
the end he may pass over the stormy tentations of this world in peace.

Let me now demand of them two things: One concerning the sign, Another
concerning the thing signified. Concerning the sign, I demand who gave
commandment to use it? Concerning the thing signified, I demand who has
promised to confer the seuen-folde grace of the holy Spirit to them who are
signated upon the forehead by the bishops thombe with the sign of the Cross?
These two things, to wit, the commandment and the promise are inlacking in
Popish Sacraments: and so their new found out Sacraments are like unto a
body that is not quickened with a soul. The Scholasticke Doctors, the first
inuentors of this plurality of Sacraments, they confess roundly, that the
Sacrament of Confirmation has no authority in holy Scripture, such as
Alexander Alensis, Bonaventura, and Thomas Aquinas, who after much fatigation
of himself and others also, he cannot find, that ever Christ, or yet His
Apostles, conferred this Sacrament to any person. Whatsoever they can cite out
of Tertullian, or Basilius, or any ancient Council, for the confirmation of
Chrisme, it is certain, that they confess, that this custom has no
authority of the written word of God. And this is the principal mark
whereat I aim in all my writings, to prove, that there is no Antiquity
where (...), that is, the written word of God, does not confirm the
antiquity of that which is alleged.

The Roman Church waketh great business to prove that in holy Scripture many
promises of confirmation and corroboration of the work of God begun in us
are contained: But they bestirre themselves in vain, in proouing that thing,
which no man denies. But incase they would prove, that the Sacrament of
Confirmation is a Sacrament in a proper sense, then it became them to prove,
that God in His word has promised the grace of confirmation, to such as are
signated upon the forehead and anointed with Chrisme, and buffeted upon the
chieke with the bishops hand. Seeing none of these things can be proved by
Scripture, it is a frivolous thing for them to allege a promise made by God,
when as they invent the element whereunto this promise shall be annexed. If
this be a form, according to the which Sacraments should be fashioned: then I
dare affirm, that the number of Sacraments may be multiplied, according to the
number of the promises contained in the word of God: So that God shall make a
promise, and man shall invent, without any warrant of Gods commandment, an
external element, whereunto the promise shall be annexed. By this form of
doing not only may they make up seven Sacraments, but also seventy times
seven Sacraments.

True it is, that the holy Apostles, by imposition of hands, conferred the
gift of the holy Spirit (that is, the gift of Languages) Act. 8.
to many professors of the true Faith: and this gift conferred unto them,
confirmed them in the faith of Christ. But what belongs this unto the Popish
Sacrament of Confirmation, in the which the external sign of imposition of
hands is inlacking, and the promise of a spiritual grace annexed to the sign
is also inlacking: and finally, that thing which was extraordinary and
appertaining to a few, is brought in as the ground of an ordinary Sacrament,
which should appertain to all them who believe.

I will not insist long to speak of this new Sacrament of Confirmation. Only
this I say, that whatsoever is brought in into the Church of God, with
derogation of the dignity of Baptism, an holy Sacrament instituted by Christ
himself, it should Matthew. 28
be abhorred. But so it is, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is brought in
with a derogation to the dignity of Baptism, ergo, etc. The second part of
the argument is proved by their slender and derogatiue speeches of Baptism,
together with their superlatiue aduancements of the eminency of the Sacrament
of Confirmation. In Baptism they say that we receive not the upholding,
defending, governing, and strengthening Spirit of God: but all these graces
are conferred in the Sacrament of Confirmation. Likewise, in Baptism is
prepared an habitation to God: but the Father, Son, and holy Ghost enter not
into this habitation before we receive the Sacrament of Confirmation. What can
be more directly repugnant to H. Scripture? Mark 16
wherein it is expressly said, He who believes, and is baptized, shall be
saved. Can any man be saved, before his soul be an habitation and Temple in the
which God is content to dwell? So that the doctrine of the Roman Church is
like unto the navigations of men who dare presume to sail in deep and
dangerous Seas without a Compass: Even so, they talk of matters of great
importance without the warrande of holy Scripture: whereby it comes to pass,
that their doctrine in many points is flat repugnant to holy Scripture.

Concerning the testimonies of Fathers, whereby they endeavor to prove the
Sacrament of Confirmation, I might answer compendiously with S. Augustine,
Quicquid attulerint, and undecunque attulerint, audiamus potius, si oues sumus
vocem pastoris nostri: non ergo audiamus, haec ego dico, haec tu duis: sed haec
dicit Dominus: August. de unitate Eccles, cap. 3
that is, Whatsoever they bring in, and from whence soever they have brought it
in, if we be the Lords sheep, let us rather bearken to the voice of our
shephearde: therefore, let us not hearken to them who say, This I say, or
this thou say, but this says the Lord. Nevertheless, seeing they glory
so much of ancient Fathers, let the judicious Reader beware of supposititious
writings, and he shall not find this Chrisme in ancient writers. The Sermon of
Cyprian, De Chrismate, is known to be supposititious. The opinion of
Tertullian, who writes, that they who are baptized with water, have not
received the Holy Spirit, but are prepared to receive it by anointing Tertull.
de Baptism.
with oil, and imposition of hands, after baptism: does not every man, who
is versed in the reading of Fathers, smell, that Tertullian writ this when
he made defection from the truth, and was entangled with the error of the
Montanistes? And Cyprian, in the books of his epistles, when he attributes
too much to Unction with Oil and imposition of hands, after baptism, Cypr.
lib. 1 epist. 12
it is easy to perceive, that he borrowed this error from Tertullian, whom he
acknowledged as his Master. But neither Tertullian Idem, lib. 2 epist. 1
nor Cyprian are speaking of the Popish Sacrament of Confirmation, but of
anointing with oil and imposition of hands immediately after baptism. Mark
the words of Cyprian, where he says, Non posse esse filios Dei, si non utroque
sacramento nascantur, lauacro scilicet aquae in verbo, and unctione Chrismatis:
that is, They cannot be the sons of God, except they be borne again by
both the Sacraments to wit, by the lauacre of water in the word, and the
anointment of Chrisme. True it is, that Cyprian calls the anointment of oil
after baptism, a Sacrament different from the dipping in water: but his
meaning is, that the anointing with oil is an element different from the
element of water, and Augustine long after Cyprian, calls the external sign
of the Sacrament, a Sacrament, August. in Euangel. Joan. cap. 6 tract. 26
and the thing represented by it, res sacramenti.

Now what vantadge has the Roman Church, when they take hold of the words,
utroque Sacramento, that is, both the Sacraments? and in the mean time they
neither take heed to the sandy ground, whereupon Cyprian leans, to wit,
the opinion of Tertullian, neither yet take they heed in what sense Cyprian
calls anointing with oil a Sacrament, to wit, because it is one of the
elements, whereby our spiritual birth is represented.

The reverence that was carried toward the ceremonies of signification in the
law of Moses, has made a patent door under the Gospel, to receive many
legal ceremonies, such as consecration by oil, the linen Ephod, the lights
shining all the night long, and many other ceremonies, which are the more
easily embraced, because in Poprie the substance of godliness is utterly
forsaken, and vain ceremonies are adhered unto, even such as are ceased,
because they had their performance in Similitude
Christ. And like as it is a folly to take the husks of the wine grapes,
after the liquor is pressed out of them, and to cast them into the wine press
again: Even so, it is a foolish conceit to return the ceremonies of
signification, which have had their performance in Christ, and are abolished,
to have place again in the Church of God.

Therefore, let the Roman Church brag of Antiquity as much as they please,
in their Sacrament of Confirmation, no antiquity shall be found, and that
for three causes: First* because the anointing with oil, whereof the Fathers
do speak, is not a different sacrament from baptism, but a ceremony
Preceding and following Baptism. Secondly, the oil wherewith persons
baptized were anointed, was not mixed with Balsome. And thirdly, after
baptism, anointing with oil, and imposition of hands followed immediately:
but in the Sacrament of Confirmation, when it began to take place in the Church
of God, anointing with oil mixed with Balsome followed not immediately upon
the neck of baptism, as a continuate action: but it was ministered 12. or 15.
year after baptism: so that it is a deluding of the world, and a perverting
of those who are weak in understanding, to prove that the Sacrament of
Confirmation is an ancient Sacrament in the Church, because it was an ancient
custom to anoint with oil those who were baptized, as if Baptism and
Confirmation were both one thing, which they utterly deny.

Let the judicious Reader understand, that the purpose of the Roman Church to
advance their Sacrament of Confirmation with impairing of the dignity of
Baptism, is but a new Popish invention: For the writers, after the days of
the Apostles, the more ancient they are, the more they magnify the holy
Sacrament of Baptism: by which (says Clemens Alexandrinus) (...): that is,
We Clemens Alexa. paed. lib. 1. cap. 6
are enlightened, we receive the adoption of children, we are made perfect,
we are made immortal. What affinity has the doctrine of the Roman Church
with Antiquity, who counts the Sacrament of Baptism only a preparation to
the Sacrament of Confirmation? Whereas ancient Writers have attributed to
Baptism received truly, and with singleness of heart, such perfection as
leads us unto immortallitie and eternal life.

Lindanus pineth himself much, as a woman traveling in birth, to bring forth
her child: so does he endeavor with Lindan. panopl. lib 4 cap. 29
all his might, to prove, that CHRIST instituted the Sacrament of
Confirmation, and that the Chrisme should be renewed from year to year, and
that this custom has been continually in use since the days of the
Apostles, not only in the Church of ROME, but also in the Churches of
ANTIOCHIA, HIERVSALEM, and EPHESVS. This is a very confident assertion, if he
could make it good. And for proof of all this gear, is brought forth
asupposititious letter of Fabian, bishop of Rome. The cause is weak that is
founded upon such sandy ground as Decretall Epistles do falselie attribute
to a great number of the bishops of Rome. The old proverb has place in
Lindanus, as much as in any Writer, Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus Mus:
that is, The Mountains are travailing in birth, and aridiculous Mouse shall
be brought forth. Fabianus testimony, written in a Legende of lies, that is,
in Decretall Epistles, unknown to Antiquity, is no sure ground to any man to
lean his Faith upon it.

Moreover, he fetches a compass to draw this Sacrament of Confirmation out of
Scripture one way or other, and he says, that Christ commanded his Apostles,
who were already baptized, to remain at Jerusalem, until they were endewed
with strength from above (Act. 1) and in the day of Penticost, the H. Ghost
descended upon them in the similitude of fiery and cloven tongs (Act. 2) and
again, the disciples at Samaria, who were already baptized, yet by imposition
of the hands of the Apostles, they received the gift of the H. Spirit (Act, 8.
17) What can Lindanus infer upon these grounds? Christ bestowed upon
Christians, who were already baptized, a more ample grace than they had at the
beginning: when they were baptized, and Christ added a sign in time of
Confirmation, sometimes fiery tongues, and sometimes imposition of hands: ergo,
Confirmation is a Sacrament of ye new Testament: it follows not: for God in
ordinary sacraments, like as he makes promises appertaining to al ye
believers: even so in like manner he seals up these promises by signs
appertaining to all ye members of the Church of God: but promises belonging to
a small number, and sealed up with signs co^ferred unto a few, cannot be the
ground of a sacrament, which is a seal of the covenant of God, belonging to
all true professors and believers. And when Lindanus has troubled himself
with much business, in end he grants that Chrisming is an unwritten
tradition, and has no authority in the written word of God, citing the
testimony of Basilius Magnus to this effect: God confirms and Basil. aduer.
sus Eunom.
strengthens them who are baptized in his name, to bring his own work
begun in them to a perfection, but not to institute a new SACRAMENT. And
like as the GENTILES of old, who worshipped the SVNNE, they worshipped it not
only for the glory and splendour that was in it, but also for the benefit that
it did communicate unto the earth, by warming it, and making it fruitful. Even
so, we do magnify God our Creator and maker, not only for his own most
excellent and incomprehensible glory, but also because he daily refreshes
our souls with his goodness, and strengthens our weakness with the power
of his saving grace. These are points whereof no man doubts: and a large and
fruitful discourse upon this subject is a commendation of the superabundant
goodness of God: but it belongs nothing to prove that Chrisming is a
Sacrament distinct from Baptism.

The African Council, called Mileuitanum, pronounced an Anatheme against all
those who say, that the grace of God in Canon 3
Baptism conferreth only remission of sins already committed, and that in it
there is no support promised to preserve men from sins in time to come that
they be not committed. Whereby we may evidently perceive, that the spiritual
graces, which the Roman Church refers to the Sacrament of Confirmation,
were of old referred to the Sacrament of Baptism.

Likewise, Antididagma Coloniensis (as Themnisius declares) demands, for
what cause does the Presbyter anoint him, who is baptized, with Chrisme, seeing
that he is to be anointed of new again, with Chrisme, in the Sacrament of
Confirmation? And out of the book, De Gestis Pontificum, he records a
constitution of Syluester, That for the peril of unexpected death, it is
meet, that the Presbyter shall anoint with Chrisme him who is to be baptized,
lest through absence of the Bishop the person baptized should depart this life
without Confirmation: but if the bishop be present, let him be anointed by the
bishop. This declares. that of old Chrisming was annexed to Baptism. But
afterward, to multiply the number of the Sacraments, they separated it from
the action of Baptism, and made it a peculiar Sacrament, to be ministered some
space of time after Baptism, at the least seven days, for reverence toward
the seuen-folde graces of God conferred in the Sacrament of Confirmation, as
Durandus cites out of RABANVS: usually twelve or fifteen years interuene
betwixt Baptism and the Sacrament of Confirmation in the Roman Church. Only
this I request of the judicious Reader, that when he reads of Chrisming in
the ancient Church, he would not take it for the Sacrament of Confirmation,
but for anointing with oil in Baptism. And this custom also had no allowance
in the written word of GOD, as Basilius expressly grants, in these words,
(...), that is, What Scripture Basil. aduer. sus Eunom. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4
cap. 32
has taught us anointing with Oil? Does not this proceed from secret and
mysticke tradition?

Finally, let us search out this matter to the very ground, whereby it may be
evidently known, how this Sacrament of Confirmation crept in into the Church.
It was a custom of ancient time, that children were presented to Baptism by
their Christian parents: and albeit their infancy could not comprehend the
sum of Christian Faith, yet never thelesse they were instructed and
catechized when they came to years of discretion: and when they had
sufficiently comprehended the sum of Christian Faith, their parents of new
again presented them to the Bishop, who after he had received in audience of
the people, a clear confession of their Faith, he blessed them, and with the
ceremony of imposition of hands, prayed to God, that these persons, who had
given out of their own mouth a confession of that same Faith, which their
parents had professed in their name in Baptism, might continue in that same
true Faith constantly unto their lives end. This imposition of hands was used
to imprint into the hearts of the persons, who had made a confession of their
faith, a deeper reverence of God, and a greater care to continue constant. But
in doing of this, there was no purpose to institute a new Sacrament of
Confirmation in the Church.

Moreover, persons who were baptized by Heretics, when they forsook their
heresy, they were not rebaptized, but they were received into the Church by
the ceremony of imposition of hands, as has been declared in the life of
Stephanus, bishop of Rome, CENT. III. CHAP. II. And this imposition of hands
was joined with prayer, That it would please God to vouchsafe upon him who was
received into the bosom of the Church by imposition of hands, the gift of the
holy Spirit, which was offered unto him in Baptism, but it was not received,
because he professed not the true Faith. Neither can there be found in this
second sort of imposition of hands any ground for the Sacrament of
Confirmation.

To conclude, this Sacrament of Confirmation is either of God or man. If it be
of God, let the warrande of His commandment be brought forth, in the which
He commands to anoint with Chrisme those who are already baptized. And is
it not a disficill thing, to these who are content to sacrifice their life for
Christ's sake to offer their children also to be signated with Chrisme when
they are twelve or fifteen years of age. But if no divine commandment can
be found out, commanding us so to do, but it is a plain humane invention,
Then let the Roman Church brag less of Antiquity than they do, seeing
there is nothing in humane inventions, but Antiquity of Error.

FINIS.
CENTVRIE IX.
CHAP. I. OF EMPERORS.
CAROLVS MAGNUS.
IN the year of our LORD 801. CHARLES THE GREAT, King of FRANCE, was declared
Emperor, by LEO the third, Bishop of ROME: and he reigned sixteen years in
his Imperial dignity: for he continued King of FRANCE forty and six
years. The Empire of the West had been cut off since the days of Augustulus,
the son of Orestes, whom Odoaser, king of Rugiheruli, etc. had compelled to
denude himself of the Imperial dignity. Now after the issue of 300. years,
and after the Hunnes, the Goths, the Lombardes, and other Nations had obtained
dominion in the West, all abstaining (notwithstanding of their prevailing
power) from the name, dignity, and style of Emperoures. Now at length (I
say) Charles the Great is anointed, and crowned Emperor, by Leo the third,
in the Town of Rome. And this was the beginning of that evil custom which
after followed, to wit, That Emperors should receive their coronatio^ from the
Bishops of Rome. At this time the Empire of the East was in ye hands of ye
Empress Irene, and in the hands of the Emperor Nicephorus. who had banished
Irene, and reigned in her stead. The Empire of the East was also weak at this
time, as apppeareth by a Covenant of Peace which they concluded with Charles,
Emperor of the West: in the which no mention is made of Exarchatus Rauenne, to
be rendered again unto them only, that the Isle of Sic^ll, and the Towns and
Lands which lie from Naples Eastwarde on the right hand, and from Manfredonia
(sometimes called Syponto) on the left hand, compessed about with the Seas,
called Superum and Inferum: these should remain in the possession of the
Emperors of Constantinople. Charles was a prudent and godly Emperor, more
sound and upright in sundry heads of christian doctrine, than many others: for
he detested the worshipping of Images, as vile Idolatry, as appears by his
books written against the second Council of Nice. Charles was very friendly
to Christians, and defended them against the violence and tyranny of their
persecuting enemies: namely, against Godefridus, King of Denmark, a fearce
adversary against the Christians who dwelt in Saxony. Likewise, he subdued the
Sclavonians and Bohemians, enemies to Christian Religion: and was justly called
Magnus for his great exploytes and valiant acts which God prospered in his hand
Pipinus, the son of Emperor Charles, was declared King of Italie^ who died
before his father: and after his death he appointed Bernard his nephew to
reign in Italy, with express commandment, That he should be obedient to his
son Ludouieke, whom he ordained to be successor to himself in the
Imperial office. So the Emperor Charles, full of days, died in the 71. year
of his age, and was buried in AKEN.

LVDOVICVS PIUS.
AFter Charles succeeded his son Ludouicus Pius. and reigned 26. years. For
his gentle and meek behavior he was called Pius. He received the Imperial
Diadem from Stephanus the fourth, at Aken. Bernard his brothers son,
forgetful of the mandate of Charles the Great, rebelled against Ludodouicus
Pius, and was beheaded at Aken. Likewise, his own sons (assisted with
Hugobortus, Bishop of Lions, and Bernhardus Bishop of Vienne, and other
bishops, who did excommunicate the Emperor for adherence to Judith his wife)
they behaved themselves very vnduetifully toward their father. Nevertheless,
he freely pardoned his sons, and accepted them again into favor. Also,
Frederick, bishop of Wtrecht, threatened to excommunicate the Emperor, if he
did not for sake the company of Judith his well-beloved wife, and daughter to the
Duke of Bauaria, because she was his near kinswoman, to wit, in degrees of
consanguinitie forbidden in the Popish law. The Empress willing to be revenged
of the bishop, she hired two gentlemen, who set upon him after Church service,
and slew him in his Priestly garments. In his time also, the Saracenes, in
hudge numbers, like unto Locusts swarmed out of Egypt and Africa, and invaded
the Isle of Sicill. By cutting down all fruitful trees, burning Towns,
Temples, and Monasteries, and by killing bishops, priests, and monks, they
brought the Isle to an utter desolation. Gregory the fourth, at this time, was
Pope: and he exhorted the Emperor, and his son Lotharius, to support the
distressed estate of the Isle of Sicill. They answered, That albeit that matter
duly belonged to Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, yet nevertheless, they
refused not to undertake the work, upon the common charges of the country.
Now whilst these things were in reasoning, Bonifacius, Count of Corsica, and
his brother Bertarius, with support Platina in vit. Greg. 4
of the people of Hetruria, arrived with a Navy at Afric: and betwixt Vtica
and Carthage, encountered with the Saracenes four times: and slew of them so
great a number, that they were compelled to recall their forces back again
from Sicill Like as of old the Carthaginians, vexed by Scipio, recalled
Hanniball for the safety of his own country: So Bonifacius returned back
again with an army victorious, and richly ladened with the spoil of his
enemies. Nothing was more vnprouidently done by the good Emperor Ludouicus
Pius, than the ouer-giuing of that right, voluntarily conferred to Charles his
father by Adrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit, That no man should be
elected Pope without the consent and allowance of the Emperor. Functii
comment. lib. 9
This fore-saide right Ludouicus gave over to the Clergy and people of Rome:
only, the Romans, for keeping of friendship, should send an Ambassador to
the Kings of France, declaring whom they had elected to be Pope. Hereby a
patent door was opened to all mischief, which after followed: and to that
horrible contention betwixt Emperoures and Popes, concerning investment of
Bishops. In his time three Emperoures reigned in the East, at Constantinople:
to wit, Leo Armenius, Michaell Balbus, and Theophilus. Leo Armenius reigned
seven years. He banished Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, for
defending adoration of Images. Michaell Balbus slew Leo his predicessour,
whilst he was praising God in the Church, and reigned in his stead nine
years. In his time the Saracenes mightily prevailed: a number of them issued
out of Spain, and took the Isle of Candie. Another company, coming from
Afric, wasted the Isle of Sicill. Theophilus reigned ten years, and faught
against the Saracenes, who did oppress the Country of Asia: but he had no
good success.

LOTHARIVS.
LOTHARIVS, the son of LVDOVICVS PIUS, was declared King of Italy, and
Augustus before his fathers death. He was anointed by Pope Pascalis, in the
Church of Saint PETER: and he reigned fifteen years. Great hostility and
bloody wars fell out amongst the children of Ludouicus Pius: to wit,
Lotharius, Jews, Charles, and Pipinus, for dividing of their fathers Lands.
In this civil dissension the Nobility of France was so miserably weakened,
that the Normandes and Daines took boldness to invade the Countreye of
France: which they vexed for the space of twenty years. In the East, after
Theophilus had concluded his life, his son Michael, with his mother Theodora,
governed the estate. Michael reigned four and twenty years. Theodora
continued only eleven years. She persecuted those who would not worship
Images: albeit her husband before his departure from this life had seriously
admonished her, that she should not trouble the Church for restoring of Images.

LVDOVICVS the second.
LVDOVICVS the second, and son of Lotharius, reigned twenty years and one.
The intestine dissension betwixt him and his brother Charles, seems to be
like unto an hereditarie sickness. Howsoever, the Emperor Ludouicke had
dishonor thereby: because the reballes of Charles desired the Emperoures
protection against his own brother: which when he had granted, the rebels
were reconciled again with their own King Charles: and the Emperor, with
dishonor, was compelled to retire from his brothers Dominions. In the East,
Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, slew his brother Theoctistus, and thrust
his mother Theodora, and her sisters, into a Monastery, and reigned himself
alone after his mothers deposition thirteen years. So the whole time of the
government of Michael, was twenty and four years. He faught against the
Saracenes, but very vnprosperously, and was slain by Basilius, who reigned in
his stead seven years.

CAROLVS CALVVS.
LVDOVICVS the second dying without children, his brother Carolus Caluus, king
of France, obtained at the hands of the Bishop of Rome, by many liberal
gifts, to be anointed Emperor. He continued Emperor not above two years:
and was poisoned by one Sedekias, a Jew, whom he used for his Physician.

CAROLVS CRASSVS.
CAROLVS CRASSVS was the son of Jews, king of Germanic: he reigned 10.
year. Carolus Balbus, the son of Carolus Caluus, was incontinent cut off by
death. Therefore, I have ouer-passed his name with silence. In this Emperoures
time the Normandes and Daines made such horrible excursions and desolations in
FRANCE, that the Emperor, who came with a great Army, to support the
distressed estate of France, was compelled to make peace with them, anno 888.
and assigned unto them that part of France which lies beyond Seane, toward
the Britannicke Ocean, to be their habitation: which has the name of
Normandy until this day. Crassus, for His. Magd. Ceat. 9 Cap. 16
his negligence and evil government, was deposed from his authority, and
Arnulphus, his nephewe, was declared Emperor.

ARNVLPHVS.
AFter the death of Carolus Crassus, great troubles ensued in Italy, by the
factions of Berengarius, whom the Lombardes choosed to be King of Italy, on
the one part: and Guido, Duke of Spoleto, whom others choosed to reign in
Italy, on the other part. In the midst of these factions Arnulphus leads
an army out of Germany. He took the Town of Bergamum, and hanged Ambrose,
the Earl thereof, upon a Gibbet, before the port of the Town. This severity
terrified other Towns, and made them to yield. He addressed toward Rome,
and was ^rowned Emperor by Formosius, whose enemies he punished unto the
death. From thence he addressed to fight against Guido: but he fled, and
escaped the Emperoures hands. The wife of Guido, having no puissance to resist
the Emperoures forces, she hired some of the Emperoures servants, who gave
unto him a cup of poison, which brought upon him a lethargy, and three days
sleeping continually. After this he arose sick, and left the siedge, (for
he was besieging the wife of Guido) and he died, after he had reigned twelve
years.

In the East governed Leo, the son of Basilius, in whose time the Saracenes
conquered Taurominium, a Town in Sicill, and the Isle of Lemnos.

CHAP. II. Of Popes, Patriarchs, Pastors, and Doctors.
AFTER LEO the third succeeded STEPHANVS the fourth, and ruled seven months.
Stephanus the fourth.
He was not elected with consent and allowance of the Emperor, but only by the
Clergy and people of Rome. Here it is well marked by Functius, that the Roman
Church does observe Funct. Comment. Lib, 9.
their own laws so inuiolably, that the privilege granted to the Emperor by
Pope Leo the third, it is undone again even in his first successors time: to
wit, in Pope Stephanus the fourth his time. In the third month of his
Popedom, he journeyed toward France, for what cause it is not certain: but it
appears he would try the Emperors mind, whether or no he was grieved for
this, that he had been elected Pope without the consent and foreknowledge of
the Emperor. When he returned again, finding that Ludouicus Pius the
Emperor, was not greatly grieved at the matter, but accepted his excuse, he
began to make Commentaries upon the Decrees of Hadrian the first, and Leo the
third: to wit that they meaned not that the Emperor should be first acquainted
with the election of the Pope: but rather, that after his election, the Emp.
should be acquainted with this business, before the Pope were anointed. By
such false Glosses and Commentaries, they were by degrees excluding the
Emperor from all kind of intromission with the election of the Pope.

After Stepha^us the fourth, succeeded Pascalis the first, who Pascalis the
first.
was elected without consent of the Emperor. He sent Ambassadors to excuse
himself to the Emperor Ludouicus Pius, because the Clergy and people had
compelled him to accept the Popedom. The Emperor Ludouicus Pius on the other
part, seeing how this matter went, and that he was troubled with the
inconstancy, ambition, and obstinacy of the Roman Church, he gave them
liberty to choose their own bishop, without the foreknowledge and consent of
the Emperor in time to come. And Pascalis, after he had ruled seven years
and seventeen days, he ended his course.

Eugenius the second, succeeded to Pascalis, and ruled four Eugenius the
second.
years. His popedom was in the time when Lotharius was appointed to govern
Italy. His commendations are these, Great Learning, great Eloquence, with a
mixture of great hypocrisy.

Valentinus, the successor of Eugenius, within the space of forty Valentinus
the first.
days after that he was elected, (of a Deacon) to be Pope, he concluded his
life.

To Valentinus, succeeded Gregorius the fourth, and ruled sixteen years.
Ludouicke and his son Lotharius were Emperors Gregorius the fourth
at this time: without whose consent he would not accept his Popedom.
Gregory would have seemed to have been a mediator betwixt Ludouicke and his
sons: but he is marked with a note of shame in the Magdeburg history, as a
man who encreassed Hist. Magd. Cent. 9. Cap. 10.
discord, rather than quenched it. What he did in the Conuention at Aken,
which was conueened by the authority of the Emperor, it shall be declared,
God willing, in its own place.

To Gregory the fourth, succeeded Sergius the second, and ruled three years.
He seemed to be the first Pope, who changed the name given unto him in
Baptism: for he was called Osporci, Sergius the second.
that is, the mouth of the Sow: and for the turpitude of the name he called
himself by the name of one of his antecessours Lotharius sent Ludouicke his
eldest son, accompanied with many Noble persons, to be crowned Emperor: for
Lotharius thought meet to enterinto a Monastery, and to lament for his
bypast sins, especially, for grieuing the heart of his father Ludouicus
Pius. He augmented the liturgy of the Mass, with the addition of Agnus Dei,
and ordained, that the Hostia should be divided in three parts.

To Sergius the second, succeeded Leo the fourth, and ruled Leo the fourth.
eight years, and three months. He was a man of many crafts, a builder, a
warrior, and a Bishop, He compassed the Vatican with a wall, and made it in
the similitude of a Town: and builded bull-warkes in the passages of Tyber, as
it issued from the Town. He was also a warrior, and faught against the
Saracenes: against whom also he prevailed. And finally, at some times he was
a Bishop: and he gathered a Council of 47. Bishops, in the which Athanasius,
a Cardinal Presbyter was damned, for negligence in the work of his calling.
This is the first time, in the
which mention is made of a Cardinal in the History: for the Decretall
Epistles, as I have already declared, are but fabulous and lying writings. In
this Popes days, Eaelwulphus, King of ENGLAND, came to Rome, for performance
of a vow that he had made. He was courteously accepted by Pope Leo: for
which cause he ordained a tribute yearly to be paid to the bishop of Rome: to
wit, a penny Sterling out of every house in ENGLAND that kindled fire. It is
well remarked by Philip Morney, that Leo thefourth, in a certain Epistle,
written to the Lib. Myste. iniquitatis.
Bishops of BRITANNIE, derogateth credit to all the Decretall Epistles
assigned to the bishops of Rome, preceding the days of Pope Siricius, except
only to the Decretall Epistles of Pope Syluester. So all the authorities that
are alleged by the Roman Church, out of the Decretall Epistles, for the
space of 384. years, are of none effect, by the confession of Pope Leo the
fourth.

After Leo the fourth, succeeded Pope Ihonne the eight, an ENGLISH Ihonne the
eight.
woman, borne in the Town of Mentz. She went to Athens, clothed with the
apparel of a man, accompanied with a Learned man: and she profited in
learning beyond her fellows. When she came to Rome, she was regarded for
her learning, and was promoted to the dignity of the Popedom, and ruled two
years, five months, and four days. About the Marian. Scot. lib. 3 chron.
year of our Lord 854. (being Pope) she played the Harlot: and by the
providence of God, this viilanie of the Roman Church, which cannot err, was
manifested to the whole world: For, in the time of a solemn Procession, as
she was going to ye Church of Latcra^, she traveled in birth, and died, and
was buried without honor. Onuphrius, the Advocate of all evil causes, cannot
ouer-passe this matter with silence: but he brings an argument from the
authority of Anastatius, a writer of Chronology, to infringe the credit of
this history, in this manner: Anastatius (says he) lived about this time and
knew best who succeeded to Leo the fourth: and he makes no mention of Ioannes
the eight, but of Benedictus the third, as successor of Leo the fourth. To
this Philip Morney answers, That an argument taken from authority,
negatiuely, has no force. Anastatius makes no mention thereof: ergo, it was
not done. It follows not: for he brings in the restimonie of Ranulphus,
declaring the cause wherefore Anastatius omitted the name of the foeminine
Pope: to wit, Propter deformitatem facti: that is, For the deformity of
Ranulph. lib. 5. ca. 32
the fact. The nature of a short Compend permits me not to insist: but let
them, who are desirous accurately to try out the verity of this matter, read
that worthy Book of Philip Morney, called Mysterium iniquitatis.

Then followed Benedictus the third, and ruled two years, six months, and
nine days. A man in honoring the Funeralles Benedictus the third.
of the Clergy, with his presence, ready at all times: and desirous likewise,
that the Funeral of the Bishop should be honored with the presence of the
whole Clergy.

To Benedict the third, succeeded Nicolaus the first, and governed seven
years, nine months, and thirteen days. He Nicolaus the first.
subdued the Bishop of Rauenna to his obedience. He suffered the Emperor,
Ludouicke the second, to light from his horse, and to lead his bridle, until
he came to the Camp, which was the space of a mile. He permitted diuorcement
betwixt married persons, for Religions cause, without consent of party. And
that persons in spiritual offices, should not be subject to the Hist Magd.
Cent. 9. cap. 10.
justice seats of civil Magistrates. He ordained also, that no man shou^de
receive the holy Sacrament from a married Priest And that the Emperor should
not be present at Ecclesiastical Conuentions: except when questions concerning
Faith should be entraited. Likewise, he ordamed, That the service of GOD in
all countries, should be celebrated in Latin: dispensing in Funct. comment.
lib. 9.
the mean time with the Sclauonians and the Polonians, to have the service of
GOD in their own Vulgar Language. He added unto the Liturgy of the MASS,
GLORIA IN EXCELSIS.

Hadrianus the second, succeeded to Nicolaus the first, and ruled five years,
nine months, and twelve days. He used Antichristian Hadrianus the second.
authority, not only against Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, but also against
Carolus Caluus, king of France, whom he commanded imperiously to present one
Hincmarus, Bishop of Laudunum, and nephewe to Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, to
the end that his cause might be judged by the Apostolic seat. The King
took these letters in a very evil part, and writ unto the Pope, That the
Kings of France had ever been Sovereign lords in their own countreye, and
not vice-gerentes and vassalles to Bishops: and, That he would not permit
any man, who had been damned in a lawful Council in his own country, to
wit, in the Council of Acciniacum, to make appellation to Rome. In this Popes
time the eight general Council was assembled, whereof I shall speak in its
own time, GOD willing.

Ioannes the ninth succeeded to Adrianus the second, and governed ten years,
and two days. This is he who for rewards Ioannes the ninth.
crowned Carolus Caluus to be Emperor: and was casten into prison, because
he was more affectionated to Ludouicus Balbus, son to Carolus Caluus, and
king of France, than to Carolus Crassus, king of Germany. Nevertheless, he
escaped out of prison, and fled to Ludouicke, king of France: whom also he
crowned to be Emperor. But Balbus, after his coronation, incontinent died:
and Pope Ihon the ninth must seek new acquaintance, because his old friends
were gone: therefore, he crowned Carolus Crassus to be Emperor. This was the
first Pope who in time of his Popedom crowned three Emperors.

Martinus the second, rul^d one year, and five months. Martinus the second.
Hadrianus the third.


Hadrianus the third, succeeded to Martinus: the time of his government was
also short: for he continued not above one year, and two months: yet
nevertheless, men who are busy, may make much stir in short time. He
perfected that work which his predecessors had been busied in bringing to
pass many years preceding: namely, That the Clergy and people of Rome
should not attend upon the allowance of the Emperor, but they should freely
choose whom they thought meetest to be Pope. He took the greater boldness
to do this, because the Emperor Carolus was occupied in warre-fare. The
Nation of the Normandes were now so sauadge and mighty, and molested France
with an hudge Army, that the Emperor was compelled to transact with them in
manner as is above rehearsed in the History of the life of Caralus Crassus.

Another constitution was made by Pope Hadrian: to wit, That after the death of
Carolus Crassus, who died without succession, the Imperial Title, together
with the government of Italy, should belong to one of the Princes of Italy.
This was the ground of unsupportable debate, and of factions, in Italy, every
man according to the greatness of his power, contending to be King and
Emperor: But chiefly Albertus, Marquis of TVSCIA, B^rengarius, Duke of
FOROVILIVM, and Guido, Duke of SPOLETO.

This seditious plotte also perturbed the Ecclesiastical estate: For, after
this, every one of the Princes of ITALY, strove with all their might, to have
such a man seated in the Popedom, as could best advance his faction, as will
clearelie appear in the election of Pope Formosus.

To Hadrian the third, succeeded Stephanus the fifth, and ruled six years,
and eleven days. The less Holiness, Learning, Stephanus the fifth.
and Virtue that he had, the greater audacitie and boldness was found in
him: for he made a constitution, whereof GRATIAN records (Distinct. 19. Cap.
Enimvero) Quicquid ECCLESIA ROMANA stat^ie, quicquid ordirat, perpetuo quidem,
and irre-fragibiliter obseruandum est: that is, Whatsoever the ROMAN CHVRCH
does statute and ordain, it (...) perpetually, and without all
contradiction, to be observed.

After STEPHANVS the fifth (whom others do call the sixth) succeeded
FORMOSVS, and continued five years, and six months. He obtained the
Popedom, not without strife: For one SERGIVS, a Deacon, was his competitor,
supported Formosus.
with the TVSCVLAN faction. Always, FORMOSVS prevailed. It was supposed, that
he was one of them who conspired against Pope IHONNE the ninth, and cast him
into bands. After this he seared the authority of Pope IHONNE, and fled
into FRANCE: but Pope IHONNE denuded him of all Ecclesiastical office, and
put upon him the habit of a Laicke person: which indignity done unto him, he
took it so grieuouslie, that he bound himself by an Platin. in vit. Formo.
oath, That he should never see the Town of ROME, nor return again to his
Bishopric: for he was Episcopus PORTVENSIS. But Pope MARTINUS absolved him
from his oath, and repossessed him into his Bishopric again, and in end he
was made Pope, as said is.

Nevertheless, the faction of his competitor, SERGIVS, ceased not to vex and
molest FORMOSVS: so that he sent secret advertisement unto ARNVLPHVS, the
Nephewe of Carolus Crassus, to come to ROME: who came with an Army, and was
crowned Emperor by Formosus, as has been already declared.

To Formosus succeeded Bonifacius the sixth, who concluded his course, after he
had continued twenty and six days. Bonifacius the sixth. Stephanus the sixth.


After Bonifacius the sixth, succeeded Stephanus the sixth, and ruled one year,
and three months: He not only annulled all the Decrees of his Predecessor
Formosus: but also caused his dead body to be taken out of his grave, and
cut off his three fingers, wherewith he was wont to consecrate persons
admitted to spiritual offices, and threw them into Tyber: and caused all
them, who had received ordination by Formosus, to receive new ordination.

This fact of Stephanus the sixth, is so full of uncouth and unnatural
inhumanitie, that Onuphrius denies that any such thing was done: whose
impudency Morneus discovers by the testimony of Luitprandus, who lived at
that same time, and was a Deacon of the Church of Ticinum, and makes mention
of this vile fact, not without horror and detestation thereof. Baronius is not
so impudent as Onuphrius, and will not deny the fact, but extenuateth the
atrocitie and vileness thereof: for he says, Non fuit error in side, sed
violenta tyrannis in facto: that is to say. It was no error in the faith, but
a violent tyranny in the fact.

And like wise, he annulled the inauguration of the EMPEROVR ARNVLPHVS, and
anointed ALBERT, or Lambert, Marquis of Tuscia, who followed the Popes course
to be Emperor. Now is the Popedom increased to the measure of a full
strength, when they dare authorize and disauthorise, place and displace
Emperoures at their own pleasure. So that there remains nothing, but to
enter into grippes with the Emperor, to throw him down to the ground, and
to tread upon the excellent honor of his Soueraignitie, which in the next
CENTVRIE will follow.

To Stephanus, succeeded Romanus, and continued only three months. He
abrogated the Decrees of Stephanus, his predecessor. Romanus.


Theodorus, the successor of Romanus, continued in his Popedom twenty days
only. In this short time he allowed the Theodorus the second.
Decrees of Formosus.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
Patriarchs of Constantinople, in this Centurie, were changed, according to
the disposition of Emperoures, favoring or disliking the worshipping of
Images. Nicephorus was a defender of adoration of Images, and was banished by
the Emperor Leo. Theodotus again, Antonius, and Syngelus, who had been
Schoolmasters to the Emperor Theophilus, were haters of Images. But after
the death of Theophilus, Theodora, his Wife, advanced Methodius, a
superstitious man, and an obstinate defender of adoration of Images, and
intercession of Saints. Concerning Ignatius and Photius, and the great
troubles that arose about placing and displacing of them, occasion will be
offered to speak of these things in the head of Councels.

Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
IN this corrupt and backe-sliding age, wherein the Roman Antichrist had so
great vpper-hande, the head of Councels will compel me to make mention of the
names of a number of Learned men, At this time, the name of Claudius
Taurinensis, puts a great number of the rest out of my remembrance, because
he was a faithful witness unto the truth of God, in a difficill time. He
was a man borne in Spain: and under the reign of Ludouicus Pius, he was made
Bishop of Thurin, in P^emont: At his first entry to his Bishopric, he
threw the Images out of his Church, affirming, that the Saints, who in their
lifetime were not content to be worshipped, much less could they be content
to have their pictures worshipped after their death. In special, he condemned
the worshipping of the Cross. affirming, that if it should be worshipped
because Jesus died upon it: then the Ship, in the which Christ sailed, the
Asle, whereupon Christ did ride into Jerusalem, and infinite other things,
which Christ touched, by the like reason, behooved also to be worshipped.
Concerning the Bishop of Rome, he said, that he was not to be counted an
Apostolic Bishop, who sat in the Apostolic Chair: but he who fulfilled
an Apostolic office.

Hincmarus, bishop of Rhemes, lived under Carolus Magnus, and continued in
office almost until the reign of the Em. Arnulph. He had great strife with
his nephew Hincmarus, b. of Laudunum, who refused to be under his Diosie: and
appealed from him unto the b. of Rome. Likewise, in the cause of Rhotardus, b.
of Soission, whom Hincmarus deposed and removed from his office. Nicolaus the
first, b. of Rome, absolved him. Hadrian 2. gave him commandment to
excommunicate C. Caluus, k. of France, his sovereign lord: but he refused to
perform such an unlawful commandment: and writ unto the Pope, to be
circumspect, and not precipitate rashly his sentences of excommunication.

The question whereunto Hadr. 2. was so serious, was about division of lands
betwixt C. Caluus. and his brother Lotharius. C. Caluus denied, that he did
unjustly invade any of his brothers lands, but lands duly belonging unto
himself by paction and covenant. And the Nobles of the country said, that it
was a strange and an unaccustomed thing, that the Pope would take upon him to
be judge in a controversy concerning the Titles and Rights of Kingdoms,
because he could not be both a Bishop and a King.

CHAP. III. Of Heretics.
THEY who of old were accustomed to condemn Heresies, now they are become
the Iconolatra
chief Patrones and maintainers of adoration of Images, a notable heresy:
whose pusillanimitie argues the weakness of their cause: for under the reign
of Ludouicus Pius, Claudius Taurinensis wrote books against the adoration of
Images: and the Emperor, by a public edict, commanded them, who were
disposed to answer to his books, to answer whilst Claudius was alive. But
Jonas bishop of Orleans concealed and obscured his books, during Claudius
lifetime. But after his death, with impotencie of railing words, rather than
with power of solid arguments, he endeavors to refute Claudius Taurinensis.
But I entrait the judicious Reader, without partiality, to read the books of
Jonas, bishop of Orliens, and the very stinking breath of the adversary of the
truth, shall give great allowance to the truth of God.

Godescalcus, a man of the Low Countries, is reckoned in the number of
Heretics of this age, about the year of our Lord Godescalcus.
849. because he spoke of Predestination perilously: to wit, that these who
were predestined to life by the decree of Gods predestination, were forced to
do well: and those who were predestined to condemnation, were forced by the
decree of God to do evil. But I remit a further Treatise of this unto the
head of Councels. Concerning old extinguished Heresies, such as the
Manicheans, Arrians, and Donatists, and such like, who preassed to build up
the walles^ of Jericho, which God had destroyed, there is no necessity to
speak, because these were vain att^ptes, without any success.

CHAP. IIII. OF COUNCELS.
IN the year of our LORD 813. by the commandment of Carolus Magnus, in the
Town The Council of Mentz.
of Mentz, were conuened 30. Bishops, 25. Abbots, with a great number of
Priests, Monks, Countes, and Judges, about reformation of the dissolute
manners, of Ecclesiasticke and Laicke persons. After 3. days abstinence and
fasting, joined with Litanies, public Prayers, and imploring the help of
God, they divided themselves into three companies: In the first company were
the Bishops, with some Noters, reading the history of the Euangell, and the
Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles, together with the Canons and works of
ancient Fathers, and the Pastoral book of Gregory, to the end, that by the
Precepts contained in these books, the enormitie of men's lives might be
corrected. In the second company were Abbots and Monks, reading the rules of
S. Benedict, for the reformation of the lives of Monks. In the third company
were lords and Judges, pondering the causes of all men, who came to complain,
that wrong was done unto them.

The 1. 2. and 3. Canons of this Council, entrait concerning Faith, Hope, and
Chatitie. 4. Concerning the Sacraments, to be ministered chiefly at Easter and
Whitsonday, except necessity and sear of death require preuening of these
times. 5. That unity and concord should be kept in the Church, because we
have one common Father in heaven: one Mother, to wit, the Church, in earth: one
Faith, one Baptisine, and one Celestial inheritance prepared for us: Yea, and
God is not the God of dissension, but of peace, according as it is said,
Blessed be the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God. The
6. and 7. Canons, entrait of Orphans, and poor people, whose weakness is to
be supported: but no man should take vantadge of their poor and desolate
estate. The 8. Can. recommendeth unity to be kept betwixt men in spiritual
offices, and civil Judges: a Canon indeed, if it had been observed, very
necessary for the estate of this time. The 9. and 10. Canon, prescribes to
the Clergy Precepts of a modest and sober life, with abstinence from the
delicate pleasures of the world, and from Theatricall Spectacles, from pompes,
and dishonest banquets: and to be more ready to go to the house of mourning,
to comfort them who are heavy hearted, than to the house of banqueting.
Usury, avarice, ambition, and taking of rewards, for the benefits of God,
such as use to be taken for medicinal cures, is forbidden. To beware of
deceit and conjurations: to flec hatred, emulation, backe-biting, and envying,
wandering eyes, and an unbridled tongue: a petulant, and proud gesture are
forbidden: filthy words, and works, are altogether abhorred: chastity is
recommended: the frequent visitations of the houses of Widows and Virgins is
prohibited: due obedience is to be given to Seniors: to take heed to doctrine
reading, and spiritual songs, as it becomes men who have addicted
themselves unto divine service.

Precepts concerning the behavior of Monks and Nuns, and the fabric of
their dwelling places, I ouer-passe with silence, lest I should ouercharge a
short Compend with an heap of unnecessary things.

In the 32. Canon, the difference betwixt (...), and (...), is set down. 33.
The great Litanie or Rogations, to be observed three days, by all Christians,
with fasting, sackecloth, ashes, walking barefooted, and all kind of humble
carriage. 34. 35. and 36. Public Fastinges, and keeping of Festival days is
commanded. 37. The Sabbath day is to be kept holy. In it no Merchand Wares to
be sold, and no criminal cause to be judged. 38. and 39. Tithes are precisely
to be paid. And, men fleeing to Churches for safeguarde, are not to be
violently drawn out of the place of their refuge. 40. In Churches, and the
portches thereof, let no secular judgments be exercised. 41. Let no ancient
Church be spoiled of tithes and possessions, for the building of new Oratories.
42. Concerning Church rentes bestowed for reparation and upholding of Churches.
43. and 43. That no Priest say Mass himself alone: for if he have no person
present except himself, how can he say, Dominus vobiscum, or sursum corda,
or such other passages? Also frequent offering of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
and presenting of the Paxe, is recommended to Christian people. 45. That every
person be acquainted with the Lords Prayer, and the Belief: and they who can
no otherwise comprehend these things, let them learn them in their own
vulgar language. 46. Drunkenness is detested: and they who continue in this
sin, without amendment, are ordained to be excommunicated. 47. Godfathers
shall attend that their spiritual children be brought up in the true Faith.
48. Filthy libidinous songs are not to be sung about Churches. 49. The
cohabitation with women is forbidden to all the members of the Clergy. 50. Let
all Bishops, Abbots, and Churchmen, have such Advocates and Agentes in their
affairs, who are men that fear GOD, and are haters of all unrighteous
dealing. 51. Let not the dead bodies of the Saints be transported from place
to place, without the advice of the Prince of the country, or the Bishop, and
Synod. 52. No dead body shall be buried within the Church, except the body
of a Bishop, or of an Abbot, or of a worthy Presbyter, or of a faithful
Laicke person. 53. Incestuous persons are to be searched out, and separated
from the fellowship of the Church, except they be penitent. 54. 55. and 56.
Marriage, in the fourth degree of consanguinitie, is forbidden: and that no man
shall marry his spiritual daughter, or sister, neither the woman, whose son
or daughter he has led to the Sacrament of Confirmation: and, incase they
be found to be married, they shall be separated again. And no man shall
take in marriage his wives sister: neither shall a woman marry her husbands
brother.

IN the year of our LORD 813. a Council was assembled The Council of Rhemes.
at Rhemes, by the commandment of Charles the Great: for it is to be
remarked, that he not only assembled that famous Council of FRANKFORD, anno
794. in the which adoration of Images was condemned: but also, when he was
now aged and saw many abuses in the Church, he endeavored, by all means
possible, to procure reformation of the lewd manners of Church men. Therefore,
he appointed at one time, to wit. anno 813. five National Councels, to be
conuened in diverse places, for reformation of the Clergy and people: One was
conuened at Mentz as has been declared: Another at Rhemes: the third at Towrs:
the fourth at Cabilone, or Chalons: and the fist at Arles. In all these
Councels no opposition is made to ye Council of Frank^ord: neither was the
adoration of Images auowed in any of th^se Councels. So much avails the
authority of a Prince for suppressing of false doctrine and heresy. In this
Counsel at Rhemes, Wulfarius, archbis. was president. 44. canons are rehearsed
in the 2. Tome of Councels made in this Council.

In the 1. Can. it was concluded, That every man should diligently acquaint
himself with the Articles of his Faith. 2. That every man should learn the
Lords Prayer, and comprehend the meaning thereof. 3. That every man, promoted
to Ecclesiastical orders, shall walk worthily, conform to his calling. 4.
The Epistles of Paul were read, to give instructions to subdeacons, how they
should behave themselves. Yet is there not one word in all the Epistles of
Paul of a sub^deacon. 5. The Gospel was read to give instruction to Deacons,
to minister condingly in their office. 6. Ignorant Priests are instructed to
celebrate the Service with greater understanding. 7. In like manner, they are
instructed how to prepare (...) to the Sacrament of Baptism. 8. The holy
Canons were read out of the Decretall of Innocentius, for ordering the life of
Chanons. 9. The rule of Saint Benedict was read to reduce Abbots, and their
Conuents, to a remembrance of their order 10. The Pastoral book of Gregorius
was ^ead to admonish Pastors of their duty 11. Sentences of diverse ancient
Fathers were read, to admonish men of all ^a^ks, both Prelates and subjects, to
bring forth the fruit of a good conversation. 12. These things being done, they
set down a form of receiving of confessions, and prescribing of penance,
according to the Canonical institution. 13. They reasoned about the eight
principal vices, to the end, their diversity being distinguished, every
man might know what vices he should eschew, and teach others to beware of the
same.
14. That Bishops should take heed to the reading of the books of the
Canonicke Scripture, and the books of Fathers: and should attend upon the
preaching of the word of God. 15. That bisshops should preach the Sermons and
Homilies of H. Fathers, in such sort as all the people might understand them.
The 16. can.
is coincident with the 12. 17. That bishops and abbots permit no man to solace
ye company with filthy gesting in their presence: but let poor and indigent
people be refreshed at their tables with lecture of divine Scripture, and
praising of God, according to the Precept of the Apostle, that whether we eat
or drink, let all things be done to the glory of God. 18. Gluttony and
drunkernesse for bidden to bishops, and the Ministers of God. 19. Let not
bishops be rash to judge in things secret, which are to be referred to the
judgment of God, who can manifest things hid up in darkness, and discover
the secrets of the heart. 20. Presbyters shall not transport themselves from a
low place to a greater. 21. Whosoever, by money-paying, procures a preferment
in the Church, shall be deposed. 22. No Church man shall cohabite with a
woman, except it be with his mother, or sister, or such like persons, by whose
company no suspicion of uncleanness can arise. Precepts given to Monks and
Nuns, I pass by, as I did in the former Council.

Can. 35. The Sabbath day shall be kept holy, and in it no servile work shall
be done, according to the Lords Commandment. 36. Let no man bestow upon the
Church yt thing which by unlawful means he has fraudulently with-drawne
from others. 37. nor yet by lies and deceitful means withdraw any thing duly
belonging to the Church. 38. Let tithes be precisely paid. 39. Let no man
presume to receive rewards for his decree and sentence. 40. Let Prayers and
Oblations be made for the Emperor, and his noble raze, that it would please
God to preserve them in all happiness in this present life, and vouchsafe upon
them Celestial joys in company of the Angels in the life to come. In the 41.
Canon mention is made of a certain rent, left by king Pipinus of good memory,
which they wish the Emperor Charles, Pipinus son, should not alter nor
transfer into another sum, in respect, that by so doing many perjuries and
false testimonies might ensue. 42. And that no man should be removed from his
mansion, to whom the Emperoures Alms is distributed. 43. And that the statute
may be confirmed by his Highness allowance, whereby all contentions and
strifes are ordained to have a decision, and end. 44. And that the statute,
made in Bononia, concerning false witnesses, may be ratified, and confirmed:
with augmentation, if need require, for eschewing of perjuries, false
testimonies, and many other inconveniences.

IN the year of our LORD 813. and at the commandment of the Emperor Carolus
Magnus, a Council of many The Council of Towrs.
Bishops and Abbots was assembled, about establishing of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, in the Town of Towrs.

In the 1. Canon all men are admonished to be obedient to the Emperor Charles
the Great, and to keep the oath of alleadgeance made unto him, and to make
prayers and supplications for his prosperity and welfare. 2. All Bishops
shall diligently read, and frequently peruse, the books of holy Scripture,
the histories of the Euangell, and the Epistles of Paul, together with the
books of ancient Fathers written thereupon. 3. It is not lawful for any
Bishop to be ignorant of the Canons of the Church, and of the Pastoral book
of Gregorius, in the which every man, as in a viue mirror, might see himself.
4. Let every Bishop feed the flock committed unto him, not only with
doctrine, but also with examples of a good conversation. 5. A Bishop must not
be given to sumptuous banquets, but, be content, with a moderate diet, lest
he should seem to abuse the counsel of our Lord, saying Take heed, that
your hearts be not surfetted with gluttony, or drunkenness: but let holy
lecture be at his table, rather than the idle words of flattering fellows. 6.
Let strangers and indigent people be at Bishops tables: whom they may
refreshe both with corporal and spiritual repaste. 7. The delicate pleasures
of the ear and the eyes, are to be eschewed, lest by such pleasures, the
mind be effeminate, and inchaunted. 8. Let not the Lords servants delight
in vain jesting, nor in hunting, nor halking. 9. Let Presbyters and Deacons
follow the footsteps of their Bishops, assuring themselves, that the good
conversation enjoined unto their Bishops, is also enjoined unto them. 10. Let
Bishops have a great solicitude and care toward the poor: and be faithful
dispensators of Ecclesiastical goods, as the Ministers of God, and not as
hunters after filthy lucre. 11. It is lawful for Bishops, with consent of
Presbyters and Deacons, to bestow out of the Church treasure support to
indigent people of that same Church. 12. A Presbyter is not to be ordained
until he be 30. years old. 13. Let the B. make dilligent inquisitio^ in his
own Paroch Church, that no Presbyter, coming from any other parts, make
service in his Church, without letters of recommendation. 14. Let a Pres byter,
leaving a low place, and presuming to an higher, incur that same punishment,
which a Bishop, deprehended in the like fault, should incur. 15. A Presbyter,
who attaineth to a Church, by giving money for it, let him be deposed. 16. Let
tithes, bestowed upon Churches, by advise of Bishops, be faithfully distributed
to the poor, by the Presbyters. 17. The families of Bishops shall be
instructed in the sum of the true faith. In the knowledge of the retribution
to be given to good men, and the condemnation of ungodly people, and of the
resurrection and last judgment, and by what kind of works eternal life may
be promerited: and that the Homelies, containing these instructions, shall be
translated into Rusticke Latin language: to ye end that every person may
understand them. Mark in what estimation the Latin language has been at this
time: that instructions, in Rusticke and Barbarous Latin, are
counted better than instructions in good French Language. 18. It is the duty
of the Bishop to instruct his Presbyters concerning the Sacrament of Baptism,
what it is that they should desire the people baptized to renounce: namely,
they should renounce the devil, and all his works, and his pomps. Now the
works of the Devil are murder, fornication, adultery, drunkenness, and
other such like faults. But the pompes of the Devil are pride, ostentation,
swelling conceits, vain glory. lostinesse, and such other faults, as spring
up from such grounds. 19. Presbyters are precisely to be admonished, that
when they say the Mass, and do communicate, they do not distribute the Lords
body indiscretely, to children, and to all persons, who happen to be present,
who if they be entangled with great sins, they procure unto themselves
rather damnation, than any remedy to their souls, according to the saying of
the Apostle, Whosoever eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup Unworthily,
he shall be guilty of the body and blood of the LORD: Let a man, therefore,
try himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. By
this let the judicious Reader mark, that even in the days of Carolus Magnus,
private Masses had no place: but they who were duly prepared did communicate
with the Priest. NOT A.
20. Presbyters shall not suffer the holy Chrisme to be touched by every man.
21. Presbyters shall not resort to Tavernes to eat or drink. 22. Bishops and
presbyters, shall prescribe to sinners, who have confessed their sines,
penance, discretly, according to the weightinesse of their fault. 23. Chanons,
who dwell in Cities, let them eat in one Closter, and sleep under one roof,
to the end they may be ready to celebrate their Canonical hours. From the
24. Can. unto the 32. are contained Constitutions concerning Monks and Nuns,
which I ouer-passe with silence, fearing to be prolixt. Can. 32. All men
should study to peace and concord, but especially Christians: forsaking
hatred, discord, and envy. 33. Lords and Judges should be obedient to the
wholesome admonitions of their bishops: and bishops on the other part, should
reverently regard them, to the end they may be mutually supported every one
with the consolations of another. 34. Lords and Judges are to be admonished,
that they admit not vile and naughty persons to bear witness in their
judicatories, because there are many, who for a contemptible price are ready
to make shipwreck of a good conscience. 35. Let no man, for his decree,
receive a reward: for divine Scripture in many places for bids this, as a
thing that blinds the eyes of the wise. 36. Let every man be careful to
support indigent persons of his own family and kindred: for it is an impious
and abominable thing in the sight of God, that men abounding in riches, should
neglect their own. 37. Christians, when they make supplications to God, let
them in humble manner bow down their knees, following the example of the
Martyr Steven, and of the Apostle Paul: Except upon the Lords day, and other
solemn days, on the which the universal Church keeps a memorial of the
Lords resurrection: and at such times they are accustomed to stand and pray.
38. Faithful people must be admonished, not to enter into the Church with
tumult and dinne: and in time of Prayer, and celebration of the Mass, not to
be occupied in vain confabulations and idle speeches: but even to abstain
from wicked cogitations. 39. Let not the Consistories and Judgment seats of
secular Judges be in the Church, or portches thereof, in any time to come:
because the house of God should be an house of Prayer, as our Lord Jesus
Christ says. 40. Let it be forbidden, that Merchandise be used upon the
Lords day, or Justice Courts: because all men should abstain from servile
labors: to the end this day may be spent in praising and thanking God, from
Morn till Even. 41. Incestuous persons, parracides, and murderers, are found,
who will not hearken to the wholesome admonitions of Church men, but persevere
in their vicious conversation, who must be reduced to order by the discipline
of the secular power 42. Let the people be admonished to abstain from
Magical Arts, which can bring no support and help to the infirmities of men
and beasts: but they are the deceitful snares of the Devil, whereby he
deceives mankind. 43. A frequent custom of swearing is forbidden, wherein
men, upon every light occasion willing to purchase credit to that which they
speak, they take God to be witness of the verity of their speeches. 44.
Many fry subjectes, by the oppression of their Masters, aro-redacted to
extreme poverty. whose causes, if our clement Sovereign please to examine,
he shall find, that they are vnjustlie redacted to extreme indigence. 45. A
false measure, and a false balance, is an abomination unto the Lord, as
Solomon records. The 46. Canon contains a regrate, that tithes were not
duly paid to the Church: notwithstanding that the Church had given in their
complaint to the civil Magistrate: whereby it came to pass, that not only
Lights in the Church, and steependes to the Clergy, began to inlacke, but
also the very Paroch Churches became ruinous. 47. When general Fastinges are
appointed, for any impendent calamity, let no man neglect the fellowship of
the humbled Church, for desire to fearce his belly with delicate food. 48.
Drunkenness and surfeiting are forbidden, as offensive both to soul and and
body, and the ground of many other sins. 49. Lords and Masters are to be
admonished, not to deal cruelly and unmercifully with their subjectes: yea,
and not to seek that which is due unto themselves with excessive rigor. 50.
Let Laicke people communicate at least thrice in the year, unless they be
impeded by some heinous sins committed by them. 51. In the last Canon mention
is made, that they diligently examined the cause of them who complained to the
Emperor, that they were disherited by the donation of lands, which their
fathers and friends had bestowed upon the Church: and in their bounds they
found no man who did complain. Always, in that matter, if any thing was done
amiss, they humbly submit themselves to be corrected by their Sovereign
lord and king.

THE Council of Chalons was the fourth Council, conuened in the year of our
Lord 813. by the commandment The Council of Chalons.
of Charles the Great, for the reformation of the Ecclesiastical estate. Many
of the Canons of this Council are coincident with the Canons of the former:
therefore I shall be the shorter in the commemoration thereof.

1. That Bishops acquaint themselves diligently with reading the Books of holy
Scripture, and the Books of ancient Fathers, together with the Pastoral
book of Gregorius. 2. Let Bishops practice in their works the knowledge which
they have attained unto by reading. 3. Let them also constitute schools,
wherein learning may be encreassed, and men brought up in them, may be like
to the sault of the earth, to season thecorrupt manners of the people, and to
stop the mouths of heretics, according as it is said to the commendation
of the Church, A thousand Targ^ are hung up in it, even all the Armor of the
strong, Cantiel. cap. 4. verse. 4. 4. Let Church men show humility, in word,
deed, countenance, and habit. 5. Let Priests be unreprovable, adorned
with good manners, and not given to filthy lucre. 6. The blame of filthy
lucre, where with many Church men were charged, for this, that they allured
secular men to renounce the world, and to bring their goods to the Church,
they endeavor, with multiplied number of words, to remove. 7. Bishops and
Abbots, who with deceitful speeches have circumuened simple men, and shaven
their heads, and by such means do possess their goods, in respect of their
covetous desire of filthy lucre, let them be subject to Canonical or
Regulare repentance. But let those simple men, who have laid down their
hair, as men destitute of understanding, who cannot govern their own
affairs, let them remain in that estate, which they have once undertaken: but
let the goods given by negligent parents, and received, or rather reaued by
auaritious Church men, be restored again to their children and heirs. 8. If
Church men lay up provision of Corns in Victual houses, let it not be to
keep them to a dearth, but to support the poor in time of need therewith. 9.
Hunting and halking, and the insolency of foolish and filthy jests. are to
be forsaken of Church men. 10. Gluttony and drunkenness is forbidden. 11.
The Bishop or Abbot must not resort to civil judicators, to plead their own
cause, except it be to support the poor and the oppressed. Presbyters,
Deacons, and Monks, having obtained license from the Bishop, may compeare in
Civil judgment seats, accompanied with their Advocate. 12. Let not
Presbyters, Deacons, or Monks, be fermers or laborers of the ground. 13. It
is reported of some brethren, that they compel the persons, who are to be
admitted, in time of their ordination, to swear, that they are worthy: and
that they shall do nothing repugnant to the Canons: and that they shall be
obedient to the Bishop, who ordains NOT A.
them, and to the Church in thewhich they are ordained: which oath, in regard
it is perilous, we all inhibite, and discharge it. 14. Bishops in visiting of
their parishioners, let them not be chargeable unto them, but rather
comfortable, by preaching the word, and by correcting things that are
disordered. 15. It is reported, that some Archdeacons use domination over the
Presbyters, and take tribute from them, which smells rather of tyranny, than
of due order. For if the Bishop should not use domination over the Clergy, but
by examplares to the flock, as the Apostle Peter writes. Much less should
these presume to do any such like thing. 16. Like as in dedication of
Churches, and for receiving of orders, no money is received: even so, for
buying of Baulme to make Chrisme, the Presbyters (keepers of Chrisme) shall
bestow no money: but Bishops, of their own rent, shall furnish Baulme for the
making of Chrisme, and Lights to the Church. 17. It has been found in some
places, that Presbyters have paid 12. or 14. pennies in yearly tribute to the
Bishop: which custom we have ordained altogether to be abolished. 18. The
receiving of paunds from incestuous persons, and from men who pay not their
Tithes, and from negligent Presbyters, is forbidden, as a thing which opens a
door to avarice: but rather let Ecclesiastical discipline strike upon
transgressors. 19. Let people give their Tithes to those Churches wherein
their children are baptized, and whereunto they resort all the year long, to
hear Church service. 20. Let peace be kept amongst all men, but in special
betwixt Bishops and Countes, whereby cuery one of them may mutually support
another. 21. Civil Judges ought to judge righteously, without exception of
persons, and without receiving of rewards: and let their Officiars, Vicars,
and Centenaries be righteous men: lest, by their avarice and griedinesse, the
people be grieved, and impouerished. And let the witnesses be of vnsuspect
credit: for, by false witnesses the Countreye is greatly damnified. 22. The
Abbots and Monks in this part of the Countreye, seeing they have addicted
themselves to the Order of Saint BENEDICT: let them endeavor to conform
themselves unto his institution and rules. 23. The ordination of Presbyters,
Deacons, and other inferioures, is to be made at a certain prescribed time.
24. Concerning Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Monks, who shall happen to
be slain, let the Emperor give determination to whom the satisfaction of
blood shall belong. 25. In many places, the ancient custom of public
repentance has ceasted: neither is the ancient custom of excommunication and
reconciliation in use. Therefore, the Emperor is to be entraited, that the
ancient discipline may be restored again and they who sin publicly, may
be brought
to public repentance: and every man, according as he deserves, may either
be excommunicated, or reconciled. 26. It is reported, that in some Churches
there is contention and strife for dividing of Church rentes: It is ordained,
therefore, That no Mass shall be said in those Churches, until they, who
are at variance, be reconciled again. 27. Neither the Sacrament of Baptism,
nor the Sacrament of Confirmation, should be reiterated. 28. Concerning the
decrees of affinity, and in what degree Marriage may be bound up, every man
is sent to the Canons of the Church to seek resolution. 29. Seeing that the
man and the woman are counted in SCRIPTVRE as one flesh, their Parentage is to
be reckoned by like degrees in the matter of Marriage. 30. The Marriage of
servants is not to be dissolved which is bound up with consent of both their
masters, every servant remaining obedient to his own master. 31. It is
rumoured, that some women by negligence, and others fraudulently, do present
their own children NOT A.
to the Sacrament of Confirmation, to the end they may be separated from the
company of their husbands. Therefore, we statute and ordain, that such
woman as either negligently or fraudulently present their own children to the
Sacrament of Confirmation, they shall be compelled to do penance all the days
of their life: neither shall they in any wise be separated from their
husbands. 32. Let a sinner confess unto his Father Confessor all his sins
which he has committed either in thought, word, or deed: because that
hatred, envy, and pride are such pestilentious bot^hes of the soul: and the
more secretly that they are couched; the more periculously they hurt. 33.
Sins should not only be confessed to GOD, according to the example of
DAVID, who says, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the
LORD, and thou for gave the punishment of my sin, Psalm. 32. verse. 5. But
also we should confess our sins to our Father Confessor, according to the
precept of the Apostle, Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one
for another, that ye may be healed, Iac. 5. 16. 34. In prescribing of
penance, let favor and hatred of any person be laid aside, and let the
injunctions be given according to the rule of H. Scripture, and according to ye
canons and custom of the Church, following ye example of ye physicians of the
body, who without exception of persons do adhibit cuttings, burnings, and
vehement remedies to perilous diseases. 35. Many in doing of penance, are not
so desirous of remission of sins, as of the accomplishment of the prescribed
time of their humiliation: and being forbidden to eat flesh, or drink wine,
they have ye greater desire of other delicate meats and drinks: but
spiritual abstinence, which should be in penitent persons, excludes all
bodily delights. 36. Let no man sin of purpose, to the end he may
abolishe his sins by Alms deeds: for that is all one as if a man should
hy^e God to grant unto him a liberty to sin. 37. Seeing all Canons of
Councels are to be diligently read, in special such as appertain unto faith,
and reformation of manners, should be most frequently perused. 38. Books,
called Libelli Poenitentiales, are to be abolished, because the erroures of
these books are certain, how beit the authors of them be uncertain: and
they prepare pillowes to lay under the heads of them who are slecping in
sin. 39. In the solemnities of the Mass, Prayers are to be made for the
souls of them who are departed, as well as for them who are alive. 40.
Presbyters, who are degraded, and live like seculare, neglecting repentance,
whereby they might procure restitution to their office, let them be
excommunicated. 41. A Presbyter, who transporteth himself from his own place,
shall not be received in any other Church, except he prove, both with
witnesses and letters sealed with lead, and containing the name of the Bishop.
and of the City which he lived in, that he has lived innocently in his own
Church, and had a just cause of transportation. 42. Let no Church be committed
to a Presbyter, without consent of the Bishop. 43. In some places are found
Scots men, who call themselves Bishops, and they ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, whose ordination we altogether disallowe. 44. Presbyters
must not drink in Tavernes, wander in Markets, nor go to visit Cities,
without advise of their Bishop. 45. Many, both of the Clergy and Laickes, go
to holy places, such as Rome, and Turon: imagining, that by the sight of these
places, their sins are remitted: and not attending to the sentence of Jerome,
It is a more commendable thing to live well in Jerusalem, than to have seen
Jerusalem. 46. In receiving the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
great discretion is to be used: Neither let the taking of it be long
differred, because Christ says, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: Neither let us come without
due preparation, because the Apostle says, He who eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. 47. The Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, which in one day is accustomed to be received of
all Christians: let no man neglect to receive it, except some grievous crime
do hinder him from receiving of it, 48. According to the precept of the
Apostle James, Weak persons should be anointed with oil by the Elders,
(which oil is blessed by the Bishop) these words enclosed in a parenthesi are
added to the Text: for he says, Is any man siecke amongst you, let him call
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him with
oil, in the Name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up: And if he have committed sin, it shall be
forgiven him, Iam. cap. 5. verse. 14. 15. Such a medicine as cures both bodily
and spiritual maledies, is not to be neglected. 49. In the Council of
Laodicea it was forbidden, that Masses should be said, and Oblations offered
by Bisshops, or Presbyters, in private houses. This question also was disputed
in this Council. 50. The authority of the Emperor, is to be interponed for
reverent keeping of the Lords day. 51. Because the Church is constituted of
persons of dine: se conditions, some are Noble, others are ignoble, some are
servants, vassalles, strangers, etc. It becomes them who are in eminent
rowmes, to deal mercifully with their inferioures, knowing, that they are
their brethren, because God is one common Father to both, and the Church is one
common mother to both. From the 52. Canon unto the 66. are contained precepts
of chaste and honest living prescribed to Prioresses and Nuns, which I
ouer-passe, as I have done in the preceding Councels. 66. It is ordained, that
prayers and supplications shall be made for the Emperor, and his children,
and for their welfare both in soul and body. 67. These things have we
touched shortly, to be exhibited to our Sovereign lord the Emperor. He who
desires a more ample declaration of all virtues to be followed, and vices to
be eschewed, let him read the volume of the holy Scriptures of God.

IN the same year of our LORD, wherein the preceding four Councels were
conuened, and by the mandate of the The Council of Arles.
Emperor Charles the Great, another Council was conuened at Arles. The Canons
of this Council were in number 26.

1. They set down a Confession of their Faith. 2. They ordain, That Prayers
shall be made for the Emperor, and his children. 3. They admonish Bishops and
Pastors diligently to read the books of holy Scripture: To teach the Lords
people in all truth: and, To administrate the Sacraments rightly. 4. Laick
people are admonished, not to remove their Presbyters from their Churches,
without consent of their Bishops. 5. That Presbyters be not admitted for
rewards. 6. It is ordained, That Bishops shall attend, that every person live
ordinately: that is, according to a prescribed rule. The 7. and 8. Canons
belong to the ordering of Monks and Nuns. The 9. Can. pertains to the
payment of Tithes, and first fruits. 10. It is ordained, That Presbyters shall
preach the word of God, not only in Cities, but also in every Parochin. 11.
Incestuous copulations are to be utterly abhorred. 12. Peace is to be kept
with all men, according to the words of the Apostle, Follow peace, and
sanctification, without the which no man shall see God, Hebr. cap. 12. verse.
14. 13. Let lords, Judges, and the rest of the people, be obedient to their
Bishop: and let no unrighteous judgment be used: and no bribes received, nor
false testimony be admitted. 14. In time of Famine, let every man support the
necessity of his own. 15. Let all weightes and measures be equal and just.
16. Let the Sabbath day be kept holy, without Markets, Justice Courts, and
servile labor. 17. Let every Bishop visit his bounds once in the year: and
if he find the poor to be oppressed by the violence of the mighty, then
let the Bis. with wholesome admonitions, exhort them to desist from such
oppression: and incase they will not desist from their violence, then let the
Bishop bring the cause to the ears of the Prince. 18. Let Presbyters keep the
Chrisme, and give it to no man, under pretense of Medicine. 19. Parents NOT A.
and Witnesses, shall bring up baptized children in the knowledge of God,
because God has given them unto Parents, and Witnesses have paunded their
word for their says. 20. Ancient Churches shall not be deprived of Tithes,
nor of none other possession. 21. That the constitution of ancient Fathers
shall be kept concerning Burial in Churches. 22. Civil Judgment seats
shall not be in Churches. 23. The goods belonging unto the poor, if they be
bought, let it be done openly in sight of the Nobles and Judges of the City.
24. Let fugitive Presbyters and Church men be inquired, and sent back again
unto their own Bishop. 25. He who has a Benefice bestowed upon him, for
helping the fabric of Churches, let him support the building of them. 26.
They who sin publickely, let them make their public repentance, according
to the Canons. These things have we shortly touched, to be presented unto our
lord the Emperor, and to be corrected by his Highness wisdom.

IN the year of our LORD 871. and in the third year of the reign of
Basilius, Emperor of the East: and under the reign of Jews the second
Emperor of the West: the Ambassadoures The eig^ General Council.
of Pope Adrian the second came to Constantinople. Basilius the Emperor
gathered a Council against Photius, the patriarch of Constantinople. In this
Council great policy was used, to have all things framed to the contentment
of Adrian bishop of Rome: For no man was admitted to the Council, except only
they who had subscribed the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, above all other
Bishops. They who refused to subscribe the fore-saide supremacy, were
contemptuously rejected, and not admitted to the Council. So did the
authority of the Bishop of Rome proceed to further grouth, by flattering of
Basilius, who slew his associate Michael: as it was founded in the flattery
of Bonifacius the third, who flattered that vile murderer Phocas, who slew
his master Mauritius. In this Council Photius was deposed, and excommunicated,
and his books which he wrote against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome
were commanded to be burnt. Photius was accused for this, that he had accepted
the office of a Bishop, before he had received other Ecclesiastical orders.
Photius alleged, that this was no sufficient cause of deposition, in respect
that Ambrose, bishop of Millan, Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople, and of
late days Tarasius, with consent of the bishop of Rome, of Laickes they were
made Bishops. The Ambassadors of Pope Adrian the second answered. that Ambrose
was endewed with extraordinary gifts, Nectarius was called at an
extraordinary time, to wit, when heresy was so ouer-spred, that it was an
hard thing to find out a man who was not spotted with heresy: and,
concerning the advancement of Tarasius to be bishop of Constantinople, to
whose admission Adrian the first gave consent, they answered, That it was done
for a special cause, in regard he was a zealous maintainer of the adoration
of Images. This answer declares, that incase Photius also had been a zealous
maintainer of the adoration of Images, the Roman Bishop and his Ambassadoures
could have dispensed with the want of Ecclesiastical orders preceding his
admission to his Bishopric, as they
did in the person of Tarasius.

In this Council also the Ambassadoures of Adrian, magnifying the authority
of the Pope, affirmed, that the bishop of Rome might judge of the actions of
all other bishops: but no man might judge of him. And albeit the Oriental
bishops in the sixth General Council, cursed Pope Honorius after his death:
yet it is to be marked (say they) that he was accused of heresy: And in
this case only it is lawful for inferiors to resist their superioures, and
to disclaim their perverse opinions. In this point also they said, That none
of the Patriarchs and Bishops Hister. Magdeb. Cent. 9. Cap. 9. Caranza de
Conciliis.
proceeded against the defunct bishop of Rome, without the consent of the
Roman Chair going before them. Now observe (good Reader) with what fidelity
Onuphrius defends the name of Honorius the first: as free of all suspicion of
heresy: when as the Ambassadors of Adrian the second, for very shame durst
not presume to do it.

More-ouer, the worshipping of Images in this Council got a new allowance
again, and it was commanded, That the image of Christ should be holden in
no less reverence than the books of the Gospel.

The Bulgarians also were made subject to the Roman Bishop. And Ignatius
Patriarch of Constantinople, in regard he was restored to his place again by
the means of the bishop of Rome, he made no opposition in the contrary.
Nevertheless, this alteration continued but short time: for the Bulgarians
drove out of their bounds the Latin Priests, and were served with Grieke
Priests again.

Diverse Canons were constituted in this Council, but so coincident with the
Canons of other Councels, that it is a superfluous thing to make a rehearsal
of them. In the subscription of the Acts of the Council, great controversy
fell out: for the Graecians could not abide the name of Ludouicke, Emperor of
the West, because they thought, that the honorable name of an Emperor only
belonged to their own Sovereign lord, who was Emperor of Constantinople.
More-ouer, a number of them came to the Emperor Basilius, and requested him,
that their subscriptions might be redeliuered unto them again, wherein they
had subscribed to the supremacy of the Roman Bishop, or else the Church of
Constantinople would be in perpetual NOT A.
subjection to the Chare of Rome. These subscriptions afore-saide were restored
again, but with great difficulty.

CArolus Caluus conuocated a Council in France at A^ciniacum, consisting of
ten Bishops. The bishops of Lions, Vason, and Trier were chief Presidents in
the Council. Hincmarus, bishop The Council of Acciniacum.
of Rhemes accused in this Conuention his own Nephewe, Hincmarus, bishop of
Laudunum. as a man disobedient to his Metropolitan, and a man who for private
injuries had excommunicated all the Presbyters of his Church, debarring them
from saying of Mass, baptizing of Inphantes, absoluing of Penitents, and
burying of the dead. And Hincmarus bishop of Rhemes, proponed unto the Council
50. Canons, which he desired to be read in the Synod: and they allowed all
the Canons written by the bishop of Rhemes. Also, they condemned Hincmarus,
bishop of Laudunum of petulancy, and compelled him to subscribe obedience to
Charles his King, and to his Metropolitan: he was also deprived of his
office, and his eyes were thrust out. But Pope Ihonne the ninth, under the
reign of Carolus Crassus, restored Histor. Magdeb. Cent. 9. Cap. 9.
him to his office again, being the more affectioned unto him, because he had
appealed from his own bishop, and from the decree of a Synod in his own
country, to be judged by the Chair of Rome. The Council of Triburium, or
Sirasburg


IN the year of our Lord 899. and in the eight year of the reign of the
Emperor Arnulphus, in the Town of Triburium, twenty and two Bishops of
Germany were assembled, who made many constitutions, a great number whereof
Caranza is compelled to ouer-passe with silence, lest he should make a
superfluous repetition of Canons mentioned before.

First it was concluded in this Council, That excommunicate persons, if they
repent not, are to be subdued by the Emperor. Canon 10. That a Bishop shall
not be deposed, before his cause be judged by twelve Bishops: and a Presbyter
by six Bishops: and a Deacon by three Bishops. 11. A Church man, who
commits slaughter, shall be deposed, albeit he has been enforced unto it.
12. Baptism shall not be ministered, except at Easter and Whitsonday, without
necessity require. 13. Tithes are to be paid for the sustentation of the
Ministry, the support of the poor, and the fabric of the Church. 15. Let
men's bodies be buried in that Paroch, unto the which they paid their Tithes.
16. No burial place shall be sold for money. 17. Let Laicke people be buried
in the Church yard, not in the Church: but if they be buried already, let not
their bodies be removed. 18. The vessels, wherein holy mysteries are
celebrated, are Challices and Platters: whereof Saint Bonifacius, a Bishop and
Martyr, being demanded, If it was lawful to celebrate the Sacrament in
vessels of wood? He answered, That of old there were golden bishops, and
wooden vessels: but now by the contrary, says he, the Bishops are wooden
bishops, and the vessels are vessels of gold. And Sepherinus ministered the
Sacrament in vessels of glass. Nevertheless, this Council straightly
inhibiteth the Sacrament to be consecrated in vessels of wood. 19. Let not
wine without water be offered in the holy Challice, because both blood and
water flowed out of the side of Christ. 20. Priests are shaven, to the end
they may carry upon their heads a similitude of the crown
(to wit, of thorns, wherewith the Lord was crowned) who is their lot and
portion. 21. Let not Presbyters, who are called before Justice seats, be
compelled to swear, but let them be put in remembrance of their holy
consecration in stead of an oath. 22. The trial of persons defamed by the
burning iron is ceased: but let no man give out rash judgment in se^ret
matters. 27. They who have undertaken a spiritual ofsice, should not go to
warre-fare, nor accept upon them civil offices, according to the seventh Canon
of the Council of Chalcedon. 31. A thief, or a robber, who is slain in the
perpetration of his diabolical fact, let no man pray for his soul, nor
distribute alms for his relief. 35. Let no justice Courts be holden on the
Lords day, neither on Festival nor Fasting days. 39. A man who marries a
woman of a strange country, but not of a strange religion, shall be compelled
to cohabite with her. 40. It shall not be lawful for a man to marie a woman
whom he has polluted in adultery during her husbands lifetime. 45. He
who has defiled two sisters, let him be subject to penance all his days,
and remain continent. 46. A woman that has committed adultery, and for fear
of her husband, who persueth her unto the death, she flees unto Bishops to
seek relief: let them travel seriously for the safety of her life: and if
that can be obtained, let her be restored to her husband again: but if that
cannot be obtained, let her not be restored: but her husband during his life
time, shall not marie another. 54. A form of external repentance is
prescribed to them who of precogitate malice and of purpose have committed
slaughter.

TREATISES, Belonging to the IX. CENTVRIE.
A TREATISE, Of Extreme Unction.
THE Council of TRENT entraiting of this subject of Extreme Unction, sets
down a glorious Preface before their Canons, That Satan, that vigilant
enemy, who is ready at all occasions to take his aduantadge, he is most
ready in the last conflict to assault poor souls, when natural powers are
weakened, and the fear of approaching death does perturbe the cogitations of
sinful people, then he endeavors to brangle their faith, and to bring them
to a distrust of the mercies of GOD. But on the other part (say they) Christ
has instituted the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, as an armor to guarde us at
our last breath against the subtle invasions of that deceitful adversary.
This Preface imports, that all the weapons of our spiritual warrefare, both
defensive and offensive, wherewith we faught against spiritual wickedness in
our lifetime, are not sufficient to guarde us in our last combat, except we
be anointed with oil at our last departure, Nevertheless, the holy
Scripture expresselie says, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
lives, and belecueth in me, shall never die, Ioann. Chap. 11. verse 25. 26.
In which words it may be evidently perceived, that the word of GOD,
apprehended by faith, can save us both in life and death.

The Romanistes, in proouing Extreme Unction to be a Sacrament of the New
Testament, in the which there is a sign instituted by GOD, and to the sign
there is added a promise of forgiveness of sins, and consequently of
eternal life. They are like to the drunkardes of our Nation, who when their
stomach is ouer-laden with too much drink, then they lay them down to
sleep: but incase by any occasion they be wakened Similitude
before the drink be digested and gone out of their heads, they arise like
mad men, and make such a stir and business, that all men wish that they
were in their bed again: Even so, the Roman Church has been so miscarried
with the traditions of men, with the writings of ancient Fathers (especially
in poinctes of doctrine in the which they were weak) and with the authority
of Councels, that they laid them down, and slept securely, as people who
were perfectly instructed in the way of GOD. But now they awake, after a
manner, out of their sleep: and they will seem to ground their doctrine upon
Scripture, which they so miserably abuse, that they are in no better case, but
rather in a worse, than when they misregarded Scripture, laid it aside, and
counted the Decretalles of Popes to be of as great authority as the holy
Scriptures of GOD.

True it is, that about the year of our LORD 520. Chemnisius reckons the
year of our LORD 528. Foelix the fourth, the successor of Ioannes the first,
and predecessor of Bonifacius the second: he ordained, That Christians,
before they departed this life, should be anointed with oil. And this is
the true original of Extreme Unction, yet in such manner, that in the days
of Pope Foelix the fourth, it had not the name of a Sacrament. But seeing the
Council of TRENT refers it unto a more ancient beginning: let us examine
the places of SCRIPTVRE whereupon they ground this their opinion.

The words of the APOSTLE JAMES are these, Is any sick amongst you, let him
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him
with oil, in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the
sick: and the Lord shall raise him up: And if he have committed sin, it
shall be forgiven him. Jacob. Chap. 5. verse. 14. 15.

For better understanding of this place of SCRIPTVRE, let us consider these
three things, to wit. That when the Gospel was first preached, for the
propagation and aduan cement thereof, GOD appointed extraordinary offices,
(EPHESIANS. 4.) which were not to continue in the Church, such as the office of
Apostles, Evangelists, and of Prophets. Likewise, he endued them, and some
other believers, with extraordinary gifts, such as the gift of tongues, of
prophecy, and working of miraculous works. And like as the extraordinary
offices continued not in the Church: even so the extraordinary gifts
continued not long in the Church: for they were given to open a door to the
Gospel: which being once opened, Christians must content themselves with
ordinary offices and gifts.

Secondly, let us consider, that persons who had received a gift of GOD to
cure diseases miraculouslie, they used not at all times the self same signs
and ceremonies in curing of diseases, but sometimes they sent hand-kirches to
the diseased persons, (ACT. CAP. 19. verse. 11.) sometimes they ouerlayed the
dead, and restored them to life, (ACT. CAP. 20. verse. 10.) and sometimes they
anointed them with oil. (MARC. CAP. 6. verse. 13.) Which diversity of signs
had not been lawful to use, if Extreme Unction had been an ordinary
Sacrament in the Church: For, like as it is not lawful to baptize with any
other liquor except water, because Baptism is a Sacrament instituted by GOD*
Even so, in curing the diseased it had not been lawful to use any other
sign and ceremony but anointing with oil, if so be it had been an
ordinary Sacrament.

Thirdly, it is to be considered, that when signs and ceremonies do
accompany extraordinary gifts, incase the gift do cease, it is a foolish
thing to keep in use the sign and ceremony, except it were to be a
memorial of a thing done of old, as the people of GVIDVS dedicated the
shelles of the Fish Remora to VENUS GVIDEA, for a memorial of their
deliverance. But we read not of any Prophet, to whom GOD gave not the gift
of working miraculous works, who counterseited HELISEVS, by sending their
staff to raise the dead, (2. REG. CAP. 4. verse. 2^.) or directing anie^eprous
person to wash his body seven times in the waters of Iordane, as HELISEVS
directed NAAMAN the Syrian to do. (2. REG. CAP. 5. verse. 10.) For in vain is
the outward sign adhibited, when the gift of miraculous he ling of diseases is
ceased. Yea, and the Priests in the Roman Church, convicted in conscience,
that by anointing with oil, they cannot restore a diseased person to health,
they delay to apply Extreme Unction, until all hope of recovery be
utterly past.

But now, lest it should seem, that their Extreme Unction is altogether
vneffectuallie applied, the very words used in the application thereof
testifies, that they believe that remission of sins shall be conferred with
to the diseased person, by virtue of Extreme Unction: for these are their
words, Peristam sanctam Unctionem, and piissimam, suam misericordiam indulgeat
tibi DEVS, quicquid peccasti per visum, per auditumodoratum tactum, gustum:
that is to say, By this most holy Unction, let GOD bestow upon thee his
mercy, for all sins thou have committed, by seeing, hearing, smelling,
touching, or tasting. Here remember, that the benefit which the APOSTLE
says is chieselie obtained by prayer, they refer it unto anointing with
oil. Next, they take not he^de to whom the APOSTLE directs this
exhortation: namely, to the faithful members of CHRIST, whom in the twelfth
verse he calls his brethren, and in the soureteenth and fif^eenth verses he
speaks to such as reverenced the order of Church-gouernement. Now it is
certain, that faithful men are so taught in the school of GOD, and
persuaded, that other men's prayers can avail them nothing, except there be
faith in their own hearts: for the prayer of SAMVEL could benefit King SAVL
nothing in respect of his reprobate and unbelieving heart. (1. SAM. CHAP. 16.
verse. 2.) But these men of whom Saint JAMES speaks, were faithful men,
penitent sinners, obedient to the ordinances of GOD: And when the Seniors of
the Church prayed for such men, their sins were forgiven them, GOD having
regard to their own faith, and to the prayers of the Elders of the Church for
them.

In this they glory much, that Extreme Unction may be called a Sacrament of
the new Testament in a proper sense: forasmuch as in it there is a sign
instituted by CHRIST (Mar^. cap. 6.) and unto the sign there is added a
promise, to wit, the healing of the diseased person, if the LORD think it
expedient, at least a promise of remission of sins. But all this is nothing
except the third circumstance be added, to wit, that CHRIST has given unto
us this sign to be used, and has annexed the promises afore-saide as
belonging unto us: for who can deny. but in circumcision there was a sign
instituted by GOD, whereunto a divine promise was annexed? Nevertheless, both
the sign and promise appertained unto them who lived under the old Covenant,
(GALATH. CAP. 5. verse. 3.) and not to us: even so, the sign and the promise
aforesaid, appertained unto that time only in the which extraordinary
gifts had place in the CHVRCH of GOD, and not to us.

Now, to the end that this their Sacrament of Extreme Unction, might be
holden in the greater reverence, they have found out many circumstances not
mentioned in holy SCRIPTVRE: as namely, that it shall be made only by a
Bishop: It shall be saluted with bowing of knees, and nine congratulations in
this manner, It shall be said thrice, Aue sanctum Oleum: and again it shall
be said thrice, Aue sanctum Chrisma: and the third time it shall be said
thrice, Aue sanctum Balsamum: that is to say, Hail, holy Oil: Hail, holy
Chrisme: Hail, holy Balsome. No such commandment is contained in the
Scriptures of GOD. In like manner they say, it is only lawful for a Priest
to apply this Oil: as if in the days of the Apostle JAMES there had been
such sacrificing Priests, as are in our days: Whereas by the contrary Pope
INNOCENTIVS the first, who lived in the days of AUGUSTINE, permitted not
only Priests, but also common Christians, to comfort themselves and their
friends by anointing them with oil, as SIGEBERTVS writes in his Chronicles.
Also with this oil, made by the Bishop, exercised, consecrated, and saluted,
as if it were a sensitive and reasonable creature, the organes of men's senses
are to be anointed, such as the eyes, the ears, the nosthrils, the lips,
the hands, the feet, and the reins. In this poinct their hearts are
ouercasten with darkness: and they err, mis-knowing the Scriptures and power
of GOD: For the ground of corruption is in the heart, and not in the senses:
and the very heart of EVA. was corrupted with infidelity and pride, before
her eyes, or hands, or mouth did sin. (GENES. 3.) No man can discourse
rightly of sin, nor of any other thing, except he know the fountain and
wellspring thereof.

Concerning ancient Fathers, they had no such custom to anoint with oil the
eyes, ears, and the rest of the organes of senses, before men's departure from
this life. And whereas they bring forth the testimony of AUGUSTINE (Lib. 2.
De visitatione infirmorum) reckoning Unction as one of the necessary
consolations to be adhibited to them, who are concluding their life. This
citation is an ouer-giuing of their cause, and a secret confession, that
Extreme Unction is but the invention of man: for they cannot be ignorant,
that those books, De Visitatione Infirmorum, were not written by AUGUSTINE,
bishop of HIPPO, but by another after his death, who set them forth under
the name of AUGUSTINE.

AECVMENIVS, writing upon the aforesaid place of the Apostle JAMES, is shorter
in his Commentary than the Apostle is in his precept or counsel: which thing
he could not have done, if he had thought that an holy Sacrament had been
recommended to the Church, to remain unto the end of the world: for he
writes only, that the Apostles had this custom whilst CHRIST was
conversant with them in the earth, to anoint sick persons with oil, and to
restore them to health. Aecum, in Epistol. Jacob. cap. 5. verse. 14.

The custom of the Roman Church approaches somewhat nearer to the fashions
of the Pagans, and old Heretics called Gnostici, than to the custom of the
Apostles: for the Pagans anointed with oil the bodies of the dead, as the
Poet witnesses in these words, Corpusque lauant frigentis, and vnguunt.
(Iren. Lib. 1. Cap. 18.) And old Heretics anointed the head of the dead
with oil and water, to procure redemption to their souls.

The Roman Church annointeth not the dead with oil, but they anoint them who
are half dead, in whom there is no hope of life and recovery.

LINDANVS, in all his writings, is like unto an ASIATICKE Orator, fighting
rather with the shaft, than with the poinct of the Spear: and when he cites
a place of CHRYSOSTOM, (De Sacerdotio, Libr. 3.) to prove Extreme Unction to
be an ordinary Sacrament in the Church, he proves stark nothing, yea the
thing that is not in controversy betwixt us and the Papists: for CHRYSOSTOM
affirms, that men are more benefited by their teachers, than by their
parents: in respect their natural parents have begotten their bodies, but
their pastors have begotten their souls to GOD: Yea, and their natural
parents have not supported their bodily infirmities so much, as their pastors
have done: for often times by prayer and anointing them with oil, they have
procured health to their bodies, as Saint JAMES witnesses, which their
natural parents were not able to procure. In all this discourse there is not
one word which we deny. But this proves not Extreme Unction to be a
Sacrament of the New TESTAMENT, instituted by CHRIST, to continue unto the
end of the world.

This Popish Sacrament LINDANVS in his Panoplia entraiteth of it in the last
rowme, as a secure haven, in the which he will leave them of his religion,
reposing and resting themselves. And truly, when I consider the ground,
whereupon Papists would have their disciples to lean, and the haven unto the
which they would have them to arrive: I am compelled to say, that their
ground is sandy ground, (MAT. 7.) and that their haven is like unto the
haven of NAVPLIVS: and they are wisest, who has least confidence in such
deceitful refuges: yea, they are wise who with ULYSSES and DIOMEDES can beware
of the stony rocks of EVBOIA, and set their course another way.

Now the LORD open unto us the bosom of His sweet Compassions, which is the
true City of our Refuge, in the which our souls may find true security and
rest:

AMEN.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Order.
THE ORDERS in the ROMAN Church, are divided into inferior and superior
Orders: The inferior Orders are doore-keepers, readers, exorcistes, and (...),
that is, followers, whom by a new invented name they call Ceroferarii, or
Waxetaper-bearers: The superior Orders are Subdeacons, Deacons, and
Presbyters, By inferior Orders men's humility and obedience was tried, and so
by degrees they were promoted to superior Orders. But seeing in every one of
these Orders the outward signs at their entry are different, and the things
signified are different, to wit, diverse graces of the holy Spirit,
increassing according as men by ascending degrees mounted up to higher
honors: what is the cause that all these seven are counted one SACRAMENT, and
not rather seven SACRAMENTS?

To all these Orders one thing was common, to wit, all were shaven in the upper
part of their heads, to represent (as Lindanus affirms. Panopl. Libr. 4 Cap.
77.) that the glory of Churchmen is to wear a crown of thorns, and to be
partakers of the sufferinges of CHRIST. And the Council of Triburium, in the
20. Canon thereof, cites the same cause of shauing the heads of Clergy men.
It is true, that men and women of old delighted in hair, as a natural
ornament of their bodies: and MARIE is commended for this, that she dried the
feet of CHRIST with the hair of her head, (JOAN. CAP. 12. verse. 3.) And all
the glory of the world, yea, and the crowns of immortal glory, should be
casten down at the feet of CHRIST. (APOCAL. CAP. 4. verse. 10.) Nevertheless,
the fact of SAMSON is reprooueable, who suffered his hair to be cut off,
and casten at the feet of DELILA. (IVDG. CAP. 16. verse. 19.) And the shauing
of the hair of men to be casten at the feet of the Antichrist, and to be a
sign of subjection unto him, that is a thing no less reprooueable, than the
fact of Samson.

We read of CONDALVS, Governor of LYCIA, under MAVSOLVS, King of CARIA, that
he gained infinite sums of Gold and Silver, for suffering the people of
LYCIA to wear their hair as an ornament of their bodies, wherein they much
delighted: But it is otherwise with the shauelinges of the ROMAN Church, whose
expectation of gain begins not until their heads be shaven: then they
get some benefice, by ascending degrees their estate is advanced, until they
become companions to Princes.

LINDANVS, according to his accustomed manner, (...), that is to say, Serious
in trifles: he will needs have this custom of shauing the heads of
Churchmen, to be referred unto the APOSTLE PETER, whose head, says he, the
enemies of the GOSPEL did shave, before they executed him unto the death. And
this rebuke of CHRIST, the CHVRCH converted it into an honorable rite of
shauing the heads of Church men, after the similitude of the shauing of Simon
Peter's head.

But if the ROMAN Church had been very sollicitous to have kept the doctrine
of the true faith of CHRIST, i^ purity, as it was delivered by SIMON PETER,
and the rest of the APOSTLES, they had not been so serious in matters of hair.

ANOTHER custom in the ROMAN Church, is to anoint with oil all them who are
admitted to Church Orders. Where have they learned this custom? from the
sons of AARON, who were anointed with oil, (LEVIT. CAP. 8. verse. 30.) and
consecrated to the work of their ministration. May it not justly be spoken
of them, which was spoken of old unto him who was too lofty in his vaunting
speeches, (...): that is to say, Either increase your strength, or diminishe
your loftiness: Even so, I say to the Chaplens of the ROMAN Church, That
they should either be liker unto CHRIST, (who was a Priest according to the
order of MELCHISEDECK) or else they should brag less of the ceremonies of
the LEVITICALL Law, seeing that the Priesthood of Melchisedeck is far
different from the Priesthood of Aaron.

To grace this Sacrament of Order, all these seven Orders afore-saide are
attributed unto CHRIST himself: He was a Doore-keeper (say they) when He
cast out the buyers and sellers out of the TEMPLE: (IOANN. CAP. 2. VERSE. 15.)
He was a Reader, when He read the place of ISAIAS in the Synagogue of
NAZARETH, saying, The Spirit of the LORD is upon me, etc. (LVKE CAP. 4. verse.
17.) He did the office of an Exorcist, when He cured a man possessed with a
Devil: (LVKE CAP. 4. verse. 33.) He practiced the office of Acoluthus, when
He said, He who follows Me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of Life: (Ioann. Cap. 8. verse. 12.) The office of a Subdeacon, when
He washed His Disciples feet: (Ioann. Cap. 13. verse. 4.) The office of a
Deacon, when He distributed Bread and Wine to His Disciples: (Matthew. Cap. 26.
verse. 26.) And finally, He executed His Priestlie office, when He offered
Himself upon the Cross, a Sacrifice for our sins. (Matthew. cap. 27. verse.
50.) Who can be so babishe ignorant, but he may understand, that CHRIST, in
working saving miracles, He declared Himself the promised MESSIAH and
Savior? In reforming the abuses of the Temple, He declared Himself to be
both King and Priest, to whom reformation of abuses in the Church belongs:
In reading Holy Scripture, and opening the sense and meaning thereof to the
people, He declared Himself to be the Great Prophet, whom GOD promised to
send into the world: (DEVTER. XVIII.) And when CHRIST says, He who
follows M^e shall not walk in darkness, etc. these words do import, That
we, who follow CHRIST are (...), but not that CHRIST himself is (...). Who
could once imagine that the hearts of men could be ouer-casten with such
horrible darkness, as to attribute to the Lord of the House of GOD, the
basest rowme in all the House, and to make a Doore-keeper of him for a time?

Now the Ceremonies which are used in the Consecration of them who are
admitted to inferior Orders, are these: The Doore-keepers are admitted with
the sign of delivering the keys of the Church-doore unto them. The Readers,
by delivering unto them the Holy Bible. The Exorcistes, by delivering unto
them certain forms of adjuration of persons possessed with Devils, or
transported with madness. And (...), by delivering unto them Tapers of wax,
with a little water pot. Are these elements instituted by GOD? and has GOD
annexed unto Keys, Books, Adjurations, and Tapers of wax, a promise of
spiritual grace? If these two things cannot be proved by Holy Scripture,
then no Sacrament can be acknowledged in these Orders: especially since the
administration of these offices is committed to boys, to ignorant fellows,
and to men who have no extraordinary gift of casting out of Devils, as the
Exorcistes of the Primitive Church had of old.

The like I speak of superior Orders, The signs and Ceremonies which are
used in admitting of Presbyters, (whom now they call Priests) are the
presenting unto them a platter, in the which consecrated Hosties are contained,
to declare, that they are called to stand at the Altar, to consecrate the
elements, and to offer up the body and blood of CHRIST, as a prop^tiatorie
Sacrifice to the Father. How blasphemous this opinion is, I have already
declared, in the TREATIS^ Of the Sacrifice of the Mass, but for the present
this I say, That if the ancient Ceremony of Imposition of hands had been
kept in admission of Presbyters, yet it could not have been called a
Sacrament of the New Testament, because a Sacrament is a visible sign, of the
invisible grace of GOD, and belonging to all them to whom the Covenant of GOD
belongs. Only this observed, that every Sacrament must be applied in its
own time, as GOD has ordained.

The Ceremony of breathing upon them who are admitted Priests, conjoined with
these words, Receive the Holy Spirit, (Ioann. Cap. 20. verse. 22.) it is a
preposterous counterfeiting of CHRIST, whom we aught to follow, in such
things as He has set down to be followed: but not to presume to do all
things which He did for demonstration of His divine power.

The Deacons in the Roman Church, are ordained by a Bishop, who cloatheth
them with their Stoles, and their Oraria, upon their left shoulders, and
puts into their hands the Book of the Euangell, whereof they should be
Preachers. Their office is to attend upon the Presbyters, when they minister
the Sacraments, to lay the Hosties upon the Altar, to prepare, and to cover
the LORDS Table, to carry the Cross, and to preach, and sing, the Gospel,
and the Epistle, to the people. In the ordination of Deacons, there is neither
a regard of the first institution of Deacons appointed by CHRIST'S Apostles,
(Acts 6.) neither is there any similitude or resemblance of a SACRAMENT
therein.

The office of a sab-Deacon is not mentioned in Holy Scripture, and their
service in carrying the Challice, and the Paxe, and the pot with water to
wash the hands of them who minister at the Altar, and the Towell: they are
such a mass of frivolous toys, invented by the brain of man, that I will
leave of to speak any further of them, remembering always this ancient
saying, That which Scripture has not commanded, may be as easily rejected,
as it may be furtherlie obtruded.

Now seeing I have remembered in all my preceding Treatises, to speak of
Antiquity, I shall not ouer-passe with silence this poinct (GOD willing) in
this Treatise also.

Albeit the Hierarchy of the Roman Church were found to be ancient, yet it
suffices for this Treatise to declare, that of old these Orders were not
called a Sacrament. And there is no ancient Writer whom I have read, who
reckons Church Orders in the number of Sacraments. As for the words of
Cyprian and Pope Leo, cited by Lindanus, they are not worthy of refutation,
because in a general signification many things may be called Sacraments.
But to call Order a Sacrament in a strict signification, it is a new invention
found out by the Scholasticke Doctors, who behooued to be serious in some
thing after they had lost the substance of Religion.

But I will set forward, and declare, that the Hierarchy it self is not so
ancient as they affirm it to be. True it is, that about the year of our
LORD 250. Cornelius, Bishop of Eusebius. hist. Libr. 6. Cap. 43.
Rome, abhorring the arrogancy of Nouaius, describes the Hierarchy of the
Roman Church, in the which there was one Bishop, forty and six Presbyters,
seven Deacons, and seven Subdeacons, forty and two Acoluthi: of Exorcistes,
Readers, and Ianitors fifty and two: of Widows and afflicted people, above a
thousand and five hundredth persons, who were all sustained by the liberality
and goodness of GOD in the Roman Church. Hereof it appears, that over and
beside offices instituted by the Apostles to continue ordinarily in the
Church, other offices crept in (into the Church) by humane institution, having
no such warrant as Elders and Deacons had. And after the time of the promotion
of the Bishop of Rome, to the honor of Universal Bishop, the number of Church
offices encreassed: and to Presbyters were added Arch-priestes: and to Deacons
were added Archdeacons. And Lindanus lamenteth that other inferior offices,
which were invented by men, had ceased in the Church, such as Fossores,
Syngeli, Copiatae. When the liberality of the people bestowed superfluity of
riches upon the Church, then new offices behooued to be found out, to the
end, that all which was bestowed might seem too little, because many Church
offices were to be sustained: the proverb spoken of old of women, (...),
that is, A woman is naturally sumptuous: now it might be justly transferred
to the Church Hierarchy, that it was a sumptuous and costly thing.

About the year of our Lord 308, and under the reign of Dioclesian, a
constitution is attributed to Caius, Bishop of Rome, that men should be
promoted to superior Orders, by degrees ascending from inferior Orders. And
all the forementioned Orders are reckoned in that Decretall of Caius, to wit,
Ostiarius, Lector, Exorcista, Acoluthus, Sub-diaconus, Diaconus, Presbyter, and
Episcopus. But the Epistle of Leo the fourth, written to the Bishops of
Britannie, derogateth credit to all the decretall Epistles written before the
days of Pope Siricius, except only to the decretall Epistles of Pope
Syluester: So that arguments taken from decretall Epistles, preceding the
384. year of our Lord, has the less credit amongst us, because they cannot
obtain credit at the hands of their own Popes.

But seeing nothing is to beee called ancient, which has not flowed from the
mouth of Christ and His Apostles, lest they should seem to be discountenanced
in this poinct, they cite the book of the Canons of the Apostles, to prove,
that the degrees afore-saide were Apostolic constitutions. This book is not
only supposititious, but also most impertinently cited by Papists, because
in the Council of Trent (De Sacramento ordinis, cap. 2.) Anathema is
pronounced against them who acknowledges not all their Orders, both superior
and inferior. But the book of the Canons of the Apostles acknowledges only
five Orders: namely, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Readers, and Psalmists, or
Chantors: but no mention is made of Exorcistes and Subdeacons: Therefore, it
were good for them either to brag less of Antiquity, or to prove better,
that their Hierarchy is ancient.

Ambrose (in cap. 4. ad Ephesians.) reckons five Orders, to wit, Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, Readers, and Exorcistes, making no mention of Subdeacons,
and Acoluthi. The Canonistes reckon nine Orders, adding to the seven above
mentioned Bishops and Psalmists.

This diversity of opinions concerning Church Orders, declares two things:
First, that of old there was no Sacrament of Orders: Secondly, that there was
no settled opinion in the Church about Orders, but one Church used one form,
and another Church another form, as is customably observed in things
indifferent: insomuch, that when it was thought expedient, that all house-holde
servants in Bishops houses, should be Clergy men, then the number of Church
offices Cyprian. Libr. 3. ^pist. 22.
were multiplied, according to the number of Oecumenicke offices accustomed to
be in Noble men's houses. Would God, that in matters of faith, of manners, and
Church Discipline, men had fixed the eyes of their minds as attentively upon
the written word of GOD, as Ship-men do upon their Compass, then had there
been less aberration, and less disputation, and less diversity of
opinions. The LORD work this in His own time, to whom be all Honor,
Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever, world without end,

Amen.
A TREATISE, Of the Sacrament of Matrimony.
IN the TREATISE of the Sacrament of MATRIMONY, the inconstancy, oblivion,
contradiction, and headstrong insolency of the Roman Church, makes me
uncertain whereat to begin: For who could once imagine, that they, who call
Marriage a work of the flesh, and an estate of living vncompetent to them who
are called to holy Orders, (forgetting what they had spoken) they would make
of it an holy Sacrament: as if the Ministers of GOD should be debarred from
the holy Sacraments of GOD. If they say, that they debar men in spiritual
offices only from copulation with women: yet in this they debar them from
the Sacrament, forasmuch as they debar them from the external sign, whereby
the spiritual grace is represented. Can any man be partaker of Baptism, and
not washen in water? Or can any man be partaker of the LORDS Super, and not
be permitted to eat and drink at the holy Table? And how is a man admitted to
the Sacrament of Matrimony, and debarred from copulation, which they
themselves grant to be the external sign of the Sacrament.

But let us mark the fraudulent dealing of the ROMAN^ Church, who has made
Marriage to be a Sacrament, albeit all the members of their Hierarchle have
forsaken it: yet this they gain, that Marriage being counted an holy
Sacrament, they have drawn the cognition of all Matrimonial causes under
their judicatorie. This being done, and their authority being settled, they
took boldness to make laws, both impious against GOD, and injurious to men:
as namely, that Marriages, bound up betwixt young persons, without consent of
Parents, should be firm and itable: That amongst kinsfolk it should not
be lawful to marry within the seventh degree: and these were already
married within these degrees, should be separated again: That a man, who is
divorced from an adulterous woman, shall not have liberty to marry during her
lifetime: That they who are spiritual brethren and sisters, by the Sacrament
of Baptism and Confirmation, shall not have leave to marry one another: And,
Marriage is forbidden at certain seasons of the year: And finally, that the
Church may dispense with the degrees of consanguinitie, forbidden in the
eighteenth CHAPTER of LEVITICUS, and find out more degrees impeding Marriage to
be bound up.

The Apostle PAVL, when he calls Marriage a great mystery, (EPHESIANS. CAP. 5.
VERSE. 32.) he is speaking concerning CHRIST, and concerning His Church: And it
is indeed a mystery unspeakable, whether we consider the beginning, or the
progress, or the consummation of this Marriage: It is begun in Earth, and
perfected in Heaven: And the love of CHRIST and His Church, is unspeakable:
For even the Spouse of CHRIST, albeit she be infirm and weak in the Earth,
yet her heart is so inflamed with the love of her husband, that she forgets
all things, and remembereth upon Him: she counts all things to be dongue
in comparison of him: one sight of His reconciled face is dearer to her than
all the treasures of the world: His name is like a sweet ointment powered out,
and delighting her soul with the sweet smell of salvation. And if the love of
the Church toward CHRIST be unspeakable, who can comprehend the length,
breadth, and deepnesse of the love of CHRIST toward His Church, who has
purged her from all spotte of sin in this world, and prepared a glorious
mansion for her in His Fathers house, that is, in Heaven. But this is not
spoken of the marriage of mortal men with their wives.

True it is, that the Apostle PAVL in that same place sets down some
similitude betwixt corporal marriages, and the spiritual marriage betwixt
CHRIST and His Church: But that is not enough to furnishe out an ordinary
Sacrament in the Church of GOD, for then should there be infinite
Sacraments: For the Kingdom of GOD (MATTHEW 13.) is compared to a man who
sows good seed in his field: It is compared to leven, and to a treasure
that is hidden in the field, and to a draw net, and to a grain of Mustard.
seed: yet all these things are not Sacraments in the Church.

Yea, and in the marriage of ADAM and EVA, we see a certain similitude of the
spiritual marriage betwixt CHRIST and His Church: for ADAM loved the woman
which was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and in whom he saw his
own similitude: (GENES, CHAP. 2. VERSE. 23.) And CHRIST in like manner, by
feeding us with His own body and blood, He makes us flesh of His own
flesh, and bone of his own bones: and more-ouer, He stampeth us with His
own similitude, to assure us, that He loves us, whom He has stamped with
His own likeness.

In like manner, a matrimonial band is more indissoluble than other bands:
for other bands, like as they are bound up with consent of parties, so in
like manner they may be dissolved and undone with consent of parties: but the
band of Marriage cannot be undone, except by death or fornication. But the
conjunction betwixt CHRIST and His Church, (ROMAN. CHAP. VIII.) cannot be
undone by death it self. As concerning spiritual whordome, the true Church,
which consists of a number, whom GOD has elected, called, justified,
sanctified, and whom He intends to glorify: These, I say, the LORD in
mercy preserves from spiritual whordome, and apostasy from the known
truth.

And, like as a chaste woman delights in her husband, whether he be
present with her, or absent from her: if he be present, she delights to
confer with him: if he be absent, she delights to talk of him, to read
his letters, to behold the tokens of his favor toward her, and finally, in
the secret parloure of her heart to meditate of his goodness toward her.
(Basil. Magn. De vera Virgini^.) Even so, the Church is ravished with an
unspeakable delight of her husband JESUS CHRIST: He is spirituallie present,
and by holy prayers she talks with Him night and day: He is corporally
absent, therefore she delights to talk of His love and goodness toward
her, and to read the books of holy Scripture, wherein His good will toward
her is clearlie manifested, and in the secret chamber of her heart
continually to meditate of His second blessed appearance.

IN nothing does the ROMAN Church agree better with us, for a time, than in
magnifying Marriage as an holy band instituted by GOD in PARADISE, and having
a type and similitude of the love of CHRIST toward His Church: and therefore
they make it an holy Sacrament in the Church, which no man ever did before the
days of Pope GREGORY. But when they perceived that this was not consented
unto, that Marriage should be counted one of the ordinary Sacraments in the
Church, especially, the whole Hierarchy of the ROMAN Church disclaiming it,
and the East Church in a general Council, disallowing prohibition of Marriage
to men called to spiritual offices.

The ROMAN Church took offense at every thing, which was repugnant to their
opinion. They could neither abide them who denied that Marriage was a
Sacrament, nor yet them, who gave liberty to Church men to marry: And so
being irritated on all sides, they began to speak evil of Marriage as a
work of the flesh, and an estate vncompetent to men in spiritual offices.

Is not the ROMAN Church, in this poinct, like unto the River EVPHRATES, which
flowing out of the Mountains of ARMENIA, sets its course Westward, until
it forgather with the skirtes of Mount TAVRVS: and then when the course of it
is hindered, it fetches a contrary course, and runs Similitude
directly East, until it be mixed with the water of TYGRIS: Even so, the
ROMAN Church, which could never abide to be controlled, it took occasion to
speak irreverently of Marriage, because their opinions were not received in
the Church without contradiction.

Now seeing the cause is evidently known, wherefore they were so serious to
draw in Matrimony into the number of Sacraments: namely, to the end that
matrimonial causes might be found spiritual causes, and might be judged by
spiritual Judges. Let us consider what constitutions they made in matters of
Matrimony, without any warrant or regard of Scripture: insomuch, that their
vilepending of Scripture Con^. Trid. de Matrimon. Can. 3.
makes a number of their constitutions to be so vilepended, that they are not
worthy of an answer: and namely, when they say, that the Church has power
to dispense with the degrees of consanguinitie, forbidden in the eighteenth
CHAPTER of LEVITICUS, and for to appoint more degrees impeding the binding up of
Marriage, than are contained in that CHAPTER of LEVITICUS. What answer shall
be given to such Apostates from the truth of GOD? They make so great account
of the Canons of their Councels, that they accurse all them who dare contradict
any of them: and on the other part, they make so light account of holy
Canonicke Scripture, that even when they add to the Scriptures of GOD, or
diminishe any thing from them, they are worthy to be heard, and to be
regarded. But HENRY the eight, King of ENGLAND, when he sought resolution in
this question at the most part of the Universities in EVROPE, if it were
lawful for the Bishop of ROME, or for a Council, to dispense with the degrees
of consanguinitie, forbidden in the eighteenth of LEVITICUS, he received a
negative answer, That it was not lawful so to do.

The prohibition of Marriage in more degrees of consanguinitie and affinity,
than are contained in the XVIII. of Leuiticus, is a wicked invention, to make
the Law of GOD of none effect: For like as Cyrus, when he caused many
channels to be made, wherein the water of the River Gyndes should be derived.
What intention had he, but to dry up the River Gyndes, and to make it ebb of
water, that young boys and girls should not be afraid to wade through it:
Even so, prohibitiue degrees, added to the Law of GOD, tended to none other
purpose, Similitude
but to undo, and make of none effect, the blessed Law of GOD. And this
appears the more manifestly, because in that same Canon, in the which they
claim liberty to add more degrees of prohibition of Marriage, to the degrees
forbidden in Leuiticus, they claim also a liberty to dispense with the
degrees forbidden by GOD. But GOD confounds the counsels of men, which are
opposite to His divine institution, and turns them all to folly. And the
prohibition of Marriage unto the seventh degree was retrenched in the Council
of Laterane, anno 1215* and reduced to the fourth degree of consanguinitie. So
men, who would correct the ordinance of GOD, they are like the Serpent,
whereof Epiphanius writes, (contra here is.) which for hunger is compelled to
gnaw his own tail, and to procure his own death.

More-ouer, the prohibition of Marriage with spiritual sisters, that is, with
them to whom they have been witnesses in the Sacrament of Baptism or
Confirmation: it is a constitution neither countenanced by Scripture, nor
known to Antiquity: but only leaning upon the authority of the ROMAN
Church: and therefore, the people and nations in our time, who acknowledge
CHRIST to be the only Lawe-giuer in His own Church, they have given this
Antichristian law as the ashes that are casten to the dongue-hill.

Their constitution concerning diuorcementes, that it is not lawful for the
innocent party to marry, so long as the other Trident. Council. Can. 7.
party is alive with whom he was once married, is partly conceived upon wrong
interpretation of Scripture, and partly upon the opinion of ancient Fathers,
who misconceauing the right meaning of holy Scripture, have given to others
occasion of stumbling and erring. True it is, that the Apostle Paul says, Let
not the wife depart from her husband: but if she depart, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband, and let not the husband put away
his wife. (1. Cor. 7. 10. 11.) In this place the Apostle is speaking of such
alienation of minds as falls out betwixt man and woman, and separateth their
cohabitation for a time but he is not speaking of diuorcements, justly made
for fornication: for like as death cutteth insunder the bands of Matrimony,
and gives liberty to the living party to marry in the Lord (Romans 7. 2. 3) Even
so, fornication cutteth insunder the matrimonial band, and gives liberty to
the innocent party to marry another in the Lord. Matthew. 5. 32.

The bills of diuorcement given to honest women in the old Testament after the
receiving whereof they married other husbands, as clearly appears in the
book of Deuteronomie, cap. 24. verse. 4. this custom (I say) is no sufficient
ground to prove that the innocent party may marry after diuorcement: for
such diuorcementes were rather tolerated for the hardness of the Jews
hearts, than commanded or allowed: and because they were made without any
trial of fornication, they are damned by Christ, as occasions of adulteries.
Matthew. 19. 9. But the exception that Christ makes in express words of
fornication, declares that the diuorcement made for fornication, is a lawful
diuorcement, and consequently gives liberty to the innocent party to marry,
as death interuening, gives liberty to the party living to marry.

The opinion of Augustine concerning the exception of fornication, made by
Christ in the question of diuorcement, (Matthew 19. 9.) has so blinded the
eyes of Lindanus, and many others of the Roman Church, that they suppose the
meaning of the words of Christ to be this, That a man who puts away
Augustir Sermon. D mini, in monte, li^ cap. 14
his wife for fornication, and marries another, he sins not so
grieuouslie, as he who puts away his wife vngrieued with any such
transgression on her part. Always, both the one and the other sins, says
he) if they marry another during the life time of the first bedde-fellowe.
But, with Augustines favor, exclusine words, such as (...) is, cannot be
expounded by Magis and Minus: but the meaning of Christ's words is evident, That
except fornication cut the matrimonial band, the husband should not
repudiate his wife, and he who marries a woman, who is not divorced for
whordome, commits adultery.

TO conclude this TREATISE, let no man be moved by the honor which the
Roman Church seems to give unto Marriage, when they call it an holy
Sacrament: neither be much troubled when they speak irreverently of Marriage:
for in the Courts of Caiaphas and Pontius Pilate, Christ was scornefullie
honored, and seriously mocked, and buffetted: (Mat. 27) Even so, when the
Roman Church speaks honorably of Marriage, they are only sporting and
delighting themselves with conceits and discourses: but when they abhor
Marriage, and speak irreverently of it, then they speak seriously, and from
their heart. But the LORD in His own time, will stop the mouths of them who
teach a doctrine of Devils, from whose deceitful doctrine the LORD make His
Church free, to whom be all praise, power, and dominion, both now and
evermore,

AMEN.
FINIS.

