THE PARADISE OF DELIGHTS. OR The B. Virgins Garden of Loreto. With brief
Discourses upon her Divine Letanies, by way of Meditation.

For the comfort of all (...), as be devout unto her; and des^^e her holy
Patronage and ^^^^^ction.

By I. S. of the Society of JESUS.

Fulcite me floribus, stipate me malis.

Cant. 2. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST WORTHY ENGLISH GENTLEMEN, OF THE SODALITY OF
THE IMMACVLATE CONCEPTION OF THE EVER B. VIRGIN MARY, IN LOVAYNE.
RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST WORTHY,
COMNENVS the Emperor is most highly co^^ended by Venerable antiquity, for
that after glorious conquest, and ^mous victory over his ^yled enemies, he
pla^d a beautyfull Image (...) the B. Virgin in the ^u^phant Chariot, pre^^red
for himself; That the Mighty City of Rome, Lady and Mistress of the World,
might witness, how duly and faithfully h^ did honor and reverence her,
through whose ay^ and assistance (next after God) he achieved the same. A
greater victor^ have you obtained ou^^ far more potent enemies; and your
gratefu^^ minds and feruorous devotions in aduaunci^^ the honor of the Blessed
Queen of Angels, and ^ovverfull Empress of ^he world, will not only be a
most faithful re^ognizing of her ready help, to the full accomplishment of
your spiritual Conquests; but also yield a most svveet and fragrant odor, of
this present age, to all true^arted Catholics; and leave a most memorable
example of your virtuous endeauours to all Posterity.

Seneca vvorthily writes, Lib. de prouid. cap. 1.
that, Inter bonos viros and Deum amicitia est, conciliante virtute: Betvveene
good men and God, there is a strait band of friendship, by reason of Virtue.
Whereby it comes to pass, that by your Generous acts of virtuous life, having
contracted, and (by your earnest seeking to advance the honor of his Elected
Mother) confirmed this perpetual league of perfect Amity with God; there must
needs follovv that friendly and familiar communication, that heavenly comfort,
and uniform consent of hearts, both with God, and amongst your selves, unto
which they only are vvorthily to be admitted, who have deserved to be are a
part in this celestial harmony, vvherby to be made truly happy.

My vnvvorthynes therefore finding you so highly esteemed in this melodious
Quire, does present this little Treatise unto you; not much unlike to poor
people, who use to offer trifling Nevv-yeares-giftes unto Great men, thereby
to make their unworthy Presents an humble petition of some greater guerdon,
and revvard. So if my slender labors might gain so much honor, and make me
so happy as to be remembered in your devout, and much respected Community, I
should think my self most abundantly satisfied. This my unpolished lines do
humbly request, not by any virtue from themselves, but for her sake of whom
we now treat. In hope vvherof I rest,

Yours sincerely affected in Christ Jesus. I. S.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
GENTLE Reader, If thou be of the Blessed number of those, whose comfort and
proffit I seek in this little Treatise; let me desire thee to pluck of thy
deceitful spectacles of Curiosity, and peruse my plain lines with devout
simplicity; otherwise thou art like to find thy labor of as little effect,
in regard of what thou seek of me, as I shall find my hopes of small
expectation, for what I desire to work in thee.

Moses with admiration did see the Bush, in which Almighty God appeared,
burning, but not consuming, which made him the more desirous to behold that
great and vvonderous vision; but yet was commanded to pluck off his shoes
before he might have access. The like counsel I find given by S. Bernard, to
those who curiously desire to behold the divine mysteries, which the Eternal
Wisdom of Almighty God has wrought in this mystical Bush, the most Blessed
Virgin his Mother. Thou will not so much admire the Gedeon Fleece besprinckled
with dew, as to behold a woman clad with the sun, yet not consumed with
so great an heat. Merito quidem admiraris Moses (says he) and curiosius
desideras in tueri; Bern. sermon. in Apoc. 12
verumtamen solue calceamenta de pedib us tuis, and inuolucra pone carnalium
cogitationum, si accedere concupiscas. Not without cause thou do admire (O
holy Moses) and more curiously do desire to behold; but cast of thy shoes
from thy feet, and bridle the inordinate desire of thy flesh, if thou desire
to approach.

No curious conceit but a pure intention, no earthly affection, but true
devotion, no faygned love, but a dutiful respect must bring thee to the
presence of this sacred Queen, to the sight of this blazing star, into the
most esteemed favor of the ever Blessed mother of God. Read therefore with
desire of proffit, and my best vvishes shall be as my intentionis, that it may
turn to the great honor of God, and his thrice happy Mother, and to the
Eternal good of thy soul. And in thy best devotions pray for me.

I. S.

A BRIEF INTRODVCTION TO THE FOLLOWING MEDITATIONS.
THE natural condition of man's will is such, that of necessity it requires the
help of the Understanding, to the due performance of her noble acts, according
to that vulgar Axiom of Philosophers, Nihil volitu^, quin praecognitum,
Nothing can be desired, unless it be first known, whereupon it comes to
pass, that the Will cannot work but according to the light that it has from
the foresaid understanding: and the greater that the knowledge is of the good
apprehended, the more does the affection of the Will increase, and kindles an
earnest desire of the thing we love.

Wherefore my intended purpose in these present Meditations, being to stir up
the hearts of all that rightly peruse them, and a reverend respect, and devout
affection unto the ever blessed and most happy Virgin Mother of God; I must
first lay before your eyes, the greatness of her excellent Virtues, and singular
graces (as far as my weakness shall be able) that the understanding being once
fully possessed with an impregnable conceit of her unspeakable Perfections,
the will may be the more strongly moved, to love and reverence so beautiful a
creature.

To this effect I have made choice of her devout Letanies of Loreto, wherein
most admirable tytles, and most manifest arguments of her greatness are proposed
unto us; by which not only our Understanding, may be abundantly enriched with
divine conceits, but also our Will may be greatly inflamed with virtuous
desires. From which two well-grounded Roots, will spring the beautiful branch
of Imitation, the chiefest and only scope of all virtuous minds, and the last
mark at which all true devotion aymeth; and without which both devotion is
fruitles, or no devotion at all, and the best purposes are without effects.
Witness that worthy saying of S. Ambrose, Amb. l. 2. de Virgin.
Quisquis Mariae exoptat praemium, imitetur exemplum, Whosoever desires the
reward of the Blessed Virgin Mary, let him imitate her example. And S. Bernard
gives us to understand, that the perfect imitation of her excellent virtues
must be the only conduict to convey unto us her loving favors, Bern. super
Missi^s est.
Vt impetres eius orationis suffragium, ne deseras conuersationis exemplum,
that thou may attain to thy desired effect of her prayers, leave not to
follow her laudable Conversation.

Consonant to this is the doctrine of the burning Lamp of Afric, and shining
light of the whole Church, S. Augustine, who writing of the true festiuity of
holy Martyrs, says, Aug. sermon. 47. de Sanctis.
Abeis Sanctorum in veritate festiuag audia celebrantur, qui ipsorum Martyrum
exempla sequu^tur. By those indeed festival days of holy Martyrs are truly
celebrated who follovv the examples of their virtues. Fidelis sermo (says S.
Chrysostom) and omni acceptione dignus etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 3. sermon. de mart.
It is a faithful saying and worthy to be received by all men, that we should
imitate in our co^uersatio^ those Saints whom we honor with solemn
veneration.

And by reason of the excellent tytles which are most worthily given to the
renowned Queen of heaven in these devout Letanies, wherein her loving Children
find exceeding Comfort and Delight; I^ have thought good to entyt le this small
work, The Paradise of delights, or, the B. Virgins garden of Loreto. And for
our better Collection, it will not be amiss to imagine, a private Garden,
^^dorned with all kind of delightful flovvers, amiddest which the B. Virgin
^seth to walk, expecting the visitation of her dearest friends, and most
devoted Clyents. Unto the gate of this mystical garden, and Paradise, we must
approach with all humility, desiring to be admitted to the pleasant view of
those celestial flowers, whose dainty odours have filled the whole world with
their fragrant smell. And if our request be graciously granted by the glorious
Queen of Heaven, and her Angels there attending on her, humbly prostrate
before her sacred feet, we must desire, that whatsoever we shall gather out
of this delightsome Paradise, may be to the honor and glory of her sweet Son
lesus, to the increase of devotion to her gracious Self, and to the eternal
happynes of our own souls Then may we begin with the first flovver of this
heavenly Garden, or the first word of these ^euout Letanies MA^IA, the most
venerable ^ame of the ever Blessed and most happy Virgin Mary, ^f which we may
frame our ^editation; imploring first ^^er daily aid and assis^ance in the
manner following.

ORATION SODALITATE a singulis in admissione recitanda.
SANCTA Maria, Mate Dei and Virgo, Ego N. N^te hodie in Dominam, Patronam and
Aduocatam eligo; firmiter^ statuo ac propono, me numqua^ te derelicturu, neque
contra te al^ quid vmquam dicturum, aut fa^ turum; neque permissurum vt (...)
meis subditis aliquid contra t^um honorem vmquam agatur Obsecro te igitur,
suscipe me i^ seruum perpetuum: adsis mihi i^ actionibus omnibus meis, nec m^
deser as in hora mortis. Amen

THE PRAYER USED TO BE said by those, that be admitted into the Sodality.
BLESSED Virgin Mary, Mother of God, N.N. do this day choose ^hee for my Lady,
Patroness, and Advocate; and (...) do firmly purpose and determine, never to
forsake thee; nor ever to speak, or do any thing against thee; nor at any time
to suffer any thing to be done against thee, by those that be under my care.
Therefore I most humbly beseech thee, to receive me into thy perpetual service
and protection; be present with me in all my actions; and forsake me not in the
hour of death. Amen.

THE PARADISE OF DELIGHTS. OR The B. Virgins Garden of Loreto.
THE I. MEDITATION. Of the Venerable, and sacred Name of the most B. Virgin,
MARIA.
MANY pious and devout consideratio^s of the mystical signification of this
most venerable Name, Maria, have been with very great reverence set down by
the holy Fathers: and with no less diligence learnedly collected by the
Reverend Father Canisius, in his memorable work Of the sacred Virgins praises:
which for so much as at this present serve to our purpose, we may not unfitly
reduce to three.

First, Maria, is as much as to say Stella Maris, Illuminata, or Illuminatrix,
that is, Star of the Sea, or North Star, one that is illuminated, or gives
light to others. Secondly, Maria is amarum mare, a bitter sea, or sea of
bitterness. And thirdly, she is Domina Lady, or Mistresso. Out of the which we
may frame three point in this manner.

1. How fitly this sacred (...) is derived from Light; and as a^ North-star is
known by the name of the Sea-starre, because thereby the wandering Mariners
direct their course, the better to attain unto their hoped and pretended
Haven: so this Beauteous Queen of light in the Catholic Church is placed,
whose radiant beams of virtuous life and heavenly conversation draws the eyes
of all those who desire to arrive at the happy Haven of eternal bliss; which
being fixed upon her unchangeable light, must needs eschew the dangerous
shipwreck of this wicked world, unless they wilfully forsake the infallible
direction of so fair a Star, and blindly run themselves against the unhappy
rocks of utter ruin, and everlasting Death.

2. Moreover she is said to be Illuminata, endued with light, and this by
reason of the divine knowledge of most high and heavenly Mysteries, the which
so firmly and undoubtedly she did believe, that not unworthily she deserved to
hear, Luc. 1.
Beata quae credidisti, blessed art thou who have believed. And as all the
beautiful stars do participate their borrowed light which we behold from the
bright shyning lamp of the world the Sun, according to their capacity and
greatness: even so this sacred Queen being nearest unto the bright Sun of
Justice Christ Jesus, and most capable of his Celestial influences, and
heavenly blessings, did participate so much of his divine light, that rightly
she may be called Illuminata, endued with light.

Further more she is said to be Illuminatrix, one who gives light unto others:
For that indeed is one of the chiefest effects of true virtue, as our Blessed
Savior not obscurel ye did insinuate unto his loving disciples, when he said,
they were Lux mundi, Matt. 5.
the light of the world, and presently did annexe their proper office and
function, Luceat lux vestra coram homi nibus: let your light shine before men.
This, I say, is a rare effect of true virtue, not only to be lightsome, yea
delightsome in it self; but also to shine and give light unto others. And this
being more apparent in the B. Virgin then in all other Saints together, I
think none will deny, but that in a special manner, and that most fitly she
has this divine Epitheton of Illuminatrix, one that gives light unto others.

2. The second Etimology, or deriuation of this Blessed Name Maria, is amarum
mare, a bitter sea, or sea of bitter nes, which well expresses the sorrowful
estate of the B Virgin, in the depth of her excessive grief, that she suffered
at the foot of the Cross, when with watery eyes, and most heavy heart, she did
behold her loving Sone, the author of life, yea life it self wrestling with
death, even till death: Which doleful spectacle did fill her tender heart with
whole floudes of sorrow, whose bitter panges (as many holy Fathers have left
written to us) did leave her more then martyred. In which almost deadly agony,
and strong encounter with a sea of grief, we may behold this glittering
Star, almost ouerclouded with the thick mist of grief, yet yielding a most
beautiful light by reason of her constant fortitude; notwithstanding we cannot
choose but say, Thren. cap. 2.
Magna est velut Mare contritio tua; quis medebitur tui? Thy Contrition or
sorrow is like unto a sea; who shall be able to comfort thee? The abundant
tears of Jacob for his murdered Joseph, Genesis 37. Job. 10. 1. Reg. c. 20. 2.
Reg. 18. and 19. Thren. per totu^.
the incessant grief of Anna for her wandering Pilgrim, the hearty sighs of
Ionathas for his lovely David, the inward throbs of David for his rebellious
Absalom, the pitiful sobs and rufull lamentations of Ieremias for his
sinful people, may well be shaddows (and but shadows) of her grief.

O sacred Queen, in the midst of these bitters storms, shall I yet presume
to call thee beautiful? Me thinks I hear thee say with mourneful Noemi,
Ruth. 1.
Nolite vocare me Noemi, sed vocate me Mara quia amaritudinibus valde repleuit
me Omnipotens. Call me not Noemi, that is to say beautiful, but cal^ me Mara,
that is bitter, because the Almighty has filled me abundantly with bitterness.

Another reason also may be why she should be compared to a bitter sea. Because
as the Red sea proved most bitter unto Phara^ and his wicked army,
miraculously withstanding their passage, and hindering their pursuit to the
great comfort and strengthening of the children of God, and to their own utter
ruin and destruction: So this B. Queen is a sea of bitterness unto the Devil
and his damned ^pirits (figured in that obstinate Tyrant and his impious
followers) who like roaring lions, never ^^ease to persecute the chosen and
beloved Children of God, seeking whom they may devour. In whose strong
defense the powerful Virgin is always ready at hand, whose only Name is most
terrible unto them, and for these respects, she is most justly entitled amarum
mare, a bitter Sea.

3. Then lastly Maria, is as much as Domina, Lady, or Mistress: and with great
reason, for indeed she was ever Lady and Mistress over all her actions, making
always her inward thoughts keep a most perfect concord with her outward
deeds; and both the one and the other directly to tend to the greater honor
and glory of God, the true and chiefest scope of all her virtuous endeauours.

Besides, she may be said to be Domina, a Lady, a powerful Princess, or
mighty Empress, by reason of the great power and authority she has with her
sweet Son, to help and succor sinners, as most devoutly S. Bernard does
acknowledge, Ber^. ser. in Apo. c. 12.
when he says Amplectamur Mariae vestigia and deuotissima supplicatione beatis
illius pedibus prouoluamur: teneamus eam, nec dimittamus donec been dixerit
nobis, potens est enim. Let us embrace the sacred footstepps of Blessed Mary,
and with most devout supplication, let us fall at her blessed feet, let us take
hold on her, and never let go, until she vouchsafe to grace us with her
blessing, for she is powerful.

Thus having somewhat dis^ouered the hidden treasure wrap^ted in this happy
Name of Mary; The fruit of Meditation.
(...) follows that we stir up our ^esires and inflame our hearts with most
feruerous devotion and true ^oue toward so beautiful a La^^ly. What soul in
danger of eter^all ship wrack, beaten with the ^ough billows of sin, and
threat^ed with the surging waves of instant death, would not open his deaf
ears and hearing the comfortable voice of S. Bernard give attentive ear,
whilst he says, Respice stellam, voca Mariam, look up man that art in
peril, view this beautiful Star, call upon the blessed Name of Mary. What man
so wretched, who having crucified her only Son by his manifold sins and
grievous offenses, would not run to the foot of the Cros^ where this sorrowful
Mother stands, and weep floods of tea^^ for his misdemeanour, and by he^
powerful intercession obtay^^ forgiveness of them. What sinful wight in
distress and misery would not fly unto so powerful Lady, to obtain new
strength ^ greater forces whereby to mast^^ his unbridled appetits, and oue^
come his disordered passions? Finally who would not be serua^ to so mighty a
Princess? who would not be suppliant to so lo^uing a Mother, and wholly deu^ted
to so beautiful a Queen?

Heerupon I will in most humble manner desire the gloriou^ Queen of heaven, The
Colloquium
that hencefor^^ by her motherly help I may so kee^ mine eyes fixed upon the
bright ^eames of her shining virtue, that ^vtterly hate all works of
darke^^es, and so drown my soul in the ^owing streams of devotion, that ^ may
wash away all the staynes of ^y former offenses, and never ^ore offend Almighty
God: yea ^^at I may always fly under her ^^otection, and that she will
vouch^^fe to guard and defend me; Sub ^^um praesidium confugimus sancta ^^ei
genitrix, under thy protection ^^e fly, O holy Mother of God. ^o conclude this
Meditation, ^t us with a firm and resolute ^^rpose dedicate our selves who^^
unto her, in all our necessityes ^ue confident recourse unto her, ^^d to the
best of our powers, ^^itate her excellent heroical ver^^es, as the most true
token of our love, and most lovely pledge of our endless friendship. For the
better obteyning whereof, let v^ here devoutly recite the Salu^ Regina, or Aue
Maris Stella which in this place is more proper.

THE II. MEDITATION Of the rare sanctity of the Blessed Virgin.
THREE famous works w^ read to have been most curiously accomplished by the
wis^ King Solomon in the old Law which if we consider as types an^ figures of
what our true Solomon Christ Jesus did afterward fulfill in his blessed Mother,
they will help us somewhat to declare the unspeakable greatness of the rare
^anctity of the holy mother of God which is indeed so far beyond all ^umane
reach, as the wits and best ^nderstandings must be forced with S. Augustine to
cry out, Quid ^icam de te paupere ingenie? What can be said of thee by the
weak wit of man? Where the high conceits of learned S. Augustine came short;
where the golden eloquen^e of fluent S. Chrysostom was not enough; where
the grave sen^ences of renowned S. Ambrose ^raue pardon; where the famous
works of learned S. Hierome con^esse their weakness; the piercing eye of
enlightened S. Anselme da^eleth; the hony-flowing style of Holy S. Bernard is
dried up; ^he devout heart of seraphicall S. Bonauenture is consumed; finally
where all the whole troop of worthy Writters do acknowledge themselves unable
to declare thy unspeakable praise, I must needs say with S. Augustine: Sermon.
18. de Sanctis.
Accipite itaque quascumque exiles, quascumque meritis tuis impares, gratiarum
acti^nes, accept of these how ever so slender praises, how ever so unequal,
unto thy worthy merits.

1. The first work of this forenamed King, registered in holy Writ, 3. Reg. 1.6.
is the building of the famous Temple of Jerusalem, which both for great cost
and excellent workmanship may well be accounted the Mirror of all Ages, an
earthly Heaven, where God himself chose to dwell, and of the which we read,
Nihil erat qu^^ non auro tegeretur, there was nothing that was not covered with
gold. If now we turn our eyes to the sacred Temple of the Son of God, to the
divine Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, and secret closet of the blessed Trinity,
the humble Virgin Mary, we shall find her a work beyond all admiration; wrought
by the eternal Wisdom of Almighty God; adorned with all kind of virtue;
enriched with abundance of divine grace, and prepared as an unspotted veyle,
wherein God himself should be inwrapped, that so indeed she might become the
sacred Temple of God, so enlightened with grace, so inflamed with Charity, that
all the world might see and bear witness, that Nihil erat quod non aur^
tegeretur, there was nothing in her, that was not covered with golden Charity.
Neither was the famous Temple of Jerusalem, ever so frequented as is this Holy
Temple of God, because as S. Bernard witnesses, omnibus sinum misericordiae
aperit, vt de plenitudine eius accipiant vniuersi: She lays open her
merciful breast unto all, that of her great abundance every one may take part.

2. The second work of admiration recorded in the holy Scripture, we find to
be a stately Palace that King Solomon erected for his own use. And this was
finished by him, and brought to full perfection in thirteen years. But
Wisdom it self built the house of which we here speak, and for himself,
Sapientia aedificauit sibi domum, Wisdom built himself a house, of which the
Prophet Isay spoke when he said: Erit praeparatus mons domus Domini in vertice
nontium: There shall be a mountain prepared for the house of our Lord in the
top of Mountains. Which words S. Gregory the great expounds of the Blessed
Virgin thus: An non mons sublimis Maria, in Reg. 1.
^uae vt conceptionem aeterni verbi at^ingeret, meritorum vertice^ vsque ad
solium Deitatis erexit: Is not this Virgin a high and lofty mountayn, who to
reach to the Conception of the Son of God she raised the ^eight of her merits
above the ^uirs of Angels unto the thron of God. And as by the mountain is
signified Perfection, she being pla^ed in the top of mountains, gi^eth us to
understand of how great perfection and rare sanctity ^he was, and is above al
other Saints and Angels: and all this the divine Wisdom had brought to pass
in the space of thirteen years; for she was not full fourteen, when she was
chosen the Mother of God.

Behold then, O my soul, this stately Palace, ascend this holy mountain,
admire the divine workmanship of all, and every part of this famous building,
and thou will be forced to say Digit^^ Dei est hic, Exodus 8.
this work could only be done by the finger of God.

The third work of fame mentioned in Holy Writ, was ^ stately Throne, which
King Solomon built for himself, and where^^ he gloryed very much, of which the
holy Scripture auerreth: N^^ est factum tale opus in vniuer^^ regnis: The like
piece of work^ was not made in the world: (...) was of Iuory, covered with the
best gold; it was beset with princely Lions in diverse places, and there were
six steps to ascend unto it. By the Iuory Throne co^ered with beaten gold is
signified the Blessed Virgin, by reason of her chaste purity, and the most
beautiful luster of her golden Charity. The six stepps signify ^^x virtuous
acts, by which we must ascend into the Blessed Vir^ins favor, signified by
these ^etters of her venerable Name ^irjam, for Sochath, the Hebrew word. The
stepps be these; Mag^nimity, Invocation, Reverence, I^itation, Affection, and
Memory of ^er. Magnanimity brings forth a ^^me and constant Resolution to be
^uly hers. Invocation, calls unto ^^r for aid and succor, for the better
performance of this good purpose. Reverence causes a desire of Imitation.
Imitation breeds love and affection. Affection keeps a perpetual memory of
what we love: and Memory is both a watchful aduiser of what we have promised,
and a certain Note-booke of what we have received.

These be the shaddows which may in some sort give us to understand the
admirable sanctity of the ever Blessed Queen of Angels and holy Mother of
sinners. For greater was the Sanctity of this excellent Virgin, then the
sanctity of all Saints and Angels, iointl^ conceived, as both Fathers, and
Deuines do auerre. Ceteris per parts, Mariae autem se infudit tota gr^tiae
plenitudo, says S Hierome: T^ other Saints grace was given by parts, but to
this sacred Queen, all fullnes of grace was at once infused. And therefore
most worthily she was saluted by the Angel when he brought his heavenly
Embassage Gratia plena, Luc. 1.
full of grace, that of her fullnes (as before I said out of S. Bernard) we
might all participate.

Having thus by these three considerations grafted in our hearts and minds the
unspeakable greatness of her imcomparable sanctity and fullnes of grace, it
rests that as little children and tender Infants we have recourse unto her,
who is loving, and therefore will not deny us; who is our Mother, and therefore
cannot be forgetful of her poor distressed children, who with true devotion
seek her. Let us therefore cry, and call, Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, Holy
Mary pray for us. Monstra te esse Matrem, show thy self a Mother. And the
better to incline her loving heart, that she may show her self a careful
Mother, let us show our selves true and obedient children, giving attentive
ear unto the divine sentence, and healthful counsel of S. Peter: Quasi modo
geniti infantes rationabiles, sine dolo, lac concupiscite. As newborn
children reasonable, without deceit, desire ye milk: not sweet alluring
milk of vain pleasure and worldly vanities, but the true nourishing milk of
a pure and unspotted life; the delightsome milk of devout love to the B.
Virgin, in which we may increase unto eternal happiness.

All hail, O sacred Virgin, full of grace the Mirror of Sanctity, Colloquium.
and pattern of all perfection: Behold I most unworthy of ^l thy Children do
here prostrate my self at thy feet, desiring from ^he bottom of my heart that
thou will vouchsafe to take me under thy protection, and with the a^undance of
thy gracious favors ^o to enrich my needy soul, that (...) may be grateful
unto thy belo^ed Son, and pleasing unto thee. And being honored with so great
and high a Title as to be called ^hyne, I may endeavor to the vt^rmost of my
power so to behave ^y self, that I may in all my acti^ns show my self a true
child of ^^ch a Mother. Amen. Salve Re^^na.

THE III. MEDITATION. Sancta Dei genitrix ora pro nobis. Holy Mother of God,
pray for us.
THIS most excellent Title of Mother of God is given to the Blessed Virgin, by
the holy Evangelists in diverse places. S. Matthe^ recounting the genealogy of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, deriueth it from Abraham, and brings it to
S. Joseph, Spouse of the Blessed Virgin, De qua natus est Jesus, qui v^catur
Christus; of whom was borne Jesus who is called Christ. S John speaking of the
wedding in Cana of Gal^lee, says: Erat matter Jesus ibi, The Mother of Jesus was
there. An^ at the death of our Blessed Savior making mention of her constant
fortitude at the foot of the Cross writes: Stabat iuxta Crucem Jesus Matter
eius: Jesus his Mother stood at the foot of the Cross. In the Acts of the
Apostles, S Luke also honors her with the same renowned title of the Mother
of God, all which being invincible testimonies need no further proof.

1. First then, I will consider how this excellent title of Mother of God, is
the chief ground and foundation of all her rare, and singular prerogatives.
Why should this heavenly Queen be called, and be both Mother and Virgin?
Because so it was fit for the B. Mother of God. Wherefore preserved from all
spot, both of actual and original sin? Because she was the B^ Mother of
God. Why replenished with grace above all other Creatures? For the same reason
that she was Mother of God. Why more Holy then all Saints and Angels
together? Because such sanctity was agreeable to the renowned title of Mother
of God. She was elected the divine Tabernacle of the most Highest, Et
sanctificauit Tabernaculum suu^ altissimus, and thus he sanctified his holy
Tabernacle. This most noble Title therefore being given her, by reason of her
profound humility, the ground of all virtues, was the beginning of all the rest
her singular favors.

2. But to diue a little further into botomles depth of this matchless Title;
let us consider the greatness thereof. If there could be found some noble Lady on
earth, whose Father should excel all the world in power, riches and authority;
whose Son did go beyond all creatures in wisdom wealth, and nobility; and
lastly whose Spouse did equal them both in all noble acts and veriuous
proceedings: if such a Lady could be found for her singular virtues and rare
qualityes, worthy to be acknowledged of such a Father, to be honored by such a
Son, and to be beloved of such a Spouse; what titles could this gracious
Queen be honored with, but such as both by Father, Son, and Spouse must
needs be excellent? Consider then the ever Blessed and most happy Virgin Mary,
daughter unto Almighty God, Mother to his only Son, and Espoused to the Holy
Ghost; who for her profound humility, Angelical chastity, most burning
Charity, and the rest of her admirable virtues, is most worthily and tenderly
beloved of them all. And shall we not think they would honor her with such a
title, as might both answer the greatness of them that gave it, and be most
honorable to her that should receive it? Yea doubtless. And what title could
this be but, Sancta Dei Genitrix, Holy Mother of God, Matter Jesus, Mother of
Jesus.

3. I will then consider the great dignity of this most noble Title. For the
better understanding whereof we may contemplate how in the Eternal Wisdom of
God the Father, the second person of the (...) Trinity, was from all Eternity
borne of his Father without a Mother, and at the decreed time being to be borne
of a Mother without a Father, he made choice of the Blessed Virgin, which was
the greatest dignity which any creature could be exalted unto; as this ^acred
Queen did most humbly acknowledge and praise God for ^he same, in her divine
Canticle, when she did also prophesy how ^or his cause all people should call
^er Blessed: Ecce enim ex hoc beatam ^e dicent omnes generationes: Behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me Blessed. Therefore most worthily this
honorable title is placed in the beginning (...) her Letanyes, as the chief
^^ound of all the rest of her noble (...) devout appellations. This I say in
the beginning, as the greatest and most worthy to be engrafted in the hearts of
all such as desire to come unto her, for the sweet milk of true and cordial
devotion. And as little Infants never cease crying and calling after their
Mothers, or Nurses, until they see them; and never content until they come to
suck the full duggs, and embrace the paps from whence they draw their
sustenance: So ought we to cry after this our loving Mother, and think our
selves and souls robbed until we both find her, and taste the sweet milk of
deuotion^ of which S. Augustine spoke, when imagining himself between the
sacred wounds of Christ, and the full duggs of the B. Virgin, (...) said: hinc
pascor a vulnere, hinc ^^ctor ab vbere. On the one side I a^^ fed with the
precious blood (...) Christ, on the other with the deuotion-flowing teats of
the Blessed Virgin; of which two dainties S. Bonauenture also gloryed, and said
he made himself a most sweet potion.

O ever Blessed, Colloquium.
and most happy Mother of God, who notwithstanding so great a Title, and high
dignity, do not disdain to be the Mother of sinners; vouchsafe to cast thy
humble eye upon a desolate and forsaken Orphane, who cries with the Kingly
Prophet: Tibi derelictus est pauper; orphano tu es adiutrix: Unto thee the
poor is left, and thou will be a help unto the Orphane: Ad te suspiramus
gementes and flentesin hac lachrymarum valle. Eia ergo aduocata nostra, illos
tuos misericordes oculos ad nos convert. Unto thee, O sacred Queen we cry,
groaning and lamenting in this vale of miseryes. Come therefore, O most Blessed
advocate turn thy merciful eyes toward us, hear our humble pititions,
Sancta Dei genitrix ora pro nobis: holy Mother of God pray for us, that we may
escape the manifold dangers of this wicked life; that we may follow thy divine
and humble footsteps; that we may not only in word and heart acknowledge thee
the Mother of God, but also come to behold thy glorious Crown, which thou
have received, answerable to so worthy a Title and so great a dignity. And that
so we may rejoice with thee for all eternity, Amen. Salve Regina etc.

THE IIII. MEDITATION. Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora pro nobis. Holy Virgin of
Virgins, pray for us.
CONCERNING this Epitheton, we may consider three principal points. First the
dignity of Virginity. Secondly why the Blessed Virgin, is called Virgo
Virginum, Virgin of Virgins. Lastly of what esteem virginity is with God, and
our B. Lady.

1. The first consideration of the excellency of Virginity, we find expressed
and counseled by Christ, when in the mystical parable of the three kinds of
Eunuchs, Mat. 19.
the ^ast, says he, are such as have made themselves chaste, for the kingdom of
heaven: and to show the difficulty in attaining to this excellent virtue, Matt.
13.
he adds, Qui potest capere, Luke 18.
capiat: he that can reach unto it, let him embrace and follow it. The like
proof we have of the dignity of virginal chastity, out of another parable,
where Christ comparing his holy Church to a good land, whereof one part
yealdeth fruit thirty fold, Cypr. de hab. virg. Hier. l. 1. in Iou. August. de
sancta virg. c. 44. and 45.
another sixty, and some an hundred: understanding hereby, as some Fathers
expound, the chastity of honest wives, devout widows, and virtuous Virgins;
amongst which, as the chiefest, Virginity brings forth an hundred fold. S.
Paul also much extolleth the quiet condition of virginal life, 1. Cor. 7.
because as it is more free from troubles and vexations of the flesh, so it is
an estate more sequestered from earthly pleasures, and therefore more fit for
the service of God.

Moreover the excellency of this celestial gift may be gathered out of the
common and continual practice of the Church, and the high esteem the holy
Fathers ever had of this so precious a jewel. S. Ambrose calls it Principalis
virtus, Lib. 2. de Virg.
the chiefest virtue, adding that no wit is able to comprehend the dignity
thereof, because it exceeds the bonds of Nature, pierces the clouds, passes
above the Stars, goes beyond the quires of Angels, and takes the Son of God
for Spouse. De disc. and habit. Virg.
S. Cyprian calls virginity, the flower of the Church, the grace, and
ornament of spiritual favor, the lively image of our Savior, deciphring his
sanctity, and the more illustrious portion of the Church and flock of Christ. I
omit others, for by these we may sufficiently understand the excellency and
dignity of virginity considered in it self.

2. Consider why, and with how great reason the B. Mother of God is called
Virgin of Virgins. Where we may contemplate, how this sacred Queen was the
first, that ever offered her virginity to God by Holy Vow; and this either in
the Temple at her Presentation being of three years of age, where she was
brought up until by divine ordination she was espoused to S. Joseph: or, as some
think, she made this laudable vow (being prevented with the use of reason) in
her Mothers womb. Howsoever it was all with uniform consent agree that in
this she was the first, and therefore, most worthily entitled the Virgin of
Virgins.

Besides, she may most justly be named Virgin of Virgins, because in her
unspotted life she was the most perfect model of all virtues, the most exact
pattern of virginity, and the most lively example for all Virgins, whereby to
frame their actions, and some their lives, as S. Ambrose witnesses: Sit vobis
(says he) tamquam in imagine descripta virginitas, vitaque Beatae Mariae;
Ambr. l. 2. de Virg.
de qua velut in speculo refulget species Castitatis, and forma virtutis. Let
the virginity, and life of the Blessed Virgin Mary be unto you as it were
engraven in an image, from which as in a lookinglasse the beams of Chastity,
and the form of virtue do yeald a most beautiful luster. For here you shall
find, both what to fly, and what to follow. And furthermore to stir up in our
hearts an earnest desire to learn of such a Mistress to follow such a guide,
and level our lives to such a rule, he sets forth her virtue and nobility
as follows: Primus discendi ardor, nobilitas est magistri, the first and
chiefest motive of the desire of learning, is the nobility of the master: then
further; Quid nobilius Dei matre, quid splendidius ea quam splendour elegit?
What more noble then the Mother of God, what more bright then she whom
brightness has elected and chosen for his Mother? She therefore for nobility
deserves the Title of Mistress, and for her bright shining virtue worthy the
most exact pattern of all perfection.

Again she may be said to be the Virgin of Virgins, because unto the honor of
her virginity was joined the fruitfulness of a Mother, never the like heard of
before, never the like hoped for hereafter: Virgo perpetua, matter and Virgo
(says S. Hierome) a perpetual Virgin and Mother, or Virgin Mother, and
therefore Mother of Virgins, and Virgin of Virgins. This is the Eastern gate
(as S. Hierom expounds) always shut, always shining, mentioned by the
Prophet Ezechiel, graced with the Title of Mother, yet without detriment or
hurt of her unspotted virginity, always remaining a Virgin: therefore we ought
to call upon her, and earnestly to cry unto her, Sancta virgo Virginu^ ora pro
nobis. Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray for us.

3. The third point may be to consider, how grateful this virtue is in the
sight of God, and how pleasing unto the Blessed Virgin. So highly esteemed in
the sight of God, that being to effect one miraculous work, that should be the
wonder of the world, that is, to wrap himself in the slender veyle of our
humanity, and become man amongst men; he would not take that mantle, but of a
Virgin, and a Virgin dedicated unto himself by a perpetual vow of chastity:
Virginitate placuit, Humilitate concepit, says S. Bernard: By virginity she
seemed pleasing unto him, and by Humility she became his Mother, or (as S.
Chrysostom says) by Chastity. This is that Altar of Perfumes, called Altar
Thymiamatis, so pleasing unto God. This is that dainty Rose of Saron springing
from the pricky thorns of mortification: this that beautiful lylly of the
humble valleys, which admits not the least touch or stain: it is that
flourishing flower of the field, which being roted in the B. virgin, has now
sprouted forth so many branches, that we may well see and say, Flores
apparuerunt in terra nosstra: Flowers have appeared in our Land; and being
virginal flowers, and flowers of virginity, Adducentur Regi virgins post eam:
After her, troops of virgens shall be brought to the King of Kings, to Christ
the true Spouse of holy Virgins. For, Oleum effusum nomen tuum ideo
Adolescentulae dilexerunt te. Thy name, O Lord, is oil powered out, therefore
young virgins love thee, and following thy divine steps they cry: In odorem
vnguentorum tuoru^ curremus: We will run after the sweet smell of thy
precious oyntements.

Virginity must also be most pleasing to the B. Virgin: for she knowing best
the value of such dainty flowers, and considering how much they are esteemed by
her sweet Son, must needs have a particular love thereto, and a peculiar care
thereof that such choice flowers be not defiled, or trampled on by incursio^ of
bruit beasts. And as one that is the first founder of some holy and Religious
Order, has a most diligent care both to defend and advance his religious
Institute, and takes great delight in the increase and progress thereof: so
the B. Virgin being the first that ever found out this Angelical life, the
first that laid the ground and foundation of vowed Chastity, the first that
displayed the banner, under which all chaste virgins ought manfully to fight, and
under which so many have already win the goal, gotten the victory, and worn
the Crown: She, I say, must needs take great delight in the groth of these so
fair flowers of her loving Son, as he takes great content in gathering of
them. Witness those beautiful flowers of virginity and constant pillars of
renowned Chastity, transplanted by our Saviors ^and from this garden of misery
unto the heavenly place of Paradise S. Catherine, S. Agatha, S. Lucy, S. Agnes,
S. Cecily, S. Winifride, and thousands more in like manner, who rather made
choice to loose their lives, then live to be deprived of so rare a Jewel, and
with the vnspoted Ermyn seemed rather to dye then be defiled.

And thus having viewed the excellency of Virginity in it self, the esteem it
has in the sight of God, the prize it bears with the Blessed Virgin: and
considering how truly she is Virgin of Virgins; let us stir up in our selves a
reverend love unto this excellent virtue, and desire this Virgin of Virgins to
pray for us, that we may every one in his estate, and according to his calling
imitate this glorious Virgin, in keeping our souls and bodies as the chaste
vessels and chosen tabernacles of the Holy Ghost, bringing forth fruit, some
thirty, some sixty, and some ^n hundred fold, whereby we shall be most pleasing
to God, be^oued of the B. Virgin, and shall ^e of the happy number of that
^elect band, of so many thousands of most holy and unspotted virgins whose
privilege is to follow the Lamb wheresouer, and whithersoeuer he goes: to
which effect let us say, Aue Maris stella etc.

THE V. MEDITATION. Matter Christi, ora pro nobis. Mother of Christ, pray for us.
HAVING contemplated the excellent dignity of the Holy Mother of God, let us
now consider her as Mother of Christ, which although it be the same in effect,
yet here we will ponder some particular points, as it were derived from this
word Christ, whereby it may the better appear what dignity has redounded to
the B. Virgin by being called Mother of Christ. Christ therefore, is as much to
say, as Anointed, because he was indeed the anointed of his Father, Vnxit te
Deus, Deus tuus, O God, thy God has anointed thee, and that Oleo laetitiae
prae consortibus tuis, with oil of gladness above thy fellows. By which divine
unction is signified the abundance of heavenly grace, wherewith the sacred
Humanity of Christ was beautifyed above al others.

Priests, Prophets and Kings are wont to be anointed, to signify the
particular grace which they have given them to perform their functions: and
Christ Jesus being both Priest, Prophet, and King, ought by all titles to be
Christ that is Anointed, so that by Christ we understand as it were the
flowing fountain of all graces, from whose fullnes we al receive to satisfy our
wants. Now if we seek the head of this divine fountain, we shall find it has
one beginning in heaven from all eternity of his Father, another on earth in
fine temporum, toward the end of the world, Homo in fine temporum.
when being made Man he came to pay the ransom of our sins, and that is his
blessed Mother, here justly entitled Matter Christi, Mother of Christ.

Let us now consider four propertyes of oil, which will in some sort declare
unto us the wonderful effects of this divine oil, whereby the greatness of the
benefit we have received of the B. Virgin (who was Mother unto this Anointed
Son of God, and brought him into this world among us) may appear the more.

The first property of Oil is to feed us, and this S. Bernard notes, and
experience teaches, and Christ is he who is our true food, without whom no
soul can live; for unless we eat his flesh, and drink his blood, we cannot
avoid eternal death. The Israelites in the desert were cloyed with the
heavenly Manna, and said, they were weary of so light meats; therefore by
the powerful hand of Almighty God they were soarely chastized with fiery
Serpents, the stinging whereof could not be cured, but by the beholding of the
brazen serpent: So if we be cloyed with this divine food, which the Blessed
Virgin has brought unto us; what can we expect but the annoyance and biting of
fiery serpe^ts, that is of unruly passions, disordered, and disordinate lusts
of the flesh, never ceasing to afflict us until we cast our eyes upon our B.
Savior nailed to the Cross, sigured in the brazen serpent; which if we do
with true devotion, firm faith, and hearty repentance of our sins, we shall
be cu^ed, and our soul shall find it self refreshed with the oil of
glade^es; for as S. Augustine says: de ^ccato dolet, and de dolor gaudet, a
sinner grieueth for the sin committed, and rejoices that he is sorrowful
for it.

The second property gathered out of the same S. Bernard is, that it gives
light: and as Christ himself auerreth, he is the light of the world, Lux sum
mu^di: I am the light of the world: therefore who soever finds himself
oppressed with the dark clouds of dull ignorance, let him have recourse unto
this divine lamp of burning oil; and let him with the blind man call upon him
and say, Lord have mercy on me: and if most bountiful Jesus shall demand what
thou would have? Thou shall answer Lord, that I may see light. What light?
The light of thy celestial doctrine, of thy heavenly grace, of thy eternal
glory.

Another property of oil is to cure wounds, as the same Holy Saint records,
of which we have an evident proof out of the parable of the miserable man, who
descending from Jerusalem to Hierico, fell into the hands of thieves, and
being sore wounded, was cured by oil and wine. The precious blood of Christ,
is the medicinable oil powered forth for the cure of our souls, and salve of
our soars; this must be the only remedy of our bleeding wounds.

The last property of oil is (as S. Gregory writes) to swim above all other
liquors, which is the true effect of the grace of Christ, to make them who are
endued therewith to swim above al waters of tribulation; and though for a time
they may seem to be cast down, because we see them encountered with so many
changes and chances; yet they will come up to their natural place again, and
like the flourishing palm grow the faster under the greatest burden, for that
is to flourish like the palm, as the Kingly Prophet writes, Iustus vt palma
florebit.

These are the four excellent propertyes of oil which do show unto us the
admirable cures that Christ by his divine grace works in our souls. And the
Blessed Virgin being called Mother of Christ, if we want food to our souls,
we must call to her, that she would vouchsafe to pray unto her most loving
Son to feed us. If we be destitute of light, that she would entreat him to
enlighten us. If we be wounded, that she would desire him to cure us. If we be
oppressed and ready to be drowned in the depth of misery, that she would by
her Motherly intercession pray him to relieve us with his mercy, that we fail
not in his cause, but like unto oil, always strive to ascend, that so we may
show our selves to have participation of that divine oil Christ, unto whose
ever Blessed Mother we must have recourse, saying: Matter Christi ora pro nobis,
Mother of Christ pray for us.

THE VI. MEDITATION. Matter diuinae gratiae, ora pro nobis. Mother of divine
grace, pray for us.
THIS Divine Tile may be given to the Blessed Virgin for three reasons, which
yeald us three devout points of Meditation.

1. The first reason why she is called Mother of divine grace, is, because she
is the mother of Christ who is the author of all graces, and favors, and
replenished with such abundance of grace, that not unfitly he may be called
Grace it self, whose Blessed Mother was the Queen of Angels, of whom we
speak, and therefore most rightly entitled Mother of Divine grace. For if we
consider the menifold benefits which we have received from our Savior by his
coming amongst us, and the abundance of grace we may draw from the Holy
Sacraments, which he has left as fountains continually flowing like the
seauen-headed Nilus, to which we may run at our pleasure, to refresh our needy
and thirsty souls: These things Isay, considered, and how he chose the Blessed
Virgin to be the long desired ship, that could bring us in, to our haven at
once such a precious Jewel, as might not only supply al our wants, but also
make us exceeding rich; we may with great reason say, Mother of divine grace,
pray for us.

2. The second reason of this noble Title is, because of the great abundance
of spiritual graces, wherewith this sacred Queen was endowed, as partly we
have said in the former Meditations, and after shall more plainly appear. She
was saluted by the heavenly Ambassador Gratia plena, (...).
or as the Greek word imports Singularly gracious, because by reason of her
great merits, she was above all creatures pleasing unto God, and for this great
abundance of grace produced in her blessed soul, partly, by the gift of God,
and partly by her own cooperating thereto, she may fitly be called Mother of
Divine grace.

And if we confider with attention how this grace did increase in the Blessed
Virgin, we cannot choose, but acknowledge her to be the Mother of divine grace.
For as many Deuines affirm, the B. Virgin by every act doubled the grace she
had before received and this for the space of all her life which was 72. years
(as the best Writers do prove) whereby in the end of her life the grace
wherewith she was endued, was almost infinite, and far surpasses the weak
reach of humane reason to unfold. How rightly then do we call her, Mother of
divine grace?

3. The third reason of this appellation is, because she is a perpetual
Advocate for us unto her beloved Son, and does by her holy intercession
obtain grace and pardon for our sins. For as S. Bernard devoutly writes,
Quidquid nos habere voluit, id per Mariam transire disposuit: Whatsoever God
would have us to receive, that would he have to pass through the hands of
the Blessed Virgin. And for this cause she is said to be as it were the Neck,
and Throat of the Church and Christ the Head. And as all that maintaynes the
body, passes from the head through the Throat to the chief parts of the body
from the which it is duly distributed to all the rest of the members: so all
that comes from Christ unto his Spouse the Church, he will have to pass
through the sacred hands of the Blessed Virgin, unto the whole body, and every
member of the Holy Church: and therefore we say, Matter diuinae gratiae, ora pro
nobis, Mother of divine grace pray for us.

O happy Mother of divine grace, Colloquium.
who by thy profound humility, unspotted chastity, unspeakable charity, and the
rest of thy excellent virtues, did bring into the world the author of grace
and wast thy self replenished with all fullnes thereof, and art as a perpetual
conduct to convey his divine favors unto us; let us so be strengthened by thy
divine favor and holy intercession, that we may in such sort show our selves
true children of divine grace, that thou may not refuse to be our Mother, or
deny us to be thy children; but according to thy Name, as thou art called
Mother of mercy, for the love thou show unto repentant sinners; so also show
thy self Mother of divine grace, in obtaining for us some portion of that
celestial gift which may make us truly heyrs of that eternal Kingdom, of which
this divine grace is the only pledge, and surest warrant. Amen. Aue Maria.

THE VII. MEDITATION. Matter purissima, ora pro nobis. Most pure Mother, pray
for us.
IN this Title of Purity we will not speak of the Virginal purity of the
Queen of heaven, of which we have said somewhat already in the Title of Virgin
of Virgins, and shall add more in the Meditations following: but we will now
speak of the unspotted Purity of the B. Virgin, from the blemish and stain of
sin.

1. First therefore we may consider, how free this B. Virgin did always keep
her self from the foul and ugly blot of all mortal sin. Our first Mother
Eve was called the Mother of the living, but was indeed Mother of the dead;
for being seduced and subdued by the serpents subtilty, she intised and
deceived Adam to sin also, by whose disobedience we all remained subject not
only to death, but also unto thousands of miseryes. But the B. Virgin, mutans
Euae nomen, changing the name of Eve, did always remain united with God, and
so crushed and bruized the Serpents head, that withal his crafty guiles and
subtle tricks he could never supplant this gracious Queen, to give but the
least concent unto any unlawful act, or to speak any hurtful word, or have
the least thought that might tend into any mortal sin: but she always kept
her self most pure ^n thought, word, and deed, and therefore most vvorthily
deserves the shining Title of most Pure and Unspotted; giving us also courage
when the foul monster and enemy of mankind shall assault us, to cast our eyes
upon her, and say, Matter purissima, ora pro nobis, most pure Mother pray for
us. For the Devil being excessive proud, and insolent, and having been
conquered and foiled by this glorious Queen, he dares not stay at the
invocation of her sacred Name, nor can he endure to hear us call for her
sovereign aid and assistance, who is most pure, and most ready to help all
those who truly call upon her.

2. The second point yealdeth us matter to meditate and ponder, how this pure
and unspotted Virgin Mother, did not only keep her self free from all tainture
of mortal sin, but did also avoid the least blemish of any venial sin,
into which ordinarily even the most Just do fall, and that many times a day, as
holy Writ does witness in these words: Septies in die cadit iustus, and
resurgit: seven times a day the just man does fall, and rise again, which is
to be understood of small sins, and light offenses. Neither are they termed
light, because we do carelessly commit them, or make light of them (for one of
them ought not to be committed to save the whole world) but they be so called,
because they be of their own nature such, as they do not extinguish the grace
of God in the Just man, nor are directly against Charity, and therefore may
stand both with grace and charity, and may the easier be forgiven. Yet I say
from the little blemishes that taint even the best, this B. Virgin was always
free, ever so perfectly united with Almighty God, and so wholly employed in his
divine service, that the least blast of any venial sin, could never stayne
the flourishing beauty of her excellent virtues. This consideration made S.
Augustine say, Cum de peccatis agitur, Aug. l. de nature. and great. cap. 36.
nolo de B. Virgin mentionem fieri, When there is any speech of sin, I will
have no mention made of the B. Virgin; for right well he knew how free she was,
not only from the deadly wounds of mortal sin, but also from the least
shadow of any venial sin, and therefore most pure and worthyly called upon
by that Title, Most pure Mother, pray for us.

3. The third point is to contemplate the undefiled purity of the B. Virgin,
even from the general spot of original sin, unto which all the children of
Adam were subject, if they descended by natural propagation, as this sacred
Queen did; yet by particular privilege was she excepted from that general
law. For the infinite wisdom of Almighty God did not think it fit that she
who was chosen from all eternity to be the Mother unto his only Son, should
ever be said to have been in the power of Satan. And therefore with his
particular grace did prevent the effect of the general curse, whereby our most
pure Mother did remain most beautiful in the sight of God, pleasing unto his
Son; and even from her first beginning, in her immaculate Conception,
espoused unto the Holy Ghost by heavenly grace. And by this indeed the Title of
Most pure does fitly agree unto her. For we may say she was pure in that she
fled all mortal sin; yet more pure in that no venial sin could ever taint
her; but in this most pure, that even from the spot of original sin she was
preserved, and by singular favor exempted from that curse, as indeed befitted
the chosen Mother of God.

O most pure, and unspotted Mother, Colloquium.
cast thy divine eyes upon thy devout servants, and let not the impurity of our
former sins, defile us. We must all confess, we are conceived the children o^
wrath, and borne in wickedness by original sin; yet, Matter purissima ora pro
nobis, most pure Mother, pray for us: That as we have by Baptism drowned the
one, so we may, by true Penance and Contrition wash away the other, that being
sprinkled with the dew of divine grace, and made more white then snow, we may
appear most joyfully in the sight of thy sweet Son, whose precious blood has
been the medicinable river Jordan, to wash away our Leprosy. Pray for us, O
sacred Queen, that we may so imitate this thy Angelical purity, and be most
pure children of a most unspotted Mother. Amen. O gloriosa Domina etc.

THE VIII. MEDITATION. Matter Castissimae, ora pro nobis. Most chaste Mother,
pray for us.
WE have already in the fourth Meditation spoken of the excellency of the
virginity of this powerful Queen. Now are we to consider the renowned title
of her singular Chastity, by which we salute her when we say, Most chaste Mother,
pray for us In this Angelical virtue of Chastity, I find three degrees, which
if we consider how eminent they were all in the B. Virgin, we shall easily
perceive how worthily she is called Matter Castissima.

1. The first degree of Chastity is conjugal, that is, such as may be kept
betwixt man and wife, at least for a time, as S. Paul counsels those that be
married to do, that they might pray the better, and be the fitter for the
service of God. This degree of Chastity, the B. Virgin had in the highest
perfection; for although she were truly despoused to S. Joseph, and was his
undoubted wife; yet as S. Gregory says, he was but Custos integerrimae
Castitatis, the keeper of her most pure Chastity. For as the sacred Text of
holy Scripture does lay open unto us, before they ever came together the
mystery of the incarnation of Christ was known, though not as a Mystery; and
therefore, as S. Hierome writes, Celabat silentio, cu^us Mysterium nesciebat,
he coue^ed with silence the mystery he knew not: So that the B. Virgin was a
wife, but always most chaste, and therefore called a Most chaste Mother.

2. The second degree of Chastity is of holy Widows, who after the death of
their husbands most earnestly embrace this heavenly virtue. In this also the B.
Virgin was most eminent: for it is very probable that S. Joseph was departed
this life before the Passion of our Savior. And therefore Christ commended his
B. Mother to S. John, as himself witnesses; after whose death, the B. Virgin
lead a widows life, and was the mirror of all chaste Widows. Besides she
may be said to be a Widow after the Ascension of Christ, in that, she was left
as it were, Viduata columba, a dove without her mate, always groaning, ever
mourning like the forsaken Turtle, until she came to meet him again in the
happy palace of eternal bliss: she therefore was a most chaste Widdovv, and
that in a most remarkable manner.

3. The third and most renowned degree of this noble Virtue, is called
Virginal Chastity, which is, when Virgins wholly dedicate themselves unto
Christ by holy vow, and take him for their only spouse, as the B. Virgin was
the first that ever did, binding her self by vow of perpetual chastity to be
wholy and only his; after whose rare example so many thousands of holy
Virgins have follovved with undaunted courage, and many of them lost their
lives in the just defense of this worthyly esteemed virtue. And how eminent the
B. Virgin was in this, we may easily gather out of that which has been said
of her Chaste Virginity.

And by these three degrees, which we find most eminent in the B. Virgin, we
may easily conceive with how great reason she is entitled, Matter castissima,
most chaste Mother. We must therefore move our selves with an earnest desire,
and loving affection toward this virtue, and no less to wards the B. Virgin,
who so greatly excelled in it. Colloquium.
And with these desires we must fall down before this chaste Mother to implore
her aid and help, for the better accomplishing what we desire, and say Virgo
singularis, inter omnes mitis, nos culpis solutos, mites fac and castos: Virgin
without peer, and amongst all others most mild, we being cleansed from our
sins by thy holy intercession, make us also both mild and chaste. Amen. Then
we may conclude, to this effect, with the devout Hymn, Aue Maris stella.

THE IX. MEDITATION. Matter Inuiolata, ora pro nobis. Undefiled Mother, pray for
us.
BY this most worthy Title is signified unto us the admirable combination of
the dignity of Virginity, joined with the honor of Mother; a thing naturally
impossible, and only by the omnipotent hand of God to be brought to pass.
Therefore in this Title we are to consider this wonderful work of admiration,
and to praise the divine providence of Almighty God; who to prepare our hard
heart to the great mystery of the Incarnation of his only Son, would begin
with this admirable Conception, long before discovered by the holy Prophet
Isay, Ecce Virgo concipiet, and pariet filium: Behold a Virgin shall conceive,
and bring forth a Son, that is, neither the strange conception, nor desired
birth of that miraculous Son, should any way impeach or diminish the dignity
of Virginity, and yet he should bring with him the fecundity of a Mother:
therefore the said Prophet as it were inuiting us to admiration, says, Ecce,
behold. And the holy Prophet Hieremy called it Nouum, a new thing, as indeed it
was both strange and new. She was a chaste Virgin, yet a fruitful Mother, and
therefore a Virgin Mother, Matter inuiolata, an undefiled Mother. For how could
she be defiled, who conceived by the work of the Holy Ghost? how could she be
spotted, who as S. Ambrose teaches, Corpus sine corporis contagione concepit,
conceived the sacred body of Christ without any contagion of her own.

Let us therefore by this both praise the goodness of God, for chosing the B.
Virgin an instrument of this divine miracle of miracles; Colloquium.
and also congratulate our happiest Queen, that she was elected to so high a
dignity, and of so great esteem in the sight of God, and so the more powerful
to help us, when we say, Matter inuiolata ora pro nobis, undefiled mother, pray
for us. For calling upon her by this divine Title, is as much as to say, for
the love of that divine work of admiration, wherein thou were made Mother of
God remaining a Virgin, pray for us, For the joy thou did conceive in this
divine Mystery, pray for us. In honor of this unspeakable combinatio^ of the
venerable title of Mother, with the shinning Iustre of virginity, pray for us:
and obtain, that by thy powerful prayers and holy intercession we may be
worthy to conceive thy Blessed Son sweet Jesus in our souls. Amen. Salve
Regina.

THE X. MEDITATION. Matter Intemgrata, ora pro nobis. Untouched Mother, pray for
us.
BY this Epitheton, we must consider another excellent property of the B.
Virgins chaste renown. For as in the former title we did contemplate how she
was Mother, yet without all stayne of her angelical purity: so here we may
ponder the unspotted beauty of her chaste virginity, not any whit diminished, or
so much as touched with that wonderful access of this new title of Mother,
and therefore most aptly she is entitled, An untouched Mother.

The Lilly which is the chief symbol and figure of Chastity, ^s of it own
nature of most dainty condition. To the eye most pleasing, to the smell most
fragra^t; but if it come to be handled, or touched, it is so soon bleamished,
that it loses both the exquisite smell, and the excellent beauty, so the
renowned virtue of chaste Virgins will not admit the least touch of any earthly
affection, and worldly love, without a perpetual stayne and utter disgrace of
so rare a virtue. And because this beautiful Lilly of the valleys, the B.
Mother of God, was Lilium inter spinas, a Lilly a midst thorns; yet ever
unspotted, undefiled, and untouched, therefore she is called Matter intemerata.
Of this most pure Virgin the holy Catholic Church sings: Benedicta and
venerabilis es Virgo Maria, quae sine tactu pudoris inuentaes Matter Saluatoris.
Blessed and venerable art thou, O Virgin Mary, who without any touch of thy
chastity did become the Mother of God.

Let us see further how this admirable work was effected. She, as the most
beautiful flower of virginity, was replenished with great abundance of grace,
and so saluted by the heavenly Ambassador, when he denounced unto her that she
should become Mother of God: yet our sacred Queen replied, in the behalf of
her unspotted purity, asking how that could come to pass, being she was a
vowed Virgin? To which the Angel answered, that it was a work to be
accomplished by the divine help of the holy Ghost; and therefore the child she
was to bear, was to be the Son of God. The humble obedient Virgin, diuing in
the depth of her own nothing, answered withal submission, and most perfect
resignation, Ecce Ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum: Behold the
hand-mayd of our Lord, let his will be fulfilled in me, according to thy speech.
And so by this humble consent, by this admirable fiat, she became indeed Mother
of God. Behold then how she was made Mother, yet with the integrity of her
virginal chastity. By a word, with a fiat, the heavens were created, the
Sun, the Moon, and all the glittering light of heaven; by a word, with a
fiat the earth was made, the Sea, the Land, and all things else that sea and
land contaynes: now (O miracle of miracles) by one word by one fiat of a
Virgin, God himself is made Man, conceived by a chaste consent, borne of a pure
and unspotted Mother, Matter intemerata.

O divine Mother, let the sweet perfumes of this Angelical virtue, so enter
into our senses, so wrappe our understanding, Colloquium.
and so ravish our will, that we may admit no other thought, or imagination, no
other affections or desires, but such as may bring forth this sweet smell, this
fragrant perfume of purity; that we may be grateful in the eyes of our Creator,
pleasing in the presence of our Redeemer, and in thy sight worthy to be
beloved. Amen. Aue Maris stella.

THE XI. MEDITATION. Matter amabilis, ora pro nobis. Lovely Mother, pray for us.
MANY causes may be assigned and many reasons found why the B. Virgin is said
to be lovely, which I will endeavor to reduce to three general heads, because
I will not exceed my wonted breuity.

1. The first cause or reason, which both makes her lovely, and moves us to
love her, may be her excellent beauty, which did so abound in this lovely
Queen, as the like has not been found in any other. For as our Savior was
the most beautiful of men according to the kingly prophesy, Speciosus forma
prae filijs hominum, beautiful and comely in shape beyond the sons of men:
so the B. Virgin was most beautiful of all the daughters of women; that
whosoever should behold them both, might say, she could not be Mother, but of
so fair a Son, nor he Son, but of so beautiful a Mother. And this beauty
of the B. Virgin (of external beauty and comlines we speak) did consist in a
most perfect proportion of all the lineaments of her sacred body, whereby she
was pulcherima mulierum, the most beautiful of women, and therefore most lovely
in that respect. Neither was her virginal comelynes such as usually does stir
up wanton lusts, or inflame bad desires; but altogether so far contrary, that
who so should behold the beautiful blush of her modest and virginal
countenance, could not chose, but be inflamed with most chaste desires and
Fervent love toward this virtuous Queen.

This then may be given for the first reason of this lovely title, Matter
amabilis. And in this beauty I include her gravity in speech, her modesty in
countenance, her grace in conversation, and the due proportion of all her
actions, being always guided and governed by her inward virtues, of which
here after we shall have occasion to speak more. Judith being to work the
overthrow of proud Holofernes, in defense of her city and people, adorned and
decked her self withal the richest jewels and best or naments she had, and
made herself as beautiful as with her best skill she could, over which Almighty
God cast a splendor, of which holy Writ tells us: Cui Dominus quoque
contulit splendorem, Iud. 10.
unto which beauty our Lord also added a luster. And shall we not then think
of the B. Virgin, whose figure Judith did bear, that after nature had showed
her self in this admirable work, that our Lord also added the chiefest grace
of her excellent beauty? How then could she be but lovely, and therefore, Matter
amabilis.

2. The second cause, and more chief reason of her comelynes (which shall be
the second point) is her inward beauty, that is, her excellent virtue, by the
which deservedly she may be said twice beautiful, and so in the Canticles
she is, and that with a kind of admiration, Quam pulchra es amica mea, quam
pulchra es! How beautiful thou art my beloved, how beautiful! Beautiful by
reason of her outward comelynes, but much more by reason of her inward
virtues: For Omnis gloria filiae Regis ab intus, all the glory of the Kings
daughter is from within.

Here therefore we must consider the singular grace and comely meeting of all
virtues in this gracious Queen; her profound humility; her humble obedience;
her shining purity; her unspeakable modesty; her burning charity; and most
perfect resignation of her self into the hands of God, withal the rest of
her excellent virtues in due time and place, in the best manner, guided by
reason, with exact observation of every circumstance, and as it were Castrorum
acies ordinata, an army of soldiers well ordered. This considered as an
harmony of perfect music, where no voice misseth his right note and tune, no
instrument iarreth, no sound out of order, must make us of force to stand
amazed at the rare composition of her inward beauty, the singular concord of
her matchles virtues, and thus be moved to love and affect her most worthy
person, wherein we find them so perfectly united, and by which indeed she is
Matter amabilis, a lovely Mother.

3. The last general reason, and the third point, is to meditat how much we
are beloved of her, and in how princely and bountiful manner she deals with
us. For nothing moves more to love, then to know we are beloved, and since
love can never be repayed but by love, seeing she has showed her self so
lovely a Mother unto us, we are bound in all gratitude and dutiful respect, to
the uttermost of our power, to requite it. She had but one only Son, whom
she loved far more then all the Mothers in the world love their children; yet
was she content that in his infancy he should be our companion, at his last
supper our food, at his death the price of our Redemption, and now she
continually prays for us, that he may be our endless joy, and happiness. How
could she show her self more loving, or how more lovely, then like another
Abraham to offer up her own beloved Son at the commandment of Almighty God,
only for our good? Let us therefore lovingly and devoutly say Matter amabilis
ora pro nobis, lovely Mother, pray for us. O gloriosa Domina etc.

THE XII. MEDITATION. Matter Admirabilis, ora pro nobis. Admirable Mother, pray
for us.
IN this admirable title we must first suppose the force of this world
Admirable; for it does import some strange and wounderfull thing which is cause
of admiration: and from hence miracles do take their name, because being beyond
our natural reach, they make us admire. But if we consider the virtuous life,
the miraculous death or departure, and the excessive glory of the B. Virgin, we
shall not only see how justly this Title is applied unto her, but also with
how great reason we may say, Matter admirabilis, admirable Mother pray for us.

1. First then, in a brief and compendious manner, we are to call to mind the
admirable life of the B. Virgin. Admirable was her co^ception, obtained by
prayer and vow, denounced by an Angel, of aged and barren parents, without the
spot of original sin: all these things are great causes of admiration.
Admirable was her strange Nativity, borne in the field (as S. John Damascen
witnesses) in a certain grange of her Fathers, among the sweet tuned notes of
innocent bleating Lambs, as one who was to be the Mother to the immaculate
Lamb of God, designed to be slain for ransom of us all; or as one who was
to bring us the true sheep-heard of our souls, who would have most tender
care of us. Admirable, in that she was prevented with the use of reason
either in her Mothers womb, or at the third year of her age, when she was
offered up and presented in the Temple. Admirable in her life and conversation,
and above al admirable in that she was both Mother and Virgin. Admirable also
in her constancy, at the foot of the cross, admirable in knowledge, in grace,
and in all kind of virtue. These things, and the like considered, will give us
perfect understanding how she is indeed Matter admirabilis, an admirable Mother.

2. The second point is to ponder the admirable departure of her Blessed soul
out of her sacred body, and out of this life. For she lived 72. years, dyed
not of any disease, or distemper of disordered humors, but of pure love and
longing desire to be with Christ her dearest Son, which was an admirable
death. Besides, all the Apostles then living were miraculously gathered
together at her departure, and most solemly performed the duties of her
exequies. After three days, our Savior descended from heaven accompanied with
his Quires of Angels, and assumpted her into heaven body and soul, where she
was seated in such majesty, and crowned with so great glory, there to reign
for ever.

3. The third point, shall be to admire this Elected Queen of Angels passing
through the Blessed company of Virgins, leaving behind her the constant
Confessors, glorious Martyrs the holy Apostles, Patriarchs, and Prophets;
mounting above the nine Quires of Angels, seated above the Cherubims and
Seraphims in a Royal Throne by her self, as best befitted so glorious and
admirable a Mother. And if we will at length come to the height of admiration,
let us behold this divine Empress vested with the Sun, crowned with stars,
and treading the Moon under her victorious feet, that is, in exceeding great
glory, answerable both to her admirable titles, and singular virtues. For as we
have already meditated, she was enriched with more grace and spiritual gifts,
then al Saints and Angels besides, and therefore must have a Crown of glory
answerable thereunto; which must exceed the glorious crowns of them all. And by
these three points we see how she was admirable in life, admirable in her
departure, admirable in glory, and so most worthily called Matter admirabilis,
an admirable Mother.

O most admirable, and ever happy Mother, who art in all points so much to be
admyred; Colloquium.
be now unto us a powerful advocate that we may (as far as our weakness will
permit) imitate thy admirable virtues in our life; that we may find comfort at
our death and deserve to receive a Crown of glory with thee in heaven for all
eternity. Amen. O gloriosa Domina.

THE XIII. MEDITATION. Matter Creatoris, ora pro nobis. Mother of the Creator,
pray for us.
MANY of these Titles are the same in effect, with Mother of God; yet we will
so consider them, that we may conceive some particular reason of this, and the
like titles, whereby the great dignity of the B. Mother of God may the more
appear. For although sometimes we use to attribute Omnipotency to God the
Father, Wisdom to the Son, and Bounty to the holy Ghost; yet being all but
one God, they are all equally Omnipotent, Wise, and Bountiful: And because in
their outward actions (as the Deuines speak ad extra) they work inseparably,
so that whatsoever the one does, they are said to work all three together;
Creation is as well attributed to the Son, as the Father, and in this sense
the B. Virgin is called Matter Creatoris, Mother of the Creator. For indeed so
he was, since as S. John says, omnia per ipsum facta sunt, all things were
made by him. Here therefore we are to consider how the infinite wisdom of God
found out so sweet means to communicate himself to man, as to shut himself
within the B. Virgins sacred womb, whereby we worthily say, Quem caeli capere
non poterant, tuo gremio contulisti: He whom the wide heavens could not
contain, thou have enclosed in thy sacred womb.

2. Secondly consider, that the B. Virgin being mother of our, and her
Creator, she is the fittest Patroness for all sinners to chose, that the
work of their creation may not be frustrate; seeing then that God has created
all things for us, and our selves for himself, ^t us make recourse to the
Blessed Mother of the Creator of all things, that by her powerful
intercession, we may use them according to the end for which they were created,
and make of them a ^adder to clime and ascend to the ^eight of that dignity,
for which we were ordained by the eternal Providence of God.

3. Thirdly we may contemplat how Creation is nothing else, but the making of a
thing of nothing; and this can only be performed by the Omnipotent hand of God:
we then considering our selves to be nothing, we may say with the Kingly
Prophet, Cor mundum ^rea in me Deus, and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus
meis: Create a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right spirit in my bowels
since of this nothing of ours, he is able to make most excellent work by the
sending his divine spirit amongst us. For as we see the scorched fields in the
middst of Summer refreshed by some gentle shower; or the face of the earth
after a long and tedious winter, renewed by a pleasant spring: so does the
presence of this divine spirit make us all new again. Therefore if we feel
our virtues dying, or our resolution failing, let us not cease to cry, Emitte
spiritum tuum and creabuntur, and renouabis faciem terrae: Send forth, O Lord,
thy holy spirit, and al things now turned to nothing will receive another being,
and thou will renew the face of the earth: and to obtain our petition of the
Creator of all things, let us not be unmindful of his Blessed Mother, but
with this worthy title say, Matter Creatoris ora pro ^obis, Mother of our
Creator pray for us.

THE XIV. MEDITATION. Matter Saluatoris, ora pro nobis. Mother of our Savior,
pray for us.
THIS most Venerable Title does inuit us to contemplat a while upon the sweet
name of Jesus; for Jesus and Savior are the same; and to be Mother of our
Savior is to be the Mother of Jesus: let us therefore with attention
diligently ponder the greatness of the gift, that our devotion toward the
giver may increase the more.

1. First then let us conside^ how we were all lost, in perpetual boundage,
in everlasting thraldom and captivity of sin until this B. Mother brought
(...) forth a Savior, a Redeemer, whose most precious blood was the only
ransom of our sins, whose death was unto us life, and whose bleeding
wounds were the only cure and most sovereign balm of our festred souls.
For dark night she brought us cheerful day; for a hard and sharp winter, a
svveet and pleasant spring; for our mortal vvounds, immortal medicines; for
our pining souls, bread of life; and lastly for all our misery, the Father of
mercyes. This the glorious Angel song unto the seely sheep hards, in the happy
night of his Nativity, Natus est vobis hodie Saluator, qui est Christus Jesus:
You have this day born unto you (of the B. Virgin) a Savior, which is Christ
Jesus. Our lost taste by this svveet Name must be restored, for he is honey in
the mouth: our ears accustomed to iarring discordes, must be reformed by this
svveet music, for he is melody in the ear: our hearts oppressed with grief
and sorrovv, must be replenished with joy, for he is gladness in the heart.

2. Secondly to diue yet deeper into the greatness of this benefit, consider
what joy a poor prisoner would find in his heart, if condemned to a most
ignominious and cruel death, one should come and lovingly offer him his
pardon? What comfort should one find if being by sentence judged to perpetual
banishment, a favorable sentence should recall him, and place him again in his
former honor and ancient dignity? Then let us apply this to the B. Virgin,
who brought us forth a Savior after the sharp sentence of death, to pronounce
us a favorable pardon; and after the doom of perpetual banishment, from the
sight of God, for having incurred his high displeasure, he has brought us
back again, and made us Sons of his heavenly Father, and fellow-heires in
this own kingdom.

3. Thirdly we are to consider the great part our B. Lady had in this happy
work of our Redemption, being chosen by Gods eternal Wisdom to be his
Mother, and the flowing conduit of all happynes to us, that we might with
great devotion say, Matter Saluatoris ora pro nobis, Mother of our Savior, pray
for us. And what better petition can we make unto her, but that we may be
grateful for so great a benefit, that now the price of our Redemption being
paid, we neglect not to make our best profit and commodity thereof, that he may
be truly and indeed a Savior unto us, as she truly was a Mother unto him. For
how great might our ingratitude be accounted, if after so long seeking us, and
so dear buying us, we should neglect his bountiful mercyes, and seem to be
careless of his undeserved liberalityes.

O most Blessed and ever happy Mother of Jesus, assist with thy holy prayers,
Colloquium.
we beseech thee, thy devout suppliants, that thy sweet Son Jesus may be unto
us Jesus, that is a Savior. Behold we call upon thee, Mother of our Savior to
be saved, Mother of Jesus to be healed, Mother of God to be made his true and
faithful children by thy powerful intercession, through the infinite merits of
the Blessed fruit of thy holy womb. Amen.

THE XV. MEDITATION. Virgo Prudentissima, ora pro nobis. Most prudent Virgin,
pray for us.
THAT we may the better understand the reason why the B. Queen of Angels is
called Most prudent, we will produce three or four examples of prudent
Matrones in the old Testament, who may seem to have borne the type and figure
of this prudent Virgin.

1. The first we read in the book of Judith, where this virtuous and prudent
matron, seeing the extreme affliction of her beloved nation to increase in such
sort that the wisest of them were thinking it best to yeald themselves unto the
merciles hands of their proud enemies; she prudently by the direction of
Almighty God behaved her self with such prudence and fortitude, that she both
foiled her enemies, and got her people a most famous and triumphant victory:
for which she was by the high Priest, and chiefest of the people denounced
blessed, and all the vulgar sort answered, Amen. This no doubt was an act not
only of invincible fortitude, but also of admirable prudence. But if we turn
our eyes unto the sacred Virgin, we shall find that she has delivered us from
a stronger enemy, preserved us from greater danger then temporal death, foiled
and overcome a prouder foe then Holofernes; and therefore with great reason we
may say, Tu gloria Jerusalem, tu laetitiae Israel, tu honorificentia populi
nostri: Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou the joy of Israel, thou the
honor and renown of our Nation. She bedecked with the pricelesse ornament of
virtue, her soul adorned with the splendour and beams of divine grace, and
assisted by the potent hand of Almighty God, came to tread our ancient enemy
Satan under her conquering feet.

2. The second act of admirable Prudence, we read in the book of Hester, how
for the good of her Nation, Hest. 5.
she adventured to enter before the King, was invited by his golden Rod, where
with her great prudence she so wrought the King, that she obtained not only the
lives of her dear Countrymen, but also great and ample privileges for them;
yea and severe chastizement of those that sought her, and her Countries
destruction. No less the B. Virgin, after Satan had conspired the overthrow
of mankind, entering before the King of heaven, with her profound humility, so
prudently she behaved her self, that she became Mother unto his only Son, who
both delivered us from eternal peril, and made us of the happy number of the
children of God, and heirs to the kingdom of heaven, which by our disobedience
we had lost, and therefore most worthily she is called Virgo Prudentissima, a
most prudent Vigin.

3. Iud. 4.
The third and fourth example we have in Iahel and Abigael the one vanquishing
proud Sisirae the fierce enemy of the Jews; 1. Reg. 25.
the other appeafing the fell wrath of King David, against her foolish husband,
when he was in danger of his life. But how often has this most prudent
Virgin deiuered us from our cruel perse^utors, who like roaring Lions ^eeke
day and night whom they ^ay devour, and how many times ^ath she appeased the
just wrath of God, kindled against us for ^ur foul offenses, and brought us
^gaine into his gracious favor.

O most prudent Virgin, by this we see, Colloquium.
how fittly this Title does agree unto thee; wherefore as by thee we are
delivered from so manifold dangers, and by whose holy intercession we receive
so many and gracious favors, let thy most prudent counsel so direct us, that
we may avoid all danger of sin, and keep our selves in the favor of thy B.
Son Amen.

THE XVI. MEDITATION. Virgo Veneranda, ora pro nobis. Venerable Virgin, pray
for us.
THIS worthy Title, does manifest unto us the honor due unto the B. Virgin,
which being threefold, does yield us three substantial grounds for this
present Meditation.

The first kind of honor is called Civil, which is due unto great Personages,
by reason of their Nobility, Place, Estate, or the like. The second is
Religious worship or honor, which belongs to virtuous and holy men, as they
are endued with excellent virtues, eminent graces, and supernatural gifts. The
third is divine and supernatural worship appertayning to God, and his Saints
in heaven as we shall after declare.

1. First therefore to consider the B. Virgin according to her lineall descent,
we shall find her worthy to be honored withal Civil honor and dutiful
respect. For if we should demand with holy S. Bernard, Bern. ser. c. 12. in
Apoc.
Quid ergo sidereum micat in generatione Mariae? What star-like splendour does
shine in the generation of the B. Virgin Mary? We may take his own answer in
the same place, that she sprung from Kings, of the seed of Abraham, of the
stock of David, that she was foresignifyed by Figures, foretold by Prophets,
and by mystical Oracles insinuated unto us; therefore if we respect her
Nobility, we shall find that she is worthy of civil honor, in the highest
degree, and so in this respect Virgo veneranda, a Virgin worthy to be honored.

2. Secondly if we weigh the great abundance of her singular graces, the
greatness of her excellent virtues, the number of her supernatural gifts, and
lastly the dignity of Mother of God, we shall find her as worthy of Religious
honor above all others, as she does exceed them all in her singular virtues
and unspeakable gifts. For as the divine Wisdom pronounces of the prudent
woman, Parab. 31.
Multae filiae congregauerunt diuitias, in supergressae es vniuersas, Many
daughters have gathered riches together, but thou have gone beyond them all;
for we may justly say of this sacred Queen, That many Holy Matrons in the old
law, many sacred Virgins in the new have been endued with rare virtues,
singular graces, and merua^lous favors; but when this glittering star
appeared, she did as far exceed them all, as the least star is in light
inferior to the Sun, and therefore most worthy of Religious honor and
respect, Virgo veneranda.

3. Thirdly if we come to the divine and supernatural worship belonging to
God, and his Saints in heaven, we shall find her to be preferred before all
Saints, and Angels, and installed next unto God; for as the divine worship of
Latriae (so the Deuines term it) is due, and given to none but to God alone:
so unto his Saints is due the worship of Dulia, which belongs unto them, as
friends and servants of God, the most eminent degree whereof is called
Hyperdulia, which most justly is given to the B. Virgin. Lo how vvorthily we
do give unto her honor and reverence in all the senses aforenamed: and why
should we not co^fidently fly unto her in our necessityes and troubles, saying
Virgo Veneranda ora pro nobis, Venerable Virgin pray for us.

Here we ought to stir up our affection toward this happy Queen, and
earnestly to desire, that this honor so justly due unto her, Colloquium.
may be given her by all true Christians, and endeavor to the uttermost of our
forces to advance it most carefully, procuring that by our negligence it be not
hindered: to which effect we must devoutly implore her Motherly help, and
powerful hand. Then may we conclude with this divine Hymn, Aue Maris stella.

THE XVII. MEDITATION. Virgo Praedicandae, era pro nohis. Virgin worthy of
praise, pray for us.
IN this laudable Title, the B Virgin is denounced to be worthy of praise and
commendation, worthy to be called Blessed throughout all Generations: but
because Praise may be given unto this B. Creature three manner of ways
therefore we will a while contemplate this threefold branch or triple head of
her deserved praise.

1. The first manner of setting forth the B. Virgins praise, is in heart, when
with a true and cordial affection we desire that she may be honored and
praised of all people; and that we do inwardly rejoice from the bottom of our
hearts of her eternal glory and everlasting happynes, praising the divine
providence of Almighty God that has chosen and elected her to so great
felicity; and in this devout cogitation we may wish and desire for her greater
honor the understanding of Cherubims and the burning love of Seraphims, the
better to blaze her worthy praise throughout the whole world, and to in flame
the hearts of all people to love and affect her: and in this first manner of
praise the first ground and foundation of true devotion does consist.

2. The second manner of praise is by word, where first we may consider how
little we are able to perform in respect of what is due unto her. For how many
learned Fathers, holy men, and great Saints have seriously employed their happy
tongues in setting forth to the view of the world her rare excellencyes, and
yet they have been forced to say, that they could say nothing at all in
comparison of what her heroical actions have deserved. What then shall we
presume (most holy Virgin) to speak of thy praise, where so many devout
servants of thine have acknowledged themselves unworthy? Yet B. Queen we know
thou do not ponder the words, but the will, not the gift, but the love, as
thy B. Son did with the poor, yet truly affected widow who with so great
devotion offered her little mite among the rest, and therefore by him judged to
have given more then all the rest. Therefore no gift so small, but being offered
with true devotion, will be grateful unto thee, o B. Virgin. And since we
neither have those words which may be sitting unto thy greatness, nor the
sincere devotion which may supply them; yet let these weak desires of ours by
thy holy intercession, so increase, that it may bring forth foam fruit worthy
to be presented unto thee, and grateful in thy sight.

3. The third manner of praise is by Work, that is, when our works be such,
as they redound to the honor of our B. Lady. For as it were not enough for
the Jews to say they were the Sons of Abraham, but they must also show the
works of Abraham, to be the truest sign and best token of their progeny: so
it will little avail us to say we are the devout children of the B. Virgin, if
our life and conversation be not conform to the rule and square of her
directions, which are the right pattern and true form of perfect life; and
which when we follow, we greatly commend in her. S John not content our love
one toward another should be in words only, but that it should also appear
in deeds, vvriteth, non diligamus lingua, and sermon. sed opere and veritaete:
let us not love in the tongue, and speech (as we say from the teeth outvvard)
but indeed, and in truth: for works are the surest testimony which speak the
best language for all men to understand.

O thrice happy they, Colloquium.
who have their wits and vvilis, their minds and hearts, wholy employed in
the B. Virgin praises! It is said, there is a tree called Persea, that has
leaves like a tongue, and fruit like a heart, which some wise men have applied
to the beautiful concord betwixt the heart and the tongue, when the
tonguespeaks what the heart thinks. But how far more beautiful a concord will
there be, when not only the heart and tongue, but also the outward works shall
sound forth the sweet music of the B. Virgins praises. Doubtless it will be
such as the heavenly Quires will not disdain to bear a part; and these be the
three ways by which every devout child of the B. Virgin, ought to ^ing her
praise. O Blessed Virgin worthy of greater praise, then humane or Angelical
tongue ca^^ give unto thee, grant that by the holy intercession we may so
employ our thoughts, words, an^ works in this divine harmon^ of thy praise,
that they may turn to the glory of God, to thy honor, and to the profit of our
poor and needy souls. Amen. O gloriosa Domina.

THE XVIII. MEDITATION. Virgo Potens, ora pro nobis. Potent Virgin, pray for us.
IN this Title we do acknowledge the great power which the B Virgin has both
in heaven and earth: in heaven to obtain us graces and favors, in earth to
defend us from perils and dangers.

1. First then let us consider her ^ower in heaven: for the better
understanding whereof, we will consider the noble and heroical ^ct of Solomon
the Wise, who sea^ed in his throne of State, caused ^is mother to be placed on
his ^ight hand, and said unto her, Ask what thou will, I will not say thee
nay. If King Solomon had ^his dutiful respect unto his Mother, to make her so
potent, that whatsoever she demanded, she should be sure to obtain; what ^ay
we think our B. Savior ^vould say unto his loving Mother, when she was seated
by him (...) heaven, but ask whatsoever ^ou wilt my dearest Mother, for ^
will not deny thee. For how ^ould she be denied who never ^^evv how to ask
but well? And how shoud he deny, who never could deny what was asked wel^^
Could Queen Hester be so grateful in the sight of King Assuerus that he bad
her ask what th^^ would, if it were the half of hi^ kingdom, it should not
be gain said and shall we not perswad^ our selves, that our B. Lady i^ more
grateful in the sight of the King of heaven, more pleasing t^ her only Son,
and therefore more potent to demand without denial? Could a wicked Herod.
King for a vvanton Dance make th^^ like promise of half his Kingdom and
shall we not believe that Christ would be more bountifu^ to his dearest and
Blessed Mother who never displeased him? L^^ us then conclude this point with
this vndeny able truth, that the B Virgin is so potent in the Court of Heaven,
that whatsoever she ^emandeth of her Son she shall obtain, and therefore
let us say, Virgo potens, ora pro nobis: Powerful Virgin, pray for us.

2. The second point may be to contemplate her great power on earth, which is
nothing else but ^he execution of her power in heaven. For as there her
Mother^y care and tender love toward ^s, is to obtain favors for us; ^o
here it is to effect, that we be not frustrate of them, which is by
^efending us from our proud ene^^ies, and strong adversaries the world, the
flesh, and the Devil; for as the grace of God is the chie^est benefit we can
enjoy on earth; so that is the mark at which our subtle enemy does most
aim, thereby to bereave us of the right and title we have to the kingdom of
Heaven: where the B. Virgin is most watchful with her potent prayers to
defend us, and to put him to flight, if we devoutly, as we ought, call upon
her, when we find our selves in danger. For as a valiant and stout Champion
would be ashamed even to hear the Name of that Woman, who should have
conquered and foiled him in plain field: so this monster of Pride, Satan,
having always been vanquished by her mighty power, dares not abide so much,
Colloquium.
as the naming of that sacred Name of Mary. Therefore as we have often said
before, let us fly unto her as to a City of Refuge, and Tower of defense, for
she is able to defend us; and if we be true Children, she will never fail us.
Hereupon we may conclude this meditation, Colloquium.
desyring that in our temporal Crosses and spiritual tentations, we may be
myndfull of so sure a refuge, so sweet a succor, so strong a Castle, and so
powerful a defense. Salve Regina.

THE XIX. MEDITATION Virgo Clemens, ora pro nobis. Clement Virgin, pray for us.
CLEMENCY is as it were a branch of compassionat mercy, by which title we do
call upon the B Virgin, that she may take pity and compassion of our miseries,
and commiseration of our necessities, notwithstanding our unworthiness, whereby
she makes her self most like unto her sweet Son, who came into the world to
forgive the fault, and pardon the offender: and by how much greater the fault
is proved which is committed: by so much more the greatness of the Clemency does
appear in him that pardons. If therefore we consider the injury done unto the
B. Virgin, when we offend her son; we shall see her high Clemency both in
pardoning, of her part, the so heinous offense; and also her Mercy in
entreating before the mercy seat for the life of him who has so often
deserved death.

1. First let us consider, how much the obstinat and stony hearted Jews did
against all justice, law, and conscience; they abused her only Son, rejected,
scorned, and put him to an ignominious death: yet when she heard the pitiful
voice of Christ upon the Cross crying to his Eternal Father to pardon them,
she also forgetful of all wrong said; and I thy mother, do also forgive them.
Salmero^.
Behold the rare Clemency of the tender bowels of the B. Virgin, whom no
wrong could move, no rage stir up, nor any fury drive from her wonted Clemency,
and most mild behavior. And if thus she prayed for the professed enemies of
Christ, why should not they who love him, and desire only to serve him,
confidently implore her gracious help, and say, Virgo Clemens ora pro nobis,
Myld Virgin pray for us.

2. Secondly, let us ponder the Ingratitude of man, after (...) much knowledge
of Christ, that he does not cease, (as much a^ in him lies) to crucify him
again by every mortal sin that he commits as S. Paul writes Neither
does he this abuse of ignorance, Heb. 6.
as Christ pleaded for the Jews; but after the firm belief of his God head,
his Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, yet after he knows him to be ascended
and seated in heaven, when^ he shall come to be our terrible Judge: yet
forgetful of al, he ce^^seth not to offend him, and st^^ his blessed Mother
does interpo^^ herself, as a wall for Jerusalem that is, for him who will
truly repent, and call for mercy in time with a firm purpose and stro^^
resolution never again to offend him.

O incomparable Clemency of this B. Virgin, who desires nothing, but to do
good even unto those who are most worthy of exceeding great punishment!
Colloquium.
who would be so careless of his own good, who so negligent of his
salvation, as not to fly unto his Sanctuary, as not to run unto this
fountain, as not to im^^ace this sweet remedy. The ^ore blind man cried to
Jesus or sight, and would not cease though some rebuked him for it) ^^til he
obtained the effect of his ^^sire: so let us call upon this clement and meek
Mother, howsoever others repine thereat; let us vvnto this mild Virgin; Let us
^t cease to say, Virgo Clemens, ora pro nobis, Clement Virgin pray for us.

THE XX. MEDITATION Virgo fidelis, ora pro nobis. Faithful Vigin, pray for us.
FAITHFVLLNES may ^^ taken diverse vvayes, and therefore diverse vvayes does yield
(...) copious matter of the B. Virgin praise.

1. First therefore we m^^ consider fidelity as it does imp^^ an excellent act
of supernature belief, in which we shall fi^^ the sacred Virgin to excel,
as (...) all other virtues, and by the to^g^^ of the holy Ghost, for the sa^^
canonized a living Saint, and (...) led Blessed: Beata quae credidisti quoniam
perficientur in te quae dicta sunt tibi a Domino: Blessed art thou who have
believed, because in thee shall be perfected those mysteries which were declared
unto thee from our Lord. For doubtless she had most excellent acts of faith,
concerning the high Mystery of the Incarnation especially, and therefore as one
truly faithful we may invoke her holy and willing assistance, saying, Virgo
fidelis ora pro nobis, faithful Virgin, pray for us.

2. Secondly we may consider Fidelity as it does import a certain kind of
assurance of one friend toward another, whereby the one is fully persuaded of
his friends love and help in all things, so long as he keeps himself within
the bonds and limits of a true friend. And of the fidelity of our B. Lady, and
loving mother, we need not doubt, who is most ready to help and comfort us in
all our miseries, tribulations, and affflictions, if our selves by our
ingratitude, and little respect unto her, deserve not the repulse. Therefore
keeping our fidelity with her sweet Son, and herself, we may assure our
selves of her fidelity toward us, at all times, in all occasions, and in all
our business we shall always find her Virgo fidelis, a faithful Virgin.

3. Thirdly we may conceau^^ fidelity as it does signify the faithful
accomplishing of all busine^^ committed to our charge: i^^ which sense our
Savior speaket^ in the Parable of the talents, congratulating the diligent
labors of his faithful servant, Euge serve bone and fidelis, quia inpauca
fuisti fidelis, super multa te constituam: Well, good and faithful servant
because thou have been trusty over a little, I will make thee steward over much.
And in this sense how worthily the B. Virgin is said to be faithful, will
easily appear, if we consider aright how profitably she did employ al her
rare talents, wherewith her blessed Son had endued her. For what gifts either
of Nature or Grace, what talents either natural or supernatural (in all which
she did abound) did she not fully employ in the service of God, and profit of
her neighbor, whose only study was to please the one, and help the other, and
therefore had the only privilege never to offend him, or be wanting to them? So
as we knowing her love no less toward us now, then it was whilst she lived,
and her power far greater, do confidently say, Virgo fidelis, ora pro nobis,
faithful Virgin, pray for us.

4. Lastly we may contemplate how Fidelity does signify the strict band of
true loyalty betwixt true and lawful spouses: which if we consider in the B.
Virgin toward S. Joseph, it may serve for a mirror to all virtuous and godly
spouses: but if we weigh the matchelesse example of her constant fidelity
toward the Holy Ghost, to whom by special grace, and holy vow, she was
espoused; it will so far pass the short reach of our weak understanding,
that we shall be no more able to view the perfection thereof, then the seely
Bat, or harmless owl is able to gaze upon the glittring beams of the sun;
yet may we with all humility say, Virgo fidelis, ora pro nobis, faithful
Virgin, pray for us; since in all those senses of Fidelity, we find her to
have the chiefest place. Aue Maris stella.

THE XXI. MEDITATION. Speculum Iustitiae, ora pro nobis. Mirour of Justice,
pray for us.
JUSTICE in this place does not so much import the special virtue of Justice,
as a general collection of all virtues together, whereby a man does perfectly
conform himself to the will of God in all things, and is therefore said to be
Just. In which sense to call our blessed Lady Mirour of Justice, is as much as
to say, the perfect pattern of all virtue, Ambr. lib. 2. de Virgin.
because in her (as out of S. Ambrose we have noted) velut in speculo refulget
species castitatis and forma virtutis: as in glass the beauty of Chastity, and
form of all virtue shines.

1. Wherefore in this title we are to consider the B. Virgin as the perfect
model of all our actions, because by this we shall most evidently see, what is
to be followed, what to be eschewed, what to be embraced, what rejected:
finally how to order our lives and actions to the greater honor and glory of
God. We must therefore look into this Glass, not for curiosity to behold our
beauty, but with earnest desire to amend our faults, we must consider her
excellent virtues as the above named Saint did, when he wrote, Ambr. vbi supra.
that she was humble in mind, grave in speech prudent in judgment, sparing in
words, studious in reading, reposing her hopeful trust not in the uncertainty
of riches, but in the devout prayers of the poor: she was willing to work,
bashful in speech, accustomed to seek not men, but God, for the arbiter of
her mind; she hurt no man, she wished well to all, respecting her elders, not
envying her equals, flying boasting, following reason, and loving virtue. This
and much more to this effect does S. Ambrose write, whereby we may see, that
most worthily the B. Virgin is said to be, Speculum Iustitiae, the Mirror of
Justice.

2. How careful would any gentle woman be, if she were to speak in the
presence of a great Person, to view herself in a glass once, and many times,
least any spot or blemish in her face, any fault or disorder in her attire,
might make her less grateful in his sight, then either he deserved, or she
could wish: and shall not we, when we go to speak with the King of Kings, for
the better and more decent attyring of our souls, look in this glass of all
perfection, and learn to deck and adorn our selves in such sort, that we may
not only with Queen Hester deserve to be invited with the golden Rod of Gods
Mercy, unto his divine presence, but also be made worthy to obtain of him,
what we most desire? Yea, let us not look only into this mystical glass, but
also let us use it as a powerful help to obtain our wished suite and petition:
let us frame our actions according to the lively portraict of her excellent
virtues, that we may with greater confidence implore her powerful aid: let
her be our Pattern and Patroness in life and death: let us deuotly say,
Speculum Iustitiae, ora pro nobis. Myrrour of al perfection, pray for us. Aue
Maris stella.

THE XXII. MEDITATION Seeds Sapientiae, ora pro nobis. The seat of wisdom,
pray for us.
IT is written by the divine instinct of the holy Ghost, and left for our
instruction, that Wisdom built himself a house, underpropped and borne up
with seaue^ stately Pillars, which not unfitly we may apply unto the Eternal
Wisdom of the Son of God, i^ beautifying and adorning the B. Virgin for his
mother, and making her indeed Seeds sapientiae, th^^ seat of Wisdom.

Let us therefore consider the seven stately Pillars which ou^ Savior did
erect in this his spiritual Soul, his mystical seat, for doubtless they
were the seven gifts, and seaue^-fould grace of the holy Ghost, to wit,
Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitud Science, Piety and fear of our Lord,
al which how eminent they were in our B. Lady, no true Christian will call in
question; whereby she became the worthy seat of VVisdome, the princely throne
of the true Solomon, and the holy mother of God.

1. And for two reasons we may call the B. Virgin the Royal seat of
VVisdome. First, in that she was the most blessed, and selected Creature chosen
amongst, and above all women, to be his holy mother; in whose sacred womb he
was to take his nine months ^^est, and then to be most lovingly ^fe^ded in her
tender arms, and seated on her lap, with all respect unto him, as her God,
and no less love as to her Son; and therefore was the seat of VVisdome.

2. The second reason why she may be so intytled, is because, i^ wisdom be
taken for the grace of the holy Ghost, or the spiritual dwelling of Christ in a
soul, we shall find that never in any pure Creature the like abundance o^
wisdom was found, the like graces, favors, and supernatural gifts. And
because she so carefully kept these gracious gifts, that she always deserved
to keep God in her blessed soul; therefore she may more properly be said to be
the seat of wisdom. For although Christ many times visits most mercifully
the unworthy house of our souls; yet by reason of ou^ strange ingratitude, we
do not esteem as we ought, the heavenly company of so worthy a ghest, and the
singular favors of so special a friend, but by our offenses we expel him
from the house of our souls, and yield his rightful seat unto his usurping
enemy. But our blessed Lady was always constant, ever true unto him, and
therefore his perpetual seat, according as our Savior witnesses of every
just man, Joan. 14.
ad eum veniemus, and mansionem apud eum fa^iemus: we will come unto him and
make our mansion or place of abroad with him.

O Blessed and ever most happy Virgin Mother, Colloquium.
the Regal seat of Eternal wisdom; Let thy powerful intercession so
prevail, with thy loving Son, that we may in such sort receive him, into
the house of our souls, that we do not ungratefully cast him forth again;
but vvithall honor and respect so serve him in this life, that we may deserve
to dwell in those heavenly mansions of Eternity. Amen. Salve Regina.

THE XXIII. MEDITATION. Causa nostrae laetitiae, ora pro nobis Cause of our
Joy, pray for us.
HEEREVVE are to conside the great joy which the B. Virgin brought into the
world a her sacred birth, according to tha^ which we read in the office of he^
Nativity, Natiuitas tua Dei Gentrix Virgo, gaudium annunciau^ vniuerso mundo:
Thy Nativity, (...) Virgin Mother of God, has been the long desired messenger
of joy to all the world: for of thee is borne the some of Justice, who
destroying the former curse, brought a general blessing unto us all. Yet for
the better understanding of the greatness of the joy we all re^eiued by her
happy coming, it will be good to make use of this contemplation.

1. Imagine after a long and ^edious vvinter, how grateful ^he approach of a
pleasant spring ^oth seem, not only unto man, ^ut even unto brute beasts and
see^ birds, yea in some sort to the ^ery plants, and the earth it self, who
vesteth herself in new ap^arell to vvelcome the near ap^roach of the
gladsome Sun, and ^^e pretty birds in their language, df the like, to show
the greatness oo their joy, with their best music.

2. Or else consider how grateful is the beautiful breaking of a fair morning
after a dark tempestuous night, telling us with a gladsome blush, that the
joy full Planet, the Sun, is near a hand.

3. Ponder moreover how comfortable was the commin^ of Judith to the
sorrovvfull gate of beseiged Bethulia, when she brought them certain nevves
o^ their present delivery, and futu^ safety. Then apply all this to the B.
Virgin, cause of our joy, w^^ after so long and tendious a wi^ter of sin, and
wickedness, (...) her happy coming into the world, did signify unto, us the
the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, was now near at
hand, and that the bright shyning lamp of heaven, would spread ere long his
beautiful beams of light upon the earth, and that the Sun of Justice would
shortly appear unto us; that it might be fulfilled as the Prophet had
foretold: The people that sat in darkness, saw great light; and to them that
dwelled in the region and shaddovv of death, light is risen. Her happy birth was
the fore runner of greater light, and her appearing in this world, the joyful
dawning of a blessed day: her prudent demeanor, and religious carriage of far
more profit and comfort unto us, then the wonder, and vvonderfull acts of
Judith to the Bethulians. She to one people only was the cause of joy; out B.
Lady unto all Nations: she unto one City, the B. Virgin unto all the world
brought joy and gladness.

Let us therefore not only acknowledge this great benefit, but let us encourage
our selves, Colloquium.
with greater confidence to invoke her blessed Name, and say, Causa nostrae
laetitiae, ora pro nobis: Cause of our joy, pray for us: that as by her person,
the Son of God became man for our redemption; so by her holy intercession we
may profit our selves by so pricelesse a ransom. Salve Regina.

THE XXIIII. MEDITATION Vas Spirituale ora pro nobis. Spiritual vessel, pray
for us.
HERE we call upon the B. Virgin by the name of Spiritual vessel, to signify
the great abundance of her spiritual Graces and blessings, wherewith she was
replenished. We will therefore consider the sweet odours of this divine vessel.
It is said, Quo semel est imbutarecens, seruabit odorem, testa diu, -- with
what sent, or savor a vessel is first seasoned, it will conserve the smell
thereof a long time. If the^ we consider the first savor of divine Grace
wherewith this spiritual vessel was so abundantly seasoned in her first
Conception, which was never after lost, but increased almost without measure;
we shall not marvel at this title of Spiritual vessel, or divine Tabernacle
of the Holy Ghost. For albeit she was full of grace when the Angel came to
deliver his heavenly Embassage; yet the coming of the holy Ghost was promised
unto her, and the protection of the most high to defend her. Moreover the day
of Pentecost the same holy Spirit descended upon her in more ample manner then
any of the rest, being indeed a vessel more capable of such divine influence,
then any else, and therefore most worthily intytled Vas Spirituale, a Spiritual
vessel.

They used in the Temple certain consecrated vessels dedicated unto the
service of God, and could not be applied to any profane use without the crime
of Sacrilege; and the like is now of the consecrated Chalices and other holy
vessels. Our B. Lady was a Spiritual vessel consecrated only to the service
of God, and would have deemed it a great profaning of his divine vessel, if
she should have admitted the least cogitation of any thought that might have
been unseemly in his eyes.

How great was the crime of Nabuchodonosor, that took such vessels from the
holy Temple of Jerusalem; and how severely his son Baltassar was punished for
the profane use he put them unto, Dan. 5.
let the Scripture be witness. But far greater punishment may we assuredly
persuade our selves is laid up for such as either shall abuse this sacred
Vessel, or not give that duly deserved respect unto her which they ought. For
if God so severely punished the profaning of his vessels of gold and silver;
what will he do when his holy mother shall be robbed of her right, and the most
worthy vessel in the world be abused? And on the contrary side, what benefits
shall they receive at his bountiful hands, who, with all religious reverence
and duty call upon her, and esteem her as she is indeed a Spiritual vessel, a
consecrated Temple, a divine Comfort, a gracious Queen, a loving mother and a
powerful Intercessor for all sinners, who devoutly come unto her Son by her.
Let us by this spiritual title call for her aid, Vas Spirituale, ora pro
^^obis, Spiritual vessel, pray for ^s; that we may be always of the number
of those, who love and defend thee, and who desire to advance thy holy name, to
the honor of thy blessed Son sweet lesus. Amen. O gloriosa Dominae.

THE XXV. MEDITATION. Vas Honorabile, ora pro nobis. Honorable Vessel, pray
for us.
THIS Honorable title does many and diverse ways demonstrate unto us the
dignity of our B. Mother. For if we look with S. Paul, to the powerful act of
Predestination, we shall find some vessels of Gold, some o^ Clay, some of
Honor, others o^ Contumely, some Elect, some Reprobate: amongst the which
elect we shall find the Blessed Virgin most highly seated, and therefore by a
certain kind of excellency she may be said Vas Honorabile, an^ honorable
vessel.

Furthermore some vessels there are which be dedicated only to the Emperors,
or Kings use, and therefore honorable vessels: and such we shall find the B.
Virgin to be, and so much the more honorable, by how much the Emperor and
King of heaven (whom she only served) is able to advance her to more noble
services. If they be called Ladies of Honor, who attend about the Queens
person; how much more the B. Virgin, who attended on God himself, should be
esteemed Honorable, and as so precious a Jewel be accounted worthy of
Reverence and Honor.

Again, if the word Honorable be taken in that sense which we spoke of, when
we treated of the honor due unto her in Heaven, we have already declared in
the XVI. Meditation, what degree of honor belongs unto her above all other
Creatures; since therefore by so many tytles, Honor is due, unto her, all
equity and reason commands, that we hold not be slack in rendering honor,
cui honor debetur, unto whom honor is due.

O divine vessel of honor, ^redestinate from all Eternity, and chosen to be
the elected mother of him who is most worthy of all honor; be our faithful
advocate before his divine Majesty that we may be always ready to defend thine
honor, and yield all honor due unto thee as the Honorable vessel of the
holy Ghost, and the most blessed of all women. Amen. Salu^ Regina.

THE XXVI. MEDITATION. Vas insigne deuotionis, ora pro nobis Noble vessel of
devotion, pray for us.
BY this worthy Title we an taught, what devotion w^ ought to have toward the
blessed Queen of Heaven, and mother of God, who is indeed the source,
fountain, and vessel of devotion. 4. Reg. 4.
In the Book of Kings mention is made of a Vessel of oil belonging to a
poor widdowe, which did not only remain full it self, but also filled full
many other vessels: which not unfitly does resemble the blessed Virgin, where
barren and dry souls may fully refresh themselves, and we shall find her so
liberal and bountiful a mother, that she will not cease to communicate
spiritual blessings unto us, so long as we have vessels capable to receive
them.

If a vessel should be placed in the midst of a market, full of gold with free
license for all poor and needy people to repair thither to relieve their
wants: if any should be found so negligen^ and careless as not to seek this
only means, to make himself truly rich; he should not only b^ judged worthy
to live in his former misery, but rightly be condemned of sloth and folly. But
i^ we cast our eyes upon this diuin^ and noble vessel, the B. Virgin we shall
see that Almighty Go^ has placed her first in his militant, the^ in his
triu^phant Church as a miraculous vessel of devotion, unto whom all that wa^
such heavenly liquor, may wit^ confidence approach; and n^ only besprinckle,
but even power full showers of devotion upon their dry and thirsting soules^
which do, and ever will mo^ sweetly flow from this wonderful vessel of
devotion.

In this Celestial vessel the ^cient Fathers dipped their leared, and devout
pens, when they left unto us so many, and most ^orthy monuments of their
du^full service to her bountiful li^erality toward them. With this ^euotion
to this sacred Queen, ^he undaunted spirit of S. Ignati^ was confirmed; the
divine co^^eits of S. Denis graced; the witty ^entences of S. Augustine
ador^ed: the grave sayings of S. Ambrose beautified; the learned wri^ings of S.
Hierome, honored; ^he illuminated mind of S. An^^lme enlightened; the
mellifluous ^ermons of S. Bernard sweetened; ^he burning heart of the Seraphi^all
doctor S. Bonauenture, in fla^ned; finally the learned men of al ^ges, were
besprinkled with this heavenly dew. Let us not therefore b^ our own wilful
blindness loo^ so great a treasure, and depri^ selves of so sovereign a remedy
but let us devoutly, or with desi^ of devotion, say, Vas insigne deutionis, ora
pro nobis, Noble vesse of devotion pray for us. Aue Mris stella.

THE XXVII. MEDITATION. Rosa mystica, ora pro nobis. Mystical Rose, pray for
us.
OMITTING many prope^ties of the Rose which mig^ most aptly be applied unto the
B. Virgin, I will only insist upon three or four, not to exce^ my wonted
breuity.

1. First the Rose is most beau^ifull to behold, and most plea^ing to the eye,
especially being be^ewed with some sweet morning ^ower, which if we apply to
our ^lessed Lady, we shall find that, (...) natural beauty none came ^eere
unto her, or could be com^ared with her, as we have already proved. And for the
aboun^ance of heavenly graces, and ^holsome showers of blessings ^owred upon
her, we have also ^eclared how far she did, and ^oth excel all other
creatures.

1. The second property wher^our blessed Queen resembles ^e Rose, is in the
sweet fragrant ^ell: for as the Rose is as it were ^^e Queen of flowers, by
reason ^f it sweet perfuming smell; so ^e B. Virgin, above all women was most
grateful unto God, and the fragrant odours of her ran^ virtues, as a most
excellent sme^^ have filled the whole Church with sweetness, according to that
saying of S. Paul, Christi bonus (...) dor sumus in omni loco: we are the good
odor of Christ in eue^ place: which is verified chiefly (...) the Queen of
heaven.

3. The third resemblance (...) this dainty flower is in color: for as some
are white, some red, others damask; so our holy Mother the Church does present
o^^ Blessed Lady unto us, sometym^^ white, as in her imaculate Co^ception;
sometimes red, as (...) her unspotted purification, when as old Simeon did
prophesy vn^ her, that the sword of Grie^ should pierce and wound her (...) to
wit the bitter passion of ^her loving Son, for whom she grieved so much,
that as many le^rned Writers witness; plus quam martyrfuit, she was more the^
mar^yred. Other whiles she appears ^n damask, as in the admirable
Annunciation, where doubtless with a comely blush she pleaded with the Angel
about the conservation of her Chaste Virginity, which when she understood it
should be kept unspotted, she most willingly admitted of the Embassage.

4. Lastly a Rose has it birth, or as we say, springs from thorns, and
amongst them it grows up to perfection: which may be applied to our blessed
Lady in two senses. First, that she sprung from the race of sinners, sicut
lilium inter spinas, as a lilly, or rose amongst thorns. For albeit her
parents were holy people; yet not so holy, as they could altogether avoid the
name o^ sinners, the only privilege o^ Christ and his Blessed Mother ^
Secondly, as the rose grows amongst sharp thorns; so the B^ Virgin grew up
in virtue, amids^ many harsh and sharp mortifications and heavy Crosses: in so
much that she is compared to the Rose-bed, quasi plantatio rosae i^ Hierico:
like the planting or planted bed of a rose in Hierico, for the rose tree the
longer it groweth^ the greater and sharper are the pricks it bears; and the
Blesse^ Virgin the longer she lived, the more her mortifications did increase,
that she might well say^ that all her life was Crux and martyrium, a Cross and
martyr dome. And by these properties it may easily be gathered: how fitly the
pattern of all perfection, and the model of patience is compared to the dainty
rose, and therefore mystically we say, Rosa Mystica, ora pro nobis, Mystical
Rose pray for us. Amen. Salve Regina.

THE XXVIII. MEDITATION. Turis Dauidica, ora pro nobis. Tower of David, pray
for us.
IN the fourth Chapter of the Canticles the unspotted beauty of the Holy Church
in diverse places is described; and in the fourth verse her Neck is compared to
the Tower of David, built for defense: and moreover it is said, Mill clypei
pendent ex ea, omnis armatura fortium; a thousand sheilds hang thereon, all the
armor of strong and valiant men. Now let us see, for what reason our Blessed
Lady is called Turris Dauidica, the Tower of David.

1. The first may be, because here we read that the Neck of the Church is
compared to a Tower; and we have said before that as Christ is the Head of the
Church, so the B. Virgin is the Neck, through which all spiritual food
descends to the whole body of the Church: therefore this Tower of David is
most fitly applied unto her, and she most worthily said to be the tower of
David.

2. Secondly this Tower of David was a Tower built for defense, and therefore a
thousand shields did ha^g on it, and al kind of armor for strong men; which if
we accomodat unto this holy Mother the B Virgin, we shall find that she was a
stately Tower, by reason of her height in virtue, and strong by reason of her
Constancy which never failed; and for this she is said to tread the moon under
her feet, which is the symbol of Inconstancy. A thousand shields are always
ready and prepared; because as the devil has a thousand crafty sleights to
deceive; so has this Blessed Tower as many divine plotts to prevent him, which
by her rare example she has left unto us, with all kind of Armor, both
offensive and defensive to withstand the might and force of our strong
adversary, who, as the holy Patriarch Job witnesses, is so potent, that no
power on earth can be compared unto him. Therefore with great reason we fly
unto this strong and invincible Tower, to call for aid, to seek weapons, to
arm our selves, against the fierce assaults of so cruel an enemy, saying once
and many times, Turris Dauidica, ora pro nobis, Tower of David pray for us.

3. Another reason why the blessed Virgin is named Turris Dauidica, the Tovver
of David, is, because as it is said of the Church in general; so it may be
applied to every just and virtuous person in particular, and especially to the
B. Virgin, who in all virtue and Religion was most excellent; yea so, per
excellentiam, as we say, that she may be called the Tovver of David, for the
reasons before named.

Wherefore O Blessed Virgin, Colloquium.
O strong and mighty Tower, under the shadovv of thy defense we flyt for
succor. Holy Mary, help those that are in misery, strengthen those that faint,
comfort those that grieve; finally pray for us all, that under so strong a
tower we may be able to defend our selves from our deadly enemies, the world,
the flesh, and the Devil. Amen. Salve Regina.

THE XXIX. MEDITATION. Turris Eburnea ora pro nobis. Tovver of Iuory, pray for
us.
THIS title declares the excellency of the Blessed Virgin. For as Iuory is
rare and precious, and therefore a Tower built of it, must needs be of great
esteem and strength; so the Blessed Queen of heaven is of very great esteem
and account; not only in the sight of God, (which is truly to be great) but
also in the sight of Angels and men, worthy to be admired. But because we have
already spoken of the Tower, we will now consider why she is compared to Iuory.

1. Iuory amongst other properties has this for one, that the older it is, the
more it turns to a beautiful red, or ruddy color; as we read in praise and
commendation of the old Nazarets, that thy were rubicundiores ebore antiquo,
more ruddy then the ancient Iuory; which property befitts best the Blessed
Virgin, who the longer she lived in this mortal life, the more she suffered;
and as her Crosses did increase, so the more she drevv to the ruddy color of
Martyrdom: and the nee^er she came unto so high a degree of love and
fortitude, the more her golden Charity did shine throughout the world; and
therefore most fitly she is compared not only to Iuory, but even unto the
ancient Iuory, when it is in greatest beauty and vvorth.

2. Another excellent virtue of Iuory is, to expel poison from the infected
waters, which is the cause (as some do write) that the other beasts where
the vvater^ often be poisoned by venemou^ serpents, use not to drink vntil^
the Unicorn has dipped in hi^ horn which expels al poyson^ and leaves
the waters as whol^ some as before: which property if we apply to the Blessed
Virgin we shall see that no waters of tribulation can be hurtful to those who
set her Heroical example o^ Patience before them. For as the wood that Moses
cast into the bitter water, made it svveet and sauoury; so no Crosses so
bitter o^ distasteful, but by meditation o^ her excellent life, will be made
sweet and pleasant.

O Blessed Virgin, be our Iuory Tovver of defense, be our City of Refuge,
Colloquium.
for sub tuum praesidium confugimus, unto thy holy protection we fly; let not
the strong assaults of our enemies daunt us, nor the fierce encounters of our
adversaries discourage us; but with thy powerful intercession help us, that to
the greater glory of thy sweet Son, and further profit of our own souls, we
may stand immovable in the service of God, and daily increase in devotion
toward thee. Amen. O gloriosa Domina.

THE XXX. MEDITATION. Domus aurea ora pro nobis. Golden house, pray for us.
IN this precious title, the golden Charity of the B. Virgin is insinuated.
For, as we have already proved, the famous Temple of Jerusalem built by
Solomon, and all covered with gold, was a type or figure of the blessed Virgin.
And as that Temple was a Golden House, built for God himself; so was the
Blessed Virgin a spiritual and mystical house, ordained and adorned for the
diuin^ Temple of the holy Ghost, and Bride-chamber of Christ; yea for an
elected house and hospital for the Blessed Trinity. She is also said to be of
gould, by reason of her burning Charity, and inflaming love, signified by
gould. And as Gould excels all other mettalls: so does the Queen of
Angels, surpass all other pure Creatures.

By this we may gather, how different are the ways of God from the ways of
men, and how far dista^t his thoughts from ours. Herod had his stately Palace
adorned richly in outvvard show; Christ his poor mother richly bedecked with
inward virtues. The eyes of men judge by the outward face; the eyes of God by
the inward heart; therefore the famous Palace of Herod is left; this celestial
house of God chosen; for though the Son of the Blessed Virgin had house to
hide his head, (as himself witnesses) speaking of an earthly habitation; yet
he never wanted this Golden Chapel, this worthy house, his devout mother, to
intertaine him, with all love and tender affection.

Since therefore we have in this world, no permanent house of abode, no certain
City to inhabit, and dwell in, for any long time (as S. Paul writes;) let us
endeavor all to follow the virtuous life of this spiritual and mystical
house, that we may also deserve to be a house, wherein Christ may rest: that
intertayning him in our souls by grace in this life, we may be made heir of
glory in the next. Amen. A^^ Maris stella.

THE XXXI. MEDITATION. Foederis arca, ora pro nobis. Arc of the Covenant, pray
for us.
IN the old Law in diverse places is mentioned the Arc of the Covenant, made by
Moses, and by Gods express Command, the form, situation, and all the rest
belonging unto it: we will briefly consider, what wood it was made of, and how
it was covered with gold, what was kept in it, and some properties thereof,
which we will apply to this our mystical Arc, the Blessed Virgin.

1. First Moses made this Arc of Settim wood, Deuteronomy. 10.
which is called incorruptible, by reason of the long time that it remay neth
uncorrupted, and this Arc by Gods ordinance was to be covered all over, both
within and without, with pure Gold. Here we may consider how fittly this
figured blessed Virgin, who thought made of the corruptible Mass whereof all
men be composed; yet by the Eternal wisdom of God preserved from all taint of
Corruption, both in body and soule^ covered over with pure Gold^ within and
without, because he^ burning Charity within did give so fair a luster to all
her outward actions, that she did seem to exceed the fairest Gold. And as over
the Arc was a Crown of the same pure and massy gold; so over the blessed
Virgins heavenly head did hang that unspeakable Crown of Glory, from all
Eternity prepared for her, which she now enioyes.

2. Secondly, we may consider, Deuteronomy. 10.
that in the Arc of the Covenant were kept the Tables of the ten
Commaundments, as a witness against those that should afterward rebel; and also
there was kept a certain measure of the Manna, in remembrance of so great a
benefit done unto the Chosen people of Israel: Exodus 16.
So in the Blessed Virgins sacred breast was laid up the table of those ten
Commandments which she always kept most inviolable, against those who shall
deny, that they are able to be kept by any.

And as for the Manna, we know she had the keeping of the Celestial Manna,
Christ Jesus, the true food of our hungry souls, and a memorial of his truest
love, and one of his greatest benefitts done unto us.

3. Besides this, the Arc coming into the waters of Jordan, they gave place
for the Children of Israel to pass over without any danger: which signifies
the B. Virgins powerful help, staying the waters of tribulation from the
hurtful pursuit of the Children of God, making them to pass as secure as if
they walked on dry land.

4. And lastly the Arc with it presence made the Idol Dagon fall flat down
before it; it was a terror unto the enemies of God; and the curious beholders
of it, were not a little punished for their fault: so the Blessed Virgin has,
and is the destroyer of Idolatry, the terror unto the enemies of the Church,
and a severe Chastizer of those who be more curious then wise, in matters
belonging to her.

Behold then, how fittly she is compared to the Arc of the Covenant, who is
also ready to help us, to keep the Covenant we have made with God, both in the
spiritual generation of Baptism, as also in our good purposes, vows, and all
other devotions wherein we give our selves to God Let us therefore devoutly call
upon her holy Name by this worthy title, and say, Foederis Arca, ora pro nobis,
Arc of the Covenant pray for us. Salve Regina.

THE XXXII. MEDITATION. Ianua Caeli, ora pro nobis. Gate of heaven, pray for us.
THIS Metaphorical speech does signify unto us, that as into strong walled
Cities there is no hope of entrance, but by the gate: so he that prete^deth to
enter into the glorious City of the heavenly Jerusalem, must knock at this
beautiful gate the Blessed Virgin, who therefore by the holy Church is so
intytled, as in that divine hymn Aue Marris stella, she is said to be Felix
caeli porta, the happy gate of heaven: and in the Anthym Aue regina Coelorum,
we say, Salve radix salve porta, ex qua mundo lux est orta: All hayle o B.
root, all hayle o heavenly gate. And conformable to this in these devout
Letanies composed in her honor, we salute her by the name of Ianua Cali, gate
of heaven.

1. First therefore we may meditate how we are created for Citizens of
heaven, where all our chiefest treasure is laid up; by sin the gate was shut
against us, as rebels against Gods sacred Laws, until Christ by his
Omnipotent power did open it again unto us, and left this beautyfull gate
patent unto all; that who so would enter into this blisfull paradise, should
first have this Gate well known, by which he might freely enter into
Eternal happiness; and therefore she is called Felix caeli porta, the happy gate
of heaven.

2. Secondly we may consider, that if this gate be shut against us, we can
have but little hope to be able to attain unto our longing desire of entrance
into the City; that is, if our life, manners and conversation be such as may
hinder our access unto this stately Gate, we can have but small hope of her
holy intercession; especially if we cease not to offend her Blessed Son,
which is the only cause that will bread a denial to our approach unto that
shyning gate, who with her beautiful beams of light inuiteth al men from
the works of darkness, to the fountain of light; from the snares of death to
the fruits of life; and from the valley of extreme misery, unto the height of
all goodness.

O let us not be so blind, Colloquium.
as not to see this light; let us with holy Moses put off the shoes of our
earthly affection, and with devout S. Bernard fall before her feet; and as
these devout Letanies do teach us, let us say Ianua Caeli, gate of Heaven pray
for us: and Felix caeli porta, o happy gate of heaven, be not shut against us,
who so much desire to enter by thee and to reign with thee, for ever. Amen.
Aue Maris stella.

THE XXXIII. MEDITATION. Stella matutina, ora pro nobis. Morning star, pray
for us.
FOR the better understanding this worthy title, we must consider first what
the Star of the morning does denote unto us, and also the time of its
appearance, by which we shall easily perceive how fittly the Blessed Virgin is
called stella matutina, the morning star.

1. First as this bright shyning star of the morning, appearing unto us,
gives us to understand that the dark night is ended, and the cheerful day at
hand; and therefore the dismal clouds of the night were shortly to be dispersed
by the coming of a glittering light, to wit the Sun: Even so the first
appearing of the Blessed Virgin in this world, was a forerunning of that great
light, her sweet Son Christ Jesus, whose joyful beams were to expel the
mysty darkness of former ignorance with his shyning light of doctrine.

2. Secondly this morning star does not only foretell the coming of a light,
that should be the ending of a sad and melancholy night, but also the beginning
of a most joyful day: so the happy birth of the Blessed Virgin, did foretell
unto the world, that happy day, that now was at hand, when the Angel should
denounce unto the whole world, and first unto the poor watchful sheepheards,
gaudium magnum quod erit in omni populo, the great ^oy which should not be
confined ^^ed to the land of Jury only, but should be common to al Nations,
^mni populo, to wit, the birth of Christ, Savior and redeemer of mankind.

3. Again, the day star appears more bright and light some, then the rest
of the starr^ that shyned before in the night and the Blessed Virgin was i^
brightness of sanctity and cleerne of virtues, beyond all Stars, that is, all
the Saints that went before or came after her (her Son al^ ways excepted, as
in all such speeches is most fit:) and thus by this glittering light, we may
easily se^ and truly say, nox praecessit, dies aut appropinquauit: that, the
night i^ past and the day draws nigh; and therefore using the holy Apostle
Counsel, let us cast away the works of darkness, and arm our selves with
light; and as at myd^ day, let us walk honestly in sigh^ of all the world, for
in such work^ we shall be sure to have this B^ star to guide and conduct us;
which God grant. Amen. Aue Maris stella.

THE XXXIIII. MEDITATION. Salus infirmorum, ora pro nobis. Health of the sick,
pray for us.
ALL manner of sickness may be reduced to two kinds of Infirmities; the one
corporal, that vexes and sometime takes away the life of the body; the other
spiritual, which weakeneth and sometime extinguisheth the life of the soul:
of both which, we may easily perceive the Blessed Virgin, to have been, and
daily to be a sovereign remedy, by which she is justly said to be Salus
infirmorum, the health of the infirm, or sick.

1. First then to consider the Blessed Virgins bounty and liberality toward
sick persons, we need no further persuasion then the manifold examples
written by grave Authors of the almost infinite miraculous cures wrought by the
Blessed Queen of Angels, upon diseased persons of all sorts, and of the
devotion of the places, yet extant, with the frequent concourse of sick and
weak people unto them, with miraculous restoring of their health, when it is
more convenient for their good, or the honor of God. This I say may serve for
sufficient proof of this point, for all such as are devoutly disposed toward
the B. Virgin.

2. Concerning spiritual diseases, it is not unknown to any Catholic, how
many miraculous Conuersions have been wrought by her holy intercession; how
many thereby have been brought from the very gates of hell, to the happy gate of
heaven; even such as have almost been swallowed up in the desperate gulf of
despair; which is an evident sign and token that she is Salus infirmorum, the
health of the diseased; by her holy intercession obteyning the perfect Cure
both of body and soul; giving us thereby full assurance, that if we
confidently have recourse unto her, we may obtain the like benefit, if we have
the like devotion. Salve Regina.

THE XXXV. MEDITATION. Refugium Peccatorum, ora pro nobis. Refuge of sinners,
pray for us.
IN the old Law there were many Cities ordained by Gods express commaundment,
whither men guilty of certain Crimes, might fly to save their lives, as now in
the new Law our Sanctuaries are, where offenders may be safe from the pursuing
enemy. And because the Blessed Virgin is a common Refuge, to whom all sinners
may fly, to hide themselves, until the wrath of God be past; therefore she is
called and rightly intytled the Refuge of sinners.

The sum of this Meditaton may be, to consider, That these forenamed Cities
of Refuge were ordained for such as casually did murder their brethren; for if
wifully they did commit any such crime it auayled them nothing at all to fly to
the said Cities: So whilst our sins, be of infirmity and weakness, we may
with confidence fly unto her; but if they proceed of obstinacy and malice, and
so continue, we can expect no favor at her hands, yet in this she so excels
all the foresaid Cities of Refuge, that although the sin be of this latter
sort of obstinate malice; yet if they will inform their understanding, and
conform their will, she is ready to take them under her protection, and with
her powerful prayers obtain them pardon, and bring them again into the
favor of God. Since therefore she does not disdain to be called Refuge of
sinners, let us not be so ungrateful and blind, as not to make use of so
friendly an offer, so strong a Refuge, and so potent an intercessor, but let
us devoutly fly unto her saying, Refugium Peccatorum, ora pro nobis: Refuge of
sinners pray for us. Pater and Aue.

THE XXXVI. MEDITATION. Consolatrix afflictorum ora pro nobis. Comfortresse of
the afflicted, pray for us.
WE have seen before that this heavenly Queen is a sovereign remedy of the
sick, the disease being either corporal or spiritual: now we are to consider
how she is a comfort to the afflicted, which will appear many ways.

1. First it is a comfort for one that is in affliction, to know that some
others have passed the same way; and far greater to understand that they
passed not only without hurt, but with great renown: So in our greatest
miseries and calamities if we look upon this comfortable object, and consider
the rare example she has left us, we shall find that all we suffer or can
suffer, is but a shaddovv to that which she has undergone. This then may be
the first cause of comfort to the afflicted.

2. Secondly it is a great comfort to those that are afflicted, to have some
dear and loving friend to take compassion of their misery, where they behold
as i^ were, the image of themselves, suffering in their friends heart ^ And
doubtless the Blessed Virgin has such perfect love unto he^ true Children, and
such tende^ compassion of their afflictions^ that she cannot choose but in
(...) manner suffer with them; which is exceeding comfort to have a partaker of
our sorrows. For albeit these passions be not in heaven, yet she has perfect
notice o^ our troubles, and as a most loving mother seeks to remedy our
afflictions when it is convenient for us.

3. Thirdly, it is a great refreshing to the afflicted, to know^ they have a
friend who is able to deliver them, if they give him notice of it, and show
that they desire it. And such is the Blessed Virgin always ready to give us
all comfort, if confidently and devoutly, as we ought, we fly unto her. For
so powerful is her intercession, that what she asks for us she obteyneth;
and so great her wisdom is, that she will ask nothing but what is convenient
for our eternal good. If therefore in our afflictions, she does not always
succor us, we may perswad our selves, that they be more auaylable for our
spiritual good, then all the comforts in the world. And by these considerations
we may see, how truly the B. Virgin is, Consolatrix afflictorum, the
comfortresse of the afflicted. Salve Regina.

THE XXXVII. MEDITATION. Auxiliu^ Christianorum, ora pro nobis. The help of
Christians, pray for us.
BY this title all true Christians do acknowledge the powerful help of the
Blessed Virgin in their necessities, especially when they undertake any worthy
exploit for her Blessed Son; as the conversion of Nations, the redeeming of
Christian Captives, or the just defense of their own Country, against the
treacherous invasions of barbarous people and Infidells; for in such worthy
employments, as the Christians have always used, to show their singular
devotion, in the invocation of our Blessed Lady: so she has never failed in
showing particular favors toward them.

Besides, we have other enemies both stronger and subtiler, against whose
assaults we have more need of her aid and assistance; I mean, the Capital
enemy of mankind, who never cease to deface the very image of God in us, and
who by her powerful intercession and holy prayers is put to confusion, yea by
the only naming of our B. Lady, which he is not able to endure. And lastly,
though we were free from all outward foes; yet shall we never want a
domestical enemy, whose disordered appetites and dishonest desires do seldom,
or never bear sway in those, who are truly devoted to the B. Virgin.

To conclude as S. Bernard writes, Bern. super Missus est.
Let us in all tribulations, in all straites, in all dangers, call upon her
Blessed name, and we shall prove in our selus how rightly she may be, and is
intytled Auxilium Christianorum, the ayder and helper of Christians: But that
we may the better enjoy this sovereign help, we must examine our selves, that
we be not, as Saint Augustine says, nomine Christiani, re vani, in name
Christians, but indeed vain, and deuoyd of all true Christianity: for such
have put a cloud before the bright beams of her favor, that they cannot
shine upon them. Therefore O Blessed Virgin help us, that we may be truly
servants of Christ and true Christians; for then we shall never be destitute of
thy loving help, who art the shield of all good Christians. O gloriosa Domina.

THE XXXVII. MEDITATION. Regina Angelorum, ora pro nobis. Queen of Angels,
pray for us.
IN these tytles following our B. Lady is called Queen of Angels, Queen of
Patriarks, Queen of Prophets, and the like. Wherefore we will briefly assign
some one or two reasons, why she may be said to be their Queen, for some
excellency that did shine in her, in that kind. As in this present Meditation
she is intytled Queen of Angels, by reason of her unspotted and chaste
behavior, wherein she did excel and lead, as we use to say, an Angelical life
on earth.

Secondly as she is now crowned Queen of Heaven, she may most fitly be called
Queen of Angels, because they be the chiefest assistants in that heavenly
Court, where she, as Queen and Empress, sits exalted above them all, and they
no doubt most prompt and obedient at her will; and by this we salute her in
this place, and call her, as indeed she is, Regina Angelorum, Queen of
Angels. Aue regina Caelorum.

THE XXXIX. MEDITATION. Regina Patriarcharum, ora pro nobis. Queen of the
Patriarchs, pray for us.
OUR blessed Lady may be called Queen of Patriarks in this respect, that the
high mystery of ^he Incarnation was fulfilled in ^er; and the chiefest Promises
made unto them had their effect ^n this Blessed Queen. Besides, ^er excellent
faith of all the mysteries of our faith, did far exceed that of the Patriarchs;
her ^eale was greater, her expectation more feruorous, her desires more ardent;
that whatsoever was ^n them prayse-worthy, was in the B. Virgin in a far more
high degree, and therefore most worthily we say, Regina Patriarcharum, ora pro
nobis, Queen of the Patriarks, pray for us.

THE XL. MEDITATION. Regina Prophetarum, ora pro nobis Queen of Prophets, pray
for us.
THE holy Prophets, as by their writings we may understand, (and their names
import as much) had great light from Almighty God, concerning the mysteries of
our faith; the conversion of the world; the order of the Church; the Birth
Death and Resurrection of Christ with the rest belonging to ou^ faith: but the
light that was communicated unto our blessed Lady, did go far beyond them,
her guiftes and prophesy greater, her grace more abundant, and was indeed the
shyning star, at which they in their prophesies did but point, as the Prophet
Isay witnesses when he says, Ecce Virgo concipiet, behold a Virgin shall
conceive: and by this she is said Queen of Prophets. Aue Maria.

THE XLI. MEDITATION. Regina Apostolorum, ora pro nobis. Queen of the
Apostles, pray for us.
BY greater reason, she is said to be the Queen of the Apostles, then either
of Patriarchs or Prophets, being (after the Ascension of Christ) left amongst
them as a Queen to govern and direct them, to their exceeding great comfort
and consolation. For although the holy Ghost was indeed their chief Directour
and Rectour; yet it is like that they did many things by her means; as it is
thought, that S. Luke did write his Gospel, especially concerning the infancy
of our Savior by her direction, though governed otherwise by the holy spirit
of God. And therefore when she passed out of this life, they all came together
miraculously conjoined, to celebrate with due reverence and devotion, the
Funeral rites of their sovereign Queen. Behold therefore, how deservedly she
is called Queen of the Apostles. Salve Regina.

THE XLII. MEDITATION. Regina Martyrum, ora pro nobis. Queen of Martyrs, pray
for us.
MOST worthily she is entytled Queen of Martyrs, and that for many reasons.

1. First because in her life she suffered more then any, yea then all the
Martyrs together, as I have already proved.

2. Secondly she may be called Queen of Martyrs, by reason of the rare example
that she left them.

3. And lastly, because in their agonyes and passions, no doubt they had
particular help and comfort from her, whom they called upon, as we do, Regina
Martyrum, ora pro nobis, Queen of Martyrs pray for us.

THE XLIII. MEDITATION. Regina Confessorum, ora pro nobis. Queen of
co^fessours, pray for us.
CONFESSOVRS are they, who though they cannot attain to the sublime dignity of
Martyrdom, yet with their good life and virtuous actions they confess Christ
to be true God and Man, and are ready to dye, if so it should please him, in
defense of the least article of his holy doctrine. And because the Blessed
Virgin in this point has gone so far beyond them all, and left them so
memorable examples of Constancy and Fortitude; therefore she is not only said to
be their comforter, as we have already meditated; but also their Queen, Regina
Confessorum, Queen of Confessors.

THE XLIIII. MEDITATION. Regina Virginum, ora pro nobis. Queen of Virgins,
pray for us.
OUR Blessed Lady having remained ever a perpetual Virgin, and being the first
that dedicated herself unto God by holy vow of Virginity; became the in^entour
and foundresse of this Angelical life; and therefore by great reason, she is
said to be the Queen of Virgins, and by which title we daily call upon her
saying, Regina Virginum, ora pro nobis, Queen of Virgins pray for us.

THE XLV. MEDITATION. Regina Sanctoru^ omniu^ ora pro nobis. Queen of all
Saints, pray for us.
BRTEFLY in this title we may consider, that what virtue or excellent gift
soever has been eminent in any Saint, has shyned far more in our blessed
Lady; yea whatsoever natural or supernatural gift or grace, has been in
them all together, has been all at once in this B. Queen; and therefore most
worthily we salute her by this renowned title of Queen of all Saints: and by
this desiring her powerful prayers, and holy intercession, we say, Regina
Sanctorum omnium ora pro nobis, Queen of all Saints pray for us. Amen. Aue
Maris stella

THE CONCLUSION, WITH AN APOSTROPHE to the ever B Virgin.
MY intention (Right Honorable, and most worthy) in these short meditations,
was not to delight your ears with flowing eloquence, which is both beyond my
reach, and past my skill; but my chief purpose tending only to the
encouragement of so Noble a CONGREGATION, so happily instituted in Honor of the
Imaculate Virgin Mary, Mother of God, and the satisfaction which I hoped many
other or her devout Children by reading thereof, would find; I was the more
willing to let it come to your view in the simple attire wherewith it is vested.

For albeit, of it self, it be scarce worthy to be read of any; yet for her
sake, of whom it treats, I desire it may diligently be perused of many.
Wherefore if any thing heerin be found worthy of commendations, let the praise
be given to the true deseruer; for all that is blameworthy, is wholly mine; for
which I crave, both your pardon for my error and boldness, and also your
prayers, for my future diligence, and amendment.

And thou thrice-happy and ever B. Virgin, Mother, Queen and Empress of
Heaven and Earth, whose Honor; next after thy sweet Son I most intend, in
these my willing, but weak labors; be thou a Star to enlighten those that
read them; a Mistress to instruct them, a Patroness to defend them, and a
safe Guide to direct them, to the haven of Eternal bliss, and everlasting
happiness. Amen.

THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
THE I. MEDITATION. Of the Venerable and facred Name of the most B. Virgin,
MARIA. page 1. The II. Meditation. Of the sanctity of the B. Virgin. page 14.
The III. Meditation. Sancta Deigenitrix ora pro nobis. Holy Mother of God, pray
for us. pa. 26. The IIII. Meditation. Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora pro nobis.
Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray for us. page 35. The V. Meditation. Matter Christi
ora pro nobis. Mother of Christ, pray for us. page 47. The VI. Meditation.
Matter diuina gratiae, ora pro nobis. Mother of divine grace, pray for us. pa.
55. The VII. Meditation. Matter purissima, ora pro nobis. Most pure Mother, pray
for us. page 62. The VIII. Meditation. Matter Castissima, ora pro nobis. Most
chaste Mother, pray for us. page 70. The IX. Meditation. Matter Inuiolata, ora
pro nobis. Undefiled Mother, pray for us. page 75. The X. Meditation. Matter
Intemerata, ora pro nobis. Untouched Mother, pray for us. page 79. The XI.
Meditation. Matter amabilis, ora pro nobis. Lovely Mother, pray for us. page 84.
The XII. Meditation. Matter Admirabilis, ora pro nobis. Admirable Mother, pray
for us. pa. 91. The XIII. Meditation. Matter Creatoris, ora pro nobis. Mother of
the Creator, pray for us. page 97. The XIV. Meditation. Matter Salnatoris, ora
pro nobis. Mother of our Savior, pray for us. pa. 102. The XV. Meditation.
Virgo Prudentissima, ora pro nobis. Most prudent Virgin, pray for us pa. 107.
The XVI. Meditation. Virgo Veneranda, ora pro nobis. Venerable Virgin, pray for
us. page 112. The XVII. Meditation. Virgo Pradicanda, ora pro nobis. Virgin
worthy of praise, pray for us. p. 118. The XVIII. Meditation. Virgo Potens, ora
pro nobis. Potent Virgin, pray for us. page 124. The XIX. Meditation. Virgo
Clemens, ora pro nobis. Clement Virgin, pray for us. page 129. The XX.
Meditation. Virgo sidelis, ora pro nobis. Faithful Virgin, pray for us. page
134. The XXI. Meditation. Speculum Iustitiae, ora pro nobis. Mirror of
Justice, pray for us. page 139. The XXII. Meditation. Seeds Sapientiae, ora pro
nobis. The seat of wisdom, pray for us. page 144. The XXIII. Meditation.
Causae nostrae laetitiae, ora pro nobis. Cause of our Joy, pray for us. page
148. The XXIV. Meditation. Vas Spirituale, ora pro nobis. Spiritual vessel,
pray for us. page 153. The XXV. Meditation. Vas Honorabile, ora pro nobis.
Honorable Vessel, pray for us. page 157. The XXVI. Meditat. Vas insigne
deuotionis, ora pro nobis. Nobleves. ell of devotion, pray for us. p. 160. The
XXVII. Meditation. Rosae mystica, ora pro nobis. Mystical Rose pray for us.
page 164. The XXVIII. Meditation. Turris Dauidica, ora pro nobis. Tower of
David, pray for us. page 169. The XXIX. Meditation. Turris Eburnea, ora pro
nobis. Tower of Iuory, pray for us. page 174. The XXX. Meditation. Domus aurea,
ora pro nobis Golden house pray for us. page 178. The XXXI. Meditation.
Foederis arca, ora pro nrbis. Arc of the Covenant, pray for us. page 181. The
XXXII. Meditation. Ianua Caeli, ora pro nobis. Gate of heaven, pray for us.
page 186. The XXXIII. Meditation. Stella matutina, ora pro nobis. Morning
star, pray for us. pa. 189. The XXXIIII. Meditation. Salus infirmorum, ora
pro nobis. Health of the sick, pray for us. pa. 193. The XXXV. Meditation.
Refugiu^ Peccatorum, ora pro nobis. Refuge of sinners, pray for us. page 196.
The XXXVI. Meditation. Consolatrix afflictorum, ora pro nobis. Comfortresse of
the afflicted, pray for us. page 198. The XXXVII. Meditation. Auxilium
Christianorum, ora pro nobis. The help of Christians, pray for us. page 202.
The XXXVIII. Meditation. Regina Angeloru^, ora pro nobis. Queen of Angels,
pray for us. pa. 205. The XXIX. Meditat. Regina Patriarcharu^, ora pro nobis.
Queen of the Patriarks, pray for us. p. 207. The XL. Meditation. Regina Pro
phetarum, oro pro nobis. Queen of Prophets, pray for us. p. 208. The XLI.
Meditation. Regina Apostolorum, ora pro nobis, Queen of the Apostles, pray for
us. page 209. The XLII. Meditation. Regina Martyrum, ora pro nobis. Queen of
Martyrs, pray for us. page 211 The XLIII. Meditation. Regina Confessorum ora pro
nobis. Queen of Confessors, pray for us. page 212. The XLIV. Meditation.
Reginae Virginum, ora pro nobis. Queen of Virgins, pray for us. page 213. The
XLV. Meditation. Regina Sanctorum omnium, ora pro nobis. Queen of all Saints,
pray for us page 214.
FINIS.

