A CONFESsion of Faith, made by common consent of diverse reformed Churches
beyond the Seas: with an Exhortation to the Reformation of the Church.

Perused amd allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Henry Wykes, for Lucas Harrison.

Unto the Christian Reader.
THe subtle Serpent, our deadly enemy Satan, lays many snares to intangeil
mankind, to withhold him from coming to the truth: but especially two, which
be of all other most perilous, Wilful ignorance and Slau^derous reports:
wherewith, if once man be ensnared, say, what you list, do what you please, he
lies still in his errors, and will not be removed: for wilful ignorance so
blinds his eyes from readinge, slaunderours reports so stop his ears from
hearing the truth, that not knowing the clerenesse of the light, he estemeth
the darkness of a cloudie night, as the brightness of noone days, and giuinge
light credit to false rumors, believes forged lies as infallible truths. Thus
many a Christian ketcheth his bane: and no marvel. For, what disease is cured
by increasing the corrupt humors, whereon the sickness feeds? how is it
possible, that he should be won to the Gospel, that wittingly and wilfully
does blindesielde him self, does stubbernly refuse to Read the truth, does
frowardely disdain to peruse any other books, then such as nussell him in
his errors? What good success, trow you, is that Captain like to have,
that considers his own power only, and is not desirous to know his enemies
strength also? what wise and trusty Lawier will harken to his Clientes tale
alone, and would not gladly (if opportunity were offered) scanne his
adversaries writings also? If the judge will give ear to the first accuser,
and believe all that he says to be true, and either will not hear the
defendant, or if he do, esteems his words as lies, how can he judge
arighte? if thou wander in Popery as in darkness, and wilt not walk in the
light of the Gospel: if thy soul be poisoned with venomous superstition, and
will not taste the preservative of God his word: if thou consider Antichrist
his power only, and wilt not understand Christ his might and puisance: if
thou defend thine errors as an evil cause, and wilt not regard thine
adversaries proufes to mayntaine his right: if thou will credit the first
doctrine, that ever thou hardest, which is nothing else but men's Traditions,
and wilt not harken to any other truth: no marvel, if thou be blind, if thy
soul be poisoned, if thou be conquered, if thou lose thy cause, if thou judge
wrongefully in weighty matters of Faith and true Religion. Such was the
wilful ignorance of the Idolatrous Jews, who said to Jeremy: The word,
that thou haste spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear it of
thee, but we will do what soever thing goes out of our own mouth, we will
burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, we will power out drink offerings unto
her, as we have done, both we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes:
for then had we plenty of vitayles, and were well and felt no evil: so, they
that now adays will not hear the Preacher of God his word, that will do
what they list, that will offer to their Lady of heaven, that will sense to
their wormeaten Images, that will do as their forefathers, their Kings and
Princes have done, bosting, that then they had plenty of all things, that
then it was a merry world, that then they felt no evil, do wilfully, as it
were, hydewinke themselves from seeing the truth: No marvel if Iehoiakim run
hedlonge into his destruction, when he would not vouchsafe so much as to give
Iehudie the hearing, while he red the book of the Lord, written by Baruch,
but cut it with a penknife, hurled it into the fire, and burnt it to Ashes.
Ahab was content at the length to hear what Michah would say, but estemyng
his words as lesinges, and believing his flattering false Prophets hasted to
his miserable end. And as Michah then said, that a spirit went out, and was
a false spirit in the mouths of al his Prophets, so in this our age, not one
but many spirits are broken lose, and be false Spirits both in the mouths,
tounges and hearts of our Romish cole Prophets. For how many lies coin they?
how many slanderous Sclaunderous reports.
reports forge they to deface the Gospel and the true professors thereof? Do
they not lay to our charge (as yt Jews did to Christ) that our doctrine is
new learning? that we are Anabaptists, Pelagians, Libertines, detestable
Heretics? that we contemn fasting, neglect prayinge, do no Alms deeds,
dispraise good works? that we deny God his power, believe not his words,
defy Christ his Image, and are enemies to his Cross? that we falcifie the
Scriptures, refuse ye Doctors, deface the Councels, set at naught Traditions?
that we honor not the Saints, esteem not the Mother of Christ, nor his
blessed Martirs? that we care not for the dead? that we make God the auctor of
sin, and man as a stock or a block, void of all goodness? that we pass not
for the Church, and rail against the head thereof? that we abuse the
Sacraments? that we are rebels, and teach subjects to disobay their Prince,
inferiors to resist their superiors? that we preach nothing but liberty,
liberty? to be short, that we cannot agree among our selves about the
chiefest points of our Religion. These and many such like slanderous
reports; have lyinge spirits put into the mouths of the Romish Clergy,
and their adherentes, which if thou credit to be as true as the Gospel, it
will be long before thou believe the truth of the Gospel.

But if thou will voutchsafe, good Christian Reader, diligently to peruse in
the fear of the Lord, this little treatise, not condemnynge it before thou
read it, nor wrestynge every word to an evil sense, but with indiffere^cie
ponder each thing and judge uprightly: then, then I hope that God will open
thine eyes, and give thee grace to see and to acknowledge his truth, will
enriche thee with wisdom, to discern the Spirit of truth, from the Spirit
of error, light from darkness, Christ from Antichriste.

To those slanderous reports I need not to answer particularly, because
they be confuted by this work it self, as by readinge thou may
understand. But two points, I cannot omit untouched, which are often urged
and never proved: that we falcifie the Scriptures, and agree not emonge our
selves; in the weightiest matters of Religion. Touching the first, we gather
the true meaning of the Scriptures Expoundinge of Scripture.
by the circumstances of the text, by reconcilinge it with other places of God
his word, to the confirmation of the truth, and not to the establishinge of
our own devises: as some wreste them and rack them, to maintain their fond
fantasies, invented of their foolish brains. We allege not the Racking of
Scripture.
saying of Christ to Peter, Ego oraui pro te etc. I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not, to prove that the Pope cannot err: Nor, Nemo
accendit candela, and ponit eam sub modio: No man lights a candell, and
hides it under a bushel, to show that candels should be set at none days on
the Altar: nor, Lumen ad reuelationem gentium, a light to lighten the
Gentiles, for carriyng of candels on Candelmas day: nor, Deus creauit hominem
ad imaginem sui, God created man according to his own image, for erectinge of
images in Churches: nor Abraham's circumcisinge, for sole and chaste life: nor,
Omnia munda mu^dis: nor, Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, Al things
are clean to the clean, They that are in the flesh cannot please God, to
prove that Priests may not marry: Nor, Nisi abundauerit Iustitia vestra plus
quam scribarum and pharisaeoru^, no^ intrabitis in regnum coelorum, Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven, to declare, that a Bishop must
have more garments at his mass, the^ Aaron had at his sacrifice. After such
a fantastical childishe sort, we violently wrest not the holy Scriptures, to
that sense which the holy Ghost never meante. Now touching our disagrement
emonge our selves in the Disagreyng in Religion.
weightest matters of Religion. Surely, if we agree no better then Papists
do, then were we at a great Jar: wherefore, I counsel them to pluck the
beam out of their own eyes, and then indeuer to remove the mote from their
brothers sight: be they so blind that they see not the civil war betwixt
themselves, and that for the chiefest Articles of their Religion? Is not yt
Popes supremacy a principal point Papists disagree, about Supremacy.
of their doctrine? And never hard they that Pope Clement denies that it is
lawful for a Bishop to bear both swoordes: saiynge, If thou will have
both, thou shalt disceaue thy self, and those ye hear thee? Contrary wise,
that Pope Boniface the. 8. was in a solemn day decked in his Pontificalibus,
and carried about Rome on men's shoulders (the great lobberly Babie would not
go alone, but must be borne) the next day glitteringe in his Imperial robes
he mounted on his Mule (an uncomely sight to behold an Ass ridyng upon a
Mule) and commau^dyng a naked swoords to be borne before him, he him self
criynge with a loud voice, Ecce. duo gladij hic, behold here are two
swoordes: bostinge him self to be Lord of the whole world (much like to
Satan's brag) both concerning Temporal and Spiritual matters. Pope
Pelagius affirmed, that the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, was ordained
neither of Men nor of Counsel, but by Christ his own appointment. Pope John
the. 3. his next successor utterly denied it. Pope Gregory the first called
him the forerunner of Antichriste, yt would be named Universal Bishop. Pope
Boniface the. 3. would be so called, manger the teeth of his Clergy, and
obtained that proud title by the mischievous aid of the impious Emperor
Phocas that Traiterous murderer, and murtheringe traitor. Pope Leo the. 3.
acknowleged it to be the Emperor his right, to elect and confirm, whom he
list to be Bishop of Rome. Pope Adrian the third forbad the people to
weight for the Emperors pleasure therein, deniyng that he had any thing to
do in such matters. Behold these Popes agree for their Headship like cattes
and dogs.

Is not erectinge of Images a principal Papists disagree about Images.
poincte of Popish Divinity? how happened it then, that the Greek Church,
and the Latin Church fell at such variance about the^, that whereas before
they agreed friendly in other matters, and were united as one Church, for
Images they were separated, and never since joined again? How well agrees
Pope Gregory the first, who would in no wise have Images to be woorshipped, or
kneeled unto, with Pope Gregory the third, who decreed that they should be
woorshipped and had in greater reverence then ever they were before, and that,
whosoever were of a contrary opinion, should be condemned as an Heretic? Is
not Tra^substantiation Disagreme^t about Transubstantiation.
a chief, a principal, and most necessary Article of Popish Divinity? how
chanced it then, yt not long after the reign of Carolus the great, 840.
years after Christ his incarnation, there began such marvelous great
contention about it, and the best learned could not agree in the matter, as the
writings and doings of Bartram, John Scot, Paschasius, La^tfranke, and diverse
others witness? Lantfrancke confessed, that the earthly substance of bread
is turned into the essence or substance of the Lord his Body, so that it may
truly be said, that we receive both the self same true Body, which Christ
took of the virgin Mary, and that we receive not the self same Body? Many of
our late Transubsta^tiators affirm, that the substance of Bread vanishes
away, and the substance of Christ his Body comes in place thereof. M.
Hardyng bids us Articl. 12. Diu. 7.
beware, that we think not that the Body of Christ is made of Bread as of a
matter, but says yt where bread was before, after Consecration there is the
very Body of Christ, this good counsel he gives, least we should misconster
his Augustine, who, (as he says, albeit we can not read it in him) writes
that the Body and Blood of Christ is made of the Substance of Bread and
Wine. The counsel called Concilium Vercellense allowed and confirmed the
opinion of the said Lantfranke: the Council holden at Antegane, and an other
at Turone, condemned that Vercellense Concilium. Pope Innocentius. 3. in his
Laterane Sinode added to the. 12. articles of our Christian Faith,
Transubstantiation, as the. 13. Article, whereas diverse other Papists think
not that we are bound to believe it in pain of damnation, or as the Articles
of our belief. Some say, that the true and natural Body of Christ is in the
Sacrament, but not naturally and sensibly: some other, that it is there
naturally and sensibly, as it is evident by Berengarius his recantation that
Pope Nicolas and the most part of the Clergy present at the second counsel
assembled at Rome then were persuaded. A late writer not so wise as hardy,
shoting his crooked bolte, ouershoteth his fellows and him self after a
strange sort: saying, that Christ his Body is present in the Sacrament, (not
as a Creature, nor as a Creator, but) after a manner as a thing between both,
not after a gross and carnal manner, but spiritually and supernaturally, and
yet substantially, not by local, but by substantial presence, etc. and to
mende the matter, he infers at the last, but in such a manner as God only
knows. Well fare a good help at a dead lift, disputinge of Christ his
presence, in the Sacrament, and tellyng how he is there and how he is not
there, concludes that he can not tell how he is there, for God only knows
and not he, but blindely I leave this blind guide, and ignorant Doctor
stumbling ignorantly in darkness, and teaching in ignorance he sees not what.

It is a world to behold, how shamefully they disagree about Hoc est Corpus
Disagreme^t about the words of Consecration.
meum, This is my Body: some say they be not the words of Consecration, but
that Christ did Consecrate, when he Blessed: most part deny that, some say
by the word Hoc, this is meante, Bread and not his Body: some his Body and
not Bread: some nether Bread nor his Body, but Indiuiduum vagu^, indiuiduum in
genere, indiuiduum entis, indiuiduum insignitu^, Indiuiduum indiuidui, and I
know not what fantastical unknown, uncertain, insensible thing. Vouchsafe,
good gentle Reader to peruse the answer of the godly learned precious Iuell
and reverend father in Christ B. of Sarum, to Articl. 24.
M. Hardinges Indiuidum vagu^, and thou shalt find, vij. or. viij. sundry
opinions or expositions about these words of Consecration, Hoc est Corpus
meum, this is my Body: which argues either their blind ignorance, or their
obstinate malitiousnesse. Thus all men may see, how they dissent in
Tra^substantiatio^, one of the Articles of their belief. I need not to
declare the vehemency of Pope Gelasius to The Sacrament in both kinds.
have the Sacrament ministered in both kinds: affirminge, that he, which
divided the Euchariste, and when he takes ye one part, absteyneth from the
other, does wickedly and commits sacrilege. For you know that Pope
Innocentius thought it no sacrilege, but high service to God, to command
that the Cup should not be ministered to the Lay people. It were to long to
show, how pitifully they dissent, and how vnco^stantly they answer, when they
be urged with absurdities, which necessarily follows their Transubsta^tiatio^.

It were to tedious to trouble your Disagreme^t about the Mass.
good ears with the iarring discord of Pope Leo, who held it unlawful to
say any more then one Mass, in one Church, in one day: and our later Popes,
who defend it to be meritorious to say a Tre^tall of Masses, in one forenoone,
in one place, whereas in deed one half Mass were to many. It were
bootelesse to put you in remembrance that you shall find very few, or none,
but mislike some point or other of Popish inventions: some the Latin
service, some prayer to Saints, some the Popes Supremacy, some Purgatory,
some Justification by works, some ministering in one kind, some sole
receauinge, some crepinge and offering to Images, some the making the picture
of God the Father, and the most part Pilgrimage, pardons, Relics, with such
like trumperie: howbeit they will openly defend the doctrine of the Romish
Church, and boldly talk their pleasure against the reprouers thereof. Hereby
thou maiste perceive, good Christian reader, what credit should be given to
the^, who would accuse us of discord, when they themselves agree not emonge
them selves, but with shame enough, be at great variance for their Princely
Supremacy, for the free election, sure confirmation, and absolute jurisdiction
of their holy Father the Pope, for the glorious erecting of their wodden
images, for their marvelous miracle of their strange Transubstantiation, for
the unnatural presence of Christ's Body in their host, for the coniuringe
Words of their divine Consecration, for the sacrilege robbing of the lay
people of the Cup, for to often saying of their Idolatrous Mass, for the
greatest mysteries, highest points, stro^gest keys, and chiefest Articles of
their opinions. Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. It is a foul
fault to rebuke an other for that, wherein thou thy self most offendest. If
they answer that the truth of their doctrine is one, albeit in some points,
a few dissent, and savor a little of errors, and so ascribe the blame to men,
and not to Religion, it might please them to allege the same excuse for our
defense. For, as here in this confession they may read: the Articles of our
doctrine dissent not one from the other. If the^ any cominge out of Egipte,
desire to woorshippe God in the form of a Calfe as the Egiptians did: or
being lately weaned from the breast of Gentilitie, long to lap some sower
whigge of Paganism: or being turned from Iudaisme, delight in sundry of
Aarons gorgious ceremonies: or being converted from Papistrie smell fulsomely,
sauer ranckely, yea stink filthelie of some dunge of Popery, blame the me^,
and not the truth. For wine is not to be dispraysed, because dronkerdes
distemper themselves therewith: nor meat to be refused, for that gluttons
surfaite thereby. The undoubted verity of God his word is pleasant meat,
and comfortable drink to that Christian soul, which does hunger and thirste
after righteousness, albeit ye queasie stomachs of the ungodly cannot brook
it, or the infirmity of weakelings, will not keep al, but cast up some, that
it receaueth. As for us, it may plainly be perceived by this little treatise,
yt we dissent not in any Article of our belief: in any matter of salvation or
damuation: but rather in ceremonies, in trifelinge and indifferent things, yea
and in such sort, that notwithstanding we al consent in this, that they may be
altered, removed, and quite abolished without any great hindera^ce to Christ
his Church.

Thus have I given thee warning, good Christian reader, of two dangerous
snares: wilful Ignorance, and slanderous Reports, wherewith thy crafty enemy
Satan would entangle thee, and withholde thee from coming to the truth. Now
then it rests, that thou wilfully do not blindefield thine eyes, from
beholding the clear light of the Gospel, least wittingly thou stumble into
perilous ginnes, nor lightly open thine ears to believe forged slau^ders, least
thou be fast tied, with the strong cheynes of diuelishe illusions, but that
thou willingely mark the proufes on both sides, and indifferently hear, what
we teach, and so uprightly judge our cause: which thing that even the
simplest might the better do, I have done mine endeavor faithfully to
translate out of Latin into English the Confession of the Christian faith,
co^piled by the general consent of sundry Christian Churches, as by the title
thou may understand. I list not at large to co^me^de their godly Zeal, who
would not couetously hoorde up from their poor brethren so great a
treasure, but liberally divide it among them to the enritchinge of their souls
with heavenly riches, for so they might lose the chiefest part of their
deserved praise, by the folly of a slender co^mender. Neither mind I to extol
the worthiness of their work: for pure Gold compared with rustie brass
prefers it self, and needs no prayser. This only I affirm, that by
readyng this book, the learned may refresh his memory, with profitable
repetinge of that he has been taught, the unskillful may learn that he never
knew, the faithful may be confirmed in the truth, the infidel reclaymed
from his error, the Parent, the Child, the Master, the servant, the Prince,
the subject, instructed to serve God, to labor in his vocation, to fulfill his
duty, so that much profit may ensue to all, except any man being blinded
with the dark miste of superstition and idolatry, disdain to read the
truth, whom justly we may accuse of wilful ignorance: or else, being wedded
to his lewd fantasy, condemns before he reads, who declares him self to
be of a malicious frowardenesse, stubbernlie bente against Christ and his
word. God (if it be thy will) convert all such from their sinful ways: God
give them the spirit of wisdom, to consider, that it is hard for them to
kick against the prick: God soften their stony hearts, least the preaching
of thy Gospel be to them, Odor mortis in mortem, a savor of death unto death
and eternal damnation. God indue us all with his heavenly grace not only to
hear and read this infallible truth, but to believe it also: that believing it,
we may openly profess it, and openly professing it, may constantly continue
therein, and constantly continuynge therein, may lead our lives accordingly,
to the profit of our country, the edifiynge of thy Church, the defacinge of
Hippocrisie, the rootinge up of iniquity, the establishinge of thy word, the
aduaunsinge of thine honor and our souls Salvation: Grant this O merciful
Father for thy dear son Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be praise and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

q, I. O.

FINIS.
To the most renoumed Prince, Jews of Borbon, Prince of Condey, etc. and
other famous and noble Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, Barons and Lords of the
Nobility, that embrace the true Gospel of Christ in the realm of France.
Theodorus Beza Vezelius a minister of the Church of Geneua, wishes grace and
peace, from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Present unto thee most renoumed Prince, and to the What is true nobility?
residue of you that are made noble by the true knowledge of Christ, through
the mercy of our most merciful and heavenly Father, the books of the new
Testament: which were translated into Latin by me, a few years by passed,
and are now again perused by me, with as great fidelity and diligence as I
could possible, and set forth with certain brief summaries of the doctrine
therein co^prehe^ded, a present unto the Churches of God (of whom you are the
tutors fosters and norishinge Fathers by the The noble are the norishers of the
church.
decree of the most Christian King) would to God so profitable, as I trust
unto you it shall be pleasant and acceptable. For why should not I promise my
self this of you, who have so stoutely and constantly declared before the whole
world that you are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: and to whom (I
would know) rather then to you (which do not only approve and allow the
doctrine here taught, but set it at liberty, and restore it) should I
dedicate these my poor trauayles? But what need we these trauayles shall some
say? Behold therefore I will recite the reasons more at large that have moved
me hereunto.

Those men are altogether intolerable and in no case to be suffered, who for
the desire of Nouelty, do condemn Antiquity may not be
Antiquity, like as also those are worthy great reproach, which can find
condemned only for desire of Novelty.
taste in nothing but in that which is old and ancient. For I pray you,
were they not al once new which now are old and ancient? And this can not be
denied of any, that will confess the truth without contention, that evermore
in all worlds there were some, Errors are old.
that either of ignorance, or of set purpose, did darken and obscure the
manifest truth of God. And also this is evident (though God did never so
severely punish the infidelity of the world, that he did leave his Church
utterly destitute of the true knowledge of his word) yet that there was not
always the like measure of knowledge, no not in those things ye are the chief
points of our Religion. So that some most false and dangerous errors are
very ancient, in so much that Paul him self of old time did write unto the
Thessalonians, saying: Now the mystery of iniquity is already in workinge.
And John said, that even then were many Antichrists in the world. Antichriste
is old.
Howbeit no man can easily find sure and certain remedies for these euels The
want of the word is the cause of all error.
and diseases, save only that knows the right and true causes of them, the
which causes in deed are many, but they flow all as it were forth of one
fountain: that is, because that men turn from the word of God, from the
word I say, that is contained in the books of the Prophets and the
Apostles, unto their own dreams and inventions. For that light being once
taken away (the which who so does not see to be the only and singular light,
sees nothing at all) what can follow, but that like blind men, they should
grope in darkness? Neither are they in any wise to be heard, that are of a
contrary opinion. For what say they, do not the Heretics pretend the word
of God? therefore stand we need of some one rule whereby ye false
interpretations of the word which sometime is ambiguous and doubtful, may
be discerned from the true: But What rule will serve.
what rule shall this be?

One sort do here obtrude unto us, that their most vain name of Catholic or
Universal, which at all times Catholic.
and in every place; and with all men has been received. Of whom if thou go
further to ask the question, what is so Catholic? there of necessity they
must stick fast in the mire, when the demand is made of ye most part, of
the matters that are in controversy.

Another sort set before them selfs the Councels and old Canons: to whom
Councelles and Canons.
they give glorious titles, as though thereby the concord of the Church might
be recovered, but all in vain: for I do think that no man is now so
ignorant, but that he does know, that many Synodes and Councels (I do speak
of them that are not openly condemned) have decreed even in things concerning
doctrine, not only darkely but also unlearnedly. Wherefore oftentimes the
Prouincials have been corrected by the General, and yet the Provincial has
sometimes judged more uprightly then the General. And that the truth was so,
every one may easily perceive, that can compare Ga^grensis Gangrensis Synod,
taught more purely of the Sacraments, etc.
Counsel with many that they call general. I pass over that thing which
the very History of those times does most manifestly prove, that in those
which we may call the best times (if they be compared with the latter) there
was partly such ambition of the Bishops, partly such a vain babbling
ignorance, and of many of them such an open and desperate malice, that very
Satan has been the president of some Councils.
blind men may easily see that Satan was the president of these assemblies.
What now then if we do set before us the Councels assembled for a rule?
since that time that most manifest tyranny has oppressed ye Church, such as
that late Council of Trent was? Yea what if those best and most approved
Councils determine nothing of any of the chief points of Religion, unless it
be of one point or twain? Again, what if some be corrupted, their Epistels
falcified, their decrees feigned, and forged Canons an infinite number crope^
into place? That fraud Pope Boniface did falcifie the Nicene Council.
and craft of Boniface, then Bishop of Rome, which was perceived in the time
of Augustine, in the Aphricane Council is not unknown: the which yet a
certain foolish and most wicked Apostata, whose impudency also is well
known, went about of late to excuse before thee (most noble Prince) To
conclude, what have not these wicked men attempted? and what durst they not
take in hand in these Countries, in the which things were lawful that they
lusted? Thus much then for the Councelles.

Others do fly unto the writings Those that call most for the Fathers will
not allow the Fathers in all things.
of those that they call the ancient and Catholic Fathers, but of so great a
number of those, whom I pray you shall we choose? for we have but few very
ancient (that is to say unto the time of Constantine) emonge whom the Latins
undoubtedly were the chief: yet are they such as they that have the Fathers in
most reverence, will not altogether agree unto, without many exceptions.

Then Arius first occupied the age that followed, unto the manifest fall of the
Roman Empire: and after him Macedonius, deniyng the holy Spirit to be God,
and therefore was called (...). But chiefly Nestorius and Eutyches in the East,
unto whom the principal and most excellent wits did answer and oppose
them selves: neither was there any age that had more plenty of learned Bishops.
The sect of the Pelagians did occupy the West, whose dregs to this day do
still destroy the Church. Here now I require that without the injury of any,
I may utter the matter as it is. Therefore I demand this question: Which
of the Fathers shall judge these controversies.
which one chiefly, or whom of al these Fathers, they will have for the judges
and desciders of these controversies that are at this day emongst us? First
of all, they them selves (as becomes them well) refuse this authority: for
they cry with one voice, that they do bring that, which the Lord has
taught: The Fathers will have the word of God judge.
and that they will have their doctrine no farther maintained then it is proved
by the word of God written. The sayings of Cyprian, Augustine, and
Chrysostom, chiefly of all others are evident in this point: whereby they call
us to the only holy Scripture. I will say a little more also by the license
of them, that have studied their writings. Even at that time in Grecia, The
learned Fathers permitted foul errors.
did Satan lay the first foundations of the invocation of the dead: the which
error the Bishops of most reputation did not only not resist, neither yet
other godly and learned men (save for such faults) but were occupied to set
forth their eloquence al together in writing of their praises. Others of
less learning busied themselves wholly in certain vain studies, which that
nation of the Greeks was always ouermuche given unto: as to the buildinge of
glorious temples, for the honoring of the memories of ye Martyrs, and to the
heapynge together of ceremonies. Another sort partly of ignorance, partly of
covetousness and ambition, and in the end of a manifest wickedness, did not
only not repress those open superstitions, as they did grow, but altogether
did norish them. Howbeit in that time, three euels did principally reign:
first, that they that had been brought up in Philosophy, Three euels in the
days of those Fathers. Philosophical Divinity.
did not remember that most grave and Apostolical sentence: Take you heed,
least any do spoil you through Philosophy. For besides that they had many
vain speculations, as in the appliyng to the Angels the imaginatio^s of Plato,
concerning the intelligences and Platoes superstitious dreams.
spirits (the which error seems to have continued from the Apostles time,
who condemns plainly the superstition about the Angels) they did manifestly
wraste the word of God unto those lessons, that they had learned of the
Philosophers. Hereof sprange the opinions, of the power and free will of man,
which are altogether Aristotelicall, Aristotels Divinity.
wherewith at this day the Church of God is shaken, and had been trodden down
long ago, had not Augustine (provoked by Pelagius) set him self against it:
yet to pass many other things (which I would gladly to be covered as the
faults of the Fathers) he him self also sometimes bearing to high a fail,
rusheth upon the rocks of humane Philosophy. Yet was there an other evil the
worst of al, that like The third evil of Allegories.
as wc a deadly disease, all men's minds were infected, with a marvelous desire
to turn and transform all the Scriptures into allegories: in the invention
whereof, every man thought every thing in this point to be lawful to him
self. Origene surely seems, to Origene.
have given occasion to both those euels, of following the Philosophers, and
also of the Allegories: which was the most vnpure writer (as I do take him)
that ever did write upon the Scriptures: whom though many (as he well
deserved) did abhor, yet some, of the other side, had him in great admiration
because he was very excellent in the knowledge of the languages, arts and
sciences: and some did pursue him rather of envy then of upright judgment.
But this evil did not stay in the East, but spredde through Afric, Italy,
France and Spain: so that all the Scripture was transformed into perpetual
Allegories. In the mean reason Pelagius and Donatus did arise, against whom
God set up Augustine Augustine.
and caused the chief points of Christian Religion (as of the providence and
Predestination, of free will, of faith, and of Justification by free grace,
which were almost oppressed by the Philosophical Gloses of the Gretian
bishops, to be known and published: and yet notwithstanding at the same time
(which is wonderful) prayer to the dead did grow into use, and also that
foolish opinion of single life: the which shameful errors Hyerome is not
Hierome.
ashamed to defend. And the multitude of Ceremonies did increase, as Augustine
complayneth to Ianuarius: and many did honor the Monks as they had been
Angels, especially in Egypt and Syria, the most superstitious of all nations:
and then began prayers to be made for the dead: and the question of Plato of
the fire of Purgatory did Plato his Purgatory.
then arise, the which yet was not generally received in the Church, as the
writings of Augustine do manifestly declare. Wherefore to returns to the
matter, whom of so great a multitude shall we especially choose for judges: if
we will hear that Apostata of whom I have spoken, we must chouse them that
lived about the time of Theodosias the great. And surely I grant that there
was at that time very learned Bishops, but yet dare I affirm this thing
(the which I do protest that I do not speak for the reproach of any) that
scarcely any of them ca^ be named which does not both dissent from him The
Doctors disse^t one from another.
self, and from others in many things, and those of no small importance. And
if peradventure that Apostata (that I did speak of) shall deny it, then let
me be counted a lier, onles I do plainly prove it. But here I know what
exception he will make: at the least by these writers says he, it shall
appear, what was the form and outward face of the Catholic Church. As
though What need we seek for formalitie.
this were the chief point of our controversy, and not rather of the
doctrine it self: or as though at all times, al rites and Ceremonies are to be
received without exception, which the Apostolic Church it self has used
either as profitable or necessary for their times: and as though they were not
plain Build thy house before thou paynte it.
fools which when the foundations of the houses were al fallen down, would be
so careful for building up the roof? And what need many words? I suppose
that many of you (most excellent and noble Lords) have in your remembrance how
when we did treat of this matter at Poissy (where we had rather a trifling
skirmishe and alteration then a serious and earnest disputation) we did thus
conclude in few words: that the way and mean to finish the troubles and
controversies, which some froward Newtrals and halfefaced me^ Agree of the
doctrine then talk of the comely Ceremonies.
(to name them no worse) do so importunately crave, was first of al, that we
should dispute and agree by the word of God, of the doctrine it self, and of
Faith, the which being once established, then should we agree much more easily
about the Ceremonial matters: of the which we would reject some as vain and
foolish, some as superstitious, either by them selves or by circumstances,
some as altogether wicked, and some finally we would willingly admit: which
could be proved either profitable or necessary. What then do these men
require any more? assuredly most noble Prince, they seek this one thing, that
they may bring into hatred Many that seem qualifiers of these controversies
seek to spoil the flock still without check.
the faithful Ministers of God, as men seditious, ambitious, and lovers of
changes, such as would have all things new, that they themselves may still
spoil and destroy the poor flock of Christ without controlment. For they
are like those without doubt of whom the Lord speaks: that they neither
will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven the^ selves, nor suffer others to enter
in. They are the most perilous men undoubtedly, that are suffered Who are the
most perilous enemies?
to live this day under the Su^ne: more dangerous by much, then the open
enemies of the Gospel, and therefore ought you principally, that are the
patrones and defenders of the Churches of God, (by the most Christian Kings
decree) to avoid such men and beware of them: who partly for their bellies
sake, partly for lucre, partly for envy and malice, partly for favor of them
whom they flatter, lie in wait to trap you. But I see that I have been somewhat
long in confutinge this opinion: therefore I do return to the matter. For
what shall we say or do to those, which imagine that the public error
Public error ca^ not be the rule of Religion.
must be followed for the rule of Religion? which set the bare names of
fathers and custom against all reasons and proufes? which finally do stick
only to that one Church, which no The Papists calling one church Universal,
ioygne together co^traries.
less foolishly then falsely they call the Catholic Romish Church (that is
to say an Universal particular Church?) surely I do think that we must let
them alone, least we should seem to labor to cure madness with reason. But
now if none of these that we have God is the Judge.
spoken of, may sit as Judges in this cause, but rather must be judged of
others, in what court then shall this great controversy be pleaded? Verily
before the judgment seat of God only. Then will they say, let him be called
Where shall we find him.
down from his Heavenly palace. Nay why do they not draw him forth of these
their Chancels and holy corners? forsooth because we stand in no need of a
dumb God, that can do nothing but keep silence, such one as their crusted
God is in the wafer cake: but of that good God yt speaks clearly and
plainly unto us. And I pray you where shall we find him? no Not in the Box.
But in the Scriptures.
where doubtless save in the writings of those me^ of God, who (as Peter
witnesses) have been stirred up by the holy Ghost to speak unto us: of those
I say upon whose doctrine as upon the foundation, the Apostle cries that the
Church is builded, even upon the books of the Apostles and the Prophets
which are contained under the name of the Old and new Testament. But say
they, the doubt stands of the interpretation Objection.
of this word which we say must be sought at the Church. But first of all we
must agree which is the Answer.
Church: for the Synagoge of Satan also does abuse that fair and beutiful
name of the Church. And how can thou judge this same thing but by the
kind of the doctrine? And how can The word is judge of the Church
thou put a difference betwixt the true doctrine and the false, but by the holy
Scriptures? As for that succession wherein some set all their succor, it
has ceased long ago to have any force or valor, seeing this is most certain,
that the most ignorant and wicked me^ have been the successors for many years
unto the good and learned Bishops: Succession of doctrine not of persons
requisite.
and that there does appear no step or token of any lawful vocation in the
Churches now for a long ceason. Furthermore we do require a succession of
doctrine, not of the persons, even of the Prophetical and Apostolical
doctrine, so that of necessity we must run again to the books of the
Prophets and the Apostles, for the proof of the true succession.

As for the name of Traditions, the The bare visar of Traditions serves not.
which some also that fear nothing more then the trial of the Scripture,
do hold forth as the terrible face of Gorgon, what is it else I pray you, but
a bare visar? for if it be understand of the doctrine, seeing we have the
word written, what need we any thing unwritten? for surely this unwritten is
more uncertain the^ that written, and no man may seek a proof at the
uncertainty of that which is certain. How be it here I do see, that many
things may be objected against us. For first of all they will say, that they
understand by the name of Tradition, An objection.
not that which was not written by no man at all, and only delivered from
hand to hand, but that which though it be not comprehended in those holy
books which men call Canonical, yet may be proved by some other worthy
writers: so that though at the first it was unwritten, yet may now woorthely
be called written: and such they call the Traditions of the Apostles. Moreover
they will also allege that they understand by this name Traditions, certain
plain and manifest explicatio^s of the Christian Faith, which were received in
the old Church, as of Christ, how he is of the same Substance with the
Father: and of the vnitinge of these two natures, and such like: for these men
use to choose forth such things as are certain and most plansible. Now
though I suppose that I have sufficiently answered unto these things
heretofore, when I did speak of the Councels and of the writings of the
Fathers: yet have I more The answer.
to answer. For first of al, they them selves will grant that all such
Traditions are not to be received without exception. What rule then shall we
keep herein? Again if we depend of men's writings and authority, when the
Men's writings can not be judges.
question peradventure is of the rites and ordinances, how many things shall
we find not only diverse one from another, but clean contrary? when that
controversy of keepinge the feast of Pasche or Easter was in the Church of
most ancient time, which proved and tried most manifestly the vain ianglyng,
the ambition, the ignorance, and the frowardnes, of the most part of the
Bishops of the whole world: so that the whole world was shaken together,
none otherwise then if the controversy had been of the whole Substance of our
faith: and both parties do allege the Traditions of the Apostles: what
came to pass at the length, but that both parties having on their side (as
they said) the Apostles, the strife was more styrred. Let ye Epistle of
Irenaeus be red, not to one counted a Pope By the Epistle of Irenaeus we may
see the liberty in Traditions.
and the Universal Bishop of the whole world, but to the most foolish and
ambitious B. of Rome: and thereby it may easily be known, what liberty has
been in all Churches hertofore in these rites and ceremonies, until by the
tyranny of some ye Churches were oppressed. Neither mean I here to reco^pte up
every thing, for we had need of a whole book so to do. What then shall we
follow here? That (say they) which shall be found every where to be received of
al men, as the oil and cream as they call it, the sign of the Cross and
such like. The^ let us conclude this one point, that the particular Traditions
being shut out and secluded, only the Catholic and Universal may be
received: and of these we shall speak afterward.

Let us come to the Traditions of Two good kinds of Traditions.
doctrine. They are such, that either to resist the Heretics, do make plain
certain things taught in the holy Scriptures, which the Heretics do use to
darke^ as they do the most clear matters: or else they do set forth such
things as may be gathered by the co^paringe of the places together, though
they be no where written in the self Evil Traditions.
same words. Either are they such, as do either add or diminishe or alter
and change either openly or privily any thing in the Prophetical and
Apostolical writings. Both those first kind of Traditions (such as are the
expositions or confessions of the faith of the four Councels) we are so farce
from refusinge of them, that contrary wise with open arms (as they say) and
most willinge minds we do embrace all such.

But for the third kind of Traditions how can we judge that to be admitted?
The Traditions that add to the word.
for if any thing ought to be added to the word of God written, it follows
that all things necessary to our Salvation are not written in the Law and the
Gospel. But of the law this neither may nor ought to be spoken for then God
might seem unjust forbiddyng by plain words any thing to be added
thereunto. Neither do I here care for ye Cabalistes, Talmudistes, and all that
kind of shameless men. For what can be spoken more plainly by the Lord? And
how severely God has aduenged this rashness when any thing was added not only
in doctrine but also in rites, and ceremonies, so many proclamatio^s of the
Prophets the interpretours of the laws, criyng out against them, and all the
History of the Bible, finally Christ him self is a sufficient witness. And
shall we think yt God has cared less for his Church, or provided worse for
it, when he sent Christ and his Apostels sufficient teachers*
his son down into the Earth? or ca^ we suppose that the Apostles were less
diligent in this point then the Prophets? Paul does protest unto the
Ephesians, that he had holden nothing back, but had declared all the
counfasle of God unto them, so far forth at the least as appertained unto
their eternal Salvation. Let them show then what Paul has taught that he
has not written: or else let them confess the full doctrine of the Gospel
(which he calls the power of God to salvation) to be comprehended in his
writings. But what need so many words? when we come to the point what can
they bring forth that is omitted in matters of faith by the Apostles and the
Evangelists? Peradventure that the blessed virgin Mary was Obiectio^s for
Traditions.
not conceived in Original sin: that she continued all her life long a
virgin, that children must be Baptized, that Baptism is not to be
reiterated, that men must fast in Lent, the holy oil and chreme, the Holy
water, that Altars must be hallowed, the Cross must be woorshipped, and what
ye will. For they confess that none of those things are found in the holy
Scriptures. As for Transubstantiation, auricular confession, praying unto
Saints and purgatory fire, they have now a good while sought the^ in
Scriptures but all in vain. But concerning the manner of conception of the
virgin Marie, not only the holy Scriptures do not teach it, but neither any
of the ancient writers do make mention of it. And although I do willingly
and reverently believe her perpetual Virginity unto death, yet (as I once
answered Answer.
to an impudent Munke in thy presence most noble Prince) this thing pertains
nothing to the mystery of our Salvation. For it is sufficient for us to
believe that which is done in deed, and declared by the Evangelists that
Christ our Savior was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the virgin
Mary. And that the infantes ought to be Baptized, and that Baptism may not be
reiterate, we do not gether of any bare Tradition without the word of God.
As for those other things how can the holy Scriptures express them? the
which could not be established in the Church, but that the authority of the
word of God must first be overthrown, as may be proved with most evident
reasons. But this much at this present, for we do not undertake now to
declare every particular matter. Wherefore I come to that kind of Traditions,
whereby Traditions that diminishe.
something is taken from the doctrine of the word of God written, as when
the one part of the Supper of the Lord is taken away from the Lay men: and
when unto the words of Paul that calls the forbiddynge of marriage, and the
law of forbiddinge of meats, the doctrine of Devils: there is added the
exception of an advised vow, and an other general exception, which many will
have to be available in all points, Except it please our Lord the Pope
othervvaies. But who Blasphemy.
I pray you that tendereth the glory of God as he ought to do, can suffer
such cursed sacrilege? for assuredly if it be lawful to take away any thing
from that doctrine written, then is it necessary that like as these men have
compted the doctrine taught by the holy Ghost a littell before, to be haltyng
and imperfect, and to want somewhat, so now in other things, they may say,
that it is redoundant and superfluous: neither of ye which two things any good
man's ears can hear without great offense. But yet they say, that no man can
deny, but that the ceremonies of the law are altogether already taken away.
Howbeit we do not treat now of the rites and ceremonies; but of the very
substance of the woorship of God, whereof though we do judge yt Ceremonies of
old to have been a portion, yet serves this nothing to defend their bold
sacrilege. For what meruell is it, though the law which was made to shadow
those things which were hoped for to come at the time appointed, did vade and
vanish away at the light and sight of the same? but if these men bring against
us that the love feasts called Agape. and that Apostolical decree of things
offered to idols and the strangeled, was taken away by commen consent, and the
anointinge Apostolical which we have now abolished. I do answer again, yt
these are external things of which we shall dispute afterward. But this we
conclude for certain, that the doctrine of Salvation contained in Gods word,
must be mainteyned safe and sound, not only in the whole substance but in
every the least and smalest part thereof without addition or diminution.

Now why should we once name or Wicked Traditions.
make mention of that third kind of Traditions, which do either shake the
fundations of the Salvation by Christ, either overthrow the things that are
builte upon that foundation. Such as are the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
ye praying to saints, prayer for the dead, the making and the woorshippyng of
Idols, the Magistrall and Doctorall determinations (as they call them) of free
will, of merit, of pardons and of such other filthiness, the which things
seeinge they could never be established so long as the authority of the
Heavenly doctrine stood unshaken in his full force, so are they over impudent,
which do think that these things may be established, either by the false
forged title of the Church, or by the prescription and length of time.

Go to then, let us conclude this All Catholic Traditions are not alvvaies
to be allowed.
place, that they are far deceived which think that the Catholic rites are
of necessity to be received, for there be also some Catholic errors, which
have crepte into the Church, partly by the ignorance of many of the Bishops,
partly by their negligence, partly by their blind zeal and apishe imitation
of others, and also by their ambition and covetousness, but chiefly by ye most
greedy desire of honor which was in the Romish Bishops. Furthermore whereas
in the appointing of External rites and ceremonies which are particular may
be alvvaies changed, and must be abolished when they become superstitious or
Idolatrous.
rites and orders, wise men always have had regard to the time, place, and
persons: who does not see, that they are most foolish, who in these kind of
things, when the circumstances are changed, will not only have nothing
changed, but also such things as are for just causes abolished, either by
the continuance of time or other ways, yet because they are ancient, they will
have them to be again revoked? but what shall we say of those things that
are degenerate into ye most manifest madness of Idolatry? the which in that
most cursed time when God was angry with our sins did prevail, though a few
in the beginning (but in vain) did resist, the which things finally though
they were not at this present utterly polluted, yet are they such, as can
scarsely (no not all) be kept pure any long space.

But here comes to my mind the Politic Gentlemen.
voice of these me^, that think themselves most witty of all others, which
think that the Church ought to be reformed but not transformed. And they call
the reformation, a restorynge again of those rites, which were in use in the
florishyng time of the Church, as they term it (taking away some things
which by the wickedness of times have been abused) the which except we do
receive, they cry that the Church is transformed, and deprived utterly of her
beauty and comeliness. Surely their words have a great show and a
beautiful, but it proceeds from the spirit of Satan, which then bewrays
it self, when we come to the matter: for the^ there is nothing so shameful
that they dare not cover under the color of antiquity and obtrude it unto us
for comely and beautiful. Those Rapsodies most vain and foolish written of
these matters by G. Cassander that babbling Apostata (with whose name I would
not defile these papers) do declare these matters.

How be it I following the example of King Ezekiah (so greatly commended) had
much rather to imitate such, which do Judge that the offense and danger that
lies in the high way, ought to be abolished and taken away, though at
sometimes there has been or may be some use thereof: rather then to appoint
monitores to stand by, which may admonish the passengers lest they at unawares
do fall into such perilles. For what if they that are admonished do not
obey? or the Monitors do not their office? Moreover besides that in many of
their suppositio^s I do not only dissent from them, but I do utterly abhor
them, so in their proposition I ca^ not agree unto them. For if we seek The
chief pattern of the Church is in Christ and his Apostles.
the most beautiful face of the Church and most perfect pattern, I suppose
that is it, which was not only begone (as these men imagine) or shadowed out
with the first pouncinge or paintinge draughtes, by the Apostles themselves
(which were the chief workemaisters ye ever ye Church has had or shall have
hereafter) but portered forth most beautifully and most diligently, with most
lively colors: from the which the farther that thou strayest, so far wide
wanderest thou more and more from the rule of thy work. And after what sort
that form was, and why I should think that we ought to seek it no where else,
save only in the writings of the Apostles and the Apostolical History written
by Luke (whom I do grant to have The co^trarietie and lies of Antichrists
Church.
painted this forth most excelle^tly) not only the contrariety emonges
themselves does co^pel me unto it, but also to speak plainly, the fond
vanity of the^ which have either perticularly recited or wholly collected ye
Apostolical Traditions (as they term them) such as those foolish and most
false descriptio^s of them attributed unto Clement, and those that they call
the Canons of ye Apostles which have been a great while ago counted emonge
the books ye are to be rejected. But if some will object that al things are
not written by ye Apostles and by Luke: I pray you why do they think so,
because there be but few Christ contented him self with fevv ceremonies, and
so did his Apostles.
things contained in their writings? Nay would to God yt they which boste
themselves to be the successors of the Apostles could have contented themselves
with this small number. For God would never have had the rites and ceremonies of
Moises abolished to the intent that others should be put in their places: and if
it were not lawful to imitate the Jews, Jews nor Idolaters may neither be
followed.
much more unlawful is it to follow the Gentiles, the which thing if the Ancient
Bishops had remembered, Christian Religion had neither swarued so soon nor so
shamefully, first into vain ceremonies and triflinge Liturgies, after ye into
manifest superstition, and last of all even degenerate into an Atheism. For
Paul woorthely does call the^ Atheists and Godless, which do not woorship
the only true God as he ought to be woorshipped. But shall we say that the
Apostles did not properly treat of this argument and matter? Nay certainly it
were a certain kind of impiety, to think that the holy Ghost had not so
great regard of the Church as was convenient: and this dare I affirm that he
which reads diligently the History of Luke, and the Epistles of the Apostles,
shall thereby very well learn, not only the chief points of the
Ecclesiastical Follow the Scriptures and thou shalt not need vnvvritte^
traditions.
order, but also almost every part thereof, so that no place need to be left
at all, to those unwritten Traditions. Notwithstanding how so ever this be,
saying we stand need of a most perfect distinction to discern the diversity
of those infinite Traditions, by what rule By what rule shall we try the
diversity of Traditions and Ceremonies.
I pray you shall we try them? for we have declared that there ca^ be no
sufficient argument concluded, neither by the Antiquity nor Authority of the
writers, neither by the multitude of the^ by whom they have been allowed:
Therefore stand we need of the word of God only, even of that word of God
(I say) which is published by the Prophets and the Apostles, and as it were,
set forth in public Tables: whereby we may disseuer the holy from the
unholy, the profitable from the unprofitable and hurtful, the necessary from
the superfluous, and to establishe those Traditions by good reason that are
thus disseuered. Now then if it be necessary ye the light of Gods word Gods
word is the touch stone of doctrine.
written must be our guide, to judge the rites and Ceremonies: how much more
necessary is it unto the knowledge of the doctrine it self, that the same
light must be our guide, in the which doctrine men are much more blinded and
do err with far more danger? For if nothing, as we have declared
heretofore may be followed of us in doctrine, but that either is expressed by
plain words in the Scriptures of God, or else is gathered necessarily by the
conferringe together of places, how can I beware of the false Prophets, onles
I do compare the doctrine pronounced by the^, with the word of God it self?
But thou will say, what if he bring forth the word of God also? for so did
An Objection.
Arrius urging this text. My father is greater then I: and so was the
disputation with Macedonius of the person of the holy Ghost, with Nestorius
and Eutiches of the union of the two natures, and with Pelagius of Grace and
Nature: So is the controversy at this day of the sacramental Phrases and
manners of speech, whiles that one sort of the same words, and those most
few in number (that is to say) this is my Body, this is my Blood, do find
out Transubstantiation, others Consubstantiation, others only a Sacramental
Conjunction. Finally say these mediators, these halters in Religion, that
would seem to appease the controversies, when the controversy falls, not of
the word, but of the sense, whether shall we run rather then to the
Church, to the writings of the Catholic fathers, that were of sound
judgment, finally to the true and lawful Councels? To the which I do
aunsweare as before, that I do The Answer.
not think that the testimonies of the Church, nor of the Fathers, nor of the
Councels are to be rejected, but I suppose that in them men must use great
warynesse.

First of all if any thing be affirmed Bare names of me^ with out Gods
word ca^ not stay our faith.
without the word of God, the bare names of the Church, of the Fathers, of
the Councils, are pretended in vain: seeing that in this point the very Angels
are not to be hard. For that saying of Paul stands still in force, that if
any Angel from heaven should preach an other Gospel let him be accursed.
Neither is it the duty of the Church to speak in this, but to here her
husband what he speaks.

And the Godly learned Fathers would have their writings none other ways to be
read, neither with any other condition, but that they should be examined by ye
rule of the word written. Finally this is not the office of the Councels to
make any new doctrine, but to confirm by Gods word that which is already
made and ordained by him: those Synodes that have done otherways, are the
chaires of the wicked and the seats of the scorners, the which we are
commanded to fly that we may be blessed. Moreover if Doctors and Councels,
may be called as vvitnesses so that we do judge by the word.
there be any doubt of the interpretation of the word written, I do not
refuse the^ to be witnesses as I have said, but I suppose that first of all we
must diligently discern the true Church from the Synagoge of Satan: the
Fathers that are not suspected in Faith nor condemned, from such as either are
me^ manifestly without knowledge, or Heretics, or otherwise suspected: and the
lawful and undoubted faithful Councels, from the Synodes and conuenticles
assembled against Christ's truth: finally the true books must be warely
Judged from the forged and counterfaite.

These things being determined, God is only judge by his word.
then do I say, that all these are to be heard, not as judges (for God is
only ye judge by his written word) but as witnesses cited and sworn, and
that certainly, after the same manner as witnesses are heard by skillful Judges
in public controversies: even so verily that they show the causes and reasons
of their testimonies, causes I say not borrowed any where else, but forth of
the same word, of the interpretation whereof the question is moved. For
Augustine renouncinge human reason says very well: by the holy Scriptures we
walk much more safely, the which Augustine.
being shadowed with borrowed speeches, when we will search them, either that
comes forth which is without controversy, or if it have any doubt, it may
be determined by ye same Scripture, by the gatheringe and finding of
testimonies and witnesses of every side. Thus says he, and that very well. For
if we must only have our wisdom by the only written word, then may not the
interpretation of this word be fetched any other where: For as the same
Augustine says, so has the holy spirit tempered and ordered the Scriptures,
ye that thing which is spoken in some place something darkly, in some other
place is declared more plainly.

Finally what other man shall we follow Who rather to be followed then Christ
and the Apostles. Heretics overcome by the Scriptures.
then Christ him self and his Apostles? and Christ did confute Satan abusinge
the Scriptures, by no other means but by the same Scriptures. The Apostles
confirm their doctrine by the writings of the Prophets: And the Jews of
Beraea are praised, that when they had heard ye doctrine taught by Paul, they
compared it with the writings of the Prophets, to try whether those things
were so or no. Certainly the Councels of Nice did with none other weapon cut
the throat of Arrius, nor that of Constantinople, Macedonius, nor the Ephesine
Nestorius, nor the Chalcedonian Eutiches, nor Augustine, Pelagius, and Donatus:
wherefore they that count the Scripture so doubtful and dark, that it
stands need to have light brought thereunto some other ways, are worthy
of all good men to be spitted upon as blasphemers, and utterly to be abhorred.

Yet do I not disprayse the writings Doctors allowed of God.
of the Doctors and their interpretations, saying that he that has ordained
pastors and doctors to the edificatio^ of the body, has Authorized them both
by word and by writings to interpretate the same: but I declare how far
we must stick unto them, even so far as they do bring nothing of their
own, no not at yt time when as the controversy is of the sense and
interpretation of any place of Scripture, but that they by the Scriptures do
interpretate the Scriptures, according to the proportion of Faith: the which
who so does, whether he be new or old, a Private person or Public officer
in the Church, whether he come alone or with many, whether he be an old man
or a young man, let him be heard. For though order Order is necessary, but not
so that we bind Gods grace to person and place, but measure all by the rule
of gods word
must needs be kept in the Church of God, yet are no men so far deceived,
as they that do bind the grace of the holy ghost, to certain places and
persons. For who murdered the Prophets? Who crucified Christ? They
undoubtedly, that should have been the chief pillars of true religion.
Therefore does not the Prophet, send the people of God, to those godless
Priests, but to the Law and the Prophettes. Neither assuredly has the
condition of the Church, a long while been any otherways, whiles the corner
stone has been reproved, by the very chief builders, and Antichrist has
sitten in the temple and place of God him self. What shall we now conclude?
Verelie, that by the word of God, all controversies must be ended: and that
it is necessary, that the false and forged The word of God end of all
controversies.
word, be judged from the true, like as also the true church, from the
false and adulterous: and the Synodes and cou^celles, governed by the holy
ghost, from those wherein Satan was presidente: Finally, the truth from lies
and errors, by Gods holy word. For we must believe, that in things
concerning our salvation, we have no The want of the word the original of all
errors.
where else the truth reueiled. The which things being true, if follows
that that thing is most certain, which I said in the beginning, most noble
Prince, to be the originalle, whence all these evils did flow, wherewith in
our fathers days, the church was almost oppressed, and therefore that this
only is the way and mean, to raise it up again, if by the pure word of God,
these controversies may be decided.

For so will it come to pass, that of the most part of those things, there
shall be no question at all: about the which, yet at this day very many,
partly by ignorance, partly through malice and frowardness, do most
stubbernely contend and strive. And those things, which shall seem to be
stayed, by the testimonies of scriptures, if they be judged not by custom
(which when it departs from the word, has no authority at all in matters
of religion) neither by the bare authority of certain men, be they new
or old, but by the comparison of the places together, all the interpretacio^s
being examined by the proporcion and rule of faith: then finally, no thing
shall be found so hard, that shall not easily be understand, nothing so dark
that shall not be made clear, nothing so doubtful, that shall not be made
plain and euidente. But who shall bind men to this order: who shall direct
this action, and who finally shall treat these things by common authority?
It is not our purpose, to prosecute these matters at this present, although
whiles I often and many times do think of this matter, some things do
come into my mind, of the which it may be, that I shall have occasion to
speak at some other time. Now let us treat, that we have in hand.

Seeing then all these controversies, must be discussed by gods holy word, I
suppose that this thing, ought chiefly to be provided for, that seeing all can
not have the knowledge, to understand the word of God, in those peculiar A
good and true copy of the scriptures very necessary.
languages, the Hebrew and the Greek (which were to be wished) that there
should be some true and apt tra^slacion, of the old and new Testamente made:
the which diverse have alredie labored to bring to pass, but no man has
yet sufficiently enough performed it. For the old translacion, The old text
(whose so ever it is) although it ought not to be condemned, yet is it found
both obscure, and imperfect and superfluous, and also false in many places, to
speak nothing of an infinite variety, almost of the copies. The which text
therefore, for good cause many godly and learned men, have labored to
amend, but not with like success. And yet how necessary a thing this is, The
learned Grecian fathers did not attain to the Hebrew verity.
whosoever shall read those most learned writers of the Grecians, and shall
compare their interpretacions (which are many times far from the purpose)
with the Hebrew verity, he shall confess it with great sorrow. And the* same
evil was not only hurtefull, emonges the Latin writers, but also the
ignorance of the Greek tongue, The Latin writers were troubled for want of
knowledge of Hebrew and greek.
where with many of them were troubled: whiles they did depend of the common
translacion, they often times seek a knot in the Rushe (according to the
prouerhe) and fall into most foul errors.

This cause therefore has moved me to compare most dilige^tlie, the diversity
of copies, and to weigh the sentenses and judgments, of the most part of the
learned men, especially of them that this age has brought forth skillful in
the languages, who are more in number doubtless, and better learned then the
Church has had, since the time of the Apostles: and so to ease the^ The
nombre of the learned.
somewhat, that desire a more pure interpretacio^. And that it might be done
with the more profit, I have also added annotacions, in the which I have also
conferred together, the diversity of interpretacions, and as much as I could,
I have labored to make plain and euidente, the sense and meauyng, of all the
most dark places.

But when as I did see, that thick work (and very painful, as I must needs
by experience confess it) grow so great, when it came again to the
Printyng, that many could not have the commodity of it, I caused it to be
Printed alone, without those annotacions: In the place whereof yet I suppose,
that I have set such things, the which (if I could have done them, as they
ought to have been dooen) I would not doubt to commend them, not only as
profitable, but also as very necessary.

There be two kinds of interpretacio^s: The one is of that sort, which Two
kinds of interpreters.
do not consider properly the thing it self, and what is spoken, but take in
hand to declare, with what words any thing is spoken, chaungyng only the
phrases, and the manner of speech. The which kind of interpretacion, although
it can scarsly, no not at all rightly be performed of him, that understands
not the thing it self, yet stands it in the words.

The other kind is of them, which do declare the thing and matter it
Calvin.
self with many words, and give the reasons. In the which kind of
interpretacion (in my judgment, and as I suppose in the judgment of all the
learned, that have read his books) that noble Ihon Calvin, that man of blessed
memory, and my father in. Christ shall be found (so that no man envy my
saying) far to have passed and excelled all the writers, both did and new.
Therefore, though I some times in certain places, not in any poinct of his
doctrine (the which I have always marked, to be most pure and sounds in his
writings, as in any other interpreter besides) but in the explicacion of
certain places, do dissent from him: yet do, I judge of his commentaries,
that which Cicero did judge of Julius Caesar's commentaries, in a kind of
writing far unlike (that is to say) that he made all men of any wit,
affraied to write after him. And would to God that we, that are ministers in
Christ's church, through the (...) of God (and I my self especially) might be
occupied in learning and teaching rather then in writing. But what shall we do?
The importunity of certain of our adversaries (against whose practices it is
necessary, that the lovers of the truth, by all means oppose them selves)
does partly drive us hereunto, least the simple be trapped at unawares: and
partly Charity, which does admonish us, to apply to the profit of our
brethren, what soever we have received. Now very many have seemed unto me
(either because it is so, or because I am deceived) to fail much in this,
that in the particular rehersals of the Evangelical, and Appostolical The
chief points of christian Religion and the order of the writers are to be
observed.
history, in to that which is divided; doubtless by most divine art, they do
not mark nor consider to what poinct chiefly of christian religion, every
thing ought to be referred: much less also in those most grave
disputacions, in the Epistles of thapostles, which are written (as is most
true) with an excellent order, do they consider, what is the state of them,
what is the order: or finally, what is the end and purpose: hereof comes it
that in some of their writings, neither head nor foot appears many times. And
they leauyng the scope and purpose, wander to certain notes and obseruacions,
confusedly and without order heaped together: So that in many places of most
importance, no regard is had to the sentence it self.

This is the cause that in Paul chiefly (who yet had as great a skill and
judgment in writing as any writer that Paul of most divine judgment has
written most orderly.
ever did write) unlearned and unskillful men have dreamed hertofore to be
infinity Hiperbatons and Anantapo dotons, sentences and words not answering
out to an other, and have in their commentaries upon him, every where to their
own shame still inculcated the same: in so much that certainly this most
excellent, declarer of gods secrets, was no more known in the schools, then if
he had left no monumentes nor writings, yea many did fly from him as from a
rock, for fear of shipwrake. Wherefore that I might find a remedy for this
mischief, I have endeavored my self as much as in me lies, to note the brefe
Bezas annotations.
summaries of doctrine in the history matters: that who so ever shall sail as
it were in that see, may mark a haven before their eyes where unto they may
direct their course. And in the Epistles I have labored that the scope and
order of arguments, and the method and all other things being set in their
places, the native expositions may be known. And if God His exposition and
the hard words and common places.
grant me that I may hereafter add hereunto two other things which I am
about now, that is to say a breife exposition of the words that offer the^
selves in the text, and commune places beside every one noted with a word, in
their proper places, then truly shall I think that I have done some thing
worthy travel. But it may please god once to grant these: In the mean
season (most noble Lords) I thought it good to writ and dedicate unto you,
chiefly that have embraced true Religion in France, my native country, all
that which God has given met both that I might show forth some token, of a
thanckfull mind (for what do we not allow unto you, which with the
bucklers of your own bodies have defended the poor miserable sheep against
the rage of the Wolves) and also that I may confirm you more and more, to
persevere in this heroical fortitude and stoutenes, which becomes your noble
courage. Lo then most noble Prince, those holy teachers of that heaue^lie
doctrine, for the defense whereof, thou haste not doubted to offer thy life (I
say) to so many and so great perilles and dangers. Lo, unto you honorable
and noble Lords, those holy mysteries of that eternal wisdom the which the
more that you shall know, the more glad shall you be, though you be driven
to shed your blood again, for him which has redeemed you with his most
precious blood. These are the excellent ensigns of the victory, of your
faith and zele, even before the very Angels of heaven: in the setting up
whereof, yet would to God, O would to God, I say, like as your desire was, you
might only have used Spiritual weapons. But now when peace is restored, you
have great need of a spiritual constancy, and an invincible power and force
of faith, that this work that you have begone, may be finished with your
everlasting laud and praise. And the Lord will minister this unto you, by the
continual and diligente hearing of his word, and meditatyng of the same. For
that, which meat is unto The exercise in gods word necessary.
our bodies, the same do these heavenly dainties, minister to our minds: that
is to say, not only that we should live by the lively juice of them, but
also that we should grow and encreace to full age, whiles at the length, we be
made perfect at that last day. And here I do desire your honors, that you
would vouchsafe with quiet minds, to hear certain things of me, which
belong to your charge. If so be that Believe faithful teachers that bring no
thing but Gods word.
you be fully persuaded, that we who^ you have heard, and of whom you are
begotten in the Lord, do teach true and holy things, I beseech you suffer
not your selves, to be drawn from Beware of crafty hypocrites.
thence one jot. And I have great cause thus to admonish you. For though I
do know the fortitude of your minds: yet do I also know, how great the
craft is of certain that lie in wait to berciue you of your salvation, and
what is their impudency and malice. I do not speak of those open and known
enemies of the truth, but I do mean those Sinons and crafty cou^terfaictes,
Sinon a Grecia^ under the pretense of religion betrayed Troy.
who partly would have a certain mean and mingled religion (I know not how)
and partly wait for the occasion, to sow discord emo^ges you, by those
unfortunate discordes and controversies, about the Lords Supper. What say
they, is it all one to transform the Church, and to reform it? Were our
fathers al blind? Are these fellow (that come we know not whence) only wise?
Are not these the', that all the best learned do call Sacrame^taries? and
utterly abhor? All true gospellers are ready to give accomptes.
Now what we have to answer hereunto, you are not ignorant, and we will
never refuse, to show the causes before the whole world, of this that they
call a trasformacion. But it is wonder if al men do not see, what these men
go about: seeing some of them do service to those, that are openly the most
deadly enemies of the Gospel Beware of crafty turn cotes.
of Christ, others are notorious, by plaiyng so often the Apostatates, others
of them have uttered al their life long unto the whole world, their
inconstancy, and their babblyng, and that they have no judgment at all,
seeing in thirty years space, they have not yet learned, that men may not
halt nor waver in religion.

These are they that I admonish you chiesly to take heed of: and you shall be
safe from them, if you steadfastly continewyng in that faith, that you have
received of your faithefull Pastors, which is sealed with the blood of so
many martyrs, whereof a plain and euidente confession is published, will
either presently chase away these poisoned plagues, or if that you have
determined ones to hear them, then that you do hear them before such
Pastors, by whom their crafts may be opened, and their lies convinced and
confuted.

Neither is there any cause, why There must needs be controversies and
contrarieties always.
these controversies should trouble you. For the Lord him self our master,
has diligently admonished us, that this is the condition of this Church, and
the continual experience of al times does confirm the same. Thus in our
times did the Anabaptists arise, being divided into many sects.

Thus at this day, does the stubbernnesse of certain, in defending most
manifest errors, so boil forth, that they openly dare dissolve the two
natures of Christ with Nestorius, and confound the properties with Eutyches,
whose pestilente books, I do forewarne you, are already translated into
French. In other places, as in Polonia, the cursed Tritheits, that imagine
three Gods are risen up, and have almost destroyed the country: and Satan
still forgeth other secret mysteries, against the which it is necessary,
that you do resist and stand steadfast, by the sincerity and pure
simplicity of Christian doctrine.

But now because that neither the Ecclesiastical Discipline necessary.
offenses, wherewith the wrath of GOD is many times provoked, nor the heresies
whereby the true doctrine is oppressed, can be taken away in due time,
except a true and lawful order of Ecclesiastical discipline be appointed:
therefore I do require this of you, by the name of the soonne of GOD: I crave
this thing, I say of you, that you do not reiecte this discipline, as any
inuencion of man, but that you would establishe it with all diligece, and
earnest affection, and keep and retain it, being ones established, The
redressinge of manners is the one half of the scriptures
as the ordinance of GOD: without the which, the whole buildyng must come to
ruin of necessity. For what? Is not this the other half of the word of God?
Surely he that denies this, denies the Son to shine at the middaie. And I
pray you, what common wealth, what city, what house, or family, shall not
straight ways, be dissolved, unless it be knit together with The church the
scolehouse of honesty, may not be the den of unthrifts.
the bonds of Laws and Order. What? Shall we suffer the Church of Christ,
that teaches all holiness and honesty, to be transformed into a school of
wickedness, and licencious life? But if we take away this discipline, that
we speak of, if every one be permitted to preach publicly, if there be no
examinacion of the doctrine and manners of the Pastors, if every man be
received without difference unto the Sacraments, if it be not lawful to
reprove those that sin with the offense of others, and severely to correct
those that resist stubbernely, and also in the end (if need be) by the
example of the Apostle, to thrust such forth of the flock, least they
infecte others: and also unless there be provision for the poor, and almoses
be distributed by the order appoincted by the holy ghost: unless finally all
things be rightly and orderly dooen, in the house of God, what will the
Church be straight ways for the most part, but an assembly of men, given
to liberty and all lice^tious life? But will some say, these An objection.
The answer.
are the duties of Magistrates. As though we we would have temporal and
yearthly things, such as are only for this world to come into question by
any means, in the Ecclesiastical Consistory, or that we would exempt, either
Pastors them selves, or any others from the authority or commandment of
the Civil Magistrates, as those do, whom men call Catholics.

Christ answered unto them, that called Christ has established the
discipline of the church.
upon him, to divide their heritage: who says he has appoincted me your
Judge? But he says also, he that hears not the Church, let him be as an
Heathen and a Publicane: wherefore those things are to be disseuered, that GOD
has divided, but they may not be taken away, that he has established. Naie
certainly, it is so far from the truth, that this Discipline, does hinder
or lessen the ancthoritie of the Magistrates, if it be lawfully (that is to
say) by the word of God only placed and ordered, that contrariwise it does
as much as may be establishe it: seeing that nothing is able so much to
maintain public tranquillity, as this one thing, that the conscienses of all
may be retained in the fear of God. But it is to be feared, least that old
Popish An objection.
tyranny be brought again into the Church. So it is, howbeit this is great
The answer.
foolishenesse (says the Poet) so to avoid vices, that thou do fall into
the contrary extremities. Wherefore we may not avoid Christ's yoke of
Discipline most sweet to the godly.
man's tyranny, shake of Christ's yoke, but we must receive it, for it is
only unpleasant unto the wicked and profane persons, and is to the good
and godly most sweet and comfortable. And we are so far from coumptyng
the Magistrates, The Magistrates, the sheldes of the Church.
and you (whom God has made the foster fathers of his Church, by the Kings
Majesty's Decrees) Lay men (as certain do) and so to separate you, as
strangers from this discipline that I speak of, that contrary wise, we do
judge that this poinct chiefly belongs unto you, to punish most severely,
those troublesome contemners of the Church, and by your authority, to
procure that the worship of God, may most purely be maintained. And seeing
this regimente of the Elders, must be appoincted, not only of the Pastors,
but of such also, by whom the pastors them selves (if need be) may be
corrected, who is so mad, but that in the chusyng of the Elders, he must
think, that great consideracion must be had, of those, that besides the
commendacions of their godliness, have also authority and proeminence in the
Church? But paraduenture I have spoken to much of these things, unto you
especially of whose good wills, I can nothing doubt. Therefore I make an end,
besechyng the most merciful and mighty God, that he would strengthen thee,
most noble Prince, with his mighty power, and you the rest of the renouned
Lords, endued with his holy and excellent spirit, and with the true
knowledge of his soonne, and vouchsafe to adorn you continually more and more,
with all his most excellent gifts: that he may finishe that great work,
that he has begone in you, to the full restoryng of his heavenly kingdom,
most blessedly with your immortal praise and glory.

At Geneua the.x. of the Calendes of March. The year from Christ's incarnacio^
for us. 1565.
To all the faithful Christians, which are in Germany, and other foraigne
Nations, the Ministers of the Churches, throughout Heluetia, whose names are
subscribed, wish grace and peace from God the Father, by Jesus Christ our
Lord.
MAny and sundry co^fessio^s and declarations of our Faith have been
heretofore written, but chieflye in this our age set forth in Printe by
Kingedomes, Nations and Cities, whereby in these our latter days, in so
unhappy increase of pernicious Heresies, (which every where spring up) they
show and testify, that they think, believe, and teach, purely, plainly, and
according to the infallible truth, all and every Article of the Christian
faith and Religion: to be short, that they are far from Heresies, or
erroneous opinions. Albeit therefore we have done the like already in our
writings, which we have published, yet because they are now, perhaps, out of
mind, scattered in diverse places, and entreat of the matter more at large,
then that every man can have leisure to peruse and read them through: we
being incoraged by other faithful men's good example, do our endeavor in this
brief declaration, to comprehend and set forth to all that believe in Christ,
the doctrine and government of our Churches, which they from the beginning of
their reformation these many years, wadinge through sundry perils have
taught, even to this day, and now also do retain with one full consent.
Hereby also we witness to all men our general agreement (which the Lord has
wrought among us) that in our Churches, wherein God has appointed us Ministers,
we al speak one thing, not disagreynge among our selves, but are a perfect
body of one mind, and of one judgment. Moreover we declare by this our
work, that we sow not such seed of corrupt doctrine in our Churches, as
many of our adversaries falsely, and undeservedly go about to lay to our
charge, and to thrust violently upon us, specially in their hearing, to whom
our writings come not, and before such as know not our Doctrine. Indifferent
Readers therefore shall most manifestly perceive by this our writing, that we
do in no wise allow any Heresies, which heresies (that it might the better
appear, how greatly we deteste) we have made mention of them almost in every
Chapter, briefly recitinge, and rejecting them. Men shall easily gather this
also, that we do not by any wicked Schism sever or cut of our selves from
Christ his holy Churches of Germany, France, England, and other Christian
Nations, but that we well agree with all and every one of them in the truth of
Christ, which here we have acknowledged. For albeit there is some variety in
diverse Churches, about the vtteringe and settinge forth of their doctrine,
and about rites or Ceremonies, Variety of Ceremonies, and dissent in trifels.
which they receive as a mean to edify their Churches, yet that variety
never seemed to minister cause of dissension and Schism in the Church: For in
such matters the Churches of Christ have always used their liberty, as we
may Read in the Ecclesiastical History. The Godly in time past thought it
sufficient, if they agreed Agreement.
in the chief points of their faith, in the true meaning thereof, and in
brotherly love: wherefore we trust, that Christ's Churches (when they shall
perceive and find that we consent in all Articles of our holy and eternal
Gods doctrine, in the true understanding thereof, and in brotherly love with
them, and chiefly with the ancient Apostolic Church) will likewise
willingly agree with us in those matters: for the chiefest cause, which moved
us to publish this Confession, was to seek, obtain, and once obtained, to
keep peace, concord, and mutual love with the Church of Germany and other
foraigne Countries: who be, as we thoroughly persuade our selves, so kind, so
sincere and perfect, that if any of our doings have, perhaps, not been well
understood hitherto of diverse, they will herafter, (hearing this our plain
Confession) not count us Heretics, nor condemn our Churches (which are true
Christian Churches) as impious. But in especial we profess, that we are
always ready, (if any man require it) more at large to declare all and each
particular thing, that here we have proposed, yea and to yield, and give them
most hearty thanks, and to obey them in the Lord, which can teach us better
doctrine, by the word of God, to whom be praise and Glory. The first of
March. 1566.

All the Ministers of all Christ his Churches in Heluetia, subscribed their
names which be at Tygur. Bern. Scaphonse. Sangall. the Court of Grisons, and
they which be ioigned in leage with them, on this side and beyond the Alps,
Milhous. and Bienne. To whom the Ministers of the Church of Geneua have
associated them selves also.

A brief, and plain confession and declaration of true Christian Religion,
etc.
Of the holy Scripture, and of the true word of God. Cap. 1.
WE believe, and confess, The Canonical Scripture is the word of God.
that the Canonical Scriptures set forth in the old and new Testament, by
holy Prophets, and Apostles, is the verse true word of God: and that they
have sufficient authority not of men, but of them selves. For God himself
spoke to our forefathers, the Prophets and Apostles, and speaks yet to us The
Scripture is sufficient to instruct us in all godliness.
by his holy Scriptures, wherein the catholic Church of Christ has at full
set forth, what so ever may truly instruct us, both how we should believe to
be saved, and what life we should lead to please God, for the which cause he
has expressly commanded, that nothing be added to his word, or diminished
from the same. We think therefore that in these Scriptures we ought to seek
true wisdom and godliness, reformation, and government of Churches,
instruction to govern our selves in all godliness, to be short, the proof of
doctrine, and reproufe, or confutation of al errors, with good admonitions:
according to that saying of the Apostle: The holy Scripture is given by the
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve etc. 2. Timoth. 3.
And again, these things I write to thee (says he 1. Timoth. 3.) that thou
may know, how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God: and 1.
These. 2 when you received of us the word of the preachinge of God, ye
received it not, as the word of me^, but, as it is in deed, ye word of
God. The Lord himself said in the Gospel: you are not they which speak, but
the spirit Mat. 10. Luc. 10. Joan. 13.
of my father speaks in you therefore he that hears you; hears me, but he
that dispiseth you, dispiseth me.

Wherefore when this word of God The preach ynge of Gods voorde, is the
word of God.
is preached in the Church by preachers lawfully thereto called, we believe, that
the very true word of God is taught and received of the faithful, and that
we ought not to imagine or to look for from heaven for any other word of
God, nor consider the preacher so much, as the word it self, which is
preached: For albeit the preacher be evil and sinful, The preachers sin
makes not Gods word the worse. The inward vvorkinge of the holy ghost
disanulleth not the outvvarde preaching. Ier. 31. 1. Cor. 3. Joan. 6.
yet the word of God remains still true and good. Neither do we think,
that the outward preachinge is therefore to be compted unprofitable, because
the true Religion depends of the inward lightninge of the holy Ghost, or
because, it is written, no man shall teach his neighbor. for all men shall
know me: he is nothing, which waters or planteth, but God which gives the
sucrease. For albeit no man come to Christ, except he be drawn of his
heavenly father, and illuminated with the holy Ghost, yet we know that God will
have his word preached by some outward means also. For he could have faught
Cornelius by his holy spirit or by an Angel, without Peter's ministry, yet
not withstanding he sent him to Peter, of whom the Angel speakinge, says:
He shall tell thee what thou must do. For he which inwardly illuminateth by
geuinge his holy spirit to men, commands also his Disciples: saying, Go
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, as Paul
preached the outward word to Lydia a sellar of purple at Philipie, but
inwardly the Lord opened the woman's heart. And the said Paul speakinge
elegantly by degreese, as it were, Romans 10. at the length infers: Then faith
is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Howbeit we acknowledge that
God can illuminate, whom, and when he will, even without the outward
ministry, (such is his omnipotent power) but we speak of the ordinary way
showed to us by Gods commandment, and declared by examples. We detest
therefore the Heresies of Artemon, of the Maniches, of Heresies.
the Valentinians, of Cerdo, and the Marcyonites, who either denied the
Scriptures to be of the holy Ghost, or else disalowed some part thereof, or
ma^gled and corrupted them. Not withstanding we plainly affirm, that certain
books of the old Testament are called of some anncient writers, Apocrypha,
Apocrypha.
of other Ecclesiastical, because they would have them Read in the Church:
but yet not to be alleged as sufficient authority to confirm our faith: as
Augustine in his book Deciuitate Dei. 18. ca. 38. declares, that in the
books of Kings mention is made of names and books of certain Prophets: but
he adds, that they are not recited in the Canon, and that those books, which
we have, are sufficient to instruct us in all poinctes of godliness.

Of expoundinge the holy Scriptures, of the Doctors, Councels, and Traditions.
Cap. 2
THe Apostle Peter said, that the 2. Pet. 1. The true interpretation of the
Scripture.
holy Scriptures are not of any private interpretation. Wherefore we do not
allow al kind of interpretations, neither do we acknowledge that sense of yt
Roman Church, as they call it, which simply, God wot, the defendors of the
Church of Rome would compel every man to receive: but we accept that
interpretation only, as true, which is gathered out of the Scriptures
themselves, that is, of the propriety of that tongue in the which they were
written, and examined according to the circumstance, and so expounded, as they
may agree with many other like and unlike places, not swaruinge from the rule
of Faith and charity; but may most auaunce Gods glory and man's salvation.
Therefore we despise not the holy Fathers expositio^s Greek or Latin, neither
do we The holy fathers expositions.
reject their disputations or treatises of holy things, as long as they agree
with the Scriptures. Howbeit we disalow (after a modest sort) their
judgments, when they are espied to write things not agreyng or contrary to
the Scriptures. Neither think we that we do them any injury in so doing,
saying they all with one consent are of this mind, that they would not have
their writings to be of equal authority with the Canonical Scriptures, but
will us so farfoorth to allow the^, as they consent with the Scriptures,
biddinge us to receive those things which agree with Gods word, and leave
that which swarueth from the same. In like manner ought we to esteem the
decrees or Canons of Councels. Wherefore Councels.
we judge it of small force in controversies of Religion or matters of faith,
to be urged with the bare sentences of the Fathers, or with Decrees of
Councels, much less with received customs, or with continuance of time. For
we admit none other judge in Who is our Judge in matters of Faith.
matters of faith, then God himself: pronouncinge in his holy Scripture, what
is true, what false, what to be followed, what to be avoided. So that we are
satisfied with the judgments only of spiritual men, which judgments are
taken out of the word of God. Jeremy and other Prophets did utterly
condemn the Councels of the Priests holden against the law of God,
earnestly admonishing us not to hear those Fathers, who, walking in their own
inventions, have gone astray from the path of Gods law.

We refuse also Men's Traditions, Men's Traditions.
which, notwithstanding their glorious titles, as though they came of God, and
his Apostels, delivered to the Church by express word of mouth, and as it
were by the hands of Apostolic men given to Bishops their successors, yet
being conferred with ye Scripture, does dissent from them, which argues that
they were never made by the Apostles scolers. For as the Apostles taught not
contrary doctrine one to the other, so their scolers published not repugnant
doctrine to the Apostles: nay it were rather impious to affirm, that ye
Apostles in their life time by word of mouth did appoint things contrary to
their own writings. Paul plainly affirms, that he taught one kind of
doctrine in all Churches. And 1. Cor. 4.
again he says: We write none other things unto you, then that you read 2.
Cor. 1.
or know. In an other place he witnesses, that he and his Disciples, that is
2. Cor. 12.
to wit, they that follow his Apostolic steps, do walk all in one way,
and do all things together with one spirit. The Jews had in time paste
traditions of the Elders, but they were confuted by Christ, saying: that the
Mat. 15. Marc. 7.
kepinge of them was an hinderance to Gods law, and that God was woorshipped
in vain by them.

Of God, of his Unity, and of the Trinity. Cap. 3.
WE believe and teach that there There is but one God.
is one God in essence or nature, subsistinge by himself, sufficient in all
points of himself, invisible without a body, infinite, eternal, maker of all
things both visible and unvisible, the sovereign good, ever living, geuinge
life, and preseruinge all things, omnipotente, of perfect wisdom, gentle,
merciful, just, and true, but we detest their Heresies, that would have more
Gods, then one. For it is plainly written, the Lord thy God is one, I am the
Lord thy God, thou shalt have none other Gods before Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20.
me. I am the Lord, and there is none other, there is no God besides me. Am not
I the Lord? and there is none Esaias. 45.
other but I alone: a just and sauinge God, there is none, but I: I am
Iehouath, Jehovah a merciful, and gracious Exodus 34.
God, of long sufferinge, aboundinge in goodness and truth.

We believe notwithstanding and teach, that the same God of infinite The
Trinity.
power being one God indivisible, is distinguished inseparably, and
vnconfusely into the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, so that the father
begat the son from the beginning: the son was begotten by unspeakable
generation: the holy Ghost proceeds from them both, and that from the
beginning and is to be adored with them both: so that they be not three Gods,
but three persons consubstantiall, co-eternall, and coequall, distinct
touching their Substance, the one goinge before the other in order but yet
without any manner of inequality, for by nature or essence they be so united,
that they be one God, and have one divine essence common to the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. For the Scriptures has taught us a manifest
distinction of persons, by the words, which emonge all other things, the
Angel spoke to the blessed Virgin: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Luc. 1.
power of the most high shall over shadow thee: and yt holy thing which shall
be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. In the baptism also of
Christ, a voice was heard from heaven, speakinge of him: This is my beloved
Son. Mat. ^.
The holy Ghost appeered in the likeness Ioh. 1.
of a Dooue: and when the Lord himself bid his Disciples Baptize, he
commanded them to Baptize in the name of the Father, the Son and the holy
Mat. 28.
Ghost. Also in another place of the Gospel, he said: My father shall send
you Ioh. 14.
the holy Ghost in my name: Again he affirms the same, saying: When the
comforter shall come, whom I will Ioh. 15.
send unto you from the Father, even the spirit of truth, which proceeds
of the Father, he shall testify of me: to be short we receive and allow the
Apostels Creed, which teaches us the true faith. We condemn therefore the
Jews, with all blasphemers of the holy Trinity, which we ought to honor. We
condemn also all Heresies, and Heretics, teaching that the Heresies.
Son and the holy Ghost is God by name only. Also that there is in the
Trinity a thing created, and serving or subject to the other, to be short
that there is in it any inequality of more or less, or that the Trinity has
one body, or is facioned like a body, differinge in manners or will, or
confuse or solitary, as though the Son and the holy Ghost were nothing
else, but the affections, and proprieties of one God the Father, as Monarchici,
the Nouatians, Praxeas, Patripassians, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Aetius,
Macedonius, Anthropomorphitae, Arius, and such like did think.

Of Idolles or Images of God, of Christ and of Saints. Cap. 4.
BEcause God is an invisible spirit, Images of God the Father.
of an infinite essence, truly he cannot be expressed or represented by any
Image, or any manner of Science. In consideration whereof, we fear not to call
ye images of God, (as the Scripture does) mere lies. We reiecte therefore the
Idols, not of the Gentiles only, but the Images of Christians also. For, albeit
Christ did take upon him our human nature, yet he took it not Images of
Christ.
for that intent, to give a pattern to caruers and painters. He denied, that
Math. 5.
he came to break the law and the Prophets: but by the law and Prophets
Deuteronomy. 4.
images be forbidden. He deuied, that his corporal presence should profit his
Esaias. 40.
Church, he promised, that he would be always with us, by his spirit, who
then would think that the shadow or Ioh. 16.
image of his body should profit the Godly any manner of ways? And seeing
that he abides in us by his spirit, we 2. Cor. 3.
are doubtless the temples of God. But what agreement has the temple of God
with Idolles? And seeing that the blessed 2. Cor. 6. Images of Saints. Act. 3.
14. Apo. 14. 22.
spirits and heavenly Saints would in no wise be woorshipped, and were
against Images, while they lived here upon earth: is it like that they being
now Saints in Heaven, and Aungelles, are pleased with their Images, to the
which men boowe their knee, put of their cappe, and otherwise honor?

To the end that men might be instructed in Religion and put in mind of
divine matters, and their salvation, Christ has commanded that his Gospel
should be preached, he has not licensed Marc. 16. Images are not Lay men's
books.
us to painte Images, and to teach Lay me^ with pictures: he ordained his
Sacraments also, but has no where appointed Images to be erected. Moreover
whether so ever we turn our face, the lively and true creatures of God are
before our eyes, which being well marked (as it is meet they should) do
much more move the beholder, then all the Images, or vain, immovable, rotten,
and dead pictures of all the men in the world. Of these the Prophet spoke full
truly: They have eyes and see not, etc. Therefore we allow the Psalm. 115.
Lactantius.
judgment of Lactantius that ancient Doctor: saying, There is no doubt, but
that there is no Religion, where so ever an Image is. We affirm also that
Epiphanius that blessed Bishop did well, Epiphani', and Jerome.
which findinge in a Church porche a vealle, whereon was painted the image as
it were of Christ, or of some Saint, cut it in pieces, and carried it away
with him, because contrary to the authority of the Scripture, as he said, he
saw the Image of Christ's human nature hang on the Cross, wherefore he
commanded that no more such vealles should ever after be hanged in Christ's
Church, as be against our Religion, (quoth he) but rather that that
scrupulositie should be taken away, which is unworthy of the Church of
Christ, and not meet for faithful people. Furthermore we approve this
sentence pronou^sed of S. Augustine of true Religion: Augustine. cap. 55.
Let us not compte it Religion, to woorshippe the works of men's hands, for
the crafts men that forge such things are much more excellent then their
handie works, whom not withstandinge we ought not to adore, or woorshippe.

Of Adoration, seruinge and calling upon God by our only mediator Jesus
Christ. Cap. 5.
WE teach men to honor, and woorshippe the true God God only is to be
adored and vvoorshipped. Mat. 4.
only. We give this honor to none other, according to the commandment of
the Lord: Thou shall honor the Lord thy God, and him alone shalt thou
serve. Verily all the Prophets have vehemently inuaide against the people of
Israel, because they woorshipped strange Gods, and not the only true God. But
we teach, that God is to be woorshipped, as he himself has taught us to
serve him: that is, in Spirit, and truth: and not with any superstition, but
with sincerity of heart, according Esaias. 66.
to his word, least he say to us at Ierem. 7.
any time: Who required this at your hands? Paul avouches, that God is Act.
17.
not woorshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing: We call
upon him only in all dangers and affairs of our life, and that by God only
is to be called upon for Christ's sake alone. Psalm. 50.
the intercession of our only mediator Jesus Christ, for we are thus expressly
commanded. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shalt glorify me: Moreover the Lord has most bountifully promised us,
saying: Whatsoever ye Ioh. 16.
shall ask of my Father he will give it you: Again, come unto me all ye that
Math. 11.
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refreshe you. And again: How Romans 10.
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? we then that believe
in God only, call upon him only, and that for Christ's sake only. For there
is one God says the Apostle, and one mediator betwixt God, 1. Tim. 3.
and man Christ Jesus: And again, If any man sin, we have an Aduacate 1.
Io. 2.
with the father Jesus Christ the righteous: wherefore we neither Adore the
Saints in Heaven, neither woorshippe, Saints should not be Adored, or
called upon.
neither call upon them, ne yet acknowledge them to be in Heaven, as our
intercessors or mediators to God. For God suffiseth us, and our only Mediator
Jesus Christ, wherefore we give not to any other the honor due to God, and his
Son, because he has plainly said: I will not give my glory Esaias. 43. Act.
4.
unto an other. And Peter teaches: Among men there is given none other name
under Heaven, whereby we must be saved, but the name of Christ, in whom truly
whosoever deliteth and takes pleasure, they seek nothing without his help.

How be it, we contemn not the Saints, nor think of them as we do What
honor is to be given to Saints.
of the common people, for we acknowledge them to be the lively Images of
Christ, the lovers of God, who have overcome the flesh and the world with
glory, we love them therefore as our brethren, and honor them also, but not
with godly honor, but have them in honorable estimation, and give them their
due and just praise, we imitate also their good steps, for we most earnestly
desire and wish, that we, being folowers of their faith and virtues, may be
made with the^ partakers of eternal life, and may dwell together with God for
ever. In this behalf we like the sentence of S. Augustine of true Religion,
saying: Let us not think it any Religion to woorshippe dead men. If they have
lived godly, they are not thought to be such, as require of us that honor,
but rather such, as would have us to woorshippe God, and rejoice when the eyes
of our heart be opened through his mercy (whereby we are made felowseruantes
of their reward). They are therefore to be honored for imitation, not to be
adored for Religion. Much less do we believe, yt the Relics of Saints are
Relics of Saints.
to be woorshipped. The holy Saints in old time thought that they had
sufficiently honored the dead, if they had Honoringe the dead.
honestly, and comely committed their Relics to the earth, when their souls
were ascended into Heaven. And they esteemed the virtues, learning, and faith
of their forefathers to be most precious relics of all other: which gifts
of God, as they extolled when they praised the dead, so they endeavored to
express in their own deeds, while they lived here on the earth.

The self same old ancient holy men To swear by the name of God only.
Deuteronomy. 10. Exodus 23.
swoore not but by the name of the only God Jehovah, according to his law, by
the which law as it is forbid to swear by the name of strange Gods, so we
take no solemn Oaths required in the Saints name, we reiecte therefore in all
these poinctes the doctrine, that attributes to to much honor to the
Saints which be in Heaven.

Of Gods Providence. Cap 6.
WE believe that all things in All things are governed by God his Providence.
Heaven, in Earth, and all his creatures are preserved, and governed by the
Providence of this wise, eternal, and omnipotent God. For David testifies,
saying: The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the Heavens,
who is like unto the Lord our God that has his dwellinge Psalm. 113.
on high, who abaseth himself to behold things in Heaven, and in earth?
Again he says: Thou have foreseen all my ways, for there is not a word
in my tongue, but lo, thou know it Psalm. 139.
wholly, O Lord. Paul also witnesses, in him we live, move, and have Act. 17.
our being. Romans II. Of him, and through him, and for him are all things:
Most truly therefore, and according to the Scriptures, has Augustine in his
book De agone Christi. Cap. 8. pronounced: The Lord said, are not two
sparowes sold for a farthinge? and one of them shall not light on the ground
without your father: By which words Romans 10.
he would declare unto us, that even that, which men think most vile, is
governed by the omnipotent power of the Lord. For so speaks the truth
himself, the fowls of the air are fed by him, and the Lilies of the Mat. 6.
field were clothed of him, and the hears of our head are numbered. We
condemn therefore Epicures, Heresies. Epicures.
which deny the Providence of God, and al those, which blasphemously say,
that God is occupied about the wheels of Heaven, and neither sees, nor yet
cares for us and our matters. David also the kingly Prophet accuses the^,
saying: Lord how long shall the Psalm. 94.
wicked triumph? They say, the Lord shall not see, neither will the God of
Jacob regard it. Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye fools when
will ye be wise? he that planted the ear shall he not hear? or he that formed
the eye shall he not see? How be it we despise not the means, as unprofitable,
whereby the divine providence We ought not to despise lavvfull means to
bring things to pass.
woorketh, but we teach that we should so farrefoorth use them, as they are
commended unto us in Gods word.

Wherefore we disalowe their rash words, which say: If all things be
governed by the word of God, doubtless, our endeavors and studies be in
Objection.
vain, it shall suffice if we commit al things to the governance of Gods
providence, neither is there cause why we should be more careful for any
matter, or do any thing else. For although Solution.
Paul did acknowledge, that he sailed by ye providence of God, who said to
him: Thou must bear witness of me at Rome also: who more Act. 23.
over promised, saying: No man shall be lost, neither shall there an hear fall
Act. 27.
from the head of any of you, yet notwithstanding, the self same Paul
avouched to the Centurion and Soldiers, except these abide in the ship, ye
can not be saved. For God which has appoincted an end for every Note.
thing, even he has ordained also both the beginning and means, by the
which he may come to the end. The Ethnickes ascribe the government of To
fortune we ought not to attribute things. Iam. 4.
things to blind Fortune, and uncertain chance, but S. James will not have
us say, to day or to morrow we will goo into such a City, and continue there
a year, and bie and sell and get gain, but adds, for that we ought to
say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that: And Augustine
shows in. 148. Psalm. all things in the world, which vain men think to be
done by chance, are not done but by Gods word, because they are not
brought to pass without his commandment: So it seemed that it was done by
chance or fortune, that Saull seeking his fathers Asses, should light upon the
Prophets Samuel. But God said 1. Sam. 9.
before the Prophet. To morrow I will send to thee a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, etc.

Of the Creation of all things, of Angels, of the Deuell, and of Man. Cap. 7.
THis good and omnipotent God has God made all things.
created by his eternal word al things both visible and unvisible, and
preserves the^ by his everlasting spirit: as David witnesses, saying: By
the word of God the heavens were made, and all the host of them by the Psalm.
33.
breath of his mouth: all things that God made were very good, created for the
profit and use of Man: We affirm that al those things did proceed of one
beginning only. We condemn therefore the Manicheis and Marcionites, who
impiously forged two substances or Manicheis, and Marcionites.
natures, the one good, the other evil, also two beginninges, and two Gods
contrary to them selves, a good, and a badde. Angels and men, do excel al
other Creatures: The holy Scripture pronounces of Angels, that God makes
Psalm. 104. Angels.
the spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his Ministers, also Heb. 1.
Are they not all ministringe spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes,
which shall be heirs of salvation? Our Lord Jesus Christ himself testifies
of the Devil. Ioh. 8. He has been a The Devil.
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him, when he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own: For he is
a lier, and the father thereof. We teach therefore, that some Angels did
continewe in their obedience, and are appointed to the faithful service of God,
and Man, and that other some fell, of their own accord, and being cast
down headlong into eternal destruction are become the enemies of al
goodness, and of the faithful. Now concerning Man, the Scripture says: Of
man.
That at the first, he was created good, Genesis 2.
according to the Image and likeness of God, that God placed him in Paradise,
making all things subject to him, which thing David does gloriously set
forth. 8. Psalm. He gave him also a wife, and blessed them both, we say that
man consists of two diverse Substances, comprehended in one person, of the
soul (which is immortal, for being separated from the body, it neither
sleeps, nor dies) and of the body, which is mortal, but shall,
notwithstanding his mortality, in the latter day of Judgment, be raised
from the dead, to the end yt ever after, the whole man, both body and soul,
may remain always either in life or death. We condemn Heresies.
al them which jest at, or by subtle disputacions call in doubt the
immortality of the soul, or that affirm the soul to sleep, or to be a
part of God. To be short, we condemn all the opinions of al those, whosoever
think of Creation, of Angels, of Deuels, and of man, contrary to the doctrine,
which is taught us by the holy Scriptures, in the Apostolic Church of Christ.

Of the fall of Man, of Sin, and of the cause of Sin. Cap. 8.
MAn was at the beginning created The fall of Man.
of God, after his Image, in righteousness, and true holiness, good, and
virtuous: but by the intisement of the Serpent, and through his own defaulte,
he fell from goodness and righteousness, and was made a bonde-slaue to sin,
death, and sundry calamities. Such as he became after his fall, such are all
they which be his offspring, subject I mean, to sin, to death, and diverse
miseries. We understand by sin, that natural corruption of manderiued What
sin is.
or spronge from those our first parents to us all, wherewith we being drowned
in wicked concupiscence, given to no good, but prone to all mischief, full of
naughtiness, distrust, co^tempte, and hatred of God, are able of our selves to
do, no not so much as to think any good: Moreover increasinge in years,
offendinge by wicked thoughts, words and deeds against Mat. 17.
the law of God, we bring forth corrupt fruit meet for so corrupt a tree,
by reason whereof through our own defaute, being subject to Gods wrath, we
stand in danger of just punishment, and should in deed utterly have been
rejected of God, had not Christ our deliverer brought, and reconciled us to him
again. By death therefore we understand, not only bodily death (whereof What
death is.
we must also ones fast, for our sins) but also continual punishment due for
our sin, and corruption: For the Apostle says, We were dead in sin, Ephe.
2.
and were by nature the children of wrath, even as other were, but God, who is
rich in mercy, when we were dead through sin, revived us with Christ.
Likewise, Romans 5. By one man sin Romans 5.
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went over all men,
for as much as all men have sinned.

We acknowledge therefore, that Original sin.
there is in all men Original sin. We confess that all other sins, which
come of it, be both in name and in very deed sins, by what name so ever they
be called, either mortal sin, or Actual sin. Mar. 3.
venial, or that sin which is named the sin against ye holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgeuen: We confess also that al sins be not equal, but some
1. Io. 5.
more heinous, then other some, (although they spring out of one fountain of
corruption and incredulity,) that according to ye Lord his saying, it should
Mat. 10. 11.
be easier for them of the land of Zodom in the day of judgment, then for
that city which despises the glad tidinges of the Gospel. We condemn
therefore also those, which have taught contrary doctrine to this: Especially
Pelagius and all Pelagians, with the Iouianistes, who as the Stoyckes do, make
all sins alike. We think in all poinctes touching this matter as S.
Augustine does, who gathered out of the Scripture, and defended by them, this
doctrine. Furthermore we condemn Florinus, and Blastus, against whom Ireneus
wrote: also we condemn those, that make God the author of sin, for it is God
is not the author of Sin.
plainly written, thou art not the God, which would iniquity, thou hate
Psalm. 5.
all them that work mischief, and wilt destroy all those, that speak lies.
Again, Ioh. 8. When the Devil speaks a lie, the^ speaks he of his own,
for he is a lier and the Father of lies, but in our selves also there is vice
enough, so that there is no need yt God should power into us a new kind of
wickedness, or more iniquity. Wherefore, when God is said in the Scripture,
Objection.
to harden, to make blind, to give over in a reprobrate sense, it is to be
understood, that God so does by rightuous judgment, as a judge, and just
Solut.
revenger. To conclude, as often as God in the Scripture is said to do, or
seems to do any evil, it is not meant, that man does no evil of himself,
but it is signified, that God suffers evil to be done, and lets or
hinders it not, by his just judgment, although he might have stayed it, if
he would, or else we may answer, that God turns the sin of man, to a good
use, as he did the sins of Iosephes brethern: or else we may say that God
rules and bridleth sin, least it burst forth and raunge further, then it is
meet. S. Augustine in his Enchiridion writes after a wonderful and
unspeakable sort, that is not done without Gods will, which is done,
notwithstanding, contrary to his will, for it should not be done, if he would
not suffer it to be done, neither doubtless does he permit it unwillingly or by
force, but willingly: Neither would he, being so good a God, suffer any
thing to be evil done, except, being omnipotent also, he could turn the
evil to good. thus much Augustine. Other questions, Curious questions.
whether God would that Ada^ should fall, or whether he compelled him to fall,
or why he stayed him not from falling, and such like, we compte to curious to
be discussed, except perhaps the wickedness of Heretics or some importunate
men, enforce us to declare these things out of the word of God, as often times
godly doctors of the Church have done. For we know that the lord Reg. 2.
did forbid man to take of the forbidden fruit, and that he punished the
breach of his commandment. Neither are we ignorant that those things which
are done, are not evil, in respect of Gods Providence, will, and power, but
in respect of Satan, and our will, which rebelleth against Gods will.

Of free will, and of the strength or force of Man. Cap. 9.
WE teach in this controversy, (which has always bredds much contention in
ye Church) (...).
that the condition or state of man is three ways to be considered. First,
what The state of man before his fall.
man was before his fall, that is to wit, that he was righteous, and had
freewil to continue in goodness, or decline to il, howbeit, he choose to do
wickedly, whereby he entangled himself and all mankind in the snares of sin
and death, as it is before declared: Secondarily we must consider in what case
What man was, after his fall.
man was after his fall, he was not berest of his understanding, his will was
not taken from him, and he clean changed into a stone or a block, yet those
gifts were so altered and diminished in him, that they were not so excellent,
or able to do so much, as they were before his fall. For his knowledge was
darkened, his will was made bond, whereas before it was free: for now it
serves sin not unwillingly, but willingly, for it is called Will, and not
Will, therefore as touching wickedness or sin, Man does evil not by
co^pulsion but of his own accord. Man has free will to evil.
man not compelled either of God, or the Devil, but of his own motion, does
evil, and in this behalf has freewill, to do mischief. Whereas we see it
full often come to pass, that God hinders the wicked enterprises and councels
of man, that he has not his purpose, we must not thereby gether, that he takes
from man the liberty he has to do evil, but that he preuenteth him, by his
might and power, of that intent, which God disapointeth man's devises.
otherwise man had freely determined to do, as Joseph's brothern did by their
own freewill apointe to dispatche Joseph out of his life, howbeit they could
not do it, because God had otherwise by his council determined.

As touching goodness and virtue, man's knowledge does not as of it self Man
cannot do good of himself.
judge well of divine matters. For the Scriptures written by the Evangelist and
Apostles, require of every one of us, which would be saved, to be borne anewe.
So that the former birth by Adam, does nothing profit us to obtain
salvation. Paul says: The natural 1. Cor. 2.
man perceaueth not the things of the spirit of God. And in the. 2. Cor. 3. He
denies that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our
selves, but our sufficie^cie is of God. It is manifest that the mind and
understanding guides the will but if the guide be blind, it is evident how
far will wandereth: Wherefore man (not yet being regenerated) has no freewil
to do good, no strength to bring any good thing to pass. The Lord in the
Gospel affirms: Verily, verily, I say Ioh. ^.
unto you, that every one that commits sin, is the servant of sin. And
Paul the Apostle writes: The Romans 8.
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed ca^ it be. Furthermore man, after his fall, had much
knowledge of earthly things. For God of his mercy, left him wit, but much
differing from that which he had before his fall. God bids man sharpen his
wits, and God himself increases his gifts in man. It is manifest
Knowledge in all sciences is Gods gift.
how litell or nothing we profit in any art, without the blessing of God.
Truly the Scripture witnesses, that all sciences come of him, yea even the
Ethnickes ascribed the first beginning of arts to yt Gods, as inue^tors
thereof.

Last of all we must consider, whether they, which are regenerated, have
freewill, The strength of men regenerate, and after what sort they have
free will,
and after what sort they have it. In regeneration the mind is inspired with
the holy spirit, to understand and know the secrets and will of God. And the
will is not only changed by Gods Spirit, but is made of ability also of
her own accord to be willing, and able to do good. Except we grant this,
Romans 8.
we shall deny Christian liberty, and shall bring in, the bondage of the law.
The Prophet Jeremy speaks thus: in the person of God, I will put my Ierem.
31.
law in their minds and write it in there hearts. The Lord also says
Ezech. 36. Ioh. 8.
in the Gospel: If the Son of God shall make you free, ye shall be free in
deed: And Paul to the Philippians. 1. Unto you it is given for Christ, that
not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake: And again, I
am persuaded that he which has begone this good work in you, will perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ. Also Philip. 2. It is God which woorketh
in you both the will and the deed. Here notwithstanding two things are to
be observed: First that those which be regenerated in election, Two things
to be noted.
and do good, both not only passiuely, but also actiuely, for they be driven
of God to do that which they do. Wherefore Augustine does well allege ye God
is called our helper, now none can be helped, except he take in hand
somthinge. The Manicheis spoiled man The Manicheis madness.
of all action, and made him as a stone or block: Secondarily we must note
that an infirmity and seblenes remains in them which be regenerated. In
saying Free Will in them that be regenerate, is feeble and very vveake.
that sin dwells in them, and the flesh (although they be borne a new)
strives against the spirit, as long as they live, they do not altogether
without comberaunce bring that to pass, which they determined, these things
are confirmed by the Apostle Romans 7. Gal. 5. Therefore weak is our free will
by reason of the dregs of old Adam, and the natural corruption of manner,
stickinge fast in us to our lives end. Howbeit, saying that the strength of
the flesh and relics of the old man be not so strong, and of such puisance
as utterly to suppress and conquer the woorking of the spirit, therefore the
faithful are said Note.
to be free, yet so that they acknowledge their infirmity and weakness,
without boostinge and bragginge of their free will. For (...) faithful ought
always to keep in mind that saying, which so often S. Augustine repeteth out
of the Apostle: what haste thou, that thou did not receive? and if thou
have received it why hastest thou, as though thou receauedst it not? Moreover
yt thing comes not straight way to pass, which he appointed. The success
of things is in Gods hand. Romans 1. In outvvard things all men have free will.
For yt success of things is in Gods hands. Whereupon Paul desires the
Lord to prosper his journey, even for this cause, then our frewill is but a
weak frewill: Howbeit no man denies, but that men regenerate and not
regenerate, have freewill in outward things: for man has his constitution as
other living creatures have, that he will do one thing, and will not do an
other thing, so he may speak, or hold his peace, go out of the house, or
tarry within doors. Yet here the power of God is always to be marked, which
brought to pass, that Balaam Number. ^4.
could not go thither, whether he would, neither Zachary returninge Luc. 1.
out of the Temple, could speak, as he had a good will to do. We condemn
Heresies.
in this behalf the Manicheis, who denied that frewill was to a good man the
beginning of evil. We condemn also the Pelagians, who affirm that an evil
man has frewill enough to keep a good commandment: both of them are
reproved by the holy Scripture, which says against the Manicheis: God made
man righteous and good: against the Pelagians. If the Son of God shall make
you free, you shall be free in deed.

Of Gods predestination, and election of his Saints. Cap. 10.
GOd has from the beginning predestined God choseth freely of his grace
or chosen freely, and of his mere grace, for no respect that is in men, the
Saints, whom he will have saved, for Christ's sake, according to the
Apostles saying: God Ephesians. 1.
has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world: And again, who 2.
Tim. 1.
has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own determinate council, and grace which was
given to us, through Christ Jesus, before the world was created, but is now
made manifest, by the appearinge of our savior Jesus Christ. Wherefore not
without a means, although not for We are chosen or predestined for Christ
his sake.
our merits, but in Christ and for Christ God has choosen us, so that they,
which are now ingraffed in Christ by faith, be also elected, and they be
reprobrate or cast awaies which are without Christ. Agreeable to the saying
of the Apostle: Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith, know 2. Cor.
13.
you not your ownselues? how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? To conclude, the Saints are choosen in Christ by God to a
certain To what end we are chosen. Ephesians. 1.
end, which the Apostle declares, saying: He has choosen us in him, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, who has predestined
us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace. And albeit God
knows who be his, and in a certain place mention be made of the We should
hope the best of every man.
small number of the elect, yet we must hope well of all, not rashely judging
any man to be a reprobrate. Paul says. I thank my God for you all (he
speaks Philip. 1.
of the whole Church of the Philippians) because of the fellowship, which ye
have in the Gospel, being persuaded, that he, which has begone this good
work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, as it becomes
me so to Judge of you all. And when the Lord was demanded, whether there were
few in number Whether fevve be chosen.
that should be saved, he answered not, that a few, or many should be
saved, or damned, but rather exhorted every manne to labor, that he might
enter in through the strayte Luc. 13.
gate: as though he had said, it is not your part so curiously to enquire of
these things, but rather to endeuer that by the right way ye may enter into
Heaven.

Wherefore we allow not their wicked Objection.
talk, which prattle, that a few are chosen, and seeinge I am not certain,
whether I be any of that small number or not, I will take my pleasure. Neither
those, that say: If I be predestinate or elect of God, nothing: shall hinder
me from the Salvation, already certainly appointed for me, whatsoever I do,
for if I be one of ye reprobrate, no faith, no repentance shall help me,
seeing that Gods determinate sentence can not be changed, and therefore all
teachinges Solution.
and admonitio^s are unprofitable: that saying of the Apostle makes against
2. Tim. 2. Admonitions are not in vain.
them. The servant of the Lord must be apt to teach, instructing them with
meekenes that are contrary minded, prouinge if God at any time will give them
repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to ame^dment
out of the snare of the Devil, which are taken of him, at his will. But
Augustine in his book entitled De bono perseuerantiae. Cap. 14. and ye
residue following does show, that both must be preached, not only the grace of
free election, and predestination, but also wholesome admonitio^s. We disalow
therefore those, which demand without Christ, whether they be elected from
the beginning, and what God determined of them before the world was made, for
thou must hear the preaching of the Gospel and believe it, Whether we be
elect.
and must undoubtedly think, if thou believe and be in Christ, that thou art
one of the elect. For the father has opened to us by Christ, (as even now I
declared) out of the Apostle. ij. Tim. j. the eternal sentence of his
predestinacion. We ought therefore to teach, and to consider above all other
things, how much love our heavenly father, has reveled to us through Christ:
We must hear what the lord himself daiely says to us in his Gospel, and
marcke how he calls us, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor, and Math.
xj.
are heavy laden, and I will refreshe you. So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son for the world, to the end, that all, which
believe Ihon. iij.
in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Also Math. xviij. It is
not my fathers will, that any of these little ones should perish. Let Christ
therefore be our glass, wherein we may behold our predestinacion, we shall
have a testimony plain and sure enough, that we are written in the book of
life, if we take part with Christ, and if he be ours, and we his, knit
together with the bonds of true faith, when we be tempted about predestinacion
Temptations about Predestination.
(then the which temptacion; there is scase any more dangerous) let it be our
comfort, that Gods promises are general to the faithful, saying: Ask and ye
shall receive, every man that asks, receives. And to conclude; Luke. xi.
let us rejoice, that with the whole church of God, we pray; Our father
which art in heaven. etc. That we are also by Baptism, ingraffed in Christ's
body, and fed in the church oftimes with his flesh and blood, to the
obtainyng of life everlasting. With these comfortes we being stre^gthened; are
willed by Paul, to work our salvation, with fear and tremblyng.

Of Jesus Christ true God, and perfect man, the only savior of the world.
Chap. 11.
WE believe and teach, that the son of God our lord Jesus Christ is true God.
Christ from the beginning, was predestinate of his father, to be the savior
of the world, and that he was begotte not only, when he took flesh of the
virgin Marie, and before the foundacio^ of the world was laid, but even
before all eternity, and that of his Father, after an unspeakable sort. For
Esaias says. xxxv. What man shall declare his generacio^. And Mich. v. His going
forth has been from the beginning, and from everlasting. And Ihon in the
Gospel. Cha. j. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God,
and that word was GOD. etc. Therefore the Son, touching his divinity, is
coequall, and of one substance with the Father, true God, not by name or
adoption, or any dignity only, but in substance, and nature, as Ihon the
Apostle says. 1. Ioh. 5.
This is the true God, and life everlasting, and Paul Heb. j. He has made his
son heir of all things, by who^ he made the world, being the brightness
of the glory, and the ingraued form of his person, and bearyng up all
things by his mighty word: for in the Gospel the Lord himself has said:
Glorify thou me, O father, with thine own self, with the glory which Ihon.
xvii.
I had with thee before the world was. It is written. Iho^. v. That the Jews
sought to kill Christ, because he called God his father, making himself equal
with God: we deteste therefore the impious doctrine of Arrius, and all the
Arians Heresies.
against the soonne of God, but chiefly the blasphemies of Michaell Seruetus
a Spaniarde, and all that take his part, which blasphemies against the son
of God, Satan by the^ has, as it were, brought from hell, and most
impudentlie and impiously does sow abroad in the world. We believe also and
teach, that the self same Christ being true man had flesh also.
eternal soonne of the eternal God, was made the soonne of man also, of the
sede of Abraham and David, not by carnal copulation (as Hebion said) but
conceived most purely of the holy ghost, and borne of Marie, who
notwithstanding continued a virgin, as The virgin Marie. Math. i. Ihon. i.
Hebre, ii.
the story of the Gospel, diligently sets out unto us: and Paul says,
he chose not Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Ihon the Apostle, likewise
says: He that believes not, that Jesus Christ came in the flesh, is not of
God. The flesh therefore of Christ was neither fantastical, nor brought down
from heaven, as Valentine and Martion dreamed. Furthermore, our lord Jesus
Christ, had a soul, not void of se^ce and reason, as Appollinaris thought,
Jesus Christ had a soul endued with reason.
neither had he flesh without a soul, as Eunomius taught, but a soul indeed
with reason, and flesh with all her senses: by the which senses he felt and
suffered true and unfeigned torments and griefs, at the time of his passion
Mat. xxvi.
as he himself said: My soul is very heavy even to the death: and in Ihon
the.xij. Now my soul is troubled. etc.

We acknowledge therefore two Two natures in Christ.
natures, a divine, and humane in our one Lord Jesus Christ, and further
say, that they be joined or knitte together, not confounded or mixte, but
rather that the property of their natures remain safe in one person, united
or joined together, for that we worship one Christ our Lord, and not two:
I say one, true GOD, and true man, as touching his divine nature, of like
substance with his father: as Heb. 4.
touching his humanity, of like substance with us men, and like in all
poinctes, exceptyng sin. For as we do abhor from the Nestorians opinion,
Heresies.
making two of one Christ, and breakyng the unity of his person, so we
willynglie deteste the madness of Eutiches, and Molothelites, or
Monophistices, who deny the property of his humain nature. Neither do we
teach, that Christ his divine nature did suffer, Christ his divine nature
suffered not, neither is his human nature every where.
or that he as touching his humain nature, remains to this day on the
earth, or that his humanity is every where: neither do we think or teach,
that Christ had no true body, after it was glorified, or that then it was
deified, and so deified, that it kept not the properties of a body and soul,
or that it was changed all together into a divine nature, and began to be
only one substance. Wherefore we allow not the fond foolish quirkes of
Schuenkfeldius, Heresies.
and such like subtle disputers, nor their intricate, obscure reasonyng of
this matter, wherein they agree not among them selves. Further more, we believe,
that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered and died in deed, for us in the flesh,
as Peter says. We 1. Pet. 4. Christ touching his humanity suffered in deed.
deteste therefore the Iacobits, and the Turks most impious madness, who
abhor the passion of Christ. In the mean while we deny not, but that the
Lord of glory, according to Paul's words, was crucified for us. For 1. Cor.
2.
devoutly and reverently we read, and use the common property of speech
drawn out of the scriptures, and used of all the old writers, in expoundyng
and reco^cilyng the places of the scriptures, which seem to disagree. We
believe and teach, that the same our Lord Jesus Christ, did rise from the
dedde in the self same true flesh, in the which he was crucified and died,
and Christ his resurrection.
that he raised not up an other body, in steed of that which was buried, nor
that he became a spirit, whereas before he was flesh, but that he kept still
his true body. Therefore, when his disciples thought that they saw the spirit
of the Lord, he showed them his Luke. xxiiii.
hands and feet, pearsed with nails, and rased with wou^des, addyng these
words: behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me, and
see, for a spirit has no flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

In the self same his flesh we believe, Christ his true ascencio^ into heaven.
that our Lord Jesus Christ, did ascend above all heavens that may be seen,
into the very highest heaven, that is to wit, the seat of God, and place of
the blessed, where he sits on the right hand of God the father: which The
right hand of god.
right hand, although it signify equal glory and Majesty with God the
father, yet it is taken for a certain place also, whereof the Lord speaks,
saying, that he would go away, and prepare Ihon. xiiii.
a place for his Disciples. The Apostle Peter also witnesses, that the Acts.
iii.
heavens must contain Christ, until the time, that all things be restored.
And he himself shall come again from heaven to the Judgment, at such time The
coming of Christ.
as there shall be in the world most wickedness: and Antichriste (true religion
being corrupted) shall ouerwhelme all with supersticion and impiety, cruelly
persecutyng the church, embruyng himself with the blood of God his saints,
and consumyng their bodies with fire: then, then I say, Christ will Acts.
xvii. i. These. iiii. Math. xiii. The Resurrection of the dead.
come to judge the quick and the dedde, to receive his elect to his mercy,
and to destroy Antichriste. For the dedde shall rise, and they which are
found living in that day, shall be changed in the twinckelyng of an yie, and
all the faithful shall be carried up into the air to meet Christ, and so from
thence they shall with him enter into a blessed place, where they shall live
with him world without end: but infidels and impious persons, shall descend
with the Devils into hell fire, there to be i. Cor. xv. Math. xxv.
burned for ever, and never to be delivered or released of their torments.

We condemn therefore all, which Heresies.
deny the true resurrection of the body, and those, who with Iho^ of Jerusalem
(against whom Jerome wrote) think not a right of glorified bodies: We
condemn those, who thought that the deuilles and all wicked men, should at the
length be saved, and have an end of their punishementes. For without exception
the Lord has said: Their fire is never quenched, and their worm does
never dye. Moreover we condemn Iewishe dreams, dreamyng that before the day
of Judgments, there shall be in the earth a golden world, wherein the godly
(their wicked enemies being oppressed) shall possess the kingdoms of the
earth. For we are far otherwise taught in the Gospel. Math. xxiiij. Luke
xxv. and xvij. Also in the doctrine of the Apostles. ij. These. ij. and. ij.
Timo. iij. iiij. chapiters. Furthermore our Lord by The fruit of Christ his
death and resurrection.
his death and passion, and by all things, which since his incarnacion, he
did and suffered for our sakes, has reconciled our heavenly father to all
Romans 4.
beleuers, has purged by his sacrifice our sin, has unarmed death, broken
the strength of condemnacion and Cor. 7.
hell, has by his resurreccion from the dedde, restored us to immortal life:
for Io. 6. 11.
he is our righteousness, life, and resurrection: to be short, he is the
fulness, the perfection, and the discharge, the health, and most abundant
sufficiency Collos. 1. 2.
of all the faithful. For the Apostle says, so it pleased the father, that
all fulness should dwell in him, and in him ye are made perfect.

For we teach and believe, that this That Christ is thouly savior of the
world.
Jesus Christ, our only and eternal Lord, is the savior of all mankind,
and of all the world: in who^ by faith so many are saved, as were saved
before the law, under the law, and during the time of the Gospel, and all
Ioh. 10.
that shall be saved before the end of the world. For the Lord himself says
in the Gospel, he that enters not in by the door into the shepefolde, but
climeth Ioh. 8.
up an other way, he is a theife and a robber: I am the door of the sheep,
Act. 4. 10. 15.
Abraham saw my day, and was glad: In like manner Peter the Apostle says:
There is salvation in none other, but in Jesus Christ, neither is there among
me^, given any other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. We believe
therefore, that we shall be saved by the grace of God, even as our fathers
were, according to Paul his saying, All our fathers did eat of the same
spiritual meat, and did al drink the same spiritual drink. For they all 1.
Cor. 10.
drank of the spiritual rock, that followed the^, and the rock was Christ.
Therefore we read, that Ihon also writes, Apoc. 15.
that Christ was that Lamb, which was killed from the beginning of the
world: And that Iho^ the Baptiste witnessed, that Christ is the la^be Ioh. 1.
of God, which takes away the sins of the world: Wherefore we openly
profess and Preach, that Jesus Christ is the only redemer and savior of
the world, a King and chief Priest, the true Messiah, and he that was looked
for, I mean, that holy blessed one, whom all the figures of the law, and
Prophesies of the Prophets, prefigured and promised. GOD has fulfilled his
promise, and has sent him to us, so that we ought not to look hereafter for
any other, neither rests there any more now, but that we give all glory to
Christ, and believe in him, conte^ting our selves with him only, despising and
reiectyng all other helps to obtain life everlasting. For they are fallen from
grace and make Christ to die in vain for them, Gal. v.
which seek salvation in any other thing, then in Christ alone.

Now in few words to speak much concerning this matter, whatsoever is
decreed by the scriptures of the mystery of our Lord Jesus Christ his
incarnacion, and comprehended in the holy sacraments, and concluded in the
first. iiij. most godly Synodes, holden The approved Credes of counsels.
at Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Calcedon, whatsoever is contained in the
Creed of that blessed manne Athanasius, or in the like, we believe it with a
sincere heart, we frelie and plainly confess with unfeigned lips, co^demnyng
all other opinions contrary to them. Thus we defend in all poinctes, the
true and catholic Christian faith, knowing that in the fore named Credes,
nothing is contained, that is not agreeable to the word of God, or plainly
and truly sets not forth the Christian faith.

Of God his law. Chap. 12.
WE teach that in the law of The law of God declares his will.
God, is declared to us his will, what he would, and what he would not have us
to do, what is good and just, what is evil and unjust. Therefore we
confess, that it is a good and a holy law, Romans 2. The law of nature.
and that this law was both written with the finger of God, in the hearts of
men, and is called the law of nature: and also that it was graven with the
finger of God, in the two Tables of The two Tables of Moses. Three kind of
laws.
Moises, and at large expounded in his books: we divide it (for plains sake)
into three parts: Whereof the first is the Moral law, which is contained in
the ten commandments: The second is, the Ceremonial Law, which
entreats of Ceremonies, and Exodus 20. Deute. v.
worshippyng of God: The third is, the Judicial Law, which consists in
Civil matters.

We believe, that in this Law of God, the will of God and all necessary God
his law is perfect.
precepts for our whole life, is fully taught: for otherwise God would not
forbid to add any thing to his law, or to take ought therfro. Neither would
Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
he have had commanded, to walk uprightly in this law, declinyng neither to
the right, nor left hand. We teach also, that this Law is not given to man,
to the end he should be justified, why the law was given.
by the keepyng and obseruyng it, but rather, that by the knowledge of the
law, he might acknowledge his infirmity; sin and conde^nacion, and despair
of any help by his own strength might be converted to Christ, through faith:
For the Apostle says plainly: The law causes wrath: And Gal. iij. To. iii.
iiii.
By the law comes knowledge of our sins: For if there had been a law given,
which could have given life, surely righteousness should a been by the law:
but the scripture concludes all under sin, that the promise through faith in
Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe: wherefore the law was a
schole master, to bring us to Christ, that we made be made rightuous by
faith. Neither could, nor yet any flesh is able, to satisfy the law Flesh
cannot fulfill the law.
of God, and to fulfill it, for the weakness that is in our flesh, and still
remains in us, even to our last gasp. Again the Apostle says, that
which Roma. v.
the law could not (because it was weakened by the flesh) that God performed,
by sendyng his own soonne, in the form of flesh, subject to sin.
Therefore Christ is the perfection of Roma. x.
the Law, and has fulfilled it for us: who, as he did bear the curse of the
law, while he was made accursed for our sakes, so he makes us by faith,
Gala. v.
partakers of his fulfillyng the Law, his righteousness and obedience being
accepted, as though it were ours. In this respect therefore, the law of God In
what respect the law of God is abolished.
is abolished, in that it does no more condemn us, nor cause wrath to fall
upon us: For we are under grace, not under the law. Moreover, Christ has
fulfilled all the figures of the Law, wherefore the shadow ceased, when the
body came, for that now in Christ we have the truth, and all fullness.
Notwithstanding, we do not therefore disdain or despise the law, for we
remember the words of the Lord, saying: I came not to break the law, Math.
v.
and the Prophettes, but to fulfill the^. We know that, in the law is showed
sundry kinds of virtues and vices, we are not ignorant, that if the law be
expounded by the Gospel, it is profitable to the church, and therefore we
affirm that the reading thereof, ought not to be banished out of the church:
For although Moises face was covered with a Vele, yet the Apostle affirms
that Vele, to be taken away and abolished by Christ. We condemn all that
the old and new heretics Heresies.
have taught, against the law of God.

Of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, of his promises. Of the spirit, and of the
letter. Chapit. 13.
THe Gospel doubtless is contrary to the Law: for the law causes wrath,
declares the curse, but the Gospel preaches grace, and blessyng. Iho^. i.
Ihon. i.
says, the law was given by Moises, Our forefathers had promises of the
gospel.
but grace and truth, sprang by Jesus Christ: Yet notwithstanding it is most
certain, that they, who were before the law, and under the law, were not
altogether destitute of the Gospel: For they had marvelous large promises of
the Gospel, as these: The seed of the Gene. iii. Gene. xxii. Gene. xlix.
Deuteronomy. xviii. Acts. iii.
woman, shall break the serpents head, and in thy feed shall all nations be
blessed. The scepter shall not be taken away from Judah, until Silo come: The
Lord shall raise up a Prophette, from the midst of his brethren.

And surely we acknowledge, that Two kinds of prounses.
our forefathers had two kinds of promises reveled to them, as we have to us:
Some were of yearthly matters, as are the promises of the land of Canaan, of
victories, and such as are to this day made to us, concerning our daiely
bread: Some other were then, and now also, be of heavenly and eternal things:
that is to wit, of gods grace, of remission of sins, and life everlasting,
by faith in Jesus Christ. Our forfathers had in like manner, not only outward
and yearthly, but also Spiritual and Celestial promises in Christ: For of
salvation speaks Peter. i. Peter. i.
The Prophets have inquired and searched, who prophesied of the grace, that
should come unto us. etc. Of this also the Apostle Paul writes. To. i. The
Gospel of GOD was promised before by gods Prophets, in the holy scriptures:
Hereby then it is euidente, that the old fathers, were not quite destitute of
all the Gospel.

But although they had the Gospel What the gospel properly is.
after this sort, in the writings of the Prophets, whereby they obtained
salvation in Christ by faith: yet the gospel is properly called, that glad
and happy message, by the which, first by Ihon Baptiste, then by Jesus
Christ himself our Lord, afterward by his Apostles, and their successors,
it was preached to the world, that GOD had now performed that, which he
promised from the beginning of the world, in sendyng, or rather giuyng to us
his only soonne, and in him atonement with the father, forgiveness of sin,
all fullness, and life everlasting. Therefore the Gospel is truly called that
history, which is written of the four Evangelists, declaryng how these
things were done, and fulfilled of Christ, and what he taught and did. And
that they, which believe in him, have all abundance of grace: The preaching
and writing of the Apostles, wherein they show unto us, how the son of God
is given to us of his father, and in him all life and salvation, is in like
manner truly said, to be the doctrine of the Gospel: So that eue^ to this day
(if it be sincerely preached) it loses not so worthy a name.

The preaching of the gospel, is called The spirit and the letter ii. Cor.
iii.
also by the apostle, the Spirit, and the service of the Spirit, because that
it is made of great efficacy, and lively by faith in the ears, or rather in ye
hearts of beleuers, by the holy ghost illuminating the^. For the letter, which
is contrary to the spirit, does surely signify every outward thing, but
chiefly the doctrine of the law, which causes wrath to unbelievers, and
provoke to sin, without the aid of the spirit, and faith woorkyng in their
minds: For the which cause, the Apostle calls it also the ministry of
death. For here unto belongs that saying of his: the letter kills, but the
spirit quicekneth. The false Prophets preached the gospel corruptly,
mingelyng the Law therewith, as though Christ could not The heresies
save us, without the law: Such as ye Hebionites are said to be, who sprang
of the heretic Hebeo^: Such were the Nazareans, which were in old time
called Minei, whom every one we condemn: Preaching the Gospel purely,
teaching, that by the spirit alone, and not by the law, beleuers are
justified. But of this matter we will entreat hereafter more at large, in the
title of Iustificacion.

And albeeit, the Preaching of the Gospel, compared with the Pharisees The
doctrine of the Gospel is not new, but a most ancient doctrine.
doctrine of the Law, seemed, when it was first preached by Christ, to be a
new doctrine (which Hieremie also prophesied of the new Testament) yet in
very deed, it was not only then and now is old doctrine) as now adays
Papists call it new, comparyng it with their long received doctrine) but
also is the most ancient doctrine in the world: For God from the beginning,
predestined she world to be saved by Christ: Which predestinacion, and
eternal counsel of his, he has opened to the world, by the Gospel:
whereby it is manifest, that the Religion and doctrine of the Gospel, is the
eldest of all, that ever was, is, or shall be. Wherefore we say, that all they
are foully deceived, and speak unseemly of Gods everlasting counsel, which
affirm, that the Gospel and this religion, is sprung up of late, and is a
faith scase thirty years old: In who^ that saying of Esaias the Prophet
Esaie. v.
is fulfilled: Woe be to them, that speak good of evil, and evil of good:
which put darkness from light, and light from darkness, and that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour.

Of repentance, and the conversion of man. Chap. 14.
THe Gospel has ioigned unto what repentance is. Luke. xxiiii
it, the doctrine of Repentance: For so said the Lord: Repe^pentaunce and
remission of sins, must be preached in my name, to all nations. By
repentance we understand, the amendment of the mind, in the sinful man,
provoked thereunto by the preaching of the Gospel, and inward woorkyng of the
holy ghost, and received with true says, whereby the sinner does strait
way acknowledge his natural corrupcion: and all his sins reproved by the
word of God, and being hariely sorry for the same, does not only bewail
his iniquities, but being ashamed thereof, confess them, but also with
disdain deteste them, mindyng earnestly to amend, and always indeuouryng to
lead an innocent and virtuous life, as long as he lives. And this assuredly
Repentance is a true conversion from satan to God.
is unfeigned repentance, to wit, a true conversion to God and all goodness,
with a spedie departure from satan, and all evil. We also plainly affirm,
that this repentance is the mere gift of God, and not the work of our
Repentance is the gift of God. ii. Cor. ii.
strength: For the Apostle bids a faithful minister, diligently to
instruct them, which resist the truth, assaiyng, if God at any time, will
give the^ repentance, that they may know the truth. Moreover the sinful
woman, mentioned in the Gospel, (who washed Christ's fete with her tears,
and Peter, who wept bitterly, be wailyng Luke. vii. and. xxii
his denial of Christ, do plainly declare unto us, what manner of mind, the
penitent should have, when he earnestly lamenteth his sins, which he has
committed. The prodigal son also, and the Publicane, mentioned in the
Gospel, and compared with the Pharisie, are fit examples for us to imitate,
in confessing our sins. The prodigal son said: Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, now I am not worthy to be called thy
soonne, make me as one of thy hiered servants. The Publicane, not being so
bold, as to lift up his yies to heaven, knockyng his breast, cried, O God be
merciful to me a sinner. These penitent offenders, we doubt not, but that God
received again to his mercy and favor. For Ihon the Apostle says: If we
acknowledge our i. Ihon. i.
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteous: If we say we have not sinned, we make him a lier,
and his word is not in us.

We believe that this plain and free confession, which is made only to God,
either privately, betwixt God and the offendour, or openly in the Church,
when the general confession of sin is recited, does suffice: and that it
is not necessary, to obtain remission of sins, by confessyng our offenses,
Popish confession.
with whisperyng in a Priests ear, or by hearing his absolucion, while he
lays his hands upon our heddes: For of such manner of repentance, there is
found in the holy scriptures, neither any commandment, ne yet example.
David protested saying, I acknowledged Psalm. xxxii.
my sin unto thee neither hid I mine iniquity from thee, I thought, I would
confess against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou diddeste
remitte the punishmente of my sin. The Lord also teaching us to pray, and
eke to confess our iniquities, said. Thus shall ye pray: Our father, which
art in heaven. etc. Math. vi.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. It is
therefore necessary, that we confess our faults, and that we reconcile Note.
our selves to our brother, if we have offended him: Of the which kind of
confession, James the Apostle speaks, saying: Acknowledge your sins James.
v.
one to another. How be it, if any what private Confession is allowed.
man being oppressed, with the burden and temptacion of doubtful sin, would
ask counsel, and seek comfort privately, either of the minister of the
church, or any other learned in the Laws of God, we disalowe it not: In like
manner we greatly comme^de, that Public confession.
general and public confession of sins, which is accustomed to be rehearsed
(as we said before) in the Church and holy assemblies.

Many babble marvelous things, of the Keys of the kingdom of God, The forged
keys of the kingdom of heaven.
and forge thereby swoordes, spears, scepters, crounes, and absolute
authority, over the greateste kingdoms: to The true keys.
be short, over bodies and soul. We simple judging, according to God his
word, say, that all ministers lawfully called, have and occupy the keys,
when the preach the Gospel, that is, when they teach, exhort, comfort,
reprove, and keep in good order the people, committed to their charge. For in
To open, or to shut the kingdom of God.
so doing, they open the kingdom of heaven to the obedient, and shut it to
the disobedient. These keys the lord promised to his Apostles. Math. xvi. and
performed his promise. Ihon. xx. Mark. xvi. Luke. xxiiii. when he sent his
disciples, and bid them preach the Gospel, and forgeuenes of sins, to all
the world. Paul. ij. Cor. v. says, that the Lord has given to his
ministers, the office of reconcilyng sinners to God: What that is, immediately
he declares, addyng: The word or doctrine of reconciliation. And more
plainly expoundyng his own words, enferreth that Christ his ministers,
do the embassage of Christ in his name, representyng God his person,
exhorting his people to be reconciled to God, by faithefull obedience. They
then use the Reies, when they exhort The use of the keys.
us to faith and repentance: So they reconcile to GOD, so they forgive
sins, so they open the kingdom of heaven, and bring beleuers in, far Mat.
xxiii.
otherwise, then they of whom the lord spoke in ye Gospel: woe be to you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hipocrites, because ye shut up the knowledge of heaven
before men: for ye your selves go not in, neither suffer ye them, that would
enter, to come in. Well therefore and effectually do ministers absolve, when
To adsolue.
they preach the Gospel of Christ, and remission of sins for his sake,
which is promised to all that believe, and are baptized. Neither do we think,
that the absolucion is therefore of greater virtue, because it is whispered in
ones ear alone, or mu^meled over ons head: We think notwithstanding, that
remission of sins, ought diligently to be preached to all men, and that every
particular man ought to be admonished, that it lies him upon, to seek for
remission of his sin.

But how circumspecte and diligent penitentes ought to be, in indeuouryng
Amendeme^te of life.
to lead a new life, in depressyng the old, and sturryng up the new man,
examples in the Gospel teach us: The Lord said to the man, whom he cured of
the palsy: behold, thou art made Ihon. v.
whole, sin no more, least some wors thing happen to thee: To the adultres
woman, whom he condemned not, he said, go thy ways, sin no more: By Ihon.
viii.
the which words doubtless, he meant not, that it was possible for man, to be
without sin, as long as he lives in the flesh, but he would have us watch
and to be very careful, to endeavor by all means we can, and to pray
unto God, that we fall not again into those sins, from the which we are
risen, as it were, and that we be not overcome with the flesh, the world, and
the devil. Zacheus the Publicane being Luke. xix.
received into God his favor, cries in the Gospel: Behold, half my gooddes I
give to the poor, O Lord, and if I have deceiptfully begiled any man, I
restore him. iiij. times so much. After Good deeds required in the penitent.
the same sort therefore, we preach that restitucion, mercy, and almose
deeds, are necessary to be done of the^, which truly repent. And generally,
with the Apostles words we exhort all, and say: Let not sin reign in
Roma. vi.
your mortal bodies, to obey it in the lusts thereof, neither give your
members, as weapons of unrighteous unto sin, but give your selves unto
God, as they that are a live from the dedde, and give your members, as weapons
of righteousness unto God.

Wherefore we co^de^ne all the impious Heresies.
words of those, ye despise the preaching of the Gospel, and say: It is an
easy matter, to return to God. Christ has made satisfaction for all sin.
We shall quickly have pardon for our wickedness what hurt then shall it do us to
sin? We need not much to pass for repentance. etc. Such impious talk I
say, we condemn. Howbeit, we teach, that at al times, each sinner may have
free access to God, who forgiueth the faithful al their iniquities, except
only the Mark. iii.
sin against the holy ghost. Therefore we disalowe the old and new Nouatians
with ye heretics called Catharie: chiflie we condemn the gainful doctrine of
ye pope, touching penite^ce. And against his Symonie, and his symonicall
pardanes, Popish pardons.
we allege the judgment of Simon Peter, thy money perish with thee, because
thou thinkeste, that the Acts. viii.
gift of God may be obtained with money, thou haste neither part nor
fellowship in this business: For thine heart is not right in the sight of
God. We discommende all those, who imagine, that they are able to make
satisfaccion Satisfactio^s:
for their sin, which they have committed, and that with their own
satisfactions. For we teach that Christ only, by his death and passion, is the
satisfaction for all sin, and the pacifier of God his wrath: Yet
notwithstanding, as we said before, we cease not to call upon men, to subdue
the rage of the flesh: Addyng, that we ought not arrogantiie to hurl before
God, our good deeds, as satisfaction for our sins, but rather humbly, like
the children of God, to show our good living, as a token of new obedience,
and thankfulness for our deliverance, and full satisfaction, purchased by the
death of Christ the soonne of God.

Of the true Iustifiyng of the faithful. Chap, 15,
TO Justify (according to the what it is to justify.
Apostles meaning, in his disputacion of Iustificacio^) is to forgive sins,
to absolve from the fault, and punishment also dew for the same, to receive
into favor, and to pronounce just: for the Apostle to the Romans writes: It
is God that justifies, who is it that condemns: To justify and to condemn
are here put as contraries. In Acts xiij. he says: By Christ remission of
sin is preached unto us, and from all things, from the which ye could not
by the law of God be justified, by him every one that believes, is justified.
We also read in the law, and in the Prophets thus: If any strief arise
between men, and they come unto Deuteronomy. xxv.
judgment, let the Judges judge them but let the rightuous be justified, and
we are justified through Christ.
the wicked condemned: And Esaie. v. Woe be to them that justify the impious
manne, for any bribe. It is most certain, that we all are by nature impious
sinners, and before the Judgment seat of God, convicted of impiety, and
guilty of death: howbeit we believe, that we are justified, that is to say,
pardoned of our sins, and delivered from death by God (who is our Judge) and
that only for Christ his sake, without any respect of our own merits. For
what can be more plain then that, which Paul says: All Roma. iii.
have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely
by his grace, and through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus.

For Christ has taken upon him, and borne the sins of the world, he has
satisfied the justice of God: God therefore for his only Christ's sake,
Justice imputed to us.
(who suffered death, and rose again) is merciful to our sins, not imputing
them to us, but accepting Christ's justice, as our righteousness: so that now we
are not only purged, and cleansed from sin, but also clothed with Christ his
justice, and delivered from sin, death, and condemnacion: to be short, we are
made rightuous, and heirs of life everlasting. To speak properly therefore,
God alone does justify us, and that only for Christ his sake, not laiyng
our sins to our charge, but imputyng his righteousness to us.

Because we receive this iustificacion, not for any of our works sake, we are
justified by faith only.
but by faith in God his mercy, and through Christ, therefore we teach, and
believe with the Apostle, that man is justified by faith only in Christ, not
by the Law, or by any works. For Paul says: We think that a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the law: And again. Romans iiij.
Roma. iii.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. For what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was co^pted to
him as righteousness. Now to him that woorketh, the wages is not compted by
favor, but by debte, and to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies, the faith of the ungodly is compted for righteousness: And again.
Ephe. ij. by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God, and not of works, least any man should boaste himself.
Then because faith ketcheth hold fast on Christ, who is our righteousness,
and attributes all things, to the grace we receive Christ by faith.
of God in him, therefore iustificacion is ascribed to faith, chiefly for
Christ, and not because it is our work, for it is the gift of God. That we
receive Christ by faith, the Lord declares at large, where he uses this
word, Ihon. vi.
Eat, for believe, and believe for eat: For as by eating we receive meat, Eat
used for believe.
so by beleuyng we are made partakers of Christ: Wherefore we divide not the
benefit of Iustificacion, attributyng Justification is not to be attributed
partly to us. and partly to Christ.
it partly to the grace of God, or to Christ, and partly to our selves, our
love to our works, to our merits: But we ascribe it wholly to the grace of
God in Christ by faith. And which is more, out love and our works cannot
please God, if they be done of us that are unjust: Wherefore we must first
be made just, before we can love, or do just works: We are made just in
deed (as we have declared) by faith in Christ, by the mere grace of God, who
does not impute our sins, but Christ his righteousness to us, and compteth
our faith in Christ, as righteousness. Furthermore the Apostle plainly
shows, that i. Timo. i.
love comes of faith: The end of the Law is Love, issuyng out of a pure
heart, a good consctence, and an unfeigned faith.

Here we speak not of a counterfeit, vain, idle, or dedde faith, but of a
lively and quickenyng faith, which through Christ (who is life, and
quickens him, who^ faith ketcheth hold on) is a live, and so is said to
be, because Saint Paul's saying, is co^ferred with saint James. James. ii.
she declares her self to line by her lively works. Saint James then
makes nothing against this dostrine, who speaks of a vain, and dedde
faith, whereof some boasted, albeeit they had not Christ, living in the^ by
faith. He says also that works Justify, not therein disagreyng from the
Apostle (for then he were to be rejected) but showing that Abraham declared
his lively and iustifiyng faith, by his works. The which thing all the
godly do, who notwithstanding put their trust in Christ only, and in no
works of their own. For in an other place, the Apostle says: Thus I Gala. ii.
live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, and in that that I now line in
the flesh, I live by faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given
himself for me, I do not abrogate the grace of God: For if righteousness be by
the law, then Christ died in vain.

Of faith and good works, of their reward, and man's merit. Cha. 16.
CHristian faith is not a bare opinion, what faith is
or persuasion of men, but a most sure confidence, an euidente and constaunte
assente of the mind: to be short, a most certain comprehendyng of God his
truth, set forth in the Scriptures, contained in the Apostles Creed, yea, and
commanded of God himself (who surmounteth al goodness) But chiefly, faith is a
confidence in God, and his soonne Christ his promises, which Christ is thence
of all promises. This faith is the free gift of God, which only he gives
Faith is the gift of God.
of his grace to his elect, according to measure, when, to who^, and as much
as he list, and that by his holy spirits by the mean of preaching the Gospel
and faithful prayer. This faith is increased, and that, by God his mercy:
For else the Apostle would not have The increese of faith. Luke. xi.
said, Lord increase our faith.

All that hitherto we have said concerning faith, thapostles have taught before
us: For Paul says: Faith is the ground of things, which are hoped for, and
the evidence of those things Hebre. xi.
that are not seen. And again he says: All the promises of god in Christ ii.
Cor. i.
are yea, and are in him Amen. To the Philippians he writes, that it was Phi.
i.
given to them, that they should believe in Christ: And again, Christ has
Romans xii. ii. These. iii. Romans xi.
distributed to every man; a measure of faith: And again, All men have not
faith, neither do all men obey the Gospel. Luke also witnesses Act. xiij.
As many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed: Wherefore he calls
faith, the faith of Gods elect: And again. Roma. x. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. In other places, he often bids men
pray for faith.

The said Apostle affirms, faith The force of faith.
to be of great efficacy, declaryng it self by Love: Faith quieteth the
conscience, opens to us a free entry unto GOD, that we may come to him
with bolones, and obtain of him profitable, and necessary things: It keeps
us in doing our duty, that we owe to God, and our neighbor: In adversity,
it strengthens us with pacie^te, facioneth and forms in us true confession:
and to speak all at a word, says brings forth al kind of good Good
works come of ^uth.
fruits, and good works in us. For we teach, that true good works, do
spryng of a lively faith, by the woorkyng of the holy ghost, and are done of
the faithful, according to the will or rule of God his word. For Peter the
Apostle faieth, give all diligence i. Peter. i.
thereunto, and join virtue with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and
with knowledge temperau^ce. etc. We said before, that the Law of GOD, which
is the will of God, does prescribe unto us, a pattern of good works. And the
Apostle affirms, this is i. These. iiii.
the will of God, your sanctificacio^, and that ye should abstain from
uncleanness, that no man oppress, or defraude his brother in any matter: For God
works that men inuente of their own brain.
allows not those works, those worshippynges, which we chose of our own
hedde, which Paul calls, volontarie religion. Whereof the lord Collos. ii.
also in the gospel says. They worship me in vain, teaching the doctrine, and
precepts of men. We reprove therefore such works, but we highly commend,
and earenestly require those works, whiche^ be according to the will and
commandment of God. The end of good works
We must therefore do good deeds, yet not to merit thereby life everlasting
(for as the Apostle says. Life everlasting is the gift of God) nor to make
our boaste or brag thereof, which Math. vi.
Christ reproves, nor yet for gain, which also he disaloweth, Math. xxiij.
but to the glory of God, to commend our vocacion, to show our thankfulness
to God, and to profit our neighbor. Again our Lord faieth in the Gospel:
Let your light so shine before Math. v.
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father, which is
in heaven: And the Apostle Paul, Eyh. iiij. Walk as becomes your vocacion:
Also Collo. iij. Whatsoever ye shall do, says he, in word or deed, do all
in the name of the Lord Jesus geuyng thanks to GOD the father, through him.
And Phil. ij. Look not every man on his own matters, but on other men's
things also: And Tite. iij. Let our brethren learn to show for the good
works, for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

Albeit therefore we teach, as the We reiecte not good works, but
necessarily require them.
Apostle does, that a man is Justified freely, by faith in Christ, and not
by any good works, yet we do not despise, or condemn good works, we
knowing that man was not made, nor regenerate by faith, to be idle, but rather
to do without ceassyng, those things, which are good and profitable. For in
the Gospel the lord faith: A good tree brings forth good fruit: Math. xii.
And in Ihon. xv. He that dwells in me, brings forth much fruit. To
conclude, the Apostle says, we are Gods creatures made in Christ Jesus, to
do good works, which GOD has prepared to walk in. And again Heresies.
who delivered himself for us, to redeem us from all our iniquity, and to
cle^se his own peculier people, which do good works. We condemn therefore,
all those that despise good works, babblyng that they are unprofitable, Our
good works are not the cause of our salvation.
and not to be regarded. Notwithstanding we think not, as was said before,
that we are saved by good works, or that they are so necessary that without
them no man was ever saved. For by grace, and by Christ's only benefit we
are saved: Works come of says necessarily, but yet salvation is improperly
ascribed to the^, for most aptly it is to be attributed to grace. For that
saying of the Apostle is very well known, if it be of grace, it is no more
of works, or else were grace, no grace: But if it be of works, it is no more
grace, or else were Romans xi.
works, no more works.

Those works doubtless do please God, and are allowed of him, which Good
works please God.
we do with faith, because they please him by faith in Christ, who do good
works, which also proceed of ye grace of God, through the holy ghost. For
saint Peter says: In every nation Acts. x.
he that fears GOD, and woorketh righteousness, is accepted with him: And we
cease not to pray for you, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord, Col. i.
and please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works. Therefore
we instruct men, with as much Note.
diligence as we can, and beat into their ears, to embrase true, and not
false or Philosophical virtues, to do in deed Hypocrites.
good works, and to perform the bounden duty of a Christian manne. We much
discomme^de, both the sluggishnesse and hypocrisy of all such, as praise and
profess the Gospel with their mouth, but with their filthy living defile
it. And we lay before their yies, Gods horrible threatenynges concerning this
matter, his large promises and liberal rewards, with exhortacions, comfortes
and rebukynges.

For we teach, that God geneth a God rewards our good deeds.
large reward to them that do good, according to the Prophettes saying:
Refrain thy voice from weeping, for Iere. xxxi. Esaie. iiii. Math. v. x.
thou shalt have a reward for thy work. Christ also promises in the
gospel: Be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven: And he that
will give to one of these little ones, a Cup of cold water, verelie I say
to you, he shall not lose his reward. Howbeit we refer this reward, which
the Lord gives, not to men's merit, Note.
who receive the reward, but to why God rewards them that do good deeds.
the goodness, liberality and truth of God promisyng, and geuyng it: who
notwithstanding he owes nothing to any man, yet has promised to give a
reward to them, which faithfully worship him, but to that end GOD
bestows on them his reward, that they should serve him. Furthermore, there
be many things unmeet to be presented to God, and sundry things are found
imperfect, even in the saints deeds or works. But because, God receives
them into his favor, and loves the workers for Christ his sake, he gives
them the reward, which he promised them. For otherwise our righteousness,
is likened to filthy clothes. The Lord Esaie. lxiiii. Luke. xvii. Men's
merits, merit nothing.
also says in the Gospel: When you have done all that is commanded you,
say, ye are unprofitable servants: we have dooen but that, which was our
bounded duty to not. Albeit then we Note Augu.
teach, that God rewards our good deeds, yet we teach there withal, as
Augustine does, that God crowns in us, not our merits, but his own gift:
And therefore, what reward soever we receive, we affirm that it comes of the
grace of God, worthelier called grace, then a reward, because that good, which
we do, is done rather by God his mercy, then by our own accord. And as Paul
says: What i. Cor. iiii.
have thou, yt thou have not received? if thou have received it; why boastest
thou as though thou had not received it? And as out of that place, the holy
martire Cyprian.
Cypria^ gathers: We must glory in nothing, because we have nothing
Heresies.
of our own: We condemn therefore these, who in such sort defend men's
merits, that they diminishe the grace of God.

Of the holy catholic church of God, of the one only hedde of the Church.
Chapi, 17.
Seeing that God from the beginning, The church ever was, and ever shall be.
would have manne saved, and come to the knoweledge of the truth, it must
needs be that ever there was, and now is, and to the end of the world there
shall be what the church is.
a Church, that is to say, a company of the faithful, called and gathered
out of the world, a company, I say, of all the Saints, to wit of them,
which do truly know, and rightly worship the true God in Christ their
savior, according to his word, and by the aid of the holy Ghost: to be
short; which are made partakers of al goodness, offered freely unto them,
through Christ by faith. All these be citezens of one City, living under one
Lord, under one kind of laws, being alike partakers of all good things: For
so the Apostle calls them, fellow citezeins with the Saints, and of Gods
household folk, namyng them saints, who abidyng in the earth, are
faithful, sanctified by the blood of gods soonne: Of whom this article of our
Ephe. ii. 1. Cor. vi.
belief speaks, wherein it is said, I believe the holy catholic church,
The Communion of Saints. And seeing that there is always one only God, one
mediator between God and man Jesus, our Messiah, and one shepherde There was
never but one true church.
of the whole flock, one hedde of this body, to conclude, one spirit, one
salvation, one faith, one Testamente or couenaunte, it follows necessarily,
that there is one only Church also: Which therefore we call Catholic, Why
it is called catholic.
because it is universal, and is dispersed throughout all the parts of the
world and extends it self to all times, being limited and enclosed in no
place, or time. We condemn therefore the Donatistes, who straightly enclosed
Heretics tiyng the church to certain places and times.
the church, in, I know not what corners of Aphrike. Neither do we allow
the Romish Clergy, who bests that almost the only Romish church, is the
catholic Church.

The Church is distributed into tiuers Diverse parts of the church.
parts, not that it is severed, or torn in pieces in it self, but rather by
reason of the diversity of the members, that be therein. For there is one
church, The Militant church.
called Militant, an other Triumphant: that is militante, which being as yet
on the earth, wageth battle, and fights with the flesh, the world and the
Prince of this world, the devil, also with sin and death: When this Church
is discharged of attendaunce here, it triumphs in heaven, for the victory
over all those her enemies, reioysyng before the Lord, albeit these two
Churches are still united, or knitte together.

The militant Church remainyng Particular churches.
on the earth, has always had many particular Churches, yet all they are
referred, to the unity of the catholic Church. This Church was otherwise
governed before the law among the Patriarchs, otherwise under Moises by the
laws, otherwise of Christ, by the gospel. Commonly also there are compted
two kinds of people, the Israelites, and the Gentiles, or a people consistyng
of the Jews and Gentiles, gathered together in the Church. There be two
Testamentes also, the old, and the new: Yet of all these people there was, and
is one society, one salvation, by one Messiah, in whom, as members of one
body, under one hedde, all are knitte together in one faith, all are
partakers of one spiritual meat and drink. Howbeit here we acknowledge, that
there were sundry times, diverse signs or Sacraments of our Messiah, both
promised and given also to us of his father: and that the ceremonies removed, a
brighter light now shines unto us, and that we receive larger gifts, and
enjoy greater liberty, the^ our forefathers had, before the coming of Christ.

This holy Church of God, is called the house of the living Lord, built The
names of the church.
of living and spiritual stones, and sect upon an immovable rock, upon such
a foundacio^, that there can none other foundacio^ be laid then it. And in
that i. Timo. iii.
respect, it is also called the pillar, and ground of truth: It erreth not,
as long when the church erreth.
as it testeth upon Christ the Rock, and foundation of the Prophettes and
Apostles. But no meruell if it err, as often as it forsakes him, who only is
the truth. The Church also is called the virgin, and spouse of Christ, and
the only and well-beloved spouse of Christ: For the Apostle says, I ii. Cor.
xi.
ioigned you to one housbande, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ: It
is also called the flock of sheep, under one shepherde Christ, both in the
xxxiiij. Chap. of Ezech. and. x. of Ihon. And it is named Christ his body,
because the faithful are the living members of Christ, under Christ their head:
The hedde is, that which has preeminence, and the higheste room in the
body, geuyng life to it, and ruling it so in all things, with the vital
spirits coming from thence, that it increases and grows thereby. There is
also but one head of that body, wherewith it does well agree: For the church
There is but one hedde of the church Christ Jesus.
can not have any other hedde then Christ: and as the Church is a spiritual
body, so it is meet that it have a spiritual hedde agreablie. Neither ca^ it
be ruled by any other spirit, then by Christ his spirit. Paul writes: he is
the hedde of the body of the church: He is the beginning; and first borne
Col. 1.
of the dedde, that in all things he might have the preeminence. Again,
Christ is the hedde of the church, and Ephe. v. Ephe. i.
the same Christ is the savior of his body: And again he says: Which is
the hedde of the church, which church is his body, even the fullness of
him, that fills all in all. Moreover, Ephe. iiij. Let us in all things grow
up into him, which is the hedde, that is Christ, by whom all the body being
coupled, and knitte together by every ioynte, receives increase. We allow not
therefore, yt doctrine of the Romish Clergy, making their Romish bisshoppe an
universal Shepeherde, the The Pope.
chief hedde, yea, and Christ's true vicare of his catholic militante church
in the earth: wherein he has fullness of power, and supreme dominion, as they
say. For we teach, that Christ is the Lord, and remains the only
universal shepherde, and chief high priest, before God his father, and that he
in Christ is present with his church
the church, does all the duties of an high bisshoppe or shepherd, and so
will continue unto the end of the world, and therefore needs no vicare, as
one that were absente. Truly Christ is present with his Church, and is a
living hedde, who straightly forbadde his Apostles, and their successors, to
challenge the primacie, or supremacy in the church. Whosoever then gainsaieth
this manifest truth; and brings into the church of Christ a contrary
government, who sees not, that they are to be coumpted among the number of
those, who^ Christ's Apostles Prophesied of ij. Peter. ij. and Paul Act. xx.
ij. Cor: xi. and. ij. These. ij.

By taking away the Romish head, No desorder in the church.
we bring into the Church of Christ no disorder, no trouble seeing that we
teach, that the gouernemente of the church prescribed by the Apostles, is
sufficient for us, to keep the Church in due order. Which (...) the
beginning, while it was without such a Romish hedde, as now adays is said to
keep the Church in order, it was not without very (...): Doubtless The head
of Rome.
the hedde of Rome, maintains the tyranny and corruption, brought into ye
church, but (...) resists, and with all the might he (...), withsta^deth the
true reformacion thereof.

It is objected unto us that there are diverse co^tentions crept into our
churches, Contentions in the church
since we separated our selves, from the Romish church, wherevpo^
Contentions in the romish church.
some conclude, that we be not the true Churches of Christ: as though there
were never any sects in the Church of Rome, never any strie for contencion,
and that for religion, not so much in Schools, as in their holte Chaires, and
in open assemblies. We acknowledge i. Cor. xiiii.
that the Apostle said: God is not GOD of dissencion, but of pear, and seeing
there is among you emulacion, and contencion, are ye not carnal, yet it cannot
be deuied, but that God was Contention is no true note of the false church.
(...) the Apostolic Church, and that that Church was the true Church, in
which notwithstanding, there was striefe and discord. For the Apostle Gal. ii.
Act. xv.
Paul, reprehended Peter the apostle: and Barna^^^ dissented from Paul. A
grievous co^tencion (...) in the church of Antibche between them that preach
Christ, as Luke reherseth. Act. rv. There has utter great strief always in
the Church, and the most famous doctors thereof, have dissented among
theimselues, in no light matters, the Church notwithstanding, ceased not to
be Christ his Church still, as it was before: for so it pleased God to use
the strief in the Church, to the glory of his name, to set forth his
truth, and to have those, who are tried, better known.

But as we acknowledge none other The marks of the true church.
hedde of the Church, then Christ, so we agnise not every one, that boasts
it self for the true Church, to be the true Church in deed, We teach that
to be the true Church, wherein are found the signs or marks of the true
Church, especially the right and sincere preaching of God his word. As we
be taught in the books of the Prophettes and Apostles: who refer all to
Christ, which faieth in the Gospel, My Sheep hear (...) voice, and I know
them, they follow me, and I give to the^ eternal life, and they shall never
perish, they follow not a stranger, but fly from him, because they know
not the voice of strangers: and these Sheep be all of one faith, of one
spirit, and therefore worship one only God, seruyng him alone in spirit, and
truth, and loving him only with all their heart, with all their strength, do
call on him only for Christ his sake, their only mediator and intercossour,
seeking without Christ, and faith in him no righteousness, no life, because
they acknowledge Christ, to be the only hedde and foundation of the Church,
and them selves to be laid upon this foundation. They do daiely repare them
selves with repentance, do patiently bear the cross (...) upon them, and
being knitte together by unfeigned love, with all Christ's members, do thereby
declare themselves, to be the Disciples of Christ, continuyng in the bond of
peace, and godly unity. They be also partakers together of the Sacraments,
instituted by Christ, and taught of the Apostles, vsyng them none otherwise,
then the lord has commanded them. The saying of the Apostle is well known to
all men: I have received of the lord, that which I also have delivered unto
you: Wherefore we condemn those i. Cor. xi.
Churches, as disagreyng from Christ his true Church, which be not such as we
have heard that they should be, boast they never so much of the succession of
Bisshops, of unity, and antiquity. Yea, the Apostles commau^de us to fly
from Idolatry and Babylon, and not to take part with her, except we would i.
Cor. x. i. Ihon. v. Apoc. xviii ii. Cor. vi. There is no salvation with out we
be of Christ his church.
take part of God his plages also. We so much esteem the society, with the
true Church of Christ, that we deny that they can live in GOD his sight,
which do not communicate with the true Church of God, but separate
themselves from it. For as out of the Ark of Noah, there was no saving help, A
similitude.
when the world perished by the flood, so we believe, that there is no assured
salvation without Christ, who offreth himself in the Church, to be enjoyed of
his elect: and therefore we teach, that they which will live, must not
separte theimselues from the true church of Christ. Howbeit we do not so
narrowly include the Church, within the signs above rehearsed, that we The
church is not tied to signs.
teach all those to be out of the church, which either receive not the
Sacraments (so that it be not a self will, or All offenders are not counted to
be out of the church.
contempt, but compelled rather by necessity, which they can not avoid)
either those, in whom sometime faith faints, but is not utterly lost, and
clean dedde: either else such, in who^ there are found faults and errors,
by infirmity. For we know that god had some friends in the world, which were
not of the Israelites Common wealth. We are not ignorant, what happened to
the people of God, in the captivity of Babylon, in the which, they lacked
their sacrifices, for the space of. lxx. years. We know, what befell to Peter,
who denied his master, and what daiely is wont to hap to the elect and
faithful weaklinges. Further, we are not ignorant, what manner of Churches in
the Apostles time the Galathians and Corinthians had, in the which the Apostle
lays to their charge, that there was many and grievous The church sumtime
seems to be quike destroyed.
sins, and yet he calls them the holy churches of Christ. Yea, some time
it comes to pass, that God by his just judgment* suffers the truth of his
word, the catholic faith, and true worshippyng of him to be darkened, and
plucked a sunder, as it were, so that it seems utterly to be destroyed, yea,
and no Church at all to remain. As we read that it came to pass in Elias
days, and other times: yet notwithstanding, God has in this world, and in
these darkness those, his true worshippers, yea, and no small number of the^,
above seven thousand For the Apostle avouches, that the foundacio^ of God
remains sure, and ii. Reg. xix Apoc. vii.
has this seal: The Lord knows, who are his. etc.

Wherefore, the Church may also The church may be called unvisible.
be called invisible, not that me^ be invisible, of whom the church is
gathered, but because, it being hid from our yies, and only known to God,
man often times is not able to Judge, All be not of the church that be in the
church.
where it is. Moreover, not all that are nombred in the Church are saints,
and the lively or true members of the Church. For there are many Hippocrites,
which to the outward show, hears the word of God, and openly receives
the Sacraments, and seem also to call upon GOD, in Christ his name only, to
confess Christ to be their only righteousness, to serve God, to do the
works of charity, and to suffer or a time their miseries patiently: but
inwardly they are destitute of the light of the spirit, of faith, of pureness
of mind, and of continuau^ce to the end, so that at length they are
disclosed what they be. Iho^ the Apostle says: They want out from us, but
they i. Ioh. ii.
were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us.
And yet while they faigne holiness, albeit they be not of the church, yet they
Apt similitudes.
are compted to be in the Church: As traitors in a Common wealth, are
nombred among citezeins, before they be discovered: and as Daruell, Kockle and
Chafe is found among wheat, and as bou^ches or swellings is found in a
sound body, whereas in dee de diseases and deformities, are truly said to
belong to the body, they are rather maladies and deformities of the body then
true members thereof. Wherefore the Church of God, is well compared Math. xiij.
to a net, wherein is drawn al kind of fish: and so a field, wherein is
found both Kockle and Wheat. Here must we take deed, that we judge not
to sone, that we go not about we must not rashly judge.
to shut out, to cast away, or to cut of those, who^ God will not have
cast out, or such; as without loss to the Church, we can not separate. Also
we must watch, lest while the godly sleep, the wicked prevail so much that
they do some hurt to the church. Moreover, we diligently teach men to
mark, wherein chiefly the truth and unity of the Church does consiste,
least by our rashenesse, we raise The unity of churches stoudeth not in
outward rytes.
and maintain some Schism in the church. It consists not in Ceremonies,
and outward rites, but rather in truth, and unity of the catholic faith:
Which catholic faith, is not taught us in man's Law, but in the divine
scriptures: a brief sum whereof, the Apostles Creed is. We have redd, that
among the old fathers, there was diversity of rites, but so free for men to
use, or not to use, that no man thought the unity of the church to be broken,
Ceremonies indifferent to be used or not to be used.
by not obseruyng them. We affirm therefore, that the true concord of the
church stands in doctrine, in the uniform preaching of Christ his Gopell,
and in keeping of those rites, which the Lord evidently delivered and
commanded. wherein the unity of the church consists. Phi. iii.
Here chiefly we allege the sentence of the Apostle, Let as many as be
perfect, be thus minded, and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reucale
eue^ the same unto you: nevertheless, in that whereunto we are come let us
proceed by one rule, that was may mind one thing.

Of the ministers of the Church, of the making of them, and their offices.
Chap. 18.
GOd, to assemble together, to ordain, to govern, or God uses ministers to
the instructing of his church.
preserve his Church, has always, and does to this day, and ever will, so
long as the church shall continue on the earth, use the service of ministers.
The first beginning then, and appointing of ministers and their function, is of
great antiquity, being God his own ordinance, not The original cause of the
ministry.
any new doctrine invented by man's brain. God doubtless could by his own
power, without any mean, join himself and his church (which consists of
men) together. But he had rather deal with men, by the service of men.
Wherefore ministers ought to be esteemed, The ministry ought not to be co^te^ned
not as ministers only, but as Gods ministers: for because by them, God
works men's salvation. Wherefore, we warn men to take heed, that they do not
in such sort attribute those things, to the secret woorkyng of the holy
Ghost, which belong to our conversion and instruction, that thereby the
ministry of the Church be abased. For it is meet that we should always
be mindful of the Apostles words: How shall they believe Romans x.
in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear, without a
Preacher? Then faith is by the hearing, and hearing by the (...) of GOD.
Neither should (...) forgette (...) his saying in the Gospel: Verily, verily,
I say unto you, he that receives, who^soeuer Ihon. xiii.
I shall send, receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent
me. We ought also to remember, John. vi.
what the man of Macedonie apperyng in a vision to Paul, being in Asia,
counseled him to do, saying: Take thy journey into Macedonie, and i. Cor. i.
come and help us. For in an other place the said Apostle writes: We
together To much ought not to be attributed to ministers.
are God his laborers, ye are gods housbandrie, and Gods buildyng. Again on
the other side: We must beware, that we attribute not to much to ministers,
or to the ministry, remembryng the Lords words: No i. Cor. iii.
manne comes to me, except my father draw him. And the Apostles saying; Who
is Paul then, and who is Apollo, but the ministers, by whom ye believed? And as
the Lord gave to every man: I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the
increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but GOD that gives the increase. Let us therefore believe, that God
does teach us in his word, outwardly by his ministers, How God does
teach, and how ministers.
but inwardly he moves the hearts of his elect, to Faith by the holy
ghost: And therefore we ought to refer all the glory of this benefit to
God. But of this matter, we have spoken in the first chapter of this
declaracion: Verily, God has used from the what kind of preachers god has
always sent.
beginning of the world, the best men of all (albeit many of them were simple
in worldly wisdom and philosopie, yet passing other in the knowledge of true
divinity) as the Patriarchs, Patriarchs
with whom God talked often times by his Angels: For the Patriarchs were
Prophettes, or Teachers in their time, who^ God would have live two or three
men's lives, to the end that they might be as it were fathers, and lights of
the world. Moises and the Prophettes followed them, who were most famous
throughout al ye world: What need I to rehearse, that after them our heavenly
father, sent his only begotten son, a most perfect teacher of the world: In
whom was hid that divine wisdom, which he derived unto us, by ye preaching of
his most holy, plain, and of all other most perfect doctrine. For he chose to
him Disciples, whom he made Apostles, who going out into all the quarters of
the world, assembled every where congregacio^s, by the preaching of the
Gospel: then in all Churches they ordained, by gods commandment, pastors
and teachers, by whose successors he has to this day, instructed and
governed his Church. As therefore God sent to his people in the old time
Patriarchs, Moises, and the Prophets, so to those to whom he has given his
new Testamente, he has sent his only begotten son, with Apostles, and
Doctors of the Church. Furthermore, the ministers of the new Testament, be
called The names of ministers. i. Cor. xii. Ephe. iiii.
by sundry names: For they are called Apostles, Prophets, Eua^gelistes,
Bisshops, Elders, Pastors and doctors. The Apostles remained in no one
certain place, but gathered sundry Apostles.
Churches throughout the world, which when they had now dooen, they were no
longer to be called Apostles, but each man became a Pastor in his own
church. The prophets in time Prophets.
paste, foreseyng things to come, were called Seers, who were expounders of
the scriptures also, as some be even now adays. Evangelists were writers
Eua^gelistes.
of the history of the Gospel, and preachers also of the glad tidings of
Christ his Gospel: As Paul bid Timothe, do the work of an Euangeliste.
Bisshops are superintendendentes, Byshopps.
and watchemen of the church, which give to it sustenau^ce, and provide for
all necessaries. Elders are au^cientes, and as it were Senators, and Elders.
fathers of the Church, gouernyng it with wholesome counsel. Pastors
Pastors.
do both keep the Shepefolde of the Lord, and provide for things
necessary. Doctors do teach and preach the true faith, and unfeigned
godliness. Doctors.
We may therefore now call the ministers of the Church, Bishops, Elders,
Pastors, and Doctors.

Afterward in process of time, the Popish orders.
ministers of the Church had many other names: For some were made Patriarchs,
some Archbishops, some Suffragans, also Metropolitans, Archedeacons, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Be^nettes and Collettes, Crorcistes, Singers, Dorekepers, and I
wotte not what, as Cardinals, Prouestes and Priers, Fathers minores and
maiores: But we pass for none of those orders, neither what ones they were, nor
what now they be. The doctrine of the Apostles, concerning ministers, is
sufficient for us.

In like manner, seeing that we know assuredly, that Monks and their orders,
Monks.
were ordained neither of Christ, nor his Apostles. We teach that they nothing
profit, nay, that they do much harm to the Church: For although in time
paste (when they were solitary, and gatte their living with their hands, and
were a burden to none, but in all places obeyed the ministers of Churches, as
lay men did) they were to be tolerated, yet now what they are, all the
world espieth and perceives. They adioyne to their orders, I know not what
vows, and lead a life clean contrary to their voues. So that the very best
of them, may be nombred among those, of who^ thapostle spoke. ij. These. iij.
We hear that there are some, which walk among you inordinatly, and work not
at al, but are busy bodies. Such therefore in our Churches, we neither have
neither by our doctrine ought to suffer in Christ his Church.

But no man ought to usurp the honor of the ministry of the church:
Ministers should be called and chosen to that office.
that is to say, by briberie, or craft, or by his own arbitriment, to take
upon him their offices: Let them be called and chosen, by the lawful election
of the Church: that is to wit, let them be chosen with aduisement, by the
congregation, or by those, which are appoincted to that office in the Church,
and that orderly, without trouble, sedicion, or contencion. But let not every
man, without regard be chosen, but only meet men, of sufficient godly How
should be chosen to the ministry.
learning, of godly vtteraunce, and wisdom ioigned with simplicity: To be
short, such as are famous for their modesty, and honest life, according to
the Cannon of the Apostle, made by the Apostle. i. Tim. iij. and Ti. j. And let
such as are chosen, be made of the Elders with public prayer, and laiyng on
of hands. Here we condemn all those, who of their own accord, thruste
themselves into the ministry not being chosen, sent, or ordained: We
co^de^ne all unmeet ministers, not vninete ministers.
endued with gifts, necessary for a shepherd, that should feed his flock:
Howbeit we acknowledge, that the harmless simplicity of some shepherdes in
the old church, did some times more profit the Church, then the great,
exquisite, and fine or delicate, but a little to proud learning of some
others. Wherefore we reiecte not now adays the good simplicity of certain, so
that they be not altogether unskillful of God and his word. Christ his
Apostles called all those, that believed in Christ, Priests, but not in
respect of Priests.
the ministry, but because through Christ, all the faithful (being made
Kings and Priests) may offer spiritual sacrifices to God. There is then a
great diversity between Priesthod A difference between priest hode and
ministry.
and the ministry. For Priesthode is common to all Christians, as eue^ now
we declared: the ministry is not so. Neither have we clean taken away the
ministry of the Church, when we cast the Popish Priestehode out of Christ
his Chuche. Truly in the new Testamente of Christ, there is no longer any
such priesthod, as was in the old Testament, which had an outward
annointyng, holy garments, and very many Ceremonies, that were figures of
Christ: and no marvel, since that Christ fulfillyng the^ all, at his coming
abolished them. He therefore alone remains a priest forever, from whom least
we withdraw any thing, that is proper to him, we call no minister by the name
of priest. For our Lord himself ordained not, Christ made no priests: but
Ministers.
any priests of the news Testamente in his Church, who being aucthorized of
ye Suffragane, might offer daielie Sacrifice, I mean the very flesh and
blood of the Lord, for the quick and the dedde: But he ordained such as
should teach the people, and minister his Sacraments. For Paul simply and
briefly declaryng, what we ought to think of the ministers of the new
Testamente, or of the Christian church, and how we ought to esteem them,
says: Let men so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers
of the secrets of God. Therefore i. Cor. iiii.
the Apostle would, that we judge of ministers none otherwise, then as of
ministers. He verily has called ministers vnderrowers, who have yte only to
the shipmaister, and men not living to pleace them selves, and to do what them
list, but apoincted to pleasure others, that is to say, their masters, at
whose commandment only they be. For a minister of the church, in all things
belongyng to his office, is bid not to please his own fantasy, but to do
that only, which his master commands him. And in the said Chapter, it
is expressed: Who i. Cor. iiii.
is the Lord or master, even Christ, to whom ministers are bound as
servants, to do all business belonging to the ministry: be adds further,
to declare more plainly, what the ministry is, that they are bailifes or
disposers of gods mysteries: Which mysteries are called in many places) chefly
Ephe. iij) the gospel of Christ, as in old time. Christ his Sacraments, why
they are called ministers.
were called mysteries: wherefore they are named ministers of the Church,
because they should preach the Gospel of Christ to the faithful, and minister
the Sacraments. In an other place Luke. xii.
of the Gospel we read, of a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord
appoincted ouerseer of his household, to give meat to them in due season.
Again we read, that a man taking his journey into a far country,
committed the gouermente of his house, to his servants, and gave them
authority to ouersee his gooddes, and appoincted every man his work.

Here have we occasion ministered, to speak somewhat of the authority and
office of church ministers: wherein The authority of ministers.
some have with much labor disputed, and have made subject unto their power,
all the chiefest things in the earth, clean contrary to the commandment
of the Lord, which forbad his disciples, to strive for chief rule, and
highly commended humility. Luke. xxii. Mat. 18. 20.
In deed there is an absolute authority, which is called Iuris, authority
by right of prescripcion, whereby The true authority and power, God keeps to
him self. Math. 28. Apoc. ii. iii.
all things are subject, to Christ the Lord of all, as he testifies,
saying: Power is given to me in heaven and in earth: And again, I am the
first and the last, behold I live world without end, and have the Keys of
hell and of death. Also, he has the keis of David, which opens, and no man
shuts, shuts and no man opens. This power the Lord keeps to
himself, and gives to none other, that he might stand idley, beholding his
ministers, while they do work. For Esaie writes, I will lay upon his Esa.
9. 22.
shoulder, the keye of the house of David. And again, whose rule shall remain
upon his shoulders: but he reserueth, and still uses his power, rulyng all.
Moreover, there is an other power, belongyng to the office or ministry, what
power god gives to ministers.
limited of him, who has full and absolute authority, that power is rather
to be likened to service, then to rule. For some lord gives to his steward,
power over his house, and therwithal A pretty similitude.
he gives his keys also, wherewith he may let in or shut out of the house,
whom the Lord will, either to be let in, or shut out. According to this
power, the minister does by his office, that which he is commanded to do
of his Lord, who ratifieth and allows his doings, and will have his
ministers deed, to be esteemed and acknowledged as his own. And this is the
meaning of those sentences in the Gospel, I will give thee the keys Math. xvi.
of the kingdom of heaven: what soever thou shall bind or lose in earth,
shall be bound or loosed in heaven. Ihon. xx.
Also whose sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins
ye retain, they are retained. But except the minister shall do all things,
as he is commanded of his Lord, if he pass the limits of faith, truly God
disaloweth his doings. Therefore the Ecclesiastical power of Church
ministers, is that function, whereby ministers do in deed rule the Church
of God, but yet do all things therein, as the Lord has appoincted in his
word: And being so dooen, the faithefull account then as done of the lord
himself. As touching the keys, we have spoken much before.

One equal power or function, is given to all ministers of the Church. Equal
power is given to the ministers.
Doubtless in the beginning Bisshops or Elders, ruled the church alike, one
helping an other, none preferring him self before other, or vsurpyng greater
authority or dominion, over their fellow Bisshops. For they were myndfull of
their master his words: He that will among you be chief, let him be your
servant. They kept them selves in humility, and helped one an Luke. xxii.
other in gouernyng, and preseruyng the Church. Howbeit for order sake, How
and when one minister is preferred before other*
some one appoincted of the ministers, sommoned their conuocacions, and in
their assemblies, proposed things to be deliberated upon, gathered also other
men's minds, and to be short, did what in him lay, to provide that matters,
should not be handled confusely, and without order. So we read that saint
Peter did in the Acts of the Apostles, who notwithstanding, was not extolled
above other, nor of greater authority then the residewe. For right well
Cyprian the martyr affirms, Cyprian.
in his book of the simplicity of the Clergy: Such were the other Apostles,
as Peter was, of like fellowship, of like honor and power: But the beginning
between them, proceeds of one unity; to the end that we may know, that
there is but one Church. S. Jerome also writes not much unlike Jerome.
words, in his commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to Titus, saying: Before
that by the Devils intiseme^t, there was strief in religion, Churches were
governed by the common counsel of thelders: but after each manner thought
those, whom he baptized to be his own, and not Christ's, it was decreed, that
one of the Elders should be chosen, and preferred above the other, to whom all
the care of the Church, should appertain, and by whose wisdom, all occasions
of schisms might be taken away. Yet Jerome boasts not of this Decree, as
though it were godly, for immediately he adds: As Elders know, by the
custom of the Church, that they are subject to him, who is their ouerseer,
so let Bisshops know that they, more by custom, tha^ by the Lords
ordinance, are in greater authority then the elders, and that the Church
ought to be ruled in comen by other, as well as by the^. Thus much Jerome.
Therefore no man by right may let us to return, to that old government
of God his church, and to receive it before the custom of man.

There are sundry duties belonging to ministers, which notwithstanding what
the duties of ministers are.
for the most part, may be restrained to two, wherein all other duties are
comprehended. The one is preaching of Christ his Gospel: the other is
ministeryng the Sacraments. For it is the ministers duty, to assemble the
holy congregation, and in it to expound the word of God, and to apply all
his doctrine, to the commodity of his church, that those things, which are
taught, may profitte the hearers, and edify the faithful. It belongs to
ministers, to teach the unlearned, to exhort them, and to prick forward those
that give over, or walk slowly in the way of the Lord. It is also their
parts, to comfort and confirm those, that are weak hearted, to arm the^
against the sunderie temptacions of Satan, to rebuke sinners, to call into the
right way those, that go a straie, to lift up those that fall, to convince
gainsaiers, to drive Wolfes from the lords shepefolde, to reprove sin and
sinners, with wisdom and gravity, not to wink at, or to conceile
wickedness, to minister the Sacraments, to commend the right use of them,
and to prepare all men with wholesome doctrine, to the worthy receiuyng
thereof, to keep the faithful in holy unity, to forbid Schisms and
Heresies, to instruct the rude, to declare to the congregation the necessity
of the poor, to visit the sick, and those that be troubled with sundry
temptacions, to inform and keep them in the way of life: Furthermore, to
provide for public prayer, in the time of necessity, and for fasting, that is
to say, holy abstinence: and with all diligence to look to all things, that
belongs to the tra^quilitie, peace, and sauegard of the Church. That the
minister may accomplish, all those things the better and with more ease, it
is required chiefly that be fear God, pray earnestly, give his mind to the
readyng of the scripture: In all things be always watcheful, and show a good
example, to all other of pureness of life. And seeing that there ought to be
discipline in the Discipline.
Church, and our auncitours used excommunicacio^, and the people of God
Excommunication.
had Ecclesiastical Indgementes, the which Discipline was exercised by wise
and Godly men: it has also belonged to ministers, for better edifiynge, to
measure this discipline as the time, the common state and necessity required.
Where always this rule is to be kept, that all things ought to done to
edify, comely, dece^tly, honestly, or without tyra^nie or sedicio^. For tha
postle witnesses, that he had ii. Cor. x.
power given him in the Church of God to edify, and not to destroy. The
Lord himself says, that the Darnell Math. xiii.
in the Lord his land, should not be rooted out, when there is danger,
least the Wheat also be plucked up therewithal.

But we deteste the Donatistes error, Ministers, albeit they be evil should
be heard.
who think preaching and ministerynge the Sacraments, to be of efficacy
and virtue, or not of efficacy, according to the good or evil life of
ministers. For we know that the voice of Christ is to be beard even out of the
mouth of evil ministers, seeing the Lord himself has said: What soever they
bid you observe, that observe and do, but after their works do Math. xxiii
not. We know that the Sacraments, by the institucion, and by the words of
Christ be sanctified, and are fruitful to the godly, although they be
offered of unworthy ministers. Of this matter Augustine the blessed servant
of God reasoned much, allegyng the scriptures against the Donatistes. But
there must be also due discipline among ministers: For diligent Disciplines
for ministers. Synodes.
inquisition must be made in Sinodes, of ministers learning, and manner of
living. Offenders ought to be corrected of the Elders, and brought into the
right way again, if they be curable: Orels being paste amendment, they
should be deposed, and as wolfes, thruste by true shepherdes out of the Lord
his flock. For if they be false teachers, they are in no wise to be suffered.
Neither do we disalowe general Councels.
counsels, if they be holden, according to the example of the Apostles, to
save, and not to destroy the church.

Furthermore al faithful ministers as good workmen are worthy of their
reward. They sin not then, when The true minister is worthy his reward.
they take a stipe^de, and all things necessary for them and their family.
For the Apostle declares, that these things are lawfully given of the
church, and received of the ministers, in. j. cor. ix. and j. Tim. v. and
other places: whereby the Anabaptists are confuted, who disalowe and rail at
those ministers, Anabaptists.
that live by their ministry.

Of the Sacraments of Christ his Church. Chapi. 19.
GOd from the beginning annexed Sacraments, or Sacrament.
Sacramental signs, to the preaching of his word For so plainly witnesses
all the holy scripture. Sacraments what sacraments are.
are mystical signs, or holy Rites or Ceremonies, ordained by God himself,
consistyng in the word of God, in signs, and in things signified, whereby
he keeps in man's memory, and somtymes renewcth his large benefits bestowed
upon his church. Whereby also he seals or assures his promises, and shows
outwardly, and as it were lays before our yies, those things to behold,
which inwardly he works in us: yea, by the^ he stre^gtheneth and increases
our faith, by the holy ghost, workyng in our hearts. And to be short, by his
Sacraments, he separateth us from all other people, from all other religions,
consecratyng us, and bindyng us to him only and signifies what he requires
of us to be dooen.

There are some Sacraments of the old Testament, and other some belonging The
Sacraments of the old and new testament are not all one.
to the people of the new Testamente. The Sacraments of the old law: were
Circumcision, the Pascall lamb, which was offered up. For the which cause it
is referred to the Sacrifices, which were offered from the beginning of the
world. The Sacraments of the new Testamente, are Baptism, and the Lords
Supper. two Sacraments of the new testament
Some reckon seven Sacraments of the new Testamente, of the which we
acknowledge, Repentance, making of Ministers, (yet not after the Popish
sort, but according to the Apostles manner) and Matrimony to be profitable
ordinances of God, but no Sacraments: Confirmacion, and extreme Unction, or
anelyng, are the inuencions of man, which the Church may want, without any
do^mage. Neither use we them in our churches. For they have some things,
which we cannot allow. We utterly deteste all the marchaundice, which the
Romistes practice, in dispensing for their Sacraments. The aucthor of all
Sacraments The author of sacraments is God.
is not man, but God only: Men can not institute Sacraments, for they
partaine to the service of God, and it belongs not to men's duty, to
invent or make God his service, but to receive and keep that, which Note.
is delivered to the^ of God. Moreover, the Sacraments have promises annexed
to them, which require faith: But faith rests only upon the word of God:
and the word of God is likened to tables or letters, the Sacraments An apt
similitude.
to seals, wherewith GOD only seals his letters. And as God is the aucthour
of his Sacraments, so continually God works in his sacraments.
he works in that Church, wherein the Sacraments are rightly ministered. So
that the faithefull, when they receive the Sacraments of God his ministers,
do acknowledge that God does work in them, and therefore receive the
Sacraments, as though it were at GOD his hands. They know also that the
ministers viciousnes (if there be any notorious sin in them) hurts not
them, seeing The Sacrament is not the worse for the ministers sin.
that they confess, that the worthiness of the Sacraments, depe^de of the
lords institucion. Wherefore they make a manifest difference, in the
ministeryng of the Sacraments, between the Lord himself, and the minister of
the A difference between the auctor, and the minister of sacraments.
Lord, co^fessyng, that the things meant by the Sacraments (as grace, faith,
forgiveness of sins in Christ etc.) are given by the Lord himself: but the
figures (to wit water, bread, or wine) Christ is the chiefest thing to be
considered in the sacraments.
be delivered them by the hands of Gods ministers. Howbeit the chiefest
thing, that in all the Sacraments is proposed of God, and taken head unto of
all the godly in all ages (which other call the substance and matter of the
Sacraments) is Christ their savior that only sacrifice, and that la^be of
God, which was slain from the beginning of the world, and that rock whereof
al our forefathers did drink, by whom all the elect are Circumcised without
hands, and by the holy Ghost are washed from all their sins, and are
nourished with the true body and blood of Christ, to life everlasting.

And touching that, which is chiefeste wherein the sacraments of the new and
old Testament are a like
in the Sacrament, and the thing it self, the Sacraments of both people are
like. For Christ the only mediator and Savior of the faithefull in the
Sacraments, both of the old and new Testamente, is that chief principal
thing, and the thing it self, meant by the Sacrament. One and the self same God,
is aucthour of them in both. To both people they were given as tokens, yea,
as pledges of God his grace, and promises, which may bring into our
remembrance, and renew his large benefits, whereby also the faithful were
separated, from al other religions of the world, which, to conclude, were
received Spiritually by faith, vnityng the Ceremonies to the Church, and
admonishyng them of their duty. In these, I say, and the like the
Sacraments of both people, are not unlike, although they differ in signs.
But we make a far greater difference, in the Sacrame^tall signs. For our
Sacraments are stronger, and of longer duraunce, because to the worlds end,
they shall never be changed. Our Sacraments witness that both the thing,
and the promise is already fulfilled, and made perfect in Christ, which the
Sacraments of the old law did signify should be fulfilled. Also ours are
more simple, less troublesome, of smaller cost, and not entangled with
Ceremonies: belongyng to a mightier people, dispersed throughout the whole
world: and seeing they be more excellent, and bread in us a stronger faith by
the working of the holy ghost) there follows also more plentiful store of
God his spirit, by the worthy receiuyng of them.

Verelie, seeing that Christ the true Christ abrogatinge the old sacraments
gave us new
Messiah, is come in the flesh, and showed to us, and abundaunce of grace
powered upon the people of the new Testamente, the Sacraments of the old
people, are abrogated, and the Sacraments of the new. Testamente, put in
their places: In the sted of Circumcision, Baptism: In the place of the
Paschal lamb and Sacrifices, the Lords supper.

Again, as in time paste, the Sacraments Sacraments consiste in three things.
did consiste of the word, the sign, and the thing signified, so now also
the self same three parts, as it were are required to the perfect making of our
Sacraments. For by the word of God, they are made that, which before The
word.
they were not, that is to wit, Sacraments: For they be consecrated by
Consecration.
the word, and are declared to be sanctified of him, which first ordained
them. To sa^ctifie or consecrate a thing, is to dedicate it to GOD, and to some
holy uses: that is to say, to separate it from common and profane uses, and
appoincte it to some holy purpose. For in Sacraments, the signs are made of
such things, as are commonly used, ^. Signs.
of outward and visible things: As in Baptism, the eleme^t of water and the
visible wasshyng, which we see the minister does, is the sign, but the
thing signified, is regeneracio^ and washyng away of our sins: In the supper
of the Lord, the sign, is bread and wine (which we commonly use in eating
and drinkyng) but the thing signified, is the very body of Christ 3. The
things signified.
delivered, and his blood shed for us. Therefore water, bread and wine of
their own nature, not serving to god his institucio^, and not put to any holy
use, are only that, which they are named to be, and we prove them to be by
experience. Howbeit, if the word of the lord be added, with calling upon
God his name, and with renewyng of the first institucion, and sanctificacio^,
these signs are consecrated, and declared to be sanctified of Christ. For
still remains in the Church, in his virtue and efficacy, that first
institucion of Christ, and consecracion of the sacraments. So that he, which
none otherwise celebrateth the Sacraments, then the Lord himself at the first
ordained, does even now enjoy the fruits, of that most excellent
consecracion of all other; and therefore Christ his own words are rehearsed
in the celebracion of the Sacraments. And because by the word of God we
learn, that these signs are ordained of the lord, for an other end, then
commonly they are used for: therefore we teach, that the signs being put to
this holy The signs bear the names of the things signified.
use, bear the names of the things signified by them, and are no more called
only water, bread, and wine, but also regeneracion, or the wasshyng of
renouacion, also the body and blood of the Lord, or sacraments of the body
and blood of Christ. Not, that the signs are changed, into the things
signified, and that they cease to be that, which they are by their own
nature, (for then they should not be Sacraments, nor signs, but only the
things signified) but therefore the signs bear the names of the things,
because they are mystical tokens of holy things, and the signs and things
signified, are ioigned together sacramentallie: I say they are ioigned or
united, by a mystical significacion, by the will and counsaille of him, who
ordained Sacraments. For water, bread, and wine are not common, but holy
signs: and be that instituted water of Baptism, did not institute it, to the
intent that the faithful should be washed with the water of Baptism only:
And he that commanded in his supper to eat bread, and drink wine, meant not
that the faithful should take the bread, and wine only without a mystery, as
they eat bread at home in their houses, but also that they should
spiritually, be partakers of the things signified, and be in deed by faith,
washed from their sins, and fed in Christ, through faith.

Therefore we allow not those, who attribute the sanctifiyng of the
Sacraments, Heresies.
to, I know not what Caracters, and to the recityng; or to the virtue of
words, promised of the consecrater, or of him that has an intent to
consecrate, or else to accidental things, which are delivered to us, neither
by word, nor by example of Christ, nor his Apostles. Nether do we allow
their doctrine, who speak of the Sacraments, as though they were common
signs, not signifiyng some weighty matter, or not of great virtue or
efficacy. Neither allow we those, who so much regard the invisible things
(meant by the Sacrament) that they despise the visible things in the
Sacraments, beleuyng yt it is superfluous for them to receive the signs,
because they imagine that they enioie already, the things meant by the^: Such
heretics the Messalians are named to be. Neither do we allow their
doctrine, who teach that grace, and the things signified, are so tied to the
signs, and encluded in them, that whosoever receives the signs outwardly,
be partakers also (what manner of man soever he be) of the inward grace, and
spiritual things, signified by the Sacraments.

Notwithstanding, as we do not ponder the worthiness of the Sacraments,
The Sacrament is not the worse for the vitiousnes of the receauer.
by the worthiness, or unworthiness of the ministers, so we compte them not
better or worse, for the virtue or vice of the receivers. For we acknowledge,
that the worthiness of the Sacraments, do depend of faith, and of the mere
goodness of God. For as the word of God remains, the true word of God,
wherein not only the bare words are rehearsed, while it is preached, but all
things signified by the words, are offered of God: Albeeit wicked and
Infidelles, hear the words, and understand them, but yet enjoy not the
things meant thereby, because they receive them not, with a true faith: Even
so, the Sacraments consistyng in the word, the signs and things signified,
remain true and perfect Sacraments, not only signifiyng holy things, but
also (God offering them) the things signified, although unbelievers receive
not the things offered. This comes to pass not through the defaulte of the
geuer, or of God the offerer, but of men receiuyng without faith, and
unworthily. Whose incredulity makes not Roma. iii.
the faith of God of none effect or force. Furthermore, seeing that in the
beginning, where it was declared, what sacraments were, we briefly showed,
to what end they were instituted, we need not tediously to report that,
which we have ones said: It follows therefore, that we severally treat
of the Sacraments of the new Testamente.

Of holy Baptism. Chapi. 20.
Baptism was first invented, Christ ordained baptism.
and sanctified of GOD Ihon being the first that baptized Christ with water,
in the river of Iordane. Afterward this office was committed to the Apostles,
who Baptized also with water: The Lord in plain words, commanded them to
preach the Gospel Math. 28. Acts. ii.
and to Baptize, In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Peter also answered in the Acts to the Jews, demaundyng of him, Act.
ii.
what they should do: Let every one of you be baptized, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy ghost. Wherefore Baptism is called of many, the first sign of gods
people, because by it his elect begin, to retain to the living Lord. There
is but one Baptism in the Church of God, wherewith it is sufficient once to
be Christened: For Baptism once One baptism.
received, does endure all our life long, being a perpetual sealyng of our
adoption. For to be Baptized in the name of Christ, is to be written, to be
entered, what it is to be baptized.
and received into the couenaunte and family, yea and into the inheritance of
God his children, yea even now to be named, by the name of God: that is, to be
called the child of God, to be purged also from the dregs of our sins, and
to have freely sundry graces of God, to lead a new and innocente life.
Baptism does keep in memory, and renew God his benefits, bestowed on
mankind. For we all are borne in the filthiness of sin, and are the children
of wrath, but God who is rich in mercy, does cleanse us from our sins
frelie, by the blood of his soonne, in whom he makes us by adopcion his
soonnes, knitteth us to him with an holy couenaunte, and enricheth us with
sundry gifts, that we may be able to live a new life. Al these benefits
are sealed with Baptism: for inwardly our souls and minds are regenerate,
purified, and made new of GOD by the holy ghost, but outwardly we receive,
the seal of his large gifts in water, by the which those great benefits
are represented, and as it were, laid before our yies to behold. Therefore
we are Baptized, that is, we are washed, and sprinckeled with visible water:
For as water makes clean our filthe, does refresh we are baptized with water.
and cool our fainte and burning bodies, so the grace of God does purge our
souls, from stinkyng sin, after an invisible sort, or spiritually. God also
separateth us by the Sacraments of Baptism, from all other religions, and from
all other people, and does consecrate us, a peculier people to him, and as
his own proper gooddes: when therefore we are Christened, we confess what we
are bond to do by baptism.
our faith, and are bound to God to obey him, to mortify our flesh, and to
lead a new life, and are enrolled in the holy roll of Christ his
soldiers, to fight all the days of our life against the world, Satan, and
our own flesh. We are Baptized also into one body of the Church, that we
may well agree with all the members thereof, in one Religion, dooyng one for
another.

We believe that the manner of Baptism, whereby Christ him self was The form
of baptismge.
Baptized, and his Apostles did Baptize, is most perfect: Wherefore, what
soever was after, by man's inuencion, added and used in the Church, we think
not to be necessary, to the perfection of Baptism: As the coniuracion, Popish
bapt.
the use of burning lights, of oil of Salt, of spittle, and the like, with
this custom to consecrate twice in the year Baptism. For we believe, that one
Baptism of the church, in Gods first Institucion was sanctified, and
consecrated by his word, and is now also of efficacy and virtue, by reason of
that first blessyng of God.

We teach that women, or midwiues, weme^ should not baptize.
ought not to Baptize in the church: For Paul secludeth women from
Ecclestasticall offices: but Baptism partaineth to Ecclesiastical duties. We
condemn the Anabaptists, who Heresies.
deny that young children newly borne, ought to be Baptized of the faithful,
according to the doctrine of the Gospel. The kingdom of God belongs to
children: And seeing they are included in God his couenaunte, why should not
the sign of the couenaunte be given to them. We condemn the Anabaptists, in
other poinctes also of their doctrine, which they alone hold particulerlie,
and defend against the word of God. We are not then Anabaptists, neither
do we take part with them, in any matter of theirs.

Of the holy Supper of the Lord Chap. 21.
THe Supper of the Lord, which is also called the table of the Lord, and the
Euchariste, that is thanks geuinge, is therefore commonly named a Supper,
because it was instituted of Christ in his last Supper, and now represents
the same, the faithful spiritually fedynge and drinking in it: for the aucthor
of ye Lord his Supper is The aucthor of the Lords Supper.
not any Angel or man, but the son of GOD him self our Lord Jesus Christ,
who first consecrated it for his Church: that consecration and blessinge
dureth as yet, among all those that celebrat none other Supper, but the self
same, which the Lord instituted, recitynge his words, and in all things
looking on Christ only with a true faith, of whose hands as it were, they
receive that, which they take by It is a remembrance of gods benefits.
the service of the ministers of ye church. The Lord will keep by this holy
Sacrament in fresh remembrance his chiefeste benefit bestowed upon
mankind, namely, that when he gave his body to be betrayed, and his blood to
be shed, he forgave us all our sins, and redeemed us from eternal death:
and from the power of the Devil, and now fedeth us with his flesh, and gives
us his bloudde to drink, which, being with a true faith, spiritually
received, nourishes us to life everlasting. And this so great a benefit is
renewed so often, as the supper of the Lord is celebrated. For he said, do
this in the remembrance of me. It is also confirmed unto us, in this Supper
(least we should waver in faith) that the Lords body in deed, was
delivered for us, and his blood shed for the remission of our sins. And
truly that to the outward yies, is by the minister, represented in the
Sacrament, and as it were laid before our face, which inwardly is done after
an invisible sort, by the holy ghost: Outwardly, bread is offered by the
minister, and the words of Christ The sign and the thing signified.
are heard, Take, eat, this is my body, take divide it betwixt you, Drink ye
all of this, this is my blood. Therefore the faithful takes that, which is
offered what the faithful receive.
by the lords minister: They eat the Lord his bread, and drink of the
Lords Cup, but inwardly, by the help of Christ, through the holy ghost
they receive the flesh also, and the blood of the Lord, and are fed with
them, to life everlasting. For the flesh and blood of Christ, is true meat
and drink to eternal life. And Christ him self in that he was delivered for
our sakes and is our savior, is that principal chief thing of the supper,
neither suffer we any other thing to be put in his stead. But that it may the
better, and more plainly be perceived, how the How the flesh and blood of
Christ is meat and dri^ke indede.
flesh and blood of Christ, is the meat and drink of the faithful, received
of them to life everlasting, we will add these few words. There be diverse
kinds of eating: For there is a bodily eating, whereby meat is received into
man's mouth, is chewed with the Two kinds of Eatinge with the bodelie mouth.
tethe, and swallowed into the beailie. After this kind of eating, the
Capernites in time paste understood, that they should eat the Lord his
flesh. But they are confuted by Christ him Heresies.
self: For Christ his flesh can not be eaten corporally, without an heinous
Aug. de doct. Christ.
and cruel act. It is not then meat for the beallie, as al men are
compelled to confess. We disalowe the Popes Canons, in the decrees of the
bisshops of Rome. Ego Bere^garius, de co^se. did. 2. For neither the godly in
time pass, nor we do now believe, that Christ his body is eaten, with the
mouth of the body, corporally, or essenciallie. There is also a spiritual
eating of Christ his body, not that, whereby we Christ his body is not eaten
with the bodily mouth. 2. A spiritual eatinge by faith.
think, that the very meat is changed into the spirit, but whereby (the
body and blood of the Lord, keepyng still their essence and property) we
receive them, not after a corporal, but after a spiritual sort, by the
working of the holy ghost, who does bestow upon us those gifts, which were
purchased by the flesh and blud of Christ, who was delivered, and put to death
for us, grauntyng us remission of our sins, deliverance from Satan, and
life everlasting, so that Christ lives in us, and we in him. For he brings
it to pass, that we receive him Christ is spiritual meat and drink.
with a true faith, and that he is spiritual meat and drink to us, that is
to say, our life. For as bodilye meat and drink, does not only refreshe
and strengthen our bodies, but also preserves our life: so the flesh of
Christ betrayed for us, and his blood shed for our sakes, do not only
refreshe and strengthen our souls, but also preserves them a live, not in
that they are corporally eaten or dronken, but in that they are given unto us,
by the spirit of God, spiritually, according to ye Lord his saying: The bread,
which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world:
Also the flesh, that is corporally eaten, profits nothing. It is the spirit
that quickens: and the words which I speak unto you, are spirit and life.
Now as we must in eating, swallowe down the meat into our stomachs, that
it may inwardly work, and show his strength in us, whereas being put without
our bodies, it does us no good: Even so is it necessary, that we receive
Christ by faith, that he may be made ours, and he live in us, and we in him.
For he says, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that believes in me, shall never thirste: And again, he that shall eat
me, he shall also live through me, and abide in me, and I in him. By this it is
manifest, that we understand not, by spiritual meat, I know not what manner
of imagined meat, but the self The receiving of christ his body.
same body of the Lord, which was crucified for us, which notwithstanding
is received of the faithefull, not bodily, but spiritually by faith. And in
this matter we follow in all points, the doctrine of our savior Jesus
Christ, which he taught. This eating Ihon. vi. what eating of Christ is
necessary to salvation.
of the flesh, and drinkyng of the blood of the Lord, is so necessary to
salvation, that without it, no man can be saved. We may also eat and
drink A spiritual eating of Christ, with out the Samentes.
spirituallie, the body and blood of Christ, although we receive not the
supper of the Lord, as often as we believe in Christ. To this end parhaps
belongs that saying of Augustine: Note. Aug.
Why preparest thou thy tethe and bealie? Believe and thou haste eaten.

Beside the former spiritual eating, A sacramental eatinge of Christ.
there is also a Sacramental eating of the Lords body, whereby the faithful
is not only spiritually and inwardly made partaker of the true body and
blood of the Lord, but outwardly also by coming to the Lords table,
receaueth the visible Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord. When the
faithful believed, he receaceaued quicknyng nourishment before, which he still
enjoys, and therefore when now he receaueth the Sacrament, he receaueth
therewith much norishment to his soul. For he continues in continual
receauinge of the Lord his body, and blood: In so much Faithful receauers
receive not the sacraments only, but Christ also.
that his faith is more and more kindled, increased and with spiritual fode
refreshed. For, while we live, faith continually increases in us. And he that
outwardly receaueth the Sacraments with a true faith, even he receives not
the sign only, but enjoys the thing it self also, meant by the Sacrament,
as we have declared. Furthermore, he obeieth the Lord his institucion and
commandment, and with a cherefull heart gives thanks, for his and all
mankindes redemption, remembryng faithefullie the Lords death, and witnessyng
the same before the church, of whose body he is a member. It is confirmed or
sealed also, to them that receive the Sacraments, that the body of Christ
was betrayed, and his blood shed, not only generally for men, but also
particulerly for every faithful receiver, whose meat Note.
and drink it is, to life everlasting.

But he that without faith, comes to the holy Table of the Lord, receives
Unfaithful receauers receive but the bare signs.
the Sacrament only, and not the thing mente by the Sacrament, whereby
comes life and salvation: and such eat unworthily of the lord his table.
Now they that eat unworthily Unworthy receauers.
of the Lords bread, and drink of his Cup unworthily, are guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord, eating and drinkyng their own damnacion. For
when they come not with a true faith, they do slander, and like vilaines
despise the death of Christ, and therefore eat and drink their own
damnacion.

Wherefore we do not so knitte Christ his presence in his Supper.
and ioigne together, the Lords his body and blood, with the bread and wine,
that we affirm the bread to be the body of Christ, but after a Sacramental
manner. Neither say we, that the body of Christ lies hidden corporally,
Heresies.
under the bread, or that it ought under the form of bread to be
worshipped, or that who soever receives the sign, he also receives the thing
it self. The body of Christ is in heaven, on the right hand of his father:
We must therefore lift up our hearts, and not fire and set our minds on the
bread. Neither ought we to worship the Lord in the bread, and yet the
Lords is not absent from his church, when it celebrateth his supper. The
soonne being absente from us, and runnyng Note this similitude.
his race in the firmament, is notwithstanding present among us by his virtue:
How much more Christ, the soonne of righteousness, being absent from us,
touching his body, which is in heaven, is present with us, not bodily but
spirituallie, by his lively working in us: And as he has declared, that he
would be present with us in his last supper. Ihon. xiiij. xv. xvj. Whereby it
follows, that we have no supper with out Christ, yet that we have a mystical
Supper, without bloodshed, even as our ancient fathers have termed it.

We are also admonished, in the celebracion Other ends of the Lords Supper.
of the Lords supper, to be mindful of whose body we are made members, and
in co^sideracion thereof, to agree with all our brethren, to live an holy
life, and not to defile our selves with wickedness, and strange religions,
but to continue in true faith, to the end of our life, to indeuer to excel in
holiness of living. It is mete therefore, A preparyng of our selves before we
come to receauinge of the lords supper.
that mindyng to come to the supper, we first try our selves, according to the
Apostles commandment, chiefly of what faith we are, whether we believe that
Christ is come to save sinners, and to call them to repentance: and whether
each man believe, that he is one of that number, who being delivered by Christ,
is saved through him: and whether he have determined to amend his sinful
life, and to live godly, to continue, by Gods help, in true Religion, in
concord with their The best kind of celebrating christ his Supper.
brethren, and to give God hearty thanks, for their deliverance. etc. We
judge that to be the plainest and best manner or way, of celebratyng the lord
his Supper, which comes nereste to Christ his institucion, and the doctrine
of the Apostles: that is to wit, which consists in declaryng or preaching
God his word, in Godly prayers, in imitatyng Christ his doings, in eating
the body, and drinkyng the blood of the Lord, also in the fruictfull
remembrance of his death, in saithfull The supper of the Lord should be
celebrated in both kinds.
thanks giuyng, ioinyng them selves in Godly fellowship, to ye unity of the
body of the Church. We disalowe therefore those, which have taken from the
faithful, the one kind, I mean the Cup of the Lord. For they offend
greuouslie against Christ his Institucion, who said, Drink ye al of this,
which commandment he gave, not so expreslie of the bread.

What the Mass was in time past, The Mass.
among our forfathers, whether it were to be suffered now, we dispute not: but
this we frelie affirm, that the Mass, which is now used; in all the churches
of Rome, is banished out of our churches, for sundry and most just causes.
Truly we could not allow it, because it was made a vain sight or spectacle,
why ye mass is not to be allowed.
of a profitable action, because it was compted meritorious, because it was
said for money, for silver and gold, because in it the Priest is affirmed, to
make the Lords body, and to offer it really, for the remission of sins,
both of the quick and the dedde, and also because it is said, For the honor,
worship, and remembrance of the saints in heaven.

Of the holy and ecclesiastical assemblies or coming to the Church. Chap.
22.
Although it be lawful for all men to read the holy scriptures what ought
to be done in holy assemblies.
priuatlye at home, and to instruct or edify one an other in true religion,
yet holy congregations and metings together in churches is very necessary, to
the end that gods words may be soundly preached to the people, that prayers and
supplications may be made publicly, the Sacraments rightlye ministered, and
alms gathered for the poor and other necessary charges and expenses of the
Church. For it is evident in the apostolic and primitive church, that there
were such assemblies frequented of all the godly. Who soever despise these
congregations Refrainers from the church.
and witholde them selves from them, contemn true religion, and ought to be
compelled by the ministers and godly magistrates to sever them selves no more
so stubbernelye from faithful people assembled in the church. Let their
metinges in the church be, not secret, but public, and often, except
persecution and the cruel enemies of the Christian congregation will not
suffer it. For we know, what manner of assemblies there were in time paste in
the primitive The place of their assemblies.
church, in hidden and secret places, during the tyranny of the princes of
Rome. Let also the places, where the faithful mete together, be honest and in all points convenient for the church of God. Let the Churches therefore be
large, yet such as are cleansed from all those things, that become not the
Church. Let all things be furnished comely, and as necessity and Godly
honesty requires. Let nothing be lacking, requisite for necessary uses of
the Church. But as we believe, that God dwells not in Temples made with
hands, so we are not ignorant that places dedicated to God, for the
worshipping of him, are not profane but holy: and that they, which be therein
ought to use them selves reverently we should use our selves modestly in the
Church.
and modestly, because they are in an holy place, before the sight of God,
and all his blessed Angels. Wherefore all excess of apparel, all pride, and
all Deckinge of Temples.
things, which become not Christian humility, discipline, and modesty,
ought far to be removed from the Church, and places of prayer. The true
deckyng of Temples, consists not in Iuerie, in Gold, and precious stones,
but in the honest behavior, godly love, and virtue of them, who are in the
Temple. Let all things be dooen in the Church comely and orderly: to be
short, to edify. Let all strange language cease in holy congregacions, and
let al service be said Service should not be said in a strange tongue.
in the vulgar tongue, and in such language, as the people in that place
understands.

Of prayers in the Church, of synging, and Canonical hours. Chapit. 23.
IT is lawful, doubtless, to pray To pray in the mother tongue.
priuatlie in any tongue which thou vnderstandeste, but public prayers in the
Church, ought to be in the mother tongue. Let all the prayers of the
faithful be made with faith, and love to God, only in Christ To whom we
should pray and in whose name.
his name above. The Priesthood of Christ our Lord, and of true religion,
forbids us to call upon the saints in heaven, as our intercessours:
Saints must not be prayed to.
We ought to pray for Magistrates, for Kings, and all that be put in
authority, for the ministers of the church, For whom we should pray, when.
and all things necessary for the same. In all miseries of the Church,
especially we ought to pray, without ceasyng, both priuatlie and publikelie.
We must also pray of our own wherefore,
accord, not by compulsion, or for any reward. Neither is it mete, that
prayer where.
should be supersticiouslie tied to a place, as though we might pray no
where else, but in the church. Neither How.
is it requisite, that common prayers be like in all churches, touching the
form or fashion, or time. Let each Church do in that behalf, as they
list. As Socrates in his history says: In no Socrates. Note.
place or religion, thou shall find two Churches, which fully agree in
praiyng. I suppose that they, who were rulers of the Churches, from time to time
were the causes of such difference. Howbeeit if they agree, it is highly to
be commended, and ought to be imitated of other.

But it is well that there be a meant A meant in prayer.
as in every thing, so in common prayer also, that they be not to long, or to
tedious. Let the chiefeste part therefore of the service in the Church, be
preaching, and expoundyng of the Gospel, Preachinge.
with provision that the people be not wearied, with too long prayers: least
when the sermon should be heard, they being wearied, desire either to go out of
the Church, or wish that all were done: To such, that sermon seems to long,
which otherwise is short enough. The preachers also ought to keep a mean. In
like manner where singyng is used, it must be moderated, and not Singynge.
excede a mean. The singyng, which they call Gregory's singing, has many
things in it, without time or reason: Gregory's singyng.
Wherefore our Churches, and diverse other, have worthily rejected it. If there
be any Churches, wherein there is faithefull and lawful prayer, without
singyng, they ought not to be disalowed. For all churches are not able to
maintain singing in them: And it is most euidente, by testimonies of great
antiquity, that as singyng was used of old, in the Orie^tall Churches, so it
was lately received into the Occidentall Churches. Our forefathers never knew
their Cannonicall hours: Canonical hours disalowed.
that is to say, prayers appoincted for certain hours in the day, which
Papists sing and say: As may be proved by the Lessons of the hours, and by
sundry other arguments. But to use few words, they are stuffed with many
absurdities: wherefore they be well omitted, and other things more profitable
for all Gods Church, put in their places.

Of holy days, faslyng and choice or difference of meats. Chapter. 24.
ALbeit Religion is tied to no time, yet cannot it be planted or exercised,
without conueniente Times appointed to come to church.
diuidyng, and appoinctyng of time. Every Church therefore, has chosen a
certain time for public prayer, for preaching the Gospel, and celebratyng
the Sacraments. Each man may not break this order of the church at his
pleasure: And except there be granted competente leisure, for this exercise,
by outward dooyng, to declare our Religion, surely men will be withdrawn from
it, by their own private business. Wherefore we se in aunciente Churches,
that there were not only certain hours in the weke appoincted for the godly
congregation, but that the Sabbath day was made holy, to assemble to pray:
and to hear God his word: which even now also veric well is observed in our
Churches, for the better seruyng of GOD, and increase of brotherly love. But
we allow not Iewishe obseruacions Iewishe observations of days.
of days, and such like supersticions. For we believe not one day to be
holier then an other: Neither think we that our rest is allowed of God, for
it self sake: But we keep the lords day called Su^daie, not the Saboth or
Saterdaie, The Lords day.
therein vsyng free liberty.

Moreover if Chuches, as they may by Christian liberty, keep religiously,
Feasts dates of christ may be kept.
the remembrance of Christ his birthe, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension into heaven, and sending his holy ghost unto his disciples, we well
allow it: but holy days dedicated Holy days for saints to be disalowed.
to men or saints, we discomme^de. And certes, holy days partaine to the
first table of the law, and belong only to God: to beshort, the feast days
instituted for saints, which we have abrogated, confirm many foolish,
unprofitable things, not to be suffered. Howbeit we confess, that fruit fully
the memory of saints, may in A memory of saints.
due place and time, be recited to the people in godly sermons, and the holy
examples of them may be proposed, as paternes to be followed of all men.

The more sharply the Church of Christ reprehendeth glotonie, dronke^nesse,
Public and Private fast is requisite.
lasciuiousnes, and all intemperauncie, the more earnestly it comme^deth
christian fasting: For fasting what fasting is.
is nothing else but an abstinence, and temperaunce of the godly, with
chastenyng of our flesh, as present necessity requires, whereby we humble
our selves before God, and withdraw from the flesh her nourishementes: that it
may easelier and wittynglier, obey the spirit. Wherefore they fast
Counterfeit fasters.
not, who have no regard of these things, but think they fast, if but once
a day they fill their bealy, and for a certain prescript time, abstain from
certain meats, thinckyng for this works sake, they please God, and do a
good deed. Fasting is the aid and help to all godly men, to pray the
feruentlier, and to live the vertuouslier. That fast pleased not God (as we
Note.
may read in the Books of the Prophets) wherein the Jews fasted from
meat, and not from their wickedness. There is a Public, and a Private fast.
Our forefathers kept in time paste, The cause of public fastes.
Public fastes, in lamentable times, and when the Church was afflicted. They
abstained altogether from meat until euenyng, spendyng the time in the mean
season, in holy prayer, and worshippyng of GOD, and in repentyng for their
sins. This did little differ from mournyng. Often mencio^ is made hereof in
the Prophets, specially in the second of Ioell: Such a fast ought to be
kept, eue^ in these our days, the Church being in so great danger. Private
fastes are observed of each man, as every man feels the The cause of private
fast.
virtue of God his spirit, to be plucked from him: For so long he abstaineth
from the nourishemente of the flesh, as he perceives God his spirit to be
withdrawn from him.

All fastes ought to come of a free, The end of fasting.
willing, and a true humbled spirit, not to get praise or favor of men,
much less to merit righteousness thereby. But let every manne fast to
this end, to tame the pride of the flesh, and to serve God more earnestly.

Lenten fast may be proved by old testimonies, but by none of the Apostles
Lent fast not to be allowed
writings. Therefore it ought not, nor may be enjoined to the faithful to
keep. It is most certain that in times paste, there were diverse kinds The
time of fasting.
and customs of fasting. Wherevpo^ Ireneus an ancient writer says, Some
think that the fast must be Ireneus.
kept, one day only, some others, many days: and others, forty days:
which variety began not now in our time, but long before our days, by their
means, as I judge, who obseruyng not simply that, which was at the first
taught them, used other manner of fastings, either through negligence, or
ignorance. Socrates also the historigrapher Socrates.
says: Because there is no au^cie^te writing found of this matter, I suppose
that the Apostle left it free to every man's mind, to do that, which is
good, not by fear and necessity.

Now as touching choice of meats: Choice of meats is a doctrine of deuyls.
In fasting we think, that all is to be with holden from the flesh, which
makes it more vnrewlie, and wherein it takes more delighte, or whereby it is
nourished or pampered, whether it be fish, flesh, pleasant fruits in savor
and taste, dainty disshes, or fine wines. Otherwise we know, that all God
Heb. ii.
his creatures are made, for thuse and service of man. All that GOD has made
are good, and without choice, moderatly to be used, with the fear of the
Lord. For the Apostle affirms, all things to be clean, to them that be
Tit. i.
clean. And again, whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, eat ye and ask no i.
Cor. x.
question for conscience sake. The self same Apostle names their doctrine,
which command to abstain from meats, the doctrine of Deuilles: For i. Tim.
iiii.
GOD made meat to be eaten, with thanks geuyng of the faithefull, and them
which know the truth, because whatsoever God made is good, and nothing is to
be refused, if it be taken with thanks giuyng. etc. He also writing to the
Collo. reproves those, who Collos. ii.
by over much abstinence, will purchase to themselves an estimacio^ of
holiness. We therefore altogether disalowe the Tatians, Encratites, and to be
short Heretics.
Eustacius his scholars, against whom was assembled the Gangrens. counsaite.

Of Cathechisyng, or instructyng youth in the articles of their faith, of
comforting or visiting the sick. Chap. 25.
THe Lord charged his people of the old Testament, to be youth should be
instructed in godliness.
very diligent, in instructyng a right their children, even from their
infancy, and gave express co^maundmente in his law, to teach them, and to
expound unto them, the mysteries of his Sacraments. Seeing then it is
euidente, by the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles, that God has no
less care for the youth of his people, with whom he left his new
Testamente, when he openly witnesses saying: Suffer little children to come
Mar. x.
unto me, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven: doubtless, those
ministers of churches do most wisely, which betyme diligently instruct the
youth, laiyng in them the first foundacions of faith, and faithefully
teaching the first principles of our religion, expoundyng to them Gods
commandments, the Creed, and the Lord his prayer, the use of his
Sacraments, with such other like first instructions, and chief poinctes of
our religion. Let the congregation show them selves faithful and diligent,
in bryngyng their children to be taught, desiryng and reioysyng, that their
youth may be well instructed. For as much as men are never more grievously
tempted, then when they be weak and sick, sore broken with diseases of the
Visiting of the sick.
mind and body, the Pastors of the Church, doubtless, ought at no time to be
more watchful and careful to save his flock, then in such sickness and
infirmities. Let them therefore visit the sick betymes, and let the diseased
send for them without delay, if the cause so require. Let the ministers
comfort, The ministers duene.
and confirm them in the true faith, arm them against the pernicious
suggestio^s of Satan, let them say prayers in the sick man's house, and if
need require, let them pray for his recovery, both of body and soul, in
the Church also. And let them do their endeavor, that he may depart out of
this world, in blessed state.

The Popish visityng of the sick, Popish visiting the sick
with their extreme unction, or ennoylyng, we said before, that we allowed
not, because it contains many foolish and odious things, not approved by the
Canonical scripture.

Of buriyng the faithful, and care which men ought to take for the dedde, of
Purgatory, and thapperyng of spirits. Cha. 26.
THe scripture commands to bury honestly, and without Burying commanded in
scripture.
supersticion, the bodies of the faithful, as the temples of the holy ghost,
which we believe shall rise again, in the latter day: Also to make mention
after a comely forte, of them who died Godly in the what care we should
take for the dedde.
Lord, and to be ready to help and releue those, whom they have left behind
them, as widows, and fatherless children. We teach men to take none other
care then this, for them that be dedde: We therefore much disalowe the
heretics, called Cynici, who despised dedde bodies, or very negligentlie
Heretics.
and contemptuously hurl them into the earth, never speaking so much as a
good word of them, nor caryng any thing at all for those, whom they left
behind the^. Now on the other side, we like not those, that are to much, and
to ouerthwertly seruicable to the dead, howli^g like Ethnikes, for their
friends departed, saying, or hearing Mass for their souls, and mummelyng for
pence certain prayers, to deliver them by this their devotion, from torments,
wherewith they suppose, that they are after their death tormented: yet so, that
by their lamentable so^ges and Diriges, they are released of their pains.
Hobeit moderate mournyng, which the Apostle. j. These. iiij. Moderate morning
is commendable.
grants, we discommende not, iudgyng it an unnatural part, to be nothing
grieved in such a case. We believe that the faithful, go straight too
Christ, after their bodily death, and therefore need not the Suffrages, or
whether me^^ souls go after their departure.
prayers of the living. We believe also, that Infidelles are without delay,
cast down hedlonge into hell, from whence no service of the living, is able
to deliver them.

The doctrine which some teach, concerning the fire of Purgatory, is
Purgatory.
contrary to our Christian faith, I believe the forgeuenes of sins, and the
life everlasting: and contrary to our clean purging from all our iniquities,
by Christ. Neither agrees Purgatory with these sayings of the lord Christ:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, John. v.
he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not be condemned but has passed from death to life. Again.
Ihon. xiij. He that is washed, needs not save to wasshe his feet, but is
clean every whitte, and ye are clean.

Moreover, as touching their doctrine The appearig of spirits is disceate of
the devil.
of spirittes, or dedde men's souls, some times apperyng to the^ that live,
and desiryng them to do somewhat, whereby they may be delivered: we esteem
such visions or sightes, as mockynges, crafts and disceiptes of the devil:
Who as he can tra^sfigure him self into an Angel of light, so is he busy to
overthrow, and bring in doubt the true faith. The Lord forbadde in the old
Testamente, to ask counsaille of the dedde, or to have any Deuteronomy. xviii
thing to do with spirits. It was denied to the rich glutton (who lay
tormented in hell fire, as Christ the aucthour of all truth, in the Gospel
declares) that Lazarus should return to his brethren, God by the mouth of
Abraham, pronou^cyng and saying, they have Moses and the Prophettes, let them
hear them, if they hear not Moses Luc. xvi.
and the Prophettes; neither will they be persuaded, though one rise again
from the dedde.

Of rites, ceremonies, and indifferent things. Chap. 27.
CEremonies were in time why ceremonies were given.
paste delivered to the people in the old Law, as a certain scolynge to
them, who were kept under the law, as it were under a scholemaister and
tutor: But when Christ came our deliverer, and had taken away the ceremonial
Ceremonies removed by Christ.
law, we that believe are no more under the law, nor yet bound to observe
those ceremonies, which at our Messiasco^ming, vanished away: which the
Apostles were so far from keeping Ceremonies not kept of the Apostles.
or renewynge in Christ his church, that they openly affirmed that, they
would lay no such yoke, nor burden upon the churches neck. Wherefore we
might seem to bring in or restore Iudaisme, if in the Church of Christ we
Increase of Ceremonies to Iudaisme.
should heap up ceremonies upon Ceremonies, after the manner of the old
church. Wherefore we be not of their minds, who thought it good, yt Christ
his church should be kept under (as with a certain scoling) with many and
sundry rites. For if thapostles would not burden Christian people with
ceremonies, why multitude of Ceremonies is not allowed.
which were first ordained and appointed by God himself, who, I pray you,
being well in his wits, would violently thruste upon them inventions
invented by man? The greater heap of ceremonies there be in the church, the
more is withdrawn not only from Christian liberty, but also from Christ,
and faith in him, while the common people look for that in ceremonies, which
they should seek in the only son of God Jesus Christ by faith. A few rites
therefore, A few Rites suffice.
which are sincere and plain, and swerue not from God his word, do suffice
the godly.

And if in Churches there be found Diversity of Ceremonies prove not dissent
in Churches.
unlike ceremonies, let no man gather thereby, that the Churches agree not.
Socrates says, it were impossible to write the Ceremonies, that be in all
cities and countries. No religion observes Socrates.
one kind of Rites, although they embrace one doctrine touching them. For
they that be all of one faith, dissent among them selves, about Ceremonies.
Thus much Socrates. And we also at this day, obseruyng in our Churches, not
all one kind of Rites, True consent is in doctrine and faith.
in ministering the Lords supper, and in many other things, do,
notwithstanding, agree in doctrine and faith. Neither is the unity and
society of Churches, for that cause broken a sunder. Surely, churches have
always used their liberty, and dooen what seemed Liberty about Ceremonies.
best to them in such Ceremonies, as things indifferent, as we also do now
a days.

But we advertise all men to take Indifferente things.
head, that they compte not those things as indifferente, which be not
indifferent, which be not indifferent in what is indifferent.
deed: as some compte the Mass, and Images in Churches. That is indifferente
(says Jerome to Augustine) which is neither good nor evil: so that we are
neither just, nor unjust, whether we do it or no. Therefore when
indifferent things are urged, for confession of our faith, they be no longer
indifferent: as Paul declares, that it How long they remain indifferent.
i. Co. viii. x
is lawful to eat flesh, if one put us not in mind, that it is offered to
Idols: for then it shall be made unlawful, because he that eats such meat,
now by his eating, seems to allow Idolatry.

Of Church gooddes. Chapit.. 28.
Christ his Church is endued with riches, by the bountifulnes of Princes, and
the liberality of the faithefull, who gave their gooddes to the Church: For
it is often in need, and therefore it has had from the beginning, some treasure
to serve for necessary uses. The true use of Church goods in time pass was,
The true use of the church gooddes.
and now is, to maintain with them learning in schools and holy assemblies,
with all furniture, rites and buildyng: to maintain also teachers, scholars and
ministers, with other necessaries: chiefly to help, feed, and succor the
poor. But let such be chosen as fear God, wise, and skillful in gouernyng
of families, which may well bestow the churches gooddes.

If the treasure of the Church, through Abuse of church gooddes.
the iniquity of the time, or some men's rashenesse, folly, ignorance, or
coueteousnesse, be put to any abuse, let godly and wise men, turn them
again to a good and holy use. For we must not wincke at any abuse, especially
if it be mixed wc sacrilege. We teach therefore, that corrupt schools and
Colleges should be reformed in doctrine, in worshippyng of God, and in manners:
and that there should be established religiously, with good conscience and
wisdom, a good order for the helpyng and releuing of the poor.

Of sole life, of marriage, and gouernyng our family. Chapi. 29.
LEt them, which have from Single life.
heaven, the gift of single life (so that in heart and mind, wholly they be
pure and continent, and not greatly burn in fleshly The gift of Chastity.
lust) let such, I say, serve the lord in that vocacion, so long as they
shall perceive them selves endued with that gift of God: not extollyng them
selves above others, but seruyng the Lord continually, with simplicity and
humility. These men doubtless, are more meet to enter into Gods ministry,
then they that are withdrawe^ by their private business of their family. But
if this gift be taken from them, and they feel a continual burning in
themselves, Marriage.
let them remember the Apostles words: It is better to mary, then to burn.

For marriage being the remedy for Marriage is continency.
incontinencie (yea, continence it self) was ordained of the Lord God himself,
who abundantly blessed it, and Math. xix.
would that man and wife, should not be separated one from the other, but live
together, in perfect love and concord: Whereupon we know, that the Apostle
says, Marriage is honorable Hebr. xiii. i. Cor. xvii.
among all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God will
Judge. And again: If a Virgin Marry, she synneth not. We condemn Polygamie.
therefore the having of many wifes or housbandes at one time a live: and them
also, who disalowe the second Second Marriages.
marriages, the marriage of widdowers or widows, deniyng that one may twice
be married. We teach that How Marriage should be made.
marriage must be made, after a lawful sort, in the fear of the Lord, and
not against those, which forbid the^ to be coupled in Matrimony, that are
within certain degrees of kindered, least inceste be committed. Let them The
parents consent is requisite in marriage.
be contracted with consent of their parents, or of such as are in steed of
their parents, and to that end chiefly, for the which the Lord has
appoincted marriage. Let the bonds of Matrimony be kept with holiness,
with unfeigned faith, and fidelity toward the yoke fellow, with godliness,
with love and Chastity, both of body and mind. Let them avoid all
brawlyng, dissencion, lusts and adultrie. Let there be appoincted in the
Church lawful Courts, for the hearing Courts kept for matters of matrimony.
of such matters, godly Judges to maintain Marriages and contractes, to
punish all uncleanness, and impudency, and to discide controversies of
Matrimony. Parents also should bring up their children, in the fear of the
Lord, and make provision for the^: remembryng the Apostles saying: He that
provides not for his own, he denies Care for our family. Bringing up of
children. 1. Timo. v.
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. But chiefly let the^ be taught some
honest science, whereby they may be able to find them selves. Let them be
plucked from Idleness, and a sure trust in God ingraffed in them, least they to
much distrusting, be to to careless, or else be given to filthy couetuousnes,
and so come to naught.

Also it is most certain, that those deeds, which be dooen of Parents
with true faith, according to the duty of Matrimony, and government of
their family, are before God holy, and good works, pleasyng him as well as
Prayers, Fasting, and Almose deeds do. For so the Apostle has taught in his
Epistles, chiefly to Timothe i. Tim. iiii.
and Titus. But with the said To forbid marriage is a doctrine of devils.
Apostle, we count it a doctrine of Devils to forbid, or openly to dispraise
marriage, or to restrain it by some crooked or couerte means, as though it were
not holy, or clean. We deteste Heresies.
unchaste single life, the secret or open and manifest lusts and
fornicacion, committed by hypocrites, faining chastity, when they are most
lascivious of all others: God will judge them all.

We disalowe not riches, and rich Riches.
men, if they be godly, and use their riches well: but we mislike the sect
of the Apostolicans, who would have all things common.

Of Magistrates.
EVery chief Magistrate is ordained of God him self, for Magistrates be
ordained of God.
the peace and tranquillity of mankind, and to bear the chiefeste rule and
degree of honor in the world. If he be an enemy to the Church, he may
hinder and trouble it much: But if he be a friend, and so a member of the
church, he is the profitableste and most excellent part thereof, which
may greatly profitte, and best help the Church.

His chiefeste office is to provide for, The duty of a Magistrate.
and keep the public peace and quietness: Which thing he shall never do with
better success, then when he fears God in deed, and zelously sets for
the his religion, imitating the steps of most godly Kings and Princes,
that governed the Lords people: and aduaunseth the Preaching of the truth,
and sincere faith, rooteth out lies and untruths, all Supersticion, with all
impiety and Idolatry, and defends God his church. We teach that a godly
Magistrate, ought chiefly to care for the furtheraunce of Religion.

Let him therefore with all his might, maintain the word of God, and
provide that no doctrine, contrary to it be taught. Let him also rule the
people, committed by God to his charge with good laws, agreyng with gods
word, and thereby keep them in good order, in doing their duty, and in
obedience: Let him exercise him self in iudgyng causes justly, not respectyng
persons, refusing bribes, defendyng widows, fatherless children, and other
afflicted: punishyng, yea, and rootyng out unjust, deceiptfull, and cruel
persons. For he has not Roma. xiii.
the swearde of God for naught. Letts him therefore draw his swearde against
evil doers, sowers of dissencion, thieves, murderers, oppressors,
blasphemours, forswearers of them selves, and against all those, whom, God
has commanded him, to punish and put to death. Let him chasten Heretics.
also and correct incorrigible heretics, which be heretics in deed, which
cease not to blaspheme the majesty of God, to trouble and destroy his
Church. If it be necessary to defend war.
the sauegarde of his people by war, let him go to war, in the name of
Lord, so that first* he seek peace, by all means he may, and can defend
his subjects none otherwise, then by battle. While the Magistrate does
this of faith, he with the self same works, as good, in deed serves God,
and is blessed of him. We condemn the Anabaptists: who as Heresies.
they deny, that any Christian, ca^ bear the office of a Magistrate, so they
defend that no man, can lawfully be put to death by a Magistrate, or that
a Magistrate ought to wage battle with any, or that they should require
oaths of men, and swear them on a Book. etc.

For as God will, that the sauegard of his people, be wrought by his Magistrate
Subjects duty.
(whom he has given to the world, to be as a father (even so all subjects
are charged to acknowledge this benefit of God, in the magistrate. It is their
duty therefore, to honor and reverence him, as God his minister: to love
him, to pray for him, as for their father: to obeie all his lawful and just
commandments: to be short, to pay him Tribute, with all such like
duty, faithefully and willynglie. If the conseruacion of the public wealth,
and Justice so require, and the Magistrate be forced necessarily to war,
let his subjects be reddie to hassarde their lives, and to shed their blood
gladly, valiantly, and cherfullie, in Gods name, to save their Country, and
their chief governor. For he that resists his rewler, does purchase God his
grievous wrath against himself. We condemn therefore, all despisers of
Magistrates, Rebels, Dispisers of Magistrates.
Traitors, enemies to the common wealth, sedicious knaves: to be short, all
that refuse either openly, or craftily and covertly, to do their bounden
duty, and allegeaunce to their governor.

We pray God our most merciful and heaue^lie father, to bless the princes
of his people, and us also, with all his people, through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and savior, to whom be praise, glory, and thanks, world without
end. So be it.

A confession Of Faith, made by common agreement of such Frenchemen, as desire
to live according to the purity of the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
The Frenchmen that desire to live according to the purity of the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to the King.
WE have great cause (most mighty Prince,) to give God thanks, that having
not hitherto had access to your Majesty, whereby we might declare what
rigor of persecutions we have suffered and daily do suffer, for desiring to
live according to the purity of the Gospel, and quietness of our
consciences: he has no vouchsaued to grant us this favor, that your grace is
willinge to understand of our cause, as appears by the last proclamation
given at Amboise the month of March, the year. 1559. when it pleased your
Majesty to cause ye publicatio^ of the same. Which boldeneth us at this
present to open mouth, which before (by the violence and injustice of certain
your officers) was closed and stopped up, rather of malice to us ward, than
good affection or service to you ward. And to the end your Majesty may be
plainelye and fullye informed of the whole cause, we most humbly beseech you to
read and understand this our Confession of Faith, which we here present unto
you, hopinge it to be sufficient defense for us, against all such blames and
slanders, as we have hitherto wrongfully ben charged withal, by such, as
have daily sought to condemn us, before our cause were known or heard. Wherein
we proteste there is nothing repugnant to the word of God, or contrary to
that subjection which we owe to your Majesty. For these articles of Faith set
forth at large in our confession, tend all to this end, that seeing God has
sufficiently declared his will, by his Prophettes and Apostles, yea, by the
monthe of his derely beloved soonne, our savior Jesus Christ, we ought so to
honor and reverence, this holy word of God, that we add nothing thereto of
our own, but wholly conform our selves, to the rewle prescribed unto us
therein. And for that the Romish Church (leauyng the use and custom of the
primitive Church) has brought in new commandments, and a new manner of
serving God, we think it most reasonable to prefer the co^maundmentes of
God, (which is the truth it self) to the commandments of men, who
naturally are inclined to lesyng and vanity. And what soever our adversaries,
prete^de against us, yet dare we say both before God and manne, that we
suffer for none other cause, but for maintainyng our Lord Jesus Christ, to
be the only Savior and redemer, and his doctrine to be the only doctrine,
of life and salvation. And this is the only cause, why the hands of hangmen,
have been so often embrued, with the bloodde of your poor subjects: Who
sparyng neither life nor gooddes, for maintainaunce of this Confession of
faith, have manifestly declared to all the world, that they were moved thereto,
by a far mightier spirit, then any spirit of man, which is more careful
of quietness and commodity, then of the honor and glory of God. And
therefore, according to the goodness and clemency, which your Majesty
promises, to show to us, your poor subjects: we most humbly beseech you,
to be so gracious, as to take in hand, the knowledge of the cause, by which
(being daily pursued to death, or banishemente) we lose the power and mean,
to show to you that most humble service, which of duty we owe. May it
therefore please your Majesty, instead of fire and sweard, heretofore used, to
examine our Confession by the word of God, and to grant us sufferaunce and
sauetie in the mean while. And then we hope that your self shall judge of our
innoce^cie, and well perceive, that there is neither heresy, nor rebellion in
us: but that we only tend to this end, to live in quietness of conscience,
serve God as he has commanded, and to obey your Majesty in all humble
obedience and service. And because the preaching of the word of God, is
necessary to put us in remembrance, as well of our duty toward him, as
toward you: we most humbly beseech your Majesty, that we may sometimes
gather together, to be exhorted to the fear of God by his word, and
confirmed by the administracion of the Sacraments, which our Savior Christ
has appoincted to his church. And if it would please you, to grant us some
open place, where all the world might see our assemblies, that only sight
should discharge us of those heinous crimes, that heretofore our said
asse^blies have been charged withal. For, there is naught to been, but
modesty and chastity, naught to be heard, but praise to God, exhortacion to
his service, and prayer for the conseruacio^ of your Majesty and kingdom. And
if it please not your grace, to show us this favor, yet may it please you at
the least, to grant, that we may particularly use that quiet order, which
is established. Most humbly besechyng your Majesty, in readyng this present
supplicacion, to consider, that it is the cries and groaries, of an infinite
number of your poor subjects, which crave such mercy at your hands, that
it may quench the fires, that your cruel Judges have kindled in your realm.
And so, that hu^blie seruyng your majesty, we may lawfully serve him, that
has exalted your highness to this dignity and state. And if ye refuse to bear
us, yet may please you to hear the voice of the son of God, who geuyng you
power over our bodies, goods, and lives, requires of you, that the power and
government over our souls and consciences (which he so dearly bought, by the
price of his heart blood) should be reserved to him only. The same God we
beseech to guide you with his holy spirit: and with pour years, to increase
your might and power, to give you victory over all your enemies, and
establishe for ever, in all equity, and justice, the throne of your Majesty:
Before whom it may please him, to grant us to find such favor, that we
may obtain some fruit of our present supplicacion: That so changing our
grieffes, and afflictions into quietness and liberty, we may also change
our sighs and tears, into perpetual thankyng GOD for your Majesty, for
grauntyng a thing so agreeable to him, so worthy of your goodness and Justice,
and so necessary for the conseruacion of your most humble and obedient
subjects and servants.

A confession of faith, made by common agreement of such Frenchemen, as desire
to live, according to the purity of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The first article.
WE believe and confess, that there is Deuteronomy. 4. 35 and 39. 1. Cor. 8. 4. and 6.
one only GOD, which is one only and simple substance, Gene 1. 3. John. 4.
24 2. Cor. 3. 17.
spiritual, Exodus 3. 15 16. and 18.
everlasting, Rom 1. 20 1. Tim. 1. 17
invisible, Mala. 3. 6.
unchangeable, Romans 11. 33 Act. 17. 24. and 7. 48.
endless, incomprehensible, unspeakable, Ier. 10. 7. and. 10. Luc. 1. 37.
that can do all things, who is To. 16. 27
wholly wise, Mat. 19. 17
wholly good, Iere. 12. 1.
wholly just, and wholly merciful.

2.
This God declares himself to men Exodus 34. 6. and 7.
so to be Romans 1. 19.
, and first by his works, as well in creatyng, conseruyng, as guidyng of the
same. Heb. 1. 1.
But secondly and more plainly by his word: which in the beginning was
Gene. 15. 1
revealed by Oracle, and afterward Exodus 24. 3. and 4.
written in books, which we call Romans 1. 12
holy scripture.

3.
All this holy scripture, is comprised in the Canonical books of the old and
new Testament, whereof the names hereafter follow: First, the five books of
Moises, that is to say: Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Nombers, and Deuteronomie.
Further, Iosue, the Judges, Ruth, the first and second books of Samuel, the
first and second books of the Kings: The first and second books of the
Chronicles, otherwise called Pari^^pomenon, and the first book of Esoras:
Also Nehemias, the books of Hester, Job, Psalms of David, Proverbs of
Solomon, the book of Ecclesiastes, otherwise called the Preacher: The
Canticles of Solomon. Likewise the books of Esaie, Jeremy, the Lamentacions
of Jeremy, Ezechiell, Daniell, Osee, Ioell, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Miche, Nahum,
Abacucke, Sophonie, Agge, Zachary, Malachie. Also the holy Gospel of S.
Matthew, saint Mark, S. Luke, and S. Ihon: Furthermore the second book of
saint Luke, otherwise called the Acts of the Apostles: and one Epistle of
saint Paul to the Romans, two the Corinthians, one to the Galathians, one
to the Ephesians one to the Philippians, one to the Collossians, two to the
Thessalonians, two to Timothe, one to Tite, and one to Philemon: Also the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of saint James, the first and second
Epistles of saint Peter: The first, second, and third Epistles of saint
Ihon: The Epistle of saint Jude: and the Apocalipse or Reuelacion of saint
Ihon.

4.
We know these books to be Canonical, and a most certain Psalm. xix. viii.
and. ix. Psalm. 12. 7.
rule of our faith: not so much because of the common agremente, and consent
of the Church, as through the witness, and inward persuasion of the holy
spirit, which causes us to discern them, from the Ecclesiastical books.
On which (although they be profitable) we may not ground any article of
faith.

5.
We believe 2. Tim. iii. xv and. xvi 2. Pet. 1.
that the word contained in these books, proceeded from God, Ihon. iii. xxxi.
and 34. and. v. 34.
of who^ it takes authority, and not of men: Iho. 15. 11. Act. 20. 27.
and (for as much as it is the rule of all truth, containyng al things
necessary to the Service of God, and our salvation) that Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and. 4.
2. Gal. 1. 8. Apo. 22. 18. and. 19.
it is not lawful for any man, no not for Angels, to add, diminishe, or
change any thing therein. Whereby it follows, that neither Mat. 15. 9 Acts.
5. 28. and. 29.
antiquity, custom, multitude, man's wisdom, judgment statute,
proclamacion, decree, counsel vision, or miracle, can be compared with the
said holy scripture, i. Cor. 11. 1. 2. and. 23.
but that contrariwise, all things ought to be tried, ruled, and reformed, by
the same. And according thereunto, we allow the three Simboles or Credes:
that is, the Apostles Creed, the Creed of Nice and Athanasius Creed, because
they be agreeable to the word of God.

.6.
This holly scripture Deu. 4. 12 Mat. 28. 19. i. Ihon. 5. 7.
teaches us, that in this only and simple substance divine which we have
confessed, there are three persons: The Father, the Son, and the holy
ghost: the Father the first cause, beginning, and original of al things: the
John. 1. 1. and 17. 5. Act. 17. 25. Romans 1. 1.
Son, his word and everlasting wisdom: the Holy ghost, his vertoe, power,
and efficacy. The Son from everlasting begotten of the Father: The holy
ghost procedyng from both: The three persons not confused, but distinct:
and nevertheless not divided, but of one only substance, eternity, power
and equality. And therein we also allow the determination of the ancient
Councelles: and deteste all such sects and heresies, as have been rejected by
the holy Doctors: as fainct Hillarie, saint Athanasius, S. Ambrose, and S.
Cirill.

7.
We beliue Gene. 1. 1. John. 1. 3. Iud. 6. Col. 1. 16. Hebr. 12. and 14.
that God in three persons, together woorkyng by his virtue, wisdom, and
incomprehensible, goodness, has ereated all things: not only heaven, and
earth, and each thing therrein contain dibut also the invisible spirit: 2.
Pet. 2.
of which, some are fallen hedlong into perdicion: and Psalm. 103. 20. 21.
other some continue in obedience. John. 8. 44.
That the first being corrupt by malice, are enemies to all goodness, and
consequently to the whole Church. The second being performed by the grace of
God, Heb. 1. 7. 8.
are ministers to glorify the name of GOD, and serve to the sauetie of his
chosen.

8.
We believe Psalm. 104.
that not only he has creater all things, but that he governs and
co^ducteth, Pro. 16. 4 Mat. 10. 29 Romans 9. 11. Acts 17. 24. and 26. 24.
disposes and ordains, according to his will, all things that come to pass
in the world. 1. John. 2. 16. Ose. 13. 9. 1. John. 3. 8.
Not that he is the aucthour of evil, or that any fault may be imputed to
him, Psalm. 5. 5. and 119. Job. 1. 22.
seeing his will is the seueraine: and infallible rule, of all righteousness and
equity. Act. 2. 23. 24. 27.
But he has such wonderful means, to use the service of Deuilles and wicked
men, that he can convert to good, the evil which they do, and wherein they
are culpable. And Romans 9. 19. and 20. and 11 23.
sa confessing nothing to be done without the providence of God, we reverence
with all humility those secrets that are hidden from us, without further
searchyng for that, which is above our reach. And rather apply to our use,
that which is declared unto us in the holy scripture, to be the better in
quiet and safety: mat. 10. 30 Luke. 21. 18.
because that God to who^ all things are subject, so watches over us with a
Fatherly care, that one hear can not fall from our heddes without his will.
Job. 1. 1. Gene. 3. 15.
And in the mean while so bridleth the Devil and all our enemies, that they
can not harm us, without his leave.

9.
We believe that man Ge. 1. 26. Eccls. 7. 30. Romans 5. 12. Ep. 2. 2. and. 3.
being at the beginning created clean, perfect, and like to the Image of God,
is through his own proper fault, fallen from the grace which he received:
Gene. 6. 5 and. 8. 21.
and is so estraunged from God (who is the fountain of righteousness, and all
goodness) that his nature is wholly corrupt, and being blinded in spirit,
and corrupt in heart, has lost all perfitenesse, without having any residewe
thereof. Romans 1. 21 and, 2. 18. 19. 20.
And though he be yet able to discern good from evil, i. Co. 2. 14
we safe that that light is turned into darkness, when he goes about to
know God: For that by all his reason and understanding, he is not able to
reach any thing nere thereunto. Iho. 1. 4. 5 and. 8. 36. Romans 8. 6. 7
And although he have a will, that moves him to do this or that, yet that it
is so thrall to sin, that he has no liberty to do well; but such as God
gives him.

10.
We believe Genesis 8. 21. Romans 5. 12. Job. 14. 4.
that all the ofspryng of Adam, is infected with such contagion, which is the
original sin, and natural vice, and not only an imitacio^, as the
Pelagians go about to prove, whom we deteste with their errors. And think it
not needful to enquire, how sin comes from one man to an other, seeing it
suffiseth, that that which God gave him, was not to him alone, but to all his
posterity: And so, that in the person of him, we are spoiled of all
goodness, and overwhelmed in all poverty and malediction.

11.
We believe also, that this vice is very sin: Psalm. 51. 7. To. 3. 9. 10. 11.
12. 13. and 5. 12.
which is sufficient to condenme all mankind, yea, eue^ newborn children,
and to so reputed bofore God: Romans 7.
And after Baptism it remains sin, as concerning the fault: though the
condemnacion be taken away from the children of God, who of his free
goodness, imputes it not to them. Further, Romans 7. 5.
that it is a peruersitie, bringyng for the continually the fruits of malice
and rebellion: so, Romans 7. 18. 19. 2. Cor. 12. 7
as the hollest (though they resist) are not unspotted of infirmities and
faults, while they live in this world.

12.
We believe, that from this corrupcion, and generail condemnacion, in which all
men are plunged, Exodus 9. 16. Romans 9. 22.
God draws out those, whom in his everlasting and unchangeable counsel he
has chosen, through his only goodness and mercy, in our Lord Jesus
Christ, without consideracion of their works: leauyng Romans 3. 2. and 9. 23.
2. Tim. 2. 20 Tite. 3. 5. 7. Ephe. 1. 4. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
the rest in the self same corrupcion and condemnacion, to show his justice
in them, as he causes the richesse of his mercy, to shine in the first. For
the one are no better then the other, till GOD has discerned them, according
to his vnchangeble counsel, which he has determined in Jesus Christ,
before the creacion of the world: Neither is any able of his own proper
virtue, to obtain this goodness, Ier. 10. 23 Ephe. 1. 45
seeing that naturally we can not have so much as one good mocion, affection or
thought, till God preuente us and dispose us thereunto.

13.
We believe that in the same Jesus Christ, all that is requisite to our
salvation, has been offered and communicate unto us: 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ephe. 1.
6. 7 Col. 1. 13. 14 Tite. 2. 14.
who being given to us for our salvation, became to us immediately, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctificacion, and redemption: so that declinyng from him, we
forsake the mercies of the Father, which ought to be our only refuge.

14.
We believe that Jesus Christ, being the wisdom of God, John. 1. 14. Philip.
2. 6.
and his eternal soonne, has taken our flesh on him, to the end that being
GOD and manne in one person, Heb. 1 17. 2. Cor. 5. 21
yea, man like to us, of body and soul, subject to passions, saving that he
is clean from all spotte. Act. 13. 13. Romans 1. a. and 8. 3. and. 9. 5. ii.
Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 2. 7. Heb. 2. 14. 15. and. 5. a.
And as concerning his manhod, that he was the true seed of Abraham and David,
Mat. 1. 18. Luke. 1. 35.
though he were conceived by the secret power of the holy Ghost: Wherein we
deteste all those heresies, that of old time troubled the Churches: and namely
also the Deuillishe imaginacions of Seruet: who altributeth to our savior
Christ a fantastical God hedde, in that he terms it to be the idea and
patron of all things: and names him the personal or figurative Soonne of
God, and finally forgeth him a body of three uncreate Elements, and so
mingleth and destroieth both the natures.

15.
We believe Math. 1. Luke. 1. Ihon. 1. 14. i. Tim. 2. 5. and. 3, 16. Hebre. 5. 8.
that in one only person, (that is Jesus Christ) the two natures are truly
and vndiuidedlie conioigned and knitte: and each nature nevertheless,
remainyng in his distinct property: So that as in this conjunction, the
divine nature retaining his property, remains vncreat infinite, and filling
all things Luc. 24. 38. 39. Romans 1. 4. Philip. 2.
so the human nature remains finite, having form, measure and property:
yea, and though Jesus Christ in risyng again, have made his body immortal,
yet took he not away the truth of his nature. And thus we so consider of his
Godhedde, that we spoil him not of his manhod.

16.
We John. 3. 16 and 15. 13.
believe that God, in sendyng his soonne, minded to show his love, and
inestimable goodness toward us: in deliuerynge him to death, and raisyng him
again, to fulfill all justice, and to obtain us everlasting life.

17.
We believe 2. Cor. 5. 19. Heb. 5. 7. 8. 9. and 9.
that by the only Sacrifice, that our Lord Jesus offered on the cross, we
are reconciled with God, 1. Pet. 2. 24. 25.
to be holden and reputed just before him: for that we can not please him, or
be partakers of his adoption, but in that he forgeueth and burieth our faults.
Heb. 9. 14 Ephe. 5. 26. 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19.
So we proteste, that Jesus Christ is our whole and perfect wasshyng, that in
his death we have full satisfaccion, to discharge us of those faults and
iniquities, wherein we offend send: and that we are delivered by none other
mean.

18.
We believe Psalm. 32. 1. John 17. 23. Romans 4. 7. 8 and 8. a. b. c 2. Cor. 5. 19
that all our justice is grounded, in the forgiveness of our sins: which is
also our only felicity, as David says: 1. Tim. 2. 5 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2 Romans
5. 19. Act. 4. 12.
Wherefore we reject all other means of iustificacion before God: and without
presumyng on any virtues or deserts, we simply hold on the obedience of Jesus
Christ: which stands us instead, as well to cover all our faults, as to
find favor before God. And in effect we believe, that straiyng never so little
from this ground, we can find it is where no rest, but are continually moved
with unquietness: for that we are never in quiet with God, till we be fully
resolved to be beloved in Jesus Christ seeing we be worthy to be hated of
our selves.

19.
We believe To. 5. a. b. and 8. 15. Gal. 4. 45. 6. 7. Ephe. 2. 13. 14. 15.
that by this mean, we have liberty and privilege, to call upon God, with
full assurance that he will show him self to be our Father: For we could
have none access to the Father, if we were not directed by this mediator.
And to be exalted in his name, it behooves us to hold our lives of him, as of
our hedde.

20.
We believe Romans 1. d. Gal. 2. d. John. 3. 15.
that we are made partakers of this righteousness, by faith only, as it is
said: that he suffered to obtain our salvation, that who soever believes in him
should not perish. Mat. 17. John. 3. 16 and 17. 10. 20 21.
And that this is dooen, for that the promises of life, which are given to us
in him, are made fit for our use: and we feel the effect thereof, when we
accept them: not doubtyng, that being assured by the mouth of God, we shall
not be frustrate thereof. Romans 1. 17 and 3. 24. 25. 28. 30. and 4. a. b. c.
Gal. 2. d.
So that righteousness, which we obtain by faith, depends on the free
promises, by which God declares and testifies that he loves us.

21.
We believe Ephe. 2. 8. 1. These. 2. 5. 1. Cor. 2. 12. 2. Pet. 1. 3 4 and. 1. c.
that we are illumined in the faith, by the secret grace of the holy ghost,
so that it is a free and particular gift, which God bestows upon such, as
seems to him good: in such wise as the faithful have not wherein to glory,
being doubly beholden, in that they were preferred before other. 1. Cor. 1. 8 9.
Yea, and that faith is not only given to the chosen, to bring them into the
right way, for one only time, but causes them to continue therein to the
end: Philipens. 2. 13 and. 1. 6.
For as God must work the beginning, so must he also work the end.

22
We believe To. 6. a. b. and 7. a b. Col. 2. 13. and 3. 10. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
that through this faith we are regenerate into newenesse of life, being
naturally thrall to sin. And that we receive through faith, the grace to
live holily, and in the fear of GOD, in receiuyng the promise, which is given
us by the gospel: that is, that God will give us his holy spirit. James. 2.
Gal. 5. 6. 1. John. 2. 3. 4 and 5. 28.
So faith, does not only not cool, the desire to live well and holily,
but rather engenders and provoke the same in us, necessarily bringyng forth
good works. Deuteronomy. 30. John. 3. 5.
Furthermore, although God to fulfill our Salvation, regenerateth us, in
framyng us to do well, Luc. 17. 10 Psalm. 16. 2 Romans 3. c. d Tit. 3. 5. Romans 4.
3. 4 5.
nevertheless we confess that the good works, which we do, through the
guidyng of the holy spirit; are not sufficient to justify us, or deserve
that GOD shall accept us for his children: for we should be always waueryng
in doubt and uncertainty, if our consciences were not stayed on that
satisfaction, where with Jesus Christ has cleared us.

23.
We believe To. 10. 4. Gal. 3. and 4 Coll. 2. 17
that all the figures of the law, took end at the coming of Jesus Christ.
But though the Ceremonies are no longer in use, nevertheless, the substance
and truth remains with us, in the person of him in whom consists all
fullness. 2. Ti. 3. 16 2. Pet. 1. 19. and 3. 2.
And further, that we must use the help of the law and Prophets, as well
to the framyng of our lives, as to confirm us in the promises of the gospel.

24.
We believe, 1. Tim. 2. 5 Act. 4. 12. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2
since Jesus Christ is given to be our only advocate, Ioh. 16. 23 24.
and that he commands us to have familiar recourse in his name to his
father, Mat. 6. 9. Luc. 11. 2.
yea yt it is not lawful for us to pray, but according to the form, that God
has appoincted us by his word, Act. 10. 25 26. and 14. 14 Apoc. 19.
that all that which men have imagined, touching intercession of dedde
Saints, is but abuse and deceipte of Satan, to turn men from the form
of true prayer. We despise also all other means, wherewith men presume to
be able to reunsome them selves to Godwarde, as derogatyng the sacrifice of the
death and passion of Jesus Christ. To be short, we esteem purgatory for an
illusio^ forged in the same forge, ye Mat. 15. 11 Act. 10. 14. Romans 14. a. b.
c. Gal. 4. 9. 10 Col. 2. 18. 19 23. 1. Tim. 4. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Monkish vows, pilgrimages, forbiddyng of Marriages and use of meats, the
Ceremonious obseruacion of days, Auriculer confession, Pardons, with all other
such like, were: whereby men think too deserve grace and salvation: Which
things we despise, not only for the false opinion of deserte, that is had in
them, but also because they are man's inventions, and yoke men's consciences.

25.
And Romans 1. 16 17 and 10. c.
because we enjoy not Jesus Christ but by the Gospel, Math. 18. 20. Ephesians. 1.
22. 23
we believe that the order of the Church, which is established by his
authority, ought to be holy and inviolable, and therefore, that the Church
can not stand without Pastors, whose charge is to teach, Math. 10. Ioh. 13.
20 Romans 10. ^
and ought to be honored and reverently heard, if they be duly called, and
faithfully exercise their office. Not that God is bound to their helps or
base means, but that it pleases him to bridle us therewith. Wherein we despise
all such fantastical persons, as go about (as much as in them lies) to
deface the ministry and preaching of the word and Sacraments.

26.
We believe then, Psalm. 58 and 22. 23. and 42 5. Ephe. 4. 12. Heb. 2. 12.
that none ought to withdraw himself a part, and be contented alone, but that
all together ought to keep and maintain, the unity of the Church, submittyng
them selves to the common instruction, and to the yoke of Jesus Christ, and
that in what place soever God has established, a true order of his Church:
Act. 4. 19 20. Heb. 10. 25
yea though the Magistrates and their ordinances be contrary thereunto: and
that all they that submit not themselves thereunto, but separate them selves
from it, do contrary to the ordenaunce of God.

27.
Nevertheless Iere. 7. 4. b. 11. 12. Math. 3. 12. and 7. 22. and 24. 5.
we believe that it behooves carefully and wisely to discern, which is the
true Church, for that this title has been too too much abused. Ephe. 2. 20
and 4. 11. 12. 1. Tim. 3. 5. Deuteronomy. 31. 12.
We say therefore, according to the word of God, that it is the company of
the faithful, which agree together to follow the same word, and the pure
Religion depends thereon: and which profit therein, all the days of their
life, encreasyng and confirmyng them selves in the fear of GOD, according as
they need to advance themselves, and to march daily forward: Romans 3. c.
and when they have done their vttermoste, that it behooves the^ continually,
to have recourse to the remission of their sins. Mat. 13. d 2. Tim. 2. 18 19.
20.
And nevertheless we deny not but that among the faithful, there are
Hypocrites and reprobate, whose malice is not able to deface the title of the
Church.

28.
Upon this belief Math. 10. 14 and 15. John 10. c. 1. Cor. 3. b. c
we proteste, that where the word of God is not received, nor any profess to
submit theimselues there unto, where the Sacraments are not ministered, to
speak plainly, we can not judge any Church to be there. And therefore we
condemn the Popish assemblies, seeing the pure truth of God is banished
thence, in which the Sacraments are corrupt, counterfeacte, falsified, or
wholly defaced, and wherein all supersticion and Idolatry bears swaie. 2.
Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 1. Cor. 6. 15.
We hold then, that all they that have to do therein, or communicate after
that sort, separate and cut of them selves, from the body of Jesus
Christ. Nevertheless, because there domaineth a certain small trace of the
Church in Popery, and namely that the substance of Baptism remains
therein, Math. 3. 11 and 28. 19. Mar. 1. 8. Act. 1. 5. and 11. 15. 16. 17 and
19. 4. 5. 6.
for that the efficacy of Baptism, depends not on the minister, we
confess those that are Baptized, to need no second Baptism: and yet by
reason of the corruption thereof, that men cannot present their children
thereto, with out pollucion.

29.
As concerning the true Church, Act. 6. 3. 4 5. Ep. 4. b. c. 1. Tim. 3. Tit.
1. b. Mat. 18. 17.
we believe that it ought to be governed, according to the policy, that our
savior Jesus Christ has established: that is: that there be Pastors,
Superintendes, and Deacons, to the end that the purity of the doctrine may
have his course, that vices may be corrected and repressed, and that the
poor and afflicted may be succored in their necessities: and that the
assemblies may be made, in the name of God, wherein both great and small
may be edified.

30.
We believe, Math. 20. 26. 27. and. 28 2. 3. 4. 1. Cor. 3. a. b c. d. Ephe. 1.
22. Col. 1. 18. 19
that al true pastors, in what place so ever they be, have equal power and
authority under one only bed: the only sovereign and only universal
bishop Jesus Christ: and for this cause, that no Church ought to pretend any
rule or Lordship over other.

31.
We believe Math. 28. 10. 19. Mar. 16. 15. John. 15. 16. Act. 1. 21. and 6. a.
b. Romans 10. 15 Tit. 1. 5. 6. 7
that none ought of his own authority to thrust himself into the government
of the church, but that it ought to be done by election, for that it is
possible, and God permits it. Which exception we add expressly hereunto,
because it behooved at sometimes and namelye in our time, (in which the church
was interrupt for a season) that GOD should raise up men by extraordinarye
means, to rear up his church a new, which was overthrown and desolate.
This notwithstanding we believe, that we must always conform our selves to
this rule, Gal. 1. 15. 1. Tim. 3. 7. 8. 9. 10. 15.
that all pastors, supertendents and deacons, have testimony of calling to
their office.

32.
We also believe, Act. 13. 2 6. 7. 25. 28. Romans 12. 6. 7. 8. 1. cor. 14. fg 2.
Cor. 12. 7 8.
that it is good and profitable, that they which are chosen Superintendentes,
should be think the^, what mean they were best to use for the government
of the whole body: 1. Pet. 5. ^. 1. Cor. 14. 40.
and nevertheless that they swerve not one jot from that, which our fauiour
Jesus Christ has ordained, which hinders not, but that they may have
certain particular ordinances in each place, as the commodity thereof shall
require.

33.
Yet for all that, Romans 16. 17. 18. 1. Cor. 3. 11. Col. 2 6. 7. 8 Gal. 5. 1.
we exclude all man's inuencions, and all Laws, which are brought in under
color of Gods service, whereby they go about to bind men's consciences:
but only allow that, which bredeth and maintains concord, and keeps each
person, from the first to the last in obedience. Mat. 18. 17. 1. Cor. 5. 6.
1. Tim. 1. 20
Wherein we must follow that, which our savior Christ declares concerning
Excommunication: which we allow and confess to be necessary with all
things thereto belongyng.

34.
We believe that the Sacraments are added to the word, for further
confirmation thereof: to be as it were pledges and earnest to us of the grace
of God, and so by this mean, to help and comfort our faith, by reason of
the grossness and infirmity, which is in us: And that they are so outward
signs, that GOD works through them, in the power of his spirit, to the end
that nothing be signified to us in vain: Nevertheless we hold that all
their substance and verity is in Jesus Christ: and being separated from
him, they are nothing but shadow and smoke.

35.
We confess Romans 6. 3. Tit. 3. 5. 9. Act. 22. 16.
only two to be common to the whole Church: of which the first (which is
Baptism) is given to us for witness of our adoption, for that thereby we are
graffed into the body of Jesus Christ, to the end to be washed and cleansed,
through his blood, and after renewed in holiness of life, through his holy
spirit. Math. 3. 11. 12. Mar. 16. 15. To. 6. a. b. c d. 22. 23
We also hold, that although we be Baptized but ones, that the profit,
which there is signified unto us, extends to life, and death, to the end
that we may have an everlasting mark, that Jesus Christ will always
remain our righteousness, and sanctificacion. And although it be a
Sacrament of says and repentance, Math. 19. 14. 1. Cor. 7. 14
nevertheless, because God receives into his Church, the children with their
fathers, we say, that by the authority of Jesus Christ, young children
begotten of faithefull parents, ought to be Baptized.

36.
We 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. and 11. 24.
confess that the holy Supper (which is the second Sacrament) witnesses
unto us the unity, which we have with Jesus Christ, in as much as he did
not only ones dye, and rise again for us, John. 6. 56. 57. and 17 21. 22.
but also truly fedeth and nourishes us, with his flesh and blood, that we
might be one with him, and his life common to us. Mar. 16. 19. Act. 3. 21.
And though he be in heaven, till he come to judge the world, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
John 6.
yet we believe that by the secret and incomprehensible power of his Spirit,
he nourishes and quickens us, with the substance of his body and blood.

We hold that this is done spiritually: not putting in ye place of effect, and
verity, imagination, nor thought. But forasmuch as the highness of this
mystery for mounteth the measure of our understanding, and all order of
natuture, to be short, because it is heaui^ly, it cannot be apprehended but by
faith.

37.
We believe, as is said, that as well in the Supper, as in Baptism, god gives
us in deed and in effect that which is figured thereby. And therefore we join
with the signs, the true possession and enjoying of that which is there
presented unto us. So that all they which bring to the holy table of Christ
a pure faith, (as a vessel) receive truly that which the signs testify:
That is, 1. Cor. 11. John. 6.
that the body and blood of Jesus Christ serve no less for meat and drink to
the soul, than the bread and wine do to the body.

38.
Also we hold, To. 6. 3. 4.
that though ye water be a transitory element, yet it truly testifies unto us
the inward washing of our souls in ye blod of Jesus Christ, through the
working of his spirit: and that the bread and wine being given us in the
supper, is very spiritual food to us, John. 6. 1. Cor. 11.
for that they manifestlye declare unto us, that the flesh of Jesus Christ is
our meat, and his blood our drink: we despise all fantastical heads and
Sacramentaries, which will not receive such signs and marks, saying that our
Lord Jesus Christ pronosiceth. Mat. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body, this cup is my blood.

39
We believe Exodus 18. Math. 17. 25 Romans 13.
that God wills the world to be governed by laws and policy, to ye end to
bridle and keep under ye disordonat appetites of the people. And like as he
has established kingdoms, commonweals, and all other sorts of powers, be
they by inheritance or otherwise, with all things belonging to the state of
justice, and will be acknowleged author thereof: for this cause has he put the
sword in the magistrates hand, not only to punish vice committed against ye
second table, but also against the first. 1. Pet. 2. 13 14. 1. Tim. 2. 2
And therefore it behooves us for his sake not only to suffer superiors to
rule, but also to honor and esteem them with all reverence, holding them for
his liftenauntes and officers, which he has appointed to exercise a lawful
and holy charge.

40
We hold than, Math. 17. 24.
that we must obey their laws and statutes: pay tributes, imposts, and other
duties: and willinglye to bear the yoke of subjection although they were
infidels: Act. 4. 17 18. 19.
so that the sovereign Empire of God be kept whole. And therefore we detest
those that would reject superiority, make all things common, and overthrow
all order and justice.

FINIS.
This confession of faith, was publicly presented again to the Kings
Majesty, Charles the.ix. of that name at Poissy the year 1561. the ninth
September.


