ENGLANDS First and Second SVMMONS.

Two Sermons Preached at Paul's Cross, the one the third of January 1612; The
other the fifth of February, 1615.

By THOMAS SVTTON Batchelour of Divinity, then fellow of Queens College in
Oxford, and now Preacher at Saint Mary Oueries in Southwarke.

The second Impression, Perused and Corrected by the Author.

MICAH 6.2. Hear ye Mountains the Lords quarrel, for the Lord has a
quarrel against his people, and he will plead with Israel.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Fox. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER Doctor AIRAY Provost of Queens College in
Oxford, all felicity both in this world and in the world to come.
RJght Worshipful, you may justly marvel what importunity might bring my
impolished Meditations so quickly to the Press, but (being much against my
will enforced to let them try their fortune in the world) why I should bequeath
them to your protection no man needs to wonder, considering the many
encouragements, and continual kindnesses which I have received from you, unto
whose favor, next under God, I ascribe the greatest part of my welbeing, since
first I came under your government. I know well you have many learned Scribes
in that Naioth, whereof God has made you the chief Seer, more worthy to have
shown their forwardness in this kind then my self, who can leave more
learning for the gleaning, then my whole vintage. (For I am but one of the
least, and lowest amongst all the sons of my mother) yet seeing you may justly
challenge the same interest in me, which Paul did in Philemon, Thou owe unto
me thy own self, I am willing to discharge some part of my debt, if you shall
allow of this coin and impression for current: and yet even in this, shall J
run farther upon the old score, as being rather in your debt for your kind
receiving of it, then out of your debt by repaying so slender thanks. J know
that the least Sabbath days journey of your own, is more worth then any whole
years pains of mine: Yet am I confident, you will both consider my years,
which are but few, and the time J had, which was but short, and my many other
occurrences, wherewith in the mean time I was interrupted, and then accept of
this for trial, as if it were the extract of some purer and better wit. The
Lord prosper your days, direct your heart, and bless all your labors, to the
glory of his Name, and the good of his Church: From Queens College in Oxford.

Yours in all duty and service, Thomas Sutton.

ENGLANDS Summons.
HOSEA 4.1.2.3. Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Israel: for the Lord
has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land.

By swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whooring, etc.


THis whole Chapter is parcel of a Sermon, penned by Hosea the son of Beeri,
containing in it a sharp and bitter inuectiue against Israel, falling of it
self into two fair and goodly channels. The one an accusation of the men of
Israel for their crimson sins, from the first unto the fifteenth verse. The
other a kind and gentle admonition to the men of Judah, to forbear the
dangerous paths of sin, wherein her sister Israel had wearied her self, in
the remnant of the Chapter.

The accusation is laid down in a legal and judicial manner of proceeding,
wherein the Israelites are summoned to appear at the bar and tribunal of Gods
judgments, there to answer unto such capital offenses, as there should be
objected, and laid unto their charge: and it contains in it four several
bills of indictment, and after plain and evident conviction, four several
judgments against them, the first bill is contained in the two first verses,
where they stand indicted of want of truth, want of mercy, etc. and the
judgment for those sins is annexed, verse the third: Therefore the Land shall
mourn. The second bill is contained in the fourth verse, where they are
accused of two notorious and inexpiable crimes; the one they would endure no
reproof, they were impatient of wholesome admonition; the other, they would
not stick to revile the messengers of God, and the sentence of the Judge
against this sin is annexed, verse the fifth: Therefore shall they fall in that
day. The third bill is contained in the seventh verse. where says Zanchius,
they are accused of palpable and gross unthankfulness; for look how fast
soever the Lord heaped his blessings upon their bodies, so fast themselves
heaped a dead weight of sin upon their own souls; and the judgment for
this sin is annexed in the end and closure of the same verse: Therefore will I
turn their glory into their shame. The fourth and last bill is contained in
the twelfth verse, where they are accused of spiritual whoredom; and the
judgment for this sin is annexed at the foureteenth verse: Therefore I will
not visit your daughters when they are harlots, nor your spouses when they are
whoores: Of all which there is only one indictment, and one judgment,
comprised in the words we have in hand.

So that the limbs and members of the Text must needs be two. The one Gods
legal proceeding with Israel. The other his verdict and stroke of judgment.
In Gods proceeding I observe first the summons, Hear the word of the Lord.
Secondly the reason of the Summons; it was to debate and decide a Controversy.
Thirdly the parties who stood at variance, and these as unequally matched, as
ever were earth and heaven, strength and weakness, or the great Beemoth, and
the silliest worm that creeps in the chinkes of the earth: It was God and
Israel. God both Judge and Plaintiff himself; Israel the weak and poor
defendant. Fourthly the sins whereof they are accused; and these are either
privative in the first, or positive in the second verse. The privative sins are
three; whereof two concern their neighbors. The first, want of Truth. The
second want of Mercy. The third respected God himself, There was no knowledge
in the Land.

The positive sins are five; Swearing, Lying, Killing, Stealing Whooring; and
every of these aggrauated from two circumstances in the text. First from the
eagarnesse and violence of their affection in the pursuit of them: for They
brake out. Perruperunt omnia repagula, quibus contineri solent homines a
peccando; there was neither love nor shame; neither awe of Gods majesty, nor
the dread of his punishments, that could restrain or keep them back, from
gruing head and reins unto all bloody and crying sins. Secondly from the
uninterrupted course and continued practice of their sinning, Blood touched
blood, every little cottaage became Aceldema, a field of blood. Finis vnius
peccati gradus futuri, so soon as ever they had wearied themselves with one of
these sins, they posted with precipitant and winged have, without all
intermission of time unto an other.

Thus sin and sin went hand in hand, and thus Blood touched Blood.

The punishments for these sins, which are here lively and emphatically
discribed by diverse metaphors, are two. First, the famine, where it is said,
The Land shall mourn; as if he should thus have said: The people will not
mourn for themselves, therefore the earth (though it be senseless) shall
mourn for them; it shall mourn as Rahel mourned for her children, being
robbed and stripped, not only of her fruits, but of her inhabitants also. The
second is the sword, where it is said, Every one shall be cut off: and both of
these are further aggrauated from the generality and extent of the punishment;
which was to seize not only upon man who had sinned, but also upon the beasts
of the field, and the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the Sea: which
last clause, that it should seize upon the fishes of the Sea, does most of all
exagerate the wrath of God against them: for even in the great and general
deluge, when man for sin was swept away with the besome of desolation, the
fishes were exempted from all punishment, Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 15.
cap 27.
as if they had been a nation of another world, who having no commerce nor
society with man, were not tainted with the flux and leprosy of his sin:
but now it seems his wrath was hotter, in as much as he threatens to make the
fishes also partakers of man's punishment, not that he purposed to catch the
silly fishes in the net of his judgments, but only that by these Rhetorical
amplifications, he might more feelingly affect and move the hearts of the
Israelites, both with some touch and feeling of their own sins, and his
punishments. Thus you see into what an Ocean of all variety and choice of
matter I am now ready to wade, both as fast as God shall give me assistance,
and as far as the time and your Christian patience will permit; and first of
the summons, which was the first thing I observed in the accusation: Hear the
Word of the Lord, as if in fuller terms he should have said.

You cannot choose but know how carefully I have solicited, how friendly I have
admonished, how powerfully I have exhorted, how sincerely I have instructed you
in matters concerning God and your own peace, but my words have perished in the
air, I have spent my strength upon you in vain, and for nothing; for how
little you have profited, how backward you have been in harkening, how slack
in performing, how cold in your zeal, how dead in your affection, how frozen
in your obedience, theworld can testify unto your face. I have wooed you with
love, but you never regarded, I have wooed you with tears, but you never
forrowed, I have wooed you with promises of rewards, but you never believed; I
have shaken you with menaces and threats of death and blood, but you never
suspected that any of these evils should come upon you: Mercy has stood and
knocked at your gates, but she has been repelled; Indgement has laid siege to
the walls of your houses, but you have not been humbled; the silver trumpets
of heaven, and the watchmen of Israel, have rackt and stretched their voices,
they have filled their mouths with ruthful Elegies so passionate, as might
have wrung a stream of tears from a heart of Iron; but you have laughed them
to scorn, you have esteemed their words but as an empty sound, and their
persons as the refuse and vassals of the earth: wherefore we cease from
henceforward to speak unto you, we will waste no more strength upon you, but
withal know, that the Lord will debate the matter with you himself: he sees
that his Ambassadors cannot prevail by Preaching mercy, therefore this
dreadful Sovereign will come himself to pass his judgment; unto which
judgment by virtue of a commission from the Court of heaven, I warn and
summon you, Hear word of the Lord.

From whence issues this point of doctrine: When the Preacher preuaile^s not,
God begins himself.
That if the Ministers of God, have long and long contended with a people, to
work their conversion and cannot prevail, then will the Lord take the matter
into his own hand, and prosecute the cause with afflictions, and judgment.

For proof whereof you shall not need to wade far into the Crystal River
of Gods Book. Stand but a while upon the brink of this silver streaming Siloam,
and you will all confess with Archimedes, as if your selves had been down in
the water; (...), we have found the Proposition true, and the doctrine sound.

When God had opened the flood gates of his love, first in the admirable work
of man's creation, changing him from a little model of slime, into a glorious
substance: secondly, in the propagation of Man, increasing his seed as the
Stars of Heaven: thirdly, in gracing Man with domination and soueraignrie over
all his creatures: fourthly, in crowning man with the highest perfection, and
beauty of temporal delights? Thus purposing to win his affection, and to bind
him for ever, to perform homage and due allegiance unto him; but still
perceiving that these blessings made them grow rather wanton then thankful,
that they turned the dew of his graces into a rank pasture to fat themselves in
sin; that the oil of his mercy made them more active, and nimble in feats
of impiety, that the strength of his creatures made them more strong to give
head and raines to open rebellion, in the end He thus resolves against the^ in
the sixth of Genesis, the third, Lo iadon ruchi. Genesis 6.3.
My spirit shall no longer strive with man: which Text the Rabbinshaue so
foully mangled that it were but folly to relate their enforced expositions.
Lutherus. P. Martyr.
I rather embrace the judgment of Luther, and Peter Martyr, and then the sense
is pregnant for our purpose: My Spirit shall no longer strive with Man; that
is, I will not endure that my Word should still be Preached in vain unto them:
as if in more ample form of words he had said, they might long since have
learned of Methusalem and of Lamech, and yet they have some time and respit to
learn of my servant Noah, how to possess their souls in peace: but if they
will not be reclaimed, then I will trouble my servants no longer in woing and
soliciting them, but after the prefixed time of an 120 years, I will come my
self in the fierceness of my wrath with an Alpheus, and inundation of water
in the one hand, and a besome of desolation in the other, to purge this Augeum
stabulum, which is the harbor of their sins. Thus when Noah, whom the spirit
of God had styled a Preacher of righteousness, had used his diuinest, and most
powerful Rhetorique; sometimes as a Pericles, thundering; sometimes as an Apollos
powerfully persuading; sometimes like a Demosthenes, sweetly pleasing;
sometimes like a learned Tertullus, strongly conuincing the old world of
disloyalty unto God. And yet all these painful Sermons proved but like paper
bullets shot against a brazen wall; then began the Judge of all the world to
stir up himself like a man of war, to muster up his sergeants of death, to
discharge whole vollies of plagues so thick upon them, that ere ever he could
be brought to stay his hand from striking, the whole earth might have
complained and mourned with Rahel, that the greedy womb, and belly of the sea,
had swallowed and entombed the carcasses of all her children in one day,
Genesis 7.22.

Thus righteous Lot for many years together wrastled with Sodom, sometime
like a sharp Satyr whetting his style with bitter and tart Iambicks to dismay
and grate their unrelenting hearts: sometimes sweeting his discourse with
hymns of comfort, intermingling gracious promise of the joys of heaven:
sometimes stealing into their hearts and attentions by pleasing descants: and
sometimes deading and appalling their wanton countenance, by showing them the
ugly visage and frightfull portraiture of their sin, by opening the doors and
dark entries of hell, by exaggerating the wrath and fierceness of a revenging
God, by frequent and vehement ingemination of a spiritual Caucasus, wherein
they should be chained for ever like Prometheus; of a Judge before whom they
should stand with fear; of a indgement and sentence under which they should
sink with utter despair; of a hell and a Tophet, wherein they should fry,
till eternity it self should have a period: when thus he had vexed and
wearied his righteous soul, and like a burning lamp had wasted his marrow,
and fatness with a sollicitous and tender regard of their welfare, and yet
with all his labor could not pull so much as one soul out of the fire, with
all his strength not break the heart of one sin, with the sling of David not
wound the head of one Goliath: with all the rich armorie of God, not so much as
snape or cool the heat of one impiety. Then the Lord began to buckle, and
join forces with them himself, to draw a sword like the sword of Saul or
Gideon, which never returned empty from the blood of the slain, and the fat of
the mighty, he parlied but a while with the clouds of Heaven, and they without
demurre of time united their forces, melted and resolved themselves into a
sudden and violent storm, not of water, whose violence their sumptuous
buildings might have abated: but of fire, which is irresistable, and that mixed
with brimestone, which both increased the heat, Genesis 19.24
and made the torment more distastefull. Thus did Moses wrestle and cumbat with
Pharao, sometimes charging him in the name of God to let Israel go: sometimes
confounding him and his sorcerers with miracles: sometimes striking him and his
whole land with such uncouth, and sore diseases, as might either have broken or
bowed a heart of iron and a face of brass, but still he hardened his face like
a stone, and would not perceive, he musted his eyes like Tamar, and would not
see, he made his conscience like a smooth pauement, whereon the heauiest
judgment which Moses thunderd, the strangest miracles which he wrought, the
waightiest plagues which the rod of the Almighty inflicted, left no mark not
impression; The turning of all their water into blood, could not wring one drop
of water from his eyes; the common plague upon all the beasts of the Land,
could not kill one sin in his heart, all the cold showers of hail could not
abate or cool his heat and rage against the Israel of God, the Suns drawing
of a black mask before her crimson face could not persuade him to pluck the
visard from his crimson sins; the killing of the first borne in all the houses
of Egypt, could not kill the strength of sin in this one Egyptian: and
therefore when the Lord saw that Moses was too weak a cumbatant for such a
potentate, he took the cause into his own hand, and plied him close with
judgments: First, daunting him with fear, and then opening the belly of the
sea, which swallowed him alive. Exodus 14.20.

To this purpose hearken you how the Prophets complain of Babel, Ier. 51.9.
Ierem. 5.1.9. We would have cured her, but she would not be cured: come, let
us all forsake her. How many passionate Sermons may we think that the Prophets
had made? How many fervent prayers had they tendered? How often had they knocked
at the doors of their hearts by powerful exhortations? How often had they
knocked at the doors and windows of heaven by supplications, before they would
give het over, or leave her to her self to sink or swim? Zwingl. and Hugo.
Zwinglius and Hugo Cardinalis make this place very strong to back the pointin
hand It is (say they) the appeal of all the Prophets to the court of heaven,
Cil enim inter Prophet as non esset, qui Babylonij fastum comprimeret, eius
vltio ad Dominum delata est. When all the Balm in Gilead could not cure her,
the^ they left her deplored and desperate to fall into the hands of God, and
when the tongues of his Prophets were wearied with crying, and their souls
fainted and failed with laboring, and their spirits groned being even tired
with wooing and entreating, and for all this she made this the burden of her
song, Nolo sanari, I will not be healed: Then the Lord called for Medes and
Persians to be the hammer wherewith he might break; for the Kings of Armenia
and Scythia, to be the arrows of his quiver, wherewith he might cleave; for
Cyrus and Darius to be his glistring sword, wherewith he might gash and slice
their flesh, and to weed them man after man out of those Elisian fields, and
Hesperian Orchards, wherein they were planted. Stephan. in apolog. pro Herodoto.
Stephanus in his Apology for Herodotus, reports of Tamberlane that warlike
Scythian, that whenever he besieged a City, he first displayed a white flag
in token of mercy; the next day a red flag, menacing and threatening blood; the
third day a black flag, the messenger, and ensign of death; a right parallel
with the method used here by God himself: His white flag, I call those bands
of love, those conditions of peace which God is feign to entreat at the hands
of sinners: His red flag of correction, I call those grating corrasiues, and
astonishing judgments, with which the Ministers of God so often use to break
the hearts of such men, as with Jonas have suffered themselves to be surprised
with a lethargy of sin, and when Gods Heralds have worn themselves out of
breath with long displaying the two flags, and cannot prevail; then the
Coronell himself, whose Chariot is the wind, takes the black flag into his
own hand, hems and walls them round with fears and terrors, he gives his
sword a charge to eat up their flesh, and his arrows a charge to drink up
their blood, and his iron rod a charge to break them like clay, and the stars
a charge to fight with them as they did with Sisera, and the earth a charge to
swallow them as it did Korah, and death a charge to mow them down like grass,
till there should not remain one man alive to bury another.

Which one point will be our guide to three heavenly meditations; and every
one of these a sovereign remedy, and antidote against some sin. The first,
go with all the gains, and will he yet spin out the suite so long, till the
client want weft to bestow upon him? does the Preacher tell the generous and
noble buddes of this Land, M.B.
that your profane and obscoene stageplaies do prcue the inexpiable stain and
dishonor of this famous City, the noisome worms that canker, and blast al
hope of grace and goodness in the blossoms, that they do so weaken and
emmasculate all the seeds of holiness by a sly and bewitching insinuation,
that whereas they are planted in these nurceries of the Law, to be fitted and
enabled for the public good, and for the continnance of the glory, and
happiness of this Kingdom; they licentiously dissolve into ungodly and wanton
pleasures, and then all hope of their ever doing good, either unto God, or unto
his Church, or unto their Country, melts as the Ice before the fire, and
flows away as unprofitable waters: and will they not yet cease to flock unto
such wanton Theaters, and there to spend their goods to no other purpose but to
set their own lusts on fire, to uphold schools of lewdness and of sin, to
maintain men of a corrupt life, and dissolute behauior in a calling no way
warranted from God? Let all these cast eye upon the doctrine which I have
delivered, and it will let them know, that if they refuse to be reclaimed from
this trade of sin by the mouth of the Preacher, then the Lord will make it
his own quarrel, and whatsoever the Preacher has threatened out of his book,
the Lord will repay it seven fold into their bosoms.

Secondly, no Plea of false imprisonment.

Thirdly, all the Nations under the canopy and roof of heaven. He has sent
his Messengers the Prophets, like Noah's Dove, with every one an Olive branch
of peace in his mouth, to beg, and purchase a divorce betwixt you and your
sins: he has sent his messengers the Angels, with their swords half
drawn, to win your affection, and to winnow and sift all the branne, I mean
ungodliness and profaneness from amongst you. What means could the Lord
have used for your conversion that he has not already used? so that if you
still persist in your gray and ancient sins: if the Preacher thunder, and you
not moved: if the Preacher beseech, and you not touched: if the Preacher
threaten, and you not humbled: know this for certainty, that ere long, the
ancient of days will harrow up your flesh, and plow up your skin, and spend
upon you all the plagues and botches of Egypt, till you be turned like Sodom,
into a fenne; like Babylon, into a Cabin for Dragons and Ostriches, and like
Moab into a plain: Et barbarus has segetes, this fruitful Canaan and this
little Naioth wherein we are planted, be given for a prey and possession to
strangers. Think not that he forgets you because it is long before he
strikes. Plutar. in vita Fabiij.
Hannibal had no reason to think Fabius a dastard, because he was slow in
marching; nor that besieged City in Curtius, to call Alexander a coward,
because he was more ready to show his clemency in saving them alive, then his
manhood in conquering of them. And so from the Summons, Hear, I should pass
to the parties summoned, the children of Israel, but that my meditations are
intercepted, and I am contented to take view of an other Doctrine by the way as
I go, offering it self unto me from these words, The Word of the Lord, and is
comprised in these terms.

The voice of Gods Ministers is not the voice of man but of God, The Preachers
voice is Gods voice.
backed and convinced out of the 10. of Luke (...), He that hears you
hears me; and from the testimony both of Church, Isaiah 2.3. The word of God
shall go forth of Jerusalem; and of Cornelius, speaking thus unto Peter: We
are here assembled to hear the things that are commanded thee of God, Acts
10.33. But most plainly by the mouth of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. He received it
not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God. Bone Deus in quae
nos temporae reseruasti? In to what a miserable time are we fallen, when each
crafty Achitophel shall have attendance when he speaks; and every syllable of
his discourse, as if it were penned at Delphos, shall pass current through the
world for an Oracle? When every histrionicall Orpheus shall be able to draw
stones and towers after him when he acts? When every proud Herod, who has
nothing in him to commend him, but his gaudy attire, shall yet have all the
applause, and his words accounted as the voice of God not of man? Vox illa
hominem non sonat: But for Esaias, he may speak till he be hoarse, who will
believe him? he may lift up his voice like a trumpet, who will hear him?
David may play sweetly upon his instrument of ten strings; and the Preacher
descant heavenly on the ten commandments, and yet who is inamored with the
melody of the one; or reformed according to the other? 2. Cor. 12.
Paul may be rapt into the highest heaven, Preach nothing but salvation, slip
not a phrase which is not sweetly enterlaced with heavenly eloquence, paue them
the readiest way to those ioies which are unspeakable; yea even thrust this
Ariadnes thread into their hands; few or none that will regard him. Thus are
Gods Heralds, esteemed no better then Cassandras Prophesies; his Ambassadors
worser then Justinians Orators, (...), such members as the world might well
want, the refuse of men. Question but a word with those despisers, and all the
Apology they pretend, all the rub they make, is the bad and corrupt life of
many Preachers: this is it that makes them refuse to hear, and puts them out
of all conceit with the message they deliver. I hope I shall drive them from
this hold, and satisfy their objection with a word. Know then, that when thou
set foot within the door of Gods house, thy intent and purpose should be,
to have thy sins opened, thy maladies cured, to take spiritual Physic, for
the remedy of some languishing disease which would eat up thy soul. Will thou then be so wilful, as refuse the sovereign medicines, because thy
Physician is sick of the same disease that thou art? Wilt not thou be cured
by this Physician, because the Physician cannot cure himself? What would God
have said to Noah, if he had refused to save himself in the Arc, because the
men that made the Arc for him, were drowned themselves? Will not you go on the
readiest way to heaven, because he that is your guide and Pilot runs counter
himself? What though the water it self be not so clean as thou woldst have
it, yet it will purge and cleanse thee? And what though sometimes the life of
the Preacher be not so spotless, as it might be wished? yet the Message
which he brings, the Word which he Preaches, the way which he points
out, is the way of life; be his life never so wicked, his heart never so foul
within him, the words which he has uttered will be sufficient to cast and
condemn thee at the last day.

We read that Elijah was well contented to be fed and nourished by the mouth
of Ravens; 1. King. 17.
birds as ravenous and unclean as any other; whereas God could have fed him by
the mouths of far cleaner birds. A good caveat for us (says Stella upon the
tenth of Luke) never to refuse the food and diet of our souls, Stella upon
Luke 10.
though the vessels wherein it is carried, be both unsanctified and unclean.
The Ravens were unclean birds, but the meat which they brought was wholesome:
and the case being all one, why should a man refuse the glad tidings of
salvation, or stop his ears at the voice of the skillful charmer, because the
messenger that brings the tidings, is overtaken with some known sin? Or
because he that charmeth, stancheth not the issue of his own corruption? I
might enlarge the point both from S. Augustine, Aug. Cont. Donat l. 4. cap. 4.
Born. in Cant. Sermon. 66.
in his 4. Book and 4 Chapter against the Donatists; and from S. Bernard in his
66. Sermon upon the Canticles. But I remember that I have far to go and little
time to spend; wherefore I only add this short caution and proceed. Beware
you murmurre not against the Preacher of the Word, lest it be justly said to
you, as Moses said to Israel; Non est murmur contra nos, sed contra Deum: Your
murmurre is not against us, but against the Lord, Exodus 16.8. Despise not him
that Preaches the Word, least it be said unto you, as Paul told his
Thessalonians: (...), 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
you despise not man but God. Deal not fraudulently with him that has a
charge of thy soul, lest it be said unto you as it was to Ananias and
Saphira; you have not dealt wickedly with man, but with God, Act. 5.4. And so I
come to the parties here summoned to the Word, The children of Israel.

By Israel (says Zanchius) we are especially to understand, those ten Tribes,
which revolted in Ieroboams time, from the regiment of Iudaea, and our Prophet
styles the^ not barely Israel, as Iunius and Tremelius render it: but Been
Iisrael, Israelis filij, sons of Israel, who was mighty with God, meaning to
put them in mind of their fathers virtues, that this comemoratiue might be an
argument to bring them home to their fathers footsteps, and to aggrauate their
shame, that having so religious parents, themselves proved such notorious and
shameless Apostataes, from whence amongst others, I have made choice of this
Note.

Good and virtuous children be loath to depart from the good example of their
parents: Good children must follow their fathers virtues.
So we read of Iehosaphat, that he made it his care to walk in the steps of
Asa his father; the first of Kings at the 22. Of Ezekiah, 2. King. 18.
that he walked in the same steps that David his father had done: Of Josiah,
2. Chr. 34.
that he turned neither to the right hand nor to the left, but walked
precisely in the way of his father. This was a high commendation that Paul gave
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. And a commendation which God gave the
Rechabites, promising that he would crown them with a hopeful posterity,
because they followed the godly example of their father: Verily Ionaedab the
son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever, Ier. 33. And
Isay 51.2. God thus speaks to Israel; Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah
that bare you; they were zealous of my glory, be not you so cold. These were
burning and shining lamps, be not you like black clouds and emblemes of
darkness. Abraham refused not to sacrifice his son: look on him, and refuse not
to sacrifice thy sin, and unclean affections. Saerah obeyed Abraeham, and
called him Lord; and Israel thou art Gods Spouse, therefore obey thy God, and
worship him as Lord only: Which virtuous imitation, not only Christians, but
Heathens have embraced. Scipio Africanus.
Scipio Africanus accounted it no small disparagement for him to walk one foot
awry, from that course of life which Cyrus in Zenophon had gone before him. It
was the height of Caesar's glory to walk in the steps of Alexander; Caesar.
Of Selymus the turkish Emperor to walk in the steps of Caesar; And of the
Arabians, Selymus Turc. imperat.
to imitate the life and profession of their fathers: as Strabo in his
sixteenth book, Strabo l. 16 Sabel. l. 6. Exemp. c. 1.
and out of him Sabellicus in his sixth book of Examples and first Chapter.

Which point should be a good encouragement for all sorts of men, as their
forefathers have done; an encouragement for Princes to follow the example of
Phineas, Numb. 25.
to be zealous for the Lords sake. An encouragement for States and Potentates,
to follow the example of the good Centurion, Luke 7.5.
in showing their love unto this Nation, and building up the Church of God. An
encouragement for Ladies and Matrons, to follow the example of Abigail, 1. Sam.
25.
to encourage and relieve all such as fight the Lords battle. An encouragement
for reverend Bishops, to follow the example of good Elisha, 2. Kings 6.
in providing for the Prophets. An encouragement for Judges, to follow the
example of Othoniel, Judge. 3.9.
in saving and sheilding the poor and impotent from the yoke and servitude of
greater personages. An encouragement for Lawyers to follow the good example of
Elias, in standing up to plead the Lords cause against all the favorites of
Babylon, 1. Kin. 18. an encouragement for rich and wealthy citizens, to follow
the example of Zacheus, in opening the bowels of their compassion to the
afflicted members of Christ Jesus, Luke 19.8. an encouragement for Courtiers,
to follow the example of Nehemiah, in redressing their contempt of Gods
sabbath, Nehem. 13.22. an encouragement for all men, of all men, of all estates
and conditions, that if they have fonnd and espied in their parents, or other
holy men, or precedent ages, any one virtue that was eminent, any one gift that
was commendable, any part or quality that was admirable, and excellent, that
they should affect and imitate: but alas, it is now the open shame of our land,
and a scar in the face of our gentry, that they are become such as Plutarch
taxed in the life of Alexander, readier to imitate his foul deformities, then
his valiant atte^pts, or Platoes crooked shoulders, sooner then his divine
discourses, or Aristotle's sta^mering speeches, sooner then his profoundnes and
depth of reason; and instead of imitating their ancient virtues, they imitate
nothing but new and quaint devices. They are full of strange children, said
Esaias 2.6. which place if I might be bold to allegorize, or follow our English
marginall, I would call their strange children, their strange devices; their
brainsicke imitation of the fantastical outside, and inward corruption of all
nations. Is it not a wonder to think that the world should be come to the age
of almost six thousand years, and yet be still in childbed? and every month
in travel of new fashions, new sins, new vanities, of all things new, save
only of the new man, and the old man is in such request with her, that the
world is ready to say with the young man in the Gospel, whom Christ would have
had to follow him, that she will indeed follow him, but first she must go bury
her father, she has an old man at home, that is not yet dead; an old man, the
old Adam, the man of sin is yet alive within her, till he be dead, there is
no following of Christ.

O the shame of this world, that men honorable and worshipful by descent,
Christians by profession, their fathers joy, and their countries hope should
seruilely yield to follow the fashions of all countries in their follies: thy
attire in the beginning was given thee only for a cover to hide thy shame, and
therefore when thou followest more fashions then all other people, thou
proclaimest it to the world that thou have more sin to hide, more shame to
cover, then all the nations of the world besides. In the Italian fashion, thou
hidest the Italians sin: in the Turkish thou hidest the Turkish shame: in the
Spanish, thou hidest the Spanish sin: and in the French fashion, thou hidest
the French-mens shame: for thy attire was given thee only to cover thy shame:
but I have small hope to prevail, the sin is so ancient. I will therefore spare
my further pains in this point, and proceed from the summons, and arraignment
to the occasion thereof; the deciding of a controversy, which one clause
contaynes, both the plaintiff which is God, and the defendant Israel: what? a
controversy with Israel? the Vine which his own right hand had planted? with
Israel the people which he honored? with Israel the son whom he adopted,
and loved more tenderly then all the Nations of the earth besides? and has God
a controversy to decide with thee? then this observation meets me by the way:
That no city, or people is so graced with privileges, No nation can stand under
the burden of sin.
so crowned with blessings, so beloved of God, but sin will set GOD and them
at variance, make Heaven their adversary, and hazard the racing and ruinating,
both of state and government: that commonweals, and kingdoms have a periode,
let Athens, and Sparta, and Babylon, and Troy, and Niniuie, and Carthage be
witnesses, who have at this day no other defense, but paper walls to keep
their memories: but what have been the cause of these subuersions the most are
ignorant. The Epicure ascribes it unto fortune, the Stoicke to destiny, Plato
and Pythagoras and Bodin in the sixth of his Methods unto number, Plato and
Pythagoras, Bodin in 6. meth Arist. 5. Polit. 12. Copernicus Cardanus.
Aristotle in the fifth of his Politickes, at the twelfth, to an asymmetry and
disproportion in the members. Copernicus to the motion of the Center, of his
imaginary excentricke circle, Cardanus and the most part of Astrologians to
Stars and Planets; but all these have only groped in the darkness, and being
misled by an Ignis fatuus, have supposed with Ixion in the fable, they had
found the true Juno. the brightest and the clearest truth, when it proved but a
cloud of palpable darkness; but if we consult with the Oracles of God, we
shall find that sin is the only cause why God falls out with his dearest
children, why he turns cities into ashes, ruinates states, and makes kingdoms
but ludibria fortunae, everlasting momuments of desolation: the Scriptures are
so pregnant in this argument, that the shallowest nouice may run and read
abundant testimonies: ask of Jerusalem, and she can witness that this
Doctrine is too too true, she will not stick to tell you what she was, and
whither she is fallen, perhaps in these mourneful terms, I was the Vine which
GOD had planted with his hand, and watered with the dew of heaven: I was the
City of the great King, the Tabernacle of the most High, I could once have said
with Niobe in the Poet, Sum foelix, I shall never have cause to mourn: but
hark you now how she has changed her tune, and the Epilogue of her
pleasing-song has proved this doleful Elegy, I sinned grievously, therefore am
I in derision, Lamen. 1.8. I sinned with a high hand, therefore has he filled
me with bitterness, and made me drunk with Wormwood, Lament. 3.15. I was
sick from the sole of my foot to the crown of my head, and I had not a man to
stand in the gap to stop the Sword of the Almighty, therefore once was I
robbed by Shishack King of Egypt, 1. Kings 14. and now am I utterly sacked by
the king of Babel. 2. Ki. 25. Inquire of Sodom, and she will tell you that she
was once as fair as the garden of Eden, and as pleasant as the valley of
Egypt, as thou go unto Zoar; of Babylon, and she will tell you, that she was
once the Empress of all the earth, the pride and beauty of Chaldea; of
Jericho, and Josephus will tell us in his first book, De bello Iudaico, that
it was a city of palm trees, whose beuty might have commanded immortal
memory, but God became an enemy to Sodom, by reason of her uncleanness, and
an enemy to Babylon, by reason of her pride, and an enemy to all the Kingdoms
of Canaan, because they were abetters and maintainers of all variety of
sins, so that they may all shake hands, and sing in order this doleful
madrigall, Sodom may thus begin, and say, My wantonness set GOD and me at
variance, therefore am I burned to ashes, and turned into a stinking Fen,
Genesis 19.25. and Babylon may answer thus, my pride set God and me at
variance, therefore are my palaces made Dens for Dragons, Esaias 13.21. and
Canaan may make up the Consort thus, My gross Idolatry set God and me at
variance, therefore has he stripped me naked, Hosea 2.3. Were it needful I
would tell you of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, Ephesus, Smyrna,
Nice, Laodicea, Antiochia, Constantinople, of all the Eastern and African
Churches, once like so many watered Gardens, moistened with all the fruitful
showers and dew of Heaven, while other places of the world remained, like the
mountains of Gilboa, whereon there fell neither dew nor rain, they were watered
like the fleece of Gideon, while the earth was dry round about them, but since
they have started aside, like the men of Ephraim, they have been settled upon
the Lees with Moah, they have plowed Aceldama, a field of blood, and sown
iniquity; therefore had the Lord a long fuite and controversy with them, but
in the end wiped out their names, discarded their Idols, gave their Land to be
inhabited by Zijm and Ochim Turks and Infidels.

And if ever, then would God, Pericles, and my Pen iron, and my sides brass,
and my speech powerful, and my prayers effectual to rent, and move the hearts
of those, who by their outrageous sins make God fall out with us, and egerly
importune the Judge of all the World to denounce a doom of death and
desolation upon this Land; as he has done upon those Cities which we
mentioned. The world can tell, that of all the Trees in the Garden, we are the
Vine, amongst all the varieties of flowers, we are the Lillies and the Rose,
amongst all cities we have Jerusalem; amongst all the Princes we only had a
Deborah, and we have a David; amongst all the Prophets of the Lord, we have
the most reverend Elishaes; amongst all the nurceries and springs of learning,
we have the most famous Naioths, we are they, upon whose heads the Cataractes
of Heaven have been opened, that we might fill our selves with that Manna
which might long since have wiped out the black spots and stains of sin,
which are the caracters of Hell: these are our high and rich prerogatives,
wherein we may outvie the felicity and pride of foreign Nations. But will
this Summers gleane of our prosperity never be ouershadowed? Will our Sun
never stoop below the Horizon? yet (beloved) we harbor such armies and bands
of sins, we are in league and compact with such prodigious vices; we take
part with Mammon against God, when we wedde our affections to the World like
Demas; we take part with Baal against God, when we are contented to wink at
our Recusants, and the Calves which are erected in Dan, and Bethel; we take
part with the flesh against God, when we do yield our bodies which should be
temples of holiness, to be defiled with filthy strumpets; we take part with
all the powers of darkness against GOD, and our own souls, when we are
content to spend our goods, bestow our time, waste and consume our bodies, in
rearing a Babell with the one hand, wherein we shall sport our selves a while,
though with the other we be digging up a hell and a Tophet, wherein without
repentance, we fry for ever: thus have we flowne in the face of the blessed
Trinity, who never did us wrong; we have dared our God to his face; our whole
Land begins to swarm with sins, as thick as Egypt did with frogs; we
are already grown so far, and yet we are going so fast, that a man would
think, that many of us did at this day contend and strive, who should
out-strippe another, and be foremost in hell.

What then can we expect, but that God whom we have constraind to be our
enemy, should begin to make furrows in our backs, to strike our heads with
giddiness, our faces with palenesse; to call again for an invincible Armado,
like to that of 88. for a new powder plot of Italian Doegs, that our Land may
be a prey to those that seek our lives; suffer our Churches to be turned into
Manors, and the houses of the Prophets be laid on ruinous heaps: this and no
other, will be the decision and final determination, of that controversy
between God and this Land, unless by a flood of tears we can stop the way;
unless by speedy repentance we can dull the edge of his sword that is ready
drawn, and slack the strings of his bow, that is already bent for our
destruction: the most secret plots and treasonable conspiracies, that are
wrought against us, are not half so dangerous, the nefarious proiects of all
the Jesuits in the world, (though their heads be the richest shops the Devil
has, for devising of bloody attempts) are not half so powerful, all the
Stratagems, the gunne-shotte and the powder that Hell can help them unto, are
not so forcible, nor so likely to interrupt the peace and happiness of our
State and Kingdom, as our own sins are, these only (our sins I mean)
are the enemies that are most like to ring our knels and proclaim our
Funerals: These only (our sins I mean) are the Edomites which are most like
to make a short cut in our peace, to set a sudden stop and period to our
prosperity, to make a crack in our hope, to alter the gracious aspect of the
heavens, to stint the influence of Gods gracious favor, to procure our woe,
and to give our whole State, our whole Kingdom, a blow that can never be
healed. Give me leave therefore for closure of the point, to exhort you (Right
Honorable) and all the rest, in the name of God, now at last to bethink your
selves of some remedy: God has put a sword of authority in your hand, for no
other purpose but to strike at sin; if yet you suffer it to rust in the
sheath (I am not afraid to tell you) that either you are afraid to quarrel
with sin, or else you be are it some good will your self; or else you have
but malt hearts, and white livers, and cold constitutions, ready to faint and
shrink in the Lords cause: and so by your means sin shall have a continual
Spring, no Autumn, not one leaf of it fall, but our Land shall feel a
continual Autumn and falling from its ancient glory, but see no Spring; and a
continual Winter, vexed with the storms and shewers of heavens displeasure,
but never see nor feel the warmenesse of Summer. Strike then at the root of
sin, for sin strikes at the root, and shakes the foundation of our Land: But
if our reverend Judges suffer him that sits upon the Bench, to wrong him
that stands below the Bar waiting for justice; the^ let him know that he
maintains a sin, and then we all know that he does his best to ruinate our
Land. If the Gentry grow rich and potent by turning Tenants out of doors, by
depopulation, by clipping or selling the Levites portion, then let them know
that they maintain a sin, and then we all know they do their best to ruinate
this Land: If Merchants and men of Trade grow rich and powerful by fraud and
cheating, these also be underminers of our State, they do their best to ruinate
this Land. Good Lord what will become of us, when foul sins in this City
become rich professions, and yet they are the Mothes that are eating, they are
the Cankers that are fretting, they are the Vermin that are undermining both
our Church and Kingdom. The sum of all is this, if we continue in our
ancient course and trade of sin, it is as sure as if God had sealed it, we
shall be either made a prey unto our enemies, or have our flesh so full of Gods
poisoned arrows, that it were better for us to die then to live: Let it then
be our joint and greatest care, to empty our houses, to cleanse our streets,
to weed the cockle and darnell out of this Land, that God may be pleased long
and long, to continue his true Religion, our peerless King, and this little
Kingdom, in peace and happiness. Remember what I say, and I say it again:
Let it be your care (Right Honorable) to strike at the root of sin in the
City: Let our reverend Judges strike at the root of sin in the Courts, on
their Benches, in their Circuites: Let my Brethren of the Ministry, strike at
the root of sin in their charges: Let every man that cares for Sion, that loves
our Nation, that favors Religion, that wishes the glory of our Lord to be
immortal, that has a true English and a Christian heart, fling one stone at
the face, make one wound in the forehead of sin; and I beseech God that the
heavens may give you good success, and that the Lord may be with you, all you
valiant men: And so I should come somewhat to the particular crimes whereof
Israel is accused.

All which sins are reduceable to two heads: some are privative in the first,
viz. Want of Mercy, etc. some positive in the second verse, viz Swearing, etc.
But before I adventure this maine Ocean observe by the way; Neglect of duties
enjoined is no small sin.
That the neglect of a duty commanded, displeases God as well as the
committing of sins prohibited; seeing this controversy betwixt God and Israel,
arose not only from the positive sins, wherein they committed things
forbidden, but from the privative also, wherein they were careless of duties
enjoined. God cursed Meroz, not for fighting against the people of God, but
because they did not assist them against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. Dives fried in
hell, not for robbing, but for not releeuing Lazarus, Luke 16. The unprofitable
servant was cast (...), into utter darkness, not for spending, but for not
bestowing his Masters talent. The sieve foolish Virgins were shut out of doors,
not for abuse in wasting, but for wanting of Oil. And the wicked shall be
condemned at the last day, not for reauing the meat from the hungry, but for
not feeding them; not only for dislodging the stranger, but for not
entertaining him; not only for stripping the naked out of his clothes, but for
not clothing him, not only for wronging the sick and comfortless, but for not
visiting, and for not comforting of him, Mat. 25. Vice and Virtue are
contraries which want a Medium, and therefore the absence of the one in subiect^
capaci, argues the presence of the other; so that if we be destitute of virtue,
then are we attended with troops of vices. If our houses be clean swept and
empty of spiritual graces, then they are convenient lodgings for unclean
spirits: If we be not graced with knowledge, then are we mufled and blinded
with ignorance: If void of faith, we are clothed with infidelity; If once we
give over doing good, then we prostitute our selves to all ungodliness. And
therefore the neglect of a duty which is enjoined, being always accompanied
with some bolts and scarres of fouler sins, is sufficient matter both of
enditement and of judgment, whenever the Lord shall summon us to appear
before him.

A special caveat for us, we are not tainted with the continual flux or
bloody issue of such sins as would make us odious in the world; or because we
break not with violence, into the outward act of such sins as are monstrous,
and deserve the ce^sure of the Law. For God has not only forbidden the evil,
but commanded the good: What if thou steal not from thy brother, yet if thou
open not thy hand to succor him, thou art a robber? What if thou do neither
lienor swear, yet if thou make not thy mouth a glorious Organ, and thy tongue
a golden Trumpet, to Preach and proclaim his love and mercy, thou art a deep
and a round offender? What if no man can condemn thee for any evil, yet
unless God and thy own conscience shall commend thee for some good thou haste
wrought, I tremble to tell thee how far thou art from the Kingdom of God. The
Judge may not bless himself in this, that he never hindered the poor, for if
he have not furthered the^; nor in this, that he never kindled suites and
contentions, for if he have not labored to suppress and smother them, he
has but a disloyal heart, and the Lord will one day be quit with him for it.
The Landlord may not bless himself in this, that he never wrung nor gript
the bowels of his tenants, for if he have not succored and protected them;
Nor in this, that he never wronged the Church, for if he have notpropt and
streng thened it, his zeal has been but cold, the Lord will one day be
quits with him for that. The Pastor that has the charge (I will not say the
cure of souls, seeing many have the charge, who never have care of discharging
their duties) may not bless himself in this, that he never seduced his people
out of the way, for if he have not painefully instructed them in the right way;
nor in this, that he never did the^ wrong, for if he have not watched over
them to do the^ good, their blood shall be required at his hand, and the Lord
will be quits with him for that. Let it be the shame of those that sit in
darkness, and are proud of their ignorance, to say they have as good souls, and
hope to be saved as well as any, because they do no man any harm; but for us who
may sit all day long at the feet of some good Gamaliel, and every hour of the
day may hear some Paul Preaching unto us; not only renounce the evil, but do
the good; not only cease to do evil, but learn to do well; not only abjure
carnal and sensual delights, the husks and mast whereon the worldling is
like to surfeit, but also make a covenant with our eyes, that they sport
themselves with looking only upon the beauty of heaven; with our affections,
to wed themselves only to the joys of heaven. Be covetous, I would have thee
so, so that thou covet no treasure but spiritual: Be ambitious, I would have
thee so, so thou affect no honor but immortal; Renounce all kind of peace,
wherein thou find no peace of conscience; Discard all joys, wherein thou
feel not the joy of the Holy Ghost: Hoc fac and vines, do this and thou
shall live in the fear, thou shall die in the favor, thou shall rest in the
peace, thou shall rise in the power of God the Father, and help to make up the
consort in singing of Halleluiah, Halleluiah, all glory, and honor, and
praise, and immortality, be ascribed unto the Lamb, and to him that sits
upon the Throne for evermore. And now I am come without further defrauding of
your expectation, to the particular grieuances whereof God complains; and the
first of those is Want of Truth.

The Hebrew word Emeth, says Zanchius, signifies that kind of fidelity,
which Tully called, Dictorum conuentorum constantiam, and this truth sometimes
respects the heart, and is called simplicity and integrity, sometime the
outward carriage in word or speech, and is called truth; sometimes the works
and actions, and then is called justice and upright dealing: so that when the
Lord charge them with want of Truth, his meaning is, there was no integrity,
or simplicity, in their hearts, therefore there was hypocrisy; no verity in
their speeches, therefore lying; no justice in their actions, therefore
fraudulent and deceitful dealing. I will wrappe up all in this one conclusion.

All dissimulation in the heart, First particular grieuance.
and lying in the tongue, and deceit in the outward action, betwixt man and
man, makes God and man at odds and variance. The, first which is dissimulation
in the heart, proved from the example of Ananias and Saphira, why did thou
conceive this in thy heart? (...), Acts 5.4. The second which is lying in the
tongue, excludes from heaven, Apoc. 22. The last, which is deceit in the
outward action, is condemned, Leu. 19. Dissimulation in the heart is the badge
and cognizance of such deplored wights as shall never see the face of God with
comfort, Job. 13.16. Lying in the tongue is the badge and cognizance of the
children of the devils getting, John 8.44. Deceit in the outward action is the
badge and cognizance of him that despises his God: nay, of him that shall
bear the wrath and vengeance of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. It is most true which
Syracides observed, Animaquae dissimulat, accelerat miseria^, the soul that
dissembleth increases his pain, Ecclesiastic. 2. and true which Bernard
observed out of Wisdom Os quod mentitur perdit animam' the tongue that lies,
Wisd. 1.11.
murthereth the soul, and true which Moses observed, Manus iniustitiae (...),
the hand that deals falsely is abomination, Deu. 25. This is Gods indictment
which you have heard; wilt please you to hear the verdict which the Jury of
the Prophets brings in against them?

Esaias and Jeremy, as fore-men in the name of all the rest, have penned it thus:
Every one of them is an hypocrite and a dissembler, Isaiah 9.16. And Jeremy
thus: They have no courage for the truth: Jeremy 9.3. This is the verdict which
the Grand-Iury of greater Prophets have brought against them; and the verdict
of the Petty-Iury, I mean the lesser Prophets, is the very same, registered by
Michah, as prolocutor for the rest, There is none righteous amongst them, every
man hunteth his brother with a net, Micah. 7.2. Thus the Jury has found them
guilty: will you now hear how the Law proceeds, when the Judge passed this
sentence, Lying lips are abomination to the Lord, Prou. 12.22. He shows he had
a whip prepared for liars, when he plagued Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. he
showed his love to all dissemblers, when he dismissed all deceitful dealers
out of his house, Psalm. 101. He showed he had a whip laid up for all
deceivers, and the lightest of these is a doom too heavy for them to bear.

See then the eminent and apparent danger whereunto men of all estates wrest
themselves, truth, they make a breach betwixt them and God that can not be
closed, they sow such seed of debate and contention betwixt them and God, as
cannot be covered; they challenge such a dreadful war betwixt them and God as
will never be ended, till the sword of the Almighty has wearied it self, and
the arrows of God have made themselves dru^k, and death the Axe of God have
surfeted it self with blood: and yet, were there a privy search to go through
each Maeander and corner of the earth to seek for truth; it would be as hard
to find, as honesty was in Athens, when Diogenes sought it with a candle at
noone-tide, or goodness in Jerusalem, when there was neither Priest nor People
that executed judgment, Ier. 5.1. Terras Astraea reliquit, truth has taken
her self unto her wings, she has hid her self and will not be found. send
privy Search to all the shops of Merchants and men of Trade, and when you have
done your best, you may write this upon the doors; Has aedes Astraea reliquit,
Had truth been one of our apprentices, we should nener have sold our wares so
dear if we had more truths in our mouths, we should have less money in our
coffers: send privy Search into our courts of Law, and when you have done, you
may write this upon the Bar, Has seeds Astraea reliquit, truth has abated
too much of our fees: we should have been but beggars if we had not banished
it: send privy Search amongst our Statesmen, and when you have done, you may
write this upon their gates for the world to read Astraea and domes and domines
reliquit, in this house truth resignes to policy, dissimulation is the ready
way to rich preferment: send privy Search to seek for truth in the very
Pulpit, which should be the Arc of Truth and Custoder of Gods sacred Oracles,
and when you have done, you may set this on many Churches and Pulpit doors,
Veritas exulat, truth is brought under hatches, either she is ashamed, or else
she dares not show her head; whiles some for raking a little profit, others for
fear of men's displeasure, sow pillows under the elbowes of great personages,
and suffer loud sins to escape like the adulteress in the Gospel: because
they are graced with greatness and authority. Seeing then our Tradesmen sell
truth for coin, our Lawyers for fees, and our Statesmen for preferment, and
our Clergy to please a Patron, how can we think the Lord will not come to
visit us for these things, and his soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
what then remains but that we either call truth home, which we have banished by
the law of Ostracisme, that it may be an apprentice to our Merchants and men of
trade, a Counselor, and Sergeant at the Law, a Retainer and Pensioner to our
me^ of state, and Usher to all the Clergy of the Land, or else look every
day for Gods arrest upon us; the heavens will not still repriue their judgments,
the Sergeants of GODS wrath will not always sleep, all the vials which God
holds in his hand, are not full of balm and oil to heal and supple; some
of them are running over with gall and addle, some ready to vent the lees, and
sowrest dregs of Gods displeasure upon this Land, Quae semper imitatur eorum
facta quorum exitum et exitium perhorrescit, which shrinks and trembles at
Isreal's fearful sentence; but makes neither stop nor rub at Isreal's crying
sins which wrings her hands, and knockes her breast so often, as she either
hears or reads the dismal Sentence which God pronounced against Israel, but
will neither weep nor cry, nor shed a tear for her self, although she lie
rotting in the same cage of uncleanness, and foming in the same menstruous
blood which made Israel so loathsome unto God. Let it therefore be the care of
our Magistrates to fetch home and encourage truth; of our Judges to defend and
support the truth; of the Clergy to preach and speak the truth; of our godly
and religious Citizens to lodge and harbor truth: let us show our selves to be
true Nathanaels, in whom there is no guile, and put in practice the Prophets
rule, Zach. 8.16. Speak ye every man the truth unto his neighbor, and love
not deceit, for that is the thing that the Lord hates. And so I proceed to the
second particular grieuance whereof Israel is indicted in the next word, Ve en
chesed, No mercy; which word chesed comprehends in it all works of Charity
and Christianity, but I cannot insist upon explication, the point is this.

Want of mercy is a sin that cries loud, Second parti cular grieuance
and knocks hard at heaven for vengeance, I shall not need prodigally to
spend either breath, or time in strengthening or supporting this clause of
truth. S. James has put the matter out of difference, Ia. 2.13. There shall be
judgment merciles to him that shows no mercy; it was want of mercy that
called for a weltering Ocean to swallow the host of Pharao, Ex. 15. It was
want of mercy that caused Gideon to harrow and slice the flesh of the men of
Succoth with thorns and briars, Judge. 8.7. it was want of mercy that hazarded
the destruction of all Nabals posterity, 1. Sam. 25. It was want of mercy that
opened the belly and bosom of hell, to devour and intombe the soul of
Dives, Luke 16. It was want of mercy (says Plutarch) that brought the men of
Delphos so low on their knees, Plutar. de sera numinis vind.
that they were enforcod to proclaim it by the mouth of criers, through all the
markets and assemblies of Greece, that whosoever would, should come and be
avenged on the^ for the death of Aesope. It was want of mercy (says Beatus
Rhenanus) that made Hatto that infamous clark and Bishop of Moguntia, Beatus
Rhenanus.
to be chased to death by an Army of Rattes. It was want of mercy toward the
little sop and handful of seed, which God had planted in Goshen, that made all
the land of Egypt to rock, and the pillars thereof to grow like the cracking of
a decayed vessel, being ouerwaued by the undaunted roughness of some violent
and uncouth storms; all of these iumping with that of Syracides, Eccles.
35.18. The Lord will not be slack, the Almighty will not tarry, till he have
smitten in sunder the loins of the unmerciful.

And have not we deserved to drink our bellies full of these waters of Marah
as well as they? may not we tune all our Songs upon this note, Help Lord? and
upon this, There is no mercy? our hands are dried and withered, help Lord:
merciful men are gone out of the world, Esaias 57. Our Land begins to ring, and
our ears are filled with such ruthful and sad complaints as these, Help
Lord, there is no mercy. Our Church bemones her self thus, Help Lord, there
is no mercy. And is not her complaint as just as any, when so many hungry
souls like poor Lazarus, would gladly gather up the crumbs of a spiritual
benedictio^, from the mouth of their Pastor, but cannot have it, when so many
zealous christians in the land, would sit all the day long at the feet of some
Gamaliel, and gladly step into Bethesda; but either their Angel is from home,
or else he is not able to trouble the water for them. Our Commons do bemone
themselves thus, Help Lord there is no mercy: And is not their complaint as
just, when Landlords are become tyrants, and Tenants be made but slaves to
serve their turn? and Naioth in Ramah (I mean the Nurceries of Arts and
Sciences) bemones her self thus, Help Lord, there is no mercy: And is not her
complaint as just as any, when so many golden wits, likely to have proved the
gracious ornaments and pride of their mother; are daily enforced to try their
fortune some other way, being utterly discoraged for want of maintenance? and
our courts of Justice bemone themselves thus, Help Lord, there is no mercy:
and is not their complaint as just as any? when the Lawyer, who should be an
Atropos to cut the thread, feeds his Client with golden hopes and sugared
words, and proves a Clotho to spin, and a Lachesis to draw in length the
threeds of contention: what christian heart would not indite both bitter and
tart Iambicks? or whose bowels would not yerne and groan within him? to see how
the Engrosser of this worst Age, employes and sets his best wits on tenters, to
join house to house, land to land, and field to field, till there be not left
a Cottage nor a Corner for the poor to dwell in; not a Common nor Pasture for
them to feed in, and if it were possible, scarce wholesome air enough for them
to breathe in. Whose heart would not boil and melt within him, to see how the
worlds Alchymist wrastles and strives to turn every corner of his field into a
beutifull garden? every little garden into a glorious paradise? every little
cottage into a palace? their clothes and garments into robes? their tables
into shrines? their chests and coffers into rich minerals of gold and silver?
and all this by turning good housekeepers into beggars, and tenants out of
doors. Whose bowels will not roll within him, to see how great men take away the
childre^s bread, whereon both church and common wealth should feed, and cast it
unto whelps, that they may be nourished? unto kites and hawks, that they may
be stufft and gorged in their mews while Christ Jesus in his distressed
members, has his face withered with hunger, and his feet parched with cold,
and his stomach grated, nay girt, and pasted unto his sides, for want of
succor, for want of sustenance? Whose heart would not bleed to see many
houses, Ovid Metam. lib. 2.
Tecta sublimibus alta columnis; goodly and tall as Babel, but not an alms at
their doors, scarce smoke within them? to see such spacious barnes, so little
kindness? to see how that in swallowing the blessings of God, every one of us
is like the monster Briareus? we have an hundred hands to receive, but in
relieuing and supplying the want of other, we have but one hand, and that
dried and withered, like the hand of Jeroboam, 1. King. 13. How then can we
think that the Lord will not visit us for these things, and his soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? They that should be a staff unto the feeble,
are of all others the readiest to bring them upon their knees: they that should
be eyes to the blind, are the foulest moates and beams, to put out the eyes
of them that see: they that are ordained to cheer the faces of the poor, are
the only men to grind and harrowe them: they that should stand in the gap,
like Moses, to save them from all annoyance, are of all others the most forward
to feed them with wormwood and the water of affliction, as Ahab did Micaiah
the Prophet, 1. Ki. 22. And shall not the Lord be avenged on such a people as
this? wherefore (beloved) let me try if I can persuade you in the words of S.
Bernard, Bern de modo been viuendi.
Animae tuae gratu^ feceris si misericors fueris, thou shall do well to thy
soul by showing mercy: in the words of S. Ambrose: Ambros. 1. Tim. p. 8.
Tract. 5. in Johan.
Nil magis comme^dat animu^ christianum, Nothing that God respects so much as
mercy: in the words of S. Augustine: Charitas tua viscera percutiat: Be ye
rich in the works of mercy. Prouocaris Christian, prouocaris a vidua in
certamen: the poor Widow of Sarepta, must tutor thee to be merciful; Job must
read thee a Lecture of mercy, who had been both eye unto the blind, and
feet unto the lame, and a father to the poor, Job 29. Let me beseech you in
the words of the Prophet, Zachary 7.9. Show mercy every man unto his brother:
let me beseech you in the words of Peter, 1. Peter 3. Love as brethren, and be
merciful: In the words of Paul, Coloss. 3.12. Now therefore as the elect of God
holy and beloved, (...), put on the bowels of compassion; let your mouths be
filled with talking, your hearts with contriuing, your hands with working the
works of mercy while you live, that when your life shall be run out of
breathe, you may hear the sentence of blessedness, Mat. 5. Blessed are the
merciful, for the Lord has plenty of mercy in store for them. And so I come
to the third particular grieuance: No knowledge.

In which words (says Zanchius) we are to note; first, Third particular
grieuance. Crimen and exaggeratio criminis.
the crime; secondly, the aggrauation: The crime, they were (...), they had no
knowledge: Which is as much as if he thus had said; you are so far from
serving me, that you know not whether I am your God or no. What do I telling
you of want of truth or want of mercy? sins of the second Table, not so
immediately against my honor. There is a worse fault in you then both these,
there is a sin against the first Table, which does more nearly impeach my
Majesty, and that the very root and stem of all sin, of all profaneness,
You have no knowledge: the aggrauation is from the generality and proceeding of
the sins, he says not there was no knowledge of God in you, but in tota terra,
in the whole land. It was a universal contagio^ that infected all the ten
tribes: much might hence be gathered, but me thinks the point that is most
obserueable should be this.

Ignorance, Ignorance the mother of sin.
in things concerning God, is the mother and root of most fearful and
enormous sins, and therefore it is that all sins be called (...), and bear
the name of ignorance, Heb. 9.7. Ignorance was the natural mother that brought
Israel so many sins into the world; or else God himself shot short of truth,
Ps. 95. My people err in their hearts because they have not known my ways.
Ignorance was the natural mother that brought the Jews so many goodly sins,
and filled their Country with sinners, or else Saint Matthew has done them
wrong, You are deceived not knowing the Scriptures, Math. 22. Ignorance made
them crucify the Lord of Life, or else Saint Luke has ouerreached himself,
Acts 3.15. It was ignorance that made them become proud Iusticiaries,
depending wholly and relying upon their own righteousness, because they knew
not the righteousness of God, or else Saint Paul has censured them too hard,
Romans 10.3. Ignorance was the blind guide that led the Gentiles to idolatry,
Gal. 4.8. And Ignorance of things concerning God, set Paul's head on working of
mischief against the Church of God, 1. Tim. 1. and this is a disease so
infectious, that it poisons whatsoever good thing lies in the same womb with
it: It poisons Religion with Idolatry; it infects devotion and zeal with
superstition; it makes hope to swell with presumption; and turns every
symptom of fear into desperation and horror: Causa causa and causa causati.
And if Logic that is old be not worn quite out of date, the^ Ignorance
which is proved and convicted to be the prime cause of sin, cannot choose but
usher and make way for punishment. I appeal for proof to the Oracles of God,
where I find it punished sometimes with captivity, Esaias 5.13. My people is
gone into captivity because they wanted knowledge: Sometimes with desolation,
Esaias 27. Sometimes with destruction, Hosea 4.6. It makes subject to the curse.
Ps. 79.6. It makes strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. It debarres
from the life of glory: For they that know not one foot of the way to heaven,
how is it possible they should pass through so many winding Maeanders, and
perplexed passages, unto those fortunate Islands of ineffable comfort? Lastly,
Ignorance makes liable to the vengeance of God in the day of judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. He shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance unto them that
know not God.

And therefore the more to blame was the Council of Trent, Bethshemesh for
looking into the Arc, 1. Sam. 6. and Pius the fourth Pope of that name, Pius 4.
for censuring the sacred Oracles of Heaven amongst books prohibited, marking
them in the forehead with the stroke of Noli me tangere, God has not
dedicated the Bible to the Laity; Hosius.
and of Hosius a father in the Trent conspiracy, that it is fitter for women
to meddle with the Distaffe, then with the word of God. Suffer me to draw a
little blood out of this vein; for whatsoever they do or can pretend, it is
evident out of ancient Stories that in the Primitive Church the word of God was
not only permitted to the Lay people to read, but also that translations were
provided of set purpose, that they might read it. We read in Socrates,
Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 24.
that they were translated by Vlphilas Bishop of the Goths, that the
Barbarians might learn them; by Methodius into the Slauonian tongue. Chrysostom.
Hom. 1. in Johan.
S. Chrysostom in his first Homily upon John, remembers the Syrian, the
Egyptian, the Indian, the Persian, the Ethiopian, and many others: And
Theodoret in his first Book, Theod. de curan. Graecorum affectibus lib. 15.
De curandis Graecorum affectibus, will bear us witness that in his time the
Bible was turned into all Languages in the world; and what one thing is more
common among the Fathers, then often to be calling upon the people to get
themselves Bibles, to read and examine them: Then the Laity was acquainted
with the Text of Scripture as well as the learned, and then the doctrine of
Hosius was not hatched: So we read in Socrates, Socr. lib. 5. cap. 8.
of Nectarius, that of a Judge, and one of the Laity, he was made Bishop of
Constantinople; by the consent of an 150 Bishops; And of Saint Ambrose, Socrat.
l. 4. cap. 25.
who was translated from the government of a Province to be Bishop of
Millain: Of Gregory the father of Nazianzene; Of Thalassim, Bishop of
Caesarea, that from private men, they were removed to sit at the stern of the
Church; which shows how painful and how indefatigably diligent they had been
in the Word of God, and in the search of Scriptures, that being but Laymen,
yet were supposed able to sustain the office and charge of Bishops. We read
in Eusebius, of Origin, Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 6. cap. 2.
that he was trained up in the Scriptures from a child, that he got them
without book, and was wont to question with his father Leonides about the
difficult meaning of some places: Of Macrina foster mother to S. Basil, Basil.
Epist 74.
that she proposed unto her self the example of Timothy, and trained him up
in learning the Scriptures from his infancy. S. Basil himself is our recorder
in his 74. Epistle; so we read in Nicephorus, Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 14.
his 8. book and 14. chapter, of Paphnusius a Layman, and yet so renowned for
his singular knowledge in Divinity, that he was accounted worthy to bear a
part, and be no small helper in the Council of Nice: And who knows not that
S. Hierome directs many of his Epistles unto godly women, Hierom.
highly commending them for their labor in the Scriptures? Or who knows not
that S. John himself writ his second Epistle to his elect Lady? Ioh. Epist. 2.
which Epistle is Canonical Scripture: And is it not a shame to think that
he would send her an Epistle which she might not read? It was indeed the
reproach which Julian the Apostata objected against the Christians; and from
him it seems that Hosius and Andradius, and our blind Romish guides have
borrowed it: By all which it appears, that this muffling of men's eyes, which
the Trent men have devised, is but a novelty and a trick to win some credit to
their Legend, thevery shop and forge of lies; and under the veil and mist of
Ignorance, to send whole droues and legions of souls to hell. But for you
(beloved) I shall beseech God in the words of S. Paul, and I beseech you use
the same prayer for your selves; That the word of God may dwell in you
plentifully in all Wisdom; that the book of God may never be wrested out of
your hand; that he would open to you the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
which there are hid; that you may be like Apollos powerful, and like
Tertullus learned in the Scriptures, that you may relish that heavenly Manna,
that you may long after the sincere milk of the Gospel, that you may perform
indeed as much as God gave Joshua in charge, Josh. 1.8. That this book of God
may not depart out of your mouths, that you meditate therein day and night,
that you observe and do all that is written therein; for thus you shall make
your ways prosperous, you shall make your sorrows easy, your comforts many,
your virtues eminent, your conscience quiet, your life holy, your death
comfortable, your election sure, your salvation certain; and so I make post
haste to those five sins which I called positive, whereof the first is swearing.

Swearing, 1 Positive sin. Zanchius. Polanus. Mercer. Ribera out of Hier. Error
Manich. and Anabap. Zanchius in 3. praeceptu^ ex Gratiano.
the Hebrew word Aloh may either signify cursing and execration, as Zanchius;
or Perjury, and foreswearing, as Polanus; or slandering and detraction, as
Mercer would have it. I rather follow the exposition of Ribera out of Saint
Hierome, that here it is used to signify rash and idle swearing; so that here
is no shroud for that doting humor of Anabaptists, and Manichees, which they
would gladly rear and build out of the fifth of Matthew, Swear not at all: and
out of the fifth of James the 12. My brethren above all things swear not.
Gratian (says Zanchius in his exposition upon the third commandment) will
help us with a lift out of the Fathers to answer them, Damnantur a Christo,
and Apostolo iuramenta temeraria, quae vulgo habentur in colloquijs, non ea
quae coram Magistratu habentur in iudicijs. Our Savior forbids common and idle
swearing in our ordinary talk and upon slight occasion, but he forbids not the
lawful use of an oath before the Magistrate, which elsewhere he allows, and
calls the Judge and Palaemon to make an end of all contention, Heb. 6.16. This
then needs must be the point.

Rash and idle swearing being not performed, in justice, in truth, and in
judgment, is such a sin as will make a whole Land to mourn and shake. The
truth whereof is most apparent in the 23 of Jeremy at the 10. Because of oaths
the Land mourns: To which we may add that black doom gone out against
profane swearers in the fifth of Zachary, The curse of God shall lay siege unto
the house of him that swears, until it have consumed the timber, and the
stones thereof: And that sentence of Syracides, Eccle. 23.11. He that uses
swearing shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall never be
removed from his house. It seems this doctrine has been long known and
Preached, and this sin also cried down by the ancient Laws of most Nations in
the world: Johannes Boaemus de moribus Gentium lib. 1. cap. 5. Boamus l. 2.
cap. 9.
for amongst the Egiptians whosoever was convicted for a common swearer was to
loose his head: amongst the Scythians it was the loss and forfeiture of all
his goods: amongst the Romans the swearer was to be thrown with violence
from the top of the rock Tarpeius. And this was the cause (says Plutarch) that
they would not suffer their children to swear by the name of Hercules within
doors, Quaest. Romam.
but enjoined them to go abroad, and there deliberate of their oaths. Amongst
the Grecians, Graeci.
the swearer was to loose his ears: Iudaei in Talmud.
the Jews were wont to rent their clothes when they heard the name of God
profaned; which if we should do in our days, we should rent our clothes so
often as we hear men spewing black and fearful oaths, one suite would not
last us one day; nay, sometimes not hang so long upon our backs, till our
flesh or skins were warm within us. Yea, the very Turks, Boaemus de moribus
Gentium lib. 2. c. 11.
as some report of them, will stop their ears at the hearing of an oath. And
it is memorable of one of the Kings of France, Rhenan in annot. in Tertul.
who (as Beatus Rhenanus records) made this Statute; that Swearers should have
their mouths seared with burning irons. And one of the Kings of this Land, out
of a religious care to prevent the doom which the heavens threatened for this
sin; ordained that a mulet and forfeiture should be exacted of every one that
was heard or noted to swear within his Court. To shut up this proof, swearing
is a sin that brings the wrath of God, not only upon the party that swears
though he be sure not to escape, nor only upon the house where he dwells, as the
sin of Ely for want of due correction upon Hophni and Phinehas: but upon the
country, as the sin of Achan brought wrath upon Israel, and the sin of the men
of Gibeah, hazarded the ruin of the whole tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 20. and yet
woe be unto us, for our land may truly take up that mournful complaint of
the Prophet Esaias, The whole Land is sick, and the whole heart is heavy with
this sin: and redouble often and often the Elegy of Jeremy: Because of Oaths
our Land mourns.

Our Magistrates that should put bridles in the lips of others, Magistrates
tainted with this sin.
do not, or else they dare not, make any Laws against this sin, for fear
lest they should prove nets to catch themselves. Most of our noble stemmes, The
Nobility.
to show their undaunted boldness, (in open railing upon God him self) do show
more base courage in out-vying of oaths then ever they are like to do in
martial feats in Arms. GOD has vouchsafed to houor them more then others,
and they dishon or him, and endanger the honor of this land, as much as any.
Those that should prove the hope and life of the Gentry, The Gentry.
make it the usual and common figure in their Rhetorike, not to give their
best friend a word, til first they have given the name of God a wound; an oath
is the proeme of all their speeches, and compleme^t of their discourse; there
is not the least error in casting of a die, but it must cost our Savior a
stab; he will not loose one penny by his gaming, but Christ Jesus must pay for
it, it shall cost him the staining and impeachment of his dearest houour; if
his neighbor wrong him, although but in show, by fearful oaths he will be
revenged on GOD for that; if GOD will be so merciful as to crown him with some
unexpected blessing, then he shows his contentment with decads and pages of
oaths. This is the Dialect wherein GOD must be thanked for that, it is most
true of them which Quintilian lib. 1. Instit. said of his pupil: No^dum prima
exprimit verba, etiam iurare didicit: an oath is the first English which he
learneth; Et qui jurat cum repit quid non adultus faciet? If they can swear in
their cradles, they will shake a Land with oaths when they are old. Citizens.
Our Citizens which should be samplars for the world to imitate, will not stick
to sell their souls, so they may sell their wares with it: but is it not a
miserable and sorry bargain, when for every trifling gain, not worth the
naming, they give their souls to boot, which cannot be redeemed with a thousand
worlds. If you chance to come near the Court, Courtiers.
you would think you were entered upon a stage, and come into a school of
blasphemy: if you walk into the streets of the city, you would think you were
among the courtiers scholars, who having often heard their lectures of
swearing, were now boldly and readily repeating them. Cast eye upon the Country
swain, Countrymen.
and there is not the silliest catiffe, howsoever defeated of all the
endowments both of grace and nature, but is wise enough to practice this sin;
he that by nature is most rude and barbarous in speaking, can be eloquent and
rhetorical enough in swearing, that howsoever they are excelled by Courtiers
and Citizens in variety of attire, yet they disdain and scorn, that they
should put them down, either in the complement and bravery, or in the variety
of new fashioned oaths. Thus do men of all estates turn worse then Jews, in
crucifying the Lord of glory, and ripping their Sauiors wounds to bleed
again; for the Jews crucified him but once, blasphemous swearer, thou
crucifiest him almost at every word thou speak; the Jews sinned of
ignorance, not knowing that he was the Messiah, but thou of wilfulness; the
Jews called for Pilate to crucify him, but thou ungracious murderer wilt do
it thy self, and instead of cross and nails, thou rentest and grindest him
to pieces betwixt thy teeth. This dreadful name of God, and this sweet name
of Jesus, is all the Evidence, and all the Charter thou have to show, for thy
right and title in heaven. If this prevail not, thou art a spark of Tophet,
and a firebrand of Hell: and will thou for all this, tear in pieces this
dreadful name? will thou rent thy own Charter, and by blotting this name,
blot thy own name out of the book of Life? Suppose there could not be found
any other sin in all our Land, suppose swearing had not any other sin to bear
it company, suppose there were no foreign enemy in the world to annoy or
invade us, yet the frequent use of this infernal dialect and language of the
Devil, would prove an engine and rampire strong enough to batter our walls,
a sword keen enough to martyr our flesh, an arrow swift enough to drink up
our blood, a disease sharp and desperate enough, to make a flawe in our
estate, a breach in our peace, and a scarre in our Church, a shaking ague, and
hot fever, sure enough to shake our Land from one end unto the other; and
therefore, if you respect and tender the peace and welfare of this kingdom; if
you bear any love to this Nation, if you affect the health of Jerusalem, if
you wish from your hearts that the flourish and happiness of our state and land
may be immortal, if you have any zeal or courage for the Lord of Hosts, then
gird your swords upon your thighs, arm your selves with courage and
resolution, to stop the mouth of this crying sin: It is a proud sin, that
scorns to quarrel with any under God himself: It is a stowt sin, that is
always heauing at the strength and foundation of our Land. O suffer it not to
walk in your streets, to sit at your boards, to tarry in your shops to jet in
your Markets without a check: why should this above all other sins stoop and
submit it self to no law? why should this above al other sins be subject to no
censure? O that some good Phinehas who is zealous of the name of God, would
break us the ice, and take in hand to purchase and procure from our Senate,
some wholesome law, some sharp and cutting statute, that might snape the
growth, and stanch the bloody flux of this heinous impiety; verily GOD would
say of such a man as he said of Phinehas, Numb. 25. This good man that was
zealous for my sake, has turned away mine anger from you; surely happy should
be that day, and immortal should be the memory, and honored for ever should
be that man, by whose zealous endeavors so good a work should be effected;
their memories should never perish, but wheresoever there should be but mention
of their names, there also the good work that they have done, should be spoken
of for a memorial of them; and would God we might be so happy as once to see
that day. And so I come to the second sin, which is Lying, wherein I dare pass
my word I will be brief.

Cachesh, howsoever in Kal, The second positive sin.
it may signify to wax faint, and be without courage, yet in Piel, as here it
is used, it signifies to lie; and is by Martyr out of Augustine defined to be
either the uttering of some untruth, or the uttering of a truth untruly, with
intent and purpose to deceive. Aquinas secunda secundae in his 110. question,
August. de mendacio.
makes eight kinds of lies, but S. Augustine more concisely comprizes them al
in three. The first for profit, which is called officiosum; another for
merime^t, which is called iocosum; the third of malice, which he calls
perniciosum. The first kind of lie takes hold of those, that for a little lucre
send truth a packing. The second takes hold of those, who affecting to make
others sport, set their wits on working. The third taks hold of those, that use
to whet their tongue with gall, to wreacke their malice. And there is none of
these, either so mincing or so neat and handsome, but it is a foul and
loathsome sin. For howsoever Plato in his second Dialogue de Republica; and
Quintilian in his twelfth Book of Institutions; and Aquinas in the place
beforecited, at the 4. Article, can find in their hearts to wink at such lies
as are full of wit and good conceit; and S. Jerome himself, would father some
officious lies, even upon the Scripture, from the example of the Egiptian
Midwiues, Exodus 1. and of Rahab, Joshua 2. and of Abraham, Genesis 12. and of
Jacob, Genesis 27. Yet seeing S. Augustine a better scholar then Plato; and
Solomon a better Orator then Quintilian; and both Job and Paul, better
Commentators then either Aquinas, or Saint Jerome, as I hope will take my part,
I shall not shrink nor retract what I have said; that there is no kind of lie,
be it never so neately trimd, and wittily contrived, All sorts of lies be
sins.
never so likely to prove good and aduantagious, which may not without any
slander be censured and noted for a sin.

For proof whereof, I might appeal to the Essaei among the Jews in Eusebius,
Eusebius. de praep. Eua^gel. lib. 8
his 8. Book de Preparatione Euangelica, and 4. cha. to Damascene in the 3. of
his Paralels: to Chytraeus in a Tract de Iacobi mendacio: to Gerson in his
protestation about the matters of Faith: to Saint Bernard de modo been viuendi,
31. Sermon: Saint Augustine, who of set purpose has answered S. Jerome in his
8. and 9. Epistles: to the laws of the Persians in Plutarch: Plutarch. de
vitando.
to infinite other authorities. But when the Scriptures be plain, I list to
seek no further. Shall Solomon then be judge? I am contented, upon condition
he may be heard to speak out of the 12. of the Proverbs v. 22. for there he
has defined a lie to be abomination in the fight of God. Or if you will hear
him speak out of the 6. of Proverbs v. 17. for there he has pictured a lie
with this mot to upon the face: The sin which God abhors. Which place is not
meant only of the pernicious lie, which is spiced with malice; but also of
merry and conceited lies. For otherwise Solomon has thwarted Hosea, who blackt
it on the head for a sin, to make Princes merry with lies, Hosea 7.3. not only
of the pernicious lie, that is lined and bolstered with gall and rancor, but
also of the officious and profitable lie: otherwise Solomon forgot himself,
when he commands, that upon no terms, that upon no conditions, we should make
sale of truth, Pro. 23. If any lie might merit or plead not guilty, then
surely it should be such a one, as makes for the defense and increase of Gods
glory and honor, and yet even this lie also deserves an Anathema, from the 13
of Job v. 7.9. will you lie for Gods defense? Is it well that one should make a
lie for him? The model of time will not abide any profuse or large discourse,
I therefore epitomize and contract my larger meditations into this brief
sum. The pernicious lie which is of malice, as it has no father but the
devil, so has it no other Patro^ to defend it: the lie for sport and
merriment we have already disabled; and the ground of the officious lie is but
a quick-sand, unable to support such a weighty sin. For say thou lie to help
thy neighbor at a dead lift, perhaps to save his life, a thing that God
commands, this is but a weak supporter; for even in this thou do thy self
more hurt, then thou can do thy neighbor good, Nisi fiat justice and rectis
medijs, P. Martyr de mendacio.
says Martyr unless it be done by lawful and warrantable means. Say thou
intend the benefit of the Church, and by conseque^t Gods greater glory; yet S.
Paul will school thee better, Romans 6.1. Thou may not give way to the
smallest evil, in hope of the greater good to follow thereupo^. If it be
objected, that the Egiptian midwiues lied, and God blessed them; I answer, that
God blessed them not for the lie, but for their faith that wrought in the^ by
love. If it be said that Abraham lied to Pharao, and to Abimelech. I answer, it
is more then can be proved. Indeed he said that Sarah was his sister, and it
was true; for they were the children of the same father, but not of the same
mother, as Abraham himself expounds his own meaning, Ge. 20.12. but he never
denied that she was his wife; Non petit Abraham vt Sarah mentiatur, says
Iunius, Abraham desired her not to lie: what then? S. August. in his 22. book
against Faustus the Maniche, Aug. contra Faust. Manic. lib. 22.
answers it thus: Veritatem voluit celari, non mendacium dici: he bid her not
speak a word but truth, and yet be wary that she told not all that she
knew, a nemine enim id exigitur vt totum depromat quod nouit; Phar ao could not
bind them to reveal the whole truth, says Martyr, in assoyling of this doubt.
If it be said that Jacob lied when he told his father that he was his elder
son Esau; Aquinas answers, secunda secundae quaest. 110. Artic. 3. Aquinus
2. a. 2. ae. q. 110. Art. 3.
that the saying was mystical not untrue, as if he should have said; I am the
elder by grace; or thus, it was Prophetical to show a mystery; Quod minor
populus hoc est Gentium substituendus esset in locum primogeniti hoc est
Iudaeorum; By Esau he meant the Jews, by himself the Gentiles, and his purpose
was to signify that howsoever the Jews were Gods first borne, yet they should
be cast off, and the Gentiles who were the younger brethren, were they to whom
the blessing and the inheritance did belong. But I will dwell no longer on this
point. The closure is this, Si quando loquuti sunt vt homines, peccasse non
diffitebimur: P. Martyr. in locis com. de mendacio.
If they speak these things as men they erred, and we deny it not: Sin vero
afflatu Dei, mirabimur e^rum dicta sed in exemplum non trahemus: If these
things were spoken by the motion and direction of Gods Spirit, we will stand
in admiration of the wisdom of God; yet dare we not make this practice a
pattern for us to imitate, but for all lies we will make bold there to include
them, where the day of judgment without repentance will be sure to find them,
even in the Catalogue and amidst the bedrole of our sins. Set a watch
therefore before thy mouth, and keep the door of thy lips, that thou utter not
a lie; set lock and key upon thy ears, that thou entertain not the voice of
him that tells a lie. For as he that tells the lie, has the devil in his
tongue; so he that hears the lie has the devil in his ear, and quickly it
creeps in at the ear that will never out of the heart while thy breath is in
thee.

The time has already commanded me to take my work out of the Loomes, and to
let the other three sins remain untouched; would God they were also left
unpracticed: nay, it were well if they were not also professed amongst you. This
(beloved) this is the only thing that we the Ministers of God, who come here to
spend our breath, would gladly beg, this onley is the thing that we would
feign beseech with all the bowels of our affections, with our eyes watring,
with our flesh shaking, with our hearts bleeding, with our souls mourning,
with all the strings of our hearts enlarged toward you, that you would not
suffer these sins to dwell amongst you, that now at length you would draw your
swords against sin, which at every corner besieges your City, before it
begin to batter your walls. It is a crastie Sinon, you cannot lodge it within
your gates but with fear and danger of your lives; it is a convicted rebel
against heaven, you may not harbor it, it is a professed traitor against the
peace and quiet of your Land, you cannot entertain it without suspicion of
high treason both against our blessed Savior, and our gracious Sovereign.
Alas beloved, how long, how long, shall the Preacher cry that sin is more to
be feared then any treason, and yet we practice it? How long shall the
Preacher cry that sin is the only Troyan-horse, whose womb can command a
bloody Armado, armed with cruelty and rage to work our overthrow, and yet we
entertain and welcome it? how long shall the Preacher cry in our streets, and
wring it in your ears, that sin is the only makebate betwixt God and us, and
yet we are in league and compact with it? How long shall the Preacher proclaim
this truth, that our Land will never be rid of Priests and Jesuits, the
little Foxes that hinder the growth of the Gospel, til first we have cried down
our sin, and yet we will not leave it? how long shall the Preacher cry, nay,
weary the strings of his tongue, and weary his sides, and break the veins and
the pipes of his heart, with crying that the sin of our Land, that the sin of
our people, and the unthankfulness of our Nation, has taken away the glory
and the mirror of Princes, the staff of our comfort, the joy of our heart,
and the hope of our Land; and yet we dandle it on our knees, and yet we foster
it: we would be lotheto bestow our love upon him that should practice treason
against the Crown, and yet we love our sin which is more treacherous: we would
be loath to see our Land invaded by foreign enemies that were stronger then
we, and yet we keep our sin at home, which is more dangerous: surely our
eyes would sink into their holes, and our hairs start from of our heads, and
our hearts would break in sunder within our sides, if ever we should hear of
the subuersio^ of our State, of the sacking of our Kingdom, of the downfall
of our Churches, of the burning of our houses and Cities over our heads, of the
eclipfe and darkening of the Gospel amongst us: and yet alas our sins are
stirring the ashes, and blowing the coals, and putting oil to the flame of
Gods displeasure, and how shall we quench it? we must quench it by a flood of
tears, by watery eyes, by bleeding hearts, by pensive souls; we must quench
it by making oureies fountains, and our heads springs, and our hearts rivers of
tears: nay, let us even turn our fountain of tears into a stream, and our
stream of tears into a flood, and our flood of tears into an Ocean, and let
that Ocean be bottomless, and that spring boundless, and that fountain of
tears never be dried up, that God may be pleased to heal our Land, which he
has shaken, to renew our hopes which he has crossed, to turn away the
judgment which he has threatened, to crown us with those myriads of blessings
which he has promised: and amongst all these thy blessings, write down these
particular by name; Crown our gracious Sovereign, and this Kingdom with
immortal happiness; let the Scepter never depart from his seed; let none of
his seed ever depart away from thee: weaken the walls of Babel; continue the
light of thy holy Gospel; bless our friends; convert, or else confound, or
infatuate ourfoes; kindle our zeal; soften our hearts; heal our fores; pardon
our sins; save our souls at the last day, for thy Son Christ Jesus his sake.

FINIS.
Englands SECOND SVMMONS.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross the 5. of February, Anno Domini, 1615.

By THOMAS SVTTON Batchelour of Divinity, then Fellow of Queens College in
Oxford, and now Preacher at S. Mary Oueries.

The second Impression, Perused and Corrected by the Author.

REV. 3.19. Be zealous and repent.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Fox. 1616.

ENGLANDS SECOND Summons
REV. 3.15.16. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would
thou werest either cold or hot.

Therefore, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will come
to pass, that I shall spue thee out of my mouth.


THIS whole chapter contains in it three Epistles endited by God in the
consistory of Heaven, sent by his faithful servant John, unto three famous
Churches of Asia.

Every Epistle may be broken into four quarters.

The first, an Exordium, or entrance: The second a general proposition: The
third a narration: The fourth an Epilogue or conclusion.

My Text is part of the last Epistle, directed to the Church of Laodicea, whose
Exordium, or entrance, is set down in the 14 verse; wherein I note.

First, the party to whom this Epistle was directed, it is the Angel of the
Church of Laodicea. Secondly, the party greeting or sending, it is Amen; God
blessed for ever.
The Proposition in the 15 verse, I know thy works.

The Natration from the 15. verse to the 22. The Epilogue and closure, verse
the last.

In the narration I discover four particulars.

First, I find her checked and reprehended for her luke-warmenesse, verse. 15.
Secondly, I find her chid and threatened, verse sixteen. Thirdly, I hear here
her exhorted to more heat and seruencie in zeal, verse. 19. Lastly, I see her
entreated and allured by a gracious promise, verse 20.
And surely this sickness of Laodicea, was a sickness unto death, seeing the
most sovereign sprigs of balm which the Physician could find in all Gilead,
were not sufficient to assuage her grief, or mittigate her pain.

If you long to see the breaking up of my Text into smaller fractions. In it
you may observe:

First, a prerogative royal appropriated only unto God, I know thy works.

Secondly, the deplored estate of these Laodiceans, wherein you have: First,
the crime which was objected, Thou art neither hot nor cold: Secondly, the
aggrauation of the crime, by comparing Luke-warmenesse in religion with another
sin damnable in it self, yet pardonable in respect of this: Would God thou
werest either hot or cold. Thirdly, the sentence of malediction which he
passed upon them; Therefore I will spue thee out of my mouth.

And thus have I briefly and coursely made my first draught, whereby you may
guess at the limbs, and gather the proportion of my whole discourse.

Now if God shall continue his gracious assistance, and you your christian
attention; I shall employ my best end euours, for this model of time, to
express the perfect feature of every member, beginning with that prerogative
royal, which none can justly claim, but GOD. I know thy works; as if in
fuller terms he had spoken thus: thou do but feed thy self with vain
and fruitless hopes, thou think thou have done me good service by kneeling
in my house, and hearing of my word, and by a tolerable care in the outward
observance of my Laws; but for thy love thou have espoused that unto the
world, for thine affection thou have wedded that unto thine Herodias, for thy
zeal thou have enflamed that with the love of thy own wanton Dalilah: thou
bowest in mine house, but thou worshippest Rimmon: thou professest my name, but
thou seruest thine own belly: thou runnest for a Crown, but thou look
back like Atalanta, and reachest at those balls of Gold which the Devil like
a crafty Hippomenes has scattered in the way. In the time of peace thou
look fair, like the Curtains of Solomon, or the Apples of Sodom; but if I
nurture thee never so lightly with my rod of correction, I find thee black
as Kedar, and rotten as the Clay in the depth of winter: thou prayest that my
name may be hallowed, but thou swearest rashly, and thou think I he are thee
not: thou committest adultery with all thy lovers, and thou think that the
night and the darkness shall be a Canopie to hide thee that I see thee not:
thou grindest the faces of the poor for whom I died: thou vnderminest the
little Church which I have planted, and thou think that I know it not: but
alas for thee, the strength of thy wit has increased thy sin, for there
is not a thought so secret, but I can tell it, not a cabin so retired but I am
in it, no closet so secure but I can open it, nor no work so cunningly
contrived and wrought, but I shall know it.

When thou drawest the curtains to commit adultery, and say, no eye sees
me; then am I standing beside thy bed, when thou art hammering and contriuing
bloody and treasonable practices, and say no care hears me; then am I
liftning within thy Closet: When thou art hiding the spoils, which thou have
taken from the Church, and say, no man can control me; then am I looking
thee in the face, and shaking my rod over thee. I am about thy paths, and
about thy bed, and I take notice of all thy ways, I know all thy works:
which one mineral, contaynes more fragments of inestimable treasures, then can
be gathered up in so short a time, I will content my self with the bare
touching of one Pearl, which lies as it were above ground, obuious to the eyes
of every passenger, described in these terms. There is no work, no purpose
so secret which is not open and manifest to the eyes of God. We can hide
nothing from God.


I shall not need to be prodigal in spending mine own breath, or your
attention, in propping such a known and ancient Theoreme, I purposely omit
the many fruitless disputations of Lombard in his first book of Distinctions;
and of Aquinas in the first of his Sums the foureteenth Question: only thus
much I must needs praemise; that there is in GOD a twofold knowledge. The one
special, which in Schools is termed the knowledge of Approbation, whereby
God is said only to know his own sons and children, and not the reprobates,
whereof we read, Matthew. 7.23. Away from me ye wicked, I know you not. And
Romans 11.2. God has not cast away his people, (...), which he knew before.
The other general, and absolute, whereby he reads the most retired
thoughts, and secret purposes both of the good and badde; as if he had them
noted in great and capital characters before his eyes. The former, which is
the knowledge of Approbation, pertayneth to the unsearchable and eternal
decree of Gods Predestination, and stands far enough aloof out of my way.
The other which is absolute and general, is now at the Bar, and ready to be
tried.

Shall Moses be the Judge? then hear him in the sixth of Genesis, at the
fifth verse, (...) the Lord fawe the inward meanings of the heart. The heart is
seated in a darkesome closet walled round about with flesh, swadled up and
covered with the richest hangings of natures wardrobe, so charily attended, so
shrouded with vails, that though thou bear it in thy bosom, though thou feed
it with thine own goods, though thou study to delight and please it, though it
be thine own, yet if thou would give a world for a sight, thou could not
have it. Yet neither is the heart so close imprisoned, but he beholds, nor a
thought so privily conceived, but he descrieth, nor a spark of lust so softly
blown and kindled, but he discerns, nor the smallest seed of ungodliness,
so warily covered, but he reuealeth it. Shall we be tried by Solomon? Then
hear him in the 1. Book of Kings, chapter 8. and verse 39 The Lord knows
the hearts of all the sons of men. Shall we be tried by GOD himself? Then
hear him in the first book of Samuel, chapter 16. verse 7. Man beholds the
outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart. Shall we be tried by
David? Then hear him in the first Book of Chronicles, chapter the 28. verse
the 9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all imaginations of the
thoughts. O hear him in that passionate Ode, that he compiled when the
nefarious proiects of Absalon, and Shimei, had almost broken his heart, psalm
139. The Lord understands my thoughts before I have conceived them, he is
about my paths, Vt quid foris perpetrem: to watch what I do abroad, and about
my bed: Vt quid priuatus cogitem: to observe what I do at home, he spieth out
all my ways: whereto the Apostle has suited his style: (...) all things are
naked and open, or as it were anatomized, and cut up before his eyes, for
that is the Apostle Saint Paul's allusion, in the fourth chapter and thirteenth
verse to the Hebrews. You shall find in the second book of the Kings and sixth
chapter that the King of Aram could never plot so secretly against Israel, but
Israel got wit and notice of it. This Aram is a fit Emblemeto resemble us,
who can not entertain a sinful thought, though slumbering upon our beds, nor
effect a wicked purpose, though bolted in our lodging, when our Windows are
closed, and our Curtains drawn, but this eye of heaven sees it, writes it
down in the Book of his Accounts, and at the last day will summon and warn
our souls to a reckoning for it, Pecces quocunque sub axe, sub Jove semper
eris. Though thou journey to the lowest vault and dungeon of Hell to hide thy
self in the ashes of Tophet: yet still shall thou find it most true which the
Heathen Poet spoke merrily of his Silenus. Virg. Egl. 6.
Ad Lunae luminae visus eris. He knows what thou art doing, better then thou
can tell him, and therefore Pierius in his three and thirtieth of his
Hirogliphicks, out of Cyril, and Eucherius wittily resembles GOD by the picture
of an eye, standing upon the top of a staff, the staff is the Emblem of
his power and Scepter, wherewith he gouernes, and the eye is the Emblem of his
all-searching knowledge, whereby he diueth and pierces into the secrecy of
all hearts.

Which point (let it be as stale and common as it will) would it once be
learned, were able enough of it self, to snape the growth of all our sins,
and stanch the bloody issue of all our impieties. It was the counsel of
Bernard in his book de Vita solitaria, and of wise Seneca in his 11. Epistle;
Semper proponendus ante oculos vir bonus, vt tanquam illo spectante viuamus,
tanquam illo vidente faciamus. The honest heathen was of opinion, that no man
would presume to sin, that had not some hope to escape unseen. Come hither and
learn, thou dissembling hypocrite; God sees hypocrites.
Introrsum turpis speciosus pelle decora: thou that coggest and dalliest with
GOD, come hither and learn, thou look like to a goodly painted Tomb, but
within thou art lined with rottenness and with corruption, and GOD has spied
it; thou make the world believe, that thou art all zeal, that thou love no
house but the Church, no household but the Saints, that thou honor no
master but God, that thou longest for no home but Heaven, that thou affectest
no joy but Spiritual, that thou reachest at no honor but immortal; and yet
thou will take a bribe like Gehezi; Thou will grate the faces, and sipe the
purses, and pare the livings, and leave desolate the mansions of the poor
without inhabitants, and yet think that no eye shall see thee. Alas for
thee, deplored Wight, will thou plow nothing but Akeldama, a field of blood,
and sow nothing in it but Zizania, the tares of iniquity, and still think no
eye shall see thee? Alas for thee; will thou openly plight thy troth unto
God, and privately wedde thy self unto the world? will thou burn with zeal
at the Church, and freeze at home? will thou dispute and speak for Christ, but
fight and strive against him? will thou bear a fair golden tongue in thy
mouth, and a foul cankred heart in thy belly? will thou wear Christ's Liuerie
on thy back, and wear the devils favor, and the shreds of his banner in thy
bosom? will thou speak aloud, Psalm. 51. Lord make me a clean heart, and
create a right spirit within me: but underneath join prayer with him in the
Satire, Da mihi fallere, da iustum, sanctumque videri, noctem peccatis and
fraudibus obijce nubem: that is, be nothing less indeed, then what thou
seem, and would be thought to be, and still think that no eye shall see
thee; wretched and shameless man, dare thou not sin in the presence of a
man, and yet lie foming and weltring in sin, in the presence and sight of
blessed Angels?

O Emblem of folly! Art thou ashamed to sin in the sight and presence of a
man, and yet lie rotting in sin, and tumbling in blood, and courting of vice,
and murdering thy own soul, before the face of a dreadful and awful God?
Were it not altogether as good for thee to damn thy soul in the sight of men,
as in the view and sight of God? What folly like to this, to watch and tend a
poor soul without doors, and stabbe it behind a curtayne? or what folly
like this, to keep thy soul well and carefully, when men see thee, but to
wound it in secret? or what folly like this, to tender thy soul at the
Church, and to damn it in thy Closet?

Let the unchaste wanton, God sees adulterers
and the adulterer by name remember this. Surely, thou of all other art one of
Salomons fools: and the Wise man has drawn thy portrayture, Ecclesiasticus
the 23. chapter, and 18. and 19. verses, Thou fear nothing but the eyes of
man, thou say in thine heart, who sees me? I am compassed about with
darkness, the walls cover me, whom need I to fear? Nulla est in rima, Eras.
Dial.
nullus qui me exaudiat: The black and sable hangings of the night have
bespredde themselves over me; either now or never, I may sin with safety, I
shall wipe my mouth in the morning, and not be descried. Not descried say
thou? then surely thou may be bold to sin, all will be well. But shall
thou not be descryed indeed? Can thou make thy door so fast, that the arm
of the Almighty, and all the strength of heaven cannot open it? Is there any
darkness so thick and palpable that this (...) the eyes of Heaven cannot spy
thee through it? Homerus.
Is there any veil so close, that the Father of Lights, and descrier of
secrets cannot find it? I dare presume thou dare not think it, for when thou
have musled thy face like Thamar, to take a short and sinful pleasure, and hid
thy self like Sarah, behind the door, or with Adam behind the bushes; or with
Jonah, in the keele and belly of the ship, yet thou must say unto thy God as
Ahab said unto Elijah, 1. Kings 21.20. Have thou found me O mine enemy? Nay O
God terrible and dreadful thou have found me? And then let me ask thee in
the same terms that the young gallant in Erasmus, asked his wanton Mistress,
An non pudet id facere in conspectu Dei, ac testibus Sanctis Angelis, quod
pudet facere in conspectu hominum? May not the Sun be ashamed, and the
Stars gloome, and the heavens be astonished, to see the hair of thy head
how it stands, the windows of thy head how they slip and sink into their
holes; thy pulses how they beat, thy flesh how it shakes, thy heart how it
pants, thy conscience how it is perplexed; how it houereth, how it chaseth it
self for fear of miscarrying and trespasiing before the Judges of the world,
which are but little Globes of earth, and pictures of living clay; but if once
the curtains of heaven be drawn, and the firmament hanged with blackes, and
thou entrencht with ruinous and dampie walls, and none sees thee but God, then
thy conscience falls fast asleep again, thy Herodian tells thee thou art too
too fearful, thy flesh tells thee thou art too too bashful; nay, thou turnest
powerful Orator thus to persuade thy own self, that there is now no cause to
fear: The eye which I feared is now ouer-cast and surprised with sleep: the
light which I doubted, is now ouer-shadowed and covered with darkness; the
witness which I suspected, is now retired and out of sight, none sees but God,
why then should I fear? As if there were no fear of going to hell, but that a
man should see thee going, were intolerable; as if it were no shame to sin,
but to be descried and taken, were inexpiable; as if the sin it self were
but a trifle, only the want of cunning and neat conueyance, made it
execrable; whereas all this while an angry God stands looking on thee, and an
iron rod is shaken over thee, and a bottomless Tophet is gaping for thee.
Alas for thee deplored wight; will thou make every sinful pleasure a haulter
to strangle thee? and every strange flesh a lure to take thee? Will thou press
out of every bunch of grapes a pond to drown thee, because thou can choke
thy self in this silken halter, and poison thy self with this strange lure,
and yet escape the censure of men? Surely thy own soul and conscience, may
seem to be the author and penman of this, or the like ruthful and
passionate Elegy. O wanton flesh whom I am enforced to serve! O rebellious
carcass, whose prisoner I remain! O sinful body whose Tenant I am, and in
whose womb I dwell! Why do thou not cease to kill me? In ipso scelere est
supplicium sceleris; It were even as good for me to be wounded in the view
and face of the world, as to be pressed to death, and stifled in a corner: and
as good for me to be hayled to the slaughter, and assaulted in the open
field, as to be murdered in a private chamber. What if no man see thee, yet
God sees thee? Who is greater then he? What if no man charge thee, yet God can
condemn thee? What if thou delude the Humane Consistory, and man's Tribunal,
yet should thou tremble to trespass against thy God who is greater then he.
It was a pretty saying of Epicurus, in Seneca his 97. Epistle. Quid si tuta
possint esse seelera, si secura esse non possint? vel quid prodest nocentibus
habuisse latendi facultatem, cum latendi fiduciam non habent? If the sinner be
hemmed and guarded with walls, and yet have a conscience to bait and to dog
him: If the wanton be attended and clothed with darkness, and yet have a
God to see and revenge him, then where is his comfort? or how is he safer for
sinning in secret?

Remember this, corrupt Gehazi, that pocketest bribes in private: Remember this
great Plotter of the world, that reachest at a hungry preferment with more
haste then good speed, by giving and taking of pledges, to bind and confirm
unlawful promises that are made in secret: and let us all remember this, that
our hearts must needs be shamelesly sinful, and our cases utterly
desperate, and our end undoubtedly miserable, if we dare fly in the face of
God, and grieve his holy Spirit, and rip our Saviors wounds, and stabbe his
blessed sides, because we have the darkness for a mask, and the night for a
covering, and the walls for a defense, and God has none to bear him witness.
It was a good Position of Boethius, Boaetius de consolatione Philosophy, lib.
5. last prose.
de consolatione Philosophiae, his fifth Book and last Prose, Magna est
necessitas probitatis, cum agitis ante oculos, iudicis cuncta cernentis: A man
cannot choose but be good, who remembers that he stands always in the sight
of God: And therefore Prudentius in one of his Hymns gives this good
memorandum, Prudentius Himnorum l. 1.
quicquid ages furtimue, palamue, memento inspectatorem semper adesse Deum.

And here would I gladly make a stop, and stint my meditations in this point,
but that I find two of the best sorts of men, that may justly wait and expect
some further use. The one would have encouragement, the other would have
comfort from my doctrine, and I have sufficient to content them both. The one
is he that spends his breath and spirits in doing of good. The other is he
that is breathelesse already, being almost disconsolate, and out of heart, by
sustaining of evils, each of them shall have a taste, lest if I send them
empty home, the one should be discouraged, the other discontented in the way.

Give me a man that has coped and buckled with the sins of the time: An
encouragement to do good.
Give me a man that has studied the advancement of Religion; Give me a man
that has pleaded the Lords cause against the favorites of Baal, as Elias did,
1. Kings 18. That has provided for the Prophets, as Elisha did, 2. Kings 6.
That shows himself zealous for the Lord of Hosts, as Phineas did, Numbers 25.
at the 11. That has encouraged those that fight the battles of the Lord as
Abigail did, the first of Samuel the 25. That has reformed the contempt of the
Sabboath, as Nehemiah did, Nehem. the 13. the 22. and then tell me what can be
more available to inflame his zeal, to set edge upon his affection, to make
him Christianly ambitious in striving for heaven, to make him outvie and
outstrip his brethren, to make a man sweat and tugge with more eagerness and
feruencie of spirit, in building of the house or provoking the Gospel of
Christ, then this one; that God sees him, that the heavens applaude him, that
God and Angels are spectators, God and Angels attendants to grace and honor
him? Was there ever spirit so degenerous and base that will not stir and
strike with violence, when the eye of his Coronell is fixed full upon him? And
is there not as good reason, that the Christian warrior should march with a
courage against sin, because his Master and Captain Jesus Christ never
casts his eye of him? If Elias be pleading against Baal, this should make him
more hot and vehement; If Elisha be providing for the Prophets, this should
make him more careful and sollicitous; If Abigail be encouraging and
releeuing those that fight the battles of the Lord, this should make her more
cheerful and magnificent; If the Preacher be hewing, and slashing at sin,
this should make him more industrious and resolute, considering that there has
not been so much, as a good purpose in thy heart; thou have not once opened
thy mouth in the Lords cause, thou have not gluen a drop of water to one of
his Disciples, thou have not relieved one of his members, thou have not
preferred one of his Prophets; thou have not broken the heart, nor wounded the
head, nor staunched the passage of any one sin, but God has seen it, and
penned it down, and does remember it, and will reward it: Go on then in the
name and blessing of God; and if thou have goods relieve Christ Jesus in his
afflicted members with it: If thou have learning, make the Church of GOD thine
adopted heir, and leave some remembrance in it: If thou have authority show
it in cutting off sin that endangers the Land; in giving of life to Religon,
which now lies in a swoone; show it in scourging and whipping of vice: bring
glory to thy God comfort to thy soul, honor and immortality to thy Country
by it. If thus thou have behaved thy self, then go on and the Lord be with
thee: And as thou go thus cheer up thy heart. Great was the good I
intended, though I have not performed it: Labored I have, though not much
prevailed; I have coped with sin, though I could not discomfite it; I have
snaped the growth of some ungodliness, though I could not dig up the roots
of it: I have done my best, though that which is best I have not done. Shall I
be discouraged because I can but do my best, and not so much as I should?
Surely no. I will still be doing some good, and striving to do better; if I
mend and do never so much; I will strive to do more; If I prevail, God shall
have glory, if I prevail not, yet still I will strive; because there is
nothing that I do or purpose, but my God does see it, writes it in his book,
does remember it, and will reward it.

Thus he that does good has had his encouragement. The next is he that
endures afflictions: If I may beg your attention till I have reached him but a
morsel of comfort, I will presently proceed to that which follows. Give me
a man has not lived so many minutes of time, as he has read and perused
whole decads and volumes of woe; or a man that has not eaten so many morsels
of bread, as he has digested whole loades and burdens of grief, or a man
that never tasted so many drops of drink, as he has shed streams and
rivers of tears; or a man that has no follower but pain, no retainer but
discontent, no companion but grief of heart; that pens no songs but sad
complaints, and mournful Elegies; that endites no descants but sighs and
groans, that sings no tunes but Lachrimae; give me such a man as this, and
you shall see, that this little sprigge of balm, which I plucked from my Text,
will make him whole and sonnd again: And this is it. The Lord sees thee. An
encouragement to endure affliction.
Thou do not shed a tear for his sake, but he puts it into his bottle,
Psalm. 56. ver. 8. The enemy has not made a scarre or a scratch in thy face,
but he accounts it done unto himself; Thou have not sweat one drop of water
for his sake, but he that sweat drops of blood for thee, he does regard it.
There is not one furrow in thy back, but he both searches the wound, and
provides balm and oil to supple it.

This was it that comforted Elias in the Wilderness, and Daniel in the Cave;
and Job on the dunghill, and Jeremy in the dungeon; and this is it that must
cheer and comfort thee; every sigh that thou fetchest, every tear thou
sheddest, every drop thou sweatest, every wound thou feel, every stroke thou
bear, every threat thou endurest, is both seen and noted, and recorded, in
Gods Writing-booke, and when that Book shall be opened, then shall all tears
be wiped from thine eyes, then shall thy wounds be washed with oil, then
shall thy sores be healed with balm, Et haec olim meminisse iuuabit, Thou
shall remember with joy the days and nights which thou have passed in
heaviness, then no more sowing in tears, but reaping in joy: Then no more
mournful Elegies, but this, or some higher strain of heavenly eloquence: I
was wont to be brewing and spending of tears, but now am I swimming and
bathing in pleasure: For every tear do I find rivers of Comfort, for every
moment of grief, a world of contentment, I had once no Songs, but sighs and
sobbes, no tunes, but groans: But now my sighs are turned, and my groans are
changed into Halleluiahs, my dittie is Halleluiah, my strains Halleluiah,
Halleluiah. Glory, and praise, and honor be ascribed, etc.

Thus this one point, that God descrieth our works, and purposes, ingeminates
and proclaims a woe and terror to the hypocrite, and the Adulterer, but
encouragement to the good, and to the afflicted store of comfort, I close it
thus. God sees thee Hypocrite, hereafter dissmble not. God sees thee
Adulterer, hereafter commit it not again. God sees thee good Christian, go
on and fear not, God sees thee afflicted soul, go on and despair not.
Hypocrite God sees thee, then be as good as thou would be accounted,
Adulterer, God sees thee, then do not that on the night, which on the day
light thou dare not. Good Christian, GOD sees the, continue in doing well,
he will shortly crown thee. Afflicted man, God sees thee, stand and sweat,
and endure, he is now coming to release thee. And so I proceed from Gods
excellent prerogative: I know thy ways, To the crime objected against
Laodicea; Thou art neither hot nor cold.

Not to trouble you with such a variety of expositions, as Pererius out of
Haimo, out of Gregory in the third of his Pastoralles, as also out of Liranus,
and Bernard, and Rupertus, have noted ready to my hand. Out of the very best
of them, I think I may thus resolve. By Hot, I mean a man zealous of Gods
honor, and worship, whose zeal is built and founded on knowledge, whose
heart is not infected, nor taynted with pride. By Cold, I mean such chill and
frozen caitiffes, as do wedde and espouse themselves unto the world, and make
no conscience of religion. who are to be meant by hot, and cold, and lukewarm.
By Lukewarm, I mean such as do divide their love between GOD and the world,
and their service between God and Baal, and their allegiance between God and
Mammon, that love God in word, but the world in heart, that profess Religion
only so far, as religion makes for their commodity. The second sort of
professors, which are cold Christians, the Lord will refuse. The Third sort,
which are Lukewarm Gospellers, the Lord will spue out of his mouth, only the
first who have given the world and Baal their bills of Divorce, and sent them
away, and not only abiured them, but are zealous for the glory and worship
of the GOD of Heaven, these only are here commended, their service only is
accepted. So that my doctrine comes off with ease, and thus offers it self to
meet me in the way.

The profession of religion without zeal and forwardness is odious and
loathsome unto God. Profession without zeal is odious.
For evidence, I appeal to the silver Trumpets of Heaven, and the Watchmen of
Israel, read unto me, what might be the cause why Moses, in the 32. chapter of
Exodus should wish to be razed out of the Book of Life; why Paul, in Romans
the 9. chapter, the third, should desire a separation from the protection and
love of Christ? was it not the fire of their zeal, and the feruencie of their
Spirit, that made them thus impatient of the least impeachment, that could be
offered to the glory of their Sovereign and majesty of their God?

Paul and Moses the Seedemen of Religion, their profession the prop and stay
whereon the Church of God does lean, their lives like to that Star in the
second chapter of Saint Matthew, to bring us to CHRIST; and yet all their
preaching, had it wanted zeal, and their profession, had it wanted heat, and
their service, had it wanted this earnest longing, and ardencie of affection,
to credit and honor their Lord and Master, all their Religion had been but
vain, all their profession but formal, all their service but smoothe
dissembling in the sight of God. If Josiah had only refused to bow and kneel
to Baal, or had he only professed the service of the true God, and gone no
farther, he had endured as sharp a censure as Azariah the King of Judah. He
did uprightly in the sight of God, but the high places were not taken away,
and therefore the Lord smote him, the second Book of the Kings, and 15.
chapter. And the Scriptures would not have so much commended him, but because
he was zealous for the glory of GOD, because he was forvvard to destroy their
Groves, and zealous to break down their Chemarims, and forward to throw down
their Altars, and sacrifice their priests, this was it that God liked, and this
was it that the Scriptures commended: and this was it that won him high title
and immortal honor from all the Kitgs that were either before or after him:
the second Book of Kings the 23. chapter and the 25. verse. It is not to be
questioned but that this Laodicea a Church so famous, did make profession of
religion, did worship the true and immortal deity, did give ear and
attention to the preaching of John, was thoroughly acquaynted with all the
grounds and principles of the Christian faith. We read of no heresy that she
maintained, of no superstitious worship that she harbored, and yet he will
spue her out of his mouth. The abomination of desolation must be set up in
her high places. She must fall as though she had never been planted, and
wither as though the seed of the Word had never been rooted, her Churches
must be sacked, her ancient glory must end in shame; In stead of the sacred
Bible, she must roue at the way to Heaven in an unhallowed and blasphemous
Alcoran, and in stead of skillful Pilots, and Christian guides, she shall be
utterly misled by an Ignis fatuus, I mean Turks and Infidels: read now unto
me what might be the cause of this. Laodicea was much of Ephraims temper, in
the seventh of Hosea, like a cake upon the hearth but half baked, Laodicea was
like the people of Meroz in the fifth of the Judges, nothing forward. Laodicea
was like those shrinkers in the ninth of Jeremy, that had no courage for the
truth, she wanted heat in her profession, she wanted life and spirit in
Christ's cause, she most of all wanted that which he most of all required, and
that was zeal, nullum enim Deo gratius sacrificium, quam zelus animarum, says
Saint Gregory in the twelfth homily upon Ezechtel.

Which point will one day nail the heart, and cut deep into the conscience of
all those that have so much to do in the Lords cause, but do either little or
nothing for it. And shall I without offense make bold to tell you that which I
have received from the Lord, and do the message for which I came hither: Then
let me first begin with the fairest; It is you (right Honorable) into whose
hands the Lord has put his Sword, for no other purpose, but to strike at the
root, and to draw at the face, and to aim at the heart and strength of sin;
if you suffer your Sword to rust in your sheathe, and your Arrows to rot in
your quiver; if you have a fair profession, and yet we find no good you have
done; if you carry a Sword, and yet we hear tell of no sin you have wounded;
be a soldier of Christ to quarrel with sin, and yet we remember no field
you have pitched; if God have honored you, and you not honored him, by
baiting and hazling of sin, by cooling the heat, and breaking the heart, and
taunching the violent issue of ungodliness, Where then is your zeal? If God
be dishonored, and you not revenge it, if virtue discouraged, and you not
defend it; if religion be outfaced, and our land endangered by the inroades and
incursions of sin, and you shall not help it; where then is your zeal? If
Sabboths be broken, and you have authority, and yet not suppress it; If
swearing and drunkenness be accounted but complement, and you have authority,
and shall not oppose it. If sin may sit in your shope and feed at your
boordes, and jette in your Markets; and you have a Sword and yet will not
strike it; If God say, strike, or else thou dishonorest me; strike or else I
will take the sword from thee; strike, or else thou fight against me; strike,
or else I will strike at thee, and yet no punishment, but you will reprieue it
where then is your zeal? Let me not offend, I condemn you not, Qui monet vt
facias quod iam facis, ipse monendo laudat. I am only your remembrancer to put
you in mind of whetting your sword, for a sword without an edge may fright,
but wounds not: to put you in mind of heating and warming your profession.
For profession without zeal, is but like the snuff of a candle, that smoketh
and stinketh, but neither warmeth nor lights the house, to put you in mind
of that courage which you should bear, and of that conscience which you should
make of the curbing of sin, of the honoring of God, of aduauncing Religion,
lest the sword which you bear, prove a nail unto your heart, and the honor
which you bear a dishonor to your Maker; to put you in mind, that a
Christian profession, that a high and honorable calling should still be
beautified and graced with zeal, and attended with christian resolution. If
then you be willing to fight for your Master, if willing to honor and credit
your maker; if you would have Religion thank you, and the world to think well
of you, good men to praise GOD for you, Gods people to pray for you, the
heavens to bless you, and all mouths to commend you, all hearts to love you;
then must you add zeal to your profession, then string up your bow, make
your arrows swift and keen, your sword sharp and glistering, and I beseech
God to strengthen both your heart and hand, to sharpen both your Arrows and
Sword, to bless you and your good endeuorus, that you may bring much honorto
his dreadful name, many blessings to this famous City, much peace and comfort
to your souls.

And seeing I am thus far proceeded, let me have leave to add a word or two,
to the wise and reverend Judges of the Land; you are they whose profession it
is to free the weak and impotent, from the yoke and servitude of greater
personages, who would swallow them up, to loppe and prune the corrupt and
rotten branches, that infect and pester the Land, to cut off the traiterous
heads of Priests and Jesuits, that hinder the peace, to whip and censure our
besotted Recusants, that repine at the growth of the Gospel, yet if this godly
profession want zeal in performing, if our laws be sovereign but want
execution, if you be good me^ but want resolution, if the poor client solicit
that his cause may be ended, if the country beseech that offenders may be
punished, if the Preachers entreat and beseech you, for the glory of God, for
the honor of our Land, for the peace of our Church, for the safety of his
Majesty's royal person, that you would weaken the forces, and abate the pride,
and frustrate the counsel, and either banish or bind to allegiance our
hollow-hearted and popish fondlings, and you shall not hear the suites, nor
satisfy the hopes of our Church and State that cry and call for the sweeping
and purging of our land of all noisome and infestious weeds, which the envious
man of Rome has sown and planted; then you do more dishonor God by want of
zeal, then ever you can honor him by your profession: If therefore you desire
to make your profession glorious, your graces eminent; if you desire to make
Religion beholding to you, good men to bless God for you, our Land to thank
and reward you, the Church to pray for you, all hearts to love you, all mouths
to commend you, and Gods blessing upon you, then must you add zeal to
profession. Be zealous like Iehu, for the glory of God, 2. Kings 10. Be
zealous to break the thread of contentions without demurres and delays: Be
zealous to ease the Church of those that contend and wrestle in her womb, to
ease the Land from Dan to Beersheba, from the one end to the other, of all such
spiteful miscreants as desire and long to see the Scepter removed from Judah:
that speak of us as Scipio in Polibius did of Rome, Polibius apu Curionem lib.
3.
at the burning of Carthage, Illadies veniet, cum flamma hac templa peribunt;
who have hope that they shall one day see our Churches burned, our Cities
sacked, our courage daunted, our State subverted, our Religion altered, our
Sovereign buried, the Gospel silenced, and our light removed: But o thou wise
and immortal God, that sit upon the circle of the heaven, and see what
these bloud-sucking and deplored wights are devising against Thee, and thine
anointed Servant; against thy poor Church and true Religion, against our
State and against our Kingdom; fill the hearts of our Magistrates with zeal,
strengthen their hands with resolution and courage to cut them off: infatuate
the counsel of these Achitophels, but grant ioyand peace unto thy Church, long
life and happiness to our gracious Sovereign, purity and continuance of true
Religion, growth and passage to the Gospel, glory and immortal happiness to
this State and Kingdom. Lord say Amen to our requests, and let every one that
loves this Nation, that cares for Syon, that favors Religion, that wishes
well to our Sovereign, help me with their prayers, hold up their hands, and
lift up their voices to heaven and say, Amen, Amen.

And seeing I am thus far proceeded, deny me not your attention till I have
left a word of exhortation to my brethren of the Clergy; You are they whose
breasts should be signed with Vrim and Thummim, and your foreheads marked
with this inscription, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.36. your profession is
the winning of souls, your charge weighty; if you win them great is your
glory, if you loose them your danger intolerable. But if your people lie at the
side of Bethesda, and you will not trouble the water for them; if they long for
the crumbs of your spiritual benediction, and shall not obtain them; if they
would sit at your feet to hear your Preaching; if they gasp for this
heavenly bread, and cry for the waters of comfort, and yet must starve and die
for want of them; then your want of care makes your profession odious; your
want of zeal makes your profession dangerous; your want of forwardness in
Religion, makes Religion be termed but policy; you can never gain so many
souls by your profession, as you may destroy and murder for want of zeal.
John was not only a lamp shining in his Sermons, but a torch burning with
zeal; Nam qui non ardet, non accendit, says S. Barnard: nec lucere potest
nisi prius ardeat, says Aquinas upon the fifth of John; If your selves burn
not with zeal how can you inflame the hearts of others? If you burn not your
selves, then can you give no light to others. You are Lucernae quoad officium,
but extinctae quoad effectum, like snuffes in the midst of a golden
Candlestick: Suffer me then to exhort and charge you all, that look for joy
and comfort on the bed of your sickness, that look for a gracious welcome to
the Supper of the Lamb; that would have your heads crowned, and your souls
saved at the last day, that now in the prime of your life, and the light of the
Gospel, you would add burning zeal to Christian profession, for then would
good Laws be strictly executed, then would sin be sharply punished, then
would our Recusants be roundly censured, then would the Gospel be frequently
Preached, then would Religion flourish, and God be highly honored. But alas
for us all, where or in whom shall we find it? where is the glowing of the
ears? where is the wringing of the hands? Where is the beating of the breasts?
Where is the sparkling of the eyes? Where is the yearning of the Bowels? The
shaking of the flesh? The panting of the heart? The thriftlesse Gallants are
out-vying of oaths, and our bearts are not wounded; your obscoene and Whorish
stages bereave this Land of many hopeful sprigs, deprive the Gentry of many
hopeful stemmes, fill this City with prodigious vices; turn good, and
ingenuous, and hopeful natures, into prodigal and dissolute, and lewd
professors, and yet our hearts are not nailed, where then is our zeal? God is
dishonored, Recusants are and will be suffered, sin is and will be
maintained, zeal is and must be taunted; a good conscience is and must be
laughed out of countenance; Religion is and must be brought under hatches, and
sent a begging, and yet our hearts are not moved, where then is our zeal?

And because there is no point wherein a man may sooner ouer-shoote himself
then in this, I will in a word or two deliver some plain and easy rules
whereby a man may judge whether his zeal be current or counterseit. Marks of
true zeal.


1 The matter must be good Gal. 4.18. The 1.
or else it is not zeal but deuillish and fleshly heat a frenzy, and
madness, counterfeiting the name of zeal like the zeal of those Idolater
that mangled and cut them selves, 1 Kings 18. Like the zeal of the Scribes and
Pharise who compass Sea and Land to make Proselites: Like the zeal of Paul
before his conversion: Like the zeal of ignorant Papists and Brownists at this
day, who are hot indeed; for they must needs run whom the devil drives, Sed
incalescunt in re frigida: They are like bittes of lime never so hot and
smoking as in cold water, never earnest but in evil canses: Which may be
hence convicted, because they use no weapons but such as the devil puts into
their hands, to wit, railing and detracting, and rotten speeches the only
Patrons for such bad causes.

2 Zeal must begin at home; The 2.
for they are most skillful Physicians, and best able to deal with others,
that have first wrought a cure upon their own souls; to check all those that
wade deep into the souls, and bloudily go are the consciences of other men,
but have not purged their own unclean sinkes at home; no not drawn one drop
of menstruous blood, out of their own corrupt and rotten hearts: Like Pharisees
who censured Christ but not themselves; like Brownists, who stretch their
veins, and make their bowels swell, with crying, Disorder, Disorder, amongst
us, but leave sinkes of sin unpurged, cages of sin uncleansed, bands and
troops of sin untamed and vnvanquished under their own roofes.

3 True zeal will look as carefully to the heart before God, The 3.
as the behavior in the sight of men, and make a man as fearful to sin,
when he is alone, as when he is in company of men. Thus it wrought with Job,
chap. 31. And thus with Joseph, Genesis 39. A check to those that would not be
accounted ill, but make no conscience of doing ill; that would be called good
men, but have no heart to good actions.

4 If it be true zeal it will make thee more strict to thy self, then to
others, The 4.
and give more liberty to another then thou will take thy self; Abraham was so
strict to himself, that he would not take of the King of Sodom, so much as a
thread, or shoe-latchet, and yet would not deny to Aner and Eschol and Mamre,
their liberty Genesis 14.23. and therefore it must be termed rather pride then
zeal to be too tetricall and rough, that whosoever is not in every point so
precise as ourselves, should be turned out as dogs, or profane persons
unworthy of our account and countenance.

5 True zeal fears not the faces of the mighty; The 5.
when we must beware of their precipitancy, who will charge the Minister to be
of a cold constitution, if he break not abruptly into open reprehension men in
authority; which (...) to reprove without the spi^^^ of meekness, to
exasperate there then to humble the part admonished.

Lastly, The 6.
if it be true zealed will make thee brook and po^^ many private wrongs done
thy self, but hot and impati^^^ of any dishonor unto G^^ When the Israelites
offered (...) ^uate wrongs to Moses, he was wont to speak mildely and pray
earnestly for them; but when they fell to Idolatry, a matter which concerned
God, then his fire was kindled, then he breaks the Tables, and stampes the
Calfe to powder, and casts the ashes into the water, and makes them to drink
up their God, Exodus 32.

I fear I have dwelt too long upon the point, the closure is but this; Let us
all bestirre our selves when Gods cause is a judging, and be earnest when his
glory is in question; be zealous to strike when he himself puts the sword in
our hands; be calous to speak when himself puts the word in our mouths: let
every one that wears the coat and livery of Christ, write ^eale upon his
breast, And o thou holy and blessed Spirit come unto us as thou came to thine
Apostles, in shape of fiery tongues, that our tongues may be tipped and
enamuled, our hearts seasoned, our souls enflamed, our profession graced with
zeal of thy honor and worship, that sin may be shaken, thy Name exalted,
thy Truth embraced, our Church continued, our Land blessed, our souls saved,
when these few and miserable days shall be ended. And so I come from the crime
objected, The crime objected against Laodicea.
Thou art neither hot nor cold, to see how the sin is aggrauated in the next
words, Would God thou were eithor hot or cold. Which words are not so to be
understood, as if they should have pleased him well enough, had they been
either hot or cold, or any thing but lukewarm, Non ostendit quid probat, sed
quid praefert, but his meaning was to let them know, that he so disliked
luke-warmenesse in Religion, and indifferency in profession of Christianity,
that he should have liked them better, and their condition should not have bin
so desperate, had they made no conscience, or had no knowledge, as now it was
by their hypocrisy and want of zeal: so that the point which by the Holy
Ghost is here delivered, may be comprised in these terms.

It were better to be of no Religion at all, Better to be of no Religion then
to be lukewarm
then to divide our love between God and the world, and our service between
God and Baal, and our attendance between God and Mammon; or to embrace
Religion no farther, then Religion serves our turn to gain withal.

Which Theoreme howsoever it be the deduction of Ambrose, and of the whole
current both of Modern, and Ancient Interpreters, yet shall it be no waste of
time to support and fence it, by copying a place or two out of Gods
Writingbooke; turn but your leafes unto the 9. of John the 41. and view our
Saviors answer to the Pharisees question; Had you been blind you should not
have sinned; That is, say Bucer, and Musculus, and Aquinas agreeing with the
gloss, Your sin had not been so exceeding sinful as now it is; as if our
Savior had thus enlarged his speech: There is no man that has not gone astray
even from the womb; The most righteous before men is defaced and speckled in
the sight of God, and may go crying all the day long with the Leper, Leuiticus
the 13. chapter and verse 45. I am unclean, I am unclean: but you dissembling
Pharisees are more deeply stained then any other, your sins are high
colored like crimson, which (as Lipsius observes) is twice dyed; other men
have Moats, Lipsius de Constantia. libro. 1.
but you have Beams in your eyes, other men have Scratches, but you have
Wounds and Scarres in your Faces, others may swallow sins as big as Gnats,
but you can digest sins as big as Cammells, and how is it that your sins
are more inexpiable then other men's? it is because you serve me not in
sincerity, and profess religion only for your profit, and divide your love
betwixt me and your own Mammon, it had been better for you, to have
worshipped only Mammon, and never to have heard of me, it had been better
for you to have trusted only to your own wits, and never to have trusted
me, unless you trust only me, and better for you to have been stark
blind, then only to see how you may turn your backs, and look a-squint at
Heaven; it were better to have been cold dead, then to be as it were in an
Istmus; Heinsy Poem.
Vt tundat mentem fluctus vterque tuam: to bide betwixt life and death, to have
thy Religion ebbing and flowing, Plutarch. de Socratis Genio. Hesych. de vita
Philosophorum.
thy profession like the soul of Hermotimus in Plutarch, and of Epimenides in
Hesychius coming and going. Let thy Religion be either pure and sound, or none,
thy profession either entire and sound, or none, thy zeal either burning hot,
or none, to be blind, to be of no profession, to make no conscience of
Religion is very damnable: but to see the way, and not to follow it, to
profess Religion, and not to be zealous for it, to wear CHRIST'S Liuerie, and
serve any other besides the Master that gave it, is intolerable. Add unto
this that clause of the Apostle, cited to this very purpose by Gregory, in the
third of his Pastoralls, out of the second Epistle of Peter, chapter 2. and the
21. verse. It were better never to have known the way, then after knowledge to
turn out of it. Which one place, by general consent, is sufficient to make
good our point, the ignorant (which in the Apostles style) knows not, is like
the cold man in my Text, that cares not for Religion, the backe-slider in the
Apostles style, that turns aside, is like unto the Lukewarm Christian in my
Text, that cares not whether Religion sink or swim, whether his profession
do stand or fall, who like to Metius Suffetius in Liuie, Liuy in his first
Decade and first Book.
will strike or speak for neither side, until one side be down, and then
join to that which is best, for their commodity. A thing odious amongst
Heathens, and therefore prohibited by Solon, That any man should stand as a
neuter betwixt two, Strigellius in 3. Apoc
as Strigellius remembers in his Commentary upon this place, a thing cried
down by Elias, in the first book of the Kings 18. chapter, and a course as
damnable as is the worshipping of a devil, as Origin in his eight book
against Ceisus that godless heathen, and a sin famous for a dreadful woe
gone out against it, Ecclesiasticus chapter 2. verse 13.

The whole Catalogue of best Interpreters will yield a large supply of Reasons
to support and fence my Proposition. Reason out of Gregory's 3. Pastor.
I will but point at one alleged by Gregory, thus speaking to the point in
hand. It is better to be cold then lukewarm in religion; not because the luke
warm sins more hainously, but because he is reclaymed more hardly; Dum enim
se sanum putet, medicinae opem non quaerit, say Marlorat and Ribera. He is like
Harpastes in Seneca, Seneca.
supposing he sees the true way to Heaven, though he be posting to Hell, and
will not be turned, dreaming of nothing but of life and happiness, though he
be wallowing in the menstruous rags of sins pollution, and will not be cleansed,
thinking it the safest course, to walk only betwixt two ways, betwixt God
and Baal, betwixt God and Mammon, to take God in one hand, and the world in the
other, which is nothing else but to purchase Hell by wit and policy, and yet
this is the lukewarm Christians resolution, that must not be altered. It was
the saying of Wisdom, Prou. chapter 26. There is more hope of a fool, then
of him that is wise in his own conceit, and I match it thus; There is more hope
of reclayming the foolish and the ignorant, that knows not what Religion
means, then of him that makes Religion like a Shepherds cur, never to bark
but when Policy and Preferment shall command it.

By which point, a man may judge of the woeful case and hopeless condition of
all such indifferent and hollow professors, as use Religion only for a
stirroppe, whereby they may mount to rich preferments, and of such as wear
Gods livery on their backs, but keep a lodging for Baal in their hearts, and
of such as stand equally affected to all Religions, who will cry aloude, God
save King JAMES, when they are with us, and yet would kiss the feet of Paulus
Quintus his Holiness, if they were in Babylon, and of all such as do want that
holy and godly zeal, which should be seated in the heart, and seen in the
life of sound Professors; for all these are but Lukewarm, and therefore
their case more fearful, their amends more hopeless, their recovery more
unlikely, their salvation more uncertain, then if they were the sons and
children of Heathens that never heard of God. Remember this, ye Romish
fondlings, ye part stakes with Christ in matter of salvation, ye extenuate the
virtue of his death, ye think the righteousness of Christ an unfit coat to
cover your shame, you will have Fig-leaues of your own to cover it, you think
Christ too weak and faint an Orator, to beg your pardon, and to purchase
Heaven, and substitute in his room your own inherent righteousness which
shall command it, you offer the sacrifice of praise for your salvation, not
unto CHRIST, but unto your own works which have deserved it; you do think
the Son of God unfit to stand between God and you, but your own lives,
they are so holy, your own virtues, they are so many, your own works, they
are so perfect and meritorious, that although sin have locked the doors of
Heaven against you, yet these can open it, be Gods justice never so infinite,
yet these can answer it; be his wrath never so hot, yet these can quench it,
though Heaven be never so hard to come by, yet these may challenge it. A woe
therefore must needs betide you, because you are neither hot to give him, nor
cold to deny him; neither hot to give him his own, nor cold to deny all the
glory due unto him, and therefore your case is the more fearful, your amends
more hopeless, your salvation more desperate, then they that have no hope,
then they that know no means, then they that never think of the way, then
they that never talk of the joy, never dream of Immortality in the kingdom
of Heaven; You shall be spued out of his mouth.

Remember this, ye wavering Gospellers, you that alter your Religion with Time
and State, you that can make your Religion to ebb and to flow like the
stream, and do as the most do, and your profession to wax and waine like to
the Moon, and show your light only by fittes, or like inferior stars
move only as some higher Planet shall carry you, you that make your zeal
like the Heliotropium, Plinius.
to open and manifest it self at every gleame of prosperity, but at the
falling of a storm, can close and shut your selves again; your case is more
fearful, your condition more deplored, your salvation more desperate, then
they that never knew what religion meant, then they that never heard the Gospel
preached, or they that never had their Souls seasoned with one spark of
grace; For you shall be spued out of his mouth.

Remember this ye Scholars of Nicodemus, who come unto CHRIST by night
only, you that seem to bear good will to our Religion, but dare not show
it, because your Rulers; I mean your Lords and Masters do dislike it, you
that have gold and incense for CHRIST, but dare not offer it, your case is
fearful, your salvation almost desperate, You must be spued out of his mouth.

Remember this, ye mediators that would gladly conclude a marriage between the
Church of God and a Romish synagogue, and patch a religion like Sergius the
monk, Boaemus de Alcorano. li. 2. ca. 11.
of good and evil; you that would make an atonement between the religion of
Protestant and Papist sacra prophanis, that would have our gold and their
dross to be stamped together, our golden head to stand upon their feet of
clay, and Gods eternal truth to be yoaked with foolish and false traditions;
you, O you are pure and perfect Laodiceans, you could be content to speak,
half in the language of Canaan, and half in the language of Ashdod, to plow
with an Ox and an Ass together, to patch some shreds of new cloth wouen by
Romish spiders, into our Apostolic and ancient vesture, surely your case is
fearful, your condition miserable, your salvation, either almost, or
altogether desperate; You must be spued out of his mouth.

Lastly, you double hearts, you hollow neutralls and temporizers, consider and
remember this, you that have the wit and skill to stand upon the churches
threshold, and we know not whether you will go in with us, or out with our
enemies, you deceitful Trumpeters and Preachers, that give such uncertain
sounds, that the hearer knows not whether it be an alarume to encorage him to
the fight, or a retreite to call him back from pursuing the Romish adversary:
ye that cannot be descried, whether you be with us or against us, consider and
remember this; The GOD of Heaven cannot endure you, his Spirit is grieved with
you, his Church is diseased yea and perplexed by you, you are like a draught of
poison in her womb, your case is fearful, your condition very miserable,
your salvation almost desperate; You must be spued out of his mouth: And let us
all remember and tremble when we consider what God is like to do with the
people and inhabitants of this Land, who lie so sick, and are so deeply
infected with this sin. It were better that our Gentry were almost Jews
and Pagans, then to be hollow and give Religion no encouragement. It were much
better that Preachers should stand like to Harpocrates that Egyptian god, with
their fingers in their mouths, then to speak so faintly when Babel is in
building, to speak so cowardly, when sin is increasing, to speak so
doubtfully, when Gods cause is in hearing, or never powerfully, but only when
rich aduowsons, or great men's favors are bestowing. It were better for many of
you Citizens, never to have heard the name of CHRIST, never to have known
what the Gospel did mean; then to profess so barely, to uphold so weakly,
the name whereby you hope to be saved, to maintain so poorly the Gospel
wherein you have a Crown proposed, and a heaven promised, we might promise
unto our selves a longer peace, unto our kingdom more prosperity, to our
hearts more true comfort, to our consciences more certain rest, to our souls
more undoubted safety, if we had neither Gospel preached, nor Religion
professed, nor Truth maintained amongst us, then now many of us can, for if we
do preach Christ, it is so slackely; if we do defend the Truth, it is so
slenderly; if we do profess Religion, it is so indifferently; if we do
shoot at Babel, it is so weakly; if we do strike at sin, it is so faintly;
if we do God any service, it is so wearily performed, that many English
Professors do come far short of these Laodiceans, and what then may we think
will God do with them?

The golden Conduites and learned Oracles of Justice and Law (as Tully in his
first book de Oratore was pleased to style them) may do better to claspe up
their mouths, and throw down their benches, and let Religion shift for it
self as well as she may, then to lie sick of an (...) as Demosthenes in
Gellius in his 11. book and 9 chapter when he was to plead for the Milesians, lay
sick of a (...) or squinancie, I mean to shrink when they should cut off
corrupt members; or hold their hand when they should ease the Land of her
impostumes; or in a sinful policy to forbear the canuasing of Romish brats,
that trouble our Church and endanger our Land, and malign our Sovereign,
Ouidui.
Vixque tenent lachrymas, quod nil lachrymabile cernunt, who pray for our
climactericall year, and are sick to see the prosperity of our Jerusalem, and
better for us all, that our mothers belly had been our Tomb; or like
Aristotle's Ephemeron in his fifth book de historia animalium, we had perished
the day that we were born; like Micaiah, 1. Kings 22. we had taken a surfeit of
the bread and water of affliction; and better to feed with Phalaris his bull;
to lie in Procrustes his bed; or sit with Joseph in the stocks, till the soul
give over housekeeping in his dampie lodging, then to houer like the young man
in Zenophon between two ways and go on in neither; Zenophon Cyrus.
or stand like an (...), between two Religions, and stick neither to the one,
nor to the other; or to play the hollow neutrals, and turn our backs upon all
Religion, save only when we grope a profit in it, or only when we are the
richer for it, or only when we can win a great man's favor, or procure to our
selves some honor, or prevent some shame and censure by it, for then we prove
our selves to be perfect Laodiceans, and the Lord will spue us out of his mouth.

Were I like Apollos, eloquent and powerful in the Scriptures, were my sides
brass, and my pen iron, and my tongue a silver Trumpet, I would here endite
a Rhetorical and passionate exhortation, unto a sort of men, quos video
volitare in forum, quos stare ad curiam, quos etiam venere in senatum, sola
fundi nostri calamitas, the only scabs, and ulcers both of Church and State,
as the Orator speaks in his second Oration against Catiline, In Cat. Orat. 2.
I mean our Church Papist, who will serve both God and Rimmon, and our
nullifidian Protestant, that can serve both God and Mammon: o that they were
wise, then would not the one come this day to Church with us, and the next day
to a Romish Synagogue to hear a Mass; nor the other need driving into the
Temple, like that Ass mentioned by Bodin, in the 2. of his Demonologie, out of
Lucian and Apuleius, but run from Church, like Timon in the Poet, ringing as
he goes, At mihi plaudo ipse domi, I had rather see one of these Angels, then
hear three of yonder Preachers: o that they were wise, then would the one
cleave wholly either to God or Rimmon, and the other bow only either to God or
Mammon; then would the one either bring his heart with him, or give us his
room; and the other would come either with some zeal, or spare his labor in
making a formal profession: Then would they either give God all, or take all
from him; unless they will serve God with one half, and an Idol with the
other; meaning that GOD should have only the one half, and an Idol should
have the other: And they meant only to trouble God so far as to save the
body, but let the devil and the Pope agree between themselves which of them
two should have the soul. O Lord open their eyes, o Lord turn their hearts, o
Lord pardon their sins, least they come into condemnation, and be spued out
of thy mouth, which is the sentence of malediction passed upon all lukewarm
professors, whereof in the last place I am to speak. I will spue thee out of
my mouth.

Which words contain an allegory drawn from the nature of warm water, The
sentence of malediction. Illyr. Bulling. and Perer.
as Illyricus and Bullinger; or from meats, as Pererius and Ribera, which if
they be hot or cold, the stomach may retain, but if lukewarm, it casts them
up again, vt ventriculus been coquat, constringi debet and claudi: The
stomach digests those meats best, whereby it is straightened and contracted; so
do meats that be hot, exciecando, contract the stomach by drying, and meats
that be cold exasperando, by wringing and pinching it; but meats that be
lukewarm do enlarge and dilate the stomach; So that when nature would turn
off any part which is hurtful, it easily casts up all; and hereby we must
understand in the General, Gods infinite hatred against lukewarm professors,
and their Tragical end: and amongst many particulars which might be gathered
from the phrase, I will spue thee out of my mouth, I have pitched my meditations
on these two.

1 That which prouokes a man to vomit is grievous and troublesome, while it
rests upon the stomach, and bears the conclusion thus:

The Lukewarm professor is a sore diseaser, and a continual disturber of the
Church.

2 That the party provoked to vomit, is well pleased when the stomach is well
purged of the load that troubles it; And bears the conclusion thus.

God is highly pleased, when the Church is eased and purged of neutrall, and
hollow professors.

I will draw a little blood at these two veins, The lukewarm professor is a
sore disturber of the Church.
and set them as the utmost borders and bounders of my discourse.

To begin with the former; me thinks the Lukewarm professor may fitly be
compared with Dan, one of the sons of Jacob, whom his own father termed, an
Adder that biteth the horses and makes the Rider to fall backward, Genesis 49. Or
to a snuff in the midst of a golden Candlestick, that cannot grace the house
so much by his glimmering light, as it offends the company by a loathsome and
ungrateful smell: or to a cumbersome Ephialtes, that will not suffer the
spouse to sleep, but proves most troublesome and dangerous, when she should
rest and is least suspicious, or to an unnatural, or rather a natural viper,
that first feeds on the mother that breeds it, and then breaks the womb that
bears it. If flinching Jonas be in the ship, the waters will presently begin
to boil and swell. Virgilius Aenid. lib. 1.
Eripient subito nubes coelumque diemque there will suddenly follow as thick a
Chimmerian darkness, as there was at Paul's voyage to Rome, when neither Sun
nor Star appeared, Act. the 27. The limbs and joints of the ship cannot
choose but menace and threaten present drowning, it can neither stand still at
Anchor, nor go on in safety; if it stand the waves run over it; if it fail
and move, the wind and weather ouer-turnes it, there can be neither token of
fair weather, nor hope of life till Jonas be cast out of it. And may it not
well enough lie heavy at the heart of a tender mother (I mean the Church)
that she knows not whether some of her sons will take her part, or fight
against her; That she knows not whether they that lie in her womb will prove
like Barnabas sons of consolation, or like Benoni, a heaviness and woe unto
her: How should it choose but perplex and nail her soul, that they whom she
feeds with the milk of her breasts; that they whom she honors with the
best of her substance; that they whom she crowns with the richest of her
gifts, yet for all this do not love her? What is there that can more disquiet
and disturb the Churches peace; that will sooner make her look old and gray;
that can make deeper furrows in her face, and plow upon her back with a
sharper edge then this? that so many of her children should be still-borne and
cannot; some tongue tied and will not; some bashful and dare not speak a word
for Religion? that some of her pillars do nothing but pill her treasures; that
some which should do her good, care for nothing but her goods; that some of
her Prophets seek for nothing but to profit themselves? What is there that
can disquiet a Church so much as this, that the mayor part of all Congregations
should be luke warm and hollow professors? some well-willers to Dagon; some
worshippers of a wedge of gold; some making Religion but a stalking horse, or
some handsome drudge to serve their policy. This, this cannot choose but be a
nail at her heart.

Which conclusion may serve to stop the stentorious mouths, Nadir, as if then
they had swept and purged the Church of all her imposthumes; whereas yet our
Churches hang full of Romish spiders, who in their Italian cobwebs would
strangle our English souls; God forbid that ever my pen should patronize any
peevish Schismatics, only it were to be wished, that some men would not herein
place their felicity, or count this the greatest service to God and the Church,
to trounce and firret a few poor and despised men; but rather they would raise
hue and cry after Lukewarm professors, and carnal Gospellers, and close
Atheists, and sleepy Sibarites, Athaenaeus lib. 12.
that they would keep Romish fire from our English tinder; these, these, are
the traitorous Sinons that trouble our Church, these are the worms that breed
in the belly, and these the imposthumes that disease the womb of our mother;
such hot frenzies, as Nouahanisme, Catharisme, and Brownisme, are seldom or
never heard of in this frozen climate, and the iron age wherein we live: the
most of our diseases are cold Epilepsies, and dead Apoplexies, and slumbering
lethargies, and surely happy should be the pen that might but wound one of
the disturbers, and happy should be the tongue that might discomfite one of
these pioners, and happy might be the man, that might exile but one of these
undermining traitors out of the Church. These are the sins that threaten our
ruin, and these the hatchets, that cut down our Vine, and these the Foxes that
eat of her grapes, and these the bells that are most like to ring our knels,
and proclaim our funerals; and therefore every Scribe that can handle a pen,
must steep it in vinegar and make it tart; every Magistrate that can handle a
sword must draw it and make it sharp; every man that wears but a Christian
heart in his bosom most rouse and waken; He that has but a tongue in his head
must move and shake it; he that has but a stone in his hand must throw and
fling it, at the brazen faces and whorish foreheads of these murdering and
prodigious sins; else may we fear that one day we shall feel Gods hand
upon us and see destruction looking in at our gates, and desolation looking in
at our windows, and find nothing but emptiness in our Churches, see nothing
but Romish spiders weauing their cobwebs in our Pulpits, Sed tarda sit illa
dies, and nostro serior aeuo, let the Sun of that morning never rise, bury
us quick o earth, Lord take away our lives rather then the light of our
Gospel from us. And now have I brought you within the view and sight of our
iournies end, I hope it will make you cheerful in hearing, while I am briefly
opening my last conclusion, viz.

God is highly pleased, God highly pleased with purging the Church of luke warm
Professors.
when his Church is eased and emptied of hollow professors. Let them take Jonas
and cast him into the sea; Et facto citius tumida aequora placant, the winds
will hold their peace and be still, the waves will give over boiling, and make
their crests as flat and leueli as a floor, and the Masters of the ship
must needs have joyful hearts, to see how merrily she cuts the waters, so soon
as she has picked up her troublesome load, and emptied her womb of Jonas:
whom she was not able to digest. I know that amongst the wheat there will be
chafe, yet if the chafe were burned; I know that amongst the beds of Lillies,
there will be weeds, yet if the weeds were rooted up; I know that within the
pales and hedges of Gods own vineyard there will be stones, yet if the stones
were gathered out; the burning of the chafe would relish like a burnt
Sacrifice, the rooting up of the weeds would savor as the smell of Incense,
the ridding of the stones would be as welcome as a free will offering unto God:
Did not the Stars and the Heavens applaude Elias in the first book of Kings
chapter 13. for reclaiming them that halted between two opinions: for settling
them that were like to fall down between two professions, or was it not a
labor well bestowed, whereby he cured the Land that was sick and weary,
not able to bear them, and purged their Souls that were sick and ready to
die within them, and highly pleased his GOD, who was so deeply offended with
them. The grief of the head can no way be better cured, then by purging the
stomach, and scouring the body of such infestuous humors as fume upward, and
disquiet the brain, and if Christ be our head, and the Church his body, how
should you imagine that his spirit can be better pleased, or our blessed
Savior delighted with any thing so much, as with the sweeping out of
Lukewarm professors, and the paring away of aequiuocall members with the
healing, if they be cureable, or else the cutting off, if they be hopeless
and incureable neutralls.

Were it not that the time were now ready to impose me silence, and commanded
me to let you see the farthest period, I could very hardly part so quickly
with so good a point: I wind up all in one word of exhortation. I should
think my breath and travel happily bestowed, my Ministry and service richly
blessed, my pains and labor highly honored and revvarded, if I might
prevail with authority, to provide some strong purgation to scour out of the
sick body of this Land, some unwholesome Tenants, who Ianus-like have two
faces, Ovid. Fast. libr. 1.
the one to look demurely up to heaven, the other wantonly to smile upon an
Idol, and come to our Churches, only to save charges. If I might preuail with
the Clergy, to provide some powerful and passionate exhortations to settle
the hearts of their hearers upon one God, renouncing Idols, upon one Savior,
abiuring this sinful trash and deceitful riches. The world knows it full
well, that our Land was never so sick, that our Church never groaned so loud,
never mourned in such a passion, nor never traveled of these Hermaphrodites,
with half so much pain and grief as now ^he does, she has already bred,
and at this day she both feeds and clothes a numberless swarm of our-cast
professors, I mean Church papists, and rotten Protestants, who sometimes like
unto Judas, pretend to kiss, but if they can come near enough, intend to kill
her, and sometimes salute her Porches, but it is as Ioab saluted Abner, 2. Sam.
3.
with a dagger in their pockets, she may conclude a peace with other enemies,
but these will cut her throat by way of friendship, she sighs so deeply, and
she groaneth with so much anguish, that her cries are heard, and her grief
lamented beyond the Seas. It is no whispering rumor, your selves have often
heard it cried here at the cross, that they are warmely lodged, and richly
friended, and costly fed, with the marrow and fatness of our own Land, who
the midst of our Iubilies, do make flawes in our peace, and in the midst
of our joys endaunger our lives, and if any forrener should invade the land,
would le^d their knives to cut our throats, and be the foremost men to bear
arms against us.

This alas, this is the malady that makes the visage of our Church so wan,
and her face so full of wrinckles, and her back so full of furrows, and her
eyes so full of tears, and her heart so full of sorrows, that though many good
Physicians will speak her fair, and wish her health, yet they lance not the
Impostume, yet they purge not the fretting humor that consumes and grieueth
her, you may read in her face, that her gripings and conuulsio^s be
insufferable, you may hear by her groans, that her pain is intolerable, you
may presage by her pulses, the signs and symptoms of desolation and death,
and when these Catholic vipers have broken her heart, what will become of us,
who suffer such Professors as will never prove good Subjects to varnish their
neasts, and make their bowers within her: it would do them good to do us hurt:
it would lengthen their lives, to shorten ours; it would bring them half way
to Heaven, to bury their ponyards in our breasts; it would make a new Feast,
and another Holyday in the Roman Calendar, if they might but smell the burning,
and hear tell of the smoke and ashes of our Churches, they are already become
so bold, their number is so exceeding great, their Religion is so exceeding
bloody, their malice so inueterate, that if no sharper course be taken to
repress and smother them, they will adventure within a while, to try whether
we or they shall be the masters; and if either malice or multitude can do it,
they will make bone-fires of our flesh, they will cut off our lives, and
confiscate our livings, and set fire on our Churches, and martyr our Clergy,
and massacre our Judges, and murder our Princes, and say of England as Edom
said of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even to the ground. And if ever
this day of mourning come upon us (which I pray God may never come;) yet if it
should come we may thank our selves for keeping Romish Wasps in our English
Hiues.

It were happy for our Land, if we now at last began to pity and bemone our
selves, and be somevvhat sharp in keeping them under, while we have the sword
in our hands, rather then to suffer them to grow so long, until they be able
to tread upon our Religion, or to vaunt or triumph over us. And if any amongst
us can prepare an offering of peace, now or never let him bring it; he that
can utter or conceive a prayer, now or never let him offer it: Let us move the
Heaven with crying: spare thy people, O God, spare thy people, give not our
church into reproach; Let not the Antichristian host be our masters; Let not
the blasted Catholics be our commanders; Let not the workmen of Babel be our
confounders.

Will you have your farewell and hear what I Will say at your parting? Let me
exhort you (reverend Judges) who walk here in Scarlet robes, and sit on
seats of Justice, to be zealous for the truth, to pity and compassionate our
Church, to settle your own hearts to bevvare of Luke-vvarmenesse in your
religion, that when you shall leave these Benches, and put off these robes, you
may sit on Thrones amongst the four and twenty Elders, and be clothed with the
long white Raiment of Saints, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Let me
exhort you, godly and religious Citizens, to be zealous for the truth, to
uphold and maintain the Gospel, to take heed of coursing and wandering amongst
religions, to take heed of luke-warmnesse in your christian profession, that
when you shall be put out of these houses, you may be received into everlasting
habitations; when you shall leave your trading in this City, you may be
fellow-Citizens with the Saints in glory, when these rotten posts and
worme-eaten timber of your bodies shall be broken down, your souls may be
carried on Angels wings into Abraham's bosom, and you also may follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. And let us all begin this day to make our eyes rivers,
and our heads springs, and our hearts fountains of tears. And let this river
never give over running, let this spring never give over swelling, let this
fountain never give over flowing; until this river of tears become a sea,
and this spring of tears become a flood, and this fountain of tears become
an Ocean, to wash our beds, to water our couches, to make our chamber swim;
for the misery that we are like to bring upon our selves, for the desolation
and woe which we are like to bring upon our Churches; for the solemn
destruction, and final subversion which we have labored to bring upon our
whole land, and upon our kingdom, by palpable luke-warmenes in our Religion,
and by our want of godly zealein our Christian profession. And when this river
of tears shall be dried, and these fountains stopped that we cannot weep.
Let us fill the air and beat the heavens with our prayers, and though sickness
may put our tongues to silence that we cannot speak, yet let our hearts
breath, and our souls enforce upon the heavens some earnest and powerful
supplications, that the dreadful God whom we have offended may be pleased to
bless our Church, to prosper our Sovereign, to protect our Kingdom, to
advance the Gospel, to increase our zeal, to cloth ourenemies in mourning
weeds, to open the windows of Heaven and crown us with his blessings, to cure
all our souls, to forgive all our sins, to save all our souls, for his Son
Christ Jesus his sake: Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

