THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH SINCE THE DAYS OF Our Savior JESUS CHRIST, until
this present Age.

Divided into four Books.

1. The first contains the whole proceedings and practices of the Emperors,
both of the West and East for, or against the Church; as also the wonderful
love of God toward it, by whom it was so preserved, that neither by Tyranny it
could be subdued, nor by policy circumvented. 2. The second contains a
brief Catalogue of the beginnings, and proceedings; of all the Bishops, Popes,
Patriarchs, Doctors, Pastors, and other learned men; in Europe, Asia and
Africa, with or against the Church, together with their deaths. 3. The third
contains a short sum of all the Heretics, which have been in the Church;
the time when, and the place where they lived; as also the persons by whom they
were subdued. 4. The fourth contains a short compend of all the Councels
General, National, and Provincial; together with their several Canons,
which have been established, either with, or against the Church.
Divided into 16. Centuries.

By all which is clearly shevved and proved, the Antiquity, Visibilitie, and
Perpetuity, of our Church; ever since Christ's days, until this present Age.

Collected out of sundry Authors both ancient and modern; by the famous and
worthy Preacher of Gods word, Master PATRICK SYMSON, late Minister at
Striueling in Scotland.

LONDON

Printed by I.D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
three Golden Lions in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange: and for William
Sheffard, at the entering in of Pope's Head Alley, out of Lumbard street. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT GRACIOUS PRINCE: LODOWICK Duke of Richmond, and Lenox; Baron of
Settrington, Darnley, Te^banten, and Methuen; Lord great Chamberlane, and
Admiral, of Scotland; Lord Steward of the Kings household; Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter; and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council.
ALthough it may seem both to your Grace and others, great presumption in me,
a stranger, to trouble your Grace, either with the view of these unpolished
lines, or this ensuing History; yet I hope the latter shall be a sufficient
excuse for the former. For having received it from your Noble Sister the
Countess of Mar: at her Ladyships commandment, and especial direction, I
revised it, put it to the Press, hastened the Printing, and now also crave
your Graces Patronage thereto: not so much respecting the greatness of your
authority as the goodness of your nature and disposition, whereof much might be
said, but that I hold it needless to show the Sun with a candle. Thus humbly
commending it to your Graces favorable acceptance, and heartily committing
you to the Almighties gracious protection, I humbly take my leave, resting

Your Graces humble servant: A. Symson.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, VIRTUOUS, and elect Lady; Marie, Countess of Mar: P.S.
wishes, grace, mercy, and eternal felicity.
THE estate of the Church of Christ (NOBLE LADY) whereof we rejoice to be
accounted feeling members, has been subject unto manifold afflictions, even
from the beginning of the world: (not like unto the estate of Moab settled upon
her dregs; Iere. 48.11.
and not poured out from vessel to vessel) yet the more afflicted, the more
beloved of God; whose face, watered with tears, is fair; and whose mourning
voice, is pleasant in the sight of God: Cant. 2.14.
and as doing of good willingly, has a great recompense of reward from God:
even so patient suffering of evil, for righteousness sake, as it is highly
commended in Scripture, so it shall be richly rewarded in heaven: yea the very
heathnick Philosopher Plato (to whom the glory of the sufferings for Christ was
unknown) affirms that men who suffer, Plato in repub.
scourging, binding, tormenting, boring out of eyes, and finally, strangling of
their breath for righteousness sake, are exceeding happy, are (as the word
(...) imports) thrice happy: although the superlatiue degree of suffering,
which can be found amongst the heathnicks, could never equal the glory of the
sufferings of Christians. They who were initiated in the mysteries of Mittera
(which word in the Persian language signifies the Sun) could not be
admitted to that honor, (...)
before they had been tried by suffering fourscore diverse sorts of
punishments; such as long abstinence from meat and drink, solitary living in
the wilderness a long time, trial of suffering the fervent heat of fire, and
the coldness of water, and many other torments, until the number of fourscore
had been completed. These voluntary sufferings, like as in the beginning they
wanted the warrant of Gods calling, so likewise in the end they wanted the hope
of Gods reward, but the mouth of God himself pronounces: Christians to be
blessed who die in the Lord, Apoc. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

The manifold persecutions of the Church, may be divided into three ranks;
Three ranks of the persecution of the Church.
some were fierce and bloody, some were crafty, the third was and is, both
crafty and cruel. The ten heathnicke Emperors, Nero, Domitian, Traian, etc.
were so prodigal of the blood of the Lords Saints, that they poured it out
like water upon the ground: The Arrian Emperors were subdolous and crafty; but
the persecution of Antichrist which is the third, goes beyond the rest both in
cruelty and craft: yea the experience which we have had in our own days of
the cruelty of Antichrists supposts, and their crafty convey of their
malicious enterprises intended against our Sovereign Lord, His Royal race,
and Noble Counselors, does clearly prove that the malice and craft of
Antichrist, goes as far beyond the craft and malice of all Emperors, as the
flood of Noah, exceeds the inundation of Nilus.

In the first, The estate of the Church in the 1, 2, and 3 Centuries.
second, and third, Centuries, the faith and patience of Christians was tried
by the yoke of ten bloody persecutions. For first the Apostles, (who had heard
with their ears the words of the great shepherd of our souls, and seen with
their eyes God manifested in the flesh) were chosen to be faithful to the
world, of the doings, sufferings, and doctrine, of Jesus Christ: and next to
the Apostles their Disciples and true successors, sealed up with rivers of
blood that faith, which they received from the Apostles.

The fire wherewith they were burnt; the water wherein they were drowned; the
air wherein their bodies were hanged; the mountains and wildernesses through
which they wandered; the dark prisons wherein they were enclosed (as people
unworthy of liberty); yea all the elements and the very light of heaven, from
whence by most unrighteous violence they (the righteous heirs thereof) were
excluded; all these (I say) were witnesses of their glorious sufferings.

In the fourth, The estate of the Church in the 4. 5. and 6. Centuries.
fifth, and sixth, Centuries, the knowledge of the Church was tried by
Heretics, who by the mistie clouds of error, endeavored to blindfold the
eyes of men, and to lead them captive from the simplicity of the truth of God;
at which time also, the power of the light of God was manifested, in
discipating the darkness of errors, as the Sunrising does the darkness of
the night.

The estate of ^^e Church in (...) 7. 8. and ^ Centuries.
In the seventh, eighth, and ninth, Centuries; the Roman Church (resembling the
Harlots of Heliopolis in Phoenitia, who having liberty to prostitute themselves
to the lust of strangers, teach their children procreated by this libidinous
copulation, to depend only upon them whom they know, not upon their fathers,
whom they know not) disadvantageth her children with the voice of God sounding
in holy Scripture; teaching, that it is sufficient to believe as the Church of
Rome (the mother of al Churches) believes, which in matters of faith cannot
err. But we must depend upon the voice of God, our heavenly Father, ^ Pet.
1.23. and 2.2. Ier. 8.22. Psalm. 46.5.
Who has begotten us by the incorruptible seed of his Word, fed us with the
sincere milk of the same, and anointed us with the balm of Gilead, making
glad his own City, even with the waters of his own Sancturay. The loud
sounding trumpets of vain and idle words, we leave to the adversaries of the
truth, for that is their armor wherewith they fight against the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

The estate of the Church in the 10. 11. and 12. Centuries.
In the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, Centuries; the tyranny of Antichrist was
accompanied with a wonderful growth of lies, falsehood, and ridiculous fables,
of which the absurdity of one, striving with the absurdity of another,
derogateth, in the end, credit from them all, and (as the soldiers of Cadmus,
who were bred of Dragons teeth) kill one another. Vincentius is not ashamed to
write, Vincen. in speculo. an. 1012.
that they who regarded more their play and game, and dancing, then they did
the reverend hearing of the mass; were plagued with a continuance in dancing
without intermission, for the space of a twelue-moneth thereafter. If pen
could blush, if hand could tremble, if paper could be ashamed, such ridiculous
fables had not been written. At this time learning was not to be found in
Pastors, sincerity in Councels, humility in Prelates, and true religion in the
multitude of people and Nations: For in stead of these, there was abundance of
Liturgies, Processions, and Pilgrimages, Masses, superstitious vows,
multiplication of unprofitable ceremonies, confidence in external service, as
if it could save, ex opere operato, Fastings, tied to days and months, not
unlike to the fasts of the Donatists. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
At this time the vines of Sodom and Gomorrah abounded with grapes of gall,
and bitter clusters. At this time the key of the kingdom of God, seemed almost
lost; the preaching of the kindome of Christ, ceased for the most part: The
authority and pre-eminence of the Pope over Princes, and all men in spiritual
offices (like the axes and hammers of the Assyrians, cutting down the carved
work of the house of the Lord) sounded so loud in all Churches, Psalm. 74.16.
that the sound of the Gospel could, scarcely be heard. And although at this
time there were some Roman Bishops who spoke against the kingdom of the
Devil, yet their hearts were so filled by him, with ambition, avarice,
uncleanness, contempt of the lawful authority of Princes, superstition, and
horrible idolatry, that he led them headlong to hell, Simile.
as men may lead dogs (though barking aloud) whither they please.

The estate of the Church in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. Centuries.
In the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth, Centuries; even to
these our times, there is nothing to be expected, but a discovery of
Antichrists hypocrisy, a decay of his usurped authority, an abrogation of his
tyrannous laws; and finally, an utter ruin and destruction of his kingdom,
notwithstanding of all the maintainers and vpholders of the same. And surely,
it is a great encouragement to us, when we see false teachers daily renewing
their forces to fight against the truth, as the Philistims did, who fought
against David in the valley of Rephaim, after they had been often discomfited
by him. The last period of their reluctation against the Lords anointed, was
loss and hurt to themselves, and dishonor to their gods, 1 Chronicles. 14.11.
whom they were forced to leave behind them, which David took and burnt with
fire, calling the place Baalperatzim (that is) the rupture of Baal. The
adversaries of the Gospel in Christendom, by renewing their forces again, are
procuring a new name unto their Idols: They cannot be content with the name of
Baal-peor, Baal-meon, Baal-thamar, Baal-chatsor, Baal-gad; but they will spread
out their banners in the valley of Rephaim against the Lord, longing for the
last name, Baal-peperatzim, confusion to themselves.

That this has been the estate of the Church, ever since the days of Christ
until this present, does evidently appear out of the ensuing History, wherein
besides the antiquity and visibility of this our Church, your Ladyship may also
(as in a mirror) behold her wonderful constancy opposed to her enemies
cruelty. Let the Papists to cover the turpitude of their new found doctrine,
pretend antiquity as much as they will, yet they will never be able to prove
it. So did the Hagarens boldly vsurp the name of Saracens, although they were
only the brood that sprang from the womb of Hagar, the hand-maide of Sarah.
And the Priests boy in the days of Eli came to the Caldron, while the flesh of
the peace offering was seething, 1 Samuel 2.14.
and thrust in his flesh-hooke, all that the flesh-hooke brought up, the Priest
took for himself, which thing was done by violence, the Priest having no
right thereto. The Roman Church in our days having borrowed the flesh-hooke of
the Priests boy, and violently arrogated unto themselves, the faithful keeping
of ancient Apostolic traditions; when we demand where the Charter containing
their title and right, we see nothing but the flesh-hooke, with these three
teeth in their hand: 1. The Church cannot err. 2. We are the true Church. 3.
Cursed be he that says in matters of faith, our general Councels can err.

Madam, accept under your Ladyships favorable protection, these my travailes
in weakness, not unlike the writer (whose life it has pleased the Lord to
prolong these many years bypast, under many infirmities of a daily decaying
tabernacle) containing a faithful testimony of my humble endeavor, to
confirm the branches of your noble household in the true faith of Christ.
Though there be many that forsake Christ, and are as reprobate silver from whom
the dross cannot be separated; yet let the Noble house of Mar follow
Christ. And as Helene, Queen of Adiabani, Eusebius l. 2. c. 12. Joseph. l. 20. c.
^. Simile.
when she left her Country, and came to dwell at Jerusalem, filled the bellies
of the poor with the corn of Egypt, and the fruits of Cyprus (for it was a
year of universal famine) and spared for no cost, to do good to the Saints
who were at Jerusalem; so I beseech the Lord to raise up many honorable Ladies
(such as your Ladyship is) to refresh the barren souls of ignorant people in
this Land, with examples of humility, modesty, godliness, and all other
virtues.

Now the mercies of the Lord Jesus, The Author and finisher of our faith,
attend upon my Lord your husband, upon your Ladyship, and all your Noble house:
and The great Mediator of the covenant of God, stablish all your hearts in the
certainty of his undoubted truth, unto the end, and in the end. Amen.

Your Ladyships humble servant: P. Symson.

The Authors Epistle to the Reader.
IT was admired of old, Theod, l. 4. c. 26.
that Aphraates, who lived in the Cottages of the wilderness all his time, yet
once was found in the streets of Antiochia, in the days of the Emperor
Valens: He excused the change of his former behavior, by the similitude of a
modest Virgin, lurking quietly in the secret corners of her fathers house, so
long as it is in safety, but if it be set on fire, it is a hurtful modesty to
lurk any longer; necessity forces her to run abroad, that she may give
warning of the imminent danger. This example of Aphraates might sufficiently
excuse mine unaccustomed boldness, to set forth my head, which has been
lapped up so long in hurtful silence. For now the power of darkness
increases, and (as the Prophet says): Woe unto us, Ier, 6.4.
for the day declineth, and the shadows of the evening are stretched out, yea
the shadow of Mount Athos reaches to the Isle Lemnos, a sure fore-running
token, of the going down of the Sun. And therefore now it is time to creep
out of our subterraneall caves, that we may give notice to quence the fire in
time, before it spread further, and bring greater desolation to the house of
our God. Papists are become insolent of late days (like unto Serpents in
summer weather, taking courage, and biting the heels of horses that the riders
may fall) not sparing both in word and writ, to reproach our religion, as not
countenanced by An iquity; and our Ministry as altogether naked and void of
the knowledge of ancient learning: Shall we now stand still (as idle men in
the marketplaces) one looking upon another? I had rather (then we should
sustain such apparent damage and hurt, through untimely silence) step forth
with the Lacedemonian soldier, impotent of his legs, and neither apt to fight,
nor able to fly; having this comfort (as he had) that happily I may blunt the
edge of the enemies sword, and make others ashamed, who are more fit for
fighting then I am. And although those who have undertaken to write Compends,
have found therein great difficulty, being so environed with straits, that they
find it very hard, either to satisfy themselves or others (for if the
Compends be short, they seem obscure; if written at length, they seem to
have need of other Compends, to abridge their prolixity) yet notwithstanding of
all these difficulties, it is better to set forward by doing some good, either
to our selves or others, then to spend our time in idleness, left our
cogitations (like unto the upper and lower millstones, Simile.
which lacking good grain to grind upon, rub violently one upon another,
until both be broken) not being well exercised, but spent upon vain things,
become hurtful to both our souls, and bodies.

In the 1. 2. and 3. Centuries; I have made no mention of Councels, either
Provincial, or National; for during that time, as they were few in number, by
reason of the rage of persecuting Emperors; so most part of those which were
gathered, were obscure, and the less regarded in respect of their
contradiction one to another. There was a Council gathered at Rome, another in
Caesarea Palestinae, Eusebius. l. 5 c. 23.
another in France, the fourth in Pontus, and one in Asia; all for one, and to
the self same purpose: viz. to deliberate concerning the keeping of Easter. In
Rome, Victor was of one opinion; Polycrates in Asia held another; Iraeneus in
France, was wiser then the rest, and was more careful to keep unity in the
Church of Christ, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 37.
then to dispute con^entiously about the keeping of days: A National Council
of Philadelp. in Arabia, was gathered against Artemon and Beryllus, wherein
Origin was present. Another at Rome, by Cornelius, for the suppressing of the
error of Novatus. Cypr. epist. lib. 1. epist. 2. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 29.
Another at Antiochia, against Paulus Samo satenus, a pernicious Heretic.
Others were gathered by Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, for rebaptizing of those
who were baptized by Heretics: which weakness both in Cyprian, and in other
Bishops of Africa, was after corrected by the Church.

Take in good part the Goats-haire, and Rammes-skins, which I present to cover
the Tabernacle of our God. I refer the ornaments of gold, silver, and
precious-stones, for beautifying the inner parts of the Tabernacle, to others,
upon whom God has vouchsafed greater gifts. The house of God is large and
ample, and as it has need of bright-shining torches, for the Hauls, Parlors,
and Chambers; so it has need of smaller lights, for Cellers, and
office-houses: if my farthing candle give light in the lowes Celler of the
house of God, my heart is fully content. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord: P. Symson.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY of the Church: whereinto the whole proceedings
and practices of the Emperors both of the West and East, for or against the
Church, are briefly expressed: as also the wonderful love of God toward her,
who so preserved her, that neither by Tyranny she was subdued, nor by Policy
circumvented.
CENTVRIE I.
Augustus Caesar.
OUR Lord Jesus the true Prince of peace, was borne in Bethlehem Judah of a
maid, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
in a very peaceable time, in the 42. year of the reign of Augustus Caesar.
At what time the Temple of Ianus was closed and locked up, Funct. Chron.
which in time of wars was continually patent and open. At the time of this
blessed Nativity the Angels of God rejoiced, Luke 1.
the devils trembled. Some affirm that all the Oracles of Jupiter, Apollo and
Hecate were silent, and gave no answers: always it is certain that many
years before the Lords blessed Nativity, the Lord permitted the world to be
wonderfully blinded with the delutions of the devil. The top of Jupiters Oak
in Dodona was shaken, the caldron was smitten with the rod that was in the hand
of Jupiters image: The Prophetesses forewarned by these fore-running tokens of
inspiration were ready to utter Jupiters Oracles, and the deceived people were
humbly kneeling and attending upon the answer that should be given. Nazianz. in
Julian. annot. nouni.
The tripode in Delphis, the laur^ll and fountain in Daphne, Apollo his
deceitful ensigns, the ram-faced image of Jupiter, Ammonius in Gyrenia, with
many more places whereinto the sound of the devils trumpet was heard, to these
places (I say) did people bewitched by Satan resort in frequent numbers to be
taught by the mouth of him who was a liar from the beginning, and who remains
a liar, albeit he spoke at some time the truth, because he speaks it animo
fallendi upon a purpose to deceive. It is very credible, that the blessed Seed,
who came to break the head of the Serpent, did stopp his mouth also in the
time of his blessed Nativity. The country of Judea at this time was subject to
the Romans, Luke 2.
and paid tribute to Caesar. The deputies of Augustus in Judea and Syria, were
Cyrenius, Coponius, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3.
Ambibuchus, and Annius Rufus, one succeeding to another. Herod the son of
Antipater by favor of Antonius obtained this honor to be Governor of the
Nation of the Jews, but the honorable name of a King he received from
Augustus Caesar: this was ratified for his further assurance by the Senate of
Rome, Joseph. antiq. lib. 25 cap. 10.
for which cause Herod to testify his thankful mind toward Antonius,
builded a Castle in Jerusalem very near to the Temple called Arx Antonia: And
to the honor of Augustus, he builded Caesarea Palestinae, sometime called the
tower of Straton. Now a forreiner and stranger, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1. Christ
was borne when the Scopter was apparanly sliding from Judah. Gen 46.10.
of his fathers side an Idumean, of his mothers side an Arabian, and an aliant
both from the stock of David, and also from the Commonwealth of Israel was
reigning in Judea, and the Sceper was sliding from Judah, now I say, was it time
that Shiloch should come, according to Jacobs prophecy, to whom the people
should be gathered. Now was it time that the promised M^ssias should come and
sit in the Throne of his father David, and of his Kingdom there should be none
end. And indeed how can the Kingdom of Christ have an end, who acquireth a new
title and right of government by death, which is the last period of other Kings
governments, and in death they leave a vacant room to a successor: Christ's
Kingdom is everlasting. Romans 14.9 Hos. 13.14.
but Christ Jesus by dying, and rising again, has a right to rule both over
dead and quick. Yea in the very death it self he was practicing his kingly
office in most effectual manner, and and trampling Satan under feet, and
undoing the power of death,

In Augustus time also, Joseph was admonished in a dream to take the babe and
his mother, Mat. 2.13. The uncertainty of tradition.
and to flee into Egypt. Sozomen not content with the certainty of Scripture,
adds a particular nomination of the town Hermopolis in Thebaida, whereinto
Christ soiourned until the death of Herod the great. This he had by the
uncertainty of tradition. The miracle of the huge and high tree Prestis, that
bowed the top lowly to the ground and worshipped her Maker Christ, and
afterward had a medicinable virtue in fruit, leaf, and bark, to cure
diseases, rather derogareth credit to that Egyptian tradition, Sozom. lib. 5.
cap. ^2.
then assures us of the verity of that report. Herod before his departure from
this life; had put to death three of his sons, Aristobulus, Alexander, and
Antipater, and by testamentall legacy had divided his dominions amongst his
remanent sons, Archelaus, Herod, Antipas, and Philip: which testament being
ratified by Augustus, Judea, Samaria, and Idumea were alloted to Archelaus,
Joseph antiq. lib 17. cap. 13.
the Tetrarchie of Galilee to Antipas, and Iturea and Trachonitis to Philip.
Joseph being returned from Egypt, when he heard that Archelaus did reign in
Judea in stead of his father Herod, feared to dwell in Judea, but being warned
of God in a dream, went to the parts of Galilee, Mat. 2.22.2^.
and dwelt in a City called Nazaret. All this was done in the days of
Augustus. After he had reigned 56. years, or as Josephus writes, 57. years,
viz. with Antonius 14. years, and after he overcame Antonius and Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt in sea-warfare over against Epirus, he had the Imperial
sovereignty himself alone all his days, Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3.
and died in the 77. year of his age.

Tiberius.
Roman Deputies in Judah 1. Bucole Index.
AFter Augustus reigned Tiberius Nero 22. years, seven months, seven days.
The Roman Deputies that were sent to Judea in the time of his reign, were
Valerius Gratus, Pontius Pilat, and Vitellius. Valerius Gratus for love of
gain removed the Priests of the Jews from their offices, at his own
pleasure. Ananus, Ismael, Eleazarus, Simon the son of Camithus, all these
were denuded of their priestly dignity, when as two of them, viz. Eleazarus and
Simon had continued scarce one year in office. In end Ios^phus Caiphas is
advanced to the Priesthood. This is the cause wherefore the Evangelist John
calls Caiphas the high Priest of that same year. Ioh. 18.13.
Matters of religion were now come to an horrible abuse, and were not ordered
according to Gods holy ordinance, but according to the appetite of the Roman
Deput ies. Joseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3.
After Gratus, Pontius Pilate was sent to be Deputy in Judea, a man vigilant
and active in all civil affairs, as the blood of the Galileans mixed with
their sacrifices clearly proves, Luke 13.1.
but in the cause of Christ remiss, negligent and slack. After the issue of
ten years, Vitellius is appointed Deputy in Judea, and Pontius Pilate
addresseth toward Rome. By gratifying of the Jews of a matter of small
importance he obtained great favor. The Priestly ^arments.
The priestly garments were wont to be kept in the Castle called Antonia, but
Vitellius gave commandment to the Captain of the Castle, to let the high
Priest have the use of them when he pleased, and to choose what place he liked
best for the custody of the priestly garments. He disauthorized Caiphas,
following (as appears) the example of Valerius Gratus, and gave his office to
Jonathan the son of Ananus, sometime high Priest. Joseph. antiq. lib. 18.
cap. 6. Eusebius, hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap 10. Mat. 3. and 4. Christ crucified in
the 18. year of Tiberius. Heb. 7.
In the 15. year of the reign of Tiberius, Christ our Lord and Savior was
baptized by John in Jordan, was led to the wilderness, fasted forty days, was
tempted of the devil and began to preach.

In the 18. year of Tiberius, the Lord was crucified, and offered a sacrifice
for our sins, which has a perpetual virtue to save such as believe. He
arose again the third day from death. The high Priests and Rulers of the
people gave money to the soldiers, to obscure the glory of his resurrection,
yet it was sufficiently known, not only to Christ's Disciples, by his frequent
apparitions to them, but also to Pontius Pilate the Roman Deputy himself, who
had given out a sentence of death against Christ. Pilate by letters signified
to Tiberius the miracles of Christ, his resurrection, and that he was supposed
of many to be God: The Senate of Rome refuses to acknowledge the divinity of
Christ. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. Romans 1.21, 22.
But the Senate of Rome refused to acknowledge the divinity of Christ, because
he was worshipped as God, before his Godhead was approved by the Senate of
Rome. The words of the Apostle Paul had performance in the Roman Senate,
(...), they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
full of darkness, when they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools.
The very smoke that rises from the furnace seems to be somewhat at the
first, but when it mounteth up into the air, the higher it ascends, the more
it scatereth, and the sudden dispartion of it declares it is but a vain
thing. Such was the wisdom of the Roman Senate, when they mounted up so high
as to judge of divine things far surpassing the reach of the natural
understanding of man, they proved stark fools, and people destitute of true
understanding: and Pilate himself ouerladen with many heavy calamities in the
days of Caius, Pilate kille^h himself.
put hands into himself, and so ended his wretched life. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.

Caius Caligula.
Caius Caligula, successor to Tiberius, reigned three years and nine months.
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 8.
He was a proud Tyrant, enemy to all righteousness, the very child of the
devil. I insist only upon Church matters. He was an hateful enemy to the
Jews dwelling at Jerusalem, and at Alexandria. For one and the selfsame
cause were they both despised and hated of Caius, Caius would be counted a god.
because they would not give unto him divine honors by building Temples, and
Altars, and offering sacrifice to new Jupiter Caius, and swearing by his name.
First concerning Jerusalem, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 6 Joseph. antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 11
he had sent Petronius to be Deputy in Judea, with commandment to dedicate
the Temple of Jerusalem to Jupiter Caius, and to set up his image in the
Temple. The Jews were more willing to die, then to see the Temple of their God
polluted. Petronius advertised the Emperor of the grievance of the Jews, The
Jews abhorted the vpsetting of the image of Caius in their Temple. Act. 12.
but before his letters came into the hands of Caius somewhat interveened that
both disappointed the purpose of Caius, and also incensed his heart with fury
and rage against his Deputy Petr^nius. At what time Herod Agrippa was at Rome,
whom afterward the Angel of God smote at Caesarea, so that he was consumed
with worms, he was exceedingly beloved of Caius, because in the days of
Tiberius he had been cast in prison, and bound with bands for the love he
carried to Caius, in so far that Caius invited Agrippa upon a certain time
to a banquet, and bade him ask what he pleased, and it should be granted. The
petition of Agrippa.
Agrippaes petition was this, that Caius would suffer the Nation of the Jews
to live according to their own law. Caius was moved somewhat with this
unexpected petition, yet partly for his excessive love toward Agrippa: also,
left he should seem to them which fate at table to be a promise-breaker, the
petition is granted. But the venom of his indignation against the Jews he
poured out against Petronius, because that by lingering in executing his
commandment occasion was offered to Agrippa to present this foresaid petition.
The bloody letter of Caius written to Petronius his Deputy Joseph antiq. lib.
18. cap. 11.
The letter of Caius sent to his Deputy was cruel and bloody, the like whereof
was seldom heard: because he fulfilled not the Emperors desire, he is
commanded to give out sentence of death against his own life, and to be both
judge and burrio to himself. Such mercy was in this new Jupiter Caius. Before
I write any thing of his cruelty against the Jews that dwelt in Alexandria, it
is a meet place to admonish the Reader of the hypocrisy and counterfeit
holiness of Herod Agrippa, who seemed both in the days of Caius, and also in
the days of the Emperor Claudius, to be a pattern of godliness, preferring
at the banquet of Caius the liberty of the people of God, and the inviolable
observation of the Law of God, to all the riches that the liberality of an
affectioned Emperor could be able to afford. The hypocrisy of Agrippa.
In Claudius days he sailed from Italy to Judea, he acknowledged God to be
the author of his deliverance from prison and bands, and offered a chain of
gold to be hung up in the Temple of Jerusalem, Joseph. antiq. lib. 19 cap. 5.
in testimony that he received that benefit with a thankful mind out of the
Lords hands. In outward things he was a builder of the walls of Jerusalem,
until the emulous envy of Marsus, or envious emulation, Joseph. antiq. lib.
19 cap. 7.
the hinderer of all good works, compelled him to desist and to leave the
work imperfited. For all this outward show of holiness, the lessons of Caius
whom he loved beyond all things, never left him till his last breath. Caius
desired to be counted a god, so did Agrippa in Caesarea delight when his
Oration was called the voice of God and not of man. Caius persecuted the Jews
without a cause, so did Herod Agrippa the Christians. Acts 12.
Caius the higher he advanced himself, the greater was his fall, the like
also happened to Agrippa. So pernicious a thing is ungodly company, burning
their associats with their fire, Contention between the Jews and Grecians who
dwelt at Alexandria.
or else blacking them with their smoke, and hurtful every manner of way. In
the town of Alexandria the Grecians contended against the Jews, both parties
sent Ambassadors to Rome, the Grecians sent Appion, the Jews sent Philo a very
prudent and learned man. Appion with flattering words insinuated himself in the
favor of the Emperor Caius, and accused the Jews that they neither builded
temples, Joseph. antiq. l^b. 18. cap. 10. Eusebius. eccl hist. lib. 2. cap. 5.
nor offered sacrifice to the honor of Caius, as the Grecians did. Philo was
ready to answer, but Caius ruled with affection rather then with reason, caused
Philo to be thrust out of his palace, and would not hearken unto him. In these
two mirrors, we may see the cruel disposition of this Emperor, whose dependers
were persecuters of Christians, like as he himself was a persecuter of the
Jews. If any good turn fell into his hand, it was rather by accident then of
purpose to glorify God, or to punish sin: he banished Herod Antipas, Eusebius.
hist. lib. 2 cap. 4. Joseph. antiq. lib. 18 cap. 9.
who beheaded John the Baptist, and his wife Herodias that incestuous harlot,
who ended their lives in penury and misery in Lions of France. But all this was
done for the favor of Agrippa, but not for detestation of murder and incest.
In end Caius was slain by his own servants, Chereas and Lupus, whom the
Emperor Claudius afterward punished unto death. Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap.
3. New Jupiter in worse case then old Jupiter.
This new Jupiter I count him to have been in worse case then old Jupiter the
son of Saturn, albeit both of them died, yet the one after his death, was
counted a god, but the other after his death was counted a devil.

Claudius.
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Claudius reigned thirteen years, eight months. He ratified the gift of the
kingdom of Judea, bestowed by his predecessor Caius upon Herod Agrippa, and
added thereto all the dominions of Herod Antipas, Joseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap.
4.
whom Caius had banished. This Herod Agrippa when he returned from Italy to
Judea, builded the walls of Jerusalem, sparing for no cost, so high and
strong, that if the work had not been hindered by the procurement of Marsus
Governor of Syria, he had made them impregnable. He was not so careful to
build the walls of the spiritual Jerusalem, for he beheaded the holy Apostle
S. James, the brother of John, and did cast Peter into prison, whom the Lord
miraculously delivered. Acts. 12.
This Herod and the Jews made havoc of the glory of God, Acts 12.
and blood of his Saints. For he gratified them by shedding the blood of the
Apostles of Christ, and again they gratified him by giving him the glory that
appertained to God alone. The famine foretold by Agabus Acts 11.
For which cause he was stricken by the Angel of God and consumed with worms,
In this Emperor Claudius days, the famine foretold by the Prophet Agabus
afflicted the world. One of the causes of this plague doubtless was the
manifold abuses of the creatures of God, in the mids of the abundance of
bread, the contempt of the poor, which faults were so universally ouerspread
in the world, that some of the Emperors themselves were not free of the foul
spot of intemperancie: Funct. Ch^on.
as the scoffing speeches of the people did witness in stead of Claudius
Tiberius Nero calling the Emperor Caldius Biberius Mero. This is referred to
the successor of Augustus.

In the year of our Lord 48. and in the sixth year of the reign of Claudius,
The Counci^ of Jerusalem, Anno. 48. Acts 15.
as Chytraeus reckons, was gathered that famous Council of Jerusalem
described viuely by the Evangelist Luke whereat were present the Apostles,
Peter and Paul, and James, and Barnabas a reverent man of God in whom
Apostolic gifts were not lacking, with other worthy men, Judas surnamed
Barsabas and Silas notable Prophets and fellow laborers of the Apostles:
likewise the Commissioners of Antiochia, and Elders of Jerusalem with many
others who were believers. What was concluded in this Council, Acts 15.
I remit to the faithful narration of the Evangelist Luke. Always if votes be
pondered rather then numbered, this is the Council of Councels more worthy to
be called O Ecomenicke then the Councels of Nice, of Constantinople, of
Ephesus, and Chalcedon. In the Council of Nice were worthy Bishops, who came
from all quarters, of the world, but in this Council were holy Apostles, who
could not err in matters of faith, O Ecomenicke Bishops indeed, and any one
of the holy Apostles was illuminated with more abundance of clear light in
things pertaining to the worship of God then all the 300 and 18. bishops
co^ueened at Nice in Bithynea. Roman deputies.
Many Roman Deputies were sent in the days of Claudius to keep Syria and
Judea in subjection to the Romans, such as Marsus, Longinus, Cuspius Phadus,
Tiberius Alexander, Cumanus and Felix. I leave Marsus and Longinus for desire
to open up in what Deputies time things mentioned in holy Scripture came to
pass. When Cuspius Phadus was deputy, there arose a deceitful man named
Theudas, to whom resorted a number of men above 400. who were slain, Acts 5.36.
and all who followed him were scattered, Josephus writes that Phadus sent
forth a trope of horsemen, who suddenly charged the people that followed
Theudas, and slew them, ^^seph antiq. lib 20 cap 2. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Acts 5 37.
and took Theudas alive, and cut off his head, and brought it to Jerusalem,
After this man arose one Judas of Galile in the days of the tribute, and drew
away much people after him: he also perished, and all that obeyed him were
scattered. If Gamaliel in that narration keep the order of time, as these
words ( After him) would import, of necessity the words of the history of the
Acts must be understood of another Theudas then that man of whom Josephus
writes in the place above mentioned. For Judas of Galile lived in the days of
Augustus* and when Cyrenius was Deputy of Syria and Judea, Josephus lib 18.
cap. 3. lib 20. and cap. 3.
But I am not certain whether or no the words (...) do absolutely import that
Judas of Galile was posterior in time to Theudas. When Cumanus was Deputy, who
succeeded to Tiberius Alexander the insolency of one Roman soldier was the
destruction of twenty thousand innocent people, he discovered the secret parts
of his body upon a solemn feast day, near unto the Temple, and in the sight
of the Jews, they counted this a contempt done to God in the porch of his own
house: Cumanus drew the Roman soldiers to the Castle called Antonia very
near the temple, and set them in order, and the people of the Jews fearing
the invasion of the soldiers, sled, and in the narrow passages ouertrode one
another, and a great multitude of people were slain, Joseph antiq. lib. 20.
cap. 4.
After this the people of the Jews came to Caesarea where Cumanus was for the
time, and complained of a Roman soldier, who had cast a book of holy
Scripture into the fire, whom Cumanus beheaded, and so pacified the Jews.
Joseph antiq. ^^b 20. cap. 4.
In end, Cumanus through his evil government procured to himself the
indignation of the Emperor Claudius, he favored the wicked cause of the
Samaritanes, who had stopped the passages of the Galileans, and slain a great
number of them. They were accustomed yearly to go up to Jerusalem to holy
fea^tes, and their way was through the towns and villages of the Samaritanes.
Cumanus rather favored then punished this wicked fact of the Samaritanes,
therefore he was removed from his place, and Felix was sent to be Deputy of
Judea. Joseph antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5.
Whether Claudius was impoisoned by Agrippina his wife to prepare an easy
passage to Nero her son to be Emperor or not, I leave that to be read in
authors, who have entreated the lives of Emperors politikly. It contenteth me
to write of the estate of the Church in their time.

Nero.
DOmitius Nero, succeeded to Claudius: he reigned thirteen years and eight
months, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 5.
His mother Agrippina after the death of Cneus Domitius Aenobarbus was joined
in marriage with the Emperor Claudius. In the first five years of his
government he abandoned the insolency of his wicked disposition, so that it
was a proverb in the mouths of men, Neronis quinquennium, in regard of his
good carriage for the space of five years. But a fire long covered, in end
breaks out into a mighty flame, that no water can slake it His cruelitie
against his mother, his wifes Octa^ia and Poppea, his master Seneca, the Poet
Lucan, and the vile abuse of his body with persons of his nearest
consanguinitie, I remit to the reading of learned authors, who have written
exactly the history of the Roman Emperors, and I have to that which is the
principal purpose of this compend, how wicked Nero kindled the first great
Furnace of horrible persecution against the Christians. It cannot be denied but
in the days of Tiberius our Lord Christ Jesus was crucified: in the days of
Caligula and Claudius the hands of that cruel persecuter Herod was mightily
strengthened by the favor, countenance and bountifulness of both these
Emperors, so that he laid hands upon the pillars of the house of God: and so I
deny not but the Church of God before the days of Nero was in the furnace of
trouble, but now 'come the days whereinto the Roman Emperors like unto
Nebuchadnezar were full of rage, Daniel. 3.19.
and the form of their visage was changed against the Christians, and they
commanded that the furnace should be hoate seven times more then it was wont to
be.

The ten persecuting Emperors wrestled against God. Genesis 32.
This history henceforth contains on the one part, the great wrestling of
persecuting Emperors against God, not like to the wrestling of Jacob with God.
The place of Jacobs wrestling was Pen^el, where he saw God, the form of
wrestling was with many tears and strong supplications, the end was, Hos. 12.
that the Angel should not hastly depart from him leaving him comfortless, the
success was the obtaining of a blessing, which was the armor of God to save
him against the hateful malice of Esau: but by the contrary, Nero, Domitian,
Traian, Antonius, and the rest set their faces against the heaven, commanded
the holy One of Israel to depart out of the world, endeavored to quench the
saving light of his Gospel, and by so doing, brought down upon themselves, in
stead of a blessing, that wrath that is reueiled from heaven upon all them who
detain the truth of God into unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
On the other part is set down the constant faith and patient suffering of the
Saints who hated not the burning bush, because it was set on fire, but they
loved it, because in it they were refreshed with the comfortable presence of
the great Angel of God, Exodus 3.
who would not for gaining of their lives once fashion themselves according to
the similitude of Idolaters in outward and external things. Tertulian in his
book de corona militis declares that true Christian soldiers abhorred from
setting a garland of flowers upon their heads, when they received wages for
their painful service in warfare, because it was the habit of Idolaters who
sacrificed to Jupiter. O happy men of God, whose virtues the dead colors of
Painters cannot represent, and the festered manners of this corrupt age cannot
imitate! When shall the fresh oil of the grace of God be powered into our
lamps, that the light of our faith, patience, and constant perseverance may
shine clearly to the world as theirs did?

The occasion of this great persecution of Nero, The first persecution. Anno.
Cler. 65. Bucole Index chron. Funct. chron. Chytr. chron.
was his own barbarous and cruel fact: he caused the town of Rome to be set
on fire, which wasted the buildings of the town for the space of six days,
and to eschew the vile infamy of this barbarous fact, he laid the blaine upon
the Christians, and gave forth edicts and commandments to to persecute them to
the death. Nero was so hateful an adversary to all righteousness, that
Eusebius following the example and words of Tertullian, affirms that if the
Gospel had not been an excellent good thing, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 25. The
martyrdom of Peter and Paul. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 25.
it had not been condemned by Nero. It is supposed that Peter was crucified,
and Paul was beheaded at Rome, in the time of this persecution. If this be
true, the very dead bones of Peter and Paul are witnesses against the Roman
Church, if they continue not in the same faith, that Peter and Paul sealed up
with their blood. The estate of the Jews under Nero was very hard in respect
of the often change of the Roman Deputies. Roman Deputies.
For in Neroes time continued Felix for a space, whom the Emperor Claudius had
sent to Judea, and after him Festus, Albinus, and Florus. This last Deputy was
fashioned according to the similitude of the manners of Nero his Master, and
the Proverb holds true in Nero and Florns, Such man, such master. In the time
that Felix was Deputy, a certain Egyptian man pretending to be a Prophet, and
promising great things, persuaded four thousand of the Jews to follow after
him, Act. 25.
but Felix sent forth companies of horsemen and footmen, who slew four
hundredth of the people that followed the Egyptian, Joseph antiq. lib. 20. cap.
6.
and took two hundredth of them alive, the rest were scattered, but the
seducing Prophet escaped, and could not be found. When Festus was Deputy, King
Agrippa heard the Apology of Paul, and said that in a part Paul persuaded him
to be a Christian. Acts. 25. Acts 12.
This Agrippa (I say) the son of Herod, whom the Angel of God slew, was
advanced to great honors by the Emperor Claudius, as his father had been
before him by the favor of Caius, and he possessed not only his fathers
dominions, but also the Tetrarchy of Iturea and Trachonitis, sometime belonging
to Philip the son of Herod the great. His might and riches procured trouble
to the Nation of the Jews. He had a palace situate upon the West Side of the
Temple of Jerusalem, and in regard it was builded upon a mountain, he had a
delectable prospect of the town of Jerusalem: yet not content with this, he
mounted up the walls of the Palace by a new building, so high, that they who
were in the Palace might have seen the Altar, and sacrifices of the Jews
offered in the inner court, which at that time was called Atrium Iudaorum. This
doing grieved the hearts of the Jews. They on the other part, to cut off the
sight of those who dwelt in the Palace, from beholding their sacrifices, raised
up the wall of the inner court on the West Side to such eminency, that no man
could behold the sacrifices of the Jews from the Palace. Contention. between
Agrippa and the Jews.
King Agrippa and Festus with authority commanded the Jews to demolish their
new builded wall. In end this matter was referred to the Emperor Nero, who
being solicited by his wife Poppea, gratified the Jews in this point, Joseph.
antiq. lib. 20. cap. 7.
and compelled them not to cast down their wall. Festus died in Judea, and
Albinus was sent to be Deputy in Judea. Ananus was the high Priest of the
Jews in those days, and finding opportunity of time, to practice the malice
of his heart against James the son of Alpheus, furnanamed Iustus, The
martyrdom of James furnamed Iustus.
an holy Apostle and kinsman of our Lord Jesus. When Albinus was upon his
journey, and had not as yet arrived neither to the coasts of Egypt, nor of
Judea, this Ananus (I say) caused James furnamed Iustus, and the brother of our
Lord, Joseph antiq. lib 20 cap 8. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
to be stoned to death. Eusebius writes that he was thrown down from the
pinnacle of the Temple. This cruelty of Ananus, albeit it displeased both King
Agrippa, and Albinus the Deputy of the Romans, and the people of Jerusalem, yet
wicked men are wiser in their own generation, then the children of light: and
Ananus saw that if he had lingered until the Roman Deputy had arrived, he
could not have procured the death of a man counted so inst, and so welbeloved
of the people, as the Apostle James was. It is to be marked that Eusebius in
the forementioned place describes the Martyrdom of James furnamed Iustus,
before the edict of the persecution of Nero, after which folloshed the
martyrdom of Peter and Paul, in the 12. year of Nero his reign, Epiphan.
contr. here is.
nevertheless, the Roman Church had forged Epistles decretall, whereinto
Clemens Bishop of Rome, writes to James furnamed Iustus, after the death of
Peter. What credit these decretall Epistles deserve, it shall be declared
hereafter, God willing. But Florus who succeeded to Albinus, was an avaritious
and cruel man: he exhausted the treasure that was in the Temple, and took
out of it sixteen talents of silver. And when the Jews at Jerusalem murmured
against him, he came to the town in great wrath, and permitted the soldiers
to slay, and to spoil the Citizens of Jerusalem at their pleasure. Likewise he
afflicted with unaccustomed cruelty, Joseph. de bello Iuduco lib. 2. cap. 15.
The ground of the war between the Jews and the Romans. Mat. 24.
men of noble birth, by scourging and crucifying them. This was the ground of
the war between the Romans and the Jews, wherein Jerusalem came to that
lamentable ruin foretold by our Savior Christ. Now to return to the Emperor
himself, and form of his death. After he had reigned 13. years and eight
months, the Senate of Rome proclaimed him to be an enemy to mankind, and
condemned him to be whipped with wands to the death, and to be harled through
the City. For fear of which punishment he was forced to fly, and by slaying
of himself, made an end of his most wretched life. Justin.

Vespatian.
AFter Nero, Otto, Vitellius, and Galba contended for the Empire, and were all
hastily cut off, and made out of the way, Bucole Index. chron.
and Flavianus Vespatian was chosen Emperor by the Roman Arny, he reigned ten
years. The Nation of the Jews at this time, for the most part was given over
into a reprobate mind, according as it was foretold by the Prophet Zachary:
Zach. 11.9.
Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die, and that that
perishes, let it perish, and let the remnant every one eat the flesh of his
neighbor. Like as the intolerable cruelty of Flerus had irritat the Nation of
the Jews: even so on the other side, the unsupportable obstinacy of the Jews
had incensed the wrath of the Romans against them. They were now become so
headstrong, Joseph. de bello Iud lib. 2. c. 30
that they rejected the sacrifice that was wont to be offered for Caesar. The
calamity of the Jews who dwelt in Alexandria, and in Damascus, was but the
beginning of sorrows: fifty thousand Jews were slain in Alexandria, Joseph.
de bello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 36. and 41.
ten thousand in Damascus. Besides this, many signs and wonders both in heaven
and earth, did proclaim their future desolation and destruction. A Comet was
seen in heaven, Forerunning tokens of the destruction of Jerusalem.
hanging over the town of Jerusalem for the space of a year, and having the
similitude of a sword: in the Temple at the mid time of the night, a clear
light was seen shining round about the Altar, in brightness not unlike unto the
light of the day: and the great brazen port of the Temple opened of it own
accord, about the sixth hour of the night: chariots of fire were seen
compassing towns, and a voice was heard in the Sanctuary warning to flit,
Joseph. de bello Ind. lib. 6. c. 31.
and to transport, with many other fearful signs and wonders. But a people
senseless, whose eyes were dim, whose ears were dull of hearing, whose heart
was fat, and locked up by Satan in infidelity, they could take no warning of
the wrath to come, because the Lord was minded to destroy them. Flavius
Vespatian, and his son Titus Vespatian leading an army of threescore thousand
armed men from Ptolemaida, besieged the towns of Galilee and Trachonitis: so
many as would not willingly be subject to the Romans, the towns of Gadara,
Tiberias, Iotopata, Tarithea, Gamala, all these were brought under the
reverence of Vespatian, and Josephus, who had been lurking in a cave (after
the town of Iotopata was conquered) was taken alive, and kept in bands by the
Romans: he foretold that Vespatian should be Emperor, and saluted him Caesar,
and (...), De bello Iud. lib. 3. cap 27.
while Nero was yet alive. When this prophecy came to pass indeed, and he
was chosen to be Emperor, he sent for Josephus, and commanded that he should
be loosed from bands, but Titus his son, thought more expedient that his
bands should be cut off from him, rather then loosed, De bello Iud. lib. 4.
cap 39.
to the end he might be counted a worthy man, who never deserved captivity nor
bands. Flavius Vespatian returned to Rome, and left behind him his son Titus
to subdue the Jews, and to besiege the town of Jerusalem, but the Christians
who dwelt at Jerusalem, were warned by God to depart out of the town of
Jerusalem, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 5.
so they left it, and dwelt beyond Jordan in a town of Decapolis, called Pela.
Separation of the corn from the chafe, goes before the unquenchable fire
wherewith the chafe shall be burnt. Titus began to besiege Jerusalem in the
first year of the reign of his father, The destruction of Jerusalem. Anno
Chr. 71. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
at the time when the people were gathered to celebrate the feast of the
Passover. The terror of the sword of the Romans without, the fear of
merciless brigands within the bowels of the town prevailing, the shewer of
the dead (wanting the honor of burial) infecting the air, and devouring the
living with contagious sickness, the violent plague of famine breaking
assunder the bands of nature, and constraining women to eat the birth of their
own bellies. De bello Iud. lib. 6. cap. 21.
All these calamities seized upon them at once, in the just judgment of God.
They despised the Father of eternity, and the Prince of peace, and said to
Pilate, We have no King but Caesar. Ioh. 19.15.
Now they find that the mercies of Caesar were cruel, and his son Titus,
who was commended in all men's mouths, as meek, merciful, liberal, and
eloquent, and was called Amor and delitiae humani generis: that is, The love
and most dainty thing of all mankind, yet God made him a terrible scourge to
the Nation of the Jews, who forsook the Lord Jesus, and preferred Caesar unto
him. In Scripture we read of many great viols of the wrath of God powered
down upon unrighteous men, but these are greatest that resemble by most lively
representation the great condemnation of the wicked at the last day, such as
the flood of Noe, the overthrow of Sodom, and destruction of Jerusalem. The
flood of Noe was universal and sudden, so shall be the condemnation of ungodly
men at the last day. The overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, Mat. 24.37. 38.39.
was a destruction unsupportable, and the more meet to be an example of the
vengeance of eternal fire. Jude ver. 7. The flood of Noe, the overthrow of
Sodom, and destruction of Jerusalem, types of the great judgment to come.
Mat. 24.
The destruction of Jerusalem, and the forerunning tokens thereof, are so mixed
with the tokens preceding the condemnation of the great day, that it may be
clearly perceived, that God has appointed the one to be a type and figure of
the other. So often as we call to remembrance the flood of Noe, the overthrow of
Sodom, and the destruction of Jerusalem, let us fear and stand in awe to fall
into the condemnation of ungodly men, because all the terrors of these
judgments concur and are massed together in the judgment of the last day.
What are the deep wells of water, what are the shoures of fire and brimstone,
what is famine, pest, and sword, both intestine and foreign, in comparison of
that worm that never dies, and that fire that shall never be quenched, and
the blackness of darkness, with weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc? It is a
terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Concerning the number
of them that were slain in Galilee, Trachonitis, Samaria, and Judea, chiefly
in the Metropolitan town Jerusalem, over and besides those that were sold to
be slaves, and those that were devoured by wild beasts, in the triumph of
Flavius and Titus at Rome, read Josephus de bello Iud. lib. 6. cap. 45.

Titus.
AFter Flavius, reigned Titus Vespatian his son, two years, two months,
twenty days. Bucole Index chron.
The Nation of the Jews being now subdued, there was great peace in all parts
of the Roman dominions, both by sea and land, and the Temple of Ianus in Rome,
Bucole.
was closed and locked up again.

Domitian.
FFlavius Domitian was associate to his brother Titus in government, The second
persecution. Anno Chr. 96. Chytr. Chron.
during his life time; and after his death was his successor. He reigned 15.
years. He was proud like Nero, and persecuted innocent Christians as he did,
so prone and bent is our corrupt nature to sin, and to follow evil examples.
Now again the Church of Christ militant upon the earth, must learn obedience
by suffering, and must give a proof before the world, that the Covenant of God
is written in the tables of her heart, and so deeply ingraved by the finger of
God, that no tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, nor death
itself can separate her from the love of Christ. The members of the Church
were the good Merchants, Mat. 13.
of whom Christ speaks, who having found a pearl of unspeakable value, were
content to sell all they had for love of gaining it: they had tasted of the
Well of water springing up into eternal life, and thirsted not again for the
water that cannot satisfy the heart of man with full contentment. Ioh. 4.14.
The banishment of the Apostle John. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 18. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap.
19.
In this second great persecution, the beloved disciple of Christ, the Apostle
John was banished to the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God. Flavia Domicilla,
a woman of noble birth in Rome, was banished to Pontia, an Isle lying over
against Caieta in Italy. Protasius and Gervasius were martyred at Millain:
Chytr. chron.
concerning the miracle wrought at their sepulchers, God willing, we shall
speak in the third Century, and in the Treatise of Relics. Chytraus writes,
that Timothy was stoned to death at Ephesus, by the worshippers of Diana, and
that Dionysius Areopagita, Domitian afraid by rumors of the Kingdom of Christ.
was slain by the sword at Pareis. Domitian had heard some rumors of the
Kingdom of Christ, and was afraid as Herod the great had been, after the
Nativity of our Lord: but when two of Christ kinsmen, according to the flesh,
the Nephews of the Apostle Jude were presented before him, and he perceived
them to be poor men, who gained their living by handy labor, and when he had
heard of them, that Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, but it was
spiritual, and that he would come at the latter day to judge the quick and
the dead, he despised them as simple and contemptible persons, Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 20.
and did them no harm. In the end, as the life of Domitian was like unto the
life of Nero, so was he not unlike unto him in his death: for his own wife and
friends conspired against him, and slew him: his body was carried to the grave
by porters, and buried without honor. The Senate of Rome also decreed, that
his name should be rased, and all his acts should be rescinded. Sueton. in
Dom. Ierom. catal. script. eccles.

Nerva.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 21
COccius Nerua after Domitian, reigned one year, four months. And hitherto
all the Emperors that ruled, were borne in Italy: from henceforth strangers
do rule: for Traian the adoptiue son of Nerva, his successor was borne in
Spain. Nerva redressed many things, that were done amiss by Domitian, and in
his time the Apostle John was relieved from banishment, and returned again to
Ephesus, Eusebius. lib. 3 cap. 21
where he died.

CENTVRIE II.
Traianus.
TRaian the adopted son of Nerva, was the first stranger who obtained that
honor to be King of the Romans. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 3.
He reigned 19. years, 6. months. A man so exceeding well beloved of the
Senate and of the people of Rome, that after his days, whenever a new
Emperor was elected, they wished unto him the good success of Augustus, and
the uprightness of Traianus. Notwithstanding of this, The third persecution.
Anno. Chr. 108.
he was a cruel persecuter of Christians. And this third persecution is
justly counted greater then the two preceding persecutions. To other
afflictions now is added contempt and shame. It was no great dishonor to be
hated of Nero and Domitian, wicked men and haters of righteousness, but to be
hated and persecuted by Traian, a man counted a pattern of upright dealing,
this was a great rebuke. Notwithstanding Christians looked to Jesus, the author
and finisher of their faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne
of God. Many have more patiently endured pain in their flesh, then shame and
contempt in the world, Heb. 12,2
but Christ's true Disciples must resolve to be a gazing stock to all the
world, and to be counted the off-scourings of the earth, as the holy men of
God did in the days of the Emperor Traian. These were Citizens of heaven,
living in earthly tabernacles, living upon the earth, Romans 12.
but not fashioned according to the similitude of this world. In doing great
things by faith, they surpassed mighty Monarchs: In patient suffering of
evil, they overwent admired Plilosophers. In this persecution Simon the son
of Cleopas, The martyrdom of Simon the son of Cleopas. Eusebius. eccl. hist.
lib. 3 cap. 23.
an holy Apostle suffered martyrdom, being now an hundredth and twenty years
old: he was first scourged, and then crucified: but all this rebuke he most
patiently suffered for the name of Christ. Of Ignatius martyrdom we have
spoke in the first Century, the time of his suffering, The letter of Pliny 2.
written to Traian.
was in the time of Traianus. Pliny the second Deputy in Bithynia, breathing
threatenings against innocent Christians, persecuted great numbers of them to
death. In the end he was commoued and troubled in his own mind, cosidering
both the number and patient suffering of christians that were put to death, he
wrote to the Emperor, declaring that Christians were men of good conversation,
and detested murder, adultery, and such other ungodliness: only they had
conventions early in the morning, and they sang Psalms to the honor of
Christ, whom they worshipped as God, but they would not worship images (here
mark the portrait of the Ancient Apostolic Church, and what conformity the
Roman Church in our days has with it, the Lord knows.) This letter of
Plinius mitigated the Emperors wrath in a part, yet gave he no absolute
commandment to stay the persecution, but only that the Judges should not
search them out narrowly, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 23.
but if any happened to be presented before them, then let them be punished.
What confusion was in this edict, it is well marked by Tertullian: Tertul. Apol.
the one part of it repugneth to the other. In forbidding to search them out
narrowly, he declares their innocence, but in commanding to punish them when
they were presented, he pronounces them to be guilty. This is that Emperor
for whose soul Gregory the first made supplications to God 400. years after
his death, and was heard of God as Damacen writes. Damas. Sermon. de defunct.
Gregory 1. prayed for the soul of Traian
This superstitious Monk, of the descent of Saracens blood, if he supposed
Gregory to be so full of charity, that he prayed for the soul of one
persecuting Emperor, why would he not bring him in praying also for all the
ten persecuting Emperors, to the end that they being all delivered from the
condemnation of hell, heaven might be counted a mansion both for Christ's true
Disciples, and also for Christ's hateful and impenitent enemies?

Adrianus.
AFter Traian, AElius Adrianus reigned 21. years. In his time Aristides and
Quadratus, Chytr. chron.
the one a Bishop, the other an Orator at Athens, wrote learned apologies in
defense of Christian Religion, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib 4. cap. 3 Ierom.
catalog. script. eccles. Barcochebas a false Prophet, seduced the Nation of the
Jews.
and did so mitigate the Emperors mind, that in his time no new commandment
was set forth to persecute Christians. Barcochebas at this time perverted the
Nation of the Jews, and called himself the promised Messiah: whom the foolish
Jews followed to their own overthrow and destruction. Tynius Rufus, Deputy in
Judea, besieged this man in Bethera, a town not far distant from Jerusalem,
and destroyed him with all his adherents. Also the whole Nation of the Jews
was banished from their native soil: and the town of Jerusalem was taken from
the Jews, and delivered to other Nations to be inhabitants of it, and was
called by the Emperors name AElia. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Thus we see that the Jews who would not receive Christ, who came in his
Fathers name, yet they received another who came in his own name, and like
unto babes, who are easily deceived with trifles, they were bewitched with the
splendour of a glorious name: for Barcochebas signifies the son of a star:
and he said to the Jews, that he was sent as a light from heaven to succor
their distressed estate: but he might have been called more justly Barchosba,
the son of a lie. Here I give warning again, that we take heed to our
selves, Note.
left we be circumvented with the deceitful snares of the devil: for it is
an easy thing to fall, but a difficult thing to rise again. The Christians
who lived in the days of Adrian, were glad to be refreshed with the crumbs of
outward comfort, which are denied to no accused person in the whole world, viz.
that Christians shall not be condemned to death for the importunate clamours
and cries of a raging people accusing them, except it be prooved that they have
transgressed the Law, and have committed some fact worthy of death. Read the
Epistle of Adrian written to Minutius Fundanus, Eusebius. ecel. hist. lib. 4 cap.
9. Adrianus his intention to build a church for the honor of Christ. Bucole.
Note.
Deputy in Asia. The good intention of Adrian in building a Church for the
honor of Christ, void of Images, (because such was the custom of Christians)
was hindered by some of his familiar friends, who said, that if he so did, all
men would forsake the temples of the gods of the Gentiles, and become
Christians. In this point good Reader mark what Church is like unto the
ancient Primitive and Apostolic Church, whether the Church decked with Images,
or the Church void of Images.

Antoninus Pius.
TO Adrian succeeded Antoninus Pius, his adopted son, and reigned 23. years.
Carrion lib. 3. Monarch. 4.
He was so careful to preserve the lives of his Subjects, that he counted it
greater honor to save the life of one Subject, then to destroy the lives of a
thousand enemies. In this Emperors time Justinius Martyr wrote notable books
of Apology for the Christians, which were presented and read in the Senate of
Rome, and mollified the Emperors mind toward Christians, as clearly
appears by his edict, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 13.
proclaimed at Ephesus, in time of most solemn conventions of all Asia.

Antoninus Philosophus, and L. Verus.
AFter Antoninus Pius succeeded his son in law Antoninus Philosophus,
otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, with his brother L. Aurelius Verus. This is
the first time wherein the Roman Empire was governed by two Augusties. Albeit
Titus had associated his brother Domitian, to be a fellow labourer with him in
the work of government, yet was not Domitian counted or called Augustus,
until the death of his brother Titus. But now at one and the self same time,
two Emperors do reign. Antoninus Philosophus reigned nineteen years, Lucius
Verus his brother nine years. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5 cap. 9. Bucole.
And so after the death of Verus, the whole government returned to Antoninus
Philosophus only. He was called a Philosopher not only in regard of his
knowledge, but also in respect of the practice of Philosophy. He was neither
greatly pust up by prosperity, nor cast down by adversity: yet he was a cruel
persecuter of innocent Christians.

Now is the fuel added to the furnace the fourth time, The fourth persecution.
Anno Chr. 168.
and the flame is great, and the arm of wicked men who hated the name of
Christians, is strengthened by the Emperors commandment. The trumpets of the
Monarchs of the world found the alarm against him who made them Kings and
rulers on the earth. The poor innocent lambs of the sheepfold of Christ
appointed for the shambles, strengthened their hearts in God, and in the power
of his might, and chose rather to suffer adversity with their brethren, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, they were content to be racked, Heb.
11.25
and would not be delivered, that they might be partakers of a better
resurrection, Heb. 11.35
whose bodies torn with stripes until their very inward bowels were patent to
the outward sight, witnessed the vnrent firmness and stability of their
faith. They were so supported with the power of that grace that comes from
above, that they were not terrified with the multiplied numbers of cruel
torments, newly devised for dashing that invincible courage of faith which was
seen in Christians. Yea further then this. When the persecuting enemies were
compelled to change the high tuned accent of their menacing speeches, and to
crave but a little conformity to the Emperors desire in swearing by his
fortune, the holy men of God would not once seem to fall away from their
profession, by answering with timorous and doubtful words: but glorified God
with a clear and constant confession of their Christian faith. Polycarpus
Bishop of Smyrna, and Justinius Martyr, The martyrdom of Polycarpus and
Justinius.
a man of singular erudition, were both martyred in the fervent heat of this
persecution. But above all other places, the consuming flame of the furnace
brast out most vehemently, in France that happy Nation, wherein, both of old,
and late time, so many were found worthy to give their blood for the name of
Christ. Vetius Epagathus, Maturus, Prothenus, Attalus, Sanctus, and Photinus
Bishop of Lions, all suffered for the testimony of Christ in France. And
Blandina a worthy woman suffered many torments, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap.
1. Bucole Index. Slanderous speeches against Christians. Eusebius. ibid.
and renewed her spiritual courage by continual iteration of these words,
Christiana sum, that is, I am a Christian. In like manner Christians were
persecuted with the slanderous speeches of Pagans, obiecting unto them the
banquets of Thyestes, and the chambering of Oedipus, that is, the eating of
men's flesh, and incestuous coppulations. But men who are given to the
momentaneall delights of sin are not willing to die, because that by death they
are separated from all bodily pleasures. The Christians by patient and willing
suffering of death for Christ's sake, clearly witnessed unto the world, that
they were not addicted to the deceitful pleasures of sin. Justin. Martyr.
Apol.
Nevertheless, these slanderous speeches were credited by the pagans, and
took such deep root in their hearts, that those who seemed before to be more
meek and moderate then others, now they became full of madness and rage,
against Christians: and that which was foretold by our master Christ, it was
fulfilled at this time, to wit, The time shall come, that whosoever kills
you, John. 16.2.
shall think he does God good service. The huge number of Martyrs that were
slain in the fury of this persecution, are both accurratly and at great length
set down by that worthy instrument of Gods glory, who lately wrote the Book
of Martyrs: I only point out shortly the estate of the Church at this time. In
this Emperors time good men were not wanting, who admonished him to appease
his wrath against Christians: such as Claudius Apolinaris, Bishop of
Hierapolis, and Melito Bishop of Sardis. But nothing could assuage his cruel
heart, until he was cast into the furnace of grievous troubles himself: for
his army that fought against the Germans and Samaritanes, fell into great
distress for want of water, The Roman Army supported by the prayers of the
Christians.
but was supported by the prayers of the Christian legion that was in his army.
For they bowed their knees to Christ, and prayed for help, and the Lord Jesus
sent rain in abundance to refresh the army of the Romans, and dashed the
Barbarians with thunder and fire. In remembrance whereof, the Christian legion
was after that time called (...), or Fulminatrix. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5.
After this victory he assuaged his anger, and wrote to the Senate of Rome to
deal gently with Christians, by whose prayer he acknowledged both himself
and his Army to have received deliverance from God.

Commodus.
COmmodus the son of Antoninus, Eusebius. ecel. hist. lib. 5. cap. 27.
reigned 13. years. Many of the Romans not without cause, called him
Incommodus. He presumed to do great things, and to change the names of months,
and would have the month of December to be called Commodus, like as the two
names of two months, Quintilis and Sextilis had been changed in time past,
and called Julius and Augustus, for honor of these two welbeloved Emperors.
But he was not so well favored of the people, that this ordinance could have
place any longer, then during his own life time. The Church in his days was
not altogether free of persecution: for Apollonius a man of noble birth in
Rome, and a man of great learning suffered death, because he would not forsake
the Christian religion. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. Contrary Jews.
His accuser also was punished to the death. Such advantages Judges might
easily have taken, finding so many discrepant laws, some made in favor, and
some conceived in disliking of Christians.

Pertinax and Iulianus.
AeLius Pertinax Emperor six months. Didius Iulianus two months. Eusebius
makes no mention of D. Iulianus, but of Pertinax only, to whom succeeded
Severus. Eseb. lib. 5. cap. 27.

CENTVRIE III.
Severus.
AFter Pertinax and Julian, Severus governed seventeene years, The fifth
persecution. Anno. Chr. 205. Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 12.
and eight months. Eusebius reckons only twelve years. He stirred up the
fifth persecution against the Christians. The crimes objected against the
Christians besides those that were objected in the former persecution, were
these: Rebellion against the Emperor, sacrilege, murdering of Infants,
worshipping of the Sun, and worshipping the head of an Ass: which last
calumny was forged against them by the malice of the Jews. This persecution
raged most severely in the towns of Alexandria and Carthage, Eusebius. lib. 6
cap. 1 Leonides the father of Origin.
like as the former persecutions had done in Lions and Vienne in France.
Leonides the father of Origin was beheaded: his son being but young in
years; exhorted his father to persevere in the faith of Christ constantly unto
the death. Potamiae a young beautiful virgin in Alexandria, was by the Judge
condemned to death, and delivered to a Captain called Basilides, who stayed
the insolency of the people that followed her to the place of execution, with
outrage of slanderous and railing words, The conversion of Basilides.
crying out against her: for this cause she prayed to God for the conversion
of Basilides to the true faith, and was heard of God, in so much, that he was
not only converted to the faith of Christ, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 5. Alexander
fellow labourer with Narcissus Eusebius. l. 6. c. 39.
but also sealed it up with his blood, and had the honor of martyrdom.
Alexander who was a fellow labourer with Narcissus in Jerusalem, escaped many
dangers, yet was he martyred in the days of Decius the 7. great persecuter. Of
this Emp erour the Senate of Rome said, Aut non nasti, aut non mori debuisse,
that is, Either he should never have been born, or else should never have
tasted of death. So it pleased the Lord by his wife dispensation to suffer the
days of Traian, Antoninus Philosophus, and Severus, Emperors renowned in the
world to be more cruel against their own people, then the days of Nero,
Domitian, Caligula, or Commodus, Note.
to the end of the poor Church might learn to be content to be spoiled of all
outward comfort, and to lean upon the staff of the consolations of God only.
Many that were brought up in the Schools of Origin, suffered martyrdom, such
as Plutarchus, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, and another having the name of
Serenus also. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 4. Rhais a Martyr burnt before she was
baptized. Eusebius. ibid.
Among women Rhais was burned with fire for Christ's sake, before she was
baptized with water in Christ's name. Innumerable more Martyrs were slain for
the faith of Christ, whose names in particular no Ecclesiastical writer ever
was able to comprehend, therefore it shall suffice to hear the names of a few.
The rest whose names are not expressed, enjoy the crowns of incorruptible
glory, as well as those do, whose names are in all men's mouths. It is the
comfort of our hearts to remember that the Apostles and Evangelists sealed up
with their blood the doctrine which they naught and committed to writ, and no
other doctrine: and the holy Martyrs immediately after the Apostles days,
sealed up with the glorious testimony of their blood, that same faith which we
now profess, and which they received from the hands of the Apostles, but they
were not so prodigal of their lives to give their blood for the doctrine of
worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, plurality of Mediators, of
intercession, the sacrifice of the Mass, both propitiatory and unbloody,
expressly against the words of the Apost le, Heb. 9. ver. 22. and such other
heads of doctrine unknown to antiquity. The Roman Church in our days is a
persecuting and not a persecuted Church, fruitful in murders, and not in
martyrdomes, glorying of antiquity, and following the forgery of new invented
religion. The death of Sevetus.
This Emperor Severus was slain at York by the Northern men and Scots.

Bassianus and Geta.
SEverus who was slain at York, left behind him two sons, Bassianus and
Geta. Bassianus flew his brother, and reigned himself alone six years, so
that the whole time of his government both with his brother and alone, was 7.
years 6. months. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21.
He put to death also Papinianus a worthy Lawyer, because he would not plead
his cause concerning the slaughter of his brother, before the people, but said
that sin might be more easily committed then it could be defended. Note.
Bucole.
He took to wife his own mother in law Iulia, a woman more beautiful then
chaste. In all his time (as he confessed with his own mouth) he never
learned to do good, The death of Bassinus.
and was slain by Macrinus.

Macrinus with his son Diadumenus.
MAcrinus and his son reigned only one year. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21.

Antoninus Heliogabalus.
ANtoninus Heliogabalus, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21. Funct. chron.
reigned after Macrinus 4. years. He was a prodigious belly-god, a libidinous
beast, an enemy to all honesty and good order. So many villainous things are
written of him, that scarcely (if the Reader can give credit to the history)
ever such a monster was fashioned in the belly of a woman. At his removing in
his progress, oft-times followed him 600. chariots laden only with bauds and
common harlots. His gluttony, filchinesse, and excessive riotousnes, The death
of Heliogabalus.
are in all men's mouths. He was slain of the soldiers, drawn through the
City, and cast into Tiber.

Alexander Severus.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap 28. Chrons. Funct.
ALexander Severus the adopted son of Heliogabalus, reigned thirteen years.
He delighted to have about him wife and learned Counselors, such as Fabius,
Sabinus, Domitius, Vlpianus, etc. This renowned Lawyer Vlpianus was not a
friend to Christians, Vlpianus an enemy to Christians.
but by collecting together a number of laws made against Christians in times
past, he animated the hearts of Judges against them. And this is a piece of
the rebuke of Christ, that Christians have borne continually to be hated of the
wise men of the world. Hist Magdeb. cent. 3.
Hereof it came to pass, that in this Emperors time, albeit he was not so
bloody as many others had been before him, (and therefore his Empire was
called (...), that is, unbloody) yet not a few suffered martyrdom even in the
days of Alexander, such as Agapetus, a young man of fifteen years old, The
martyrdom of Agapetus.
at Praeneste a town of Italy: he was assayed with many torments, and
finally with the sword he was beheaded. The Judge who gave out sentence of
death against him, fell out of his judicial seat, and suddenly dyed. The
martyrdom of Cecilia, if by her trauells Valerian her espoused husband, and
Tiburtius his brother, and 400. more had been converted to Christ, and secretly
baptized by Vrbanus Bishop of Rome, immediately before her death: I marvel that
no mention should be made by Eusebius of such a rare and miraculous work.
Senators and noble men at Rome, such as Pammachius, Simplicius, and Quiritius,
Hist. Mag. cent. 3.
with their wives and children died for the faith of Christ, with many others.
The favor that this Emperor showed to Christians, against whom the very
stubbering cooks did contend, challenging unto themselves the right of a place
wherein Christians were accustomed to conveene for exercise of divine service,
this favor, I say, seems to have proceeded from the council of Mammea his
Christian mother, rather then from the counsel of Vlpianus that renowned
lawyer an hateful adversary to Christians. Mammea the Emperors mother is
instructed by Origin in the faith.
But Mammea his mother hearing the report of the learning of Origin sent for
him and by him was instructed in the grounds of Christian faith. The learned
doctor who wrote the book of the martyrs, very judiciously observes the
iniquity of this time, whereinto no Christian Churches were erected, Note.
when as yet (notwithstanding of the favor of the Emperor at some times) no
public house could quietly be obtained for the Christians: so that by reason
hereof may appear the decretall epistle of Pope Hyginus concerning the
dedication of Churches is forged and fained, because the reign of Alexander is
a long time posterior to the days of Hyginus (who lived under the reign of
Antoninus Pius) and in the reign of A lexander as yet there was great
difficulty to obtain a place whereinto Christians might assemble together.
The just deserved punishment of Turinus, whom the Emperor caused to be
fastened to a stake in the open market place, Turinus killed with smoke.
Seuerus his death.
and thereto be killed with smoke, the Herald standing by and crying to the
people, Smoke he sold and with smoke he is punished. This punishment I say
declares that this Emperor counted flatterers worthy of great punishment.
Bucole. Index. chron.
Alexander and his mother Mammea were both slain by his own soldiers.

Maximinus.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28.
AFter Alexander Seuerus Maximinus was Emperor and reigned 3. years: A man of
base parentage, of an huge stature, promoted to honors by Alexander, who
nourished a serpent in his own bosom (as the proverb speaks) when he
advanced Maximinus an ingrate foster to great dignities and honors. For by his
means the army killed Alexander, and his mother Mammea, and saluted him and
his son Emperors without advise of the Roman Senate: Eucole, Index. chron.
The 6. persecution. Ann. Christi. 237. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. ^8.
a man hated of all good men, beloved of evil men, more grievous to the
citizens of Rome then to their enemies, who for hatred of the house of
Alexander (as Eusebius records) raised up the sixth persecution against
Christians, specially against the teachers and leaders of the Church, thinking
the sooner to vanquish the rest if the Captains and guiders of them were made
out of the way.

Origin wrote a book de martyrie. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28.
Origin at this time wrote a book de martyrie, and dedicated it to Ambrosius
and Protectetus, pastors of the Church of Caesarca: because these two under
this persecution had sustained great afflictions, and constantly perseuered in
the true faith. No persecution was more violent, no persecution endured shorter
time. In no persecution are the names of suffering martyrs so obscured and
covered with silence, possibly because the book of Origin de martyrio through
injury of time is not to be found, therefore some learned men do refer the
martyrdom of such as we have spoken of in the days of Alexander to this time,
or to the persecution of Decius. I will not dispute of such doubtsome things.
Three other things that are more necessary to the edification of the Church I
will touch. 1 The malice of Satan against true Pastors.
First the malice of the devil, who hates the welfare of the sheepfold of
Christ, and labors either to spoil it of true Pastors, or to send in among
them poor sheep hyrelings, and men not regarding the welfare of the flock,
but their own gain: or else, if they have true Pastors, to move the flock to
be disobedient to faithful and vigilant Pastors. The stock that can eschew
all these three snares of the devil, and all these three woeful calamities, so
often seasing upon the poor sheepefolde, they are in good estate. Read
Chrysostom writing upon the 13. chap. Heb. ver. 17. 2
Another thing is worthy to be marked, that in three great persecutions, in
the fifth, sixth, and seventh, Origin a man more renowned in his life time then
after his death, God vouchsafed upon him two great honors, but not the third,
whereof he was most of all desirous. He encouraged his father Leonides, Not^
and his disciples, Plutarchus, two S^reni, Heron and Heraclides patiently to
suffer martyrdom in the days of Seuerus. Next he wrote a book de martyrio
in the days of Maximinus the sixth persecuter, Origin got not the honor of
martyrdom.
whereby doubtless many were encouraged patiently to suffer evil for Christ's
sake. What remains now but the third and principal honor of martyrdom it
self, whereunto he had a bent desire in the days of Decius the 7. persecuter,
but then he fainted, as shall be declared hereafter God willing? When we call
to mind this weakness of Origin, Note.
let all the cogitations of our hearts stoop, and think that we are not
meet for great things, but if the Lord call us to suffer great things for his
Names sake, the Lord perfect his strength in our infirmity and weakness.
Thirdly let us mark the great difference that is between the volume of the
book of holy canonicke and sacred Scripture, and all other books whatsoever.
In Scripture the ouerpassing of matters of great importance and moment is not
for ignorance, misknowledge or doubting of those things that are ouerslidden,
difference betwixt holy scripture and other books.
but for mystery and representation of things more necessary to be known: as
namely when Moses a most accurat writer of the life, death, and genealogies, of
holy Patriarchs: ouerpasseth the description of the genealogy, death, and
beginning, of the life of Melchisedecke: this was done of purpose to bring in
Melchssedeck, as a type and figure of the true king of peace Christ Jesus, as
the Apostle declares, Heb. 7. but among ecclesiastical writers I find a
preterition of the names of these worthy Pastors who were martyred for the
cause of Christ in the sixth persecution, and this ouerpassing with silence so
weighty a matter, is a secret confession of ignorance in this part of the
history, together with a doubting, whether Vrbanus the first, Valerianus,
Tiburtius, Cecilia, and Martina suffered under Alexander, or under Maximinus,
or under Decius. Yea Platina writes it was the opinion of some men that
Vrbanus 1. was martyred in the persecution of Dioclesian. I have insisted at
greater length in this purpose to the end that every man may give unto sacred
scripture that reverence that is due unto it, but other writings let us read
them with judgment, for assuredly there is palpable weakness in them. The death
of Maximinus and his son. Func, chron.
In the end this wicked persecuter Maximinus and his son were slain by his
own soldiers at the siege of Aquileia.

Gordianus.
THe tyranny of Maximinus enforced both the Senate of Rome and likewise their
oppressed confederates in Afric to advise by what means the distressed
estate of the Commonweal might be supported. And first Gordianus a man of
noble birth in Rome, and at that time Praconsul in Afric, with his son
bearing the name of Gordianus with his father, these two were declared to be
Emperors to resist the tyranny of Maximinus, but they were both cut off by
Capellianus, Captain of the Mauritanians. Within a short time the senate of
Rome chused Maximus Pupienus and Balbinus to be Emperors, and to resist the
tyranny of Maximinus. But this election displeased the people of Rome,
therefore they were compelled to associat Gordianus a young man of 13. years
old in conjunct authority with them. This Gordianus was the nephew of him who
was Proconsull in Afric: and the soldiers made out of the way, Max. Pupienus
and Balbinus. So Gordianus reigned himself alone without associats six
years. Chron. ^unt.


Philippus.
PHilippus a man borne in Arabia and his son reigned five years, Eusebius
says 7. years. He was the first Emperor who became a Christian, Chron. Funt.
^^cole.
and was baptized by Fabianus B. of Rome. He was content to stand among the
number of the penitents who made confession of their sins, Eusebius. lib. 6 cap.
34.
for his life was reprooueable in somethings before his conversion, especially
in slaying of Gordianus an Emperor inclined to peace. Decius one of the
Captains of his army conspired against him, Philippus his death.
and slew him, and his son reigned in his stead.

Decius.
DEcius and his son obtained the Empire. Chron Fun^. The 7 persecution. Ann.
Chapter 250.
2. years: Whether for hatred of Philip his master, whom he had slain, or for
detestation of Christians, or for covetous desire of the treasures of Philip
left in the custody of Fabian B. of Rome, or for some other cause, it is not
certain. Always he moved a terrible persecution against the Christians. The
martyrs who suffered death in the time of this persecution were innumerable.
Some few of the principal martyrs I shall rehearse, Alexander and Babylas
both died in prison.
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem died in prison at Caesarea. Babylas Bishop of
Antiochia died likewise in prison. Fabian Bishop of Rome suffered martyrdom.
Dionisius Alexandrinus by a wonderful providence of God escaped the hands of
persecuting enemies. Ciprian Bishop of Carthage was banished and reserved to
the honor of martyrdom until the days of Valerian the eight persecuter.
Origin at Jerusalem closes the book and weepeth.
Origin who from his childhood was desirous of the honor of martyrdom, in
this persecution of Decius he fainted, and his heart was so ouerset with fear
to have his chaste body defiled with an ugly Ethiopian, that he choosed rather
to offer incense to the Idol, then to be so filthily abused. For this cause he
was excommunicated by the Church of Alexandria, and for very shame fled to
Judea, where he was not only gladly received, but also requested publicly to
preach at Jerusalem. Nevertheless in stead of teaching he watered his face with
tears, when he read these words of scripture. To the wicked man says God,
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? Ps. 50. ver. 16. These words so deeply wounded his
heart with grief, that he closed the book and fate down and wept, Hist. Mag.
cent. 3. cap. 10.
and all the congregation wept with him. No pity nor compassion was had
neither of sex or age. In this persecution, The teeth of the holy martyr
Apollonia.
Apollonia, a virgin of good years, after they had dashed her face with
battons till all her teeth were stricken out of her jaws, they burned her
quick at the port of Alexandria. This is that holy martyr whose teeth the
Roman Church in our days say that they have them as holy monuments kept in
the treasures of their relics until this time. But the trial that was taken
of late days by Henry the eight king of England, seeking for the teeth of
Apollonia as a remedy of the toothach clearly proves that many teeth are
supposed to be the t eeth of Apollonia that were never fastened in her jaw
bones. Chemnisius dereli quiis.
The death of Quinia, Ammonarion, Mercuria, Dionisia, clearly declares what
pity was had of the weaknesses of women. Iulianus. an old and gowtie man
burned with fire testifies what regard was had to the gray hairs of ancient
men. Note.
Dioscorus a young man not exceeding 15. years of age, albeit they were ashamed
to condemn him to death, yet he escaped not many painful torments, and was a
glorious Confessor with patient expectation awaiting until the Lord should
call him to the honor of martyrdom. The Martyrdom of Nemesion.
Nemesion was accused in Alexandria as a companion of brigants, and was
punished with stripes and fire unto the death with greater severity then any
brigant, albeit his innocence was sufficiently known. Ammon, Zenon,
Ptolemeus, Ingenuus, Theophilus, warri ours and knights standing by the
tribunal seat beckened with their hands to a certain weak Christian, who
for fear was ready to incline and fall, that he should continue constant, and
stepped to the bench, and professed themselves to be Christians. This daily
increasing courage of Christians, who were emboldened by the multitude of
sufferings, astonished and terrified the Judges: Ischirion was slain by his
own master. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 41.
The number of martyrs in Alexandria and Egypt, (of whom Dionysius in this
Epistle written to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia makes mention) clearly
testifies that if the names of all those who suffered martyrdom in the towns
of Rome, Carthage, Antiochia, Ephesus and Babylon, were particularly set down,
together with the names of others who suffered in other towns of Asia, Afric
and Europe: subject to the dominiof the Roman Emperor, it were not possible in
the volume of a little book to comprehend them all. For mine own part I
presume not to do it, but I reverence the painful trauelles of learned men
who have dipped deeply into such a fruitful subject, specially the writer of
the book of martyrs. Only I find somethings in this seventh persecution,
which the principal purpose wherefore I have collected this compend will not
permit me to pass over with silence. The verity has no need to be
underpropped with lies.

Note.


Namely these: first, let no ma n think that the verity is weak, and has
need to be strengthened by a lie, as Nicephorus is accustomed to do. The
seven martyrs of Ephesus, whose names were Maximianus, Malchus, Martinianus,
Dionysius, Ioannes, Serapion, and Constantinus, were lurking in a cave, the
entry whereof Decius commanded to be closed with great heaps of stones, to
the end that the forenamed Christians might be killed with famine, which came
to pass indeed: Yet famine could not separate these holy Martyrs from
Christ. But Nicephorus the father of many other fables also says, that they
fell on sleep, which they continued till the time of Theodosius, that is, from
the 250. until the 379. year of our Lord, and then they did awake out of
their sleep, Nic^phorus. lib. 5. cap. 27.
says Nicephorus: But he who will give hasty credit to Nicephorus fables,
writing of the 7. martyrs, who lurked in a cave of mount Caelius and to
Euagrius description of Barsanuphius an Egyptian monk, who enclosed himself
in a cottage beside Gaza for the space of 50. years, and used no kind of
bodily refreshment to sustain his earthly tabernacle, he may be easily led to
all kind of error. Note.
The second thing worthy to be marked, is, that many persecuted preachers had
wives and children, as the history records. Cheremon Bishop of a city in
Egypt called Nilus fled to the mountains of Arabia, accompanied with his wife,
and returned not again to Egypt, neither was he seen of those who sought him
in the wilderness, Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 42. Married Bishops.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, who miraculously escaped the cruelty of
persecuters, makes express mention of his children, Deo mihi vt migrarem
praecipiente, viamque mirabiliter aperiente, ego and liberi, and multi fratres
egressisumus; that is, after that God had commanded me to remove, and had
miraculously opened a passage unto me, Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 40.
I and my children, and brethren went forth: If antiquity be regarded, Bishops
who do marry, are not Nicolatian Heretics, but rather such as forbid to
marry teach a doctrine of devils. 1 Timothy 4.3.

Note.


Thirdly it is to be marked, that in time of this vehement persecution, many
fainted and fell back from the open profession of Christian faith. The rigor
of Novatus.
Others to provide timous remedy against such defections, gave out a rigorous
sentence against such as had fallen of infirmity, that they should not be
received again into the fellowship of the church. In this opinion was Nouatus,
and his accomplices. And by their example we should learn to beware of such men
as under pretense of zeal perturbe the unity of the Church, and invent
remedies to cure the maladies of the diseased Church, which are worse then the
sickness it self, as the Novatians did: Weakness at some time is to be pitied,
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
but deuilish rigor pitying no man, who falls of infirmity, is a lesson
that has no allowance in the book of God. Gal 6.1.
This cruel tyrant, after he had reigned two years, made war against the
Scythians (some call them the Goths) by whom he was vanquished in battle,
and fearing to be overtaken, and to come under the tyranny of barbarous
people, he cast himself into a deep pit, where he ended his life, Bucole
Index. Chron. chron. Funct.
and his body could not be found. The great desolations that were made in the
world about this time by the plague of pestilence the Ethnickes imputed the
cause of them to the Christians. But Cyprian, whose pen the Lord guided better,
declared that the cause of all these calamities was the worshipping of Idols,
the contempt of Gods true service, Cypry. ad Demetrianum.
and the persecuting of innocent Christians.

Gallus and Volusian.
AFter Decius, Gallus and Volusian his son reigned two years. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 1.
He walked in the footsteps of Decius. He was slain by Emilian, who presumed
to reign, but he was so hastily made out of the way, that Eusebius and many
other Historians misknow his name in the Catalogue o^ Emperors.

Valerianus and Gallienus.
VAlerianus and Gallienus his son, reigned 15. years. viz. Gallienus with
his father in coniunct authority 7. years, after his fathers captivity and
death, he reigned alone eight years. In the first three or four years of
the Empire of Valerian, he was favorable and friendly to Christians, and
great numbers of them were found in the Emperors Court: But afterward he was
seduced by an Egyptian Sorcerer, who hated Christians, because that by them he
was hindered from practicing his magical charms. So the eight persecution began
under Valerian. The 8. Persecution.

Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 10.

Anno Chr. 259.

The martyrdom of Laurence.


In this persecution suffered three Bishops of Rome, Lucius, Stephanus, and
Sixtus; and a Deacon, Laurence who was laid upon an hot broyling iron, and
patiently, endured the torment of fire. This is that Deacon who called the
poor the treasure of the Church: for then is the Church rich, when it is rich
in good works, and feeds, clotheth, and visits Christ in his hungry,
naked, and diseased members. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, was banished to
Cephro, a place in the wilderness of Libya. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 11.
Priscus, Mal^bus, and Alexander were devoured by beasts in Caesarea, Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 12.

The martyrdom of Cyprian.

Naz. in Ieudem Cypriani.

Theosecnus B. of Caesarea, encourages Marinus.


Palestina. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was beheaded. Marinus a Roman Captain
in Caesarea, was envied for the dignity and honor he was advanced unto, and
he was accused to be a Christian, and consequently to be incapable of great
preferments and dignities: he was encouraged by Theotecnus Bishop of Caesarea,
patiently to suffer death for the cause of Christ, by taking him into a secret
chamber and laying before him a drawn sword and the book of the Gospel, and
bidding him take his choice of one of these two which he liked best: Marinus
liked better the book of the Gospel then of the sword; and was martyred for
the faith contained in that sacred book of holy Scripture. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
15.

Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 16.

The miserable captivity of Valerian.

Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13.

Bucol. Index. chron.


Astyrius a noble Senator, carried the body of this holy Martyr Marinus upon
his own shoulders, and buried it hounourably. In the end the Lord delivered
this persecuting Tyrant into the hand of Sapor, King of Persia, who not only
detained him in strait captivity, but also abused him most filthily, and made
his body a footstool, and trampled upon his neck at such times as he was
about to mount on horseback.

This fearful captivity of Valerian had unto it a notable testimony of the
wrath of God against persecuters. For like as he trampled under his feet the
Church of Christ: so in like manner the Lord gave his neck and back to be
trampled upon by the feet of his enemies. Note.
This example of Gods heavy indignation somewhat terrified Gal^ienus his
son, and he gave out an edict, for the safe returning of such as were
banished, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13.
to their own dwelling places, and for staying the rage of persecution.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, having liberty granted by the Emperors edict to
return from banishment, came back again to Alexandria, wherein he found such
terrible desolation by famine and pestilence, that there remained not of men,
women, and children so many alive as there were wont to be of ancient
hoare-headed men, walking upon their streets: the Lord was so highly displeased
with the unthankful world, that he was determined to consume them who had
consumed his people.

The good carriage of Christians at this time is worthy to be marked,
Christians full of pity.
who were full of charity and love, and visited the sick, and did all offices
of humanity to those who were diseased, or dead: whereas the Pagans by the
contrary forsook their dearest friends, left them comfortless, and thrust out
such as were half dead into the streets, and left them there unburied, and to
be eaten with dogs. This is written in the letter of Dionysius inserted in the
history of Eusebius. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 21.22.
So great difference is between Christians trained up in the school of
Christ, and others, who have not been fed with the sincere milk of the Word.
Christians in time of sickness were more dutiful to their enemies, then
others were unto their friends.

If any man would defend worshipping of images to be an ancient custom in the
Church, The history of Eusebius concerning the two brazen images in Caesarea
Philippi Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 18.
by the two brazen images, which were set up in Caesarea Philippi, for a
memorial of the miracle that Christ wrought in curing of the woman who had a
bloody issue, this place of Eusebius will make nothing for him. For these
images were not made for adoration, neither were they set up in temples, nor
worshipping places, but in the very street, before the door of the woman who
had been cured. The places whereunto Christians were gathered together for
divine service, at this time are called in the mandate of the Emperor
Gallienus, Caemiteria. In these places no man reads that images were set up.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13.
Besides this, these images were graven or molten by the hands of Pagans, and
not of Christians: and this fact was done by imitation of the Gentiles, (...),
that is, according to the custom of the Gentiles; he says not (...),
according to the custom of her own kindred, but (...), as is said. Yet may
we take warning by this place, Note. Similitude.
to beware of the small beginnings of error. Images have been like unto a
base borne fellow, who at the first can have no credit to set his head into the
Kings palace, but afterward he gets access into the outer court, and in
the end, his credit daily increasing by degrees, he gets favor to lie in
the Kings bedchamber: even so in the first 300. year of our Lord, images were
not brought in, into places of holy conventions: afterward they were brought
in, into Churches, but not worshipped, as the Epistle of Gregorius the first,
written to Severus Bishop of Marsil, clearly testifies. But in the end
adoration of images was in so frequent use, as if it had been the principal
point of the worship of God.

Claudius and Quintilius.
Eusib. lib. 7. cap. 20.
Claudius, after Gallienus reigned two years. And his brother Quintilius
seventeen days. He is not reckoned by Eusebius in the roll of Emperors.

Aurelianus.
AFter Quintilius, Aurelianus possessed the crown six years. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 30. The 9. Persecution. Anno Chr. 278.
In the beginning of his reign he was not a great disturber of Christians.
Notwithstanding in continuance of time, his nature somewhat inclinable to
severitie, was altered to plain tyranny, which tyranny first he showed
beginning with the murder of his own sisters son, as witnesses Eutropius.
After that, he proceeds to moove the ninth persecution against Christians:
albeit the merciful working of God did soon overthrowe all the wicked
purposes of the Emperor. For as the edict and proclamation should have been
denounced, for the persecuting of Christians, Note.
the mighty hand of God from above did suddenly stop his purpose: clearly
declaring to all men, that there is no power to work any violence against the
servants of God, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. Funct. chron.
unless his permission do suffer them, and give them leave. Here I see that
D. John Fox, writer of the book of Martyrs, takes leave of Vincentius
Martyrologie. If others had done the like, they had not heaped up so many
Martyrs in the days of Claudius Quintilius, and Aurelian as they have done.
For Eusebius had assuredly made mention of it, if the number had been so great
as Vincentius records. Before the Emperors mind was altered and inclined to
tyranny against Christians, he assisted with his authority the Bishops
convened at Antiochia, for the deposition and excommunication of the heretic
Samosatenus, Aurelian with civil authority assisteth the Church against
Samosatenus. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 3.
and so the Emperors authority being interposed, this proud Heretic was
compelled to stoop and to give place, and with great ignominy was driven from
the town of Antiochia. In his place Domnus was elected to be Bishop of
Antiochia, a man endued with good graces, the son of Demetrian, who
immediately before Samosatenus governed the Church of Antiochia. And here again
it is to be marked, that the Bishops at this time (albeit it was a time of
persecution) yet did they not abhor from marriage: Note.
for Demetrianus Bishop of Antiochia, was a married man and had children, and
Domnus his son, so that the prohibition of marriage to men in spiritual
offices is not an ancient doctrine.

Annius Tacitus and Florianus.
AFter Aurelian was slain between Bizans and Heraclea, the Imperial chair
was vacant six months. The Senate of Rome elected Annius Tacitus to be
Emperor. He continued but six months in his government. Eusebius overpasseth
his name with silence, Funct. chron.
as likewise the name of his brother Florianus, who aspired to the Imperial
dignity.

Aurelius Probus.
AVrelius Probus a gentle and peaceable Emperor, reigned six years, Eusebius.
Func. chron.
three months. He was envied by his Captains and Soldiers, because he
appointed them to plant vineyards, and said there was no great need of
soldiers, His death. Func. chron. Bucol.
where no enemy was to be feared. He was slain by his soldiers.

Carus, Carinus, Numerianus.
CArus with his two sons, Carinus and Numerianus reigned after Probus. Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 30.
All these three continued not above the space of three years. And Numerianus
was slain by his own father in law, Func. chron.
called Aper. Carus was slain by thunder: and Carinus was overcome in battle,
and slain by Dioclesian, Bucol. Index. chron.
whom the Roman army had declared to be Emperor, while Carinus was yet alive.

Dioclesianus and Maximinianus.
LIke as Dioclesian overcame Carinus the son of Carus in battle, even so
likewise he slew Aper, the father in law of Numerianus, Func. chron.
with his own hands. Whether this was done for detestation of sin, or for
desire of government, it is uncertain. Always some affirm that his concubine
Druas had said unto him, that he should kill a wild Boar before he should
be Emperor. And after the killing of Aper (which name by interpretation
signifies a wild Boar) he became Emperor. In the beginning of his reign
he chused for his colleague Maximianus surnamed Hercules, father to Maxentius.
And these two chused other two, viz. Galerius and Constantius Chlorus, the
father of Constantine, whom they called Caesar's: but the honorable title of
Augustus Dioclesian and Maximian retained to themselves. These two Augusties
reigned 20. years. Constantius Chlorus Caesar continued fifteen: Galerius
Caesar 21. years. Dioclesian and Maximianus Herculeus, abstained from
persecuting of Christians until the nineteen year of their reign. Before I
touch the History of the tenth persecution, three things are to be premitted.
First, that after the persecution Valerian the eight Persecuter, the Church
enjoyed great peace, which albeit it was like to be cut off by the altered
mind of Aurelian, yet the wise dispensation of the wisdom of God, provided
that all his cruel enterprises were disappointed. Psalm. 129.4.
The righteous Lord cutted the cords of the wicked. Secondly, Christians were
in great favor and credit with Dorotheus and Gorgonius. Thirdly, they had
liberty to build Oratories and Temples, large and ample in every Temples were
built by Christians after the death of Valerian. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 1.


All this came to pass in the forty years peace, that intervened between the
reign of Valerian, and the nineteenth year of the reign of Dioclesian. Yet
the Church of Christ in this short time began to be festred with the corrupt
manners of carnal and fleshly people, so that contentions abounded, but
charity waxed cold in the Church of God. What wonder was it then that the Lord
permitted this tenth and most horrible persecution of Dioclesian to stir and
to waken drowsy Christians, who were beginning to be fashioned according to
the likeness of the world?

In the nineteenth year of his Imperial authority, and in the month of
March, The 10. Persecution. Anno Chapter 308.
this horrible persecution began to arise: Dioclesian in the East, and
Maximianus in the West, bending all their forces to root out the profession of
Christians, out of the world, Dioclesian was pufft up in pride for his manifold
victories and triumphs, and would be counted a God, and adorned his shoes
with gold and precious stones, and commanded the people to kiss his feet.
This Persecution continued ten years, even until the seventh year of the
reign of Constantine the great. So that whatsoever cruelty was practiced by
Maximinianus, Maximinus, Maxentius, and Licinius, all goes under the name of
Dioclesian, the author of this tenth persecution. Cruel edicts and
proclamations were set forth in the beginning of this persecution, commanding
to overthrow and cast to the ground the Temples of Christians, to burn the
books of holy Scripture, to displace all such as were magistrates and were in
office, and to cast Christian Bishops into prison, and to compel them with
sundry kinds of punishments, to offer unto Idols. Also common people, who would
not renounce the profession of Christianity to be spoiled of their liberty.
Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 3. The great cruelty used in this 10. persecution.


These edicts were hastily put in execution. Many Christians were scourged,
racked, and cruciated with intolerable torments. Some were violently drawn to
impure sacrifice, and as though they had sacrificed, when indeed they did not,
were let go: some were down upon the ground, and drawn by the legs a great
space, and the people was made to believe that they had sacrificed: some
stoutly withstood them, and denied with a loud voice, that they had not bin, or
ever would be partakers of Idolatry. Notwithstanding, of the weak sort, many
for fear and infirmity gave over even at the first assault. When the foresaid
edicts were proclaimed, John a noble man borne, rent in pieces, the Emperors
Proclamation. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 5.
both the Emperors happened to be in the town of Nicomedia: notwithstanding a
certain Christian being a noble man borne, whose name was John, ran and
took down the proclamation, and openly tare and rent it pieces. For which
fact he was put to a most bitter death, which he patiently endured until his
last gasp. The general Captain of the army of Dioclesian, gave choice to the
soldiers, whether they would obey the Emperors commandment in offering
sacrifices, and keeps still their offices, or else lay away their armor, and
be deprived of their offices: but the Christian soldiers were not only
content to lay away their armor, bu also to offer themselves unto the death,
rather then to obey such unlawful commandments.

In Nicomedia the Emperor refraind not from the slaughter and death of the
children of Emperors, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 4.
neither yet from the slaughter of the chiefest princes of his court, such as
Peter, Note.
whose body, being beaten with whips and torn that a man might see the bare
bones, and after they had mingled vinegar and salt, they powered it upon the
most tender parts of his body, and lastly roasted him at a soft fire as a man
would roast flesh to ear, and so this victorious martyr ended his life.
Dorotheus and Gorgonius being in great authority and office under the Emperor
after diverse torments were strangled with an halter. The martyrdom of P^ter
Do^orbeus and Gorgonius. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6.
The torments that Peter suffered, encouraged them to give a worthy confession
that they were of that same faith and religion that Peter was of. This
persecution raged most vehemently in Nicomedia, where the Emperors palace
through some occasion being set on fire, the Christians were blamed as authors
of that fact: Therefore so many as could be found out, were burned with fire,
or drowned in water, or beheaded with the sword, amongst whom was Anthimus
Bishop of Antiochia, who was beheaded. The bodies of the sons of Emperors
that were buried, they dug out of their graves, and sent them in boats to
be buried in the bottom of the sea, lest Christians should have worshipped
them as gods, if their sepulchers had been known, such opinion they had of
Christians. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6.
The number of twenty thousand burned in one temple of Nicomedia by Maximinus
smells of the liberty that Nicephorus takes in adding many things to the
verity of the history. The martyrdom of Serena the Emperor Dioclesians wife
is rejected by learned men as a fable, albeit recorded by Hermannus Gigas. The
number of Christians cast into prison and appointed for death was so great,
that scarcely a void place could be found in a prison to thrust in a
murderer, or an opener of graves, such heaps of Christians were enclosed in
dark prisons. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6.
The martyrs of Palestina, of Tyrus in Phenicia, of Tarsus, of Antiochia, of
Alexandria, of Miletina in Armenia, and of Pontus, Cappadocia and Arabia, they
could not easily be numbered. Horrible cruelty against Christian wom^n.
In Thebaida, horrible and unnatural cruelty was used against christian
women, whom they hanged upon gibbets with their heads down-ward toward the
ground, and fastened one of their legs only to the gibbet, the other being
free: thus their naked bodies hanging upon trees in manner aforesaid, Eusebius.
lib. 8. cap. 9.
presenced to the beholders a spectacle of most vile and horrible inhumanitie.
In like manner the branches of trees were artificially bowed down to the earth,
and the feet and legs of Christians tied to them, so that by their hasty
returning again unto their natural places the bodies of Christians were rent
in pieces. This was not a cruelty finished in a short space of time, but of
long continuance, some days 20. some days 60. and at sometimes an hundred
were with sundry kinds of torments excruciated unto the death. And these
torments they suffered with joy and gladness, and singing of Psalms until
the last breath. Eusebius ibid. A town in Phrygiaset on fire, and all the
inhabitants burnt with fire. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 11.
In Phrygia a town was set on fire by the Emperors commandment (the name
whereof Eusebius passes over with silence) and the whole inhabitants being
Christians, men, women, and children, were burned with fire. Tirannion Bishop
of Tyrus, Zenobius Presoyter of Sidon, Siluanu's Bishop of Gaza, and Pamphilus
a worthy Presbyter in Caesarea, whose life and death Eusebius has described in
a several treatise, Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 13.
all these (I say) were crowned with martyrdom. Maximinus Emperor of the
West, whose persecution Eusebius describes not at such length as tho
persecution of Dioclesian in the East, Mauritius with a whole legion of
Christian soldiers martyred. Hist. Mag. cent. 4.
he was like unto a wild Boar trampling under his feet the vine-yarde of
God. He slew Maximinus a noble Captain with a legion of Christian and Thebane
soldiers, because they would not consent to offer sacrifice unto idols. This
was done beside the river of Rhonne. The martyrs of France, Italy and
Germany, specially at Colen and Triers, where the blood of Christians was shed
in such abundance, that it ran like small brooks, and it colored great and
mighty rivers. the multitude (I say) of these holy martyrs, and the diversity
of torments daily excogitated against them, what memory is able to comprehend,
or what tongue is able sufficiently to express? In the end, when these two
Emperors were drunken with the blood of the Saints of God, and saw that the
numbers of Christians daily increased, they began to relent their fury and
madness a little, being at last content that the punishment of Christians
should be the thrusting out of their right eyes, and the maiming of their left
legs with condemning them to the mines of Mettalles. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 12.
Pro. 12. verse. 10
The mercies of the wicked are cruel, says Solomon. Before two years were
fully complete after the beginning of this tenth persecution, these two
furious persecuters (for what cause God knows) gave over their imperial
function, and remained not Emperors any more, but as private persons,
Dioclesian after he had denuded himself of the imperial dignity, Eusebius.
lib. 8. cap. 13. Diocletian and Maximian give over their imperial function
Bucol.
lived almost 9. years. Maximian within four years after, was slain by the
commandment of Constantine. The imperial dominion then remained with
Constantius Chlorus and Galerius Maximinus. these two divided the whole
monarchy between them. Constantius contented himself with France, Spain and
Britain: Galerius Maximinus had the rest. Constantius took Constantinus his
son to be Caesar under him, and Galerius Maximinus chused his two sons,
Maximinus and Sonerus to be Caesar's under him. The Roman soldiers also set up
Maxentius the son of Maximianus Herculeus to be their Emperor: against whom
Galerius sent his son Seuerus, who being slain, he chused Licinius in his
stoad. Of these five, who reigned at one time (the like whereof came not to
pass at any time before) two Emperors and three Caesar's, three of them viz.
Galerius and Maximinus his son, and Licinius prosecuted the persecution,
begun by Dioclesian, near the space of 7. or 8. Note.
years, which was to the year of our Lord 318. The other two, Constantius and
his son Constantine were favorable to Christians.

Constantius and Galerius Maximinus.
COnstantius Chlorus reigned as Emperor 13. years. Others say 16. some say
11. years. He ended his life in peace at York. Hist. Magd. Constantius tried
his Captains whether they were Christians, or not.
He was not only friendly to Christians, but also he counted them the only
faithful subjects to Emperors. And such, as he perceived that for love of
honor, gain, or any worldly commodity would make shipwreck of a good
conscience and sacrifice to idols (albeit they had allowance by his own
fained commandment, given out for exploration of the religion of his Captains
and soldiers, rather then seriouslly and from his heart, allowing the
worshipping of idols) these (I say) who made no conscience to worship idols
for conquessing favor at the Emperors hands, he disauthorized them, Eusebius.
lib. 2. de vita Constantius lib. 1.
removed them from offices and counted them men who were false to God, and
would never be true to him.

Maximinus elder and younger in the East part of the world were cruel
persecuters. Because ecclesiastical writers do not clearly distinguish the
cruelty of the father from the cruelty of the son, I shall comprise all
under the name of Galerius Maximinus the father of the other Maximinus. A
comparison betwixt Maximinus and Pharaoh.
He was not unlike unto Pharaoh, for when the correcting hand of God was upon
him, then he relented his fury: but when the plague ceased, he returned again
to his wonted malice. First God smote him with a wonderful uncouth disease, so
that his flesh began to putrify and innumerable multitude of vermin swarmed
out of his inward parts, then he commanded that the persecution should cease,
and that Christians should pray for him, and he published edicts of peace in
their favors throughout all his dominions. But scarce continued he in this
good resolution 6. months, when as he sent out contrary edicts, and caused
them to be engraued in brass (which thing was not done at any time before) and
to be set up in every City, Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 7.
whereupon ensued a grievous persecution of Siluanus Bishop of Emisa. Lucianus
Bishop of Antiochia, who suffered martyrdom at Nicomedia after he had given in
his apology to the Emperor, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria. Eusebius. lib. 9.
cap. 6.
The martyrdom of king Antheas and 37. thousand more martyrs with him I pass
by as a thing uncertain: because Eusebius could not have ouerpassed with
silence such a rare and wonderful cruelty committed in his own time, if it
had been of verity done, as some allege. Other thirty thousand are said to
have been martyred in sundry places, and this is very probable, because the
martyrs who suffered in this tenth persecution were innumerable. Quirinus
Bishop of Scescania a town of upper Pannonia was thrown into the flood having
an hand-mill hanged about his neck, Quirinus his death.
and so was drowned. I leave a recital of the names of all the rest of the
martyrs, of whom I read to have suffered martyrdom at this time, like as I
have done in all the preceding persecutions.

Now to speak somewhat of the cruel edict of this Emperor ingraued in
brass, Edicts against Christians ingraued in Brass.
and hanged up in all principal cities, specially in Tyrus. In it he gloried,
that peace, wealth, prosperity and plenty of all good things were in his
time: and he attributed the glory of all this abundance to the deuote
worshipping of the heathen gods. At this time (says Eusebius) was that
fulfilled which the Lord Jesus fortold that the tribulation of those days
should be so great, that except those days had been shortened, Mat. 24, 22,
24.
no flesh could have been saved: but for the Electes sake those days should
be shortened: yea and if it were possible the very Elect should be deceived.
But the Lord pitying the infirmity of his Saints and to stop the blasphemous
mouths of heathen people, turned suddenly all their joy into mourning and
lamentation, A sudden change of the prosperity of Pagans into adversity.
with famine, pestilence, warfare, and uncouth diseases, whereby the eyes of
men and women were blinded, by which the Lord tamed the insolent pride of this
bloody Tyrant. It is to be noted that in time of this public calamity,
Christians and no others but they only, were found to be fraughted with love
and full of charity even toward their hateful enemies. Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 8.
The second time whereinto Maximinus seemed to change his mind toward
Christians was after the victory obtained by Constantine and Licinius against
Maxentius. The said two Emperors set forth edictes in favor of the
Christians: and Maximinus rather fearing Constantine then loving God, began in
his bounds also to stay the rage of cruel persecution, as the letter written
to his Deputy Sabinus clearly declares. But after a small time he altered
his mind and set forth new commandments to persecute Christians. Eus^b. lib.
9. cap. 9. Maximinus was overcome in battle by Licinius.
Yet the Lord pitying the grievous afflictions of his persecuted Church,
brought this Tyrant to an end. For he made war against Licinius being
counseled thereto by his sorcerers and charmers, who promised unto him good
success in his battle against Licinius: but the contrary fell out: for he
was discomfited, and cast off his imperial ornaments, and fled feeble and
naked, and mixing himself with the effeminat multitude, wandering through
towns, and lurking in villages, hardly escaped the hands of his enemies. After
this he killed and put to death those enchanters and deceivers who had
bewitched him all his days, and had put him in esperance of victory in his
battle foughten against Licinius, and shortly after oppressed with a certain
disease, glorified the God* of the Christians, and made a most absolute law for
the safety and preservation of them. And so the Tyrant of Tyrants by the
vehemency of his sickness ended his life. Eusebius. lib 9. cap. 10.


After we have spoken a little of Maxentius who was chosen Emperor by the
Praetorian soldiers, rests nothing but to conclude this short sum of the
history of the ten persecutions with the end and death of that notable
hypocrite, Licinius. Maxentius was so villainous in his behavior, that he
abstined not from abusing of the wives of noble senators, whom he caught
violently from their husbands, and contumeliously abused them, and sent them
back again. Eusebius. lib 8. cap. 14.
The like villainy also he intended to have done to a certain Christian
gentlewoman at Rome, called Sophronia, Sophronia chused rather to kill her
self then to be abused by Maxent^us.
whose husband neither could nor durst make resistance to the vile appetite of
the proud Emperor, but this noble woman desiring liberty to go to her
chamber to adorn and deck her self a short while, and after she would go
with the messengers to the Emperor, she chused rather to put her self to
death in her chamber then to be abused by him. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 15.
Which lamentable fact being reported to him, he was nothing moved therewith,
neither abstained he any white from his wonted sins. The people of Rome being
weary of his villainy sent to Constantine for aid, who gathered an army in
France and Britain to repress this Tyrant: to whom when he approached he
feared Maxentius charms (wherewith he was supposed to have vanquished
Seuerus, whom Galerius Maximinus had sent against him before) and stood in
doubt what to do: Constantine sees the similitude of a bright cross in
heaven, Eusebius lib. 1, de vita Constantini, Maxentius overcome in battle by
Constantine is drowned.
and as he was doubting he cast his eyes often to heaven, and saw about the
going down of the sun a brightness in the heaven in the similitude of a
Cross, with certain stars of equal bigness giving this inscription like
Latin letters, In hoc vince, that is in this overcome. After this vision his
banner was made in the similitude of a Cross, and carried before him in his
wars. Maxentius was compelled to issue out of the town against Constantine,
whose force when he was not able to sustain, he fled, and retired in hope to
get the city, but was overthrown off his horse about the bridge called Pons
Miluius and drowned in the flood.

Dioclesian hearing tell of the prosperous success of Constantine, The death
of Dioclesian.
and what edicts he had set forth for the peace of Christians, for very grief
he died. Others allege that he poisoned himself. Ann. 317.

Licinius was made Caesar by Maximinus, as is said. He was very familiar with
Constantine and was his colleg in the government 7. years, and married
Constantina the sister of Constantine. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 8.
Likewise he concurred with him to subdue the tyrant Maxentius. Also he
overcame Maximinus in battle. He purposed likewise to have circumucened and
slain the good Emperor Constantine to whom he was many ways greatly
addebted, but the Lord disappointed his counsels, and preserved Constantine to
the great benefit and good of his Church. But Licinius failing of his purpose
converted his rage against the Christians, notwithstanding he had set out
edicts before to procure their peace. He pretended this quarrel against them,
that they prayed for the welfare of Constantine and not for his welfare. Eusebius.
lib. 2. de vita Constantini Three cruel edicts of Licinius against Christians.
He set forth against the Christians three cruel edicts. 1. Inhibiting
assemblies and conuentions of Bishops to consult in matters belonging to their
religion. 2. He discharged women to resort to the assemblies where men were to
pray or to be instructed in matters to religion. 3. He commanded that no man
should visit imprisoned Christians or succor them with any relief, threatening
against those who would disobey such punishment as the imprisoned persons were
to suffer. After these edicts the mountains, woods and wildernesses began to
be the habitation of the Lords saints. The Bishops about Libya and Egypt were
taken, cut in pieces, and their flesh cast into the sea to be meat for the
fishes. And this was done by the flatterers of Licinius, supposing to gratify
him by the cruel handling of the Lords servants. In his time were put to death
these 40. Forty martyrs tormented first with cold and next with heats.
martyrs of whom Basilius writes, who were set in a pond of water all night
lying open to the blasts of cold Northen winds, and in the morning they being
frozen and almost senseless with the extremity of the cold, yet were carried
upon carts to be burned with fire, to the end their poor carkeses might feel
by experience whether the extremity of cold or heat were the greater torment.
Of these 40. noble soldiers of Christ, one being stronger then the rest,
endured the vehemence of the cold better, to whom his mother came, not to
desire him to embrace this present life by a filthy denial of Christ, nor to
weep for the pains of the tormented body of her son, but rather to exhort
her son to persevere constantly in the faith of Christ, to the end: for she
craved license to lift up her son with her own hands into the cart,
admonishing him to accomplish that happy journey he had begun. But whether
these were the 40. Martyrs who suffered the like punishment in Sebastia, So^om.
l. 9.6.2. Basil. Magn. in 40. Martyrs.
a town of Armenia, or not, is not certain, in respect that some
circumstances set down by Basil, do agree to those of Sebastia.

Likewise in this persecution suffered Barlan a noble man mentioned in a Sermon
of Basilius, who after many torments was in the end laid upon the altar,
whereupon they used to offer sacrifice to Idols, and while there was some
strength in his hand, The martyrdom of Barlan.
they put frankencense into his right hand, thinking that he would have
scattered the incense upon the altar, and sacrificed, but he endured the
torment patiently, saying the words of the Psalm, Blessed be the Lord who
teaches mine hands to fight. Psalm. 145.
In the end Licinius made war against Constantine, and being diverse times
overcome both by sea and land, The death of Licinius.
he yielded himself at length, and was sent to Thessalia to live a private
life, where he was slain by the soldiers. So Constantine obtained the whole
Empire alone.

Here end the ten Persecutions.
CENTVRIE IV.
Constantine.
THE Church of Christ flourished in time of the ten Persecutions, Similitude.
as a Palm tree grows under the burden, and spreads out her branches by
increasing growth toward heaven. Satan on the other part, that piercing and
crooked Serpent, Esa. 27.1.
who strives against the militant Church of God, both by might and slight: when
his might fails, it is time to try his slight: which he did by the
canker-worme of heretical doctrine. Now therefore, let us entreat of the
Arrian and Eutychian Persecutors, in the three subsequent Centuries. Other
Heretics, albeit they were fierce and cruel, such as the Donatists, yet
their cruelty was like unto the stighling of a fish, Similitude.
when the water is ebbed, and she is not covered with the deepenesse of
overflowing water: the more stir she makes, the nearer she is unto her
death. But the Arrian and Eutychian Heretics found Emperors favorably
inclined to the maintenance of their errors, such as Constantius and Valens,
protectors of the Arrian heresy, Anastatius and Heraclius, favorers of the
heresy of Eutyches. This support they had of supreme powers, strengthened the
arm of Heretics, and made them able to persecute the true Church of Christ.

Notwithstanding, betwixt the ten great Persecutions, and the Arrian
persecution, a short breathing time was granted by God unto his Church, who
will not suffer the rod of the wicked perpetually to lie upon the righteous,
lest they put out their hand unto inquity. The days of the reign of
Constantine, were the breathing days of the persecuted Church: Men banished
for the cause of Christ, by the Emperors edicts were returned from their
banishment, restored to their offices, dignities, and possessions, which duly
belonged unto them. The heritage and goods of such as had suffered death for
the cause of Christ, were allotted to their nearest kinsmen, and in case none
of these were found alive, then their goods were ordained to appertain unto
the Church. These beginnings of an admirable change of the estate of persecuted
men, Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib.
wrought in the hearts of all people a wonderful astonishment, considering
within themselves what could be the event of such sudden and unexpected
alteration.

The care that Constantine had to disburthen persecuted Christians of that
heavy yoke of persecution, that pressed them down so long, was not only
extended to the bounds of the Roman Empire, wherein Constantine was sovereign
Lord, and absolute Commander: But he was careful also to procure the peace of
Christians, who lived under Sapores King of Persia, Sozon. lib. 2. cap. 14.
who vexed Christian people with sore and grievous persecution: so that within
his Dominions, more then sixteen thousand were found, who had concluded their
lives by martyrdom. Among whom Simeon Bishop of Selentia, Idem lib. 2. cap. 8
9.10. and 13.
and Vstazares the Kings eldest Eunuch, and his nurs-father in time of his
minority, Pusices, ruler of all the Kings Artificers, Azades the Kings beloved
Eunuch, and Acepcimas, a Bishop in Persia: all these were men of Note, and
Mark, who suffered martyrdom under Sapores, King of Persia.

While the cogitations of Constantine were exercised with meditation, Sozom.
lib. 2. cap. 15.
by what means the distressed estate of Christians in Persia might be
supported: by the providence of God, the Ambassadors of Sapores, King of
Persia, came to the Emperor Constantine: whose petitions when he had granted,
he sent them back again to their Lord and Master: and he sent with them a
Letter of his own, entreating Sapores to be friendly to Christians, in whose
Religion nothing can be found, that can justly be blamed. His letter also bare
the bad fortune of the Emperor Valerian the eight persecuter of Christians and
how miserably he ended his life: and on the other part, what good success the
Lord had given unto himself in all his battles, because he was a defender of
Christians, and a procurer of their peace. What peace was procured to
distressed Christians in Persia by this letter of Constantine, the history
bears not: always his endeavor was honest and godly.

In Constantines days the Gospel was propagated in East India, Ruffin. l. 1.
c 9. Theod. l. 1 c. 22. Sozom. l. 2. c. 24 Ruff. l. 1. c. 10. Socrat. l. 1. c.
20 Theod l. 1. 23. Sozom. l 2. c. 6.
by Frumentius and Edesius, the brother sons of Meropius, a man of Tyrus.
This History is written at length by Ruffinus, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and many
others. Likewise it was propagated in Iberia, a country lying in the uttermost
part of the Euxine Sea, by the means of a captive Christian woman, by whose
supplications, first a child, deadly diseased, recovered health, and afterward
the Queen of Iberia her self was relieved from a dangerous disease, by her
prayers made to Christ. The King of Iberia sent Ambassadors to Constantine,
craving of him, that he would send Preachers and Doctors to the country of
Iberia, who might instruct them in the true faith of Christ. Which desire also
Constantine performed with great gladness of heart.

Now to return and to speak of the Dominions subject to the Roman Empire,
Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4.
Constantine the son of Constantius Chlorus, began to reign in the year of
our Lord 310. and he reigned 31. years: he gave commandment to reedifie the
Temples of the Christians, that were demolished in the time of the persecution
of Dioclesian. This commanmandement was obeyed with expedition, and many more
large and ample Churches were builded, meet for the conventions of Christian
people. Likewise, the temples of Idols were locked up: better they had been
demolished, and equalled to the ground: then had it been a work of greater
difficulty to Julian the Apostate, Theod. l. 5. c. 20. Socrat. l. 1. c. 1. Idem
l. 3. c. 11. and l. 3. c. 18.
to have restored again Heathen Idolatry. Many horrible abuses, both in
Religion and manners, were reformed by the authority and commandment of the
Emperor, such as cubitus mensuralis, called (...), in Egypt, whereunto was
attributed the virtue and cause of the inundation of Nilus, Ruff. l. 2. c. 3^.
by the Egyptians: therefore by the Emperors commandment this (...) was
transported out of their Temples. In Rome the bloody spectacle of Gladiatores,
Socrat. l. 1. c. 18
that is, of Fencing men, with swords killing one another in sight of the
people, was discharged. In Heliopolis, a town of Phoenicia, the filthy manners
of young women, accustomed without controulment, to prostitute themselves ^o
the lust of strangers, until they were married: this filthy custom (I say) by
the commandment of the Emperor Constantine, was interdicted and forbidden. In
Judea, the Altar builded under the Oak of Mambre, Soz^m. l. 1. c. 8.
where the Angels appeared to Abraham, and whereupon the Pagans offered
sacrifice in time of solemn Faires, Gen 18.
for buying and selling of Merchant wares in that place: This Altar (I say) was
commanded to^ be demolished, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 4.
and a Temple to be builded in the same place, for exercise of divine service.

The care this good Emperor had, to quench the schism that began in
Alexandria, shall be declared in its due time, God willing. In some things
Constantine was not unlike to King Solomon, who finding his Kingdom to be
peaceably settled, he gave himself to the building of the Temple, of Palaces,
and of Towns, which he fortified and made strong. Even so Constantine finding
that no enemy durst enterprise any longer to molest the peaceable estate of
his settled Kingdom, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 2.
he builded magnifique Temples in Bethlehem, the place of the Lords Nativity,
upon Mount Olivet, from whence Christ ascended to Heaven, upon Mount Calvarie,
where Christ's Sepurchre was. He builded also a City in Bithinia, Socrat. l.
1. c. 18
and called it Helenopolis, for honor of his mother Helena, and another in
Palestina, and called it Constantia, by the name of his Sister. Also he
builded a glorious Temple in Antiochia, which his son Constantius perfected,
and to the dedication of that Temple a number of Bishops were assembled. And
finally, he builded the great City of Constantinople in Thracia, and called
it Nova Roma, whereas before it was called Byzantium. Socrat. l 5. c. 8 Socrat.
l 1. c. 6 Func. chron.
This town was builded Anno 336.

In the end the good Emperor intended to have made war against the Persians,
and by the way he was purposed to have been baptized in Jordan, where our
Savior Christ was baptized by John: John 3.
but the Lord had disposed otherwise: for the good Emperor fell sick at
Nicomedia, and was baptized in the suburbs of that principal town of
Bithynia, not in Rome, nor by Silvester: but in Nicomedia, and by Eusebius. How
this Eusebius coozned the Emperor, and obscured the wicked purpose of his
heretical heart from him, Eusebius. de vira Constable. lib. 4
and continued in good favor and credit with the Emperor, even to the last
period of his life, so that he had the honor to baptize the good Emperor,
will be declared hereafter. In his testamentall legacy, he left his Dominions
to his sons, ended his life happily, and was buried in Constantinople.

Constantius, Constans, and younger Constantius.
COnstantius governed the East parts of the Roman Empire, and he reigned 25.
years. The other two brethren governed the West parts. Constantine the younger
was slain at* Aquileia, after he had reigned with his brethren three years.
Ruff. l. 1. c. 18 Socrat. l. 2. c. 46 Idem l. 2. c. 5 Soc. l. 2. c. 32
The Emperor Constans reigned 13. years, and was slain in France, by the
Tyrant Magnentius: so after the death of Constance, the whole government of the
Empire turned into the hands of Constantius. He overcame Magnentius in battle,
who fled to Lions, and slew his mother, his own brother, and himself: And so
the Tyrant Magnentius brought himself and his kindred to a miserable end.
Constantius was infected with the heresy of Arrius, by the means of an Arrian
Priest, who had been in Court with Constantia, the sister of the Emperor
Constantine, and relict of Licinius. Ruff. l. 1. c. 11
When she was bound to bed, by infirmity and sickness, where of she died: She
recommended this Arrian presbyter to Constantine her brother, whereby it came
to pass, Theod. l. 2. c. 3
that he had favor and credit in the Emperors court. He procured the
returning of Arrius from banishment, and was the first reporter to Constantius
of his fathers testamentall legacy. And finally, he perverted Constantius from
the true faith, which his father had professed. So pernicious a thing is it to
have deceitful Heretics lurking in the courts of Princes.

During the lifetime of his brother Constans, Arrianisme had no great upper
hand, because Constans Emperor of the West protected Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and the rest of the
Bishops whom the Arrians had most unjustly accused, deposed, and persecuted.
But after the slaughter of Constans, the Arrians were encouraged by the
inconstancy of the Emperor, Theod. l. 2. c. 3
whose flexible and instable mind, like unto a reed shaken with the wind,
was inclined to follow the course, that the forementioned Priest put in his
head. This Priest informed the Emperor Constantius, that the word (...), that
is, Consubstantiall, was not found in holy Scripture, and that the inserting of
this word in the form of faith set down by the Nicene Council, was the
occasion of many debates and contentions in the Church of God: and that the
returning of Athanasius from banishment, Theod. ibid.
was the ground of a terrible tempest, whereby not only the estate of Egypt
was shaken, but also the estate of Palestina and Phoenicia, and other places
not far distant from Egypt. Moreover, he added, Athanasius had been the
author of m^testine dissension betwixt the Emperor Constantius and his brother
Constans, so that (...) wrote menacing letters to his brother, either to
repossesse Paulus and Athanasius into their places again or else if he lingered
in so doing (since their innocence was cleared in the Council of Sardica) he
threatened to lead an army to the East, and to see them repossessed in their own
rooms again. The Emperor Constantius was easily incited to wrath against
Athanasius, and he sent Sebastianus, one of his Captains, Theod. l. 2. c. 13
accompanied with 5000. armed men, to slay Athanasius: but the Lord delivered
him miraculously out of their hands, when there seemed to be no way of
escaping, because armed soldiers were planted round about the Temple: yet he
went safely through the midst of them, and was not discerned, albeit many
Arrians were present of purpose to design and point him out by the finger, as
a sheep ordained for the slaughter.

Georgius, an Arrian Bishop, was seated in Alexandria, in the place of
Athanasius, a wolf in the chair of a true Pastor, whose fury and madness was
helped by Sebastianus, who furnished him with armed soldiers, to accompany all
his wicked and divelish devices. A fire was kindled in the town: Christian
Virgins were stripped naked, and brought to the fire, and commanded to renounce
their faith: but the terror of the fire made them not once to shrink. When the
sight of the fire could not terrify them, he caused their faces to be so
dashed with strokes, and misfashioned their countenances, that they could not
be known by their familiar friends: but they, like unto victorious soldiers,
patiently endured all kind of rebuke for the Name of Christ. Theod. ibid.
Thirty Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, were slain in the fury of this Arrian
persecution. Fourteen Bishops (whose names are particularly mentioned by
Theodoretus) were banished, of whom some died in the way, when they were
transported, others died in the place of their banishment. Forty good
Christians in Alexandria were scourged with rods, because they would not
communicate with the Arrian wolf Georgius: and so pitiously demained, that
some pieces of the rods were so deeply fixed in their flesh, that they could
not be drawn out again, and many through excessive pain of their wounded
bodies, Pro. 10.9
concluded their lives. Here is a lively portrait of the mercies of the wicked,
which are cruel.

The like cruelty the Arrians practiced in Constantinople Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople was banished to Cuculus, a little town in Cappadocia, where he
was strangled by the Arrians. Macedonius was placed in his room, a notable
Heretic, who used no less cruelty, in compelling the Christians of
Constantinople, Socrat. l. 2. c. 27.
to communicate with him, then was used of old, to compel Christians to
sacrifice to the Idols of the Gentiles.

The exquisite diligence of the Arrians in procuring Councels to be gathered
for establishing of their error, shall be declared in the right place, God
willing. Now, to return to the civil estate of Constantius, After that
Magnentius had made an end of his own life in most desperate manner, as is
said, and his associate Britannio had humbly submitted himself to Constantius,
and obtained pardon: yet was not the Emperors estate quiet and free of
trouble: for there arose another Tyrant, Socrat. l 2. c. 32.
called Siluanus, whom the Captains of Constantius army in France did hastily
cut off, and make out of the way. Also the Jews of Diocaesaria, a town of
Palestina, rebelled against him, who were overthrown by Gallus the Emperors
coosen, Socrat. l^b. 2. cap. 33.
and the City of Diocaesaria was leuelled with the ground; This good success
made Gallus somewhat insolent, and he slew Domitianus, the Emperors great
Treasurer in the East: therefore the Emperor gave commandment to cut him off.
Finally, the Germans, who had assisted him in his wars against Magnentius,
they rebelled against him. And he sent against them his coosen Julian, the
brother of Gallus, who subdewed the Germans, and he likewise waxed insolent,
and suffered the soldiers to salute him with the name of (...), that is, of
an Emperor. This was not unknown to Constantius, who made have to prevent all
further usurpation. But by the way as he was leading his army through
Cilicia, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 32.
he concluded his life, sorowing for this, as Theodoretus writes, that he had
changed the form of the Nicene faith.

Iulianus.
IN the year of our Lord 365. Julian began to reign, and he reigned 3 years.
Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Ruffinus assigns unto him one 8. months only: he was Constantius near
kinsman, who made him Caesar, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1.
and gave unto him in marriage Helena his sister: He was brought up in
Christian Religion, but was perverted by Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher, whom
Valentinian the Emperor afterward punished unto the death, Socrat. ibid.
as a practiser of Magical arts. In the beginning of his reign he restored
those Bishops to their places again, Socrat. ibid.
whom Constantius had banished, not for love of Religion, but to impare the
fame of Constantius: yet immediately after, he manifested his affection toward
Heathnicke superstition, and opened the doors of the Temples of the gods of
the Heathen, Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4.
which Constantine had locked up, and encouraged others by his own example, to
offer sacrifices to the gods of the Gentiles.

Julian absteined, for a time, from cruelty, and shedding of blood: Note.
Theod. lib. 3. cap. 8.
not for pity, and compassion of Christians: but rather for envy: For he
enuyed the glory of Christian Martyrs whose magnanimity, courage, and constant
perseverance in the faith of Christ unto the death, was commended in the
mouths of all men. But he endeavored by subtle and crafty means to undo
Christian Religion. He debarred the children of Christians from Schools, and
from the use of Learning: Socrat. lib. 13. and 14. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 15.
Also he debarred them from war fare, from offices of government of Roman
Provinces, and from offices of heavy taxations: which taxations also the
avarice of the Deputies of Provinces increased, and made them more grievous and
intolerable. Nevertheless, when Christians complained of the unrighteous
dealing of the Deputies, the Emperor mocked them, and said, their happiness
was increased, according to the speech of Christ their Lord and Master Blessed
are they, Math. 5.
who suffer persecution for righteousness sake.

Likewise, in the market places of Cities, he set up his own Image, with the
Effigies of the gods of the Heathen pictured round about it: to the end, that
whosoever should do civil reverence to the Emperors Image, might also seem
to worship the gods of the Gentiles: And by the contrary, they who would not
bow to the gods of the Gentiles, Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16.
might seem also to refuse all due reverence to the Emperor. When he
distributed gold to his Captains and Warriors (as the custom was) he used a
form of distributing not accustomed before, to have an altar near unto his
Princely throne, and coals burning upon it, and incense upon a table near
unto the altar whereby it came to pass, that no man received gold, Sozom. lib
5. cap. 17.
before he cast incense upon the coals of the altar: by this subtle artifice
circumuenting many, who knew not, that it was Iulians purpose to entangle them
with the rites of ido latrous service. In Antiochia, and in the Region round
about he dedicated all the Fountains to the Goddesses of the Gentiles, and
caused all the victual that was to be sold in market places, to be sprinkled
with Heathenicke holy water. Nevertheless, Christians, without scruple of
conscience drank of the water that was in the Wells, and ate of the meat
which they bought in the market, being fully persuaded, Titus 1. verse, 15. 1
Cor. 10. verse, 25.
that to the clean all things are clean: and again, it is written,
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat ye, and ask no question for
conscience sake. The liberty that Iunentius and Maxentius, two worthy
Warriors, used in reproving the Emperor to his face, for his Heathnike
superstition, moved Julian to such wrath, that he punished them unto the
death: And so by degrees the policy and wisdom of Julian in the end breaks
forth into the fruits of cruelty and shedding of blo od. Theodor. lib. 3.
cap. 15.


Albeit no public mandate of Julian was set forth, commanding to persecute
Christians, yet by many evident testimonies it was known to the people, that
the Emperor hated them, and that no man would incur punishment, for outrage
and violence used against them. Therefore in the town of Sebaste, Ruffin. lib.
2. cap. 28.
the Sepulcher of John the Baptist was opened, his bones were burnt, and the
ashes scattered abroad. Likewise the wicked men of Gaza and Ascalon, killed
Preachers and holy Virgins, ripped their bellies, filled them with barlie, and
cast their bodies to the swine to be eaten. Cyrillus also, a Deacon in
Hierapolis, a town of Phoenicia, at the foot of Mount Libanus, Theod. lib. 3.
cap. 6.
who in time of the reign of Constantine had broke in pieces the images of the
Gentiles, was taken by them, his belly was ripped, his liver was drawn out of
his body, which with Barbarous inhumanitie they chawed with their teeth. But
the Lord suffered not such uncouth cruelty to escape unpunished: for the teeth
of those who committed this fact of unnatural inhumanitie, fell out of their
jaw bones, Theod. lib. 3. cap. 7. Note.
their tongues rotted within their mouths and their eyes were darkened and
blinded: a just and deserved punishment of brutish Savages practiced by men.
Marcus Arthusius had his body ouerlaid with honey, and it was hung up in hot
summer weather, to be molested with wasps, and flies. Theodoret. ibid.
In Alexandria many Christians were slain for discovering the abominations of
the Pagans, especially in sacrificing to Mythra bloody sacrifices of reasonable
creatures. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Among others, Georgius the Arrian Bishop was bound unto a Camel and both he
and the Camel were burned with fire: whom no man counts a martyr, because he
kept not the true faith. In the country of Phrygia, and town of Miso,
Macedonius Theodulus, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 15.
and Tatianus, for breaking in pieces images, were broiled upon hot grates of
iron. The persecution of Athanasius, which with great hazard he escaped, by a
stratageme, of turning back his ship in the face of the persecuting enemies,
was procured by Philosophers, sorcerers, and inchanters, who were about Julian,
and affirmed that all their travails would be spent in vain, Rufsin. lib. 1.
cap. 33.
if Athanasius, the only bar, and obstacle of their doings, were not made out
of the way.

The wrath of Julian was highly kindled against the inhabitants of Caesarea in
Cappadocia. This town of old was called Maza, but the Emperor Claudius
changed the name of it, and called it Caesarea. The inhabitants of the city,
for the most part, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4.
were Christians, and they had of old overthrown the Temples of Jupiter and
Apollo, and the Temple of Fortune (which only remained) they overthrew in
Iulians own time. For this cause Julian rased the name of Caesarea, out of the
roll of cities, and exacted from them 300. pound weight of gold, compelled
their Clergy to serve in warrefare: And finally, he threatened to punish to
the death all the inhabitants of Caesarea: but the righteous Lord cutted the
cords of the wicked and he had not power to perform all his bloody designs.

He had intention to fight against the Persians, yet would he do nothing
without consultation of his gods. He sent his most assured friends to all the
Oracles within the Roman Dominions, and he himself would inquire at the
Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 9. 10. Socrat lib. 3. cap.
18. 19.
what should be the success of his enterprises. The answer of Apollo was,
that he was hindered by the dead, to give his responses. Hereof it came to
pass, that Julian gave liberty to Christians, to transport the bones of the
Martyr Babylas. About the same time fire came down from heaven, Theodoret. ibid.
and destroyed the Temple of Apollo in Delphos and beat the image of Apollo in
pieces, like unto the lightest and smallest powder, or dust.

Moreover, Ruffin. lib. ^. cap. 37.38.39. Socrat. l. 3. c. 20. Theod. lib. 3.
cap. 20. Sozom. l^b. 5. cap. 12. Socrat. l. 3. c. 21.
he gave liberty to the Jews, to return to Jerusalem, to build their temple,
and to offer sacrifices conform to the law of Moses: not for love he carried
toward the Jews, but for hatred of the Christians: therefore the work
prospered not, but was hindered by earthquake, fire and a mighty tempest of
wind. Mark how every thing this hateful enemy of Christ enterprised, had an
evil success. Julian arrived at Ctesiphon the Metrapolitane town of Chaldea,
Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1.2.
after that Babylon was ruined. The king of Persia had his people in better
preparation then the Emp. looked for: therefore he took deliberation to
return back again to the bounds of the Roman dominions: The death of
Iulianus.
but he who was deceitful al his days, was in end deceived by an old Persia^
captive, who led the Emp. into a baren wilderness, where he concluded his life,
wounded with a dart: but it remains uncertain by whom he was slain.

Iouinianus.
R^fin lib. 2. cap. 1.
AFter the death of Julian, Iouinian was chosen, by the Roman army, to be
Emperor, but lived not full 8. months in his Imperial dignity. He accepted
not the sovereignty, until the time the whole army with uniform consent
acknowledged themselves to be Christians. He made a covenant of peace with the
King of Persia, such as necessity of a distressed army compelled him to
condescend unto: Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.22.
for Nisibis, a great City in Mesopotamia, with some dominions in Syria, were
resigned over to the King of Persia. The blame of this hurtful capitulation,
was imputed to the temerity of Julian the apostate, who had burnt with fire the
ships that should have brought victualles to the army, and gave hasty credit
to a Persian captive. When he had reduced the army to the bounds of the Roman
dominions, he buried the dead body of Julian in Tarsus, a town of Cilicia:
and he reduced from punishment the worthy captain Valentinian, whom Julian
had banished, Theod lib. 4. cap. 2.3.
together with the Bishops banished from their places, or compelled to lurk:
and in special Athanasius, whose counsel he was resolved to follow in matters
of Faith and church government. Theod. lib. 4. cap. 4.
In the end he took purpose to go to Constantinople: but by the way, in the
confines of Galatia and Bithinia, he concluded his life in a Village called
Dadasta 9. Sazom lib. 6. cap. 6.


Valentinianus and Valens.
AFter the death of Iovinian, the Roman army choosed Valentinian to be
Emperor, who reigned 13. years. In whom was accomplished which is promised in
the Gospel, to render an hundreth-folde in this life, to them who suffer any
loss for Christ's sake, in the world to come eternal life. Valentinian for
Christ's sake lost his office in Iulians Court, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31.
and he received in this world a kingdom, and has a greater recompense of
reward laid up for him in heaven. The magnanimous courage of Valentinian in
beating on the face that heathen priest, Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 2.
who sprinkled holy water upon his garments, whereby he thought his garments to
be contaminate, and not his body sanctified. Theod. lib. ^. cap. 16.
This courageous fact was the cause wherefore Julian banished him to Miletina,
a town in Armenia. He was relieved from banishment in the days of Iouinian,
and wa^ made Emp. after his death. He was borne in a town of Panonia, Sozom.
lib. 6. cap. 6.
called Cibalc: he addressed himself immediately after his acceptance of the
Emperial sovereignty to Constantinople, and within the space of 30. days he
choosed his brother to be his associate in the government: in such sort, that
the Emp. Valentinian governed the West, Socrat lib 4. cap. 1.
and the Emperor Valens governed the Eastern parts of the Roman Dominions.

The Emp. Valens finding the Persians to be quiet, and disposed to keep the
covenant of peace bound up in the days of Iouinian, he undertook an
unsupportable warfare against the Homousians. The usurpation of the Tyrant
Procopius, did somewhat slacken the readiness and quicknes of his attempts but
after Procopius was delivered into the hands of the Emp. Valens, by Agelon and
Gomarius his Captains, he rent in pieces the body of Procopius, by bowing
down to the ground the tops of strong trees, Socrat lib. 4. cap. 5.
whereunto he caused the legs of Procopius to be fastened. The bodies of Agelon
and Gomarius, the two Captains who betrayed Procopius, were cutted in twain
with sawes of iron. In which fact the Emprour Valens had no regard to the oath
of God, which he made unto them for their safety.

Procopius being subdewed, Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 13.
he bended all his might against the Homousians: He banished Miletius, B. of
Antiochia, to Armenia: Eusebius B. of Samosata, to Thracia: Pelagius Bishop of
Laodicea, to Arabia. The town of Samosata was so affectioned to their own
Pastor Eusebius, Theod. ibid.
that they would not communicate with Eunomius, whom the Arians sent to fill his
place. Valens was filled with wrath against the Fathers conucened in the
council of Lampsacum (this is a town near unto the strait forth of
Hellespontus) because they adhered fast unto the Nicene faith. Socrat lib. 4.
cap. 6.
In Constantinople he not only banished the Homousians, but also the Novatians,
and their B. Agelius, because they would not consent with the Arrian in the
matter of faith. Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 5.
In Edessa, a town of Mesopotamia, the Emperor gave commandment to slay the
Homousians, who were assembled together in the church: but the seruent zeal of
one woman, Theod. lib. 4. cap. 17.
that ran in have through the ranks of soldiers, drawing with her, her young
and tender child, together with her courageous answer to the Captain, Soz^m.
lib. 6. cap. 18.
stayed the rage of the Emp. wonderfully: for she counted it a sweet fellowship
that she and her babe should be found amongst the number of these, who were
counted worthy to suffer death for the name of Christ. Nevertheless the Emp.
banished of men who dwelt in Edessa, especially of such as were in spiritual
offices, to the number of fourscore, whom he commanded, by two and two, to be
dispersed through Thracia, Arabia, and Thebaida. The invincible courage of
Basilius, Bishop of Caesarea in Capadocia, the peaceable death of Athanasius,
which happened in the very time of Persecution of this Arrian Emperor Valens,
together with the fury and madness of the Arrian Bishop Lucius, intruded in
Alexandria, All these things, God willing shall be touched in their own
places.

Amongst all the facts of unspeakable cruelty committed by Valens, Socrat. lib.
4. cap. 16.
one fact ouerwent all the rest. While the Emp. was at Nicomedia, fourscore
Ambassadors were directed unto him: amongst whom Menedemus, Vrbanus and
Theodorus were the chief. These complained to the Emperor, of the manifold
injuries done to the Homousians. Theod. lib. 4. cap. 24.
The Emperor gave commandment to Modestus, the Governor of his army, to
embarke them into a ship, as if they were to be banished unto some remote and
far distant place: but secret direction was given unto the ship-men, to set the
ship on fire, and to retire themselves into a boat. So it came to pass, that
these fourscore Martyrs circumvented by the craft of Valens, Sozom. l. 6. c. 14
glorified the Name of Christ, by patient suffering of many deaths at one time,
both tormented by fire, and drowned in water.

Terentius and Traianus, two worthy Captains, used some liberty in admonishing
the Emperor to abstain from persecuting of innocent people, Theod. l. 4. c. 34
because his fighting against God, procured good success to the Barbarians:
but the Lord was minded to destroy him, therefore he could receive no wholesome
admonition: for a number of the Nation of the Goths, whom he entertained as
soldiers, meet to defend his Dominions against the invasion of forrainers and
strangers, Ruff. l. 2. c. 13.
they began to waste the Country of Thracia: and they fought against the
Emperor Valens, and prevailed against him: so that he fled, and was overtaken
in a certain Village, which the Goths set on fire. So this Emperor died
miserably, Valens his death.
burnt with fire by his enemies, without succession, and left his name in curse
and execration to all ages, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 40.
after he had reigned 15. or 16. years, as Sozomenus reckons.

Now to return to the Emperor Valentinian: He was a defender of the true
Faith, and was so highly offended against his brother Valens, that he would
make him no support against the invasion of the Goths: Theod. l. 4. c. 12
for he said, it was an impious thing, to strengthen the hand of a man, who
had spent his days in warfare against God, and his Church. In his days the
Samaritans invaded the bounds of the Roman Dominions. Valentinian prepared a
mighty army to fight against them: but they sent unto him Ambassadors, to
entreat for peace. Socrat. l. 4.c.31.
When the Emperor saw that they were but a naughty people, he was moved with
excessive anger, whereby he procured the rupture of some arters, or veins,
whereupon followed great effusion of blood. And so he himself died, Sozom.
lib. 5. cap. 36. Valentinians death.
leaving behind him two sons, Gratianus, whose mother was Severa, and
Valentinian the second, whose mother was Justin

Gratianus; Valentianus the second, and Theodosius.
GRatianus, the son of Valentinian, after the death of Valens, Ruff. l. 2. c.
13
his fathers brother, had the government both of West and East. Socrat. l. 5.
c. 2
His brother Valentinian the second, was his associate in the government of the
West: But when he perceived, that the weighty affairs of the Kingdom required
the fellowship of a man who was ripe in years, he chose Theodosius, a man of
Noble parentage in Spain, to whom he committed the government of the East,
contenting himself and his brother Valentinian, with the government of the
West. Gratianus in the beginning of his reign, reduced from banishment those
Bishops, whom the Arrian Persecuter Valens had banished. He was slain by
Andragathius, Captain of the army of Maximus, Sozom. l. 3. c. 17
who usurped the Empire of the West. This Andragathius, not by valor and
might, but by circumvention, fallhod, and treason, overthrew the good Emperor
Gratian: for he made a report to pass in Lions, where the Emperor Gratian
had his remaining, that his wife was coming to him: and he in simplicity
went forth to meet his wife beyond the river Rhonne: but Andragathius (who was
covertly lurking in a chariot) stepped out, The death of Gratian.
and slew Gratianus, after he had reigned with his father, with his brother,
and with Theodosius, fifteen years.

His brother Valentinian, young in years, was seduced by the intising speeches
of his mother Iustina after the death of her husband, in whose days she durst
not presume to avow the Arrian Heresy: yet after his death, she entised the
flexible mind of her son, Theod. l. 5.13.
to persecute Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, because he would not consent to the
Arrian doctrine. The zeal of the people affectioned to their faithful Pastor,
hindered the cruel purposes of Iustina. Sozom. l. 7. c. 13.
Likewise the miracles wrought at the sepulchers of Protasius and Gervasius,
opened the mouths of the people to glorify God, and to magnify that Faith,
which Protasius and Gervasius had sealed up with their blood: these holy men of
God were martyred in the second great Persecution, moved by the Emperor
Domitian. Aug lib. Confess. 9 cap. 7.
The dolorous tithings of the death of Gratianus, and the near approaching of
the Tyrant Maximus to Italy, compelled Iustina to leave the persecuting of
Ambrose, and to fly to Illericum, Ruff. l. 2. c. 16 Theod. l. 5. c. 14
for safety of her own life, and her sons life. Theodosius being mindful
of the kindness of Gratianus toward him, led an army against the Tyrant
Maximus. The Captains of Maximus army, terrified with the rumor of the might
of Theodosius army, Soc. l. 5. c. 14
delivered him bound into the hands of Theodosius, and he was justly punished
unto the death. Andragatius, who slew the Emperor Gratian (as is said) seeing
no way to escape, threw himself headlong into a river, and so ended his
wretched life. About the same time, Iustina the mother of Valentinian the
second, she died, her son was peaceably possessed in his Kingdom, Ruffin.
l. 2. c. 17.
and Theodosius returned to the East again.

But within few days he was compelled to gather a new army, and fight against
the Tyrant Eugenius, and his chief Captain Arbogastus, who had conspired
against Valentinian the second, and strangled him while he was lying in his
bed. This battle went hardly at the beginning, but Theodosius had his recourse
to God by prayer: and the Lord sent a mighty tempest of wind, which blew so
vehemently in the face of Eugenius army, that their darts were turned back, by
the violence of the wind, in their own faces. Of which miraculous support,
sent from above, the Poet Claudian writes these Verses: O nimium dilecte Deo
eui sundis ab antris
Eolus a mat as biemes, Claudian de 3. consul. honorii.
cui^^^ at ather,
Et cominrati veniunt ad classica venti.


The Tyrant Eugenius fell down at the feet of Theodosius, to beg pardon: but
the soldiers pursued him so straightly, that they slew him at the Emperors
feet. Arbogastus, the author of all this mischief, he sled, and being out of
all hope of safety, slew himself.

Like as there was no sacrifice, wherein dung was not found, even so the life
and actions of this noble Emperor, was spotted with some infirmities. Against
the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, the Emperor was moved with excessive anger,
Ruff. l 2. c. 18.
so that seven thousand innocent people were slain, invited to the spectacle
of Plays, called Ludi circenses, and in the Greek language, (...). For this
fault the good Emperor was reprooved by Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, Theod. l.
5. c. 17.
and confessed his fault in sight of the people with tears: and made a law,
that the like commandments, concerning the slaughter of people, should not
have hasty execution, until the tune that thirty days were overpassed: to
the end. that space might be left to either mercy, or to repentance. In like
manner, he was angry out of measure against the people of Antiochia, Theod. l.
5. c. 19.
for overthrowing the brazen portrait of his beloved bedfellow Placilla. The
Emperor denuded their town of the dignity of a Metrapolitan City, conferring
this eminent honor to their neighbor town Laodicea. Moreover he threatened
to set the town on fire, and to redact it unto the base estate of a village.
But Flavianus Bishop of Antiochia, by his earnest travels with the Emperor
mitigated his wrath (for the people repented their foolish fact, Sozom. l. 7.
c. 23
and were fore afraid) and the good Emperor moved with pity, pardoned the
fault of the town of Antiochia. His lenity toward the Arrians, whom he
permitted to keep conventions in principal Cities, was with great dexterity
and wisdom reprooved by Amphilochius, Theod. l. 5. c. 16.
Bishop of Iconium: For he came in upon a time, and did reverence to the
Emperor, but not unto Arcadius his son (albeit already associated to his
father in government, and declared Augustus) whereat Theodosius being offended,
Amphilochius very pertinently, and in due season, admonished the Emperor, that
the God of heaven also would be offended with them, who tolerated the
blasphemers of his only begotten Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. Whereupon
followed a law, discharging the conventions of Heretics, in the principal
Cities. In all these infirmities, it is remarkable, that the good Emperor
ever gave place to wholesome admonitions. Note. Theod. l. 5. c. 26
The excessive pains he was compelled to undertake in Warfare, hastened his
death: for he contracted sickness soon after his returning from the the
battle fought against Eugenius, and died in the 60. year of his age, and in
the 16. year of his reign. He left behind him his two sons: Arcadius to
govern the East, and Honorius to govern the West.

CENTVRIE V.
Arcadius, and Honorius.
THE good Emperor Theodosius left behind him two sons, Socrat. l. 6. c. 23
Arcadius to govern the East parts, and Honorius the West. Arcadius reigned 14
years: He was a meek and godly Emperor, but not courageous, as his father
had been. His simplicity was abused by Eudoxia his wife, Ruffinus his chief
counselor, and Gania his chief Captain. Eudoxia was offended at the freedom
that Chrysostom used, in reproving of sin: And by the means of Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria procured his deposition. Theophilus had gathered a Synod
at the Oak of Calcedon: and because Chrysostom being warned, refused to
appear, they convict him of contumacy, and deposed him: after deposition
followed banishment, from which the affectioned minds of the people toward
their Pastor, constrained the Emperor to reduce him again: yet Eudoxia
continued in her malice, and procured by the means of Theophilus, his second
deposition and banishment, with commandment to journey his weak body with
excessive travels from place to place, Sozom. l. 8. c. 28
until he concluded his life.

Ruffiinus stirred up Alaricus King of the Goths, to fight against Arcadius,
secretly presuming to the kingdom, but his treasonable enterprises being
espied, he was slain, and his head and right hand were hung up upon the port
of Constantinople.

Gaina of a simple soldier was made general Commander of Arcadius his army:
he waxed insolent and proud, affected the kingdom, being in blood a stranger,
of the Nation of the Goths, in religion an Arrian. He craved a petition of the
Emperor, that he might have one of the Churches of Constantinople, Theod. l.
5.32.
wherein he might serve God according to his own form: but this petition by
the prudent advice of Chrysostom given to the Emperor was rejected, and the
pride of Gaina for a time was something abated.

Honorius reigned in the West, all the days of his brother Arcadius and 15.
years after his death. The whole time of his government was very troublesome.
Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3.
Gildo, his Lieutenant in Afric, usurped the dominion of Afric; and
Mascelzer his brother, who at the first detested treasonable enterprises in his
brother, yet afterward followed his brothers footsteps, and received the just
deserved reward of his inconstancy, for he was slain by his own soldiers.
In like manner Stilico, the Emperors father in law (for Honorius married his
daughter) and the Emperors chief Counselor, presumed to draw the kingdom to
Eucherius his son, and stirred up the Vandales, Burgundians, Almans, and
diverse others to invade the kingdom of France, to the end that Honorius being
overcharged with the multitude of unsupportable business, might permit Stilico
to set forward to the designs of his own heart. About this time, Rhadagisus a
Sythian, Func. chron.
accompanied with an army of two hundred thousand Goths, came to Italy. And
the help of Vldinus and Sarus, Captains of the Hunnes and Goths, being
obtained, Rhadagisus was suddenly surprised, himself was taken and strangled,
many were slain, the most part were sold, whereupon followed incredible
cheapnesse of servants, so that flocks of servants were sold for one piece of
gold, in Italy.

The next great trouble came by Alaricus, King of the Western Goths, who
invaded Italy, and camped about Ravenna, with whom Honorius entered into a
capitulation, and promised to him and his retinue, a dwelling place in France.
The Goths marched toward their appointed dwelling place: Compend. Theod.
catalog. Casaru^.
But Stilico the Emperors father in law followed after them, and set upon them
at unawares, when they suspected none evil, and slew a great number of them.
By this the Emperor clearly perceived the treason of Stilico, and caused him
and his son to be slain, but to his own great hurt, he appointed no
general Commander of the army in his place. Alaricus and his army were
enraged, partly by their loss, and partly by remembrance of the covenant made
with them, and incontinent violated: Therefore they turned back again, and
invaded Italy with all their might, and besieged Rome two years, and took it
in the year of our Lord, Platin. in vita Zosimi 1.
410. or as some reckon 412. In the midst of burning, slaying, robbing, and
military outrage, some favor was shown by the express commandment of
Alaricus, Sozom. l. 9. c. 9.
to such as fled to Christian Churches for safety of their lives. Alaricus led
his army from Rome, and was purposed to sail to Afric, there to settle his
abode, but being driven back with tempestuous winds, he wintred in
Consentia, where he ended his life. Alaricus in his lifetime had given in
marriage Placidia the sister of Honorius, Func. chron.
to Ataulphus his nearest kinsman, and Ataulphus after the death of Alaricus,
reigned over the Goths. The Goths under the conduct of Ataulphus, returned
back again to Rome. Placidia through her intercession purchased great good to
the town of Rome: the Goths abstained from burning, and shedding of blood,
and addressed themselves toward France and Spain.

Theodosius 2. and Valentinian 3.
AFter Arcadius, reigned his son Theodosius the second 42. years. His uncle
Honorius governed in the West: After whose death the whole government pertained
to Theodosius, who associated unto himself Valentinian the third, the son of
Placidia, his fathers sister. Theodosius in godliness was like unto his
grandfather, in collecting a great library of good books, nothing inferior
to Ptolemaus Philadelphus. In collecting in one short sum the Jaws of kings
and princes: he tread a path whereinto Justinian walked, following Theodosius
example, and benefited all men desirous of learning. Socrat. l. 7. c. 22 Iaem.
lib 7. cap 42. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3.
His house was like unto a sanctuary for exercises of reading of holy
Scripture, and deuote prayers. He was of a meek and tractable nature almost
beyond measure: his facility in subscribing unread letters was corrected by
the prudent advice of his sister Pulcheria. In these two Emp. time the estate
was mightily crossed and troubled by strangers. By the procurement of
Bonifacius deputy of Afric, the Vandales under the conduct of Gensericus
their king came into Africa, took the town of Carthage, and other principal
towns and settled their abode in that country. Valentinian 3. Emp. of the
West was compelled to make a covenant with the Vandales, and to assign unto
them limited bounds in Afric for their dwelling place.

The Vandales were partly Pagans and partly Arrians whereby it came to pass
that the true Church in Afric was persecuted with no less inhumanitie; and
barbarous cruelty by Gensericus King of the Vandales, then it was in the days
of the Emp. Dioclesian. Attila, King of the Hunnes encombred the Roman Empire
with greater troubles. Theodosius Emperor of the East bought peace with
payment of a yearly tribute of gold to Attila. Valentinian the third by the
means of Aetius his chief Counselor allured Theodoricus King of the Western
Goths to take his part. The parties fought in the fields called Catalaunici a
great fight, wherein a hundredth and fourscore thousand men were slain. And
Theodoricus King of the Goths in this battle lost his life. Attila was
compelled to flee. Thrasimundus the son of Theodoricus was very willing to
pursue Attila, for desire he had to revenge his fathers slaughter, but he was
stayed by Aetius. This counsel seems to be the occasion of his death:
Valentinian commanded to cut off Aetius. Attila finding that the Roman army
was destitute of the conduct of so wise a governor, as Aetius was, he took
courage again, and in great rage set himself against Italy, took the towns
of Aquileia, Ticinum and Millane, sacked and ruined them, and set himself
directly against Rome, with intention to have used the like cruelty also
against it. But Leo Bishop of Rome went forth, and with gentle words so
mitigated his mind, that he left besieging of the town of Rome. Soon after
this Attila died, the terror of the world, and the whip wherewith God scourged
many nations.

Valentinian the third, after he had reigned in whole 30. years, was cut off
for the slaughter of Aetius. Maximus usurped the Kingdom, and violently took
unto himself Eudoxia the relict of Valentinian: but she was relieved again
by Gensericus King of Vandales, who led an army to Rome, and spoiled the
town, and relieved Eudoxia, and carried her and her daughters to Afric, and
gave Honoricus his son in marriage unto her eldest daughter. Maximus was cut
in pieces by the people, and his body was cast into Tyber. From this time
forth the Empire utterly decayed in the West, until the days of Carolus
Magnus, so that Anitus, Evigr. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Richimex, Maioranus, Severus, Anthemius, Olybrius, Glycerius, Nepos, Orestes
and his son Augustulus, they continued so short time, and governed so
vnprosperously, that their names may be left out of the roll of the Emperors.

Now to return again to Theodosius Emperor in the East, a King beloved of
God, in so much that by prayer he obtained of God a wonderful deliverance to
Ardaburius captain of his army. Note.
When his uncle had ended his life, Ardaburius was sent against a tyrant John,
who did usurp the Kingdom in the West. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 23.
The ship whereinto Ardaburius failed by tempest of weather was driven to
Rauenna, where the tyrant John took him prisoner. Aspar the captains son,
being conducted by an Angel of God (as Socrates writes) entered in Rauenna,
by the passage of the loch, which was never found dried up before that time:
the ports of the town were patent, so that Aspar and his army entered into
the town, slew the tyrant John, and relieved Ardaburius his father. This
miraculous deliverance is thought to be the fruit of the effectual prayers of
the godly Emperor. His death was procured by a fall from his horse, after
which he was diseased, and died: an Emperor worthy of everlasting remembrance.

Martianus.
MArtianus by the means of Pulcheria the sister of Theodosius was advanced to
the Kingdom with whom Valentinian the third, of whom I have already spoken,
reigned 4. Catalog. Casarum.
years. Martianus, albeit he obtained the government in a time most
troublesome, when the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, and Herules had disquieted the
estate of the Roman Empire out of measure, yet by the providence of God the
short time of his government was peaceable, Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 8.
for he reigned not fully 7 year, and he left behind him great grief in the
hearts of the people, because a government so good and godly endured so short
time. Concerning the council of Chalcedon assembled by him, it is to be
referred unto the own place.

Leo.
AFter Martianus succeeded Leo, and governed 17. years. He was godly and
peaceable, not unlike Martianus his predecessor. He interposed his authority
to suppress those who proudly despised the council of Chalcedon, and
obstinatly maintained the heresy of Eutyches. Notwithstanding the madness and
rage of Eutychian heretics began in his time, Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 8.
immediately after the report of the death of Martianus. Procerius Bishop of
Alexandria was cruelly slain by them in the Church, haled through the streets,
and with beastly cruelty they chewed the intrals of his body, having before
ordained Timotheus to be their Bishop. Idem cap. 12. and 13.
The Emperor banished Timotheus being first foreseen, that not only Leo
bishop of Rome, but also all other bishops, of chief account, damned the
ordination of Timotheus. The terrible earthquake which destroyed a part of
Antiochia, and the more terrible fire which wasted a great part of
Constantinople, were fore running tokens of the great desolation that should
ensue by the detestable heresy of Eutyches.

Zeno.
THe Emperor Leo left his Kingdom to his nephew the son of Zeno called Leo,
but he fell sick and died, when he had scarce reigned 1. year. So his father
Zeno had the Imperial sovereignty 17. years: he was of a bad religion,
dissolute in manners, intemperate, effeminate, and hated of all men. Evagr.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
Therefore Basiliscus conspired against him and Zeno fled. Basiliscus was a
persecuter of the true faith, damned by his encyclicke letters the Council of
Chalcedon: restored Euthychian bishops to their places again: such as
Timotheus Arideus to Alexandria, Petrus Cnapheus to Antiochia, Idem lib. 3.
cap. 5.
Paulus to Ephesus: five hundredth preachers were found, who subscribed
Basiliscus letters, and cursed the council of Chalcedon. So great a plague it
is, either to have ignorant Pastors, who know not the truth of God, Note.
or cowardly teachers, who will suffer no rebuke for the known truth of God.
Zeno returned to his Kingdom again within 2. years: Idem cap. 8. and 11.
he banished Basiliscus to Cappadocia, where he was slain with his wife and
children. He abolished the encyclicke letters of Basiliscus and eicted Petrus
Cnapheus out of Antiochia, and Paulus out of Ephesus. Timotheus of Alexandria
was old, infirm, and near to the last period of his life, else also he had bin
eiected out of Alexandria: for Zeno, not for love of the true faith, but for
hatred of the name of Basiliscus endeavored to do all that he had done.

Under the reign of Zeno came Odoacer assisted with people of Pannonia called
Rugi, Turcilingi and Heruli, and invaded Italy, and slew Orestes at Pagia, and
compelled his son Augustulus, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3.
to denude himself of imperial honors so that the Roman empire, as it began
in the person of Augustus Caesar, so likewise it ended in the person of
Augustulus the son of Orestes. Odoacer would not usurp the glorious title of
an Emperor, but called himself King of Italy, and reigned 14. years. Zeno
on the other part stirred up Theodoricus King of Goths to expel Odoacer out
of Italy. Theodoricus encountered with him diverse times, and prevailed. In the
end he besieged him in Ravenna, until a covenant of peace was bound up betwixt
them, but it lasted a short time: for Theodoricus under pretense of friendship,
Note.
called Odoacer and his sons to a banquet and caused them cruelly to be
slain. Afterward he reigned himself alone in Italy 33. years: he reedified
the towns in Italy which by violence of wars had been wasted and made
desolate, and was well beloved of the people: and albeit in religion he was an
Arrian, yet he abstained from persecution of those who professed the true faith.

The Eutychian persecution is already begun, Hist. Magd. ibid.
but the Arrian persecution is not yet ended. Hunnericus son of Gensericus
king of Vandales, was an Arrian persecuter so unmerciful, that in Afric
where his dominion was, he had neither compassion on sex or age: he banished
at one time five thousand professors of the true faith. And such as were
infirm and weak; and could neither travel by foot nor horse, he commanded
cords to be knit to their legs, and to traile them through the rough places
of the wilderness, and by such merciles dealing, the death of many innocent
people was procured: but the Lord suffered not this cruelty to be unpunished:
for the Lord plagued the Vandales with famine, and pest, and Hunnericus was so
long tormented with venomous biles, that in the end he was consumed with
vermin, and in great misery ended his most wretched life.

In this Centurie studying for brevitie, I have ouerpassed some remarkable
things, such as the deceitful practices of the wise men of Persia, Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 8.
to divert the affection of their King Isdigerdes from the love he had carried
to Maruthas Bishop in Mesopotamia, and Ambassador of Theodosius. 2. This
history is set down at length by Socrates. In like manner the calamity of the
Jews who dwelt in the Isle of Candie, and were piteously abused by a deceiving
fellow, who called himself Moses, and promised to lead them through the
Mediterran sea, to their own land, as Moses led the people of Israel through
the read sea: this calamity read in the 7. book of the ecclesiastical
history of Socrates chap. 38. The Jews were commanded to cast themselves into
the sea, Func. chron.
and to swim unto a rock: but they were drowned in the sea, and dashed upon
the hard rock, and by the means of Christian fishers some few escaped. This
history is referred unto the 434. year of our Lord: so that it fell forth
under the reign of Theodosius 2. The miraculous conversion of the Burgundians
to the faith of Christ about the same time, I have of purpose ouerpassed,
willing to be short, and to give a view of the history to those who are
desirous to read.

CENTVRIE VI.
Anastatius.
AFter Zeno succeeded Anastatius, and governed 27. years. He was a patron of
the heresy of Eutyches. He banished Euphemius Bishop of Constantinople,
because he would not redeliuer unto him that letter which he had subscribed
before his Coronation, wherein he was bound to attempt nothing against the true
faith, and namely against the council of Chal^edon. In like manner he banished
Macedonius the successor of Euphemius for the same cause (for he had the
custody of the handwriting of Anastatius) and the Emperor gave secret
Commandment to make him out of the way at Gangra the place of his banishment.
Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Xenoeas Bishop of Hierapolis, a firebrand of Satan stirred up the Emperors
mind to great rage, partly by gathering a Council at Sidon, wherein they
damned the acts of the council of Chalcedon and partly by stirring up the
Emperor to wrath against good men, such as were principal defenders of the
true faith: namely Flauianus Bishop of Antiochia and Helias Bishop of
Jerusalem. The people of Antiochia were very friendly to their Pastor, and
finding that a great number of Monks sauouring Eutyches error, had assembled
in the town of Antiochia to compel Flauianus their Bishop to accurse and
abjure the council of Chalcedon: Note.
they set upon the Monks, and slew a number of them, others leaped into the
river of Orontes, where they found a meet burial for seditious Monks. On the
other part a great number of Syria Caua, Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 32.
came to support the troubled estate of Flauianus. For these things, as if he
had been a contentious man, he was banished, and Senerus a notable Eutychian
heretic was placed in his room: this is he, of whom I have mentioned diverse
times that Alamundarus prince of Saraceus deluded his messengers, and sent them
back ashamed and confounded. The next attempt was against Helias Bishop of
Jerusalem, against whom this quarrel was forged, that he would not subscribe
the Synodicke letter of Seuerus, and damn the council of Chalcedon, and by the
Emperors commandment. Olympius the captain came to Jerusalem, expelled
Helias, and placed John a familiar friend of Seuerus in his room. This John by
the persuasion of Sabas a Monk of Palestina forsook the fellowship of
Seuerus, and was cast into prison by Anastatius the Emperors captain: but
when he was brought forth out of prison again, he disappointed the
expectation of Anastatius the captain: for he openly avouched the four
general councels, and anathematifed the followers of Arrius, Macedonius,
Nestorius and Eutyches. In doing whereof he was mightily assisted both by the
people, and the Monks: so that Anastatius the Emperors captain fearing
popular commotion, fled and returned again to the Emperor, Hist. Magd. cen.
6. cap. 3.
but Seuerus Bishop of Antiochia moved with wrath against the Monks of Syria,
set upon them, and slew 300. of them, and gave their carcases to the fowls of
the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, such mercy was, and is to be found
in headstrong heretics. In all this desolation the courage of Cosmas Bishop
of Epiphania, and Severianus bishop of Arethusa is to be admired, who wrote a
book containing a sentence of deposition of Severus Bishop of Antiochia,
Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 34.
which book Aurelianus a deacon of Epiphania clad in a woman's apparel
delivered unto him in Antiochia, and afterward conveyed himself away secretly.
The Emperor was highly offended against Cosmas, and Severianus, and he wrote
to Asiaticus governor of Phoenicia, that he should eiect them out of their
places: but when answer was returned to the Emperor, that it could not be
done without blood, the Emperor left off further pursuing of them. Many
counted Anastatius a peaceable Emperor, because he would have settled
controversies in the Church, as eiuil controversies at sometimes are settled,
namely, by a law of oblivion, but there is no capitulation betwixt darkness
and light, but darkness must yield unto the light of God. In Afric more then
900. Note.
were crowned with martyrdom under the reign of Anastatius, as Magd history
records out of the first book of Regino, Platin. de vi^^ Hormisda.
de Anastatio. Platina writes that he was slain with thunder.

Justinius the elder.
AFter Anastatius, succeeded Justinius a godly Emperor, and governed nine
years and three days. He restored the Bshops whom Anastatius had banished.
He banished also Arrian Bishops, who were found within his Dominions. Severus
Bishop of Antiochia, a vile Eutychian Heretic, and a bloody Fox, he
displaced, and caused him to be punished by cutting out of his tongue, as some
affirm. Theodoricus King of the Goths obtaining domion in Italy, Evag. l. 4.
c. 4.
persecuted true Christians with great hostility, and sent Ambassadors to the
Emperor Justinius, to restore the Arrian Bishops whom he had banished: else he
would pursue the Bishops who were in Italy, with all kind of rigor. And
because the Ambassadors returned not back again with such expedition as he
expected, he put hand to work, and slew two noble Senators, Symmachus, and
Boethius. Likewise when the Ambassadors were returned, he cast in prison
Johannes Tuscus, Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3.
Bishop of Rome, and his companions, whom he had before employed to go on
message to the Emperor Justinius. The Bishop of Rome died in prison for lack
of sustentation, but the Lord suffered not this barbarous cruelty of
Theodoricus to be long unpunished: for the Lord struck him with madness of
mind, so when he was sitting at table, Note.
and the head of a great fish was set before him, he imagined it was the head
of Symmachus, whom he had slain, and was so stupefied with fear, that anon
after he died. In the days of this Emperor Justinius, was a terrible
earthquake, Evag. l. 4. c. 5.
the like whereof has not been heard at any time before, wherewith the town
of Antiochia was shaken and utterly ruined. With the earthquake, fire was
mixed, consuming and resolving into ashes the remnant of the town, which the
earthquake had not cast down. In this calamity Euphrasius Bishop of Antiochia,
perished. The good Emperor mourned for the desolation of Antiochia, and put on
sackcloth on his body, and was in great heaviness, Chron. Fu^e.
whereof it is supposed, that he contracted that disease whereof he dyed.
When he found his disease daily increasing, he made choice of Justinian his
sisters son to be his colleague, who governed four months in equal
authority with his uncle, and then Justinius ended his course.

Iustinianus.
A After the death of Justinius, Iustinianus his sisters son, governed 38.
years. He would suffer no faith to be openly professed, Evag. l. 4 c. 10.
except the faith allowed in the four general Counsels. Notwithstanding the
Empress Theodora his wife, was a favourer of Eutyches heresy. This Emperor
was bent to recover all that was lost by his predecessors, in Asia, Afric,
and Europe, and he had good success through the virtue and valor of his
Captains, especially Belisarius, and Narses. Belisarius first fought against
the Persians, who had overcome not only Mesopotamia, but also many parts of
Syria, Antrochena, and Cava. He overcame them in battle, and compelled them
to go back beyond Euphrates. Next, he was employed to fight against the
Vandales in Afric, who possessed great bounds of the Roman dominions, ever
since the days of Gensericus, King of the Vandales. And it is to be marked,
that the time was now come, wherein the Lord will declare, that the blood of his
Saints is precious in his eyes. For since the days of Dioclesian, that bloody
persecuting Emperor, no race of people persecuted Gods Saints with so
barbarous cruelty, as the Vandales did, for zeal they had to the Arrian
heresy, wherewith they were infected. After Gensericus, Hunericus, and
Amalaricus, and Trasimundus, who closed the doors of the Temples of
Christians, and banished their Bishops to Sardinia. Childericus would have
showed some favor to Christians, and reduced their Bishops from banishment:
for this cause the Vandales did slay him, and gave his kingdom to Gillimer.

Now the Lord remembered the groans of his own prisoners, Note.
and would not suffer the rod of the wicked perpetually to lie upon the lot of
the righteous. Belisarius fought against the Vandales, prosperously recovered
Carthage, and all the bounds pertaining to the Roman Empire possessed by the
Vandales. Also he took Gillimer their King, and carried him captive to
Constantinople. It is worthy of remembrance, that Justinian would not receive
into his treasure the vessels of gold, which the Emperor Titus (when he burnt
the Temple of Jerusalem) transported to Rome. These same vessels Gensericus
King of Vandales when he spoiled Rome transported to Carthage, Evag. l. 4. c.
17.
and Belisarius after he had conquered Carthage, he brought them to
Constantinople, again but Justinian sent them to Jerusalem, to be disposed
upon according to the wisdom of the Christian Bishops in those bounds.

The third warfare against the Goths, for recovering Italy out of their hands,
was the greatest of all the rest, and endured longest time, to wit, eighteen
years, wherein Belisarius and Mundus, Idem l. 4. c. 19.
and after them Narses, all valiant Captains, were employed. It was brought on
upon this occasion, Platin. de vita Joan. 1.
as Evagrius following Procopius (in whose time this warfare was intended) does
record. A^alasunta, the daughter of Theodoricus, had the government of Italy.
Astalarichus her son, before he came to perfect age died. Theodatus, a
kinsman of Theodoricus had the government by the marriage of A^alasunta, Fun^.
chron.
but he rendered unto her evil for good, and thrust her into prison, and slew
her. In Theodatus time came Belisarius to Italy, to fight against the Goths,
but seeing Theodatus was more meet for Philosophy then for warfare, he gave
place to Vitiges to have the government. Belisarius recovered the Isle of
Sicile, Evag. l. 4. c. 21.
he came to Rome, and the ports were opened to him, and he was gladly
received: he took Vitiges King of the Goths, and carried him captive to
Constantinople. Mundus another Captain, overcame the Goths in Dalmatia,
recovered the Country to the Romans: but in the mids of this victory he was
slain through too hasty and furious pursuing of his enemies, who had slain
his son. In the absence of Belisarius (for the Emperor had sent for him to
fight against the Persians) the Goths chose Theudebaldus, and after him
Attaricus, who continued but short time. Finally, Totilas was chosen to be
their King, who recovered again the town of Rome, and the most part of all
the principal towns of Italy. Belisarius, albeit he was sent back again to
Italy, and recovered Rome the second time, yet the Persian war continually
was the cause of reducing him back again from Italy. In the end, Narses, a
valiant man was sent to Italy, who overcame the Goths, drove them out of
Italy, and brought it again under the sovereignty of the Romans. What good
recompense for so great service was rendered to Belisarius and Narses, many
writers have recorded, I pass it over with silence. Narses moved with
indignation against the Empress Sophia, the wife of Justinius the younger, the
successor of Justinian, he sent for the Longobards, who came out of Pannonia,
and possessed themselves in that part of Italy, which is unto this day called
Lombardy.

It is one of Justinians chief praises, that he caused the great Ocean Sea of
the Roman laws to be abriged into short compend, and to be comprised within
the compass of fifty books, (...) 2. Concel.
vulgarly called Pandectis, or Digestis, having short titles prefixed unto
them, rather then prolix and tedious commentaries subioyned unto them. Also he
gathered a general Council in Constantinople, about the 14. year of his
reign, to pacify if it were possible, the contentious disputations that were
moved about the writings of Origin, Theodorus, and Ibas, but this I refer to
its own place.

Justinius the younger.
IVstinus was nephew to Justinian. Evag. l. 5. c. 23.
He governed sixteen years. He governed alone twelve years, and with
Tiberius, whom he associated, three years and eleven months. All things
succeeded vnprosperously in his time. Alboinus King of the Longobards,
possessed himself and his people in Italy. Evag. l. 5. c. 10.
Cosroes King of Persia, with his Captain Adaarmanes, took the town of
Apamia, and burnt it with fire, and the town of Circesium, and put garrisons
into it, and miserably wasted the bounds of the Roman dominions. When these
things were reported to Justinius, who would credit no true information before,
now is stricken with madness and astonishment of mind, being grieved for this,
that the state of the Roman Empire should have decayed in his time, Idem l. 5.
c. 11.12.
and through his default. For remedy whereof, Tiberius a wise and valiant man,
by the advice of Sophia, was associate to Justinius, to govern the affairs of
the kingdom. Evagrius describes at length the Oration of Justinius to
Tiberius, when he clothed him with all Imperial ornaments, and how he
exhorted him not to be bewitched with the splendour of those garments, as he had
been, but with vigilance and wisdom, to govern the estate of the kingdom.
This he spoke after he was recovered of his disease; Evag. l. 5 c. 13.
and in presence of all the noblemen of his Court, so that they were compelled
to shead abundance of tears, when they heard at one time so clear a
confession of his own miscariage, and so prudent counsel given to his
associate.

Tiberius.
Tiberius reigned three years and eleven months, in coniunct authority with
Justinius, and after his death, he reigned four years himself alone: so all
the time of his government was seven years and eleven months. In his time
Cosroes King of Persia, was puffed up with such insolency, in regard of his
former victories, that he would not admit the Ambassadors of Tiberius to his
presence, but commanded them to follow him to Caesarea of Cappadocia, there to
receive their answer, for he had taken Daras a town of Mesopotamia, in the
borders of the Roman Empire, builded by the Emperor Anastatius, and called
Daras, because about this place Darius had his last overthrow by Alexander of
Macedonia. Evag. l. 3. c. 37.
After the taking of Daras, he marched toward Armenia, in the Summer time, and
from thence intended to address toward Caesarea Cappadocia, expecting none
encounter or resistance of the Roman army. But Tiberius had prepared a well
appointed army, consisting of mo then an 100. Evag. l. 5. c. 14.
and fifty thousand men, to resist Cosroes, whose forces when Cosroes could not
match, he fled: and for very heart-griefe he died, and gave advice to the
Persians, not to make war against the Roman Empire, in any time to come. The
estate of the Church was the more peaceable under his reign, because the
Vandales in Afric, and the Goths in Italy were already utterly subdued. The
Longobards, whom Narses brought out of Pannonia to Italy, were the more
insolent to afflict Christians, because Tiberius was occupied in the Persian
warfare against Cosroes. The Nation of the Goths had as yet full sway in
Spain, Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3.
and they were miserably addicted to the Arrian heresy, insomuch that
Lemugildus King of the Goths, caused his own natural son Elmingildus to be
slain, Pla^in. de vit. Gregor. 1.
because he forsook the Arrian faith. Also their number was augmented by
returning of many Vandales to Spain, who had escaped the hands of Belisarius.

Mauritius.
MAuritius was Captain of the Army of Tiberius, to whom Tiberius gave his
daughter in marriage, with his kingdom: Evag. l. 5. c. 22.
for he found himself sick unto the death. He reigned 20. years, he fought
against the Persians, and prospered in that warfare: and after that, peace was
bound up amongst them. Chaianus King of Avares, Hunnes, and Slavonians, fought
against him, and carried away many captives and prisoners. In redeeming of the
captives, Mauritius was too niggardly, whereby it came to pass, that Chaianus
slew 12. thousand prisoners, which might have been ransomed for a small sum
of money. This oversight of the Emperor, not only stained other his noble
virtues, but also purchased the hatred of the soldiers against him, whereby it
came to pass, that they set up Phocas to be Emperor in his stead. Commen^
Funct. lib. 8.
Of this calamity it is thought that Mauritius was foreseen in his dream, and
that he chose rather to be punished in this world for his faults, then in the
world to come. Afterward he was brought in bands to Phocas, his wife, and five
children were cruelly slain in his own presence, and finally, bloody Phocas
slew himself, of whom it is reported, that when he saw his wife and children
put to death, Note.
he gave glory to God in his greatest calamity, and said; Just art thou, O
Lord, and righteous in all thy Judgments.

CENTVRIE VII.
Phocas.
THe heresy of Eutyches continued in this Centurie from the beginning, to the
end thereof: countenanced by the Emperors, such as Heraclius and Constans.
Nevertheless I have cut off the Eutychian Persecution at the end of the sixth
Centurie, because Heraclius, albeit he favored the error of the Monothelites,
(a branch of Eutyches heresy) notwithstanding he was so employed with wars
against the Avares in the West, and the Persians and Saracens in the East, that
he had not a vacant time to persecute them who professed another faith. And
Constans began to persecute, but was quickly interrupted by new occasion of
Sea-warfare against the Saracens, wherein also he was overcome. For this cause
I have referred the Eutychian persecution rather to the former Centurie, then
to this. Moreover, in this Centurie the universal Bishop, and the Antichrist
begins to spring up: so that all the rest of the History must be spent in
three heads: First, in declaring The growth of the Antichrist, in the seventh,
eight, and ninth Centuries: Secondly, in declaring his tyranny, and prevailing
power over the Roman Emperors, and Monarchs of the world, in the tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth Centuries: And finally, in declaring his discovery, and
his battle against the Saints, especially against those who discovered him:
and this shall be done (God willing) from the thirteenth Century unto our time.
In the History I am compelled to be short, because it may be read in many
Authors, Chronologies, and Compends, whereby it may be^ sufficiently known.

Phocas, after the cruel slaughter of his master Mauritius, was proclaimed to
be Emperor by the Roman soldiers, in the year of our Lord 604. and he
reigned 8, years: in cruelty, drunkenness, lechery, he surpassed beyond
all men, and justly was called, The calamity of the Roman Empire; nothing
succeeded prosperously with this parricide: Cosroes on the East Side, the
Auares on the West, the Slauonians on the North-side, inuading Dalmatia, and
Agilulphus king of Lumbardis in Italy, adding unto his dominion Mantua,
Cremona, and Vulturnia: all these at one time weakened the Roman Empire, so
far that it could never attain again to the former strength and splendour
that it was wont to have. Great strife had been betwixt the chaires of Rome
and Constantinople for supremacy. The Patriarch of Constantinople thought it
due to him, Platina in vita Bonif 3.
be cause Constantinople was the seat of the Empire. The Patriarch of Rome on
the other part, said, that Constantinople was but a Colonie of Rome, and that
the Grecians themselves in their Letters called the Emperor (...). To this
controversy Phocas put an end, and ordained Bonifacius the third to be called
Universal Bishop, and the Church of Rome to be head of all other Churches.
This dignity the Roman Church begged (as Platina grants) and not without
great con^ention, obtained it at the hands of Phocas. This is that style,
which Gregorius the first counted Antichristian in the person of Ioannes (...),
Patriarch of Constantinople. In the end Priscus his own son in law,
Heraclianus, the father of Heraclius the Emperor, and Phocius, whose wife
Phocas had unhonestly abused, conspired against him, and ouer-came him, and
brought him to Heraclius, Note.
who commanded his head, feet, and secret members to be cut off, and the
stamp of his body was given to the soldiers to be burnt with fire.

Heraclius.
AFter Phocas reigned Heraclius thirty years. Cosroes king of Persia had
mightily prevailed, Paulus dia^^nus, lib. 18. rerum R^nan.
and had conquered Syria, Phenicia, and Palestina, and had taken Jerusalem, and
Zacharias the Bishop thereof, and the Holy Cross, and had given many
thousands of Christians to the Jews to be slain. Neither would he accept any
conditions of peace with Heraclius, except he would condescend to forsake the
worshipping of Christ, and worship the Sun as the Persians did. For this
cause Heraclius was compelled to make peace with the Auares on his West side,
and to lead his Army to Asia against the Persians, which endured the space of
six years, wherein he prevailed against Cosroes, and recovered all the
Provinces which Cosroes had taken from the Roman Empire. Hist. Magd. cent. 7.
cap. 3.
Finally Cosroes was taken, cast in prison, and cruelly slain by his own
son Siroes, because he had preferred Medarses his younger son to Siroes, his
elder brother. This Siroes made a covenant of peace with Heraclius, and
delivered unto him Zacharias Bishop of Jerusalem, with the Holy Cross and the
prisoners whom his father had carried Captive. And so Heraclius in the seventh
year, returned back again to Constantinople with great triumph. After this
the Emperor being circumuened by Pyrrhus Bishop of Constantinople and Cyrus
Bishop of Alexandria, fell into the Heresy of the Monothelites: And to this
fault he added other faults, such as incest, for he married his own sisters
daughter: and he was given to curious Arts, and to seek out the event of
things by judicial Astrology: and was admonished by the Astrologians to
beware of the circumcised people. Heraclius only deemed, that the Jews should
trouble him but it was the Saracenes, in whom this prophecy had performance: A
description of the Saracens
for in his time began the Monarchy of the Saracenes, and the blasphemous
doctrine of Mahomet. Platinain vita Senerini.
The Saracenes were people dwelling in Arabia, Note.
the posterity of Hagar, and not of Sara: These fought under the banner of
Heraclius in his sixth year warrefare against the Persians: when they craved
the wages, of their service, in stead of money they received contumelious
words, and were called Arabik dogs by the Emperors treasurer. This contumely
did so irritatate them, that they choosed Mahomet to be their captain, Anno,
623. invaded Damascus, and took it, and within few years conquered Syria,
Phaenicia, Palestina, and Egypt: And not content with this, they invaded the
kingdom of the Persians and subdued it, and cut off the kings seed. The
blasphemous Alcaron and alfurca of Mahomet, which he said he received from
heaven, was a doctrine of lies, containing a mixture of the religion of the
Jews, Pagans, and Christians: to the making whereof concurred Sergius a
Nestorian heretik, and John of Antiochia, an Arrian heretic, and some Jews.
Mahomet also ordained, that all people whom the Saracenes could conquer, should
be compelled by fire and sword, and al kind of violence, to receive the
doctrine contained in these books. Heraclius perceiving the sudden and great
increase of the do^inion of the Saracens gathered a great army, and fought
against them, but he was overcome in battle and lost 150. thousand men of his
army. And when he renewed his forces again to fight against the Saracens, he
found that 52. thousand men of his army died in one night suddenly, as those
did who were slain by the Angel of God in the army of Senacherib. Isai. 37.36.
Heraclius was so discouraged with the calamity of his army, that he
contracted sickness and died.

Constantinus and Heracleonas.
AEter the death of Heraclius reigned his son Constantine, 4 months, and was
made out of the way, by poison given unto him by Martina his fathers second
wife, to the end that Heracleonas her son might reign. But God suffered not
this wickedness to be unpunished: For Martina and Heracleonas were taken by the
Senators of Constantinople, and her tongue was cut out, and his nose cut off,
least either her flattering speeches, or his beauty and comelines should have
moved the people to compassion: and they were both banished.

About this time the Saracenes had taken Caesarea in Palestina after they had
besieged it seven years: and they slew in it seven thousand Christians.

Constans.
AFter the banishment of Martina, and Heracleonas her son, reigned Constans
the son of Constantine, 27. years: in religion he followed the footsteps of
Heraclius and was infected with the heresy of the Monothelites, and persecuted
Martinus 1. Bishop of Rome, because he had gathered a Synod in Rome, and
damned the heresy of the Monothelites: whom also he caused to be brought in
bands to Constantinople, Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 3.
cut out his tongue, and cut off his right hand, and banished him to
Chersonesus in Pontus, where he ended his life. He fought also against the
Saracenes in sea-warre-fare, and was overcome by them, like as interpreters of
dreams had fore-tolde him: for he dreamed, that he was dwelling in
Thessalonica, and the interpreters said it portended no good, but that others
should overcome him, as if the world Thessalonica did import (...), that is,
render victory to another. Constans was slain by one of his own servants as
he was washing himself in the bathe-houses of Saracuse.

Constantinus Pogonatus.
COnstans being slain in Sicile, the army in those parts appointed Mezentius,
a man of incomparable beauty, to be Emperor: but Constantinus, the eldest
son of Constans, sailed to Sicile with a great navy, slew Mezentius, and the
murderers of his father, and recovered his fathers dominion to himself. He
was called Pogonatus, because his face was not bare and void of hair when he
returned from Sicile, as it was when he sailed thither from Byzans, but his
face was rough and covered with hair. He had 2. brethren, whom the people
reuer^nced with equal honor as they did him: therefore he disfigured their
faces by cutting off their noses, and reigned himself alone 17. years. In
religion he was not like unto his predecessors, Chron. func.
who had been favorers of heretics, but he assembled a general Council at
Constantinople, vulgarly called, the sixth Oecumenick Council, wherein the
heresy of the Monothelites was utterly damned, as in his own place shall be
declared, God willing. Likewise, the estate of the Emperor was more peaceable
than it had been in time of his predecessors: for the Saracens were compelled
to seek conditions of peace from him, and to offer yearly payment of 3000.
Hist. Magd. cen. 7. cap. 3.
pound weight of gold unto him, with other tributes of horse, servants, and
prisoners.

Iustinianus the second, Leontius, and Absimarus.
AFter the death of Constantine, reigned his son Justinian the second, sixteen
years, to wit, ten years before his banishment, and six years after his
banishment: His government was cruel and blood^e, by persuasion of Stephanus,
and Theodorus, whose counsel he followed, even till the purpose of exirpation
of all the Citizens of Constantinople. But Leontius, a man of noble birth,
pitying the City, took Justinian the Emperor, cut off his nose, and banished
him to Chersonesus Ponti, where he remained in great misery ten years.
Stephanus and Theodorus his bad counselors, received a condign punishment,
for they were burnt quick in the belly of an hot brazen bull.

After this banishment of Justinian the second, Leontius reigned three years.
The flexible minds of unconstant people, and soldiers, choosed Absimarus to
be their Emperor, who dealt with Leontius as he had dealt with Justinian, and
cut off his nose, and thrust him into a Monastery, where he remained seven
years, to wit, all the time of Absimarus government.

In the end, Justinian, after ten years banishment, recovered his Imperial
dignity again, by the help of Terbelli^ Prince of Bulgaria. He caused
Leontius, and Absimarus to be brought unto him, whom he trampled under his
feet, and after commanded that they should be beheaded. The cruelty that he
used against the Citizens of Constantinople, and against the inhabita^^^ of
Chersonesus Ponti, is almost unspeakable. He was hated of all men* Philippicus
conspired against him* and he was slain by one named Elias, his servant.

CENTVRIE. VIII.
Philippicus.
AFter Justinian the second was slain, Philippicus, reigned two years, and
nine months. Great dissension fell out betwixt the Emperor Philippicus and
Constantine Bishop of Rome, for razing (as appears) the pictures of Fathers,
who were present at the sixth General Council, which being pictured in the
Temple of Sopia, were abolished by the commandment of Philippicus. Constantine
Bishop of Rome declared the Emperor an heretic, and commanded, Note.
that his name should be razed out of charters. This was the first great
direct, and violent opposition, that the Bishops of Rome attempted against
noble Emperors. Philippicus was taken, and his eyes were put out by
Anastasius, otherwise called Artemius, his Secretary who reigned in his stead.

Artemius.
ARtemius, otherwise called Anastasius, reigned one year and three months:
he deposed John Patriarch of Constantinople, who kept not the true faith: and
placed Germanus in his stead. He was taken by Theodosius, and sent prisoner
to Nice, and from thence to Thessalonica, where he was compelled to renounce
his Imperial dignity, and to be clothed with the habit of a Monk.

Theodosius.
THeodosius reigned scarce one year: and when he heard that Leo Isaurus,
governor in the East parts, was saluted Emperor by the army, he willingly
gave over his Imperial dignity, and lived, a private and peaceable man.

Leo Isaurus.
LEo Isaurus reigned twenty four years: great commotions were in his time,
both, in Church and policy* In Church-affaires, he was an hater of Images, and
burnt Images made of wood, other images he melted, and misfashioned: against
whom Gregorius the second, pust up with antichristian pride, Note.
opposed himself not only allowing worshipping of images, but also forbidding
to pay tribute to the Emperor Leo. The Emperor on the other part irritated
with the proud attempts of Gregorius the second, used indirect means to cut
him off: but the enterprises of his deputies, Marinus, Paulus, Eutychius, and
their followers, succeeded vnprosperously. Moreover, the Bishop of Rome sought
support from the Lombardis, who had been at all times preceding enemies to the
chair of Rome: yet in Leo his days they were bound with the bishop of Rome
in a covenant of friendship, for none other cause, but this only, to shake off
the yoke of the Emperors obedience. And when the bishop of Rome saw that the
Emperor had great business in wars against the Saracens he thought it a
fit occasion to draw the dominion of Italy unto his own subjection: and
therefore, Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 3.
with advise of the Clergy, he both excommunicated the Emperor, as a
destroyer of the Images of the Saints, and disauthorised him of his Imperial
sovereignty in Italy. So early began the increasing Grando of Antichrist, to
send forth the thunderbolts of cursings against the anointed of the Lord.

In this Emperors days the Saracens passed over the Straits, invaded the
kingdom of Spain, slew Rodericus King of the Goths, and his son, and put an
end to the kingdom of the Goths in Spain, after they had reigned 346.
years: Platin. in vit. Greg. 2.
and being incited by Eudo, Duke of Aquitania, they marched toward France: but
through the valor of Carolus Martellus, a man of noble birth in France, they
were so encountered, that three hundred thousand, and threescore and ten
thousand Saracens were slain, and the country of France was made free of the
fear of the Saracens.

Constantinus Copronymus.
AFter Leo, his son Constantinus Copronymus reigned 35. years ( Chytreus
reckons only 23. years) because he hated the worshipping of Images (which
error had taken deep root in this age): The writers of the History of this
time have dipped their pens in gall and wormwood, to blaspheme the honorable
name of Constantinus: but whatsoever Paulus Diaconus, or Zonoras have written
to his disgrace, his name will be in honorable account and regard in the
Church of Christ. The Senate, and the people of Constantinople, addicted to the
worshipping of Images, hated the Emperor, and were glad of the false rumoured
tidings of his death, when he went to fight against the Arabians, and they
chose Artabasdus to be Emperor in his stead. But Constantine returned to
Constantinople, besieged the town, and recovered his own kingdom again. He
gathered a general Council at Constantinople, anno 755. wherein the
worshipping of Images was damned, as shall be declared (God willing) in its
own place. In this Emperors days were wars betwixt the King of Lombardis,
and the Bishops of Rome: but the Roman Bishops begged the help of Carolus
Martellus against Luitprand, and the help of Pipinus against Aistulphus, and
the help of Carolus Magnus against Desiderius, all Kings of Lombardis: and by
continual imploring the help of the Nobles and Kings of France, the Lombards
were utterly subdued, the chair of Rome was enriched, the revenue of the
Emperor of the East was impaired, and a ground was laid for the advancement of
the Kings of France to the Imperial dignity. In this Emperors days the
Turks, or Scythians, invaded the Armenians, Platin. in vit. Step^ 2.
and molested the Saracens, and some countries of Asia minor, in the end they
accorded with the Saracens: But this agreement could not be perfected without
condition, That the Turks in Persia should undergo the name of Saracens,
hoping thereby that they would easily embrace the Mohammedan religion, wherein
their expectation was not frustrate.

In the year of our Lord 579. and in the 18. year of the reign of
Constantine, a wonderful thing fell out amongst wise men of Persia, called
Magi, and Maurophori P^^s^ they persuaded both themselves, and others also,
That if a man would sell all that he had, Funct. Comment. lib. 8.
and throw himself headlong from the walls of the City, his soul should by
and by be transported to heaven. Note.
So prone and bent is the corrupt nature of man to lean upon vain hopes, and
to believe promises which God has not made.

Leo the son of Copronymus.
LEo the son of Constantinus Copronymus, reigned five years. He followed
the footsteps of his father in zeal against worshipping of Images: and
punished the Grooms of his own chamber, such as James, Papias, Strat^ius, and
Theophanes, for worshipping of Images. The superstitious writers of the History
of this time, such as Zonaras, and Pa^lus Diaconus reckon the aforesaid persons
in the Catalogue of holy Confessors. But Christ will never count them to be his
Martyrs, who fight obstinately against the truth, even unto the death: neither
will he count them to be his Confessors, who suffer justly inflicted
punishment for the contempt of the laws of Magistrates, being agreeable to the
law of God.

Irene, and Constantinus her son.
AFter the death of Leo, reigned Irene his wife, with her son Constantine,
ten years. Afterward Constantine deposed his mother from her authority, and
reigned alone seven years. And Irene on the other part, taking this indignity
done unto her grievously, she spoiled her son both of his eyes, and of his
Empire, cast him into prison, where he dyed for heart grief: and she reigned
again 4. years after her sons imprisonment: So all the years of the reign
of Irene and her son, coniunctly and severally, first and last, were 21^
years. This Empress was superstitious, crafty, and unfortunate. She was a
superstious defender of the worshipping of Images. A malicious and venomous
hater of the name of Constantinus Copronymus, (whose dead body she commanded
to be brought out of his grave, to be burnt with fire, resolved into ashes, and
to be cast into the Sea (albeit Constantine was her own father in law). Pro.
12.
The mercies of the wicked are cruel. Her craft appeared in bringing her
forces to Constantinople, in the sixth year of her reign, under pretense of
fighting against the Arabians, and in disarming of them whom she knew to have
been adversaries to the worshipping of Images, and sending them in ships to
the places from whence they came. For before the days of Constantinus
Copronymus, the town of Constantinople by famine and pestilence, and being
besieged three years by the Saracens, was miserably dispeopled, so that thirty
thousand of the people of Constantinople died. Platin. in vit. Greg 2.
But Copronymus for the repayring of that loss, sent for strangers, and
replenished the town with new Inhabitants. These strangers she sent back
again, Funct. Comment. in chron. lib. 8.
to the places from whence they came, especially, because in popular commotion
they had set themselves in arms, and menaced the Fathers convened in
Constantinople, by Irene and her son, for allowance of adoration of Images.
She was unfortunate, because the Empire of the East was so extenuated in her
time, that it was rather like unto a shadow, then unto an Empire. So that in
the subsequent History I will forget (after a manner) the Emperors of the
West. Now Irene was deposed, and banished, by Nicephorus, who reigned eight
years after her banishment.

CENTVRIE IX.
Carolus Magnus.
IN the year of our Lord 801. Charles the Great, King of France, was declared
Emperor, by Leo the third, Bishop of Rome: and he reigned sixteen years in
his Imperial dignity: for he continued King of France forty and six years.
The Empire of the West had been cut off since the days of Augustulus, the
son of Orestes, whom Odoacer, King of Rugiheruli, etc. had compelled to
denude himself of the Imperial dignity. Now after the issue of 300. years,
and after the Hunnes, the Goths, the Lombards, and other Nations had obtained
dominion in the West, all abstaining (notwithstanding of their prevailing
power) from the name, dignity, and style of Emperors. Now at length (I say)
Charles the Great is anointed, and crowned Emperor, by Leo the third, in the
town of Rome. And this was the beginning of that evil custom which after
followed, to wit, That Emperors should receive their coronation from the
Bishops of Rome. At this time the Empire of the East was in the hands of the
Empress Irene, and in the hands of the Emperor Nicephorus, who had banished
Irene, and reigned in her stead. The Empire of the East was also weak at this
time, as appears by a covenant of peace which they concluded with Charles,
Emperor of the West: in the which no mention is made of Exarchatus Ravennae,
to be rendered again unto them: only that the Isle of Sicile, and the towns
and lands which lie from Naples Eastward on the right hand, and from
Manfredonia (sometimes called Syponto) on the left hand, compassed about with
the Seas, called Superum and Inferum: these should remain in the possession of
the Emperors of Constantinople. ' Charles a prudent and godly Emperor, more
sound and upright in sundry heads of Christian doctrine, then many others: for
he detested the worshipping of Images, as vile Idolatry: as appears by his
books written against the second Council of Nice. Charles was very friendly
to Christians, and defended them against the violence and tyranny of their
persecuting enemies: namely, against Godfridus, King of Denmark, a fierce
adversary against the Christians, who dwelt in Saxony. Likewise he subdued the
Slavonians, and Bohemians, enemies to Christian Religion: and was justly called
Magnus, for his great exploits and valiant acts, which God prospered in his
hand. Pipinus, the son of the Emperor Charles, was declared King of Italy:
who died before his father, and after his death he appointed Bernard his
nephew to reign in Italy, with express commandment, That he should be
obedient to his son Ludovicke, whom he ordained to be successor to
himself in the Imperial office. So the Emperor Charles full of days, died in
the 71. year of his age, and was buried in Aken.

Ludovicus Pius.
AFter Charles succeeded his son Ludovicus Pius, and reigned 26. years. For
his gentle and meek behavior, he was called Pius. He received the Imperial
Diadem from Stephanus the fourth, at Aken. Bernard his brothers son,
forgetful of the mandate of Charles the Great, rebelled against Ludovicus
Pius, and was beheaded at Aken. Likewise, his own sons (assisted with
Hugobortus, Bishop of Lions, and Bernhardus, Bishop of Vienne, and other
Bishops, who did excommunicate the Emperor for adherence to Judith his wife)
behaved themselves very undutifully toward their father. Nevertheless, he
freely pardoned his sons, and accepted them again into favor. Also
Frederick, Bishop of Vtrecht, threatened to excommunicate the Emperor, if he
did no^ forsake the company of Judith, his welbeloved wife, and daughter to the
Duke of Bavaria, because she was his near kinswoman, to wit, in degrees of
consanguinity for bidden, in the Popish law. The Empress willing to be
revenged of the Bishop, she hired two Gentlemen, who set upon him after Church
service, and slew him in his Priestly garments. In his time also the Saracens
in huge numbers, like unto Locusts, swarmed out of Egypt and Afric, and
invaded the Isle of Sicile. By cutting down all fruitful trees, burning
Towns, Temples, and Monasteries, and by killing Bishops, Priests, and Monks,
they brought the I Will to an utter desolation. Gregory the fourth at that time
was Pope: and he exhorted the Emperor, and his son Lotharius, to support
the distressed estate of the Isle of Sicile. They answered, That albeit that
matter duly belonged to Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, yet nevertheless,
they refused not to undertake the work, upon the common charges of the
Country.

Now whilst these things were in reasoning, Platin. in vit. Greg. 4.
Bonifacius, Count of Corsica, and his brother Bertarius, with support of the
people of Hetruria, arrived with a Navy at Afric: and betwixt Vtica and
Carthage, encountered with the Saracens four times, and slew of them so great a
number, that they were compelled to recall their forces back again from
Sicile: like as of old the Carthaginians vexed by Scipio, recalled Hanniball
for the safety of his own country: So Bonifacius returned back again with an
army victorious, and richly lodened with the spoil of his enemies. Nothing was
more vnprovidently done by the good Emperor Lodovicus Pius, then the giving
over of that right, voluntarily conferred to Charles his father, by Adrian the
first, and Leo the third: to wit, That no man should be elected Pope without
the consent and allowance of the Emperor. Funct. comment. l. 9.
This foresaid right Ludovicus gave over to the Clergy and people of Rome:
only; the Romans for keeping of friendship, should send an Ambassador to
the King of France, declaring whom they had elected to be Pope. Note.
Hereby a patent door was opened to all mischief, which after followed: and
to that horrible contention betwixt Emperors and Popes, concerning investment
of Bishops. In his time three Emperors reigned in the East, at Constantinople:
to wit, Leo Armenius, Michael Balbus, and Theophilus. Leo Armemenius reigned
seven years. He banished Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, for
defending adoration of Images. Michael Balbus slew Leo, his predecessor, whilst
he was praising God in the Church, and reigned in his stead nine years. In his
time the Saracens mightily prevailed: a number of them issued out of Spain,
and took the Isle of Candie. Another company coming from Afric, wasted the
Isle of Sicile. Theophilus reigned ten years, and fought against the Saracens,
who did oppress the country of Asia: but he had no good success.

Lotharius.
LOtharius, the son of Ludovicus Pius, was declared King of Italy, and
Augustus before his fathers death. He was anointed by Pope Paschalis, in the
Church of Saint Peter: and he reigned 15. years. Great hostility and bloody
wars fell out amongst the children of Ludovicus Pius: to wit, Lotharius,
Lewis, Charles, and Pipinus, fordividing of their fathers Lands. In this civil
dissension, the Nobility of France was so miserably weakened, that the Normans
and Danes took boldness to invade the country of France: which they vexed
for the space of twenty years. In the East, after Theophilus had concluded his
life, his son Michael, with his mother Theodora governed the estate. Michael
reigned four and twenty years. Theodora continued only eleven years. She
persecuted those who would not worship Images: albeit her husband before his
departure from his life had seriously admonished her, that she should not
trouble the Church for restoring of Images.

Ludouicus the second.
LVdouicus the second, and son of Lotharius, reigned one and twenty years.
The intestine dissension betwixt him and his brother Charles, seems to be
like unto an hereditarie sickness. Howsoever, the Emperor L^douicke had
dishonor thereby: because the rebels of Charles desired the Emperors
protection against his own brother: which when he had granted; the rebels
were reconciled again with their own King Charles: and the Emperor, with
dishonor, was compelled to retire from his brothers Dominions. In the East,
Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, slew his brother Theoctistus, and thrust
his mother Theodora, and her sisters, into a Monastery, and reigned himself
alone after his mothers deposition thirteen years. So the whole time of the
government of Michael, was twenty and four years. He fought against the
Saracenes, but very vnprosperously, and was slain by Basilius, who reigned in
his stead seven years.

Carolus Caluus.
LVdovicus the second dying without children, his brother Carolus Caluus, king
of France, obtained at the hands of the Bishop of Rome, by many liberal
gifts, to be anointed Emperor. He continued Emperor not above two years:
and was poisoned by one Sedekias, a Jew, whom he used for his Physician.

Carolus Crassus.
CArolus Crassus was the son of Lewis, king of Germany: he reigned ten
years. Carolus Balbus, the son of Carolus Caluus, was quickly cut off by
death. I herefore, I have ouerpassed his name with silence. Hist. Magd. cent 9.
cap. 16.
In this Emperors time the Normanes and Danes made such horrible excursions
and desolations in France, that the Emperor, who came with a great Army, to
support the distressed estate of France, was compelled to make peace with them,
Anno 888. and assigned unto them that part of France which lies beyond
Seane, toward the Britannicke Ocean, to be their habitation: which has the
name of Normandy until this day. Crassus, for his negligence and evil
government, was deposed from his authority, and Arnulphus, his nephew, was
declared Emperor.

Arnulphus.
AFter the death of Carolus Crassus, great troubles ensued in Italy, by the
factions of Berengarius, whom the Lombardes choosed to be king of Italy, on
the one part: and Guido, Duke of Spoleto, whom others choosed to reign in
Italy, on the other part. In the midst of these factions Arnulphus leads
an army out of Germany. He took the Town of Bergamum, and hanged Ambrose,
the Earl thereof, upon a Gibbet, before the port of the Town. This severity
terrified other Towns, and made them to yield. He addressed toward Rome,
and was crowned Emperor by Formosius, whose enemies he punished unto the
death. From thence he addressed to fight against Guido: but he fled, and
escaped the Emperoures hands. The wife of Guido, having no puissance to resist
the Emperors forces, she hired some of the Emperoures servants, who gave
unto him a cup of poison, which brought upon him a lethargy, and three days
sleeping continually. After this he arose sick, and left the siedge, (for he
was besieging the wife of Guido) and he died, after he had reigned twelve
years. In the East governed Leo, the son of Basilius, in whose time the
Saracens conquered Taurominium, a town in Sicile, and the Isle of Lemnos.

CENTVRIE. X.
Ludovicus tertius.
AFter Arnulphus succeeded his son Lewis the 3. and reigned 10. years, he
received not the Emperial Diadem at Rome: because Bere^garius by force inioyed
the Kingdom of Italy. At this time the Hungares a nation fierce and cruel
invaded Italy, France, and Germany, and made in these nations horrible
desolations. Likewise the Saracens invaded Calabria and Apulia in Italy,
Platin. in vita. Joan. 10.
and if the Lord had not pitied the distressed estate of Europe, it was at
this time like to be undone, for Platina writes that while they were besieging
Consentia, the King of the Saracens was slain with thunder, and the Saracens
terrified with this unprosperous success returned back again to Africa. In
this Emperors days a remarkable thing fell out. Albert Marquis of Bamberg
rebelled against the Emperor Lewis, Funct. Comment in chronol lib. 9.
and he had slain Conrad the Emperors brother. The Emperor seeing that by
no means he could prevail against him, Note.
he was supported by the coofening treason of Hatto Archbishop of Mentz; for
he came to the noble Marquis as though he would make reconciliation between
the Emperor and him, and swore unto him, that he would bring him back in
safety to his own house, but his deceitful manner of reducing was this. After
they had riden a short way the Bishop felt his stomach, and repented they had
not first dined before they had taken journey. Thus the Marquis and the Bishop
returned back again and dined, this the Bishop counted an exoneration of his
promise and oath, and like a traitor delivered him to the Emperor, who by and
by beheaded the Marquis. In the East Alexander reigned two years, and after
him Constantine, a man of good disposition, but defrauded of his kingdom by
Romannus Captain of his army.

Cunradus primus.
AFter Lewis, his Nephew Cunrad the first was made Emperor and ruled seven
years. He was the last of the offspring of Charles the great (who had enjoyed
the empire of the West 112. years) after whom the Empire was transferred to
the Saxons. When he fell sick he called for his brother Eberhard, and desired
him to deliver the imperial ornaments, to Henry Duke of Saxon, who for his
wisdom and worthiness was most meet to govern the troubled estate of the
Empire, Note.
which duty Eberhard most faithfully performed, preferring fidelity in
performing his promise made to his brother, before the desire of a kingdom.

Henricus auceps.
Henry Duke of Saxony to whom Eberhard brought the Imperial ornaments, was
called Auceps, because he was delighting himself in hauking when Eberhard came
unto him with the ornaments a foresaid. He reigned 17. years for wisdom and
magnanimity worthy of so high a place. He made a covenant of peace with the
Hungars for the space of 9. years. He fought against the Sclauonians, the
people of Dalmatia and the Bohemians, and made them tributaries unto him, when
the 9. years were expired he fought a great battle against the Hungares at
Mersburg and prevailed against them, and in testimony of his thankfulness to
God who gave unto him victory, he purged his dominions from Simonie, a fault
universally ouerspread in those days, Not^
and dedicated to Gods service the whole tribute which the Saxons were
accustomed to pay to the Hungars, he was greatly beloved of his subjects and
was called Rater patriae.

In the East Constantine recovered his Empire again From Romanus and his
Sons, and measured to his sons such measure as they had measured to their
father Romanus. For Stephanus and Constantine had caused their father Romanus
to be shaven and thrust into an Isle called Prote. Hist. Magd. cent. 10. cap.
16.
And Constantine after the issue of 26. years, wherein Romanus and his sons
reigned, he laid hands on Stephanus and caused him to be shaven and sent unto
the isle Mytelene, Note.
and his brother to the Isle of Samothracia. Thus the Lord who will not suffer
iniquity to escape unpunished rendered to the sons of Romanus a just
recompense of their unkindly dealing with their father.

Otto Primus.
OTto the first after the death of his father Henry was chosen Emperor, and
reigned 36. years. He was molested with many foreign and domestique wars,
but he prospered in all his enterprises, yea and Lyndolphus his own son
conspired against him, for the marriage of Adelphed the relict of Lotharie
son to Hugo, who contended against Berengarius for the kingdom of Italy.

This Adelphed the Emperor, Otto not only relieved from her distressed
estate, but also married her. The mother of Lindolphus was daughter to Edmont
King of England, after whose death it displeased him that his father should
marry Adelphed. But when he made war against his father he was overcome,
and besieged at Ratisbon, and in the end was reconciled to his father. The
tyranny of Berengarius the second enforced the Romans to implore the
assistance of the Emperor Otto, who led an army to Rome at diverse times. The
first time he gathered a Council at Rome and deposed Joan. 13. whom others
call Joan. 12. and placed Leo 8. in his steed. Likewise he subdued
Berengarius, and his son Albertus did fly to Constantinople, and so the
Emperor recovered again his own dignity to be king of Italy, and that no
man should be chosen Pope without consent of the Emperor. Again, the
inconstancy of the Romans in rejecting Leo 8. and receiving again Joan. 13.
or 12. compelled the Emperor to return to Rome, and to punish the authors of
that sedition to the death. After he had declared his son to be Emperor, he
died and was buried in the Church of Magdeburg, which he had builded in his
own time.

In the East, after Romanus the son of Constantine had reigned 3. years,
Nec^phorus reigned 6. years, a man more magnanimous in warfare, then wise in
government. He was murdered by the Counsel of his own wife Theophania, and
Zimisces reigned in his steed.

Otto Secundus.
OTto the second after his fathers death reigned ten years, he was a virtuous
Prince, but not like unto his father. Henry Duke of Bavare contended against
him for the title of the Empire, but Otto prevailed. Likewise Lotharie the King
of France invaded the country of Loraine, only belonging to the Emperor. But
Otto gathered a strong army, recovered the Country of Loraine and pursued
Lotharie to Paris, burning and destroying all the Country whether he went.
The third great conflict was against the Eretians assisted with the Saracons,
for the Countries of Apulia and Calabria. These countries did appertain of old
to the Emperor of the East. But Basilius, with his brother Constantine willing
to recover these Countries, again did fight against the Emperor Otto, and
discomfited his army, and the Emperor himself hardly escaped in a fisher
boat, faining himself to be but a simple Soldier, and paid his ransom.
Afterward he converted all his wrath against the Italians, who had
trayterouslie forsaken him, and were the chief cause of the discomfiture of
this army, he died at Rome and was buried in the Church of S. Peter.

Basilius Emperor of the East reigned 50. years, and recovered the Isle of
Candie from the Saracens, and the Countries of Apulia, and Calabria from Otto
as is said, after whom his Brother Constantine reigned 3. years.

Otto Tertius.
OTto the third was young in years when his father died. For he exceeded not
eleven years old, notwithstanding he was chosen Emperor, and reigned 19.
years. He was wise above his years, and was called Mirabile mundi, that is,
the admirable thing of the world. The Italians continually breaking
sovereignty, advanced one Crescentius to be Emperor. The Emperor Otto for
suppressing such seditious attempts, pierced into Italy with an army at three
diverse times, and pardoned Crescentius twice. But when he made no end of his
seditious attempts, the third time, he hanged him. Likewise Iaon 18. whom the
Seditious Romans had advanced, rejecting Gregory the fifth who was made Pope
with the Emperors consent, his eyes were plucked out, and he was thrown
headlong from the Capitol. By the prudent advise of Otto, Gregory the fifth,
appointed Seven electors of the Emperor, to wit the Bishops of Mentz, Collen,
and Treer, with Count Palatine* the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of
Brandenburgh: and in case of contrary opinions, the King of Bohemia. Which
custom does continue even to our days. One thing was lacking in the felicity
of this noble Emperor, that his wife, Mary of Arragon, was a notable and
barren harlot, and the widow of Cresentius, Note.
and had almost bewitched his noble heart. She being always disappointed of
her expectation, sent unto the Emperor a pair of impoysoned gloves, which
procured his death, and he was buried in Aken.

CENTVRIE XI.
Henry the second.
AFter Otto the third, Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria, by the Princes
Electors was declared Emperor, he reigned two and twenty years. Platina
assigns unto him only eighteen. He was a wise, valiant, and godly
Emperor. He subdued all his rebels: He received the Imperial crown from
Benedict the eight: He expelled the Saracens out of Italy. The Danes invade
England.
In this Emperors time Sueno King of Denmark invaded England, and subdued it
to his obedience. A savage Prince, in whom (if power had not lacked to perform
his designs) his cogitations were highly bended to extirpate all profession of
Christian religion in England. Likewise, about this time Calipha of Egypt, one
of the Saracen Princes, destroyed some of the temples of Jerusalem, and poluted
the rest, but in special he overthrew the Temple builded about the Lords
Sepulcher. His mother was a Christian woman: when that was objected to him in
way of exprobation, as if he had favored Christians for his mothers sake: he
bended all his might against the Christians, destroyed and poluted their
Temples, and massacred in most cruel manner, all them who were in spiritual
offices. This was the first ground of the terrible warfare which afterward
ensued, The occasion of Bellu^ sacru^.
vulgarly called Bellum sacrum.

Conrad the second.
AFter Henry the second, succeeded Conrad the second: and was elected Emperor
three years after the death of Henry. In this inter-raigne many cities of
Italy desirous of liberty, made desertion from the subjection of the Emperor.
But Conrad was a wise and valiant warrior, Comment Func^^ lib. 9.
and reduced the cities of Italy in short time to subjection. He was the first
Emperor who made a law, Note.
that the perturbers of the common peace in Germany should be punished unto the
death. He received the Imperial crown from Pope John 21. and reigned 15.
years. In whose days Michael Paphlago, who married Zoe the daughter of
Constantine the tenth, reigned in the East eight years.

Henry the third.
AFter Conrad the second, his son Henry the third, reigned 17. years. He
married the daughter of Canutius, the son of Sueno King of Denmark, who at
that time reigned in England. In his time great strife was among the Bishops of
Rome, contending for the Popedom. Which sedition the Emperor suppressed, by
remooving all the three seditious Popes, and appointing Clemens the 2. to be
Pope, as shall be declared God willing in the Head of Councels.

In the East, Hist. Magd. cent. 11. cap. 3.
after the death of Calypha Prince of Egypt, his son Dabir made a covenant of
peace with Argyrophilus Emperor of the East, and gave liberty to Christians to
build those Temples again, which Calypha had demolished. Constantinus
Mononiachus, also furthered the building, so that the work was perfected,
anno. 1048.

Henry the fourth.
HEnry the fourth, was a young child of seven years old when his father died,
and he reigned 50 years. He was an Emperor valiant, wise, eloquent, and
fortunate in warfare. Nevertheless he was miserably vexed with the divilish
pride of Pope Gregory th 7. by whom he was twice excommunicate, and his
subjects in Germany were stirred up by the Pope to rebel against him, under
the conduct of Rodolph Duke of Sueue. But the God of heaven gave victory to the
the Emperor Henry, and Rodolph was sore wounded in the last battle, for his
right arm was cut off, and he convicted in conscience of the treasonable
attemps against the Emperor his Master, and the breaking of his oath of
allegance, admonished the Bishops who had incited him to seditious
insurrection, to be more obedient to their sovereign Lord in time to come,
Note.
because God had punished him for his disloyalty in his right arm, which was
once lift up to swear the oath of allegance to his Master. The seditious
enterprises of Gregorius the 7. against the noble Emperonr Henry of purpose to
throw out of his hands the power of investment of Bishops, together with the
wise resolution of the Emperor, to repress the pride of this insolent Pope,
they are to be declared (God willing) heareafter in a more convenient time.

In this Emperors time William Duke of Normandy entered into England, to whom
Harold (who at that time usurped the government of the country) gave an hard
and sharp encounter: ^illiam Duke of Normandy subdueth Englan^
but Duke William prevailed, slew Harold, and governed the country. At this
time also was the estate of Christians in most lamentable manner afflicted by
the Turks and Saracens: as shall be declared hereafter at greater length, God
willing.

CENTVRIE XII.
Henry the fifth.
IN this Century the Bishops of Rome, who breathed for pre-eminence, and longed
for sovereignty, attained to all their intended desires. And albeit no age
afforded more magnanimous and courageous Emperors, such as Henry the 4. Henry
the 5. Lotharius the 2. Conrad the 3. Frederick the 1. called Barbarossa, yet
the power of the wrath of God justly punishing the defection of men from the
true faith, suffered the man of sin, and child of perdition to be mounted up
to high pre-eminence, and to tread under foot the power of the Emperor: So
that the Bishop of Rome was reverenced as a God in the world, and all high
powers stouped under his authority. Henry the fifth, was incited by the Council
of Bishops to make cruel war against his natural father Henry the fourth.
And from a Council assembled at Mentz, Note.
the Bishops of Mentz, Collen, and Worms, were sent to deprive Henry the fourth
of all his Imperial ornaments, and to confer them to his son. The father
through sorrow, and partly through sickness, departed this life, after he had
reigned 50. years, as has been declared.

After the days of Henry the fourth, his son Henry the fifth reigned 20.
years. Who came to Rome to be crowned Emperor by Pope Paschalis the 2. The
Pope would not consent to his coronation, except he first did give over all
right of election of the Pope, and all right of investments of Bishops, by
staff and ring. The Emperor grieved with this proud carriage of the Pope,
laid hands upon the Pope and his Cardinals, and compelled them to perfect the
work of his coronation, and to confirm his privileges of right to elect
Popes, and to confer investments to Bishops. It is to be noted, that Pope
Paschalis when he covenanted with the Emperor, and confirmed the privileges
aforesaid, took a consecrated Hostie, and divided it in two parts, and gave
one part of it to the Emperor, and took the other part unto himself,
uttering with his own mouth this imprecation. Hist. Magd. cent. 12. cap. 8.
Let him be divided from the kingdom of Christ who shall presume to violate
this covenant, bound up between you and me. Note.
Nevertheless Pope Paschalis, so soon as the Emperor returned unto Germany,
he revoked all that he had done, and cursed the Emperor, and called the
privilege which he had confirmed unto the Emperor, pravilegium, and not
privilegium.

The Emperor hearing what the Pope had done, with expedition marched toward
Rome, with an army: the Pope was forced to fly to Apulia. The Emperor
returned to Germany, where he did find the Bishops for the most part
seditiously affectionat to the Pope. Therefore the Emperor wearied with
multitude of businesses stirred up against him by Bishops, gave over his
privileges aforesaid, gaining some peace with giving over of rights. At this
time died Mathildis, a noble Countess in Italy, and excessiuely addicted to
the Roman Church. In restamentall Legacy she gave to the Church of Rome many
towns and possessions, lying betwixt the Apenning and the Sea: and among the
rest the town of Ferrara. The Roman Church braggeth of many donations, such
as the donation of Constantine, of Aistulphus, of Pipinus, of Charles the
Great, of Ludovicus Pius, of Otto, and of Mathildis. If these bounds
appertained to the chair of Rome by so many anterior donations, How did these
towns belong to Mathildis in hereditary possession, Note.
so that she had power to bestow them on whom she pleased?

In Jerusalem, after Godfrey succeeded Baldowin his brother, the second King of
Jerusalem: and after him another Baldowin, of Burgon. He prospered for a time,
but in the end was taken prisoner by Balach, King of Parthians, and was
redeemed by paying a great sum of money. He left Fulto Earl of Aniow his
successor, the fourth King of Jerusalem.

Lotharius the second.
AFter the death of Henry the fifth, Lotharius Duke of Saxony, by the consent
of the Electors, was chosen Emperor, and reigned thirteen years. In his time
two men contended for the Popedom, to wit, Inn^centius the 2. and one Peter a
citizen of Rome, and son to Peter Leo, whom they called Anacletus, whom
Rogerius Count of Sicile did favor. But the Emperor Lotharius came to Rome
with an army, and authorized Innocentius. Rogerius fearing the power of the
Emperor, returned back to Sicile.

Conradus the third.
AFter the death of Lotharius, Conradus Duke of Sueue, and sister son to the
Emperor Henry the fifth, was elected Emperor, and reigned 15. years. Henry
Duke of Saxony, and Guelphus Duke of Bavaria, rebelled against him, whom he
easily subdued. And he besieged Guelphus in a town called Winspergh. The men
of the town were saved by the wisdom of the women. For they foreseeing that
the town could not endure the strictness of the siege, they gave a petition
to the Emperor, that they might have liberty safely to depart out of the
town, only with so much as they were able to bear upon their backs. The
Emperor supposing they would transport upon their backs burdens of silver or
gold, Note.
or costly raiment, he condescended to their petition. The women preferring
the lives of their husbands to all rich treasures, came out of the town, every
woman bearing her husband on her back. The worthy Emperor admirng the virtue,
wisdom, and piety of the women, spared their husbands, and would not violate
his promise.

After this the Emperor gathered a great army, and set forward to fight
against the Turks and Saracens, of whose cruelty against the Christians in
Edessa, many advertisements were sent to Europe. In the way he conferred with
Emmanuel Emperor of Constantinople, who with deceitful promises betrayed the
good Emperor Conrad, and suffered him not to tarry and get provision of
victuals for his army: for Emmanuel promised that he would in all haste send
provision unto him. And while Conradus was besieging Iconium, Note.
Emmanuel in stead of wholesome victuales, sent meal mixed with lyme, whereby
the army was impoysoned, and huge numbers of them died, so that Conrad left the
siege of Iconium, and went back to Thracia.

In Jerusalem after Fulco, his son Baldowin was made the fifth King of
Jerusalem, who repaired Gaza, and conquered Askalon, and gave it to the
templaries. At this time many Christians were in Asia. For besides the Emperor
Conrad, and Lewis King of France, Rogerus Count of Sicile, all these were sore
grieved with the villainy done by Emmanuel Emperor of Constantinople, and they
subdued Corcyra, and took Corinth and Thebes, and the towns of Euboia. Conrad
and Lewis also went to Jerusalem, and joined their forces with Baldwin, and
besieged Damascus, but with no good success. After they returned to Europe.
But the Christians in Asia, and Syria daily decayed in number and courage,
until all the conquered places were reduced again under the dominion of
Infidels.

Fredericus 1.
AFter Cunradus, Frederike the first surnamed Barbaross^ was chosen to be
Emperor, and reigned 39. years. He was a man valiant, of a quick Spirit,
expert in warrefare, strong in body, in Counsel giving, provident. In doing of
his affairs, magnanimous: very affable to meek men: a^ enemy to proud
persons: a man of an excellent wit and m^ morie: whomsoever he had once known,
albeit he had been absent from him a long space, yet the Emperor could call
upon him by his name, as if he had been daily conversant with him: He was
crowned Emperor by Pope Adrian the 4. to whom he did this honor, when the
Pope met him at Sutrium, the Emperor lighted off his horse, and came on foot
to salute the Pope. And when our holy father was dismounted from his horse, the
Emperor did hold his left stirrup in steed of the right, and when the Pope was
somewhat offended, thereat, the Emperor softly smiling craved pardon of his
oversight, because he was not accustomed with such servile offices. Before the
Coronation of the Emperor, Note.
Pope Adrian required of him this condition that he should fight against
William Duke of Apulia for recovering of that Dukedom to the Chair of Rome.
Nevertheless the Pope not expecting the Emperors leisure, incited Emmanuell
Emperor of Constantinople to drive William Duke of Apulia out of Italy, and
addressed himself and his Cardinals to warrefare, having first excommunicated
William Duke of Apulia. On the other part, William begged peace from the Pope,
promising to restore unto him all that belonged to the chair of Rome; and more
also. But by the malignant Council of his Cardinals, the Pope would not hearken
to conditions of peace, hoping to gain more by warrefare. The Duke seeing no
hope of peace brought his forces out of Sicile, arrived at Apulia, and did fight
against Emmanuel and did put him to flight. This done, he marched foreward
toward Benaventure, where the Pope and his Cardinals were expecting victory.
But the Duke so strictly pressed the city, that the Pope and his Cardinals
were glad to sue for peace, which they refused before. The conditions of peace
were these, that the Duke should invade no possession belonging to the Roman
Church, and on the other part the Pope should acknowledge William to be King of
both Siciles.

The bad success of the Popes enterprises was not unknown to the Emperor,
who pondering in his own heart, the iniures which his predecessors had suffered
by Popes, specially in bereauing them of the right of inuesting of Bishops, and
in sending Ambassadors so frequently to Germany to the great impouerishing of
his dominions, whereat the Emperor conceived such indignation, that he charged
all Germany, Note.
that they should not receive the Popes Legates in time to come, except they
were expreslie sent for: and that no man should make appellation to Rome: also
in the Letters sent to the Pope he prefixed his own name to the Popes name.
The Pope took all this matter grieueouslie, and persuaded the towns of Italy
to make defection from the obedience of the Emperor, and specially the town
of Millan rebelled against him. But Frederick brought them partly by force,
and partly by fear under his subjection again. In the end the Pope had
recourse to the old weapons of his warfare, and he excommunicated the Emperor,
but the Lord suffered not this proud Pope to escape unpunished, for as he was
walking with his attendants, in a Town called Anagnia, a fly entered into his
throat, and choked his breath.

After the death of Adrian the Emperor was not free of trouble, in regard of
the schism that fell out in the Roman Church, for two Bishops contended for
the Popedom, to wit Alexander the third and Victor the fourth. The Emperor
was required to pacify this schism, who gathered a council at Papia, and
desired both the Popes to be present to hear their cause discussed in a
lawful assembly. But Pope Alexander disdained to be judged of any man, and
therefore he appeared not before the council; For which cause the Emperor and
the council ratified the election of Victor the 4. Pope Alexander fled to
France and cursed both the Emperor, and his own competitor Victor. Afterward
by money and flattery, (powerful weapons in a declining age) he procured such
favor in the City of Rome that he was received gladly of the most part of the
city. Pope Victor had ended his life before this time, to whom Guido Bishop of
Cremona was appointed successor whom they called Paschalis tertius, and many
followed him. When Pope Alexander came to Rome the Towns of Italy were in
great ^^ope of liberty, and rebelled against the Emperor, they reedefied the
town of Millan, which the Emperor had sacked, and ruinated, and they builded
a town called Alexandria in contempt of the Emperor; and in honor of the
Pope. When the Emperor Frederike came to Italy, he besieged this new builded
town called Alexandria, but was betrayed by Henry Duke of Bauaria, and
Saxonia, so that he escaped hardly in the habit of a servant and returned to
Germany. The Emperor renewed his forces again, and pierced into Italy with
a great army. Pope Alexander fled to Venice. Otto the Emperors son on the
other part with a well appointed navy pursued after him, having received a
commandment from his father to attempt nothing against the Venetians until his
own coming. But the young man more hardy, then circumspect, encountered with
the Venetians, and was overcome, and taken prisoner. The father for relieuing
of his son from Captivity was content to come to Venice, and in Saint Marks
Church to crave absolution from Pope Alexander. When he kneeled down at the
Popes feet, Note.
the proud Pope set his foot upon the Emperors neck, and abused the words of
holy Scripture, Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis leonem
and draconem, Psalm. xci. 13.
that is, thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Aspe: the young Lion and the
Dragon shall thou tread under feet. The Emperor answered, non tibi sed petro,
that is, not to thee but to S. Peter: but the proud Pope replied, Et mihi and
petro, that is both to me and to S. Peter, (to wit) thou do this homage. The
Emperor not willing to give any further occasion of offense held his peace,
and so was absolved, and his son relieved, with whom he departed from Venice.

After this, some affirm, that he led an army to Palestina, to fight against
the Turks, and that he prospered, until at length he was drowned in a
certain river. The Christians in Jerusalem had their last help and
refreshment from Philip king of France, and Richard king of England. These two
besieged Acon and conquered it. But there was kindled between the two kings a
fervent heat and indignation, every one of them envying the honor of another,
Note.
so that Philip returned to France, and king Richard after he had conquered
Ioppo, returned also to England. But by the way he made ship-wracke, and
hardly escaped the peril of drowning. And albeit he disguised himself,
putting on the habit of a servant, yet he was known and taken prisoner, by
the Duke of Austria, and was brought to the Emperor Henry the sixth: where he
was detained until he paid the ransom of 10000. pounds money.

After Baldowine succeeded Amalricus the sixth king of Jerusalem. And after him
his son Baldowine the 4. the 7. king of Jerusalem. He was sickly and not
meet for government. Therefore he committed the government to Guido and
Raimundo Count of Tripoli. The discord and debate between Raimund and Guido
presented occasion to Saladin king of Turks to recover again Jerusalem, Note.
and other Towns possessed by Christians for the space of 88. years.

Henry the Sixth.
AEter the death of Frederike the first, his son Henry the sixth was declared
Emperor, who reigned 8. years: he was Crowned by Pope Caelestinus the second
who took Constantia the daughter of Rogerius out of a Monastery, and gave her
in marriage to Henry the sixth, and both Sicils were bestowed to him in way of
dowry, paying always to the Bishop of Rome the fee duly that was accustomed
to be paid out of those parts. Henry the sixth took Trancredus the young king
of Sicile, put out his eyes and thrust him into a Monastery; and used great
cruelty against the Bishops and other inhabitants of the Isle of Sicile; So
that Pope Caelestinus did excommunicate him for his Barbarous cruelty, but he
went to Rome, acknowledged his fault, and obtained pardon together with a
confirmation of the kingdom of Sicile. The Pope solicited also the Emperor
to lead an army to Asia, for support of distressed Christians, which thing he
performed, albeit he went not thither in his own person for he sent the Bishop
of Mentz, the Duke of Saxony, the Duke of Austria, and the Duke of Bauaria,
and the Lantgraue of Thuringia, with many other noble persons, and with a well
appointed army. But the year following their arriual at Palestina, the report
of the Emperor Henry's death, caused them to return back again to Germany,
leaving the Christians in a very desolate care.

CENTVRIE XIII.
Philippus.
AFter the death of Henry the sixth, Philip his brother by the help of the
Bohems, Saxons, Bauaroies, and Sueuians took on him the Imperial authority,
contrary to the mind of Innocentius Bishop of Rome and reigned 10. years. In
his time the country of Germany was tormented with most cruel wars, for the
Pope of Rome did excommunicate him, and caused the Bishop of Colen and other
electors to make Otto Duke of Saxon Emperor, between whom and Philip were
fought diverse battles. But Philip defended himself so courageously, that by
force he held the Imperial Crown all his lifetime against the heart both of
Otto and the Roman Bishop who oftentimes had threatened, that either he would
pull from Phillip the Imperial Crown, or else that Phillip should take from
him his triple Diadem: Note.
so meek was this gentle Bishop. In the end the Country of Germany being
wearied with continual wars entreated for peace between Philip and the
Pope, which was obtained upon these conditions, that one of Philips daughters
should be given in marriage to Count Richard the Popes Nephew, and another of
his daughters should be given in marriage to Otto Duke of Saxon, who should for
that cause denude himself of the Imperial dignity. Not long after this peace
was concluded, The beginning of the Tartarian kingdom.
the Emperor was cruelly murdered in his own chamber by Otto Count
Palatine. In this Emperors days began the kingdom of the Tartarians who came
from the mountains of India with their wifes and children in (...) 1202, and
began to spoil the Provinces nerest adjacent to themselus, afterward they
ouerhaled the Parchians, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Armenians, and Sarmatians,
and in the end settled their dwelling place at Meotidis Paludes, a barbarous and
fierce people, practicing great cruelty against all nations both of Christians
and others.

Otto Quartus.
AFter the death of Philip, Otto Duke of Saxon was Crowned Emperor by Pope
Innocentius the third. Now it was the custom that he who was crowned Emperor
used to distribute gifts to the Romans, which custom being neglected by Otto
the Romans made some commotion and tumult, wherein they abused the Emperors
servants. He therefore departing from Rome with great coffeehouse invaded
certain towns belonging to the Chair of Rome, whereby he incurred such
hatred at the Popes hands, that he was forthwith excommunicated, and although
the Pope hated the offspring of Henry the sixth, yet when the Electors of
Germany condescended to make Frederike the son of Henry Emperor, the Pope
agreed thereto, because he had a more deadly hatred at those who touched the
apple of his eye, that is S. Peter's patrimonio (as they call it) then at any
other sort of people.

In the East Alexius Ducas, otherwise called Murzulfus reigned a short time,
for he was taken by the Venetians and Frenchmen, (who had restored again
Isacius, to his kingdom) and they threw him headlong over a steep place
because he had murdered his Master for ambitious desire of his kingdom.
These Venetians and Frenchmen set up Baldwine Count of Flanders to be Emperor
of the East. Thus was the Empire of the East translated to the French nation
for a time, as the Empire of the west had been before in the days of Charles
de maine. After him reigned Henry his brother 2 years, who having no male
children left the kingdom to Petrus Antisiodorensis his son in law, who was
cut off by the fraud of Lascharis after he had reigned two years. After him
his son Robert reigned 7 years, he was crowned Emperor by the Bishop of
Rome, as the Germane Emperors were accustomed to be. To him succeeded his
young son Baldwine, in whose time the Empire returned again to the Grecians.
And Theodorus Lascaris son in Law to Alexius Commenus who plucked out the
eyes of Isacius, was saluted Emperor and reigned eight years, after whom
Ioannes Ducas his son in Law reigned 33. years.

Fredericus Secundus.
AFter the death of Otto, Frederike the second son to Henry the sixth,
obtained the Empire and r^igned 38. years. He was by inheritance king of
Naples, Apulia, Calabria, and Sicilia. His father obtained, shortly after he
was borne, of the Princes Electors that they should choose his son Frederike
Emperor after his death, which they did, crowning him Emperor at Aquisgraue
when he was about 20. year old. From thence he passed with his nobles and
Princes to Rome, and there with great solemnity was consecrated and called
Augustus by Pope Honorius the third. After his consecration he gave by his
charter to the Church of Rome the Dukedom of Fundanuus, for by the insatiable
covetousness of the Roman Bishops this wicked use and custom grew, that
except the Emperors Elected and crowned would give unto them such great and
large gifts, they could not obtain of them their consecration and
confirmation, which for that intent they devised. Note.
Furthermore the said Emperor willing to show himself more bountiful toward
the Church of Rome, gave and admitted those constitutions which the Pope
himself would desire, by which doing he gave a sword in their hands to cut his
own throat; for he did grant to the Canon of proscription devised by the Pope
and his adherents, that whosoever were excommunicate for diminution of the
liberties of the Church, and so continued a years space, that this person
should be within the danger of his proscript, and should not be relaxed before
he had made satisfaction, and was admitted by the Pope to the Church and
Congregation of good men again.

But this liberty of Frederick was well required by Hononorius, for soon
after his returning to Germany, he heard of certain who begun to raise and
make new factions against him: amongst whom were found Thomas and Richard, the
brethren of Innocentius the third, Earls of Anaquinos, that held certain
Castles in the kingdom of Naples against him by force, which Castles he
besieged and beat down. Richard also he took and sent him prisoner to
Sicilia. But Thomas escaped and came speedily to Rome, where he was not only
received by Honorius, but also when the Emperor began to expostulate with him
for the vnseemlinesse of this deed, the Pope was so chased, that without
further delay, he thundered out against him like a tyrant, Note.
his cursings and excommunications.

After this fell out a ground of a new debate between the Emperor and the
Pope. For the Christians that were in Asia were so weakened, that John surnamed
Brennus, King of Jerusalem came himself to the Emperor, and to the Pope to
seek help for the distressed Christians, who were in Asia. This John gave his
daughter Joel in marriage to the Emperor, with the title of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem in dowry with her. The Emperor on the other part promised that with
all possible expedition he would lead an army into Asia against the Turks:
whereupon, and by the means of John King of Jerusalem, the Emperor and the
Pope were reconciled again. But before the Emperor took his journey to Asia,
Honorius died, in whose room succeeded Gregorius the ninth, who excommunicated
the Emperor a new again, because he was compelled by sickness to come back
from his journey to Asia, and to remain a space in Europe for the recovering
of his health again.

The next year after, to stop the mouth of the slanderous and cruel Pope, and
to declare to the world, that the last year he did not leave off his journey
by his own voluntary will, but by necessity: he set forward with a great army
and arrived at Ioppa. The Saracens were so troubled with his arrival, that
they were content to render to Frederick the town of Jerusalem, with all the
possessions that were situate between it and Ptolemaide, and the greatest
part of Palestina, and the Cities of Tyrus and Sydon, which were in Syria, and
all other territories which Baldwin the fourth at any time had occupied there.
Also they were content to set at liberty all the prisoners who were in their
hands: and finally, to conclude peace for the space of ten years.

In the meanetime, while the Emperor is thus occupied in Asia, Pope Gregory
the ninth in the Emperors absence, made it known to the whole world, for what
cause he was so earnest to chase him away to the East: not that he cared for
the welfare of the distressed Christians in Asia, but to the end he might
work him some trouble in his absence, Note.
as appeared by all these subsequent practices. For he invaded the kingdom of
Naples, and the rest of the dominions which pertained to the Emperors
inheritage: and subdued a great part of these dominions to himself. Likewise
he had a secret dealing with Henry the Emperors son, to stir him up against
his father, and prevailed so far in this divellish treason, that by the Popes
counsel he put from him his trusty Counceller Ludovicus, Duke of Boioria,
whom his father had ordained to be guider of his son in his absence. Likewise
when the Emperor sent letters out of Asia declaring the good success that God
had given him, and therewith desiring the Pope and Christian Princes and
people, to give thanks to God for the same. These letters so grieved the Popes
mind, that he rent them in pieces, cast them upon the ground, and trod them
under his feet to the great admiration of the Emperors Legates. Again to
color the rage of his impotent mind with some excuse, Note.
who could not brid^^ the fury of his malicious heart, pretending this to be
the cause of his anger, because the Emperor amongst other conditions of peace,
bound up between the Christians in Asia and the Saracens, he had licensed
them to come (always without armor) to the place of the holy grave. Also he
made rumors to pass through Italy of the Emperors death, to the end the
towns which were under his dominion, might be faint-hearted, and resign over
their cities into his hands. As likewise the soldiers who returned home out of
Asia, he caused to be cut off, left by their reporting the truth, and the good
success of Frederick, the towns under his obedience might be encouraged.

The Emperor being advertised of all these practices done against him in his
absence, left in Asia Renaldus with his garrisons, commanding all the other
bands to be under his appointment: And with all speed came with certain
galleys to Calabria, and within short space tamed his enemies, and recovered
all his holds and dominions again. Also he sent to the Pope to entreat for
his favor, notwithstanding all the injuries he had received at his hands, but
was not heard nor accepted into favor, until he had paid an hundred and
twenty ounces of gold, for his absolution.

After this, great rebellon was stirred up in Germany against Frederick, for
his own son Henry Caesar began to utter the fruits of that old traffic
that was between him and the Pope, and caused Ludovicke Duke of Boiaria, of
whom we did speak before, not only to be put from his Court, but also most
cruelly to be murdered. The Emperor thought it no time to sleep: wherefore
ent^ing into Germany, he assembled a Council in the city of N^urburg, where
the conspiracy of Henry Caesar was manifestly detected, whereof the Pope was
the chief author, and ^ee by the judgment and sentence of (...) Princes,
condemned of high treason. And being commanded by his father to be bound, was
as a prisoner brought to Apulia, where not long after he died in prison. In
whose room he ordained his third son Conradus Caesar, by consent of all the
Peers and Princes. Also Fredericus Austriacus his son, was proclaimed for an
enemy to the Commonwealth, from whom were taken Austria and Stiria, and
brought again under the Emperors obedience and fidelity: who having set
Germany at quietness, left there Conradus Caesar his son, and with his army
returned to Italy, to punish such as with Henry his eldest son had conspired
against him, whose treasons were all detected at the condemnation of Henry
Caesar, and chiefly the Popes, who understanding that the Emperor with warlike
furniture marched toward Italy, albeit he fained himself to be reconciled,
and a friend to him, yet was he notwithstanding to him a most secret and
intestine enemy. For he sent to those cities who had conspired against the
Emperor, admonishing them that they should join themselves together, and that
they should furnish strongly their cities with garrisons, and send for aid to
friends, and that with all their force they would prepare themselves for war.
Also he sent Ambassadors to the Emperor to forbid him and his army to come
forward unto Italy, and to say unto him (not by way of entreaty, but
imperiously) that what cause of controversy he had against the Longobards,
the same he should commit to him, and stand to his arbiterment. The Emperor
nothing regarding this foolish interditement, prosecuteth his purpose and
marches toward Italy: where he brought under his subjection those cities that
rebelled against him, as Mantua, Verona, Ternisium, Patavium, and others: and
then he afterward set upon the great Host of Mediolanenses, the Brixians, the
Placentines, Note.
and other confederats, of whom he took a thousand prisoners, and also their
General, being the chief Magistrate in the city of Mediolanum, Petrus
Tenopolus the Dukes son of Venice, and slew diverse Captains more, and took
all their Ensigns.

The Pope perceiving the overthrow of his confederates, could no longer cover
his malice, but did break out in open fury and rage against the Emperor, and
pronounced a sentence of proscription against him, depriving him of all his
dignities, honors, titles* prerogatives, kingdoms, and whole Empire. Also
calling unto him the Venetian and Genuan Legates, made a peace between them
(for they had been at variance for certain causes about their Sea coasts) and
covenanted with them upon this condition, that upon their charges they should
rigge and man 35. galleys, which should spoil and burn all along the Sea
coasts of the kingdoms and dominions of Frederick. But when he saw the good
will and fidelity that the Duke of Venice bare unto the Emperor, who
notwithstanding the displeasure he took by the imprisonment of his son, yet
would he not make war against him. For which cause the Pope had recourse to
his old practices, whereby his predecessors had trodden all Princes under their
feet. And so he put forth an edict at Rome, to the universal Church and
people, the beginning whereof is, Ascendit de mari bellica bestia: wherein he
declares the causes wherefore he curses the Emperor to the devil of Hell,
and deiecteth him from his Princely dignity: charging him with treason,
perjury, cruelty, sacrilege, killing of his own kindred, and all impiety, and
accuses him as an heretic, schismaticke, and miscreant. And this edict of
the Emperors cursing, Note.
he commanded all Bishops, Prelates, and others of the Clergy, that they should
solemnly recite the same in their Churches in stead of a Sermon. And
furthermore, charged them and all other Christian men, under pain of cursing
and damnation, that they neither help the Emperor, nor yet so much as wish
him well.

Moreover, by means of Albertus Bebauus his Legate, he stirred up great
rebellion against the Emperor in Germany. For he drew Otto Duke of Boiaria
from the Emperors obedience, and with him Venceslaus and Belus, Princes of the
Hungarians, and Henry Duke of Polonia. To whom also Fredericus Austriacus the
Emperors son (because he was proscript or outlawed of his father) was
easily adjoined. The Emperor was at Patavium, when these news were brought to
him. Therefore he commanded Peter de Vineis his Secretary, upon Easter day to
make a narration to the people of his great munificence to the Bishops of
Rome, and again of their injuries toward him in recompense thereof: of his
innocence also, in all the heads whereof he was accused by the Pope: and
finally, of the use of Ecclesiastical censure, and of the errors and abuse of
the Church of Rome. By which Oration of his, he so remooved the clouds of
blind superstion from men's hearts, and the conceived opinion of holiness of
the Church of Rome, and also of their usurped power, and subtle persuasion,
that both they saw, and plainly perceived the vices and filthiness of the
same. At the same time the Emperor (as faith Albericus) writ to the Pope these
veres.

Roma diu titubans longis erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
To whom the Pope answered again in other verses.

Niteris incassum navem submergere Petri;
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.
The Emperor moreover, by his Letters and Legates, gives intelligence to all
Christian princes, as well of the fained crimes wherewith he was charged, as
also of the cruelty of the Bishop of Rome against him. In all this time it
pleased God to support the Emperor with some comfort, which many of his
Predecessors lacked. For the Bishops of Germany were faithful subjects unto
him, and not only refused to execute the Popes edicts and mandats in their
Churches, but also they accused and condemned Albertus Bebavus the Popes Legate,
as a most impudent impostor and a wi^cked fellow, and a most pestiferous botch
and sore of the Christian Commonwealth, and gave him to the Devil as a
ruinous enemy as well of the Church, as of his natural Country. This war
between the Emperor and the Pope waxed so hot, that upon a time the Emperor
came to Pisas and Viterbium, the Pope fearing he would come to Rome, caused a
supplication to be made, wherein the heads of Peter and Paul were carried
about, and with a sharp and contumelious Oration he fought to deface the
Emperor, promising everlasting life, and giving the badge of the Cross to so
many as would arm themselves and fight against the Emperor, as against the
most wicked enemy of God and his Church. Now the Emperor marching somewhat
near the gates of Rome, when he saw soldiers marked with the badge of the
Cross coming out against him, gave a sharp charge upon them, and put them
soon to flight, and as many as he took (cutting off that badge from them) he
caused to be hanged. But the more he prospered the more he was enuyed of the
Pope, who by his Legates, called to a Council at Rome, all such Prelates out of
Italy, France, and England, as he thought to favor him and his proceedings:
that hereby as his last shift and only refuge, he by their helps might
deprive Frederick of the Empire, as an utter enemy to God and his Church. Of
all which the Emperor having intelligence, and knowing that these assemblies
should be but to his destruction, he determined to stop and let their passages
to Rome, both by Sea and Land. And therefore sent out his son Henry with
certain Galleys, to keep the coasts of Sardinia, and from thence to Pisas,
and with the Pisans to rigge out a Navy to meet with such as should aid the
Pope of Rome. The Popes associats on the other part, procured that the galleys
and ships of Genua (having Guilielmus Braccius for their chief Captain)
should be sent out for defense of the Prelates that were to repair to the
Council. Thus the Pisan army launched forth to the Sea with forty ships and
galleys, and between the Isles of Lilium and Mons Christ's, which lie between
Liburnium and Corsica, they met with the Genuan ships, and fiercely began to
board them. In which fight at length were three of the Genuan ships sunk and
22. taken and brought away, with all the riches and treasures in them. In those
were taken three of the Popes Legates (whereof two were Cardinals) Iacobus
Columna, Ottho Marchio, Note.
and Gregorius de Romania (all cruel enemies against the Emperor) and many
other Prelates more, besides a great number of Legates and Procurators of cities,
with an infinite number of Monks and Priests, as also the Genuan soldiers,
with diverse others. Also besides the prey and booty, they found many writings
and letters which very much helped the Emperor, in clearing his cause against
his enemies.

Whilst this discord was between the Emperor and the Pope, Orthodarius the
Emperor of the Tartarians, soon invaded the borders next adjacent to him, and
conquered Ropolanium, Bodolium, Mudanium, with diverse other towns and
villages: destroying, wasting, and burning the countries all about: killing and
slaying, men, women, children, sparing none of any sex or age. At whose sudden
invasion the people being affrighted and troubled, were glad to leave all that
they had, and disperse themselves into woods, and fly unto marshes and
mountains: so that by this time the Tartarian Host was come as far as
Wratislavia, where Henricus of Polonia, and the Duke of Silesia met with them,
but by reason of inequality both in number and forces, they were easily
defeated and slain. From thence they came to Moravia, and from thence to the
kingdom of Bohemia and Hungary, at which time Belus King of Hungary sent to
the Emperor for support against the Tartarians, promising that Hungary ever
after should be under the jurisdiction of the Emperor. The Emperor on the
other part was most willing to help the Hungarians and other Christians, and
sent to the Pope to persuade him that he would take up and conclude a peace,
and mitigate somewhat his wrath, in regard of the immiment danger like to
ensue upon the whole state of Christendom, by reason of a civil dissension.

But when he saw that by no means the Pope would relent his fury, he was
compelled to write again to the King of Hungary, that he could stand him in
no stead at that time, because the Bishop of Rome refused all treaty of peace:
notwithstanding he sent Conradus Caesar king of Bohemia, and other Princes of
Germame to resist and withstand the enemy so far as in them lay. Thus may
be seen the loving zeal and affection that the Pope of Rome has toward
Christian people, that he had rather bend his forces to revenge his malice
upon the Christian and good Emperor, then either by himself to withstand, or
yet by concluding a profitable peace to permit others to withstand the most
bloody and cruel Tartarian. But even in the midst of this spoil and havoc
of Polonia, Bohemia, and Hungaria, was it determined that Libussa the Princes
confederate with the Pope should be assembled about the deposing of the
Emperor, Note.
and creating of another. When Frederike saw there was none other remedy and
that he labored in vain to have peace, he prosecuted the war to the
uttermost, and when he had gotten Tudetum and reconciled the same, he
destroyed the Towns of Geminium and Naruia and gave the spoil of them to his
soldiers, he gently received the yielding up of Siburnium and wasted all the
country about Rome: wherewith the Pope being dismayed, and seeing that things
prospered not so well with him against the Emperor as he looked for, being in
despair of obtaining his purpose died in great anger and displeasure.

Thus when the author of all this conspiracy was gone, The Emperor with his
army marched forward against the Tartarians who hearing of his coming left
the straigh^way through Hungary by which they came, and returned by the river
of Danubium to Taurica, and so through the Fenns of Meotida and by the river of
Tanaium into Sarmatia Asiatica.

After Gregory Celestinus was created Pope who died within 18. days after, to
whom succeeded Innocentius. In whose time the Emperor hoped for peace but was
disappointed; for albeit a day was appointed for their meeting together at
Festennia, and the Pope had promised that he would be there before the
Emperor and expect his coming, yet he mocked the Emperor, and secretly in
the night took ship and first came to Genua, and from thence to Lions in
France where he gathered a council and excommunicated the Emperor.
Notwithstanding the Emperor was determinate to go to Lions himself, and to
confer with the Pope, both concerning this sentence pronounced against him,
as also about the conclusion of peace, if by any means it could be obtained.
But as he was upon his journey news was brought to him that Parma was taken by
his out laws assisted by the Popes Legate, wherefore being out of hope of
peace, he set himself again to the war, and besieged Parma planting over
against it the form of a town, which he called Victoria, wherein his
Soldiers camped. But the citizens of Parma getting knowledge upon a time that
the Emperor was gone to hunting and his soldiers were straggling here and
there without order, issued out of the town, and slew a great number of them,
and burnt his Camp Victoria. Soon after the Emperor being in Apulia in a
certain Castle called Florentinium, ended his life.

In this time it is to be noted that there was such dissension between the
Emperor and the Pope that the factious names of the Guelfes and Gibelins
sprang up in Italy, Note.
and continued ever since, almost to our own days, for the Guelfes followed
the Pope, the Gibelins the Emperor, so that it came to pass that all they who
followed the Pope were called by the name of Guelfes, and these who followed
the Emperor, Gibelins.

Conradus Quartus.
AFter the death of Frederick succeeded Conradus his son who with manly
courage, began to subdue the Towns of Apulia, and of the kingdom of Naples
which rebelled against him, but he was hastily cut off by his brother Manfred,
who being covetous to keep in his own hand the Dukedom of Apulia (which he
had invaded) caused to empoyson the Emperor Conrad, after he had reigned 2
years. Also he caused the testament of Conrad to be suppressed wherein he
had appointed Cunradinus his son to be heir of all his dominions. At this
time Innocentius 4. thinking it most convenient to invade the Kingdom of
Sicilie and bring it under his dominion sent two strong armies to subdue it,
but they were both overcome and driven back by Manfred, whereat the Pope was so
grieved with Melancholy that he died. But Pope Clemens succeeding Innocentius
stirred up Charles Count of Angeow brother to Lewis king of France to make war
against Manfred, who prevailed against him, and killed him and possessed
Sicilia, Calabria, and Apulia, and all that Manfred before had under his
obedience. Cunradinus the son of Conrad being come to perfect age came with
an army to Italy to claim his fathers Dominions and was gladly received at
Rome, soon after was overcome in battle by Charles Count of Angeow (who had
slain Manfred before) and was cast into prison, and afterward by commandment
of the Pope was beheaded at Naples with Frederick Duke of Austria his
assister. For Charles upon a time demanded the Roman Bishop Clemens 4. what he
should do with his prisoners, to whom he answered Vita Cunradini, mors Caroli,
Note.
that is, the life of Cunradinus, is the death of Charles, whereupon ensued
their public execution. So the Kingdom of Naples by the cruelty of the
Roman Bishop against the just owner, came into the hands of Frenchmen.

Wilielmus.
William Count of Flanders (whom Pope Innocentius had declared Emperor when
he excommunicated Frederike at Lions) was yet alive and was accounted
Emperor, but he was slain by the Frisians, after he had reigned one year,
after the death of Cunrad. After whose death variance fell between the
Electors of Germany for choosing of the Emperor, for part named Alphonsus
King of Castile, others Richard the brother of king Henry of England. But
because neither of them were received by the whole Empire, The Empire void of
an Emperor the space of 17. years.
the Imperial authority was counted void and vacant the space of seventeen
years. In the East reigned Theodorus Lascaris the younger 4. years.

Rodulphus.
IN the year of our Lord 1273. the Princes Electors being assembled together
at Frank foord choosed with one consent Rodulph Count of Halsburg to be
Emperor, who governed 18 years. This man never received the Imperial
dignity nor entered into Italy, for he used to recite to his familiars, the
fable of the fox that said to the Lion he was afraid to enter into his
den, because he perceived the stepps of many beasts going inward, but of
none that returned out again. Note.
And so he said, many Emperors have entered Italy with great Pomp and
glory, but by the means of the Bishop they returned evil handled with great
injuries. He had deadly war with Ottiocarus King of Bohemia who had invaded
Austrich and appropriated it to himself while as the Empire wanted an head
through the variance of the Electors, against him he fought a sore battle in
the fields of Austrich and obtained the victory, and Othocarus there was
slain, whose son the Emperor gently entreated, giving him Suta his
daughter in marriage, and giving Agnes daughter to Othocariu in marriage to
Rodulph the Emperors son.

Adolphus.
AFter Rodolph, Adolph Count de Nassaw was chosen Emperor and reigned six
years, he was unfortunate in all things he went about, and therewith so
needy and poor that when he had received of King Edward of England a great
sum of money to aid him against the King of France he spent the money upon
his household and had not wherewith to fulfill his promise when time required.
He had great wars with Albert Duke of Austrich, whom he traveled to deprive
of his Dukedom, But Albert led out his army against him, in the fields of
Spira, and discomfited his host and killed himself, and reigned in his steed
as will be declared in the next Centurie, god willing.

In Constantinople after Theodorus Lascaris the younger, Emperors of
Constantinople.
succeeded Michael Paleologus, and reigned 35. years. He plucked out the eyes
of John the son of Lascaris and right heir of the Empire. His son
Andronicus again who succeeded to him, caused his father to be buried in an
obscure place and not in a princely Sepulcher, because he had agreed with the
Church of Rome.

Now as touching the holy Land many great armies went to Asia in this Centurie
for recovering of Jerusalem, The first Army was led for recovery of the holy
land.
first under the conduct of Ludouick Duke of Bavaria, Leopold D. of Austrich,
and Andro king of Hungary with the Florentins and Genuans marked with the
badge of the Cross, and diverse Bishops of France and Germany raised an army,
took the town of Damiata in Egypt, but soon after it was lamentably lost,
by a devised stratageme of the Sultan of Egypt, who fained as though he had
been flying from place to place, until he found the Christian army Camping
in a low place beside the river Nilus, and then opening the slu^es of the
water, the most part of all the Christians were drowned, and Damiata again
recovered. The second army.
The second army was led by Fredericus the second into Asia, at what time
Jerusalem was recovered again, and all that Baldwine the fourth had of old in
his possession, was rendered to the Christians, and a covenant of peace was
bound up for 10. years to come, as has been declared in the treatise of the
life of Frederick. The third army was raised up by Theobald King of Navarre,
The third army.
Americus Count of Montfort, Henry Count of Campanie, Peter Count of Britan,
and Anselmus de Insula: Theobald having the chief regiment of the army, which
set foreward by the intisement of Gregory the 9. before the time of the 10.
years peace concluded by Frederick had taken an end. For the which cause it
is not to be doubted but this voyage had the more unprosperous success, for
they had lost the third part of the army before they came to Antiochia, from
thence they went to Ptolemais and from thence to Gaza. The Barbarians
perceiving that this army was set forth without the Emperors advice (because
his Soldiers that were in Asia kept the bond of peace and assisted not this
army of Theobald) they laid there Ambushments in secret places waiting for
advantage of the Christian army, and set upon them when they were weary,
returning from their spoiling with great prey: but the Christians made strong
resistance and put the aliens to flight. The day next following the Barbarians
renewed their forces and prevailed against the Christians, Americus Count of
Montfort, and Henry Count of Campanie being slain. And Theobald king of
Navarre with great difficulty escaped and returned home accompanied with a
very few number of men who remained undestroyed in that unprosperous voyage.
The fourth army was led by Richard Count of Cornwall, The forth army.
whom the Pope had put in hope to be made Emperor, but when he came to
Jerusalem, and understood by Rainoldus the Emperors deputy there, of the
peace which had been concluded by a solemn covenant he enterprised nothing
against the Barbarians, but subscribed the bond of peace concluded before by
the Emperor Frederick, and left he should seem to have made all his travels
in vain, he received some dropps of the Lords blood from the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, so blind was this seduced age that a vain show of counterset
relics was counted a worthy price to recompense the ieopardous travels of
Princes leading great armies from one end of the world to another. After the
death of Rainald, The templars breaking the covenant made with the Barbarians
are destroyed.
the Templaries without all regard of the peace bound up, denounce war to the
Saracens and compelled the Christians in Asiato put themselves in arms. But
the Sultan of Egypt sent for support of the Babylonians, who sent unto him a
company of sauadge men called Grossouij who pitched their camp at Gaza and
took it, and destroyed all the Templaries that dwelt therein. The like did
they to the inhabitants of Askelon, also the people that came to support the
Templaries were utterly cut off, and finally they set upon Jerusalem which was
easily conquered, and all the inhabitants thereof were put to the sword without
regard of sex or age, and the town it self was subverted, neither was any
building spared though never so ample pleasant, also they subverted the
Sepulcher of the Lord.

The first voyage The fist vovage.
was undertaken by Lewis King of France son to the Queen Blanch who being
diseased and almost at the point of death vowed to God that in case he
recovered health: he would be crossed or marked with the cross, to visit the
Lords Sepulcher and there solemnly to render thanks; which vow also he
endeavored to perform, and in the year of our Lord 1248. after he had received
the Popes blessing at Lions, set forward with a mighty army having in
company with him the Earl Atrabacensis his brother the Duke of Burgundy, the
Duke of Brabant, the Countess of Flanders with her two sons, the Earl of
Britanie with his son, the Earl of Barrensis, the Earl of Swesson, the
Earl of S. Paul, the Earl of Druise, the Earl Retel, with many other noble
Persons.

In the beginning of this enterprise they seemed to prosper well, for they
took the Town of Damiata at their first arrival into Egypt, which was the
chief seat and hold of the Saracens in all Egypt. At the loss whereof the
Sultan of Egypt with the Saracens in those parts were so astonished, that they
offered the Christians the possession of Jerusalem, and the holy Land, which
the Christians so much contended for, providing they would render unto them
again the Town of Damiata. But the Earl of Artoys, the kings brother puffed up
with insolent pride would in no ways suffer the offers of the Saracens to be
accepted, but required also Alexandria the chief Metropolitan town of Egypt
to be delivered unto them. But soon after the Sultan of Egypt beset them so
strongly, both by Sea and Land, that they were glad to crave again the peace
which was offered and could not obtain it. In the end they were purposed to
leave a Garrison to keep Damiata, and to march out in battle themselves. The
Earl of Artoys through his insolent pride (thinking all was his own
whenever he gat any small advantage of the enemy) brought himself and all
the army to confusion, for he passed over a shallow foord of Nilus which a
certain Saracen lately converted to Christ had made known, and having in
company with him the Master of the Temple, and William Longspath, with his
company of English soldiers and diverse others, even the third part of the
army, set upon the Saracens when they were not aware, and did them great
harm. This victory obtained he would needs go forward, dividing himself
from the maine Host and besieged the Castle, and Village of Mansor. But the
Saracens finding him separated from the rest of the army, compassed him about,
and destroyed him and all his company, in so much that scarce one man escaped
alive (except two Templars, one Hospitular, and one poor Soldier) to bring
news thereof to the King. After this the Souldan suddenly appeared with
multitude of innumerable thousands, against the King himself. In this
miserable conflict the King with his two brethren, and a few that claue unto
him were taken captives, all the residue were put to the sword, or else stood
to the mercy of the Saracens, whether to be slain or remain in woeful
captivity.

The Souldan after the captivity of the King, fraudulently suborned an army of
Saracens to the number of the French army, with the arms and ensigns of them
that were slain, and sent them toward Damiata, where the Duke of Burgundy
with the French Queen, and Odo the Popes Legate and other Bishops, and their
garrisons were remaining, supposing under the show of Frenchmen to be let in.
But the Captains mistrusting their hasty coming, and misdoubting their
visages not like to the French-mens, shut the gates against them, whereby they
returned frustrate of their purpose. Yet afterward Damiata was rendered to the
Saracens as a part of the Kings ransom, which city being twice won, and twice
lost by the Christians, the Souldan afterward caused utterly to be razed down
to the ground. It is to be noted in this Tragedy, Note.
that the Pope of Rome was the chief ground of all this lamentable calamity.
For the King wisely considering what great help he might have gotten by the
concurrance of the valiant and wife Emperor Frederick, travailed for
reconciliation between him and the Pope, before he undertook his voyage, but
all his travails were spent in vain, and so the King of France went alone to
this dangerous enterprise, taking with him the Popes blessing, as is said
before.

But like as Frederick before prospered not the worse thate he was cursed of
the Pope, so it may be perceived that Lewis King of France prospered not the
better, albeit the Pope blessed him. Before we speak of the sixth voyage of
his age it is to marked, that God raised up Mango King of the Tartarians to
make war against the Saracens: he was baptized and professed the name of
Christ, Mango King of the Tartarians fights against the Saracens.
and sent his brother Hal^ to fight against the Saracens. Who overhailed
Persia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, and in the end came to Syria, and conquered
Damascus, appointing his son Abaga to be Governor of the same, for he
returned himself to inherit the kingdom of his brother Mango, whom he heard
to be dead. Also Abaga afterward hearing of the death of his father Halo,
returned to govern his fathers kingdom, leaving behind him ten thousand
horsemen to support the Christians, in the hands of Guirboca, who also favored
the Christians for a time, until they slew his Nephew, and then he also became
an enemy unto them, and invaded the town of Caesarea, and set it on fire.

At this time Nelethinus the son of Turqueminius, Souldan of Egypt, fearing
the dominion of the Tartarians in Syria, provoked Guirboca to fight, and
destroyed him and his army: and they that escaped of the Tartarians fled to
Armenia. Thus the small comfort which the Christians had by the Tartarians, was
first turned into hatred, and afterward was utterly taken away by their
destruction.

The sixth army.
The sixth voyage was under the King of France, and Henry King of England, who
sent Prince Edward his son to Palestina in his place, and Charles Duke of
Angeow, who was declared by the Pope to be King of Sicile, and King of
Jerusalem. In this voyage the one part of the army, to wit, Frenchmen, arrived
at Africa and besieged the town of Carthage and took it: also they besieged
Tuenetum six months, at which time the army was troubled with a grievous
pestilence, A peace concluded.
whereof the King himself, and the Popes Legate both died. But Charles King of
Sicile came with a fresh army: Mulet the Prince in those parts, entreated for
peace, which was granted upon these conditions. First, that if any in Afric
would profess the Christian religion, they should be permitted so to do
without molestation. Next, that the Christians who were detained in captivity
should be set at liberty. And thirdly, that there should be paid yearly to
the King of Sicile forty thousand crowns.

The other part of the army under the conduct of Edward Prince of England, came
to Syria, where Edward was circumvented by a deceitful Saracen, who came with
letters to him from his master, and wounded him with an invenomed knife,
whereby he was in great danger of his life, but being cured by skillful
Physicians, he escaped death. Also he stayed in Ptolemais upon the arrival of
the rest of the army out of Afric, but when he had long waited in vain, he
was compelled to return back again to his own country.

In this voyage it is to be noted, that the Pope of Rome miserably abused the
Christian people: for the armies raised against the Turks and Infidels, Note.
he caused to serve the covetous appetite of his bloody heart, as plainly
appears in the French army which Guido Bishop of Altisiodorum conducted to
Viterbium: Vrbanus Quartus sent his army against Manfred King of Sicile, to
subdue unto him Sicilia, and to root out the offspring of Frederick, which he
deadly hated; and when this enterprise succeeded not to his hearts contentment,
Clemens his successor stirred up this Charles Duke of Angeow, who usurped the
kingdom of Sicile, destroyed the posterity of Frederick, and at the Popes
desire undertook this voyage to Asia, whereof we have last spoken.

The seventh voyage of this age, was undertaken by the Emperor Rodolph, The 7.
army.
who according to his promise made to Pope Gregory the tenth, was willing to
raise an army and succor the Christians in Asia, but he was so impeded by the
wars he had with the King of Bohemia, that he could not in his own person
go to Syria, but he sent Henry Prince of Mechelburg with a strong army to
supply his place, who coming to Ptolemais wasted and burnt with fire the
region round about Damascus. The Barbarians durst not encounter with him in
open battle, but circumvened him, and upon a time as he was leading away a
great prey, they lying in wait for him, arose and brought him to the Souldan:
where he was detained in captivity 26. years. After this the Christians in
Asia were brought to utter wrack, The Christians utterly destroyed in Asia.
for the Saracens invaded Antiochia and took it, and destroyed the Christians
there. Afterward under the conduct of Aphir their Souldan, they besieged
Tripolis and took it, and razed it to the ground. Also Tyrus was rendered upon
condition that the Christians there should safely depart with so much of their
substance as they could transport with ships, or draw with beasts. And
finally, all the towns and holds which the Christians had in Syria, were taken
by the Saracens, only Ptolemais excepted, which afterward was taken by Araphus
the Souldan, the Christians therein being put to the sword, and the city it
self utterly razed to the ground, in such sort that there was not so much as a
monument of it left undestroyed.

Now when all was lost, Note.
the Christians obtained some new and fresh comfort by the conversion of
Cassanus Prince of the Tartarians, to the Christian religion, who expelled the
Saracens out of Syria, and repaired the temple and town of Jerusalem, and
restored it to the Christians, and set at liberty Henry Prince of Mechelburg,
who had been detained captive a long time. Also he took the town of Damascus,
and appointed Capcacus to be Governor there, like as Molais was left to defend
Jerusalem. But after the return of Cassanus to his own country, Capcacus
revolted to the Souldan of Egypt, and Molais finding himself alone, unable to
resist the force of the Saracens, departed to Mesopotamia. So did the Saracens
easily recover again Jerusalem.

Here also is to be marked, that the Popes of Rome who were too prodigal of
Christian men's blood, continually instigating them to lead arms to Asia, for
the recovery of the Holy Land, yet did they esteem so much of their own
glory, that they preferred it to the Holy Land and the lives o^ all the
Christians that were in Asia, as evidently appears in the doings of
Bonifacius the 8. who had the fairest occasion offered to him of all others, of
recovering the Holy Land. For Cassanus Prince of the Tartarians had conquered
Syria from the Saracens, and left Governors in it, with express commandment
that they should bind up a covenant of friendship with the Princes of the
West, and get support from them for the keeping of Syria, in the Christians
possession. But the Bishop of Rome puffed up with pride, was so busy to tread
under his feet the King of France that he neglected this ocasion, the like
whereof was never offered in any time following. And this negligent dealing was
the cause why Capcacus made defection to the Souldan of Egypt.

CENTVRIE XIV.
Albertus the first.
AFter the slaughter of Adulph, Albert the first, Duke of Austria was made
Emperor, and reigned ten years: and in the end was killed by his Brothers
son. In his days sprang up Otthoman the first King of the Turks, The death
of Albert. Otthoman first King of the Turks.
who being a conragious warrior, by spoils and robberies enriched himself,
and subdued a great part of Bythinia, and of the country lying about Pontus
Euxinus, and took upon him the name of a King, to be called the King of the
Turks.

Henricus the seventh.
NExt to Albert, reigned Henry the 7. A Prince, wise, just, honest, and
beloved of all men, neither puffed up with pride in his prosperity, neither
dejected in mind for any kind of adversity. After he had pacified the country
of Germany, he took his journey toward Italy, to reform the abuses there,
but was hastily cut off by the wicked malice of the Florentines, as is
supposed, for they hired a certain Monk to poison the Emperor, which thing
he performed, and mixed poison with the bread of the Eucharist, Henry the 7.
poisoned by a Monk.
wherewith the noble Emperor was impoysoned in the Castle of Bonconvent,
after he had reigned four years and eight months.

Ludovicus the fifth.
Lewis the fifth was chosen Emperor after the death of Henry the 7. and reigned
32. years. He was Duke of Bavaria, against whom others had elected Fredericus
Pulcher, Duke of Austria to be Emperor, which was the ground of cruel wars
betwixt the two new chosen Emperors, War betwixt Lewis and Fredericus
Pulcher about the Empire.
but Frederick was vanquished in battle, and taken prisoner himself. During
the time of these wars, the burgesses of Vren, Switz, and Sylvania, or
Vnderwalden, assisted Lewis of Bavaria, and would not acknowledge the Emperor
Frederick Duke of Austria, for which cause they were continually vexed by him,
so that at last they assembled themselves in the town of Urania, and there
entered into a mutual league of perpetual society amongst themselves. To whom
afterward were joined Lucernates, A league made amongst the Cantons of Helvetia.
then Tugani, then the Tigurines, then the Bernates. The last almost of all
were the Basilians, after whom followed other seven pages, who now by a
general name are called the Switzers, or the Cantons, or Pages of Helvetia.

The Emperor Lewis after he had subdued his competitor, fell into a greater
trouble, for he was excommunicate by Pope Clement the sixth, Lewis
excommunicated by the Pope and Charles the 4. chosen Emperor.
and the Princes Electors were commanded to choose another Emperor, which
commandment they also obeyed, and assembled themselves at a certain town of
the Diocie of Trevers, called Bens, and chose Charles the fourth, son to John
King of Bohemia.

Carolus the fourth.
CArolus the fourth was chosen Emperor, after that his predecessor Lewis was
excommunicated by the Pope, and reigned 32. years. Amurath King of the Turks
conquereth Thracia.
In his time Amurathes the King of the Turks, passed over Hellespontus, and
took the towns of Cestus and Callipolis, which was the first beginning of the
conquest of Thracia, and all other regions of Europe which are now subject to
the Turk. This Charles procured at the hands of the Princes Electors, that his
son Vinceslaus should be proclaimed King of the Romans in his own time.

Vinceslaus.
TO Charles the fourth succeeded his son Vinceslaus, and reigned two and
twenty years. A man very unlike his father, for he was sluggish and
careless, more inclined to riot, excessive drinking and voluptuous pleasures,
then to any princely virtue. In his time Baiazeth King of the Turks, The
Battle of Nicopolis betwixt the Christians and Turks.
fought a cruel battle against the Christians at Nicopolis, a town of
Thracia, at the side of Ister: and albeit many more of the Turks were slain
then of the Christians, yet at length the Turks prevailed against the
Christians, and put them to flight. This is that King of the Turks, who
afterward was overcome by Tamberlaine King of the Sythians, and being enclosed
in a cage of iron was carried about all Asia, Baiazethes overcome by Tamberlane
and carried about in a Cage Vinceslaus deprived of his Imperial dignity.
Emperors of the ^^ast.
as a mocking stock to men, and as a spectacle of the wrath of God against all
cruel Tyrants. The Emperor Vinceslaus for his beastlines was deprived of his
Imperial dignity by the Princes Electors, and Rupertus Duke of Bauaria chosen
to be Emperor in his steed.

In the East during the reign of those foresaid Emperors, ruled Andronicus
the son of Michael, Paleologus, and after him Michael, and after him
Andronicus the younger, after whom followed Ioannes, Catecunzenus, and Calo
Ioannes and his son Manuell^ these are all the things worthy of rememberance,
are left in writing.

CENTVRIE. XV.
Rupertus.
VInces^aus the Emperor for his Cowardice, and dishonest life, was deposed, and
Rupertus Duke of Bauaria was advanced to the Imperial authority by the
Electors of Germanic, and ruled (10.) years. This Emperor went unto Italy,
against Galiatius of Millan, but he prevailed nothing. In his time Mahomet,
the Turk when he had killed his brother, Mahomet after the death of Tamburlan
vexes the Christians and takes Hadrianopolis.
obtained alone the kingdom; who after the death of Tamburlan, the Tartarian,
recovering again his fathers dominion, vexed with extreme murder and
slaughter, the Bulgares and Vallaches, and took the city of Hadrianopolis,
which he made his Seat royal.

Sigismundus.
AFter Rupertus Sigismund son of Charles 4. and brother to Vinceslaus being
King of Bohemie and Hungary was ordained Emperor and reigned 27. years. He
was a prudent, witty, learned, and noble Prince, but in war and deeds of
arms unfortunate: for he was oftentimes overcome and chased of the Turks and
other enemies. By the procurement of this Emperor a great council was holden
at Constance, for the union of the Church which continued for the space of 4.
years. In this council John Husse was burned for preaching against the Bishop
of Rome. Also Hieronymus of Prague was condemned by the same council and
burned, The burning of John Husse the cause of a great tumult and sedition.
after whose burning in Bohemie, was great tumult, sedition, and civil war:
For the common people that favored John Husse, gathered together in great
number, and choosed a certain valiant man named Zisca to be their Captain, a
man very witty and expert in warfare, as may appear by this witty policy
which he used against his enemies. Upon a certain time, his enemies set upon
him in a rough place, where no battle could be fought but on foot only,
whereupon when his enemies were lighted from their horses, The polieie of Zisca
for the overthrow of his enemies.
Zisca commanded the women which customably followed the host, to cast their
kirchiefes upon the ground, wherein the horsemen being entangled by their
spurs were slain before they could unloose their feet. And forasmuch as he
had no walled nor fenced town to inhabit, he chosed out a certain place upon
the river of Lusinitius which was fenced by nature, about 8 miles from the
City of Ausca. This place he compassed with walls, and commanded every man to
build them houses where they had pitched their tents, and named this City,
Thabor; and the inhabitants his companions Thaborits, because their City was
built upon the top of a mountain. He fought against the Emp. Sigismund and
drove him out of Bohemia, and although the Emperor came back again to
Bohemia with a great army of Hungarians and Morauians, yet the second time
also he cowardly fled, and Zisca pursued after him a days journey, found
great and rich spoils, and took the town of Broda by force and set it on
fire. The provident care of Zisca in time of his blindness.
It is almost incredible that a man, being blind, as Zisca was in the time of
his hottest wars (for having but one eye he lost it at the siege of a
certain town) did so prouidently forecast all opportunities and advantages
against his enemies, as if he had seen.

It is reported that when he was lying sick and ready to die, Zisca at his
death appoints a drum to be made of his skin.
being demanded where he would have his body to be buried, he answered that
they should pull the skin from off his dead body, and that a Drum should be
made thereof, which they should use in the battle, affirming that as soon as
their enemies heard the sound of that Drum they would not abide but take
their flight. After the death of Zisca the Emperor Sigismund assembled the
Nobles of Germany at Norinberge, and levied a great army to enter into
Boheme, and pursue the Hussites or Thaborites of new again: Also Pope Martin
sent Julian his Cardinal of S. Angelie into Germany to that same effect, that
is to say, to make war against the Bohemians.

The Emperor warreth upon the Hussits with bad success.
But the Emperor had no better success in this enterprise, then he had in the
former, for all his army was stricken with a sudden fear, before any of his
adversaries were come in sight, and fled most shamfully to the great
encouragement and inritching of their adversaries. The Cardinal Julian
himself being present and marueling at the sudden fear, went about the
Captains, persuading them to put on armor, to order their battles, and
courageously to abide their enemies. But this exhortation was all in vain, for
fear had put away all boldness, and every man did run headlong away. The
Cardinal also, although it were against his will, was forced to do the like,
after this, the Cardinal addressed himself to the council of Basile wherein
he was appointed to be president in name and behalf of the Bishop of Rome. But
of this hereafter.

Albertus.
NExt to Sigismund, Albert Duke of Austria his son in law, was chosen to be
Emperor, and governed eight years: for his liberality, justice and manhood
in wars, greatly renowned. He subdued the Bohems, Amurathes subdueth Scopia and
Newmount in Seruia, as also Thessalonica and Croia.
and brought in subjection the people of Morauia. In his time Amurathes
Emperor of the Turks invaded the king of Seruia, from whom after long siege
he wanne Scopia, and Newmount, and he took in battle his two sons whom he
berest of their sight, but after he took their sister in marriage and restored
Newmont. He took also the famous town of Grecia called Thessalonica, being
then under league and protection of the Venetians, and the town of Croia in
Epirus, but God raised up Ioannes Huniades a valiant man in Wallachia, Ioannes
Huniades an enemy to the Turks.
who being aided with the power of Vladislaus the king of Polonia did infringe
the puyssance of the Turk, and recovered again to the Christians the greatest
part of Seruia, and Bulgaria, so, that the Turks was compelled to desire truce
for ten years. But after the truce was concluded on both parts, and with
solemn oath also confirmed, A truce concluded betwixt the Christians and
Turks for 10 years, by means of the Pope broken to the overthrow of the
Christians.
and Amarathes was returned back again to Asia, Pope Eugenius the 4. sent
Iulianus Caesarianus, to the foresaid king with full dispensation to break his
oath and league with the Turk, whereby it came to pass that the young king
enticed by the wicked instigations of Eugenius set forward his army against
the Turk until he came to Varna a town of Bulgaria, where he was discomfited
and slain by Amurathes to the great hurt, and greater shame of Christian
people, whom the Infidels might justly accuse of perjury, and breaking of
Covenants, sealed by the name of Christ whom they profess to be their Savior.
This battle at Varna fell out in the reign of Frederick, The battle at
Varna.
of whom we are to speak in the next place.

Frederick 3.
AFter Albert Frederick the 3. Duke of Austria was chosen to be Emperor and
reigned 53. years, in whose days much war and dissension reigned almost
through all Christian Realms, Note.
whereby it had been easy for the Turk to have ouerrunne them all, if the
merciful providence of God had not kept Amurathes occupied at this time. To
this Frederick came Elizabeth the spouse of Albert sometime Emperor with
Ladislaus her son, by whom he was nourished and entertained a certain space,
till at length after the death of Vladislaus aforesaid king of Hungary (who
was slain by the Turks, in the battle of Varna) the men of Austria rising up
in armor required the Emp. to give them their young King, The kingdoms of
Ladislaus committed to three governors.
who being restored into their hands, and being yet under age, committed his
three Kingdoms to three governors, whereof John Huniades the worthy Captain
above mentioned had the ruling of Hungary.

George Pogicbzachius had Bohemia, and Vlricus the Earl of Cilicia had
Austria. Vlricus seeks the destruction of Huniades
But Vlricke had the chief custody of the young King, and was a great enemy
to Huniades by many secret means seeking his destruction. But Huniades being
courageous, and wise, and circumspect, easily disappointed all his fetches.

After the death of this worthy governor his two sons Ladislaus and Mathias
governed Hungary, and in their time Ladislaus King of Bohemia, Hungary, and
Austria came into Alba a town of Hungary, accompanied with Vlricus Earl of
Cilicia, and governor of Austria under the young king. Ladislaus most gladly
received the king, but debarred from entering into the City 4000. armed
soldiers, of the number of them that accompanied the king. Vlricus the Earl
grudging at this and sitting in Council required Ladislaus to appear before
him and accused him of treason, for shutting the gates upon the kings
soldiers, and not content with this, he took his sword from his Page and let
a stroke flee at his head. But the Hungarians hearing the noise in the
Council brake in upon them and there incontinent killed Vlrick the Earl,
Vlricus sl^ine by the Hungarians.
wounding him and cutting him in pieces. The king hearing thereof, although he
was not a little discontented thereat in his mind, yet seeing there was none
other remedy he dissembled his grief for a time. The king of Hungaria
causes the one son of Huniades to be beheaded, the other imprisoned.
But afterward in his Progress when he came to Buda accompanied with the two
sons of Huniades, he caused them both to be taken and cast into prison, and
Ladislaus forthwith was beheaded. Mathias was carried Captive to Austria, to
suffer the like punishment, if the Lord had not prevented Ladislaus, the king
by sudde^ death, The death of the king of Hungaria.
who departed this life about the very time appointed for the celebration of
his marriage in Prague with Magdalen daughter to the King of France.

Thus the young king who hated the race of Huniades, and more hated the light
of the Gospel that shined in Bohemia, and was of purpose (as is supposed) at
his marriage to root out the sect of the Hussits (as he called it) was
timously in the mercy of God cut off himself to the great benefit of the true
Church of God.

In this Emperors time suite was made by the Germans to the Emperor that he
would provide remedy against the actions of the insatiat Popes, The Germans
make petition to the Empe. to be freed of the Popes burdens, but in vain.
and that he would not suffer his subjects in Germany to be exhausted, and
empourished by them. The Emperor being moved and overcome by their persuasion,
promised that he would provide no less for them, then the king of France had
done for the Frenchmen. But the subtle persuasions of Aeneas Syluius did so
bewitch the Emperor that he contemning the equal just and necessary requests
of his subjects, chosed the said Aeneas to be his Ambassador to Calixtus newly
chosen Pope, to swear unto him in his name, and to promise the absolut
obedience of all Germany. Thus the Germans were derided and frustrate by
Frederick, and the Emperor on the other part fearing least the Germans after
his death should transport the Empire to another family caused his son
Maximilian 7. years before his death to be chosen and also crowned king of
Romans, and did associate him to the ministration of the Empire. In this
Emperors time likewise flourished a valiant man son of John Castriotus
Prince of Epirus, The valor of George Castrio^ named by the Turks Scanderbege.
and Albania, called George who was given in hostage to the Turk, with other
two brethren. But this George excelling all the rest of his equals, in
strength of body, vigor of mind, and actiuitie in warfare, was named by the
Turks Scanderbeius, which sounds as much as Alexander Magnus. He overcomes
Caramanus of Cilicia.
He was sent out by the Turks to fight against Caramannus of Cilicia the
Turks enemy, in which expedition he behaved himself so manfully, that he
wanne great renown with the Turk, insomuch that he trusting to the Turks
favor, Asks of Amurathes his fathers dominion of Epirus.
when he heard of the death of his father, durst ask of the Turk the grant
of his fathers dominion to be given unto him. The which request although
Amurathes did not deny unto him, yet notwithstanding he perceiving that the
matter was dallied out with fair words, Is put off with fair words, flies
from the Turk: recouereth Croia and the other Cities of Epirus, and
maintains war against the Turks.
by subtle means and policy slipped out of the Turks Court, and came to Epirus
his own inheritance, where first by counterfeite letters he recovered Croia.
The other cities of their own voluntary mind yielded to him, and he so
manfully behaved himself, that against all the force both of Amurathes and
Mahomet he maintained his own, repulsed their violence, and put to flight
their armies many years together.

Mahomet the second takes the Isle of Euboia, destroys the town of Calcis,
razeth Athens, besieges, takes, and sacketh Constantinople.
In this Emperors time Mahomet the second took the Isle of Euboia, and
destroyed the town of Calcis, afterward he commanded the City of Athens to
be razed and utterly subverted, and from thence returning his army to Thracia,
with a mighty multitude compassed the town of Constantinople both by sea and
land in the year of our Lord. 1453. and in the 54. day of the said siege, it
was taken and sacked, and the Emperor Constantinus slain: such terrible
cruelty did they use as the like is not often read of in any history. There
was no corners in Constantinople which was not defiled with floodes of
Christian blood, His cruelty against the Christians of Constantinople.
so that in this one town are reckoned to the number of forty thousand
persons that were slain, amongst whose dead bodies, the body of Constantine
the Emperor was found, whose head being brought to Mahomet, he commanded it
to be carried upon a spear through the whole City, for a public spectacle
and derision to all the Turkish army. He causes the Crucifixe to be carried
about in derision.
Also he took the Image of the Crucifixe, being there in the high Temple of
Sophia and (writing this superscription upon the head of it, Hic est
Christianorum Deus, this is the God of the Christians) caused it to be carried
through all his army, and made every man to spit at it most contumeliously.
Thus was the noble city of Constantinople sacked 1139. years after it was
first built by Constantine the great, Constantinople made the seat royal of
the Turkish Emperor.
and now is made the Imperial seat of the Turkish dominion. Notwithstanding
the proud heart of Mahomet which was so highly lift up by the conquest of
Constantinople, was by the providence of God somewhat abated soon after. For
at the siege of Belgradum in Hungary, in the year 1436. he was so manfully
resisted by that worthy Governor Johannes Huniades, that he was compelled
after the loss of a great part of his army, Mahomet is forced by John Huniades
to raise his siege of Belgrade.
to the number of 40000. soldiers, his own person also being sore wounded, to
raise his siege, and for fear and shame ready to kill himself.

In the East after Emanuel reigned Johannes his son, who was present at the
Council of Florence, Emperors of the East.
with Eugenius 4. Pope of Rome, but lived not long after his returning. And
after his death, because he had no children, his brother Constantine
succeeded, in whose time the town of Constantinople was pitifully destroyed,
and the Emperor himself slain, as has been declared. And here is the end
of the Empire of Christians in the East.

CENTVRIE XVI.
Maximilianus.
IN the year of our Lord 1486. Fredericus waxing aged, and partly also
mistrusting the hearts of the Germans, did in his lifetime associate his
son Maximilian to be joined Emperor with him, with whom he reigned for the
space of 7. years till the death of Frederick his father, after whose
departure he reigned 25. years. This Maximilian as he was a valiant Emperor,
prudent and singularly learned, so was his reign entangled in many unquiet and
difficult wars. First in the lower Countries of Flanders and Brabant, where
he was taken captive, Maximilian taken prisoner, and relieved by his father.
but worthily again relieved by his father. He had to wife Mary the only
daughter to the Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had two children, Philip the
father of Charles the fifth, and Margaret. this Mary by a fall from her horse,
fell into an ague and died. So happy was the education of the Emperor in good
letters, so expert he was in tongues and sciences,, but especially such was
his dexterity and promptness in the Latin tongue, He writes an history in
Latin of his own acts and feats of war.
that he imitating the example of Julius Caesar, did write and comprehend in
Latin History his own acts and feats of war done by him.

In this Emperors time Baiazeth the second Emperor of Turks, after long
siege took a strong town of Peleponesus called Methon, Baiazeth the 2.
subdueth Modon, and kills the Noblemen found there.
or Modon, being under the dominion of the Venetians, and caused all the
Noblemen of the Venetians and Grecians that were found in the town, to be
brought into his own presence, and there most cruelly to be slain.

Carolus quintus.
AFter Maximilian, Charles King of Spain, Duke of Austria and Burgundy, and
nephew to Maximilian, was chosen Emperor, and reigned 37. years. He was a
Prince of singular wisdom, expert in war, slow to wrath, and if it had
pleased the Lord to have illuminated his heart with that true light that begun
to shine in his time, he might have been reckoned amongst the most renowned
Emperors. His inclination to wisdom may appear by these witty sentences
uttered by him. Sentenc^s v^tered by Carolus quintus.
Like as Saturn which is counted the most supreme planet, has the slowest
course of all the rest, even so they that are in supreme authority, ought to
do all things with greatest deliberation and advisement. And like as the Sun
sends out his beams in like brightness both upon poor and rich, so ought
supreme Magistrates minister justice without partiality, both to poor and
rich. And like as the eclipse of the Sun is a foretoken of great commotions,
so likewise the errors and oversights of Princes bring with them great
perturbations to countries. He was entangled with great and dangerous wars
all the time of his government, either against foreign Princes, or some of the
Empire. In his wars against the King of France, he had better success then
he could have looked for, for as much as the town of Millaine being already
taken by the King of France, and the town of Pavie in Italy likewise besieged,
yet the Emperors army shortly after encountered with the Frenchmen, and both
vanquished them, He subdueth the Frenchmen and takes their King prisoner.
and also took the King himself prisoner, and from thence conveyed him away
to Spain, where through care and grief he fell into sickness, but when he
was comforted by the Emperor, and put in some hope of agreement, he began to
take heart unto him and recovered: and in the end a peace was agreed upon at
Madruce in Spain, and the King was set at liberty, leaving for pledges his two
eldest sons. But shortly after he revoked his oath, being absolved by the
Bishop of Rome, and said he was forced to swear or else he should never have
been delivered. The Emperor after the delivery of the King of France, gave to
Charles Duke of Burbon the Duchy of Millaine, on condition to pay 4000.
ducats, and find a number of soldiers yearly. This Charles Duke of Burbon
passing through Italy to Naples afterward, Rome sacked by the soldiers of
Charles D. of Burbon: and the Pope and his Cardinals besieged
in the Emperors quarrel besieged Rome, and in the assault was slain, but
his soldiers took the city, spoiled it, and besieged the Bishop Clement with
his Cardinals, in the Mount Adrian, from whence he could not be dismissed by
any means, until he agreed with the soldiers. Notwithstanding this, the
Emperor Charles being then in Spain, and staying the thunderbolt of
Excommunication (which the soldiers nothing regarded) did excuse himself by
letters, that he knew not of that his men had done, and therefore willed the
Bishop to be set at liberty.

The beginning of reformation of religion in Germany by Martin Luther.
In this Emperors days begun reformation of religion in Germany, by means of
the disputations, writings, and doctrine of Martin Luther, whom the Emperor
labored by all means to suppress. First, by gathering a convention of the
estates of Germany, in the town of Worms. Which convention was kept in the
year of our Lord 1521. and Martin Luther being cited by an Herald of arms to
appear before the said Council, with a letter of safe conduct by the Emperor
and Princes, appeared: and although many persuaded him not to adventure
himself to such a present danger, He appears at the conventio^ of Worms.
yet Luther answered that he was resolved, and certainly determined to enter
Worms, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, although he knew that there were
so many devils to resist him, as there were tyles to cover the houses in
Worms: thus being presented before all the Estates of the Empire, Questions
propounded by Eccius.
John Eccius (who then was the Bishop of Triers general official) at the
Emperors command demanded of Martin two questions. First, whether he
confessed those books which were given out under his name to be his or no,
showing herewith an heap of Luthers books written in the Latin and Dutch
tongues. Secondly, whether he would revoke and recant them, or stand to all
that he had written. Answered by Luther.
To the first point he answered affirmatively, that he would acknowledge his
own books. As touching the second, whether he would recant any thing
contained in his books or no, he craved time to premeditate what he should
speak in that matter: which was the more easily granted, because they were in
some hope that Luther would recant some of his writings, but it fell out far
otherwise then they looked for. For at the time of his next appearance he
divided his books into three sorts, Luther urged to recant some things which
he had written, refuses.
some of them opened the grounds of Christian religion simply, which his very
enemies had counted inculpable, and therefore he would not condemn them
himself. Another sort contained invectiues against the Papacy, and others of
that retinue which had with their pestiferous doctrine and pernicious examples,
corrupted the whole estate of Christianity, which books if he should revoke,
he should add more force to their tyranny, and his retraction should be a
cloak and shadow to all their impiety and naughtiness. The third sort of his
books were written against certain particular persons, who with tooth and
nail labored to maintain the Roman tyranny, and to deface his doctrine, and
these likewise he could not recall, left by his recantation it should come to
pasle, that tyranny and impiety supported by his means should rage more
violently against the people, then ever it did before. When no recantation
could be obtained, nor yet submission of his writings to the judgment of the
Emperor, and his Estates: Martin Luther departed from Worms, being dismissed
according to his promise of his safe conduct, and returned to his own country.

Soon after this, The Emperors decre^ against Luther.
the Emperor Charles to purchase favor with the Pope (because he was not yet
confirmed in his Empire) provideth and directs out a solemn writ of outlawry
against Luther and all them that take his part, commanding the said Luther,
wherever he might be gotten, to be apprehended and his books burned.

After this another convention of the Estates of Germany was gathered at
Norinberg for the suppressing of Martin Luther, to which Council Pope Adrian
the sixth, sent his Ambassador Cheregatus, to desire that the sentence of the
Apostolic Sea, and the Emperors edict against Martin Luther should be put in
execution. The proceedings of the convention of Norinberg against Luther.
The Princes of Germany on the other part, declared great urgent causes
wherefore they were compelled to forbear the execution of those decrees for a
time, and namely for this, that the greatest part of Germany have always had
this persuasion, that great inconvenience has come to this Nation by the Court
of Rome: and now if they should proceed with rigor in executing the Popes
sentence, and the Emperors edict, the people would suspect in their minds,
this to be done for supporting and confirming the former abuses, whereupon
great wars and tumults (no doubt) would ensue. For the avoiding whereof, they
thought to use more gentle remedies serving better for the time. Also seeing
the Pope by his foresaid Ambassador desired to be informed what way were best
to take, in resisting those errors of the Lutherans: The Estates answered,
that if the Popes holiness with consent of the Emperors Majesty, should
gather a free Christian Council in some convenient place of Germany, The
Princes of Germanies judgment concerning the suppression of Luthers attempts.
and that with such speed as conveniently might be, it were in their judgment
the readiest way to suppress the attempts of Luther: and in the mean time
until the Council might be set, they had provided ways to stay the tumults
of the German people.

1. First, by dealing with the Noble Prince Frederick Duke of Saxony, that
Luther nor his followers shall not write, set forth, or print any thing during
the said space.

2. Item, that the Princes shall labor so with the Preachers of Germany, that
they shall not in their Sermons teach or blow into the peoples ears such
matters, whereby the multitude may be moved to rebellion or uproar, or be
induced unto error, and that they shall preach or teach nothing but the true,
pure, sincere, and holy Gospel, and approoved Scripture, according to the
exposition approoved and received of Christ's Church.

3. And finally, as concerning Priests that contract Matrimony, and religious
men leaving their Cloisters, for as much as in the civil law there is no
penalty for them ordained, they shall be referred to the Canonical
constitutions, to be punished thereafter accordingly: that is by loss of their
benefices and privileges, or other condign censures.

Amongst others things done at this assembly of Norinberg, An 100. grievances
collected by the Germans, and exhibited to the Bishop of Rome.
certain grievances were collected to the number of an hundredth, and exhibited
to the Bishop of Rome, wherewith the country of Germany was grieved, as
namely, that many things were prohibited by men's Constitutions, which are not
prohibited by any Commandment of God, and many things were exacted which are
not commanded by any precept of God.

Item, that the Popes indulgences and pardons be most importable, persuading
simple people of a remission of sins, a poena and culpa, and that not in this
life only, but after this life: through the hope and occasion whereof, true
piety is almost extinct in all Germany, whilst every evil disposed person
promises to himself for a little money license and impunity to do what him
lists, whereupon follows fornication, incest, adultery, perjury, homicide,
robbing and spoiling, rapine, usury, with a whole flood of mischiefs.

Item, that whosoever has received Ecclesiastical orders, does contend to be
free from all punishment of the secular Magistrate, how great soever his
offense be which he commits.

Also, that in many places the Bishops and their Officialls do not only
suffer Priests to have concubines, so that they pay certain sums of money,
but also compel continent and chaste Priests to pay tribute for concubines,
which being paid, it shall be lawful for them either to live chaste or
otherwise, as it shall please them.

These with many mo, to the number of an 100. the secular States of Germany
delivered to the Popes Legate, desiring him to present them to Pope Adrian. But
Pope Adrian died about the same time, and Pope Clemens the seventh succeeding
in his place, sent down his Legate Cardinal Campeius, unto the Council of
Germane Princes assembled again at Norinberg the next Convention, with letters
to Duke Frederick full of many fair petitions and sharp complaints. But as
touching the grievances above mentioned, no word at all was sent.

Thus was the Pope ever ready with all diligence to call upon Princes to
suppress Luther, Note.
and the liberty of the Gospel. But when any redress or reformation of the
Church was craved, hereto the Pope neither gave ear nor answer.

In these Councels of Norinberg it is to be noted, that the execution of the
sentence of Leo, and the Emperors edict made at Worms against Luther was
suspended for a time; and many other things that were desired by the Popes
Legate to be enacted in a full Council, and with consent of all the Empire,
yet could not be brought to pass, by reason that the minds of diverse were
gone from the Pope. For this cause Ferdinand the Emperors brother, with
Campeius and the Cardinal of Salisburg, A conventicle at Ratisbone, wherein
articles were ratified for suppressing of Luthers doctrine.
the two Dukes of Bavaria, the Bishops of Trent and Ratisbone, also the Legates
of the Bishops of Bamberg, Spires, Stransbrugh, Ausbrugh, Constance, Basile,
Frising, Passavie, and Brixine, assembled themselves together in a particular
Conventicle at Ratisbone, and there ratified all the articles which they had
hatched amongst themselves for suppressing of Luthers doctrine.

1. First, that the edict of the Emperor made at Worms should be observed in
all their precincts.

2. That the Gospel, and all other holy Scriptures shall be taught according
to the interpretation of the ancient forefathers.

3. That in the Sacraments of the Mass, and in all other things, no invocation
shall be, but all things shall stand as before time they did.

4. That all that approach to the Lords Supper without confession and
absolution, or do eat flesh on days forbidden, or which do run out of
their order, also Priests that be married shall be punished.

5. That no Book of Luther or Lutheran shall be Printed or sold.

6. That they of their jurisdiction, which study in the University of
Wirtenberge, shall every one repair home within three months after the
publishing hereof, or else turn to some other place free from the infection of
Luther, under pain of confiscating all their goods, and loosing their heritage.

7. That no Benefice or other office of teaching be given to any Student of
that University; with diverse other Articles contained at greater length in
the commentaries of John Slendan.

After this other two Conventions were kept at Spiers. Two conventions at
Spiers with a rehearsal of those things which were concluded.
In the first were exhibited to the Princes many bills of request, that Monks
and Friars might be no more in place of them that died, and that the
privileges of the Clergy might be taken away, as lets of civil
administration, that certain holy days might be abolished, that choice of
meats and ceremonies might be free. And finally, seeing there was no hope of a
general Council, that either the Emperor would appoint a Provincial
Council in Germany for matters of Religion, or else cause the decree of Worms
to cease. At this time the Bishops would not suffer any matter of Religion to
be handled, and therefore the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraue would have
departed. At last it was decreed, that either a general or provincial
council should be had within the space of a year, and in the mean time the
decree of Wormace Council to cease. In the next Council kept at Spire, where
Ferdinand Ambassador in the Emperors name was present, certain Cities were
greatly blamed for altering Religion, contrary to the Emperors commandment;
and the Ambassador for the City of Argentine was not suffered to sit in the
Council, because that City had disanulled the Mass. Shortly after by the
assent of a few Princes, these points were decreed.

That such Cities as had altered Religion should make no further change.

That other places should obey the decree of Worms until a general Council.

That it should be lawful to all men who would use the mass, even in those
Cities where it was abolished.

That the Anabaptists should be punished by death. That the doctrine of the
Lords supper should not be received.

That the Ministers should teach according to the interpretation of the Church.

That the Princes and Cities should not receive foreiners coming for Religion
into their dominions, if any man did otherwise, he should be proscript.

The Duke of Saxony, George Prince of Brandenburgh, Erneste and Francisse,
Princes of Luneburg, and the Landgraue of Hesse, and a Prince called Anhaldius,
withstood this decree, and answered to every point thereof, saying that the
consent of a few could not undo that decree which before was made at Spire by
the whole Empire, A protestation against the decrees of the a conventions of
Spire.
and therefore that they all made protestation, that they would not acknowledge
it. And of this protestation were those Princes, and all that allied with them
called Protestants, which name is now given to all them that in their doctrine
swerue from the Bishop of Rome. Whence the name Protestants was derived.


To the Princes aboue-named, these Cities following did agree, Argentine,
Norinberg, Vlmes, Constance, Ruteling, Winsemium, Mening, Lindan, Campodune,
Hailbrune, Isna, Wiseborough, Norling Sangall. All these Cities with the
Princes refused the act of Spire, and appealed to the Emperor, and to a
general or provincial Council. After the breaking up of this Council, the
Protestants send Ambassadors to the Emperor, to declare the causes of their
appellation from the Council of Spire. The Protestants Ambassadors roughly
en^reated by the Emperor.
The Emperor at this time was in Italy, and on his journey to Rome to be
crowned with the Imperial Diadem by Pope Clement the seventh; who having heard
the Ambassadors of the Protestants, entreated them roughly and sent them back
again with menacing words, threatening to punish with all rigor those that
would not be obedient to the Decree of the foresaid Convention of Spire.

This was the first ground that moved the Protestants in the conventio^ of
Smalcaldy, A league amongst the Protestants.
to bind up a covenant amongst themselves of mutual aid, if any of them were
pursued for Religions sake, as shall be declared afterward, God willing. In the
mean time, the City of Argentine entreated league with Tigure, Berne, and
Basil (who being not far distant might be more helpful each to other) that
if they were invaded for the quarrel of Religion, they should mutually assist
one another, wherewith the Council of the Empire were much grieved, and found
great fault with them. After the Emperors returning from Italy, where he was
crowned with the Imperial Diadem, and had sworn to be a defender of the Roman
Church, a solemn conuention of the Estates of the Empire was kept in the Town
of Angusta, or S. Ausbrugh, A convention at Ausbrugh.
to which were brought many learned divines. The Protestants brought with them
Philip Melanchton, Iustus Jonas, Georgius Spalatinus, Johannes Agricola,
Islebius, and diverse others. The Roman Church had for their part Cardinal
Campeius, the Popes Ambassador, Eccius, Johannes Faber Cochleus, and many
others. The Emperor commanded the Princes of the Protestants to come to Mass
with him, and to command their Preachers to silence, but they answered, they
would neither come to Mass, nor inioyne their Preachers to silence, before the
matter was concluded. Only the Duke of Saxony after deliberation with his
Divines, was content at the Emperors commandment (according to his duty) to
carry the Sword before him as he went to the Church. Then the Emperor under
great peril commanded both the parties to silence, and he by prerogative
appointed certain to Preach that should touch no Controversy.

The Protestants obtain their confession of faith to be openly read.
In this Convention the Protestants offered unto the Emperor a copy of the
Articles of their Faith, which with great difficulty they obtained to be
openly read before they delivered it into the Emperors hands. This Confession
commonly called Augustana Confessio, was exhibited to Eccius and Faber, Divines
on the contrary part, to be confuted, and the copy of this confutation was
also openly read. But when the Protestants desired that they might answer to
it, the Emperor would not grant it, saying, he would hear no more
disputation, but willed them to return to the Catholic Church.

Also the Citizens of Argentine, Constance, Mening, and Lindan (who differed
from the other Protestants in the opinion of the Sacrament) did in like manner
exhibit a confession of their Doctrine: a confutation of this Book also was
made by Eccius and Faber, with very bitter and sharp words; but the other
party could not have license to reply, nor any sight of the copy but as they
heard it read. After this, three were chosen on each side to debate matters of
Religion, where although Melanchton granted more then his ^ellowes would have
him, yet nothing was agreed, because that Eccius and his two Lawyers, who were
chosen for the Roman Church, stuck so fast by their Mass and Monastical
Vows, that in those things they would admit no reformation.

In the end the Emperor published a Decree, wherein he declared, that although
the confession of the Protestants was sufficiently confuted, yet he would give
them respite for a time, to return to the Church of Rome. In which time they
should keep peace, and alter nothing of Religion, and suffer all that would to
follow the Church of Rome. But the Princes and Protestant Cities answered, that
they could not keep that Decree with safe consciences. The Princes and
Protestant Cities refuse to obey the Emperors Decree concerning the retur^ing
to the Church of ^ome. Another Decree of the Emperor.
Thus was the Emperors interim refused, wherefore he set forth another Decree,
wherein he confirmed the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in all points, and
abrogated all manner of appellations made by the Protestants. It appointed also
an order how the Emperors Court, called the Chamber, should proceed in
judgment against the Protestants, and forbidded that any Prince of that sect
should bear any office in the Court, and all that were of the faith of the
Roman Church to be taken into the protection of the Emperor against their
own Princes. This act caused great fear, wherefore the Princes and
Ambassadors of the Protestants shortly after met again at Smalcal^ie, The
Princes and Ambassadors of the Protestants meet at Smalcaldie, and enter
league to aid one another.
and went through with the League which they had begun the year before, to
aid each other in the quarrel of Religion.

About this time the Emperor having sure information, that the Turk with
great preparation, was setting forward his army against Vienna in Austrich,
begun somewhat to relent of his rigor, and through the intercession of the
Bishop of Mentz, and the Palsgraue, Peace granted by the Emperor to the
Protestants.
granted peace to the Protestants, so that they should aid the Emperor
against the Turks, and on the other part the action of the Chambercourt should
cease in all suits of Religion against the Protestants. About the same time
that all this business was in Germany for the Doctrine of Martin Luther,
Vlricus Zuinglius Preached at Zurik against the corruptions of the Roman Church.
Vlricus Zuinglius Preached the Word at Zurik, detested the abuse of pardons,
and of other corruptions then reigning in the Church: but, see, great offense
begun to rise, and diverse stepped out on the contrary side to Preach and
inveigh against him. Upon this the Magistrates and Senate of Zurik, sent forth
their commandment to all Priests and Ministers within their Dominion, A
disputation at Zurike.
to repair to the City of Zurik against the 29. of January next ensuing;
there every one to speak freely, and to be heard quietly touching those
Controversies of Religion. This disputation was appointed in the year of our
Lord 1523. Zuinglius had contrived all his doctrine in a certain ord^^ of
places, to the number of 77. Articles, which he had published also abroad
before, to the end that they who were disposed might resort thither better
prepared for disputation. The Bishop of Constance sent thither Johannes Faber
Stapulensis his Vicegerent; who in stead of disputation, reasoned that this was
no convenient place for disputation, but rather the handling of Controversies
in Religion belonged to a general Council, which he said was already
appointed, and nigh at hand.

The decree of the Senate of Zurik concerning the abolishing of men's
traditions, and purely Preaching of the Gospel.
Whereupon the Senate of Zurik caused incontinent to be proclaimed through all
their Dominions and Territories, that the traditions of men should be displaced
and abandoned, and the Gospel of Christ purely taught out of the old and new
Testament.

When the Gospel begun thus to flourish in Zurik: the year next following,
Anno 1524. another assembly of the Helvetians was convented at Lucerna, where
Decrees were made on the contrary part; An assembly of the Helvetians at
Lucerna, contrary to that of Zurike.
that no man should deride the Mass; that no mention should be made of Luther,
or any new doctrine; that Pictures and Images of Saints in every place should
be kept inviolate: and finally, that all the laws and decrees set forth by the
Bishop of Constance should be observed.

After these things thus concluded at Lucerna, the Cantones of Helvetia
together direct their public Letter to the Tygurines, or men of Zurik,
complaining that they had received a new Doctrine, which would be the seed of
discord, whereas before time all things were in quiet. Whereunto the Tigurines
answered, that at the first this Doctrine seemed strange to themselves, but
after they understood it directed them only to Christ, as the pillar and only
rock of their salvation; they could no otherwise do but with ardent affection
receive so wholesome and joyful message. And like as faithful Christians in
former times after they had received the Gospel, did not by and by fall out in
debate with their neighbors: So l^kewise they trusted, God willing to keep
peace with all men. Nevertheless, the rest of the Cantons grew in hatred
against the men of Zurike, and for suppressing of the doctrine of Zuinglius,
appointed a disputation to be holden at Baden, A disputation at Baden.
which was kept in the month of June, Anno 1525. where were present amongst
other Divines, Johannes Faber, Eccius, and Murnerus. The Bishops also of
Lucerna, Basile, Curiak, and Lawsanna. The conclusions there propounded were
these.

1. That the true body and blood of Christ is in the Sacrament. 2. That the
Mass is a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. 3. That the blessed Virgin,
and other Saints are to be invocated as Mediators and Intercessors. 4. That
Images ought not to be abolished. 5. That there is a Purgatory.
Which Conclusions or assertions Eccius took upon him soundly to defend.
Against him reasoned Oecolampadius, Preacher at Basile, with other more.
Zuinglius at that time was not there present, but by writing confuted the
doctrine of Eccius, The causes of Zuinglius absence.
declaring withal the causes of his absence, which were for that he durst not
for fear of his life commit himself to the hands of Lucernates, Vrbani,
Suitij, Vnternaldi, and Tugiani his enemies, and that he refused not to
dispute, but only the place of disputation; excusing moreover, that he was not
permitted of the Senate to come. Nevertheless, if they would assign the place
of disputation, either at Zurik, Berna, or Sangallum, thither he would not
refuse to come. The conclusion of the disputation.
The conclusion of this disputation was this, that all should remain in that
Religion which hitherto they had kept, and should follow the authority of the
Council, neither should admit any other new Doctrine within their dominions.

In the year of our Lord 1527. the Senate and people of Berne (whose power
amongst all the Helvetians chiefly excelled) considering how neither they
could have the acts of the disputation of Baden committed unto them, A
disputation ordained to be holden at Berne.
and that the variance about Religion still more and more increased, assigned
another disputation within their own City, and sending forth writings
thereof, called unto the same all the Bishops bordering about them, as the
Bishops of Constance, Basile, Sedune, Lusanna, determining also the whole
disputation to be decided only by the authority of the old and new Testament.
To all that would come thither they granted safe conduct. And to the end men
might come thither better prepared before, they proposed in public writing
ten conclusions in the said disputation to be defended by their Ministers by
the Scriptures, Conclusions maintained by the Ministers of Berne.
which Ministers were Franciscus Colbus, and Bertholdus Hallerus. The Theames
or Conclusions were these.

1. That the true Church, whereof Christ is the head, rises out of Gods Word,
and persisteth in the same, and hears not the voice of any other. 2. That the
same Church makes no laws without Gods Word. 3. That traditions ordained in
the name of the Church do not bind, but so far forth as they be consonant
to Gods Word. 4. That Christ only has made satisfaction for the sins of the
world, and therefore if any man say, there is another way of salvation, or
mean to put away sin, he denies Christ. 5. That the body and blood of
Christ cannot be received really and corporally by the testimony of the
Scripture. 6. That the use of the Mass, wherein Christ is presented and
offered up to his heavenly Father for the quick and the dead, is against the
Scripture, and contumelious to the Sacrifice which Christ made for us. 7. That
Christ only is to be invocated as the Mediator and Advocate of Mankind to
God ^he Father. 8. That there is no place to be found ^y the holy Scripture,
wherein souls are purged after this life, and therefore all those prayers and
ceremonies, yearly dirges, and obiles, which are bestowed on the dead, also
Lamps, Tapers, and such other things profit nothing at all. 9. That to set up
any Picture or Image to be worshipped, is repugnant to the holy Scripture, and
therefore if any such be erected up in Churches to that intent, the same ought
to be taken down. 10. That Matrimony is prohibited to no estate or order of
men, but for eschewing of fornication, generally is permitted to all men by the
word of God. And forasmuch as all fornicators are excluded by the testimony of
Scripture from the communion of the Church; therefore this unchaste and filthy
single life of Priests, is most of all inconvenient for the order of
Priesthood.
At this disputation were present Oecolampadius, Bucerus, Capito, Blanreus,
with many other more, all which defended the affirmative of the conclusions
propounded. On the contrary part of the opponents, the chiefest Captain was
Conradus Trogedus, a Friar Augustine, who to prove his assertion, when he was
driven to shift out of the Scripture to seek help of other Doctors: and the
Moderators of the disputation would not permit the same (being contrary to the
order before appointed) he departed out of the place, and would dispute no
more. The disputation endured nineteen days, The conclusions aforesaid
allowed.
in the end whereof it was agreed, that the conclusions there disputed, were
consonant to the truth of Gods Word, and should be ratified not only in the
City of Berne, but also proclaimed by the Magistrates in sundry other
Cities near adjoining. Furthermore, that Masses, Altars, Images, in all
places should be abolished. The day and year when this reformation with them
began from Popery to true Christianity, they caused in a pillar to be
engraven in Golden letters, for a perpetual memory to all posterity to come.
This was Anno 1528. The rumor of this disputation and alteration of Berne was
noysed in other Cities and places abroad; and others were encouraged by this
occasion, to take the like order within their bounds, and namely the Towns of
Strousbrough, and Basile, and Geneua. All this time by the providence of God,
the Emperor and the King of France were together occupied in Wars and
strife, which happened very commodiously for the success of the Gospel: for
otherwise it is to be thought that the Helvetians and other Germans should not
have had that leisure and rest to reform Religion, and to link themselves in
league as they did: albeit, Ferdinandus the Emperors brother and Deputy in
Germany omitted no time nor diligence to do what he could in resisting the
proceedings of the Protestants: as appeared both by the decrees set forth at
Ratisbone and Speirs, as has been declared.

The rest of the Pages of the Helvetians which were of a contrary profession,
hearing of the end of this disputation at Berne (and namely because they had
not regarded their admonition, dissuading them to proceed in their intended
purpose of disputation and reformation of Religion) confederated themselves in
league with Ferdinandus, Ferdinand and five Pages of the Helvetians enter
league against the Bernates.
to suppress the Religion of Christ in Berne and Zurik. The names of which
Pages especially were five, to wit, Lucernates, Vrani, Suitenses, Vnternaldij,
and Tugiani, who for hatred and despite, hanged up the arms of the foresaid
Cities upon a Gallows; beside many other injuries and grieuances which they
wrought against them. For the which cause the said Cities of Berne and Zurik
raised their power, intending to set upon the foresaid Switzers, as upon their
capital enemies. But as they were in the field ready to encounter one Army
against the other, through the means of the City of Strousbrough and other
intercessours, they were parted for that time, and so returned.

The five Pages and the Bernates being twice ready to join battle, are
pa^ted, and the third time the Bernates vanquished.
After this, the old wound waxing raw again began to burst out, and the
Tigurines and Bernates by reason of certain new injuries, and contumelious
words spoken against them, began to stop the passages and straits, whereby no
corn not victual should be conveyed to the five Pages aforesaid. This second
debate also was composed by means of the King of France, and certain Towns
of Switzerland, as namely the Glareans, Friburgians, Soloturnians, and some
other labored to set them at agreement upon certain conditions, which not
being kept, and the five Pages not observing the covenant, the war brake up
of new again amongst them. And the Tigurines and Bernates begun again to
stop the passages, so that for lack of victual the five Pages were pinched
with penury. Who notwithstanding arming themselves secretly, set forward in
warre-like array toward the borders of Zurike, whereas then was lying a
Garrison of Zurike men, to the number of a thousand and above. Whereupon word
was sent incontinent to the City of Zurike for aid to their men. But their
enemies approached so fast, that they of Zurike could hardly come to rescue
them; fot when they were come to the top of the hill, whereby they must needs
pass, they did see their fellows at the foot of the hill in great distress.
Whereupon they encouraging themselves, made down the hill with more have then
order, striving who should go fastest, by reason whereof they were discomfited
and ouer-matched by their enemies. Amongst the number of them that were slain,
Zuinglius killed.
was also Vlricus Zuinglius the blessed servant of God, whose body after his
death they most vildly abused by cutting it in pieces, consuming it with fire,
and practicing against it, all despite that malice and hatred could devise. The
Bernates were willing to come and revenge their quarrel, but before they came,
their enemies set upon them the second time, and had the upper hand, yet would
they of Zurik nothing relent in Religion.

At the last through mediation, a Peace was concluded, and thus the matter
agreed, that the Tigurines, Bernates, and Basilians, should forsake the league
which they lately made with the City of Strousbrough, and the Landgraue.
Likewise, should the five Page men give over the league and composition made
with Ferdinan^us; The occasion of the alteration of religion in England about
Henry the eights marriage of his brother Arthurs wife.
and hereof Obligations were made and sealed for the greater surety and better
keeping of the promises.

In this Emperors time, amongst other places, great alteration of Religion
fell out in the Country of England upon this occasion. Henry the 7. King of
England, had two sons, Arthur and Henry; Prince Arthur his eldest son
married Katherine, daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, but he soon after his
marriage died without children. King Henry with advise of his Nobles to the end
her dowry might remain within the Realm, thought meet to espouse Lady
Katherine to Prince Henry, brother to King Arthur. This marriage seemed very
strange and hard for one brother to marry the wife of another; but yet by
dispensation of Pope Julian the second, this marriage, which neither sense of
nature would admit, nor Gods law suffer, was concluded, approved, and ratified,
and so continued as lawful without any scruple or doubt the space of twenty
years, till that a certain doubt began to be moved by the Spaniards
themselves of the Emperors Council. Anno 1523. At which time Charles the
Emperor being in England, promised to marry Lady Mary daughter to King Henry
the eight, King of England, with the which promise the Spanyardes were not well
contented; Obiecting, that the Lady Mary was begotten of the King of England
by his brothers wife. Whereupon, the Emperor forsaking the marriage, did
couple himself with Lady Isabell, daughter to King Emmanuel of Portugal,
which marriage was done in the year of our Lord 1526. The King upon this
occasion casting many things in his mind, began to consider the matter more
deeply, and finding that neither his conscience could be cleared in keeping his
brothers wife, nor yet the estate of the Realm firm by the succession of a
daughter begotten in such a marriage; he proposed the question to the chief
Universities of all Christendom, whose censures all agreed in one, that the
marriage was unlawful. Yet would not the King proceed to the divorcement
without the Popes consent. Who sent Campeius his Ambassador with concurrance
of the Cardinal of York to be judges in that cause. The Cardinal of York,
called Wolsey, at the first was verily bent to have the divorceme^t set
forward, but afterward finding that the Kings affection was bent toward Lady
Anne Bulloigne, to take her in marriage, he changed his purpose, and sent
advertisment to Pope Clement, that in case King Henry the eight were divorced
from Lady Katherine, then should another infected with Luthers doctrine
succeed in her place, to the great hurt of the Church of Rome. For this cause
the Pope calls back his Ambassador Campeius, before the Kings cause was
decided. Nevertheless, the King proceeded in his purpose, and was divorced
from Lady Katherine by means of Dr Cranmer. Hatred betwixt the Pope and King
Henry the 8.
This was the ground of that great hatred that fell out between the Pope and
King Henry; for on the one part, the Pope cursed King Henry, and the Realm of
England for the divorcement. The King on the other part abolished in his Realm
the Bishop of Romes unlawful tyranny, with commandment, that he should be
called no more Pope in his Country, but only Bishop of Rome, and that the King
should be taken and reputed as supreme head of the Church of England, and have
full authority to reform and redress errors, heresies, and abuses in the
same.

Now to return again to Germany. The Emperor was so busied with Wars all
this time, that he had no leisure to tarry in Germany, and although many
assemblies were gathered to suppress the doctrine of Luther, he was only
present at two, to wit, at the first kept at Worms, and the last kept at
Auspurg. For this cause it seemed good to the Emperor, to declare his brother
Ferdinand to be King of the Romans, and apparent successor to the Empire, to
the end he might with greater authority govern the affairs of the Empire in
his absence. He sent also letters to the Protestants, commanding them to
acknowledge him King. Wherefore the Ambassadors of the Protestant Cities being
gathered at Franckford, concluded with the Princes, that for their part they
would not for this resist the Emperor, and for denying a title and a name only
to his brother, to make him more eager against their Religion. But the Duke of
Saxony, and other Princes, not agreeing thereto, writ to the Emperor, that
because it was done against the manner and liberty of the Empire, Wars
betwixt Ferdinand and the Protestant Princes.
they could not allow it. This seems to be the first ground of the wars
that after followed. For Ferdinand King of the Romans expelled Vlrich of
Wirtenberge from his Lordship, and when no redress could be had at the
Emperors hands, the Landgraue of Hesse with his cousin Vlrich, gathered an
Army; at Lawferme by Wirtenberg overcame their enemies, and put them to
flight; recovered the towns of Asperge, Wrath, Tubinge, and Niphe, and took
prisoner Philip, Prince Palatine and chief Captain of Ferdinands army.

Shortly after, agreement was made on these conditions, that Vlrich should have
again his Lordship of Wirtenberg, Agreement made betwixt them.
but so that he should hold it by the benefit of Ferdinand, and the house of
Austrich; that if issue male did sail in the house of Wirtenberge, that
Lordship should return to the heir of the Emperors house of Austrich: that
the Landgraue and Vlrich should come to Ferdinand, and submit themselves to
him. The Emperor foreseeing that this diversity of Religion that was in
Germany, would in the end burst forth into some bitter fruit, and great
inconvenience, advised with himself by what means reconciliation might be
made, and all controversy might cease: and in the end appointed a Council at
Worms, and communication of Religion, and for this cause sent Granuellanus
thither. But the matter was so long delayed by the fautors of the Sea of Rome,
until Letters came from the Emperor again to defer the whole matter to the
Council of Ratisbone. To which came all the Princes of the Empire, except the
Duke of Saxony, who came not himself, A Council held at Ratisbone about the
ending of controversies.
but sent thither a noble embassage, together with Melanchthon, and other
Preachers. Unto the same Council also came from the Pope Caspar Conterane, a
Cardinal. In this disputation, Frederick the Palsgraue, and Granuellane were
appointed moderators: Melanchthon, Bucer, and Pistorius, Disputers for the
Protestants. Pflugius, Eccius, and Gropper for the Papists. Unto these six was
offered a book containing the definition of most Articles in Controversy,
which they were willed to ouer-looke, and either to allow or disallow those
things that they could agree upon. This book was delivered again after a time
to the Emperor; in many points they could not agree, in some they did. The
Protestants delivered together with the book, their opinion concerning those
controversies, and their arguments to prove the same. The Emperor delivered
the same to the Princes to be examined: but they being most part Popish,
referred the whole matter to the Popes Ambassador, who exhorting the Bishops
to honesty of life, and suppressing of Luthers doctrine, thought good it
should be deferred to a general Council. This convention which began in
April Anno 1541. was dissolved in the end of Iulie; after that the Emperor
had decreed, that the communication begun, and whole controversy of Religion,
The conclusion of the Council.
should be deferred to a general or Provincial Council of Germany: That the
Protestants should teach no other points of Religion, then such as were agreed
upon: That Bishops should see amendment of life in their Diocese: That there
should be a Provincial Council within a year and an half, if they could not
obtain a general Council of the Pope: That the Churches of Monasteries
should not be pulled down, but reformed: that the Church-goods should not be
inverted: that the decree of Ausbrough, and all Proscriptions of the
Protestants should be suspended: all those conventions of estates,
disputations, promises of general or provincial Councels to be kept in
Germany, could not reconcile diverse Religions, but at length lurking hatred
behooved to break out into open hostility.

The first occasion whereof was offered by Henry, Wars betwixt Henry Prince
of Brunswick, and the Duke of Saxony in name of all the Protestants, wherein
Henry's dominions were subdued.
Prince of Brunswick, who by often invasion of Cities, confederated with the
Protestants in Germany, moved the Duke of Saxony and the Landgraue, to make
war against him in name and quarrel of all the Protestants, confederated by
the league of Smalcaldy. In this war they subdued all his dominions, and
compelled him with his eldest son Charles to fly for their safety into
Bavarie. Henry to recover his dominions again, first pursued the Protestants
in the Chamber-court of the Empire, but the Protestants appealed and refused
the judgment thereof.

Next he made his complaint to Ferdinand, the Emperors brother; and last went
into Italy to the Emperor, and there at Cremona grievously accused the
Protestants, to whom the Emperor sent an hard message, that if the Prince of
Brunswick were not restored, he would take such order, whereby he should be
restored whether they would or no. Notwithstanding all this, the Emperor at
his returning into Germany, after he had heard the declaration of the
Protestants against the Duke of Brunswick, albeit, the Emperor was loath to
give out any grievous sentence against him, yet at length he determined that
all the Dukes lands should remain as sequestered in his hands, until that
matter were ended.

A peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the King of France, wherein was
determined that both should join against the Protestants.
All this while the Emperor was busied in wars against the King of France;
^ut in the end a peace was concluded between them upon certain conditions.
Amongst others this was one, that they should both join in the restitution of
the Romish Religion. The effects of this unhappy agreement were soon felt,
both in France and Germany; for in France Minerius governor of Provance, by
the Kings commandment went with an Army against the Waldenses that dwelt in
Merindol, Cabreire, and certain other Towns of Provance. The poor men of
Merindol, fearing his coming, fled into the Woods and Mountains with their
wives and children; he in the mean time spoiled and burned the towns being
left void: The cruelty of Minerius.
and in Merindol finding but one young man, bound him to an Olive tree, and
shot him through with guns. At Cabreire the City was yielded unto him, upon
promise that they should sustain no harm, but he kept no promise, but showed
great cruelty, killing them every one: some in the Churches, some in other
places, and burned 40 women that were in a Barn full of straw. There were
slain, partly in that town, partly abroad, above 800. beside other places.
They which fled unto the mountains and woods, partly were famished, partly
otherwise slain, partly sent to the Gallows. 25 persons that fled into a cave
by the town of Mussie, were smoothered to death with smoke.

Certain of the Heluetians, sued unto the king of France to fa^our the
Waldenses, but no entreatie would serve: always this tyrane Minerius escaped
not the just judgment of God, The miserable death of Minerius.
for God striked him with a terrible disease, and he felt like unto a fire
burning him from the navell upward, and the lower parts were rotten and
consumed away with vermin, with an extreme stink, and profusion of blood in
place of his urine, and so with great torments he ended his wretched life.

In Germany like as it was harder to oppress so great a number as had
already embraced the Gospel, so likewise the Emperor was compelled to do
his turn by craft, rather then by force, for he sent letters to diverse cities
of the Protestants as to Argentine, The Emperor uses policy to subdue the
Protestants.
Noriberg, Ausbrough, Vlmes, indeuouring to persuade them, that he intended not
war against them, but against certain other traitors and rebels, against
whom he doubted not but they would assist him. In like manner also he writ to
the Prince of Wittenberg. Also when Palsgraue of Rhene writ to the Emperor to
know against whom he prepared his war, he received the same answer that before
was written to the cities with manifest signification that it was against
certain Princes of the Protestants, not so much for religion as for other
things: and finally the Heluetians who had received the Gospel, Tigure, Berne
and Basile were circumuented with the like policy: for the Emperor had
persuaded them that he would not meddle with religion: by this means he had
not only diverse places quiet, but also used the help of many Princes and
cities which favored the religion against the Duke of Saxony and Lantgraue of
Hesse. This war begun in the self same year wherein the Council of Trent was
gathered, to with. 1546. and the league between the Emp. and the Pope against
the Protestants was openly pronounced at Trident. The Pope also laid in the
Venetians hands for this war 200000. Crowns, and moreover for the space of
half a year did find 10000. Italian foot, and 500. light horsemen.

Thus was their great preparation and deep policy used to suppress two noble
Princes whom they knew to be chief defenders of the reformed religion.

The Emperor being at Ratisbone and looking for his companies of Italians and
Spaniards, The Emperor Proclaims the D. of Saxony and Lantgraue outlawes.
The causes alleged.
in the mean time by Proclamation proscribeth out-lawes, the Duke of Saxony
and the Lantgraue, alleging these causes. That they had made war against
certain Princes of the Empire. That they had spoiled them, and oppressed
certain Bishops. That they refused and subverted the judgment of the
chamber-court, and entered league against him, making no mention of religion.
Shortly after he sent a copy of this proscription unto Maurice and August
Princes of Saxony, and commanded them as being next of their kindred to enter
upon the goods and lands that appertained unto them, threatening grievous
punishments except they so did. The Protestants having a copy of the
proscription, The Protestants answer unto the proscription.
answered unto the same at large. And first whereas the Emperor pretended the
favor of religion and commonwealth, they declared by many arguments that it
was dissembled and false. And as touching the causes of their proscription
expressed they answered to every part, and cleared themselves protesting that
they did not make war upon the Emperor, but repel that injury which he
offered them.

The Bohemians and Maurice invade and subdue the D. of Saxons lands.
The Bohemians incited by their king Ferdinand first invaded the lands of the D.
of Saxony lying next unto them: Maurice Prince of Saxony sent advertisement
to the Duke, that seeing he was heir to the Dukedom he would take such
order, as his heritage should not come into other men's hands, and immediately by
the help of Ferdinands army subdued all the Dukes lands, except Viteberge,
Isimake, and Goth: and perceiving himself to be in hatred and displeasure with
many for so doing, Maurice excuses by Proclamation what he had done.
set forth a Proclamation to excuse himself, saying that he could not
lawfully resist the Emperor, seeing that he had assured him that he would
neither opresse religion, nor yet hurt the liberty of Germany.

The Duke of Saxony willing to recover again his own lands assaulted Lipsia,
The Duke of Saxony recouereth what he had lost.
and departing from thence, did not only recover all that he had lost in
Turinge and Misne but also wanne from Maurice all his cities except Lipsia and
Dresta. Maurice and August on the other part joining with the army of
Ferdinand, were all minded to join also with the Emperors army, and so with
all their forces to invade Saxony. The nobility in the Country thinking it
was dangerous to their liberty to bring so many Spaniarde and Italians into
their Country, sent word to Maurice and August that they would depart with
their bands of Italians and Spainiards, otherwise such order and remedy should
be found as the time and matter required. In this mean time many of the
Princes of the Protestants and towns (with whom the Emperor was displeased,
because of the aid they had sent to the Duke of Saxony and Lantgraue)
reconciled themselves to the Emperor and obtained their pardon after they had
paid great sums of money. Of this number was Palsgraue of the Rhene Elector,
and the Prince of Witemberg. Also earnest request was made to the Emp. for the
Lantgraues pardon by the Marquis of Bra^denburg. But the conditions were so
grievous, that the Lantgraue would rather venture the extremity, then submit
himself. The Emperor came forward to Misne by the river Albis, not far from
the Duke of Saxony Camp. Wherefore the Duke made speed to Witemberg and burnt
the bridge that the Emperor should have no ready passage to pursue him, but
the Emperor getting knowledge of a shallow ford in the river quickly followed
the Duke, and by the wood of Lothans ouertooke him, The Emperor discomfiteth
the D. of Saxony and takes him prisoner, and gives all his his lands to
Maurice.
and joining battle discomfited him and took him prisoner, and although the
Duke was condemned to die, yet by the entreatie of the Marquis of Brandenburg
his life was granted him with most grievous conditions, amongst which this was
one, that he should submit himself to the old religion, but he chosed rather
to die then so to do. Wherefore the Marquis of Brandenburg obtained also that
condition to be remitted: but al his lands and goods were given to Maurice,
except a pension of 50000. crowns which the same Maurice paid him yearly.
Immediately hereupon Witemberg yielded to the Emp. as also diverse other Princes
and Cities did the like. The Lantgraue was content to yield all that he had to
the Emp. pleasure so that he might not be kept prisoner, which condition the
Marquis of Brandenburg and Maurice the new Duke of Saxony, that had married
his daughter, undertook to obtain, and for the performance of the same bound
themselves to him in great bonds But when he came to the Emp. he was
commanded to remain as prisoner: The Lantgraue detained prisoner by the
Emperor.
then he began to complain grievously saying that the Emperor kept not
promise. And the next day the Marquis of Brandenburg and Maurice went to the
Emp. and entreated for the Lantgraue, but all would not serve: for the Emperor
answered that he brake no promise, although he kept him 14. years in prison.
For his meaning was only to pardon him perpetual emprisonment. This matter
afterward turned the Emp. to great trouble. In the mean time having the
principal chief Princes of the Protestants in Captivity, the Emp. thought
meet to gather a conuention of the estates at Ausbrough to finish that matter
which he had intended long before. A convention at Ausbrough.
All the Electors with other Princes were gathered together in great number,
but about the city and in diverse places of the country, near thereto was
companies of Spaniards and Italians, and other soldiers to the terror of them
that were present. The Principal matter purposed was concerning the Council
of Trident.

The Emperor required of the Princes, priuatlie of the Palsgraue and Maurice
Duke of Saxony, whether they would submit themselves to the Council of
Trident or no. At the first they refused it, but afterward fearing the Emp.
displeasure they were contented to permit the matter to his will. The free
cities also being demanded if they would add any thing to the answer of the
Princes, answered it was not their part so to do, and offered a writing to the
Emperor, on what condition they would admit the Council.

The Emperor as though they had fully consented sent to the Cardinal of
Trident and the Pope desiring that the Council which was removed from Trident
to Bononia, might be again revoked to Trident which was nearer to Germany,
upon hope that the Germans would come and submit themselves to the Council.
But forasmuch as the Pope and Bishops assembled at Bononie, would not return
back again to Trident, but upon such conditions as liked themselves best: the
Emperor protested by his Ambassadors that all such things that they should
decree there to be unlawful and of no force, and that he himself would
undertake the care of the commonwealth of Christendom which the Bishops
neglected. Thus the Emperor perceiving that there was no hope of a general
council in Germany consulted with the Princes about the agreement of
Religion, and appointed Julius Pflugins Bishop of Numburg, Michael Sidon and
John Islebie to draw out a book for reformation of Religion, The book called
Interim urged by the Emperor.
which they called Interim. This was the ground of a new trouble, for the
Emperor strictly commanded that the Princes would receive and admit the
manner of Religion set forth in the book called Interim. The Duke of Saxony
that was kept prisoner, being earnestly required to subscribe would not in any
wise, and for that cause after was used more strictly, insomuch that his
Preacher who was hitherto permitted, fled for fear of danger.

The Lantgraue hoping to obtain favor, and liberty received the Emperors
book, and submitted himself to it, but all would not help him. The Marquis
of Brandenburge not only received it himself, but also sent for Martin Bucer,
whom partly with entreatie, partly with thretnings he commanded to subscribe
the Emperors book, but he constantly refused, and with great danger of his
life returned to Argentine.

Wolfangus Musculus Preacher at Ausbrough perceiving the counsel of the town
not to stand constantly in defense of Religion, went to Berne in Switzerland.
Brentius was compelled to fly from Hala a town of Sueue and was received of
Vlrick Duke of Wirtemberg. Andreas Osiander, Erasmus Sarcerius, Erardus
Schueffins, and other Preachers of the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, fled because
they would not allow the Emperors book. Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius left
Germany and went to England, Ambrose Blaurer left the town of Constance.

Mauricius Duke of Saxony returning home from Ausbrough, Proclaimed the
Emperors decree concerning Religion. Upon that occasion the divines and
Preachers, of the universities of Lipsia and Witenberg, diverse times assembled
themselves, and at length concluded upon these things (that they called
indifferent) to receive them as the Emperor had prescribed. This thing was by
other Preachers in Germany sore impugned, saying that by the interpretation of
their indifferency they had opened a way to the whole doctrine, and
superstition of the Church of Rome taking those things for indifferent in which
was manifest error.

The foresaid book hated of all men, both Pope, Papists, and Protestants.
The tyranny of this book endured not long, for it was hated of all men, the
Pope himself added his corrections unto it: for albeit it established all the
grounds of the roman Religion, yet because it tolerated the marriage of Priests
and the use of the Sacrament under both kinds, and took not so sharp order
for restoring of the Church goods as he could have wished, for those causes
and others such like the Pope would not give his allowance to this book
without some corrections. This book also was impugned both by Protestants and
Papists. Of the Protestants Caspar Aquila a preacher in Turingia impugned it as
a book replenished with false doctrine, and on the other side Robertus
Abrincensis Episcopus impugned it for giving liberty to Priests to marry, and
permitting the people to have the Sacrament under both forms. While this great
stir and trouble was in Germany, in England by the authority of a
Parliament the use of the Mass was altogether forbidden, The Mass forbidden
in England.
and a book made of an uniform order of common prayers, and administration of
the Sacraments in the English tongue. Edmond Boner Bishop of London, Boner and
Gardener deprived of their Bishoprics.
and Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, for obstinate defending of the
Roman doctrine were deprived of their Bishoprics, and cast in prison, where
they continued all the time of king Edwards reign.

But to return again to the troubles of Germany, of all the Cities of the
Protestants, there was none that more constantly beared out the Emperors
indignation as the City of Magdeburg. War betwixt the town of Magdeburg and
Maurice Duke of Spain. Their agreement.
For neither would they acknowledge the council of Trident, neither yet the
Emperors book of Interim, but fortified their town against Maurice Duke of
Saxony, whom the Emperor made Captain in that war, until at last an
agreement was made upon easy conditions. When Maurice with his garrison
entered into their City, he grievously blamed their Preachers, that both in
their books and pictures they had done much to his reproach, but yet he
exhorted them to pray for the good success of the Emperor, and the general
council of Trident. To whom they answered that they could not pray any
otherwise for that Council that was assembled to oppress the truth, but that
God would soon disturb it, and break it up.

The end of the war against the City of Magdeburg was the beginning of great
war, War betwixt Maurice Duke of Saxony and the Emperor.
and dangerous trouble against the Emperor. For Maurice Duke of Saxony
perceiving the Emp. would not stand to his promise, consulteth with foreign
Princes how he might by force deliver his wifes father, the Lantgraue, and
when he found that all things were in readiness, he begun to muster his
soldiers, and shortly after set forth a Proclamation to the states of the
Empire, in the which first he lamenteth the discord of Religion, secondly he
rehearses grieuouslie the imprisonment of the Lantgraue his wifes father,
signifying that he was so kept against all truth and honor, to the report of
all Germany. Lastly he bewaileth the pitiful estate of all Germany, and
oppression of their liberty, protesting that the cause of this war was to
restore the old dignity and freedom.

Albert Marquis of Brandenburge, makes also his Proclamation, and after a long
rehearsal of the miseries of Germany, refers the cause of all to the
Churchmen, and therefore signifies this war to be chiefly against them.
William the Lantgraues son joined his power with Duke Maurice at Shuinforde.
The king of France also joined in this war and led an army unto Germany.
As they went forward, they caused the Cities to submit themselves, commanded
them to pay great sums of money, and displaced such as the Emperor had set
in authority, and restored their old Senators, willing them to use their
privileges, and liberties that the Emperor before had forbidden.

The report of this war and the good success of Maurice, namely after the
city of Ausbrough was by him taken, made the council of Trident to break up
and dissolve. The Emperor, on the other part set at liberty Frederick the
old Duke of Saxony, as it were to signify to Maurice that he should claim
again the Dukedom of Saxony, and Electorship that he enjoyed, and thereby to
put him in more fear. Albert Marquis of Brandenburge, in this war showed
great extremity to diverse cities, and noble personages, against the mind of
Maurice and the other confederates.

The King of France led forward his army to Strawsburge, and hearing that
communication of peace was betwixt Maurice and the Emperor, and that they were
in good hope to have their Princes delivered, he to gratify them was content
to return to France, but was much displeased that Duke Maurice would enter in
communication of peace without his knowledge. In the end agreement passed
between the Emperor and Duke Maurice upon these conditions. The conditions of
Maurice his agreement with the Emperor.
That the Lantgraue should be set at liberty. That their Religion should be
quiet, until a certain order were taken for the same in the next assembly of
of the Empire. That Maurice and the Princes confederats should suffer their
soldiers to serve king Ferdinand in Hungary. That the Protestants should be
admitted Judges in the Chamber-court, with diverse such other like conditions.

The end of this war was also the beginning of another cruel war betwixt
Duke Maurice and the Marquis of Brandenburg, War betwixt D. Maurice and the
Marquis of Brandenburg wherein the Marquis was overcome.
which fell out upon this occasion. The Marquis being reconciled to the
Emperor and in great favor with him, did many injuries in Germany, not only
to the Bishops (whom he ever deadly hated) but also to diverse Princes and
Cities, yea and that under the name of religion. Duke Maurice with certain
other went against him, and met at the river of Visurg, where Albert was
overcome. But Duke Maurice was so stricken with a gun, that he died within two
days after. The death of D. Maurice. Strange sights seen in Germany. Popery
embraced in England by means of Q. Mary.
Before this, in Germany were seen drops of blood upon the trees, and
certain other strange sights.

In England about this time, fell out a great alteration in religion, through
the death of King Edward, of whom the world was not worthy: Lady Mary his
sister succeeding to the kingdom. She joined her self in marriage with Philip
son to Charles the Emperor, and restored not only the Popes supremacy,
dissallowed by her father King Henry the eight: but also the mass, and all
superstitions of the Roman Church, abrogated in the days of King Edward her
brother. The Court of Parliament confess their error in forsaking it and are
absolved.
Also she caused the Realm of England in the high Court of Parliament, to
confess their defection from the Catholic Church, and to crave absolution,
having there in readiness Cardinal Poole, the Popes Ambassador to absolve
them.

What excessive cruelty was used in her time, Q. Mary's cruelty against
Protestants.
no tongue can express. The very name of Diocl^sian begun to be less
abhorred, when the name of Queen Mary came forth. Her cruelty beginning at
John Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, John Bradford, Laurence Saunders, Rowland
Tailor, John Rogers, Preachers: proceeded shortly after to Ferrar Bishop of
Saint David's, whose constant death amazed the people, and confirmed their
minds in the true doctrine that they had learned of him. This persecution
raged in all parts of the Land, but specially in Kent, Essex, and Norhfolke.
Some of those parts were chief maintainers of her authority, and against the
mind of the Nobility and Council, set forward her right to the Kingdom, but
this reward they received in the end at her hands. A bad reward.
The cruel martyrdom of Cranmer Bishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of
London, Latymer Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Philpot, and many others, with the
raising up of the bones of the men of God, Bucer and Fagius, out of their
graves, and the cruelty intended against her own sister Lady Elizabeth: all
these things being so well and amply discoursed in the Book of Martyrs, A
reference to the Book of Martyrs.
the godly Reader is to be remitted to the reading of the said book.

Now to conclude this History of Charles, something is to be noted of his
wars with the Turks. In his time Solomon the great Turk conquered the city
of Belgrade, Solomon conquereth Belgrade and the Isle of Rhods, kills Lewis K
of Hungary and Paulus B. of Collen, besieges Vienna and is repelled.
the most sure and strong garrison of the Christians, and vexed the country of
Hungary. He besieged the Isle of Rhodes and took it, to the great shame and
rebuke of Christian men. who provided not support for the Rhodians, that
resisted the common enemy so long and so courageously. After this Solomon slew
Lewis King of Hungary, and Paulus Bishop of Collen, who more rashly then
wisely, with a small power of four and twenty thousand men, encountered the
great Turk leading an army of 200000. soldiers. Also he besieged Vienna, but
was mightily resisted and repulsed with loss of a great number of his army:
all this was done before the Emperor Charles began to stir himself against
the Turk: but when the matters of religion in Germany were put to some point
in the Council of Ratisbon, the Emperor raised an army of eighty thousand
footmen, and thirty thousand horsemen: and compelled the Turk to raise his
siege from the town of Gunza, and with speed to retire back to
Constantinople. Charles restores the K. of Tunis to his kingdom.


After this Charles sailed with an army unto Africa, and restored the King of
Tunis to his kingdom again, whom Barbarossa Admiral of the Turks Navy in
Afric had dispossessed and deprived of his kingdom. In this same voyage he
delivered 20000. captives out of servitude. Notwithstanding Solomon with
insatiable ambition pnft up to conquer all Europe, was ever subduing towns and
Isles, as Corcyra, Zacynthus, Cythara, Naxus, with diverse others, also the
town of Newcastle in Dalmatia, Solomon takes Buda in Hungary.
and Buda in Hungary, which he obtained by means of Friar Cogdridge Tutor to
Stephen, son to John, Vaivod of Transylvania, and means of the relict widow
of the said Vaivod. These two sent for aid to the Turk against Ferdinand, and
the Turk not neglecting so good an occasion, came to Hungary, discharged the
Host of Ferdinand that was besieging Buda, and got the city into his own
hands. Which done, he prevailed mightily in Hungary, and took the town
called Quinque ecclesiae, and Strigonium, Alba regalis, and Vizigradum: and it
was an easy matter for him to have conquered all Hungary, in respect the
Emperor Charles was so busy in wars with the King of France, that the
common enemy of all Christian people had leave to rage at his own pleasure,
and had it not been the gracious providence of God, pitying the misery of
Christian people, who stirred up the Persian Sophie against Solomon, and drove
him back out of Europe for a time, and likewise the murder of his own son
Mustapha, which stirred up a piece of a Tragedy in his own house, the
Christian people had no doubt been brought to greater extremities in Solymans
days. The unprosperous voyage of the Emperor to Argier, I pass by, and many
conventions of Estates in Germany, kept for quieting of religion and
preparation for war against the Turks. In the end the Emperor finding
himself troubled with sickness, resigned the government of the Low Countries
into the hands of King Philip his son, and surrendered the Imperial crown
unto the Electors of Germany, and sailed unto Spain, where he entered into an
house of religion, Charles enters into a religious house and dies.
and gave himself to meditation and prayer, and there concluded his life.

Ferdinandus.
AFter that Charles the fifth had surrendered the Imperial crown into the
hands of the Electors of Germany, they assembled at Frankford, and there
elected Ferdinand King of Bohemia, and brother to the forenamed Charles the
fifth to be Emperor, who reigned seven years. The ancient manner was that he
should be crowned in the forenoone at mass: but because diverse of the
Electors would not in any wise come to mass, the coronation was solemnized in
the afternoon, and the mass with other like ceremonies omitted.

To this King before he was elected Emperor, his Nobles in the country of
Bohemia made earnest supplication that they might be permitted to use the
Sacrament in both kinds, according to Christ's institution: but he strictly
commanded them they attempted no alteration in religion. The Bohemians obtain
of Ferdinand the use of the Sacrament in both kinds. Persecution of the
Protestants in France.
Nevertheless, the Nobility continuing constant in the purpose of their
minds, at last after many earnest suits obtained their desire.

In France about this time the persecution of the Protestants waxed hot, and
King Henry the second was sore grieved, that the Parliament of Paris it self,
could not be kept free of this new doctrine as he called it. Wherefore he
caused Annas Burgeus, an honorable and wise Counselor to be taken, to whom
he spoke in great wrath, that he would stand by and see his body burnt for
that new religion which he favored. But he was wonderfully cut off before
he could get his heart satisfied with that pitiful spectacle of the burning
of a noble Counselor. For God so disposed the matter, that the King clothed
all in armor put a spear in one of his subjects hands, and compelled him
against his will to run at him, at which time the said spear broke, and a
small splinter of it entering at the Kings eye, The death of Henry the 2. K. of
France. Francis the 2. having married the Q of Scots seeks to reduce the
Scottish Nobility to the popish religion: but his army was vanquished.
pierced into his brain, whereby he died. Yet by his death was not the
foresaid persecution relented, but rather vehemently augmented for Francis the
second, succeeding to his father Henry in the the kingdom, married Mary Queen
of Scots, who was descended of the lineage and stock of the house of Guise. By
this means the Guisians were in great credit and authority with the King, and
presumed to high things, not only to suppress the Gospel utterly in France,
but also in Scotland. For at this time a great part of the Nobility and people
of Scotland had shaken off the yoke of the Roman Bishop, they had thrown
down Altars and Images, and had forsaken all the superstitious ceremonies of
the Roman Church.

The Guisians purposing to supresse the Scottish Nobility, sent out of France
into Scotland an army of 4000 men, under the conduct of Monsieur La Broch. This
army assisted the Queen regent to reduce back again the kingdom of Scotland
to the Romish religion: But the Scottish Nobility obtained help of the Queen
of England, and brought the Frenchmen to such extremity, that they were
compelled to accept conditions of peace, and to retire back again to France.
So this first high attempt of the Guisians against the reformed religion in
Scotland, was by the providence of God disappointed.

In France the King with advice of the Guisians had appointed a national
Council to be kept in Orleance, A Council kept at Orleance.
for the quieting the tumults which were like to ensue for religion in France:
but all was done in hypocrisy and with deceitful minds as evidently
appeared: so soon as the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie came to
Orleance, and had saluted the King, The Prince of Condie taken by the Kings
guard is in danger.
the Captain of the Kings guard laid hands on the Prince of Condie, and the
King was informed that the Prince of Condie had conspired against his honor
and life. Thus by the craft and deceitful practices of the Guisians, was the
Prince of Condie brought into great danger and hazard of his life, and had
assuredly died if the mercy of God had not provided timely relief: But the
Lord pitying the estate of his own poor Church in France, The death of
Francis.
shortened the life of Francis the second, who dyed of a putrefaction of his
ears. And thus was the second high attempt of the Guisians against the Gospel
marvailously disappoynted by the sudden and unexpected death of Francis the
second. After whose death the innocence of the Prince of Condie, was declared
by a decree of the Parliament at Paris: and the government of the young King,
Charles the ninth, was devolued in the hands of the Queen mother, and the King
of Navarre. Those Governors with advice of the States of the Realm, A
disputation at Poyssie.
thought meet that a free disputation should be appointed at Poyssie a town in
France, near to Saint Germane, wherein the controversies of religion should
be freely reasoned, in presence of the young King, the Queen mother, the King
of Navarre, and other Princes of the royal blood.

This disputation began the ninth of September, anno 1561. For the Protestants
part were appointed Theodorus Beza Minister at Geneva, Peter Martyr professor
of Divinity in Zuricke, Nicholas Gelasius, Augustinus Marloratus, Johannes
Merlinus, Franciscus Morellus, Johannes Malo, and Espineus, a man of great
learning, who had lately forsaken the Roman Church, and embraced the true
reformed religion. On the other part the Cardinal of Loraine, with many other
Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, to the number of fifty Prelates, besides
many other Divines and Doctors were ready to plead the cause of the Romish
Church. In this disputation, after that Theodorus Beza had at length declared
the sum of the Protestants faith, and the Cardinal of Loraine had answered:
In the end the Roman Prelates devised a pretty shift to cut off all further
reasoning: The Papists policy to cut off further reasoning.
for the Cardinal of Loraine produced the opinion of the Germans about the
matter of the Sacrament, extracted out of the confession of Ausbrugh, and
Jemanded of the Protestants whether they would subscribe to it or no, to the
end that if they consented to subscribe, they might seem to have convicted
themselves of error in the matter of the Sacrament; and if they refused to
subscribe, then it might be known to the Princes that were present, that the
Protestants agreed not amongst themselves.

To this it was answered by Theodorus Beza in the next meeting, that if the
confession of Ausbrough should be subscribed, then it was good reason to
require a subscription of the whole confession, and not of one line thereof
only: also if they urged the Protestants to subscribe that confession of
Ausbrough, then let themselves first begin to subscribe the same: and when they
have yielded to the whole confession of Ausbrugh, it will be more easy to
find out any way of agreement in matters of religion. After this the form of
disputation was changed, and a few in number, to wit, five only on either
side, were chosen to confer in quiet and peaceable manner, who beginning at
the matter of the Sacrament, seemed all to agree in this form: that Jesus
Christ by the operation of the holy Spirit, offers and exhibiteth unto us the
very substance of his body and blood, and we do receive and eat spiritually
and by faith that same body which dyed for us, to the end we may be flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bones, and that we may be quickened by him, and
receive all things that are needful to our salvation. And because faith
leaning to the word of God makes those things that are received to be present,
by this faith indeed we receive truly and effectually the very natural body
and blood of Jesus Christ, through the power of the holy Spirit. In this
respect we acknowledge the presence of the body and blood in the Supper. The
article of the Sacrament being conceived in this form, was presented to both
the parties, and many of the Roman Prelates condiscended to the article above
specified: but when they had conferred with the Doctors of Sorbon, they all
with one consent refused the same: and finding that the communers that were
chosen for their part did persevere in their opinion, they cried out against
them, and would give no further power to them to reason in that cause. Thus the
disputation of Poyssie broke up the 25. of November, without any agreement of
the controversies in religion, but rather leaving in the hearts of men a seed of
greater contention and cruel wars, which afterward ensued. But before we speak
of the wars in France for religion: somewhat is to be spoken of the cruel
persecution that the faithful suffered in Piemont, in which country certain
towns had received the Gospel, and abolished the mass: namely, the towns of
Angrona, Lucerne, Perose, Tallaret, with diverse others in the convalles of
Piemont: all which towns are subject to the dominion of the Duke of Savoy, who
hearing of the reformation that was made in the foresaid bounds of his
dominion, sent out his Captain Triniteus with an army of 500. The Duke of
Savoy warreth against the Protestants within his dominions.
men, against them, to sack and utterly destroy them, except they would receive
the mass again, and put away from them their ministers. The town of Angrona
was first assaulted, and the people fled to the mountains, but being strictly
pursued they turned themselves, and with slings and stones defended their lives
and put their enemies to the worse, in so much that Triniteus the Dukes
Captain was to deal with them by subtilty and craft, Triniteus by policy
spoileth those of Angrona both their money and armor.
rather then by open force, and therefore promised unto the Convallenses that
if they laid down their armor, and sent messengers to the Duke to cuane his
pardon, and would pay to him the sum of sixteen thousand crowns, then upon
those conditions they should have peace.

The poor people glad to accept conditions of peace, performed all that was
required, but no peace could be obtained of the Duke, except they would put
away their Ministers, and receive the mass again. Therefore being spoiled
both of money and armor, by the craft of their enemies, and a new army also
sent against them, they were compelled in time of winter to fly with their
wives and children to the mountains all over-layd and covered with snow* and
from thence to behold the pitiful spectacles of the burning of their houses,
and spoiling of their goods. But necessity compelling them to make some shift
for their lives, they took the strict passage of the mountains and resisted
their enemies, committing the success to God, who so prospered this poor
unarmed people, God prospers the success of the Protestants.
that in few skirmishes there were killed a thousand of their enemies, and
scarce forty persons of their own. Triniteus the Captain by the counsel of
Truchetus, an expert Warrior, thought meet to besiege the Castles of
Convallenses, but God fought against them in all their enterprises, and the
Convallenses came upon them suddenly as they were besieging a certain Castle,
The death of Truchetus.
and slew a great number: and Truchetus himself was first sore wounded with
stones, and afterward was slain with his own sword by a poor Shepherd, that
was keeping cattle in the fields. In the end when Triniteus was out of all
hope to subdue the Angronians and their accomplices, he advertised the Duke of
Sauoy how all matters went, Peace concluded with the Convallenses.
and peace was granted to the Convallenses, with liberty to use their own
Religion; providing they should render all due service and obedience to the
Duke of Savoy their Sovereign Lord and Master.

To return again to France. After the disputation at Rossie the number of the
Protestants daily increased, and rumors of sedition and vprores were in the
mouths of all the people. The Queen mother willing to provide timely remedy
for repressing of civil and intestine war, assembled the estates of the land
at S. Germane, The edict of January in behalf of the Protestants.
where the edict of January was made, bearing that the professors of the
reformed Religion might assemble themselves together, to hear Preaching of the
Word, provided those assemblies were kept without the towns and without armor.
This edict was published throughout all the land, and sore grieved the hearts
of the adversaries, namely, the Duke of Guise, the Constable Mommeraunce, and
the Marescall Santandreus, who consulted together how they might have this act
undone again, but no way could be found out to bring this matter to pass,
except first the King and Queen mother were in their hands, to the end that
the force of the Laws which they feared might be turned against their enemies,
when as they had the Lawmakers in their own hands. This was also thought to be
an high attempt, and dangerous to be enterprised, so long as the King of
Navarre was their enemy, and a favorer of the reformed Religion; for this
cause all means were sought out to divert the affection of the King of Navarre
from his foresaid Religion. The Cardinal Ferrar being the Popes Ambassador in
France, put him in hope that by the Popes travails with Philip King of Spain,
the kingdom of Navarre should be restored to him again, if he would turn to
the Catholic Religion. The King of Navarre turns Papist.
Thus was the heart of the King of Navarre stolen away from his Religion, to
the great encouragement of the Duke of Guise and his accomplices, who without
further delay put hand to work.

The first fruits of his martial deeds after he raised his army, was the
cruel Massacre of poor unarmed people, assembled to hear the Word of God at
Vassiace, a town in the borders of Champaigne, and near unto his dominion.
Those poor people to the number of a thousand and five hundredth, The Duke of
Guise kills 1500 people at a Sermon.
being occupied as is said upon the Sabbath day, the Duke of Guise came upon
them suddenly, and compassed the Church wherein they were with armed soldiers,
that none might escape; also the Duke himself stood in the entry with a drawn
sword in his hand, and sent in his soldiers, who most cruelly without
compassion of sex or age, martyred the poor members of Christ, for hearing of
his Word. After this, the Duke of Guise addressed himself toward Paris, where
he was received with joyful acclamations of the people: and from thence he
marched forward to Fonteblew, The Duke of Guise takes the King, and the Queen
mother, prisoners, for whose delivery the Protestants bind themselves
together. The first civil war.
where the King was, and seized himself of the King and the Queen mother, and
for greater security transported them both to Paris. On the other part, the
Prince of Condie went to Orleance, to whom resorted a great number of the
Nobles of France, namely, the admiral Castilion, Andelot, Princeps Porcianus,
Rupsfocald, with many others, who all bound themselves together, to set the
King and the Queen mother at liberty from captivity, wherein they were
detained by the Guisians; as also to defend the true professors of the Gospel
of Christ, that according to the act of January they might without molestation
assemble themselves to hear the Word of God.

The Prince of Condie was chosen to be their Chieftaine, The Prince of Condie
chosen General for the Protestants.
to whom the Queen mother sent many secret Letters, declaring that she was
detained by the Guisians against her heart. And if the Prince of Condie could
set the young King and her self at liberty, she would never be unmindful of
so great a benefit. Thus in the beginning of the Wars the Queen mother
favored the Prince of Condie, and stirred him up with many Letters and secret
advertisements, to procure her and her sons liberty: for greater evidence
whereof, the Letters themselves are inserted in the French History.

Many great towns in France were taken and fortified by the Protestants, Many
towns taken and fortified by the Protestants, whereof Burges and Roane were
recovered by the Papists. The death of the Prince of Navarre. The death of
Augustinus Marlorart.
as namely, Orleance, Lion, Valence, Granoble, Roane, Bourgos, Towers,
Poictiers, Montpellier, and Nimes. Many of those towns were recovered again
by the Guisians, namely, Bourges, and Roane. At the siege of Roane, the Prince
of Navarre was slain, and received a just reward of his inconstancy and
leuitie. And Augustinus Marlorart, a faithful servant of Christ, and Preacher
of the Gospel, was taken by the Guisians, and afterward hanged. Many great
cruelties were designed against those of the Religion in this first War,
namely in Tullus, Aurange, Burges, Roan, Sens, and diverse other places. In
Montargis, belonging to the Lady Rence, daughter to Lewis the twelfth, Duchess
Dowager of Ferrar, fell out a very remarkable matter.

This Lady was a retrait to diverse families of the Religion, Note.
notwithstanding the threatenings of the Duke of Guise, son in law to the said
Lady, who sent thither one Malig corn, a new Knight of the order, to sease
upon the Town and Castle: who begun to threaten the Lady with Canon shot, to
batter her Castle, wherein were diverse of the Religion. But the Princess
answered him, that there was not any man in the realm, except the King alone,
that had power to command her. And if he would proceed to such boldness as to
batter her Castle with Canon shot, she would first stand in the breach her
self, to try if he durst be so bold as to kill the daughter of a King. Those
words caused Malicorne, like a Snaile to pull in his horns, and presently to
depart.

Afeer this, the Prince of Condie perceiving that great preparation was made
against him, and the Queen mothers affection was turned away to the Guisians,
thought meet to send for aid to the Queen of England; and the Prince of
Condie willing to join himself with the English army, marched forward to
Normandy, but the Duke of Guise followed after him with so great celeritie,
The battle of Dreux, wherein the Prince of Condie was taken by the Papists,
and the Constable by the Protestants.
that the Prince of Condie was compelled to join Battle with the Guisians at
Dreux in Normandy, before he was supported of the English army.

This battle was fought with uncertain victory, for on the one part the
Prince of Condie was taken by the Guisians, and on the other part, the
Constable was taken by the Protestants, and the Marescall Sanctandreus was
slain. The Duke of Guise after this battle renewed his Forces, and besieged
the Town of Orleance, The Duke of Guise his death. A new edict in behalf of
the Protestants.
where he was slain by a Soldier, called Portrot. This slaughter was the
ground of a new Peace; for after the death of the Duke of Guise, a new edict
was made the thirteenth day of March Anno 1563. although not so ample as the
edict of January: Yet by it some liberty was granted to the Protestants to
enjoy their own Religion without disturbance of any. This was the end of the
first civil war in France for Religion. The end of the first civil war.


Maximilianus the second.
AFter the death of Ferdinand, Maximilian his son King of Hungary was made
Emperor, and governed twelve years: he gave his two daughters in marriage
unto two puissant Princes, to wit, to Charles the ninth: King of France, he
gave Elizabeth, and to Philip King of Spain he gave his eldest daughter Anna.
Great troubles for Religion fell out in his time, Troubles in the low countries
about Religion.
namely, in the Low countries and in France. In the low countries, the number
of them that professed the Gospel increased marueilously; and on the other
part, the rage of the Popish Prelates causing the Spanish Inquisition to be
severely executed, wrought great fear in the hearts of the professors of the
Gospel.

Also Duke de Albe was sent with a great Army unto the low Countries, Duke de
Albaes cruelty against the professors of the Gospel.
utterly to extirpate and root out the Gospel, who behaved himself most
outragiously against the Nobility and Towns of the low Countries, in
beheading Count Egmount, and count Horn, and permitting his soldiers to use
all kind of villainy against honest matrons, and the daughters of honest
Citizens, and oftentimes compelled the husbands themselves to stand beside, and
be eye witnesses of the vilde abusing of their own wives. Also with so great
severity he executed the Spanish Inquisitio^ against the professors of the
Gospel, that the people were compelled to take arms, under the conduct of
William Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and Lodouicus his brother, to defend their
lives, the liberty of their Country, and of their Consciences against the
barbarous tyranny of this Duke and his army.

In this War although the Prince of Orange was oftentimes defeated, and his
brother slain, yet the Country so abhorred the cruelty of Duke de Albe, that
the most part of Zeland and Holland was conquered by the Princes army, and was
free from the tyranny of the Spaniards.

In France the professors of the Gospel could not enjoy the benefit of the
Edict of pacification made in March, The Prince of Orange warreth against the
Spaniards.
Anno 1563. except in a few parts where the authority of some noble persons
favoring the Gospel procured obedience to the foresaid Edict, as namely, the
presence of Condie in Picardie, Andelot in Britannie, and the Queen of Navarre
in Gascoigne. In other parts of the country, little regard was had to the
Edict. The Cardinal of Loraine also a capital enemy to the Gospel, had
consulted with the fathers of the Council of Trent, The Cardinal of Loraine
takes counsel how to suppress the Gospel.
by what way the Gospel might be suppressed in France, and it was thought
meetest that a covenant should be made amongst them that favored the
Catholic Religion (which they called the holy league) to extirpate and root
out them that professed the new Religion (for so they named it) and the two
puissant Kings of Spain and France in special should be entreated to be of
this league, and mutually to help one another to root out the Gospellers. Now
when King Charles the 9. was 14. years old, and declared to be Mayor, it was
thought meet that he should make a progress through the bounds of his
Dominions; pretending that it was expedient that the King should know the
estate of his Country, and that he should hear the complaints of his people;
but the cause indeed of this progress, was that the King of France might meet
with the King of Spain in Bayon, for binding up of the league aforesaid. In
this progress was discharged all Preaching and exercising of the reformed
Religion in the Towns of France, wherein it should happen the King to be,
during the time of his progress. Also many new interpretations of the edict of
March were invented and found out, whereby the liberty granted to the
Protestants was utterly infringed and impunitie granted to them that should do
them wrong. In the end the King came to Bayon, where he met with his sister
Elizabeth, wife to Philip King of Spain, who after she had declared certain
causes why her husband could not be present himself, A league made betwixt the
Kings of France and Spain, for the rooting out of the Protestants.
bound up in name of her husband a covenant with Charles, King of Spain,
mutually to help one another in rooting out the professors of the reformed
Religion. The report of this league was not kept so secret but it came to the
ears of the Prince of Condie, and the rest of the nobility of France, that
professed the Gospel, who all thought meet that the Prince of Condie should
in proper person address himself to the King (being for the time at
Moncellium) and should exhibit to the King the supplication of the Protestants
in France, pitifully complaining, that contrary to the edict of March they
were iniuried and cruelly slain, desiring redress of the aforesaid injuries,
and that they might have liberty to enjoy their Religion according to the act
of pacification above mentioned. But the King hearing of the Prince of Condies
coming to him, and (namely because he was well accompanied with four hundred
men all in arms) fearing the malignitie and obstinate malice of his
adversaries, left they should hinder his journey or do wrong to himself. The
King (I say) hearing tell of the Princes coming, made have to depart, and with
all expedition, to Paris in great fear, and caused the Parisians to give
thanks to God, as though he had been delivered from a great peril and
imminent danger.

After this, The second civil war in France.
without further delay, the second war for Religion in France broke up. The
Prince of Condie approached with an army to Paris, and so beset it about in
all quarters, that this populous Town soon began to be grieved for want of
food, and issued out of the Town under the Conduct of the Constable, and came
by S. Denis, where the Prince of Condies army lay. In this Battle the
Admiral set upon the Parisian soldiers, and disturbed their ranks and put
them to flight. The Constables troop also was greatly perturbed by their
flying, and the Constable himself refusing to be taken by M. Stewart, was shot
by a Scottish Soldier, whereof he soon after died.

The Constables sons, The Parisians overcome by the Prince of Condie.
Anveil and Momerance, being careful for their Father, succored him, and the
battle was renewed again, and cruelly fought, until night compelled them to
make an end. The morrow after, the Prince of Condie came with his Forces again
to the place where the battle was fought, but none of the Parisians came forth
to encounter him.

After the battle he marched toward Loraine, of purpose to join with the
Germane Army, which was to be sent for his support from the Count Palatine of
the Rhine, under the conduct of Cassimire, his own son. This army of the
Germans joined with the Forces of the Prince of Condie at Pontamonssou, a
town in Loraine on the river Mosell, and from thence marched forward without
battle offered to them by the adversary party, until they came to
Chartresse, The Protestants besiege Chartresse.
a famous Town within two days journey to Paris.

This town the Prince of Condie and the Germans besieged, and when it was
fore battered, and not able to endure the siege any longer, the Queen mother
according to her wonted manner, thought meet to compass them with fair and
deceitful promises, whom she could not get overthrown by force. And therefore
sent to the Prince of Condie, desiring him to require of the King conditions of
peace, such as himself liked best, and they should be granted.

The Prince of Condies army dismissed, and the towns by him subdued delivered
into the enemies hand through the policy of the Queen mother.
The Prince of Condie being ever more bent to peace then provident to foresee
the deceitful snares of his adversaries, required of the King, that the edict
set forth in March Anno 1563. should be precisely kept, all new additions and
interpretations of the said act being disanulled, and that the injuries done to
the Protestants should be severely punished, and not passed over with silence
as they were accustomed to be. All this was granted, and the edict of
pacification was proclaimed. The towns also which the Protestants had
conquered with great pains and effusion of their blood, were all delivered
into the hands of their enemies, the Germane soldiers were dismissed, and
every man returned to his own house. But in the very time of their returning,
it was known that this pacification was but a subtle snare to entangle them
withal; for the professors of the Gospel were compelled to lay down their
armor when they entered into the towns where they dwelt, and strictly
commanded to remain in their houses, so that they had not liberty to visit
one another.

Every where cruelty used against the Protestants.
In all the parts of the Country great cruelty was used, and many cruelly
massacred, so that within the space of three months, more then three thousand
were reckoned to be killed by the sword. Besides this cruelty committed
against the inferior sort, all means were sought out to intercept the Prince
of Condie, the Admiral, Andelot, Rupesocald, and other principal personages;
for this counsel was given by Duke de Albe (whose advise was often craved in
this turn) that one Salmond head was better then an hundredth paddle heads,
Simile.
signifying thereby, that it was most needful to cut off the principal
Noblemen of the Protestants. The Prince of Condie, and the Admiral, after
many advertisements, that their lives were directly sought, began to remove,
and the Prince came to Nucetum, a Town in Burgundy, the Admiral lodged at
Tauleum, in a place pertaining to his brother Andelot, not far distant from
Nucetum, where they received new advertisements, that the companies that were
appointed to take them were with great celeritie approaching already to
Nucetum. The Prince of Condie and the Admiral fly toward Rotchell.
Thus was the Prince of Condie and the Admiral compelled in all have to fly
with their wives, young children, and families, and commending themselves to
the providence of God, entered into a long and dangerous journey from Noyers to
the Town of Rotchell. The good providence of God so conducted them, that
albeit, all the bridges and passages were strictly kept, yet God provided a
foord in the river of Loyre, Note.
near to Sanser, which was not known before, neither was any passage found to
be there two days after. By this way they passed very safely, and in the end
came to the Town of Rochell, although through many dangers and infinite perils.

In the mean time, the Prince of Condie had sent Letters to the King, heavily
complaining of the Cardinal of Loraine, who so wickedly abused the Kings name
and authority, and so maliciously sought the lives of his innocent Subjects
for their Religion, expressly against the Kings edict of pacification, which was
sealed with the Kings own handwrit, and his great oath solemnly made. The third
civil war in France for Religion.
To those Letters no answer was made, but all the Country was inflamed with
wrath, and bent to war, and the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King was made
general commander of the army. The Queen of Navarre, on the other part,
adjoined her self, and her Forces to the Prince of Condie, and from Britanny
came Andelot and his Forces, who had passed the river of Loyre by a certain
foord unknown before, and impassable afterward, Note.
no less miraculously then the Prince of Condie, and his family had done in
another place of the same river before. After whose coming, Angolesme, a Town
of great importance in those parts, was besieged and taken by the Prince of
Condie. Likewise Acierius brought with him to the Prince, a great company out
of Delphine, Provance, Languedok, and other parts favoring the Gospel, to the
number of twenty three thousand men.

On the other side, the Duke de Anion was come with his army to Poictou, and
pitched his Camp at Castellerault, a Town of Poictou near to the river
Vienna. The Prince of Condie and the Admiral daily provoked him to fight, but
he was admonished by frequent letters from the Queen mother, that he should
beware to hazard the cause in battle, but should prolong time to abate the
fiery courage of the Protestants, Note.
and to take his advantage when he could see it.

In the mean time, both parties waited for supplyment of new Forces out of
Germany, and Duke de Aumald was sent to Loraine to meet the Dukes who came to
support the Kings army; as also to hinder the progress of the Duke of Bipont,
who was marching forward to support the Prince of Condies army.

The Papists receive support from Germany.
The first support came to the Kings army the Count of Tend, brought three
thousand footmen, Bingrane and Bossempeire brought two thousand and two
hundredth horsemen out of Germany to the Duke. This supplyment so encouraged
the Kings army, that they enterprised to recover the Town of Angolesme
again, and for recovering of it, it was needful that the town of Iarnaque
should be taken for the commodity of the bridge, to transport his army over
the river of Charence, but the Admiral prevented the Duke, and fortified the
Town of Iarnaque, and disappointed him of the commodity of the bridge.

The Prince of Condie marched forward to Iarnaque, and the Admiral to
Blansack, where he understood, that a timber bridge was set up near to the
stone bridge that was at Casteaneur, for the greater expedition in transporting
of the Dukes army over the river of Charence. This great celeritie of the Duke
(who transported all the army over the river in one night) put the Prince of
Condie and the Admiral in great fear, because their Forces were far behind
them. Therefore it was thought expedient to retire back in time to their
Forces. But the Duke pursued so strictly, The Battle of Blansack.
that before they had marched back half a mile from Blansack, they were
compelled to turn and fight.

In this battle the Prince of Condie was taken and slain, The death of the
Prince of Condie.
and two hundred of the Protestants more, and forty taken prisoners. The rest
of the army the Admiral led back to Saint Iande-angeli: Soon after this,
Andelot dyed at Sainetes, to the great grief of all the army: his body being
opened was found to be poisoned.

The Queen of Navarre comforted the army of the Protestants, The King of
Navarre and young Prince of Condie govern the army of the Protestants.
and the King of Navarre her son, with the Prince of Condies son, took
upon them the government of the army, and sent Count Mongomrie to support the
Town of Angolesme, which was then besieged by the Dukes Forces, by whose
coming the town was so refreshed and encouraged, that the Duke was compelled
to raise his Siege and depart from the Town.

About this time the Duke of Bipont with his Germane Forces were entered into
France, The Duke of Bipont comes from Germany to support the Protestants,
takes the town of La charity, and within two days dies: having appointed
Velrad Count of Manfelt to be General in his room.
to support the Princes of the reformed Religion, and took the Town of La
charity in Burgundy, a Town of no small importance, for the passage of the
river of Loyre. The Princes of the Protestants marched forward to meet the
Duke of Bipont, and by the way killed two hundred Hagbushers, who were
appointed by the Duke of Andion to stop the passage of the river Vienna, in
the river of Limosin, and so the passage being opened, they came the day after
to the Camp of the Germans, and received them with great gladness; but
through the sudden death of the Duke of Bipont (who died two days after their
meeting) their gladness was mixed with great heaviness. Notwithstanding, the
Duke before his death exhorted all his Captains valiantly to debate that cause
of Religion; For the which they were entered into France, and placed in his
room, Wolrad, Count of Manfelt, to be general Commander of the Germane army.
In which were reckoned to be seven thousand and five hundred horsemen, and
six thousand footmen, besides two thousand French horsemen, who came in their
company, and ten Ensigns of footmen. The Prince of Orange with his brother
Lodowick and Henry were also in this army.

In the Country of Poictou, the Princes had taken many Towns, and the most
part of the Country was already subject unto them. And it was thought meet
to besiege the Town of Poictiers it self, Poictiers besieged.
and the Town was willing to render to the Princes, upon reasonable
conditions, if the Duke of Guise had not come to support the Town. But the
coming of the Duke altered their mind, and the Town was strongly fortified,
and valiantly endured a strict Siege.

The Admiral although he had lost two thousand men at this Siege, and great
sickness, and penury of victuals was felt in the army, yet was he very
unwilling to raise the Siege, till at length the Duke of Andum strictly
besieged Monsieur Lo in Castelleralt, The admiral raises his siege from
Poictiers.
whom the Admiral willing to relieve, left the siege of Poictiers.

Soon after this, the army of the two Princes being at Moncontuire, in the
Country of Poictou, was purposed to march toward Niort; and the army of the
Duke in like manner was purposed thither. The battle of Moncontuire, wherein
the Protestants were discomfited.
Through this occasion the two armies joined in battle a little space from
Moncontuire, and the Duke of Andium had the Victory. The footmen of the
Germans were cruelly slain in this Battle, without all commiseration; some
greater favor was shown to the French Soldiers. The Admiral foreseeing (as
appears) the event of this battle, had caused the two Princes of Navarre and
Condie to be conveyed out of the Host.

The number of those that were slain at this battle, are supposed by some to
have been six or seven thousand men; by others, twice as many. The report of
this loss so discouraged the Protestants, that all the Towns which they had
conquered in Poictou, were incontinent recovered by the adversaries; S. Ian
Dangely besieged and taken.
and S. Ian Dangely after it was besieged two months, was surrendered to the
adversary, upon certain conditions. At the siege of this Town Martiques,
Governor of Britanie, a great enemy to those of the Religion, The death of
Martiques, governor of Britanie, an enemy to the Protestants, and a
blasphemer of the name of God.
was slain, wherein is to be noted the just judgment of God, punishing the
pride of those that blaspheme his blessed name. This Martiques persuaded La
Matpinolis, to yield the Town to the King, and desired the town to remember
the battle of Moncontur e, wherein their strong God had forsaken them, and
said it was time for them to sing, Help us now, O God, for it is time. Not
long after, this proud man felt that the strong God was living, able to help
the weak, and to confound the proud.

The Princes with the Admiral consulted in what part of the Realm it were
meetest to sustain the hazard of the Warrefare; By a new edict of
pacification the third civil war ends.
and it was thought meetest in Languedok, because the Town of Nimes was lately
surprised by the Protestants, and many towns in that Country favored their
Religion.

While new preparations are made by the Princes to sustain the War, behold,
a new edict of pacification is for forth, granting liberty of Religion to the
Protestants again, and granting to them for their further security, the
keeping of four Towns during the space of two years, to wit, Rotchell,
Cognack, Montallan, and Caritea. This edict being proclaimed in both the
Camps, the people were in great joy, being wearied with long and perillou^
Wars, and being desirous to visit their own houses and families. Thus was
an end put to the third civil war in France.

The King marries.
After this pacification, the King married Elizabeth, daughter to Maximilian the
Emperor: and the rumor went through the Country, that the King was inclined
to peace. Likewise the apparent hatred betwixt the King and the Duke of Aniou
his brother confirmed this rumor: for it seemed to the people, that the King
was offended, because the Prelates of France depended more upon his brother
then upon himself, and paid to him yearly 200000 Frankes, to be a patron and
defender of their cause. Wherefore it seemed to many that the King would
incline his affection toward the Protestants, to abandon the power of his
brother. But all this was deceitful treachery, to color the intended malice
of his heart.

Also the edict of pacification was better kept then it had been at any other
time before, except in a few places. And when the Queen of Navarre sent
messengers to the King, to complain of the violation of the edict in the
Towns of Roane and Aurenge: the King returned back again to her a very
pleasant answer, that he would not only punish most severely the
transgressors of the edict, The King offers his sister in marriage to the
King of Navarre, that thereby he might insnare^ the Protestants.
but also for a further confirmation of a steadfast bond of Peace with the
Protestants, he would bestow Margaret his sister in marriage to the King of
Navarre her son.

The King himself passed to Bloyes, and sent for the Queen of Navarre, whom
he received so courteously, and conferred with so lovingly, that the Queen
was fully persuaded, that this marriage would be a sure pledge and bond of
constant peace.

The Admiral also was sent for, and met the King at Bloyes, whom the King
seemed to reverence and honor out of measure; in so much that the Admiralls
heart was betwitched with the Kings fair speeches, supposing that he meant
uprightly, to bind up indeed a bond of constant Peace with the Protestants.
Specially for this, that the King seemed to prepare an army for support of the
Prince of Orange, and the Admiral was appointed to be general Commander of
the army.

The time of the celebration of the marriage drawing near (which was appointed
to be solemnized in Paris by the Cardinal of Burbone) the Queen of Navarre
addressed her self toward Paris, The Queen of Navarre being empoysoned, dies.
to make preparation for the marriage, and the Admiral with many earnest
requests of the King was solicited to be present at the marriage; As also all
the principal Noblemen of the Protestants.

The forerunners of the lamentable Tragedy that after followed began soon to
appear, if the hearts of men had not been settled in a deep security. For
the Queen of Navarre, as she was busied in making preparation for the
marriage, died hastily being cut off by empoysoned Gloves, which she received
from an Italian the Kings Vnguentarie.

But the King seemed to be in such heaviness for her death, and the matter was
so finely conveyed, that all suspicion was incontinently quenched and buried,
The King of Navarre married to the Kings sister.
and the marriage was celebrated the eight-teenth day of August Anno 1572.
Soon after, to wit, the twenty two day of August appeared a clear presage of
the future Tragedy: for the Admiral as he went from the Loover to his house
was shot with two or three Bullets in the arm. The Admiral shot in the arm.
This was taken in very evil part by the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie:
who desired liberty to depart from Paris, wherein they saw so evident danger
to themselves and their friends. But the King with so many attestations,
protested the miscontentment of his own mind in that matter: and that he
would diligently search and severely punish the authors of that deed, that in
some part he quieted the hearts of the complainers.

Likewise, the King himself came to visit the Admiral, with pitiful words,
lamenting the chance that was fallen out, and affirming the dishonor to be
done to him, although the Admiral had received the hurt. Also he desired that
the Admiral would be content to be transported to the Loouer of Paris for his
better security, in case any popular commotion should fall out, until he
should be trying and punishing the authors of that fact. And when the King
perceived that the Admiral made excuse of his infirmity, that he could not
suffer to be transported, the King appointed some of his own Guard to attend
upon the Admiral^ house, The Admiral attended upon by the Kings Guard.
and the Protestants were commanded to prepare their lodgings near to the
Admirals house, to be a guard unto him, in case any commotion should happen in
the Town.

All this was done under deep dissimulation, to put the Protestants in
security, that they should not once imagine of the Tragedy that was to come.
And the Admiral sent his Letters to all parts of the Country where the
Protestants were, that they should make no stir for that which was done unto
him, for the wound was not deadly, and God and the King would see the authors
thereof punished. The night after, The Massacre of Paris the 24. of August Anno
1572.
was the appointed time for the horrible Massacre of the Protestants that were
in Paris. The Duke of Aniou and the Duke of Guise having their soldiers ready
armed in the streets, were waiting for the sign that was to be given to
begin their bloody Enterprise: which being once given out of the Church of
S. Germane, the Duke of Guise set first upon the Admirals house; Those of the
Kings guard (of whom we spoke before) that were appointed for defending of the
Admiral now evidently declared the true cause wherefore they were placed in
that room; The Admiral killed.
for they rushed in violently, and killed the Admiral, and threw him down out
of a window into the close, where the Duke of Guise was awaiting for that
spectacle, and for joy would scarcely believe that it was he, until he had
wiped the blood from his face.

Then he encouraged all his company, The Duke of Guise encourages the
company to murder the Protestants.
and said. This is a good beginning, go to, go to: it is the kings will, it
is the kings commandment. What bloody cruelty followed, without all
commiseration, slaying men, women and children, no tongue is able to express,
the sounding of bells, the shouting of the pursuers, and the pitiful cries of
the slain, all concurring together made the spectacle of that day to be very
terrible. Also the Duke of Guise with Mompensier and many others passed through
the streets, encouraging the people and augmenting their fury and madness,
saving that the wicked seed of the Protestants should be utterly rooted out.

The like outrageous cruelty was also practiced in the Lower where the king
was. The companies which attended the king of Navarre and Prince of Condie,
slain
For the whole company that were attending upon the king of Navarre and Prince
of Condie were commanded to lay down their armor, and go without the
Palace, where they were most cruelly slain by armed Soldiers attending on
their outcomming. The king of Navarre and Prince of Condie themselves were
brought before the king and threatened that except they would renounce that
religion which they professed, they should surely die.

The king of Navarre humbly requested the king to regard that new bond of
friendship that was bound up between them, The king v^geth the Prince of
Condie and king of Navarre to be come Papists. Their resolute Answer.
and for his religion not to urge him so, strictly incontinent to forsake that
religion whereunto he had been trained up from his very youthward.

The Prince of Condie added moreover that his life was in the kings hands, to
dispose of it as it pleased him but as for his Religion he had received the
knowledge of it from God, to whom also he behooved to render account of the
same, and he would not renounce it for any fear or danger of this present
life.

Some of the Protestants then lodged in the Fobers of S. Germane, as Count
Mongomrie and diverse others, for intercepting of whom the king had given
commandment to the Dean of Gild of Paris to have in readiness 1000. armed
soldiers, but through the providence of God those soldiers were not in
readiness, and that by the oversight of an inferior captain to whom the Dean
of Gild had given charge to execute the kings Commandment.

This matter being signified to the Duke of Guise, he took with him a
Company of armed men to intercept in time, Note.
Mongomrie and his accomplices. But when he came to the Port dividing the town
from the Fobers, he was compelled to stay a while, because in have the wrong
Keys had been brought out in stead of the right keys of the Port.

Count Mongomrie and diverse others escape.
In this mean time Count Mongomrie, Carautensis, and others that were in the
Fobers had been advertised of the cruel Massacre that was in the town, and
scarcely would credit that the King could be partakers of so foul a treachery.

But when they saw the Heluetian soldiers making have by boats and ships to
cross the water, and to come over to the Fobers of S. Germane to cut them off,
they made have and fled. The Duke of Guise with Duke De Aumald and the Count of
Angolesme pursued them to Montfort which is eight leagues distant from Paris,
but could not overtake them and so returned back again to Paris. In this
Massacre were slain many noble men such as the Admiral, Telignius,
Rupefocald, Renelius, and many learned men, amongst whom were Petrus Ramus and
Lambinus: and of others more than 10000. persons whose bodies were laid on
heaps upon carts, and cast into the river of Seane which was coulered red
with the blood of the slain. The like cruelty was practiced in Lions, and the
bodies of the slain were cast into the river of Rhene, and the heaps of the
slain were carried down to the sight of those of Delphin, Provance and
Languedok that dwelt nigh unto the river, whose hearts were compelled to detest
the spectacle of so Barbarous cruelty, the like whereof was scarcely to be
found amongst the Turks and Infidels.

Likewise in many other towns the rage of the like cruelty was felt, In this
Massacre were killed 30000 persons in France
so that within the space of a month more then 30000. persons were reckoned to
be slain. To all this Tragedy was added the defection of Rozarius a Preacher
at Orleance who by his vilde Apostasy so brangled the King of Navarre and
Prince of Condie, By the example of Rozarius, the King of Navarre and Prince of
Condie fell away for a time.
that they were induced by his example and persuasions, to fall away from their
religion for a time, yet afterward this same Rozarius being gravely admonished
of the vildnesse of his Apostasy departed out of France to Germany; and writ
letters to the Prince of Condie, wherein he acknowledged his error and begged
mercy of God for that he had been a snare and stumbling block to him.

The report of the Massacre was so detestable in the ears of all men that
heard it that they were forced to bear out that matter with forged lies which
they had begun with cruelty: The repentance of Rozarius. The Papists defend
their cruelty by lies
and to the end this Massacre should be the less odious in the ears of
strangers, they alleged that the Admiral and his accomplices were purposed to
cut off the king and all the blood royal, (yea and the king of Navarre himself
although he was of the same religion) and to set up the Prince of Condie in the
throne of the kingdom, to the end the Admiral might have the government and
administration of al himself. And for this cause they tortured two noble men of
the Protestants whom they had taken to wit Canagnius and Briquemald to draw
out of them by torturing a confession of the fore alleged co^spiracie. But the
noblemen died constant in the true faith, Note.
and w ithout confession of any such treason as was alleged. Notwithstanding
they were not ashamed after their death to publish in their names a confession
of horrible treason which they never confessed while they were alive. After
this pitiful disaster it seemed that the religion in France was utterly
quenched, for the noble men were slain, some had made defection, and others
for fear had left the land. Only a few towns were in the Protestants hands
such as Rochell, Montalban, Nines, Sauserr and some others of small account.
Yet the Lord so wrought by those small beginnings that the force of the
adversaries was more wonderfully resisted by this small handful, The fourth
civil war in France for religion. Rotchell besieged. God miraculouslie
provides for the poor, during the siege of Rotchell.
then it was by forces of so many noble men with concurrance of strangers in
the former war.

The town of Rotchell was the town of greatest importance of all the rest,
and the king thought meet to besiege it both by sea and land with a mighty
army, which siege began in the month of December, Anno 1573. and endured
until the month of June next following. The marvelous providence of God was
felt in this siege, for God sent a number of fishes called Surdonnes to the
support of the poor during the time of the siege, and when the siege was
loosed the fishes departed away, and were found no more in that coast.

Conditions of peace offered to the town of Rotchell.
In the month of June the Ambassador of Poland came unto the Kings Camp to
the Duke of Aniou the Kings brother, whom the Polonians had chosen to be their
king, and immediately after conditions of peace were offered to the town, and
liberty to exercise their religion within their own bounds, and in this peace
were contained their associats of Montalban and Nimes. The Rotchellanes had
required that those of Sanfarre and all others of their Religion should be
comprehended in this bond of pacification, but no special mention was made of
the town of Sansarre, only a general clause of their associats was cast in.

The town of Sansarre besieged and (some conditions of peace being granted) at
last surrendered.
The town of Sansarre likewise was besieged, but it was so strongly fortified,
and the Protestants within the town so courageously repulsed the enemies that
they were compelled to retire back from battring of the walls, and to beset
them round about on all quarters, that they might by long famine compel them
to render whom they could not overcome otherwise. This siege endured from the
month of January until the month of August, so that the famine within the
town was so great that the famine of Samaria and Saguntum seems not to have
bin greater. In the end conditions of peace were granted, and the town was
rendered to Castrius the kings Lieutenant in those parts.

The towns of Montalban and Nimes was not besieged as yet, to whom and to all
the rest of the Protestants dwelling in Lauguedok, Delphine and Provance was
offered those same conditions, which the Rotchellanes had embraced. But they
craved of the king and his brother liberty first to assemble themselves
together before they should give their answer, which being granted and the
assembly conveened at Miliald, An assembly of the Protestants at Miliald.
it was thought meet with common consent to crave more ample conditions and
liberties then were contained in the peace of the Rotchellans: namely that in
every Province of France two towns might be granted to the Protestants for
their further security, The conditions which they required of the king.
and those towns to be kept by the guardes of their own soldiers, and to have
their pay out of the kings treasury, and that liberty should be granted to all that were of their religion to exercise the same freely, without any exception
of places. Also that all those that should be found guilty of the horrible
murder committed at Paris the 24. of August might be severely punished. Many
other conditions were required, very amply and freely. Order was taken in like
manner in this assembly how the war might be maintained in case those
conditions of peace were not granted.

The Queen mother when she had read the conditions that were required, said
with great indignation; that if the Prince of Condie had been in the midst of
France with 20000. horsemen, and 50000.^footmen yet would he not have
required the half of those conditions. This great boldness of the Protestants
in craving so great liberties put the enemies in suspicion and fear that the
Nobles of France had secretly banded themselves with the Protestants.

About the same time Count Mongomry had returned out of England, Count
Mongomrie besieged in Donfront, taken, and sent to Paris.
and had taken some towns in Normandy; but soon after he was besieged in
Donfront a town of Normandy, by Matigonus the kings Lieutenant in those parts;
to who^ he yielded himself upon certain conditions which were not kept unto
him, but he was sent immediately to Paris to the king. The Duke of Aniow had
departed from France to the kingdom of Polonia, Duke Aniow chosen king of
Poland depareth thither.
and the king of France was fallen sick: also many noble men in the land were
highly offended at the ambition, pride, and cruelty of the Queen mother, who
had not only cut off the noble men of the Protestants, but also intended the
like cruelty against many other noblemen in France, whose names were insert
in the bloody roll of the Massacre, albeit they professed the Roman religion.
The Queen mother knowing that she was vehemently hated in the land and
fearing left this matter should tend to her utter disgrace and abandoning of
all her authority thought meet to prevent all the devices of the nobility of
France against her, The Queen mother imprisoneth diverse of the nobility who
were discontent with her.
and begun to lay hands on those of the Nobility whom she most suspected, and
cast them in prison: such as D. Alauscone her own son whom she knew to be
discontent with her form of government, and the king of Navarre, also
Monmerance, and Cassens Marescallis. The Prince of Condie also was to be taken,
but he conveyed himself away secretly unto Germany.

The death of King Charles.
In the mean time the king died in the month of May Anno. 1574. with
greateffusion of blood from many parts of his body. And the Queen mother had
all the government in her own hand until the returning of her son out of
Polonia, whom she advertised of the death of his Brother Charles, and desired
him without all delay to return again to France.

Count Mongomrie condemned to death by the Queen.
In the mean time the cruel heart of the Queen mother thirsting for blood
procured that Count Mongomrie should be condemned to death. This is that noble
man who had slain king Henry the father of Charles with a spear, whom king
Henry would not suffer to be harmed for that cause, it being done in game and
against Mongomries heart. Nevertheless when he came in the hands of this
merciless woman he must die. Before king Henry returned out of Poland unto
France, the Prince of Condie had sent from Germany to France, Messengers to
declare to the Protestants the great care of his mind to advance the Religion,
and to procure the peace and liberty of his country, who also was chosen to
be general commander of all the Protestants. The Prince of Condie chosen the
Protestants general.
Many Catholics were associate with him, who being of a contrary religion,
notwithstanding took arms with the Prince of Condie to restore the country
to the own liberty. In the month of December Anno 1574. the king came to
Lions where the Queen mother accompanied with Alauscon her son, and the king
of Navarre, and Duke of Guise were awaiting for his coming. In this town they
advised what was most expedient to be done, whether they should prosecute the
war, or they should quiet the country with new edicts of pacification. The
Queen mothers advise was, that the king should assault the towns of Languedok
and Delphine that were kept by the Protestants, because the presence and
terror of the king would so astonish the peoples hearts that incontinent they
would yield and give over the towns into the kings hands. The fifth civil
war in France for Religion. Libero besieged in vain by king Henry.
This advise was followed and the king besieged the town of Pusinum in
Viuaret, and took it, also the town of Libero in Delphin was strongly
besieged, but the king was compelled to leave his siege and to depart from the
town, which according as the name of it foretokened remained free and
unconquered by the adversaries: during the time of this siege the Cardinal of
Loraine died upon this occasion. The king being in Avinion some Paenitentiaries
fortuned to scourge themselves in a cold winter season, The death of the
Cardinal of Lorain procured by himself.
the Cardinal would join himself to their fellowship, and walked barefooted
in the company of those Paenitentiaries, whereby he contracted a deadly
disease, and soon repented this repentance. The king himself was content to
afflict his body after the same form, King Henry scourges him self, after
the manner of the penitentiaries. Many Ambassadors solicit the king for peace,
but in vain.
which was expounded by many to be an evil presage that he should not conquer
that little town of Libero, but should be scourged from the town, and leave
the siege of it with shame, which truly came to pass. From thence the king
went to Paris to his Coronation, where many Ambassadors came to the king; not
only from the Prince of Condie who as yet remained in Basile, but also from the
D. of Sauoy and the Cantons of the Switzers, and from the Queen of England to
treat for peace, but al their travels were ineffectuall: for the conditions of
the peace could not be agreed upon, so the war continued and waxed hot. In
Languedoke Anvillius although he was of the Roman religion, yet had joined
himself to the Protestants, and took Agnes Mortes a town of great importance
in those parts with many other towns. In Delphin Mombruniris was chief
commander, Mombruniris taken and executed by the Queen.
and had so good sucesse in all his attempts that he was a great terror to the
adversaries. In the end he was sore wounded and taken, beside Dia a town in
Delphine, and by the commandment of the king and Queen mother, was carried
to Grenoble and there was executed in the sight of the people. This war was
much different from the former wars, wherein those that were of one religion
were also on one side, but now the Catholics were mingled with the Protestants
which thing albeit it seemed for a time to augment their number, yet in the end
it turned to evil, as shall be declared hereafter, God willing.

Cassimire the son of Count Palatine promises to aid the Protestants.
The Prince of Condie had required help of Cassimire the son of Count
Palatine, who also had condiscended to support the distressed Church of
France, and very strict obligations of mutual duties were passed between them,
as these namely, that they should not dissolve their arms until that liberty
were obtained to the Protestants fully to enjoy their own Religion. And
likewise that Cassimire should have the towns of Metis, Tullion, and Verdum,
in his hands; besides other towns in all the Provinces of France which the
Protestants were to require for there further assurance, and as pledges of the
Kings fidelity and faithfulness toward them. While this army of Cassimire
was marching forward toward Loraine, Alauscon the kings brother departed from
Court, and many of the nobility of France resorted to him, all pretending that
they could not suffer the country to be exhausted with civil wars, and the
people to be vexed with exorbitant and unnecessary taxations. Alauscon the
kings brother joins himself with the Protestants.


All those tumults were found in the end to be the subtle policies of the Q.
mother by the means of Alauscon her son to dissolve the army of Cassimire.
Notwithstanding the army of the Germans and Frenchmen, entered into France
under the conduct of the Prince of Condie and Cassimire; and came forward to
Charossium, a town in Borbon, not far from Molins: where Alauscon the Kings
brother joined with them, and the whole army being mustered was found to be of
horsemen, and footmen thirty thousand. The King of Navarre about the same time
departed from Court and returned to his own country, whereby the fear of the
King and Queen mother was greatly increased. In conclusion the army approached
daily nearer and nearer to Paris, yet no battle was fought, because the Queen
mother listened more to the instructions she had given to Alauscon her son,
then to the doubtful success of battle, and force of armed men, and indeed a
more sure way to obtain their purpose. For messengers being sent to the King
to treat for peace, the Queen mother perceived that all other conditions how
ample soever they had been, might be easily eluded and broken, but if the
towns of Metis, Tullion, and Verdum, were in the hands of a potent stranger,
it would be a great abandoning of the Kings power in all time to come.
Therefore the matter was so brought about, that Cassimire was content to
receive from the King a great sum of money, in stead of those towns which
should have been put in his hands, and liberty was granted to the Protestants
to exercise their own religion openly and freely, without exception of places,
the Court and the town of Paris, with a few leagues about, only excepted.
Also they were declared to be capable of places in Parliament, and places of
Justice Courts: all judgments which were made against them for any enterprise
whatsoever was declared void: The cruel day of Sant Bartholomew disavowed, and
for better assurance and performance of the conditions, they had eight towns
delivered unto them, with the conditions of their governments, Aques Mortes,
Bencaire, Perigneux, Le mas de verdun, N^ons yissure, By an edict of
pacificatio^ the fifth civil war ended.
La grand tour. Thus was the edict of pacification proclaimed through the
country, in the month of May, 1576. and an end was put to the fifth civil war
in France for religion.

In this Emperors time Solomon being now stricken in age, Solomon the Turk
besieges Zigeth.
came notwithstanding into Hungary again with a great army, and besiedged
Zigeth: In the mean time of the siege Solomon dyed, Solomon dies, the town
taken, Selim sent for and proclaimed Emp.
but his death was so secretly concealed, that the siege continued after his
death, and the town was taken by force. Likewise Selim the son of Solomon,
was in haste sent for to come from Constantinople to Hungary: all this was
done before the death of Solomon was known, either to his own army, or to the
Emperor Maximilian.

Selim takes Famagusta from the Venetians. The battle of Lepanto, wherein the
Turks received a great overthrow by the Christians.
This new Emperor of the Turks Selim, took Famagusta, in the Isle of Cyprus,
which belonged to the Venetians: and did fight a cruel battle by Sea against
the Christians, in the gulf of Lepanto, of old called Sinus Corinthiacus: in
the which the Turks Navy was overcome, and Haly Bassa the chief Governor of
the Turks was slain, and his head was set up upon the top mast of his own
ship, to the great terror and astonishment of the Turks. This battle was
fought the seventh day of October, Anno 1571. Don John de Austria was General
commander of the Navy of the Christians: the number of the Turks that were
slain, is supposed to have been fifteen thousand men, and thirteen thousand
Christians were delivered from the captivity of the Turks. Onuphrius writes,
that an hundred and seventeene ships were taken, with thirteen galleys, and
thirty two thousand Turks were slain in this battle.

Rodulphus.
AFter the death of Maximilian, Rodulphus his son was made Emperor. In his
time the wars in France, which seemed to be well quieted by the last edict of
pacification, began to kindle up again with greater flame. For the adversaries
of religion besought the Kings Majesty to restrain the pernicious liberty of
the edict of peace: but perceiving him not to be sufficiently moved to break
the peace, and to take knife in hand, they began to assemble at Perone, The
league of Peron 1576. for the extirpation of the Protestants.
Anno 1576. and to bind up a league amongst themselves for the extirpation of
the Protestants, and for the revocation of the edict of peace, wherein they
swore obedience and service to the General tha^ should be appointed over this
fellowship, engaging their lives and honors, never to separate themselves for
any commandment, pretense, The causes moving the Leaguers to proceed in their
association.
excuse, or occasion whatsoever. There were two things that greatly animated
the Leaguers to proceed in their association, to wit: First, that the
Protestants yielded not up the towns which they had gotten for their
assurance, for the space of six years. The six years being ended, they
complained to the King that conditions were not kept unto them, and that for
the abolishing of wars, and settling of peace in France, it was needful that
they should have those towns a longer time in their maintenance, whereto the
King condiscended.

This grieved the Leaguers: but another thing grieved them more, that Alauscon
the Kings brother for grief of the hard success of his affairs in the Low
Countries, died at Chasteau Thierry. And the King himself having no children,
the fear that they conceived of the King of Navarres succession to the
Kingdom, caused the Leaguers rage. While the flame issued out of this furnace,
the King of France easily perceived that the drift of all the Leaguers
enterprises was against his life and crown, The drift of the Leaguers
enterprise against the K. and crown.
and to set up another whom it pleased them in his place. For the Leaguers
pretended war against the Hugonots, and yet they seized upon the best towns
of the Catholics, in all the Realm. The religion was preached in Guyen, and
they went to drive it out of Picardie. The Hugonotes were in Rochell, and the
Leaguers army marched straight to Paris. They are at Montpelliere, and the
league set upon Marseille. Likewise the pasquells and libells without names,
daily thrown down in the town of Paris, and the disdainful speeches daily
uttered of the King, speaking of him as a Sardanapalus, and a Prince drowned in
his pleasures and delights, and for his third crown which he looked for in
heaven, promising him one made with a rasour in a Cloister: all these things
presented to the Kings mind a sufficient understanding of the resolution and
purpose of the Leaguers* Notwithstanding fear so possessed his mind, that in
stead of courageous resisting of the Leaguers in due time, The King for lack
of courage makes himself a slave to the appetites of he Leaguers.
he made himself a slave to their appetites. The army of the Duke of Guise
(who was made General of the fellowship of the league) at the first rising,
exceeded not the number of a thousand horsemen, and four thousand footmen:
which company might easily have been dispersed, if the valorous courage of the
King had not been utterly abashed: who in stead of commanding with authority,
desired the Queen mother to procure that the Duke of Guise might leave off
arms, and to assure him of his favor, and that he would give him what part of
his Realm he would ask to let him live in peace.

This their enterprise succeeding so well, far above their own expectation,
moved them to set forward, and to desire of the King that he would make and
swear an irrevocable edict of extirpation of Heretics: To take by force the
towns holden by those of the new religion: To renounce the protection of
Geneva, to authorize their wars, to reconcile them unto him, to be of their
league, and of a King to become a participant. Whereupon followed an edict
prohibiting the exercise of the new religion, An edict against the Protestants.
and revoking all other edicts that favored it, commanding all the Ministers
out of the Land, and all subjects in France within six months after to make
profession of the Catholic religion, or to depart out of the Realm.
Dispersing also the tripertite chambers of Parliaments, likewise ordayning that
the towns given in hostage to those of the religion, should be yielded up, and
approving the war which the Leaguers had begun, acknowledging it to be done
for his service.

And not content with this, they asked of the King for their further surety,
the towns of Chalon, Thoul, Verdium, Saint Desire, Rhems, Soissons, the Castle
of Dyon, the town and castle of Beaume, Rue in Picardie, Dinan and Conque in
Britain, to be delivered unto them.

The King of Navarre all this while kept himself quiet, being solicited by the
King so to do. But when he saw the King had rendered himself to the appetite
of the Leaguers, he set forth a declaration of the cause, why the Leaguers had
taken arms, of the vanity of their pretenses, and of the fruits which the
Estates in France might reap by the conclusions of Peronne, The King of
Navarre and the Prince of Condie with diverse others, oppose themselves to the
Leaguers.
Nemours, and Nauty, (for in those places the Leaguers had bound up their
league) with protestation that with him, the Prince of Condie his cosen, the
Duke de Mommerencie, with Lords, Gentlemen, Provinces, and Towns, both of the
one religion and of the other, so many as would concur with him, should
oppose themselves to the authors of these troubles.

In the mean time, while the King of Navarre is so busied with the King and
the Leaguers, who were now as it were incorporate in one body: the third
assault comes on, The Pope exco^municateth the King of France.
and Pope Sixtus the fifth, with his thunderbolts of excommunication sets
upon him, declaring him to be incapable of the crown of France, abandoning his
person, and his country for a prey to such as should obtain them. At the same
time also, the Electors of Germany, who in all the former wars had been so
helpful to the Protestants of France, was not unmindful of them at so strait
a pinch, but sent Ambassadors to the King, The Prince^ of Germany send
Ambassodors to deal for the Protestants help.
desiring him to hear the requests of his neighbors, and to pity the case of
his poor subjects, and not to keep back the edict of peace, that he had
lately granted unto them. The King answered that he thought strange that
foreign Princes should meddle with his affairs: and that he would do nothing
against the honor of his conscience, nor the fatherly care he had unto his
people. With this answer the Ambassadors returned, not well pleased.

The Duke of Guise being advertised of the dislike the Ambassadors of Germany
had touching their answer, The sixth civil war in France for religion.
counseled the King to set upon the Protestants before the Rutters entered into
France, so that in less then eighteen months the King of Navarre saw
himself assailed by five Camps royal, under five several Generals.
Nevertheless very few exploites worthy of remembrance were done by those
armies, until the army of the Germans entered into France, An army of Germans
enter France in behalf of the Protestants.
under the conduct of the Baron of Othna, a man of greater courage then
experience. The Duke of Bulloigne in the name of the King of Navarre, joined
with the Baron of Othna, to lead this great army, wherein were more then thirty
thousand Switzers, Rutters, and Frenchmen. They marched from Loraine to
Cheaumont in Bassigny, and passed the river of Marne, also they crossed l' Anbe
at Montigny and Seine above Casklion, and Cure above Vermentone and Yome, hard
by Crenaunt, and so made haste toward the river of Loire. There began the
complaints of the Switzers and the mutinies of the Rutters, because the King of
Navarre came not to them, and the King of France was at the side of the river
Loire, either to fight with them, or to stay their passage. At this time the
King used a stratagem, which was the cause of his victory, and of the
dissipation of the army of strangers. For he considered that the only means
to break their army, was to impeach their joining with the King of Navarre.
Therefore he commanded the Duke Ioyense to keep the King of Navarre in
Poictou, and rather to hazard battle, then suffer him to pass the river of
Loire, as he determined at the head thereof: to the which end the Duke de
Ioyense that had an army fortified, both with men, munition, artillery, and
means marched to Coutras, to pass la Drogne at Que, and upon tuesday the
twentieth of October, Anno 1587. he stayed with all his forces between la Rotch,
The battle of Coutras betwixt the Kings army and the Protestants.
Chalais, and Coutras. The King of Navarre made toward him, fully resolved to
fight, and about eight of the clock in the morning, the King of Navarres
artillery began to play, and that of Duke de Ioyense to answer them, but not
very fortunately, for that either the ignorance or malice of the Canoners had
placed it so low, that the mouth of the canon, shot right upon a little hill of
earth, wherein the bullets stayed without piercing any further. The battle was
so soon decided, that in ten hours this great army of the Kings (that had the
vantage both for place and number) began to retire and was sooner broken then
fought withal.

The King of Navarre, the Prince of Condie, and the Earl of Soissons behaved
themselves most valiantly, executing the offices both of Captains and
soldiers, and gave thanks to God in open field.

In this battle Duke de Ioyense and Monsieur de S. Sauueur his brother were
slain, The death of D. de Ioyense.
and five and twenty other Gentlemen of name: all their cornets were taken,
with their artillery and baggage, and fourteen Gentlemen of account were taken
and put to ransom. That done, the King of Navarre being eased of so many nets
that were set up to catch him, marched forward to join with the foreign army,
and to pass the river Loire. The King on the other part to impeach the meeting
of the two armies of his adversaries, caused the ditches between Povilly and
Dony to b^e broken up, filling them with thousands of trees, stones, and
chains to entangle the feet of the Rutters horse that should pass: and in
truth the letting of that passage, was next to the help of God, the second
cause the King had of the victory. For the Rutters being disappointed of their
passage were compelled to recoile, and having failed of their enterprise at la
Charity, they entered in the way of Beauce, drawing toward Montargis. From
this time forth a great mutiny began in the army of the strangers, being
moved with impatience, because they could neither have money nor sight of the
King of Navarre: whereof the King being then at Bonevall had intelligence, and
thereupon used all the means he could to sound the hearts of the Switzers,
and persuaded them to separate themselves from the rest of the army, and retire
home: whereunto the Switzers condiscended, and upon agreement of 400000.
crowns paid to them in ready money, they returned back again to their own
country. The Duke of Guise perceiving the army of the Rutters to be as a body
dispersed, having nothing left but the arms and legs, took boldness to set
upon them as they camped at Aunew, A skirmish betwixt the D. of Guise and the
Rutters.
and entered with his footmen into the streets, about the time that the carts
and baggage were ready in the morning to issue out, and so courageously
surprised the Rutters at their breakefast: when the trumpets began to sound a
chivall, having no means to issue out, they were constrained to retire into
their lodgings, at the pleasure of the assaylants. The booty was great, being
800. chariots, jewels and chains of gold, and two thousand horse, both for the
field and wagons. The gates being seized upon, and the streets chained, there
was no means to save themselves but by the walls, which the General leaped
over.

Notwithstanding of this surprise, the army of the Rutters was in such estate,
that by reason of some small assurance they had of the King of Navarres
arrival, it was likely to have overcome the Duke of Guise forces. And as it
was at point to retire back again, the Prince of Condie, the Duke of
Bulloigne, and the Lords of Chastillion and Cleruant, promised to pay them all
their wages, if they would march forward. The hope of their pay made them to
march in a time not very convenient, toward the Forest of Orleance. The King
perceived that the longer the army kept the fields, the greater would be the
ruin of his Country, and that, being joined with the king of Navarre would
do great hurt, caused the Sienrs of the Isle of Cormont to certify the
Coronels that if they would yield up their colors, and swear to bear no
arms in France without the express commandment of his Majesty he would
give them assurance to retire in safety. They on the other part perceauing
themselves to be far from the king of Navarre, hardly handled by the
Frenchmen, beaten by the league, pursued by the king, and forsaken of the
Switzers, assembled themselves together at Marsigni: The Rutters retire out of
France.
and accepted his Majesty's offers sent by Monsieur D' Esperno, and retired out
of France toward Geneua.

The Marquis Du pont, eldest son to the Duke of Loraine, and the Duke of
Guise, against their faith given, followed the miserable troop of the Rutters
to the mountain at Saint Clande, where they gave thanks for the good success
of their company: and from thence to please their hungry troops they
trauersed the Country of Bourgoundie, entering into the Countries of
Mombeliard and Hericourt, where his men used diverse great cruelties and spared
not the lands of the Bishop of Basile.

After the bloody ceasing of so lamentable vengeance upon a poor innocent
people, which as yet do feel the loss and destruction of two hundred
villages, the violence used to a number of women and maids, the Massacre of so
many old men, and the furious and beastly inhumanitie of the League, they
bear the signs of their spoils into Loraine.

Nevertheless after this exploite of the Duke of Guise, The Duke of Guise
honored by the Pope, and extolled by the Preachers of France for his cruelty.
so full of cruelty, falsehood and inhumanitie, the Roman Church extolled him
above all measure. The Pope sent unto the D. of Guise a sword engraued with
burning flames in token of his valiantnes, accompanied with burning zeal
toward the Roman religion. The Preachers of France adva^ced him above the
king, saying that Saul had slain his thousand, but David ten thousand, The
assembly at Nancy of the Leagners against the King.
and so the Duke of Guise puffed up with winds of popular praise, seeing also
that the greatness of the Sovereign majesty was embraced, and that the
Protestants were retired unto the Rotchell, also that England had a proud
Spaniard embarked on her back (meaning the great Spanish Navy by Sea) he
assured himself to take the king without danger: and to this effect advertised
the Cardinal of Burbone not to neglect so good an occasion, but to gather his
principal friends at Nancie there to advise the means to pass forward, and
to constrain the king as it were to make his will, The conclusions agreed
upon, by the assemble at Nancie.
and so that assembly concluded that the King should be summoned to join his
forces to the league: to refuse the Counsel and amity of such as should be
named unto him: to establish the inquisition in every town: to publish the
Council of Trent even touching the things that derogated the privilege of the
French Church: to consent to the restitution of the goods that had bin
alienated and sold, for the charges of the wars: to give them towns wherein
they might place men of war, and to make such fortifications as the necessity
of the time would require: ordain the sale and confiscation of Hugonits
goods, also the disabling of their persons, and entertain an army upon the
Fronteris of Loraine: against the return of the Germans that would come to
have some recompense, for the cruelties by the league committed in the county
of Montbeliard.

The Duke of Guise came to the King at Soissons to constrain the King either
to bow or break, and to confirm the articles drawn, and devised at Nancie
and Dyion.

The King on the other part, by Mousieur de Bellieure gave the Duke to
understand, that he should do him a pleasure if he would abstain from coming
to Paris in so troublesome a time, wherein so many factions reigned: and if he
came thither against his will: he would lay the cause of all the troubles that
might arise by his presence upon him.

But the Duke of Guises heart, as it were attainted with a burning fever could
find neither appetite nor pleasure, The Duke of Guise contrary to the king^
commandment arriueth at Paris and is of the people received with joyful
acclamations.
but in that which liked his stomach, would needs for the loouer or die by the
way: and therefore mounted on horseback with eight Gentlemen, about nine of
the clock at night, leaving the Prince de Iumueille his son at Soissons, and
desiring the Archbishop of Lions to follow him in the morning, and so arrived
at Paris.

This manner of arrival together with the peoples favor uttered by their
joyful acclamations at the Duke of Guises lighting increased the distrust of
the kings heart, so that he resolved to prevent the enterprises intended
against him, and commanded the Marescall Biron to cause four thousand Switzers
to enter into the Town and to lodge them in diverse quarters thereof, who
seized incontinent upon the bridges of Nostredame and Saint Michael. The
fearful day of Barricadoes in Paris
But the Parisians being abashed at the sight shut up their shoppes, and took
their weapones in their hands, and brought forth their Barricadoes (which was a
seditious invention of the league) each one distant from another thirty foot,
and reached almost to the Sentinel of the Loouer.

The Switzers were set upon and they yielded, crying Viue Guise, and Monsieur
de Brissac caused them to be disarmed: and Sienre de S. Paul caused the kings
guarde to retire, holding down their arms with hatts in hand. The Queen
mother got into her Coach in great fear, and went to seek the Duke of Guise
to appease the commotion. The D. although he laid the fault upon the people,
yet neither would he stay the commotion, neither go the Loover to the king.

The Queen marking the stubbornness and resolution of the Duke of Guise,
caused the king to be advertised, who desiring not to stay any longer in that
trance, issued out of Paris by the newgate, and so happily eschewed the
Tragedy of Chilperic, The king flies out of Paris.
and the new crown of the razour prepared for him by the Leaguers: from Paris
he went to Chartresse, and from thence to Roane, fretting in heart for the
indignation he had sustained in Paris, and being determined, one way or other,
to be avenged on the Duke of Guise; the chief Captain of the league, and the
author of the Barricadoes. The chief thing that hindered this resolution for a
time was the two extremities wherewith he found himself beset: for either he
must make peace with the Protestants, or strengthen himself with their forces;
or else of new again adioyne himself to the league, because he was not able
to match them both at one time.

In the end he resolved to join with the league again and by a new edict set
forth in July Anno, 1588. An edict published against the Protestants.
he ratefied the decrees of the leaguers at Nemours which they had made, Anno
1585. containing in effect and substance the same things that were afterward
decreed in Nancy.

Moreover he remitted and excused the fact done against him in the town of
Paris: acknowledging it was done by them for the zeal of the Catholic
religion. And lest he should seem to foster in his mind some secret choler
against the leaguers: he bestowed his liberalities and favors upon the
principal heads thereof. To the Duke of Guise he gave the office of
Lieutenant General over all the forces throughout the Realm of France. To
the Cardinal of Guise his Brother he promised to procure the Pope to give him
the office of Legate of Anignon. To Duke De Maine was given a fair and great
army in Dolpkin.

He gave the Duke Nemours the government of Lions. He forgot not the
Archbishop of Lions, but made him one of his privy Counsel, before being only
of the counsel of estate: and finally declared the Cardinal of Burbon to be
the chief Prince of the blood royal, thereby wholly to exclude the king of
Navarre from the crown, The leaguers on the other part have the wind in their
sail and fearing that this great goodness of the king would not continue,
ceased not until they had procured all his wise Counselors to be removed, and
two armies to be leauied against the Protestants, the one in Poictou under the
conduct of the Duke of Neuers, the other in Dowphine under the Duke De Maine:
all this contented them not except the edict aforsaid were christened with the
name of a fundamental law, and because it could not be done but by the three
estates in France, they besought the king to hold a Parliament which was kept
in Bloyes, A Parliame^^ holden in France. The death of the Duke of Guise.
Anno 1589. There they played subtilie one with another, and he who was
deceived, thought upon nothing else but to deceive: for the Duke of Guise was
slain at this Parliament, and the Cardinal of Guise, the Archbishop of Lions
was arrested, and Ianueille the Duke of Guises son, and the Cardinal of Burbon
were detained prisoners.

The Queen mother took this sudden alteration so grieuouslie that she took
bed, The Queen mother dies.
and in the month of January following, died. The two armies that were sent
against the Protestants, the one stayed in Lions awaiting on the issue of the
Parliament, the other arrived into Poictou and had taken the Towns of Montagu,
and Ganach lying in the Frontiers of Poictou and Brittannie: while the
Parliament was at Bloyes the assembly of the Protestants was gathered in
Rotchell, which began the foureteenth day of November, the king of Navarre
being present (now the Prince of Condie was dead in the month of March, An
assembly of the Protestants at Rotchell send a request to the states at Bloyes.
Anno 1588. being poisoned by one of his own servants) and deputies from all
parts of the Countries, by whose advise and resolution came the request
presented to the states at Bloyes, under the name and title of the Frenchmen
exiled for the Religion: beseeching the King to restore them to the liberty of
the first edict which was called the edict of January: to ordain that a
national Council might be assembled where the Doctors of both parts with
good security in presence of his Majesty, and all the assembly might debate
those differences, and wholly decree and resolve upon the same: to grant them
the free liberty of possessing their goods: and to permit the registring of
their supplication: to the end that nothing might be done in that assembly to
preiudge them. But the Deputies of the Parliament, being for the most part,
composed of men that were taken out from among the passionate aduancers of the
League, not only refused to agree to the foresaid petitions, but also ceased
not, until both from the king himself and all the assembly, they had
procured a declaration of the perpetual disabilitie, of the king of Navarre to
the succession of the Crown.

But let us see what success followed upon the death of the Duke of Guise. Two
days after the execution at Bloyes the sixteen Arch-leaguers of Paris, as
Furies issuing out of hell, displaced the choler of their minds against the
king, crying out murder, fire and vengeance. They presently made a collection
of money to maintain wars; the poorest artificer amongst them was content at
least to import six crowns; The rebellion of the league against the king.
gold ran like a River a long the streets; they elevated the Duke of Guise
to the heavens and with open mouth spoke evil of the king, detesting his
actions, abhorring his life, and accounting the execution done at Bloyse as
most cruel, barbarous and inhumane. Many other towns followed the example of
Paris, namely Amiens, Dijon, Orleance, Tullose. The Doctors of Sorbon published
their decree, importing that the people of France, were freed and absolved
from the oath of fidelity and obedience made to Henry the third; and that the
same people might lawfully and with good conscience arm and unite themselves
together for defense of the Roman Church against the king or his adherents
whatsoever.

The report of those vprores, hastened the dissolution of the Parliament, which
was dissolved in January, 1589. and the king made for war to suppress the
rebellious insurrection of the league: and immediately he translated to the
town of Tours such exercises of Justice, as were accustomed to be performed
in his Court of Parliament of Paris, and deprived Paris with the towns of all
offices, charges, dignity and privileges whatsoever, as guilty of rebellion,
fellonie, and high treason against his Majesty's estate, and Person. Now the
king was brought to that pinch by the insolency of the league, that he
behooved to take truce with the king of Navarre, and to fortify himself with
the assistance of his forces, and he gave to the king of Navarre Saumure for
security of his passage over Loire, by means whereof the king of Navarre
caused all his troops to pass over on this side of Loire, to join with the
forces of Normandy, Maine, and other places which attended him with intention
to approach the leaguers.

The Duke De Maine, Duke De Maine sends men to surprise the king but is
prevented.
on the other part being chief commander of the Leaguers army, made a
selection of their resolutest men, and marched into Vendesmois with an
intention to surprise the king, in Tours where he was not very strongly
guarded; but the king was eased of this fear by the sudden arrival of the
king of Navarre for his relief.

In Normandy Duke Monpensier with forces for the king, besieged Salaize a
Town that held for the league, and Count Brissac, accompanied with two or
three hundredth, gentlemen leaguers, and with them five or six thousand men came
to support the town. Duke Montpensier hearing of those news left the siege of
the town and set upon Count Brissac and his army, being lodged in three
villages, and slew of them more than 3000. men; and took 1200 prisoners
amongst whom were 30. Gentlemen of the chiefest. This was a bad presagement for
the League.

In like manner at the siege of Senlis (a Town of France lying between Paris
and Picardie) which the Parisians besieged, because it was a Town of great
importance, the Duke of Longoveille came with support to the Town; upon which,
battle ensued: wherein, 1500. of the assailants were slain and all their
artillery and baggage was taken.

The king encouraged by those prosperous beginnings determined to go forward,
and to besiege the Town of Paris with his army of 45000. men.

The Duke De Maine and other principal Leaguers in Paris ^erc^^ued their
faction tending to a ruin, The leaguers procure a Iacobin Monk to kill the
king.
but found no ^^ued^^ except they executed some notable villainy by procuring
the kings death. And they found out a young Iacobine Monk called Friar Jacques
Clement, who for a kind of Dextcritie observed in him was found meet to strike
so great a stroke. The Monk departed from Paris, and being presented to
speak to the king the first day of August, said that he had letters from the
president of Harley and credence on his part. The king caused him to be called
into his Chamber, where there was none other but the (...) Belligard chief
Gentleman of the same, and the procuror general, whom he procured to retire a
part more priuatlie to give ^are unto him, who adressed himself (as it seemed)
with a countenance very simple and demure.

It is affirmed that in the self same chamber the massacre of Paris had been
concluded, Anno 1572. the king himself that was then Duke of Aniou being one
of the chiefest. The Monk perceiving himself alone, and opportunity offered
him drew out of one of his sleeves a paper which he presented to the king, and
out of of the other a Knife which he violently thrust within the kings small
ribs, he being attentive in r^^ding.

The king perceiving himself wounded plucked the knife out of the wound
wherewith he stroke the Monk above the eye, and thereupon some gentlemen came
running in; who moved with the indignity of so execrable fact, could not
contain but killed the murderer with their swords, The death of Henry the
third.
who went to the place appointed for him, and was canonized and adorned by the
league. The king being carried to his bed, died about three of the clock^ in
the morning the day following. A little before his d^parture, he named the
King of Navarre his brother in law, lawful successor to the crown, exhorting
his good subjects to obey him, and to refer the difference of religion to the
Convocation of the Estates general of the Realm, and to pray to God for him,
upon these words he gave up the ghost.

After the Kings death, the image and portraiture of the traitorous Monk, The
Iacobin who killed the K. canonized.
who killed the King by the commandment of the chief of the league, was most
artificially framed in brass, and other paintings, wherewith they garnished
both their houses and their Churches. Then was he canonized, and amongst the
superstitious prayed unto as a martyr, whom they called by the name of Saint
Jacques Clement. The Leaguers had with all their might endeavored in the former
Kings days to disappoint the succession of the King of Navarre, to the crown
of France. Now therefore they caused that title by proclamaton to be given to
the Cardinal of Burbone, The Cardinal of Burbon proclaimed K. by the Leaguers.
being then prisoner, whom they called King Charles the tenth, and Duke de
Maine was declared Lieutenant general to the Estate and Crown of France,
thereby disguising and coloring his usurpation to the Crown.

But King Henry the fourth, after he had buried the corpse of his predecessor,
took his first journey to Normandy, where the Pont to Larch was yielded to
him: K. Henry the 4. declared K. by K. Henry the 3. opposes himself to the
Leaguers.
Then he came to Deep, won Caen unto his side, and constrained Neuscastle
to be rendered into his hands. And having made a show to besiege Roane, it
caused Duke de maine being called to the succor by Aumalle and Brissac, to set
himself in the field with more then 3000. horsemen, and 5000. footmen, who
promised to the Parisians, at that time to make an end of all war, and to
bring their enemy bound unto them both hand and foot. The King marching toward
his enemies, encamped at a certain village called Arques, about two miles from
Deep, and so entrenched it about on all sides, that he might easily ouerrunne
the enemy at all times.

The Duke de Maine lay about Arques, from the end of August until the midst of
September, gayning nothing but loss of his best approoved soldiers, and nine
or ten of their Captains.

This first enterprise against the King did truly presage unto them what
success they were like to have in all their attempts to come, whereof followed
nothing else but shame and sorrow. This done, the King by easy iourneys drew
nigh to Paris, and entered by force the suburbs of S. Jacques, and being
advertised that the Duke de Maine was come forth of Picardie, and with all his
forces had entered into Paris, he stayed four long hours in battle, to see
if any of the Leaguers would issue out to fight. Afterward he departed from
Paris, and took the towns of Vendosme, and Man's, and Falaize, wherein Count
Brissac was taken prisoner: also he recovered Honfleur, a town upon the Sea
coast in Normandy, and compelled the Duke de Maine to raise his siege from the
town and fort of Meulan. In the beginning of March, the Duke de Maine with all
his forces passed over the bridge of Maule, which is about eight miles from
Dreux: whereof the King being advertised, provided for his affairs, and the
twelfth of the same month, set himself on the way to go against his enemies.
On the thirtith day the King after he had ordered his army, The battle of
Dreux, wherein the Leaguers were discomfited.
made an earnest prayer to God, and looked for battle, but there were nothing
but skirmishes, wherein the Leaguers had the worst. The next day the battles
joined near to the town of Dreux, wherein the King obtained a great victory,
and overthrew all the footmen of the Leaguers, which were counted to the number
of twelve thousand men. Only the Switzers who cast down their weapons, and
yielded to the King, together with the Frenchmen who were mingled amongst them,
had their lives spared: also fifteen hundred horsemen of the Leaguers were
slain and drowned, and four hundred taken prisoners. The Duke de Maine fled
toward Dreux, and when he was entered the town, broke up the bridge before his
own people were all come, which was the cause of the death of a great number
of his army, especially of the Rutters, of whom a great sort were drowned. In
this battle the army had their joy mixed with sorrow, at the first: for they
saw not the King return, but within a while after, they espied him coming all
stained with the blood of his enemies, not having shed one drop of his own
(whom they discryed only by the great plume of white feathers, which he had in
his creast, and that which his palfrey had on his head) all the army gave
hearty thanks to God for his safety, crying with one voice, God save the King.

The Duke de Maine and other Captains of the league being frustrate of their
hope, and seeing their army thus spoiled; betook themselves to their ordinary
shifts, which was to feed the Parisians with fable and lies: publishing that in
the battle they had almost eq^all loss, and that the King if he was not
already dead, he was near unto it. But the people being every day more and
more ascertained of the truth, began to grudge, and to be desirous of peace, so
that the Duke of Maine took his journey toward the Duke of Parma, to obtain
support from him.

The King drew nigh to Paris, The King besieges Paris.
and shut up the passages of the river of Seane, being master of Mance and
Poyssie on the one side, and Corbell Melum, and Monterean on the other side of
Paris; so that neither from above, nor from below, could any provision be
carried to Paris by the river of Seane: likewise by taking of Lagnay, and the
fort of Gonrey, he stopped the passage of the river of Merue, and by taking
Compienge, Creil, and Beaumont, he stopped the passage of the river of Oisso,
or Ayne.

In that populous town the famine was soon felt, and within the space of
three months, more then an hundred thousand dyed in the town: yet the most
part of them stirred up by the seditious Preachers, were content rather to
endure an hundred deaths, then to acknowledge their own sovereign King, whom
they called an Heretic, and a favourer of them.

The Duke de Maine having obtained promise of support from the Duke of Parma,
returned from Beuxellis, whom the King pursued from Laon to Meux, where he
enclosed himself between two rivers, waiting for the coming of the Duke of
Parma. The King hoped for battle so soon as the Duke of Parma was joined with
the Duke de Maine, but the Duke of Parma got up to an hill to view his enemies
army, and after he had thoroughly noted it, he took resolution not to fight,
The Duke of Parma enters France for the ^eliefe of Paris.
but to fortify and entrench his army within a great marrash, and so by means
of his intrenchments, he eschewed the hazard of battle, and came to Paris,
and named himself the deliverer of it. But after he had stayed a while in
Paris, the principal Captains of the league, began to give the Duke of Parma
thanks for his good will, and entreated him to go with his people to
Breuxelis again.

This request or secret command, fell out very well for the Duke. For on the
one part, his army was seen by all men daily to waste, and himself did
plainly behold that he stood in the midst of an inconstant multitude.
Therefore he dressed himself homeward with all possible speed, The Duke of
Parma returns home.
and the king pursued him to the very frontiers of Artoys. The Duke of Parmaes
coming, served to none other purpose but to fill their purses with the gold of
Peru, and to entangle and bring their affairs unto a remediless end: for in
the beginning of the year 1591. the King continued his siege, and the
Parisians were fallen into their wonted distresses, as before. But we leave for
a while, and mark the estate of the rest of the country.

In the country of Dauphein, Francis de Bonne, Lord of Diguireres, In all
other places of France the Leaguers went to ruin.
chased the Leaguers out of that part, and became master of Grenoble. In
Normandy the Duke of Montpensier, won Honfleur, and forced the Leaguers to
forsake field. In Poictou the Vicount dela Guerche, commanding over certain
regiments of footmen, and horsemen, and finding about a thousand of natural
borne Spaniards, newly come from Britain to do some great exployt, they were
all charged by the Baron de la Rotche Pose, and others of the Kings chief
servitors. In this conflict la Guerche was compelled to see 300. Gentlemen of
his most assured favorers, slain, and lying on the ground, at the which sight
he was so abashed, that he fled to the next river, where finding the boat,
and thinking to go over easily, the throng was so great, that the boat and
all the passengers sunk to the bottom: La Guerche was there drowned, with a
great number of others. There perished in the water and in the fight, more then
seven hundred Spainards: some supposed this loss of the Leaguers to be little
less then that of Coutras, by reason of the great number of the Nobility that
dyed therein. Likewise the Lord Digners overthrew in the plain of Portcharre,
the Duke Savoyes army, commanded by Amedio, the Dukes bastard son, and Don
Pleneres, a Spanish Captain, and the Marquis of Treuic, and others. There were
slain upon that plain, 2000. and 500. of the Dukes army, and a great number
were taken prisoners, being for the most part Gentlemen of command. The booty
which was gotten, amounted to the sum of two hundred thousand crowns.

The next day two thousand Romans and soldiers of Millaine, who with their
Commander, the Earl of Galcot of Belioyense, were saved within the Castle of
d' Analon, at length yielded themselves to the Kings mercy: but the fury of the
soldiers could not be quenched, till they had slain six or seven hundred of
them. The rest having white rods in their hands given them in stead of
pasports, were sent home to Italy.

In the mean time the King handled his affairs so busily, that he had taken
the towns of Chartresse and Noyon, and taken order that Paris should still be
enclosed on every side: so that the great tribute and taxes which were gathered
for the bringing in of victuals to the Parisians, and for the maintenance of
their troops, did gleane away their money piece after piece, and brought the
people to great poverty. Likewise the King after the taking of Noyon, sent some
of his troops to Normandy, to tame those of Roan, who showed themselves no
less obstinate then the Parisians. The Leaguers had none other shift, but
again to cry for aid of the Duke of Parma: who entered into France the second
time, The Duke of Parma enters France the 2. time in behalf of the Leaguers,
but with bad success.
with four thousand footmen, and three thousand horsemen, besides some
Italians conducted by S. Fondrat Earl of Mont Martian, and three thousand
Switzers. At this his approaching to Roane, the town of Candebec was yielded
to him, howbeit he did not keep it long: and he entered into Roane, but made no
tarrying there, because his purpose was to set forward to Paris.

The King on the other part, sent to all the neighbor towns, such as
Louviers, Mance, Menlan, Vernon, and others, where his garrisons were, that
they should march toward him, which was speedily performed: so that in six
days, his army grew to more then three thousand horsemen, and six thousand
footmen. With this company the King followed the Duke of Parmaes army, and
charged diverse times so roughly, that at one time they lost six hundred of
their number, another time, two thousand and five hundred, and so fled
shamefully toward Paris, and from thence to Brie, and last they came to
Artoys: where within few months the Duke of Parma with his troops melted,
like wax in the Sun. S. Fondrat saw his people also confounded.

The Kings favorites in diverse places prosper against the Leaguers.
Besides this good success, the Kings favorites in many other parts of the
Land, still continued prevailing against their enemies. The Duke of Bouillone
Mariscall of France, accompanied with four hundred horse, and two hundred
hagbuziers, only overthrewe before Beaumont, the Lord of d' Amblise, high
Mariscall of Loraine, and the Dukes Lieutenant general, accompanied with two
thousand footmen, and eight hundred horsemen. Amblize was slain in the field,
with more then seven hundred others: his artillery won, all his corners and
ensigns taken: and 400. Lance-knights sent away unarmed.

In Languedocke Duke de Ioyense, the brother of him who was slain at Coutras,
had besieged Montaban, and Villemure, but Thimenes issuing out of Villemure,
constrained the Duke to forsake the held, with the loss of three thousand men,
three canons, and two culverines. The bridge which the Duke had builded over
Tie was cut up, and was almost the cause of all their deaths. Ioyense himself
overcome with despair in this distress, was heard to vomit out these
desperate words. Farewell my great canons, ha, I renounce God, I run this day
an high fortune: and therewith desperately he plunged himself horse and all
into the river Tae. The death of D. Ioyense.
This was the miserable end of this cruel, proud, and blasphemous young Duke,
who was much lamented of the Leaguers: for whom he had done many great
exployts.

The Kings army in that part consisting of five hundred horsemen, and two
thousand and five hundred hagbuziers, besides those that were within the town
of Villemure, withdrew themselves in good order unto their garrisons, after
they had given thanks to God, for so prosperous a victory. After all those
successes which God granted to the King, The defection of the King from
religion.
followed his defection from his religion, in the month of July, Anno, 1593.
The Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors of Sorbon, were appointed to meet at
Mance, the fifteenth of July, without any mention of the Protestants Ministers,
who were before put from the King. By whose persuasion the King was induced to
hear and see mass sung, in the Cathedral Church of Saint Denise, the five
and twentieth day of July. All this assuaged not the fury of the Leaguers, who
still continued in their wonted malice against the King, and stirred up a
wicked man, called Peter Burrier, Peter Burrier stirred up to slay the King.
alias, Bar, borne at Orleance, to slay the King. This man was committed to
prison at Melun, the six and twentieth day of August, where he confessed that
he was seduced by a Capushan Friar at Lions, and by a Curat and Vicar of
Paris, and also by a Jesuit, closely to follow the King, and to murder him
with a two edged knife, which also was found about him: He was drawn through
the streets of Melun, where then the King was; they cut off his right arm
holding the murdering knife therein, and after burned the same: also his
arms, legs, and thighbones were broken upon a wheel, where he languished
certain hours till he dyed.

The King seeing that the malice of his enemies still continued, resolved no
longer to bear the same, wherefore he caused a declaration to be imprinted
and published in the beginning of the year, The K. opposes himself to the
Leaguers.
1594. containing an Oration of the mischiefs and unfaithful practices of the
Leaguers. Prescribing a months liberty as well to the chief of the Leaguers,
as to the clergy, cities, towns, communalties, yea, and to all men generally
within the same, to acknowledge him their King, and to submit themselves to his
government. The time once past, he would revoke his grace and favor,
accounting them to be rebels, and guilty of high treason, for contempt of his
Kingly offer.

The report of this declaration, and the preparations which the King made to
chastise their stubborn opinions: amazed the very principal of the league,
and the most part of the rebellious towns and commons. The town of Meux in
Brie, Diverse towns yield themselves to the King.
a small journey from Paris, yielded themsselues to the King, the eleventh of
January: and by a pithy letter, exhorted the Parisians to follow their example.
Soon after the cities of Orleance, Lions, Roane, Poicters, Bourges, Haure de
grace, Pontean de Mervernueil at Perch, Pointoise, Riome in Anergne, Peron,
and mondidier in Picardie, were received in favor: and those of Annens and
Abeveil, after they had remained neuters a while, shortly after acknowledged
their sovereign King. Last of all, the town of Paris yielded to the King, in
the month of March. Wherein it is to be noted, that the Kings troops entered
so peaceably into the town, that within two hours after, the shops were all
set open, and the town appeared so peaceable, as if there had never been any
change. In Picardie the town of laon was fortified against the King, by the
Spaniards forces, and yet was compelled to yield Soissons and La Fere, which
were possessed by the Duke de Maine, and the Spaniards would not yield: and the
town and fort of Blauel in Britannie was also fortified against the King. But
now seeing the League inclined to an hasty ruin, the last refuge was by
horrible treason, to cut off Henry the fourth, John Castill stirred up by the
Leaguers to murder the King, is disappointed of his purpose*
as they had done Henry the third before. To this effect they stirred up a
young stripling, named John Castill, about 18. or 19. years of age, to slay
the King as he was returning from Picardie to Paris. Thus upon the 27. day of
December, Anno, 1584 ^as the King was ready booted and spurred to return from
Picardie to Paris, within a chamber at Lououre, this stripling went into the
chamber amongst the press, and as the King was busily occupied in receiving
his Nobles, and in a princely manner kissing them for his farewell, suddenly he
would have stricken the King in the body with a knife he had in his hand. But
by reason his Majesty was very ready to take up the Lords which were on their
knees before him, in his stooping he struck him in the face on the upper iaw
on the right side, therewithal cutting out one of his teeth. Presently this
miserable caitiue was taken, and after examination, understanding that he was a
scholar of the Jesuits, the King said, And must it needs be that the Jesuits
must be confounded by my mouth.

This parricide being brought to prison, freely declared all the circumstances
of his evil intent, discovering many of the Jesuits secret practices. Amongst
many other things he remembered he heard the fathers of that holy society say,
that it was lawful to kill the King, Note.
that he was excommunicated out of the Church, that he was not to be obeyed nor
taken for their King, until such time as he was allowed by the Pope. The Court
of Parliament condemning this Castile of Treason in the highest degree, caused
him to be brought naked in his shirt before the principal part of the
Cathedral Church in Paris, holding in his hand a taper of wax, lighted, there
to confess his heinous sin, asking forgiveness of God, the King, and the
laws, which done, he was conveyed to the place of execution, carrying in his
hand the murdering knife, The Parliaments decree about the execution of
Castill, and the Jesuits of Clermonts banishment
wherewith he intended to murder the King: the which was there first cut off,
his flesh pulled off with hot burning Pincers, both from his arms and thighs;
after that, his body was drawn in pieces with four horses, and cast into the
fire and consumed to ashes, and the ashes scattered in the wind. Likewise the
said Court of Parliament ordained, that all the Priests and Scholars of
Clermont college, and all other of the same society of Jesus, to be holde^
and reputed as corrupters of youth, disturbers of the public peace, enemies
to the King and State: and to avoyde within three days after the Proclamation
of this edict, out of Paris and all other towns and places where their
Colleges are, and within 15. days after, out of the kingdom, on pain, if
being found after the time prefixed, to be punished as guilty of the said
crime of treason.

Besides these horrible troubles that were in France in the days of this
Emperor Rodulph, the King of Spain prepared a great army to invade the
Realm of England. This army was counted invincible, and of most admirable
preparation, The preparation of the Spanish navy Anno 1588.
it contained an hundredth and thirty Ships, wherein were as many Regiments,
having an hundredth seventy two Ensigns, and 20000. fighting men, besides the
number of 1000. more that had nothing to do with arms; also their furniture
and provision was exceeding great, for they had 11000. Quintals of Biscat.
14170. Pipes of Wine. 6500. Quintals of Bacon. 3433. Quintals of Cheese. 8000.
Quintals of dried fish of all sorts. 6320, Bushels of Beans and Pease. 11398.
Roues and Measures of oil. 23870. Roues of Vinegar. And 11850. Pipes of fresh
Water: besides the victuals and necessaries of household, that were in great
number, and of all sorts. The arms reserved for store were 7000. Caleeuers,
and their furnitures, a 1000. Muskets, a 1000. Lances, a 1000. Partisants and
Halbards. 6000. Pikes. More Pickaxes, Payles, and other instruments then would
serve for 700. Pioners. With this number and in this manner being prepared, the
army departed out of Lisbone, under the conduct of the Duke de Medina Gidonia,
assisted with 22. Lords, of estate, council, and experience. But it had searce
entered into the sea, sailing toward the Gnongnes in Gallicia, but there arose a
storm with so great force, A storm co^^traineth the navy to put to land.
that the Navy was constrained to put to land, and there to stay till wind
and weather served: having lost in that storm three Galleys of Portugalls, and
many of them so scattered and bruised, that they were not serviceable for that
Voyage. The storm being calmed and the weather good, about the 22. of Iulie,
the General caused them to set sail so fortunately, that in less then five
days after, they descryed the point or end of Cornwall, and at the same time
they were seen from Plimmouth by the Admiral of England, and Sr Francis
Drake, Vice admiral, The Spani^^ Navy overthrown.
who made them turn their faces, and gave them such a skirmish, and that so
near, that the Ships were in disorder, and a great Gallion lost, wherein was
found a part of the treasures that the Army brought with it, and all the
instructions which the Duke de Medina had, and what he should do, having
Conquered England. At the last the Navy got as far as Callis, where it
should have joined with the Duke of Parma; but the Army of England that fought
to impeach it, followed it, and that so nie, that it was forced to leave her
Anchor-hold, and confusedly to fly away. Their principal Gallias, among other
Vessels, was by the streams cast upon the sands hard by the haven of Callis,
and there with his Ordnance was left for the governor of Callis. After this, it
made toward the North seas, passing between Norway and Scotland, and so toward
Ireland, where those northern seas, being as then risen according to the time
of year, were very tempestuous, and used the rest of the army very hardly,
for it drowned and sunk 17. great Vessels upon the coast of Ireland, and
spoiled, broke, and overthrew diverse others, in such manner, that of 130.
Ships, there were scarcely 30. that returned to SPAIN.

Here ends the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF the Church, Containing a brief Catalogue
of the beginnings, proceedings, and deaths of all the Bishops, Popes,
Patriarchs, Doctors, Pastors, and other learned men in Europe, Asia, and
Africa, since Christ's days until this present.
CENTVRIE I.
Of Apostles.
AFter the Lords resurrection, Apostles.
his twelve Apostles were endued with grace from above, and sent forth to
convert all people to the obedience of Christ: whose travels the Lord so
wonderfully blessed, that within a short time many thousands of all Nations and
Languages, whom God had appointed to eternal life, were converted to the faith
of Christ. This conquest that Christ made by the Ministry of twelve poor and
contemptible men, Note.
is more worthy to be called a Conquest; then all the valiant exployts of
Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, and other Conquerours. For he made this conquest by a
small handful of poor and infirm Disciples; also he conquered not only the
bodies of men, but also their hearts to his obedience: and finally, he made
this conquest, not by shedding of peoples blood, but by Preaching of his own
death, and bloodshed for the redemption of many. Neither conquered he free men,
to make them slaves, as other Conquerours had done: but they who were slaves
indeed to Satan, unto them he gave the liberty of the sons of God.

Now these twelve Apostles the more faithfully they labored in the work of
their ministry, the worse were they entreated by the unthankful world, Ioh.
16.
according as Christ had foretold. The most part of them were put to death, the
rest were not free of many painful sufferings and rebukes, which they
willingly sustained for the name of Christ. Peter and Paul are supposed to have
been martyred at Rome: Andrew to have been crucified in Achaia: Matthew
beheaded in Ethiopia: James the brother of John was beheaded by Herod in Judea:
Act. 12.
James the son of Alpheus, called Iustus, was thrown down headlong from the
Pinnacle of the Temple: Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 32. Ierom. Cat. s^rip. eccles.
Simon of Canaan was crucified in the days of Traianus, being an hundredth and
twenty years old, when he suffered Martyrdom. Bartholomew is said to have
been martyred in Armenia: and Simon Zelotes, to have been crucified in
Britain: John died at Ephesus: Philip in Hierapolis, Functius calls the
Town Hierosopolis: Ierom. cat^l. s^r. p. eccles.
Judas Lebbeus, at Edessa: Thomas in India: and Matthias in Ethiopia.

Of Evangelists.
AS concerning the Evangelists, Evangelists.
they were fellow laborers with the Apostles in the work of Christ, and were
also partakers with them of Christ's sufferings. The Evangelist Mark died in
Alexandria. Func. chron. Ierom.
Luke in Bithynia, others say in Constantinople. Philip, who first was a
Deacon, and afterward an Evangelist, died in Cesarea. Barnabas in the Isle of
Cyprus. Where Timothy and Titus did complete their days, it is not certainly
known. Chytraeus opinion about Timothy I have already declared. Jerome
supposes that Titus died in Candie. The successors of the Apostles and
Evangelists, are not to be reckoned as the successors of Emperors: because he
who next obtains the Imperial Diadem and place of government, The true
successors of the Apostles.
is counted the successor of the last Emperor: but he who obtains a
faithful Pastors chair, and teaches a doctrine contrary to that which a
faithful Pastor has taught, is to be counted a grievous Wolf stepped up into
his room. Act. 20.
And Nazianzenus calls such a man an adversary, standing up in the place of
a faithful Pastor, darkness succeeding to light, a tempest succeeding to
calm weather, and madness obteining place where right reason was wont to be.
Nazia. in orat. in laudem Athanaf^.
And therefore those Bishops and Doctors following, who keep inviolably that
form of wholesome doctrine which they received from the Apostles, these, I
say, alone are to be counted true successors of the Apostles.

Bishops of Rome.
OF this number, Linus.
was Linus Bishop of Rome, who after the martyrdom of Peter and Paul governed
that Church ten years, three months, and twelve days. Eusebius thinks this
is that same Linus, of whom the Apostle Paul writes in the last Chapter of his
second Epistle to Timothy: Eubulus and Pudens and Linus, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 2.
and Claudia salute thee.

After him succeeded Anacletus, and governed nine years, three months, and
ten days; and after him Cl^mens ruled eleven years; Eusebius also thinks,
this is that Clemens, of whom the Apostle Paul writes to the Philippians,
Chap. 4. ver. 3.
Yea I beseech thee faithful yoke fellow, help those women that labored with
me in the Gospel, with Clement also and with other my fellow laborers,
Ignatius.
whose names are in the book of life. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, had his
heart so inflamed with the love of Christ, that when his dissolution was near
approaching, he said to the Romans: now do I begin to be the Disciple of
Christ, I covet for nothing that can be seen with bodily eyes, to the end that
I may enjoy Jesus Christ: let the fire, the cross, the beasts, the breaking of
bones, convulsion of members, and bruising of the whole body, and the torments
of the Devil sease upon me, provided I may be partaker of Jesus Christ. He was
devoured with beasts in the days of Traianus, and so patiently endured death
for the Name of Jesus, that he allured the devouring beasts to approach near
unto his body, that it being ground with the teeth of beasts, Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 36. Papias.
he might be found as fine flower in the house of his Father.

About the same time also flourished Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, who was a
man of great authority, because of his neerenesse to the Apostles days: yet
leaning more to the report of the doctrine of the Apostles, then to the
certainty of their own writings, he fell into the error of the Chiliastes,
who imagined that Christ should raise the godly first, and live with them a
thousand years in this earth, in all kind of delicate pleasures. Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 39.


CENTVRIE II.
Bishops of Rome.
IN this second Centurie the Bishops of Rome for the most part proved faithful
and worthy servants of Christ. Bishops of Rome.
A great number of them were baptized with the Baptism of Christ, and drank
of the cup that Christ drank of, and were drenched with their own blood, and
they watered the Church of Rome with the streams of their blood, as Egypt is
watered and made fruitful with the inundation of Nilus; men of blessed
remembrance: Damasus writes that from Saint Peter to Telesphorus, all the
Bishops of Rome were Martyrs. Note.
Others added, that until the days of Sylvester, who lived in the time of the
reign of Constantine, all the Bishops of Rome had the honor of martyrdom.
But in these hyperbolicke speeches, neither has the distinction between a
Martyr and a Confessor been rightly considered, (albeit well marked by Eusebius.
eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2.) neither has the history of the reign of
Antoninus Pius been rightly pondered, in whose days Hyginus and Pius lived,
and were not slain for the testimony of Christ. Always it is an envious mind
that holds back from worthy men their due praise and commendation, both in
doing of good and patient suffering of evil for Christ's sake.

In rehearsing the names of the Roman Bishops, I thought meet to follow
Ireneus and Eusebius rather then Platina. In the first Centurie after the
martyrdom of Peter and Paul, Linus, Anacletus, and Clemens, were teachers of
the Roman Church. In the second Centurie, follow Evaristus, Alexander 1.
Xistus 1. Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius 1. Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and
Victor. This Victor must needs be called the 13. Bishop of Rome, if
Eleutherius be the 12. according to the computation of Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 3.
Onuphrius according to his own custom, gives more credit to old
parchments, that he has found in the Vatican Bibliotheke, then to any ancient
Father. He begins early to distinguish Cletus from Anacletus, that by
taking liberty to thrust in one more in the first Centurie, he may have the
greater boldness to thrust out another of the feminine sex in another
Centurie. For it grieueth him to the heart to hear this thing so universally
affirmed, and to see the pen of Platina blushing, when he writes of Johannes
the eight, he makes little contradiction to that settled and received opinion
of the feminine Pope. But I leave Onuphrius sporting with his own conceits, as
a Pleasant does with his own fingers, when no other body will keep purpose
with him. Euaristus finished the course of his ministration in eight years.
Alexander martyred. Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib 4. c 1. Xistus martyred. Eusebius.
lib. 4. cap. 5. Telesphorus ^ martyr. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 10
Alexander who is in express words called the fifth B. of Rome, after the death
of Peter and Paul, governed ten years, and suffered martyrdom in the days of
Adrian, as Platina writes. After him Xistus 1. continued ten years, and died
a martyr, Platin. Telesphorus the 7. Bishop of Rome after the days of the
Apostles lived in that ministration eleven years, and was honored with
martyrdom. Hyginus An. 4. And Pius the 1. ministered 11. years. These two
suffered not martyrdom, because their lot was to live in the calm days of a
meek Emperor Antoninus Pius. Anicetus ministered in that office 11. years,
Anicetus a martyr. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14
with whom Polycarpus B. of Smyrna, conferred at Rome concerning the
observation of the festiuitie of Easter day. He concluded his life with the
glorious crown of Martyrdom. To him succeeded Soter, An. 9. After him
Eleutherius, An. 15. In whose time Lucius King of the Britons desired that he
and his people should be baptized and received into the fellowship of
Christians: to whom Eleutherius sent Fugatius and Damianus, who satisfied the
desire of the King, and his people, so they were baptized and counted
Christians. Platira de vita Eleuth^^ij. The ras^n^sse of Victor.
After him Victor, An. 10. He intended to have excommunicated all the Churches
of the East, because they kept not the festiuitie of Easter day, conform to
the cust^me of the Church of Rome, but rather upon the day wherein the Jews
were accustomed to eat their Paschall Lamb. But this rashness of Victor was
somewhat abated by the grave and prudent counsel of Ireneus, B. of Lions, who
admonished Victor, that there was no less discrepance of customs concerning
keeping of Lent, then was concerning the keeping of Easter day, yet was not the
unity of the Church violated nor rent asunder for this discrepance. And when
Polycarpus B. of Smyrna came to Rome, in his conference with Anicetus neither
of them could persuade the other to change the custom of keeping of days
which they had received by tradition of their predecessors. Notwithstanding
they kept fast the bond of Christian fellowship, Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5.
cap. 26.
and Anicetus admitted Polycarpus to the communion of the Roman Church, and
they departed in peace one from another.

Quadratus B. of Athens, Of other Doctors and Preachers.
lived in the days of Adrian. This Emperor upon a certain time wintered in
Athens, and went to Eleusina, and was (...), that is to say, initiate into all
the mysteries of Grecia. This fact of the Emperor gave encouragement to those
who hated Christians without allowance of the Emperors commandment to vex
the Christians. Concerning his apology for Christians given into the Emperor,
together with the apology of Aristides, a learned Philosopher and eloquent
Orator in Athens, Ierom. Catal. scrip. eccles.
we have spoken already in the description of the life of Adrian.

Agrippas Castor, Agrippas Castor.
a very learned man answered to the books of the Heretic Basilides, who with
the novelty of barbarous and uncouth words, troubled the hearts of rude and
ignorant people, talking of a god whom he called Arbraxas, and of his Prophets
Barcab and Barcob, words invented by himself to terrify simple people. Such
delusions of Satan Quintinists in our days, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7.
an ignorant race of brain sick fellows have used. And so the blind led the
blind, and both fell into the ditch.

In this age, Hegesippus. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 11
Hegesippus of the nation of the Jews was converted unto the faith of Christ,
and came to Rome in the days of Anicetus, and continued until the days of
Eleutherius. But for what cause he came to Rome, or in what part of the world
he bestowed the travels of his ministry, no mention is made, neither by
Eusebius, nor by any other ancient Writer, no not by Jerome himself, a most
accurate explorator of all antiquities.

Melito, Melito. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13.
B. of Sardis, a famous town in Lydia, wrote an apology for the Christians to
the Emperor Antoninus Philosophus, whom Eusebius calls Marcus Aurelius
Verus. His apology was written with Christian freedom and courage: for he was
not afraid to declare to the Emperor what good success Augustus Caesar had,
in whose days Christ was borne, and what unprosperous success, Nero and
Domitian had, Hist. Magdeb. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
who persecuted the Christians. Eusebius calls him an Eunuch.

In the fourth persecution died Justinius Martyr, Justinius a martyr.
accused and delated by Crescens. He was converted to Christ's Religion by the
travels of an old man, whom he supposed for his gravity to have been a
Philosopher, but he was a Christian. The manner of Justinius his conversion.
This ancient man counseled Justinius to be a diligent reader of the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, who spoke by divine inspiration, who knew the
verity, and were not covetous of vain glory, neither were they dashed with
fear, whose doctrine also was confirmed with miraculous works, which God
wrought by their hands. Above all things willed him to make earnest prayers to
God to open unto him the ports of true light, because the truth cannot be
comprehended, Justin Dialog. cum Trepb.
except the Father of light, and his son Christ Jesus give unto us an
understanding heart. He wrote two books of apology for Christians to the
Emperor Antoninus Pius, and to his sons, and the Senate of Rome. In the
second book of his apology he declares that Christians were put to death,
not for any crime they had committed, but only for their profession. In
witness whereof, if any of them would deny his Christian profession, straight
way he was absolved, Justin. apol. 2.
because there was no other thing wherewith he was charged.

In this same persecution also suffered the holy martyr of Christ, Polycar^us
martyred.
Polycaryus, B. of Smyrna. He was willing to have remained in the town of
Smyrna, but by the earnest supplications of friends, was moved to leave the
town, and lurk secretly in the country. Polycaryus his dream before his
apprehension.
Three days before he was apprehended by his persecuters, he dreamed that his
bed was set on fire and hastily consumed, which he took for a divine
advertisement, that he behooued to glorify God by suffering the torment of
fire. His conference with the Roman Deputy, and how he refused to deny
Christ, whom he had served fourscore years, and ever found him a gracious
Master: also how he refused to swear by the fortune of Caesar, and how
patiently he suffered death for the name of Christ, Eus^b. l^b. 4. cap. 15.
I^eneus. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5.
this history is set down at large by Eusebius.

Ireneus B. of Lions in France, and successor to Photinus, a martyr and
Disciple of Polycar^us in his youth, flourished in the days of the Emperor
Commodus, whose meek conversation and peaceable carriage answered to his name
(...), that is, peaceable, and made his name to be in great account amongst
Christians. How he pacified the fury of Victor, B. of Rome, and the pernicious
schism springing up in the Church of God upon very small occasion, it has
been already declared. He lacked not his own infirmities and errors, Iren.
lib. 5 con. Valen^.
even in doctrine. He was entangled with the error of the Chiliasts. He
supposed that as Christ being thirty year old was baptized, so likewise he
began to teach when he was forty year old, and suffered when he was fifty,
because he came to save all, and therefore he would taste of all the ages of
mankind. Iren. l. 2. c. 34.
Yet is this opinion repugnant to the narration of the four Evangelists.

Clemens Alexandrinus lived in the days of the Emperor Commodus. Clemens
Alexandrinus.
He was the disciple of Pantenus. These two seem to be the authors of
Universities and Colleges: For they taught the grounds of Religion, not by
Sermons and Homilies to the people, but by catecheticall doctrine to the
learned in the schools. B^colc. chron. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 11.
This Clemens esteemed too much of tradition, like as Papias did, of whom we
spoke in the former Centurie, whereby it came to pass, that he fell into many
strange and absurd opinions, directly repugnant to the written word of God:
affirming that after our calling to the knowledge of the truth, possibly God
may grant to them that have sinned, (...), but if we sin ofter then once or
twice, there is no more renewing by repentance, or pardon for sin, Strom. lib. 2.
but a fearful expectation of judgment. And in his 4. book of Strom. as it
were forgetting his own rigorous sentence against those who sin ofter then
once or twice after their illumination with the light of God, he says, (...),
that is to say, whether here or els-where ( viz. creatures do repent) no place
is void of the mercy of God. In which words he would insinuate, that those who
repent either in this world or els-where, (that is in the world to come) may
possibly obtain favor at Gods hand: nothing can be written more repugnant
both to the word of God, and also to his own forementioned opinion. Many other
worthy Preachers and learned men flourished in this Centurie, whose names of
purpose are pretermitted. In Athens, Publius and Athenagoras: In Corinth,
Primus, Dionysius, and Bacchilus: In the Isle of Candie, Philippus and Pinytus:
In Antiochia, Hieron, Theophilus, Hist. Magdeb.
Maximus, Serapion. In Jerusalem before the days of the Emperor Adrian, the
Bishops of Jerusalem were of the nation of the Jews. But after the days of
Adrian who banished the Jews from their native soil, Christian Preachers of
other nations were Bishops in Jerusalem, such as Marcus, Cassianus, Eusebius. lib.
5. cap. 12.
Publius, Maximus, Iulianus, Capito, Valens, Dolichianus, Narcissus: the most
part of all these lived in this Centurie, but Narcissus with some others, are
known to have lived in the days of Seuerus the fifth persecuter, and some
space after him. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. ^.
But to write of all other worthy Preachers and Doctors in particular, it were
an infinite labor, and far surmounting the ability of these ecclesiastic
Writers, who wrote in ancicient times, and much more our ability who live in a
latter age.

CENTVRIE III.
Bishops of Rome.
TO Victor succeeded Zephyrinus the 14. Zephyrinus. Platin. Eusebius. 6.21.
Bishop of Rome, who lived in that charge eight years, seven months, ten
days. Eusebius attributes unto him 18. years, so uncertain is the
computation of the years of the government of the Bishops of Rome. Eusebius
writes nothing of his decretall Epistles, and these that are forged by late
Writers are foolish and ridiculous. Consecration of the holy cup to be in a
vessel of glass only. A Bishop to be accused before honest Judges, twelve in
number, whom the Bishop himself shall choose if need be. Honest and unspotted
witnesses to be heard in this cause no fewer then 72. conform and above the
number of those 70. Disciples whom Christ adjoined as fellow laborers in
Preaching with his Apostles. And finally, that no definitive sentence should be
pronounced against a Bishop, until the time his cause were heard of the
Patriarch of Rome. This is but a mocking of the Church of God, to attribute
such smelling pride, such unaccustomed forms of Iudicatory, such defencing
armor fencing and guarding unrighteous men against just deserved punishment,
to the simplicity of an ancient Church, humbled under the cross, and fighting
under the yoke of heavy and long-lasting afflictions. These false and forged
decretall Epistles, altogether unknown to the Fathers, who lived before the
days of Constantine, Note.
will procure one day a decree and sentence of wrath against those, who have
given out new intended lies, under the names of ancient and holy Fathers.

The canons of the Apostles (albeit a book falsely attributed to the Apostles)
do agree better with Scripture, then the constitution of Zephyrinus; for the
scripture says, That by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall
be confirmed. Mat. 18.16
The canons of the Apostles say, (...), that is, Let not an Heretic be
admitted to bear witness against a Bishop, neither yet one witness only,
albeit, he be faithful: Canon. Apost. cap. 74.
because that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall be
confirmed. The writer of the canons of the Apostles, had some remembrance of
the words of Scripture: but the forger of the decretall Epistles of Zephyrinus
is like unto a ship-man, who has hoised up his sail and advanced his ship so
far into the sea, that he has lost the sight of land and towns, as the Poet
speaks, Provehimur Pelago, terraque vrbesque recedunt. Surely this lying
fellow, who ever he has bin, that has written this supposititious decretall
Epistle of Zephyrinus, he has hoised up his sail, and is so bent to lie, that
he has lost both sight and remembrance of the words of holy Scripture.

Callistus the 15. Callistus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21.
Bishop of Rome continued in his charge five years. Platina says 6. years,
10. months, 10. days. The fable of Pope Damasus, who affirms that Callistus
builded a Church to the honor of the Virgin Mary, beyond Tyber, is rejected by
Platina himself, because the history of the time clearly proves, Note.
that in the days of Seuerus, and his sons, the conuentions of the
Christians could not have been in magnificke temples, but rather in obscure
chapels, or subterraneall places, so that the multiplied number of lies
written of the Bishops of Rome, who lived in this age, and the decretall
Epistles falsely attributed unto them, plainly prove, that the garment of
antiquity, under the lap whereof Papists would so gladly lurk, is altogether
wanting to them.

Vrbanus 1. was the 16. Bishop of Rome. Vrbanus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 22.
He continued in his office 8. years. Platina 4. years, 10. months, 12.
days. Of his martyrdom Eusebius makes no mention. Others who record his
martyrdom, are not certain in what Emperors days he was martyred.

I proceed to his successor Pontianus the 17. B. of Rome. He continued in his
charge 9. years, Pontianus. Platin.
5. months, 2. days. Eusebius. says 6. years. He was banished to the Isle
Sardinia where he died. Of the two decretall epistles ascribed unto him, the
second is general written to al men who fear and love God, and the very first
words of it prove it to be false and forged: Pontianus sanct^ and uniuersal^s
Ecclesia Episcopus, etc. that is, Pontianus B. of the holy universal Church, to
al them who fear and love God, Tom. 1. C^ncil.
wishes welfare. Such magnificke styles as these were not as yet in use, and
when they crept into the Church afterward, they were given by persons who
admired the virtues of some singular and rare men, such as Cyprian and
Athanasius and Eusebius: but no man did usurp such proud and arrogant ti tles
of dignity in his own writings directed to other Christians, and therefore
the learned reject this epistle as composed by some late unlearned and
flattering fellow. After Pontianus succeeded Anterus the 18. B. of Rome,
Anterus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 29.
to whom Eusebius assigned but one month of continuance in his ministry:
Damasus assigns to him 12. years: Platina 11. years, 1. month, 12. days:
and this diversity of counting cannot be reconciled. Fabianus.
Next to Anterus succeeded Fabianus the 19. B. of Rome, upon whose head a dove
lighted when the people were consulting concerning the election of a B.
therefore with full consent of the whole congregation he was declared to be
their B. The people at this time were so far from being secluded from giving
their consent to the election of him who should be ordained their Pastor, that
the consent of the people had the sway in the election of Pastors, Func.
Chron, and Commentar. Func. Chron. and Commentar. Platin. de vitis
He suffered martyrdom under the reign of Decius the 7. great persecuter,
after he had continued in his office 14. years, 11. months, 11. days: Many
constitutions made by him are cited by Gratianus and inserted Tom 1. Council.
Tom. 1. Council.
One of them I cannot pass by. We constitute that upon every Lords day the
oblation of the altar shall be made by every man and woman both of bread and
wine, Note.
to the end that by these oblations they may be delivered from the heaps of
their sins. First mark in this constitution that the bread and wine which
the people brought with them upon the Lords day, for the ministration of the
holy communion is called the oblation of the altar, the table whereupon the
bread and wine were laid, was called the alter: the bread and the wine are
called the offering or the sacrifice, because part of it was distributed in the
holy communion, to keep a memorial of the Lords death, and the rest was given
to the sustentation of the poor, and in that respect also it was called a
sacrifice as ^he scripture speaks, Heb. 13 16.
To do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. The last part of the decree is blasphemous and falsely attributed to
Fabian: because the sins of men and women, who believe and repent, are
forgiven only for the merit of that bloody sacrifice which the Lord Jesus
offered upon the Cross for our sins. But our furnishing of elements to the
communion, and sustentation of the poor cannot merit forgiveness of sins.

The successor of Fabianus was Cornelius the 20. Cornelius. A council at Rome
against Novatus Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
Bishop of Rome. He had a great strife against Nouatus and his accomplices. He
assembled a Council at Rome of 60. Bishops, besides Elders and Deacons, by
whom the heresy of Nouatus was condemned: and the Nouatians were separated
from the fellowship of the Church. Cornelius was ba^ished from Rome by the
Emperor Decius, and sent to a town in Hetruria called Centum-cellae where he
had great comfort by the mutual letters that passed between him and Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage. When the Emperor got knowledge of this, he sent for
Cornelius, and accused him as a man who not only despised the worshipping of
the gods, and was disobedient to the Emperors commandment, but also that he
was a trafficker against the estate of the empire by receiving and sending
letters beyond sea. Cornelius answered that he wrote matters pertaining to
Christ, and the salvation of men's souls, and not of matters belonging to the
estate of the empire. Notwithstanding the Emperor Decius commanded that he
should be scourged with plumbats (this was a sort of grievous whip) and
afterward that he should be led to the Temple of Mars with commandment to put
him to death, The martyrdom of Cornelius. Platin. de vita. Eusebius lib. 7. cap
2. Lucius.
if he refused to worship the image of Mars. Thus was Cornelius beheaded for
the name of Christ, after he had governed. 2. years, 3. days. Or as Eusebius
writes, 3. years.

Lucius the 21. Bishop of Rome was successor to Cornelius, and continued in
the government of the Church of Rome 3. years, 3. months, 3. days, Platin.
Eusebius. 8. months, lib. 7. cap. 2. One decretall epistle is assigned unto him,
written unto the Bishops of France and Spain, Platin. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 2.
Tom 1. Conc^l.
wherein he braggeth that the Bishops of Rome cannot err in matter of faith:
but the ineptitude of a barbarous Latin style, wherein the Epistle is dited,
declares it has been written by an unlearned Ass, and not by Lucius Bishop
of Rome.

Stephanus 22. Bishop of Rome ruled that Church 2 years Platin. 7. years,
Stephanus. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 5.
5. months, 2. days. He was greatly commoued against Cyprian B. of Carthage,
because that by his opinion of rebaptizing those who were baptized by
Heretics, Platin. in vit^ Lucij.
the unity of the Church of Christ was perturbed and rent, Platina writes
that Cyprian before his martyrdom forsook his opinion of rebaptizing and was
content by imposition of hands according to the custom of the Roman Church to
receive such as had been baptized by Heretics. The constitution concerning
consecrated garments that men in spiritual offices should wear in the Church,
and no where else, lest they incur the like punishment with Baltasar, Dan 5.
who abused the holy vessels of the house of God, in my opinion is not
judiciously attributed by Platina unto this B. Stephanus: because the ordinance
smells rather of Iudaisme then of Christian religion, and the reason
subioyned to the constitution is altogether impertinent. It was sacrilege
indeed and a proud contempt of God in the person of Baltasar, to drink common
wine with his harlots in the vessels of gold dedicated to the holy service of
God, but an holy preacher to walk in the same apparel in the street wherein
he preached and ministered the communion in the Church, this is no sin nor a
thing forbidden by any Apostolic precept. But Platina is dreaming when he
ascribes such sriuolous constitutions to a Bishop, preparing himself for
death: for Platina supposes that he was martyred in the days of Galliexus.
Let the reader mark upon what sandy ground of frivolous constitutions (and
falsely alleged) Popish faith is grounded. The decree of Stephanus concerning
marriage, Tom. 1. Council. ^ Gratia no.
bearing that the Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, of the Oriental Church were
coupled in matrimony, but in the Roman Church no person in a spiritual office
from the Bishop to the Subdeacon had liberty to marry; if it were true, as it
is assuredly false, the Oriental Church has a great commendation, because
they would not be wiser then God, and they would not lay the yoke of the
ordinances of men upon the consciences of their Churchmen: but prohibition of
marriage (which I have proved to be a doctrine of devils) cannot be referred
to so ancient a beginning.

The Roman church desirous to be masked with a show of antiquity, they have
attributed Canons to the Apostles which are not found in their writings. Yet it
is a shame to the forgers of these canons to be found the principal impugners
and transgressers of them, cap. 5.
(...), that is to say, A Bishop, elder, or deacon, who under pretense of
religion puts away his own wife, if he cast her off, let him be
excommunicated: and if he persevere in so doing, let him be deposed. How can
this constitution of Stephanus agree with the Canons of the Apostles? Here I
appeal to the consciences of honest and upright men if they find not that the
lie is not only repugnant unto the verity, but also unto it self. The
supposititious Canons of the Apostles, and the supposititious constitutions of
Stephanus cannot both consist. I know what they answer, viz. that the Canons
of the Apostles speak of those Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who had wives
when they were admitted to ecclesiastical offices, these should not put away
their wives under pretense of religion: but concerning others who were
unmarried in the time of their admission the 25. Canon declares otherwise.
(...), that is, to unmarried men who are promoted to the clergy, we command
that if they please they shall marry, but only readers and singers, to wit,
shall have this privilege. It is an insufferable thing to hear such leuitie
and inconstancy imputed to the holy Apostles, that they debarred no man from
the office of a Bishop, Elder or Deacon, because he was a married man. O but if
any man enter unmarried to be a Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, then he must not
marry. If marriage had been an unclean thing it might have debarred men from
entering into holy offices, but if it be a clean thing, it cannot exclude them
after they have entered.

The other decree alleged out of Gratian, did. 79. Oporrebat ut haec, etc.
that by the constitution of Peter and his successors it was ordained, that one
of the Cardinal Elders or Deacons should be consecrated to be Bishop of Rome,
and no other. Such styles of pre-eminence are unknown to scripture, Xistus. 2.
and to the antiquity of this time. Xistus or Sixtus the 2. of that name, and
in number the 23. Bishop of Rome succeeded to Stephanus, and governed 2.
years, 10. months, 23. days. Eusebius lib. ^. cap. 27.
And Func. Chron, 11. years, such uncertainty is in counting the years of
their administration. The chair of Rome through the vehemency of persecution
was vacant without a successor 1. year 11. months, 15. days, as Damasus
grants, and Onuphrius the corrector of Platina cannot deny. Note.
If the Bishop of Rome be the head of the Church, then was the Church headless
almost for the space of two years.

To Xistus 2 succeeded Dionysius 24. Dionysius.
Bishop of Rome, and continued in his ministration 9. years, according to the
computation of Eusebius. Damasus assigns unto him 6. years and 2. months,
Marianus 6. years and 5. months: such certainty is in the chief and
principal ground of the Roman faith, concerning the succession of the Roman
Bishops, that scarce two writers do agree in one mind concerning the time of
their succession.

To Dionysius succeeded Felix 1. the 25. Bishop of Rome, Felix 1. Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 32.
and governed 5. years. He lived in the days of Aurelian the 9. persecuter,
Platin.
and obtained the honor of martyrdom. In the three supposititious decretall
epistles assigned to him, the second epistle written to the Bishops of the
Provinces of France, very sollicitously cares for Bishops that they be not
accused by secular men, but with so many caueats, as in effect exempteth them
from all accusation. The language wherein the epistle is indicted, cannot agree
with the ornat style of the Latin tongue in this age, he being a Roman borne,
as, Platina writes. Post quam ipse ab ^s charitative conventus fuerit. Ad
summos primates causa ejus canonice defertur. Conciliu^ regulariter convocare
debebunt, etc. The Galilean language manifested not more evidently that Peter
was a man of Galile: then the first of these 3. phrases manifests that the
foresaid epistle was compiled in a time of great barbaritie. Mat. 26.73.


Eutychianus. ^^seb lib 7. cap ^2. caius. Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 32. Func. chron.
Eutychianus the 26. Bishop of Rome followed after Felix 1. Hee^ continued
scarce ten months in his ministry.

Caius the 27. Bishop of Rome succeeded to Eutychianus and continued 15.
years. He lived in the days of the persecution of Dioclesian, and lurked for
a time in subterraneall places. In the end he was found out by the persecuters,
and put to death, and with his brother Gabinius and his brothers daughter
Susanna suffered martyrdom. Platin. de vita.
Here it is to be marked that many martyrs died before the edict of horrible
persecution was set forth in the 19. year of Dioclesians reign. For
Marcellinus succeeded to Caius, Func.
Anno 298. but the cruel edicts of persecution of Dioclesian were not set
forth before the 308. year of our Lord. Whereby it appears evidently, that
many Christians were put to death before the edicts of horrible persecution
were renewed by the Emperor Dioclesian. So hard was the outward estate of
Christians, that they were put to death upon the warrant of the edicts of
Valerian and Aurelian, before the edicts of Dioclesian and Maximian came forth.
To Caius is attributed the constitution of ecclesiastical orders and degrees,
by which men must mount up to the dignity of a Bishop. Platin. De^^ct. Cai^.
^x lib. Pent. D^m^^.
First he must be Ostiarius, next Lector, 3. Exorcista, 4. Acoluthus 5.
Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbyter, and last of all Episcopus.

This order of ascending by degrees to the dignity of a Bishop is confidently
referred to the constitution of the Apostles: but I say, Beatus qui non credit,
that is, happy is he who believes it not. Note.
Like as within scripture there is no lie, so likewise without scripture there
is no truth in matters of faith, ordering of manners, and appointing of
ecclesiastical offices, all that is necessary is contained in the written Word
of God. But now to perform a part of that which I promised in the end of my
treatise of Antiquity, and to let eue^ry man see what unlearned Asses they
have been who have set forth the fained. decretall epistles of the fathers of
this age. In the epistle written by Caius to the Bishop Felix aboue-mentioned,
he says, If any man, of what dignity so ever he be, delate such persons
(viz. Bishops, Elders, Deacons) for faults that cannot be proved, let him
understand that by the authority of this constitution he shall be counted
infamous. This constitution has three parts: First, that no ecclesiastical

The compiler of this supposititious decretal epistle had no consideration of
the time wherein Caius lived. It was a time of persecution, Christian Bishops
were continually drawn before secular Judges, and accused of odious crimes
whereof they were most innocent: and Caius himself was compelled to lurk a
long time in a subterraneall cave. At this time to bring in Caius, as it were
sitting in a throne, commanding that no Bishop should be accused before a
secular Judge, Note.
etc. what is this else but profusion of words without judgment and
understanding? If this decretall epistle had been attributed to Bonifacius 8.
Gregorius 7. Alexander 3. it had bin a more competent time, and the
constitution had seemed more probable to the reader. Moreover the language is
like unto the matter it self. Intelligat jacturam infamiae se sustinere, in
place of, jacturam fam^.

Marcellinus. Platin. Func. Chron.
Marcellinus the 28. Bishop of Rome succeeded to Caius and ruled 9. years: he
fainted in time of the persecution of Dioclesian, and sacrificed to idols, but
afterward he repented as Peter did, and gave his life for the testimony of
Christ. He who accuses himself, closes all other men's mouths from accusation
of him: he who truly repents, by his repentance is restored to all the
dignities of the children of God which were lost by sin: he who suffered
martyrdom for Christ, and he whose body lacked the honor of burial for the
space of 30. days, for the cause of Christ only (I say) his name should be
kept in reverent remembrance as if he had not fallen.

After Marcellinus succeeded Marcellus the 29. B. of Rome who continued in that
Ministration 5. year. Marcellus.
6. months 21. days. He lived in the days of Maxentius, by whom he was
enclosed into a filthy stable, to the end that lacking the salubritie of
wholesome air, he might be destroyed with the filth and stink of the dung of
beast: which thing also came to pass indeed, for he died in the stable. This
holy martyr, so long as he lived, he made the stable lik^ unto a sanctuary:
for he never intermitted the holy exercises of prayer, and fasting: and the
church when peace was granted to them by the mercy of God, builded a temple in
that same place where the stable had been, Platin. de vitis.
wherein Marcellus died. The name of Marcellus is pretermitted by Eusebius.

Eusebius.
After Marcellus succeeded Eusebius the 30. Bishop of Rome and continued 6
years, 1. month, 3. days. In his time Platina writes that Helena the mother
of Constantine found the cross of Christ. But Onuphrius himself is compelled
to grant that both Damasus and Platina erred in that narration, because
Constantine at this time had no dominion in Syria, Note.
neither was he as yet converted to the faith of Christ. But the tyrant
Maximinus with great cruelty oppressed the Church of Christ in the bounds of
Syria and Judea. And therefore such as read the history of the primitive
Church, let them read with judgment: because it is an easy thing to err, if
any man give such undoubted credit to ecclesiastical writers as he gives to
sacred scripture.

Of other Preachers and Doctors.
TErtullian a learned Preacher of the African Province, Tertullian.
and of the city of Carthage, a man of a quick and pregnant wit, flourished
under the reign of Severus, the fifth persecuter. When he came to Rome, he
was not free of the envy and reproaches of the clergy of the Roman Church,
and moved with anger, he declined to the opinion of the heretic Montanus,
and wrote books against the true Church, such as the volumes following, De
pudicitia, De persecutione, De i^iuni^s, De monogamia, De exsasi, lib. 6. and
his seventh book against Apollonius.

This lamentable defection of Tertullian, may be an example to all men of
great understanding and excellent learning, not to be puffed up, nor to be high
minded, lest they fall into the snare of the devil. For Tertullian wrote
learned apologies for the Christians, Ierom. catal. scrip. eccles. Hist. Magd.
cent. 3. cap. 10.
and mightily confuted the error of Marcion: notwithstanding of all this, he
was high minded, and joined himself to the opinion of Montanus. If he had
kept himself free of this foul spot, he was worthy for his gifts to have
been counted amongst the most famous Doctors of the Church, after the days of
the Apostles.

Origin the son of Leonides an Egyptian, Origin.
was a young man of seventeene years of age, when his father was martyred, in
the persecution of Severus. His wit was so pregnant in his youth, and so
capable of all kind of instruction, that his father would often uncover his
breast when he was a sleep, Hist. Magd. cent. 3. cap. 10.
and kiss it, giving thanks to God, who had made him father of so happy a
son. After his fathers death, he sustained himself, his mother, and six
brethren by keeping a School, for all his fathers goods was confiscate, for
his confession of Christ.

When Origin had spent his young age, the description of his life, in Greek
says; (...), that is, when he was in his mid-age, the Churches of Achaia
vexed with heretics, sent for him: and as he was upon his journey to Athens,
he went through Palestina, and was ordained to be a Presbyter or Priest, by
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea. This fact
offended Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, so highly, that he was full of rage
against Origin: and wherefore? because he being a man of Alexandria received
ordination to an Ecclesiastical office, from the Bishops of Jerusalem, and
Caesarea.

Note.
When Bishops become serious in trifling matters, and have a greater regard to
their own glory, then to the advancement of the kingdom of God: then that may
be spoken of them, which Jerome writes of Demetrius, Qui tanta in eum
debacchatus est insania, vt per totum mundum super eius nomine scriberet, that
is, He was so full of rage against him, that he replenished the world with
writings mentioning the name of Origin. But consider what fault was in Origin,
who was craving no ordination: And what fault was in Alexander and Theoctistus,
men whose names shall be had in everlasting remembrance. They did nothing of
intention to grieve the heart of Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, but only
being careful of the advancement of the kingdom of God, they endeavored to
strengthen the hands of Origin, against the heretics of Achaia, by conferring
unto him, the calling of a Presbyter. No man can justly offend against me, if I
cast in this sentence, as a common admonition to all Preachers, (...), Let us
not be over serious in ridiculous matters. The name of Origin was so famous,
that not only the Bishops of Achaia, solicited him to come to their bounds
for stopping the mouths of Heretics, but also he was sent for at two
diverse times to be present at the Councels convened in Arabia, against
heretics. Some Heretics afffirmed that the souls of men perish with their
bodies, and are raised up again in the day of the resurrection, Coment. Func.
in Chron. l. 6.
with the bodies, whom Origin mightily refuted. Likewise, he was present at
the Council in Arabia, gathered against Berillus Bishop of Bostra, who denied
that Christ was existent before his manifestation in the flesh, and by the
travelles of Origin, Berillus was reclaimed and reduced to the true faith:
therefore I reckon him not in the roll of heretics. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33.
Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, invited Origin to come to
Cappadocia, where he detained him a long time. Likewise Mammea the mother of
Alexander the Emperor, sent for him, to come to Antiochia, and had him in
reverent regard. Likewise he wrote to the Emperor Philip, and to his mother,
who was the first Emperor that professed the name of Christ. Ierom. catal.
script. Eccles.
He studied to be acquainted with the Hebrew language, far contrary to the
custom of his own Nation: and he conferred the Hebrew text with the Greek
translations, not only the Septuagints, but also the translations of Aquila,
Eusebius. l 6. c. 17.
Theodosion, and Symmachus, and he found out the fifth, sixth, and seventh
editions.

Notwithstanding all these excellent gifts and renowned fame of Origin, he
wanted not his own gross errors, and foolish facts. In expounding of
Scriptures, he became a curious searcher out of allegories. Yet this father of
allegories Origin, mistook the words of Christ spoken of Eunuchs, Mat. 19.12.
There be some chaste, which have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of
heaven: these words, I say, spoken in an allegor^coll sense, he took in a
simple and vnfigurate meaning, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 8.
and gelded himself, to the end he might live without all suspicion of
uncleanness. No learned man has commended this fact of Origin, so far as my
reading can extend, for if a man might lawfully dismember his own body, to the
end he might live chastely, why might not a man in like manner cut off his
own hand, to the end he should not in hasty motion of anger kill his
neighbor? But the obedience of the commandments of God is seated in the
heart, and more commended for voluntary subjection, then for necessity of
abstinence of committing evil, because there is not an instument in the body
able to commit transgression.

Finally, by seeking of divinity without the bounds of the holy Scriptures of
God, in stead of true divinity, he was entangled with foolish errors:
concerning the creation of many worlds, one succeeding to another: concerning
the pains of devils and wicked men, after long torments to be finished: and
concerning the possibility of nature to keep the whole law of God. For which
opinions, long after his death he was excommunicate in the fifth general
Council, holden Anno, 551. Concerning his weakness in offering to Idols,
rather then to suffer his chaste body to be abused, I have spoken in the
history of the seventh persecution. He lived until the days of Gallus and
Volusianus, and died in 69. year of his age, in the town of Tyrus, where he
was buried.

Cyprian was an African, borne in Carthage, in his youth altogether given to
the study and practice of Magical arts. His conversion was by the means of
Cecilius, a Preacher, whose name after he bare, and through occasion of
hearing the history of the prophet Jonah. Ierom. catul. script. eccles. and
coment in Iona. Ierom. ibid. Nazian. in laudem Cypriani.
After his conversion he distributed all his substance to the poor, and
became first a Presbyter, and afterward Bishop of Carthage. He was banished in
the persecution of Decius, and martyred under Valerian. The worthy D. I. Fox
thinks that Nazianzen commends another Bishop of that same name borne in
Antiochia, and Bishop in Antiochia, who suffered martyrdom in the days of
Dioclesian.

This Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, was a man full of love, a great comforter of
Cornelius, Bishop of Rome. He suffered martyrdom, as Ierom writes, that same
day, albeit not in the same year, Ierom. catal. script. eccles.
that Cornelius concluded his life by glorious martyrdom. He had great strife
against two contrary Sects, viz. againsh Novatus, who was excessive rigorous
against those who had fallen in time of persecution: and against Novatia^us and
Felicissimus, who by the contrary would have had both Heretics and Apostates
received without all form of Ecclesiastical discipline. Hist. Madg. cent. 3.
c^p. 10.
He esteemed much of those who suffered rebuke for the Name of Christ: and he
said of the metal mines, that those that were condemned for Christ's sake to
work in them; that whereas they were wont to deliver gold, Note.
and silver, and precious things unto the world; now by the contrary, the mines
receive gold, and silver, and the most precious things in the world: counting
the Confessors and Martyrs of Christ the rich treasures of the earth, of whom
the world was not worthy.

His opinion concerning rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics, albeit
it was erronius, yet his modesty in not damning them rashly, who were of a
contrary opinion, is greatly praised by Saint Austen, who says that the
modesty of Cyprian in his error, was more to be regarded, then a sound and
right opinion concerning baptism, without humility and modesty. Aug. de
Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 17.
He was a faithful builder of the house of God, not by word only, but also
by writing, and his books remain to this day, as a precious treasure in the
Church of Christ. The book de Revelatione capitis Iohannis Baptisiae, is
supposititious, because in it mention is made of the reverence that Pipinus
King of France did to the head of John Baptist, when it was transported from
Constantinople to France; and it is known that Pipinus was not borne 300.
years after the martyrdom of Cyprian: how then could Cyprian write of a fact
done so long time after his death?

The Church of Christ was multiplied under the persecutions of S^verus,
Maximinus, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian, and Dioclesian. All these six
persecutions are comprehended in the third Centurie.

Bishops of Jerusalem.
IN Jerusalem was Narcissus, Narcissus.
against whom wicked men combined themselves together, with forged accusations
and false testimonies, sealed up with oaths and imprecations, to grieve the
heart of Narcissus, in so much that he left his calling, and fled to the
wilderness, where he lurked a long time. But the false witnesses who bare
testimony against him, Examples of Gods justice against false witnesses.
escaped not unpunished by the hand of God: One of them and his whole family
and substance was burned with fire: another of them was stricken with an heavy
disease, such as he himself in his imprecations had wished unto himself: the
third was terrified with the sight of the judgments of God, that lighted upon
the other two, and he repented, and poured out the grief of his dolorus heart
in such abundance of tears, Eusebius. c. 6. l. 9.
that he became blind. All these false witnesses were punished, and he who
was penitent, albeit the Lord pardoned his sin, yet he chastised him with
temporal punishments.

The Bishops of the next adjacent Churches, because they knew not what was
become of Narcissus, they admitted another called Dios, Dios. Germanion.
Gordius.
who continued but a short time. To him succeeded Germanion: and after
Germanion, Gordius, in whose time Narcissus manifested himself to the Church of
Jerusalem, who requested him to take his office again: for they reverenced him
as a man raised from death to life again, and the punishment of God inflicted
upon his accusers, increased their reverence toward him. He was old, and not
able to discharge the weighty office of a Bishop: therefore Alexander a worthy
man, Alexander.
was joined as fellow labourer with him. Eusebius writes that he was
admonished by a celestial vision of the will of God, that he should be
Bishop of Jerusalem with Narcissus (for he had been Bishop of another paroach
before, in Cappadocia): by the like celestial vision, Ierom. catal. script.
Eccles.
Narcissus and other of the Clergy were admonished, that the day next
following, a Bishop should enter into Jerusalem, whom God had appointed to be
an helper to Narcissus. He defended Origin against the fury and madness of
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, who set both himself and others to great
business for a matter of no importance, as is said. Ierom. ibid.
In the persecution of Decius, he was carried to Caes^rea, closed in a dark
prison, and dyed a Martyr, as has been declared. Alexander is supposed to
have been the 35. Bishop of Jerusalem. Eusebius. l 7. c. 14. Func. Chron.
Mazabanes, Hymeneus Lebdas, Thermon, all these followed Alexander.

Bishops of Alexandria.
IN Alexandria to Philetus and Demetrius, succeeded Heraclas the twelfth Bishop
of that town. Heraclas.
He was disciple to Origin, and a fellow labourer with him in governing the
School of Alexandria, in the end he was chosen to be Bishop of Alexandria:
Dionysius.
whose successor was Dionysius, the thirteenth Bishop, whom God delivered
miraculously from the hands of persecuters, in the days of Decius, by the
sudden assault of a number of people, who had been at a marriage feast. When
they heard that Dionysius was taken by soldiers, and led away to Taposiris,
they arose from table and followed with a speedy pace, and with a tumultuary
voice, so that the soldiers who had Dionysius in keeping, were afraid and
fled: and so Dionysius by the great providence of God, was delivered out of the
hands of his enemies. After him Maximus, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 40. Func. chron.
Theonas, Petrus, a Martyr under Dioclesian and Achillas, were Bishops of
Alexandria.

Bishops of Antiochia.
AFter Serapion, Asclepiades.
succeeded Asclepiades the ninth Bishop of Antiochia: of whom Alexander Bishop
of Jerusalem (being the prisoner of Christ in Caesarea) wrote unto the people
of Antiochia, that it was a comfort to him, and it made his imprisonment and
bonds the more easy, that he heard it reported that Asclepiades, a man well
exercised in the true faith, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 1^. Zebenus.
by the providence of God, was made Bishop of Antiochia. Philetus was the
tenth: Zebenus the eleventh: and Babylas was the twelfth Bishop of Antiochia,
Babylas.
of whom Eusebius records, that he dyed in prison: like as Alexander Bishop
of Jerusalem ended his life in prison: both the one and the other, Eusebius. l. 6.
c. 39.
suffered such kind of martyrdom under the persecution of Decius.

In the Catalogue of Emperors, catholic Bishops and Heretics, subioyned to
the Ecclesiastical History of Theodoretus: we read that Babylas Bishop of
Antiochia, would not suffer Decius to enter into the Temple wherein Christians
were convened, and that before he was beheaded, he gave direction to bury
with his body, the chain also, wherewith his body had been bound, as a
funeral ornament of his buried body. But Eusebius deserves best credit, who
affirms that he dyed in prison, and makes no mention of his beheading. Some
imagine that he who died in prison, and he who was beheaded, were both
Bishops of Antiochia, but living in different ages: yet seeing the Catalogue
aforesaid, speaks of this suffering under the Emperor Decius, it is more
probable that there is some oversight in the writer of the Catalogue. To
Babylas succeeded Fabius. Fabius.
He was entangled with the error of Novatus, but was reclaymed again by the
vigilant travails of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 44.
Demetrianus. Paulus Samosatenus. Domnus.
Demetrianus a married man, was successor to Fabius. Paulus Samosatenus a
pestilent Heretic, was the fifteenth Bishop of Antiochia. Domnus the son of
Demetrian the sixteenth, Timeus the seventeenth, Cyrillus the eighteenth, and
Tyrannus the ninteenth Bishop of Antiochia.

The names of the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antiochia, were the more
accurately observed and registered after the Council of Nice (albeit I recite
them before) because it happened in that generll Council, that for timous
suppressing of heresies, the Bishops of these places were called Patriarchs,
and had power to convocate Councels within their own bounds, for suppressing
of Heretics. Always it fell out far contrary to the expectation of holy
fathers: for the Patriarchs were the chief protectors of heresy, as the
history of the subsequent Centuries evidently declares. Nevertheless in this
Centurie beside those men of God above mentioned (nothing inferior in
spiritual graces to the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Antiochia and Jerusalem)
there were many worthy men in other places, such as F^rmilianus Bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, a man familiarly acquainted with Origin. Gregorius and
Athenodorius, brethren and Pastors in Pontus. Helenus in Tarsus, and Nicomas
in Iconium. Theotectus in Caesarea Palestinae. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 2^.
Maximus in Bostra. Eusebius and Anatholius Bishops of Laodicea. Quirinus
Bishop of Scesiana, or as others call it, Scescania, a worthy martyr, about
whose neck a millstone was hanged, Func. Chron.
as has been before declared.

I make an end of this second head with the greater gladness, that I perceive
the little stone hewed out of the mountain without hands to be waxing and
growing to the bigness of a great mountain, replenishing the whole earth,
even in the time of most horrible persecutions.

CENTVRIE. IIII.
Bishops of Rome.
Plat. ^. M^litiad^^.
AFter Eusebius, Miltiades governed the Roman Church 4. years, 7. months, and
8. days. His ministration was in the days of the reign of Constantine, to
whom the Emperor remitted the controversy betwixt Cecilianus and the
Donatistes, Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5.
to be judged by him and his Colleagues, Rheticus Maternus, and Marinus. The
Donatistes would not rest upon the determination of Miltiades, and his
Colleagues. And therefore the good Emperor appointed this cause of new again
to be judged in Arles, August. epist. 68.
by a number of Bishops of Spain, Italy and France. In the Council of Arles,
Cecilianus was likewise absolved, and the Donatistes again succumbed in their
probation. Notwithstanding they appealed to the Emperor Constantine: and when
the Emperor heard the cause of Cecilianus pleaded before himself, the
Donatists could not prove, that either Cecilianus had been admitted Bishop of
Carthage by a man who was Proditor, or yet that he had admitted any other man
culpable of the like fault to an Ecclesiastical office. If the Bishop of Rome
had bin supreme Judge in all Ecclesiastical causes, Constantine had done him
wrong, to appoint other Judges to judge in this cause, after the B. of Rome,
and his Colleagues, had given out their definitive sentence. August. epist. 162.
and 166. August. Caus^la^o. epist. 86.
His ordinance concerning prohibition of fasting upon the Lords day, expedient
at that time to be a distinguishing note of true Christians, from Manichean
heretics, whose custom was upon the Lords day to fast. The purple garment,
the palace of Lateran, the superiority of the town of Rome, and government of
the West, which honors some allege were conferred by Constantine to Miltiades
and Silvester, is a fable not worthy of refutation: all these honors the
Emperors of the West, successors of Constantine, possessed, and not the
Bishop of Rome, for the space of many hundredth years.

To Miltiades succeeded Silvester, Silvester. Platina, de vita Silvest. S^crat.
lib. 1. cap. 6. Theo. lib. 1. cap. 2.3.
and ministered 23. years, 10 months, and 11. days. In his time was the
heretic Arrius excommunicated by Alexander, without the foreknowledge of the
B. of Rome: It was enough, that after excommunication intimation was made to
other bishops, which duty the B. of Alexandria neglected not. Learned men should
be ashamed of fables, to say that Constantine was baptized by Siluester, for
Siluester was dead before Constantine was baptized. And Platina himself is
compelled to grant, that Marcus, the successor of Siluester, Eusebius de vita
Const^nt. lib. 4.
governed the church of Rome in Constantines days. And Eusebius testifies,
that Constantine was baptized in Nicomedia, immediately before his death.
Concerning the donatio^ of Constantine, wherein he conferreth the do^inion of
the West to the B. of Rome, Simile.
it is like unto a rotten egg, which is cast out of the basket, lest all the
rest be set at the less avail. No ancient writer makes mention of any such
thing. Yea Constantine, in his testamentall legacy, allotted the Dominion of
the West to two of his sons, namely, to Constantinus younger, and to Constans.
Note.
How then had he, by an anterior disposition, resigned these Dominions to the
B. of Rome? If Papists be not better countenanced by Antiquity in other
things, Marcus. Platin. de vita Mar. Julius. So^om. l. 4. c. 8.
then in this point, they have no great cause to brag of Antiquity.

To Siluester succeeded Marcus, and ministered 2. years, 8. months, and 20.
days.

After Marcus, Julius governed the Roman church, 15. years Sozomenus
attributes to Julius 25. years. His ministratio^ was in the days of the Emp.
Constantius and his brethren. He was a defe^der of the true faith, and a city
of refuge to those who were persecuted by Arrians: as namely, to Athanasius B.
of Alexandria, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Paulus B. of Constantinople, Asclepas B. of Gaza, Marcellus B. of Ancyra, and
Lucius B. of Adrianopolis: All these were unjustly deposed from their offices
by the Arrians and had recourse to Julius. He was neither ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, nor of his aflicted servants. In the council of Sardica
great honor was co^ferred unto him, to wit, that men unjustly condemned by
Arrians, should have refuge to Julius: to whom they gave power of new again,
to judge their cause. This was an Act of the council of Sardica, and not of
the Nicene council (as was confidently alleged in the council of Carthage)
and a personal honor conferred to one man alone, for respective causes: but
not extended to his successors, as though all the Bishops of Rome at all times
should be Judges of appellation. The Arrians were sore grieved for this, that
Julius both in word, and deed, and writ, assisted Athanasius and his
accomplices. The chafing letters, and mutual expostulations, that passed betwixt
Julius and the Arrians conueened in the Council of Antiochia, are to be read
in the History of Socrates. Socrat. l. 2. c. 15. Idem, lib. 2. cap. 17.
Platina, in the grandoure of his speeches, is inconsiderate, as if Julius had
damned the presumption of the Oriental Bishops, who durst conuocate an
assembly without license before obtained from the Bishop of Rome. Sozom. l. 3.
c. 10.
Noe such thing is contained in the letter of Julius, but only an
expostulation, that they did not advertise him of their Council, to the end
he might have sent his Ambassadors, and given unto them his best advise.
Julius knew the Constitutions of the Nicene Council, Ruffin. l. 1. c. 6.
Canon. 6.
which gave power to every Patriarch within his own bounds, to conuocate
Councels.

To Julius succeeded Liberius, Liberius. Damas. Marian. Ierom.
and continued six years: some assign unto him eighteen years, others
nineteen years: so uncertain is the computation of the years of their
government. He governed the Church of Rome in the days of Constantius, by
whom also he was banished to Thracia, because he would not consent to the
deposition of Athanasius: which point was seriously urged in the Council of
Millane. Theod. l. 2.^.15.16.17.
Theodoretus gives ample testimony of his constancy and freedom of speaking
to the Emperor (not disagreeing with his name) before his banishment. In his
absence Foelix the second was chosen to be Bishop of Rome; to whom Theodoretus
gives this praise, that he adhered firmly to the Nicene Council: but
blames him for this, that he received his ordination from Arrians. Theod. ibid.
Notwithstanding he was more hated by the Arrians, then was Liberius, and was
put to death by them, Platina, de vita Foeli^.
after he had governed one year, four months, and two days. After two years
banishment, Liberius returned back again to Rome. Theodoretus is silent in
the matter of his praises after his returning. Hilar. in fragment.
Hilarious, Bishop of Poitiers affirms, that he both consented to the
deposition of Athanasius, and to the council of Sirmium. There is nothing
lacking now to give out a determinate sentence, whether or no the Bishop of
Rome may err in matters of Faith: but only the appearance of the great
Advocate of all evil causes Onuphrius, who will needs find out some old
partchment, or some unknown manu-script, to free the Chair of Rome from all
suspicion of error in matters of faith. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 4 cap. 9.
But Bellermine gives over his cause, and can find no sufficient Apology for
him, because his letters written to the Emperor Constantius after his
returning from banishment, smells of Arrianisme.

After the death of Liberius, Damasus.
succeeded Damasus, and ruled 18. years, in time of the reign of Julian, of
Iouinian, and of Valentinian: Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9. Ruff. l. 2 c. 10. Socrat.
lib. 4. cap. 29.
his competitor Vrsinus had many favorers, in so much that the question who
should be elected Bishop of Rome, was tried by the sword, rather then by
reasons, suffrages, and votes: so that in the Church of Sisinum were slain to
the number of 137. persons. Damasus prevailed, and had the upper hand. He was
friendly to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, whom Lucius an Arrian Bishop
imprisoned: Theo. lib. 5. cap. 9.
but he escaped, and fled to Rome, as Athanasius had done before in the days
of Julius. He damned the Heresy of Apollinaris, in a council met at Rome. His
Epistle written to the Oriental Bishops, wherein he intimates unto them the
condemnitory sentence pronounced and Apollinaris and his disciple Timotheus,
Theod. ibid.
is indicted with the swelling pride of a lofty mind, breathing sovereignty and
pre-eminence above all other Churches, as if the Roman Church were that only
Apostolic chair, whereunto all other Churches ought homage and reverence.
Basil. epist. 10. ad Eusebius. Samosat.
So that Basilius, Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, complains of the pride of
the West, because they cared only for their own pre-eminence, but not for the
estate of their persecuted brethren in the East, under the Arrian Emperor
Valens, whose estate they knew not, neither sent they messengers to visit
them, neither would they receive true information concerning the estate of
their brethren. Yea, and Basilius says, that he purposed often times, to have
written to the chief of them, that is to Damasus, that he should not count the
splendour of pride to be true dignity, Note.
and honor. Where it is to be marked, that when he speaks of Damasu^, he
called him (...), that is, the principal of them, to wit, of the Churches of
the West: but not the supreme governor of the universal Church, neither the
sovereign commander of the Churches of the East. It is ignorance of the
Ecclesiastical history, that makes men to imagine, that the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome is an ancient thing. When Damasus damned the heresy of
Apollinaris, in the council conueened at Rome, it was the year of our Lord,
379. according to the computation of Ierom: and at this time the very aiming to
supremacy is counted Splendour superbiae, that is, the splendour of pride.
Damasus wrote concerning the lives of the Bishops of Rome preceding his time:
and was familiarly acquainted with Ierom, as Ieroms writings clearly declare.

Siricius. Socrat. l. 7. c. 9. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. Malac. 2. verse 14.
To Damasus succeeded Siricius, and ministered 15. years: at what time Gratianus
and Valentinian obtained the Imperial government: he ordained, that married
men, who were admitted to Ecclesiastical offices, after their ordination
should abstain from the company of their wives as if it were great devotion to
a man to transgress against the wife of his youth the wife of his covenant,
Platin. de vita Pontif.
and his companion in all his wearisome labors. His prohibition of the second
marriage, smells of the Heresy of Montanus. In his time with pride of the
Clergy at Rome was joined insatiable auaritiousnesse, Lege 27. de Episcop and
Cleri. in C. Thodos.
increasing daily by degrees, so that the Emperors Valentinian the 11. and
Theodosius, were compelled by a law, to inhibite widows under pretense of
devotion to leave their houses, treasures, and house-hold-stuffe, to the
Church, to the utter impouerishing and undoing the estate of their children.

Bishops of Alexandria.
IN the third Centurie we rested at the name of Achillas, Alexander^
Bishop of Alexandria, whose successor was Alexander. His accurate disputation
concerning the unity in the Trinity, made Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria,
to think that Alexander was entangled with the error of Sabellius: Hereof
arose contentious disputations, new opinions, exulcerate minds, and open
schisms. This intestine malady was not unknown to the good Emperor
Constantine, who sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a man singularly beloved of the
Emperor, together with perswasiue letters from the Emp. exhorting both
Alexander and Arrius, to leave accurate and profound disputations, and keep
inuiolably the peace and unity of the Church: But no means could avail until
this question was decided by the determination of the general Council of Nice.

After the Council of Nice had damned the opinion of Arrius as Heretical,
Athanasius. Theod. l. 1. c. 25. Sozom. l. 2. c. 17
Alexander continued not above five months alive: In the last period of his
life he called for Athanasius, but he was not present: Of whom Alexander said;
Thou have escaped, but shall not escape, fore-prophecying, that Athanasius
should undergo the weighty charge, which he, giving place to nature, and to
the calling of God, was leaving. Athanasius in his young years and childish
plays was counterfeiting divine mysteries, and baptizing children: R^ff. l. 1.
c. 14.
yet after such due form of interrogatories and answers preceding Baptism,
Hist. Magd. cent. 4 cap. 10.
that Alexander, the Bishop durst not presume to rebaptize those who apparently
in childish simplicity had been made partakers of divine grace. He began no
sooner to accept the weighty charge of the Church of Alexandria, Anno, 333;
but the Arrians began to fret and offend, knowing how diligent he attended upon
Alexander his predecessor, at the council of Nice, and how vigilantly and
wisely he had detected the lurking absurdities of the vilde Heresy of Arrius:
And they thought the preferment of Athanasius was the utter undoing of their
opinion. Therefore they conspired against him, Socrat. lib. ^. cap. 35.
and by a multiplied number of false accusations prevailed somewhat against
him, even in the days of the Emperor Constantine. But in the days of
Constantius and Julian, almost the whole world conspired against him: so that
except he had been vpholden by that grace that comes from above, it was not
possible that he could have borne out such unsupportable hatred. Nazianzen. in
laudem Athanasii. Sin^^l.
Justly did Nazianzene compare him in time of adversity to the Adamant, and in
time of prosperity to the Magnes. In time of adversity no trouble overcame
him: in time of prosperity, he allured the hearts of men more intractable
then iron, to embrace the truth of God.

The troubles of Athanasius.
Now seeing Athanasius lived six and forty years, governor of the Church of
Alexandria, his great troubles cannot be comprised in better order, then by
declaring shortly what troubles he sustained: first in Constantines days, next
under the reign of Constantius: thirdly, under the reign of Julian: and last
to speak of his peaceable end under the reign of the Emperor Valens, albeit
he was an Arrian Persecuter. In the days of Constantine first he was accused
by an effronted harlot, whom the Arrians had suborned to bear false witness
against him: but Athan. guided the matter with wisdom, and suffered
Timotheus, a worthy Presbyter, Theod. l. 1. c. 29.
to speak (whom he had brought in with him to the Council) but he was silent
himself. The impudent woman pointing out Timotheus by the finger (as if he
had been Athanasius) with clamours void of all womanly modesty, affirmed
that he had abused her in whoredom, so that all who were present were ashamed
of her impudency. This was done in the Council of Tyrus, to the perpetual
shame of the Arrians, who subborned an harlot to accuse the faithful servant
of Christ without a cause.

Secondly, they accused him for this, that he had cut off the hand of
Arsenius, sometime his own servant: and for greater evidence, they produced in
the Council of Tyrus before the Judges, the hand of a man enclosed in a case:
which hand they affirmed that Athanasius had cut off from Arsenius. This they
spoke the more confidently, because they supposed that Arsenius remained still
kept in their own custody: Note.
but by the providence of God he escaped, came to Tyrus, and was presented
before the Council, having both his hands perfect, sound, and vnmutilated.
After this the Council was full of confusion, for the Arrians cried, that
Athanasius by magic arts deluded the senses of men: and they were purposed,
by violence and force to lay hands upon him, and to tear him in pieces: but he
fled by a ship, and came to Constantinople, where the Emperor was, as shall
be declared, God willing. The rest of his accusations, and how they dealt
against him most unjustly and falsely, and gave out a sentence of deposition
against him in his absence, I remit unto its own place.

Under the reign of Constantius, Athanasius was compelled to fly at two
diverse times. First, while the Emperor Constans was yet alive, who procured a
Council to be gathered in Sardica, wherein the cause of Athanasius was tried,
and he found innocent: and was sent back again and resto^ed to his place.
Theod. l. 2 c. 8.
For Constantius feared the menacing letters of his brother Constans, who
threatened to lead an army to the East, and to possess Athanasius in his place
again, Idem lib. 2. c. 13
if his brother lingered in doing of it. After the death of Constans, Sabinianus
was sent to kill Athanasius, but he escaped miraculously, as has been
declared.

Again, he was compelled first to fly, and afterward to lurk in the days
of Julian. He was restored again by the good Emperor Iovinian: and he
continued in his ministration until the days of Valentinian and Valens:
Ruffin. l. 1. c. 34.
and although Valens was a cruel persecuter, yet he abstained from
persecuting of Athanasius, for honor of his gray hairs, and for that he was
reverently regarded of all men. Sozom. l. 6. c. 19.
Thus Athanasius, full of days, died in peace, after he had governed the
Church of Alexandria 46. years.

To worthy Athanasius, Peter.
succeeded Peter, whom the Emperor Valens caused to be imprisoned, and Lucius
an Arrian Bishop, to be seated in his room. Lucius was made Bishop of
Alexandria, against all kind of Ecclesiastical order: neither did the people
crave him, nor the clergy of Alexandria approve him, Theod. l. 4.22.
nor any Orthodox Bishop give him ordination. Peter escaped out of prison,
and fled to Damasus Bishop of Rome. Lucius like unto a ravening wolf, not
only banished the Homousians out of Alexandria and Egypt, but also that which
was more insolent, and never attempted before: he persecuted the Monks who
dwelt in solitary places of the wilderness, and banished them, who had already
banished themselves, from all the delicate pleasures of the world. But mark,
To what place could men be banished, who inhabited the desert places of barren
wildernesses? He caused them (especially Macarius and Isidorus) to be
transported to an Isle, wherein no Christians were to be found, but only
Pagans, and worshippers of devils.

When these prisoners of Christ approached near unto the Isle, the devil left
his old habitation, to wit, the mouth of the Image, from whence he was
accustomed to speak; and he possessed the Priests daughter, who ran vn^^ the
shore, and cried, words not unlike to those which were spoken to Paul and
Silas in Philippi, by the maid who had the spirit of divination: Acts. 16.17.
and after this the devil left her, lying upon the ground, as though she had
been dead. But the men of God, Note.
by their supplications to God, restored the young woman to health, and
delivered her to her father. The Inhabitants of the Isle, who saw the
wonderful works of God, received the faith, and were baptized in the Name of
Christ. Lucius was so dashed with the fame of this wonderful work, and with
the crying out of people against him, that he permitted the foresaid Monks to
return back again to their own places.

After Peter succeeded Timotheus, Timotheus.
for one cause worthy to be blamed, because he favored the usurpation of
Maximus Cynicus, who presumed without a lawful calling to be Bishop of
Constantinople. And after him Theophilus succeeded, whose attempts against
Chrysostom I remit to the next Centurie.

Bishops of Antiochia.
IN Antiochia, Vitalius.
after Tyrannus, succeeded Vitalius, about the time that the rage of the tenth
Persecution began to be assuaged: therefore he re-edified a Church in
Antiochia, which had been demolished in the time of the persecution of
Dioclesian: Philogonius. Theod. l. 1 c. 3. Eustatius. Theod. l. 1. c. 7.
and his successor Philogonius, perfected the building. To whom succeeded
Eustatius, who was present at the Council of Nice, and was Moderator and mouth
to all the rest. Eusebius sometime Bishop of Berytus, afterward Bishop of
Nicodemia, and last of all Bishop of Constantinople: Soc. l. 1. c. 24.
did insinuate himself in favor with the Emperor Constantine, and obtained
from him liberty to go to Jerusalem, and to visit the Temples that
Constantine had lately builded in Bethlehem, Jerusalem, and upon Mount Olivet.
To him resorted a number of Arrian Bishops, who had all secretly conspired
against Eustatius, and subborned a vile woman to accuse him of whoredom. The
Arrians upon the simple deposition of a woman, subborned by themselves: Theod.
l. 5. c. 21.
contrary to all kind of order, deposed Eustatius, and persuaded the Emperor
to banish him, as a man convict both of adultery and of tyranny. But the Lord
laid his correcting hand upon the woman, whom the Arrians had suborned, so
that she dyed, sore tormented with a grievous sickness, and confessed that
money was given unto her to accuse Eustatius, Note.
and that she had sworn deceitfully, because the child procreated with her,
was begotten by Eustatius a Smith of that name, but not by Eustatius Bishop of
Antiochia.

The Arrians in the days of Constantine, had no great upper hand, except only
in the matter of Athanasius his banishment to Triere: and in the deposition and
banishment of Eustatius to Illyricum. But in the days of Constantius they
took boldness, and planted Arrian Bishops, in all principal places: so that
in Antiochia (after Eustatius) Eulalius, Euphronius, Placitus, Leontius,
Eudoxi^s, all these were Arrian Bishops, placed by them in Antiochia. In the
end Meletius was ordained Bishop of Antiochia, Meletius.
a man of great gifts, whom the Arrians transported out of Sebastia in Armenia,
and placed him in Antiochia; supposing that by his excellent learning, many
should be allured to their opinion: but it fell out far otherwise; for
Meletius professed the true faith. Only the reproueable form of his entry,
by receiving ordination from Arrian Bishops, was the ground of remediless
schisms in the Church of Antiochia. There had been already two factions in the
town; to wit, Arrians, and Eustatians: now the third faction is added of them,
who were called Meletians, with whom Eustatians did not communicate, but
abhorred them as they did the Arrians. Theod. l. 3. c. 4.


This schism endured after the death of Meletius for the space of fourscore
and five years. Meletius was banished in the days of Constantius, S^^^r^. l.
2. c. 44.
and Euzoius an Arrian Bishop, placed in his room. He was restored again
by Julian, only for desire he had to undo things done by Constantius, and to
bring his name to disgrace. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Likewise under the reign of the Emperor Valens, he was banished the second
time. He governed the Church of Antiochia five and twenty years, Soz^m. l.
6.7.
and dyed in Constantinople, immediately after the second general Council: and
was carried to Antiochia, to be buried there.

The ordination of Paulinus to be Bishop of Antiochia, Paulinus.
Meletius being yet alive, was the foolish fact of Lucifer Bishop of Calaris,
in the Isle of Sardinia. He was restored from banishment in the days of
Julian. and took purpose, accompanied with Eusebius, Bishop of Vercellis in
Liguria, who was likewise restored at that same time, to visit the estate of
their brethren. S^^. l. 3. c. 6.
Eusebius addresseth himself to Alexandria, and conferred with Athanasius. But
Lucifer went to Antiochia,, where he found miserable distractions, even amongst
those who professed one and the self same Faith. When exhortation to unity
could prevail nothing, but the dissension daily increased, he ordained
Paulinus presbyter of Antiochia, Theod. l. 3. c. 4.
and the chief of those who were called Eustatiani, to be Bishop of Antiochia.
This fact of Lucifer was like unto fuel added unto the fire, and mightily
augmented the schism. Theodoretus blames him for so doing, and Eusebius
Vercellencis, when he came back from Alexandria, disliked also the fact of
Lucifer. Wherefore Lucifer would not communicate any longer with Eusebius.

These sorrowful times of multiplied schisms, alienated the hearts of a great
number of people, from the true Church. Soc. l. 3. c 9.
Meletius was restored from his second banishment, Idem l. 5 c. 5.
in the days of the Emperor Gratianus. Paulinus would on no condition
communicate with him, because he had received ordination from the Arrians.
When Meletius had ended his life, the people would not admit Paulinus to be
their Bishop, Theod. l. 5.23.
because they said, it was not meet that he should be his successor, who
despised his fellowship and counsel in his life time.

To Meletius succeeded Flavianus, Flavianus.
a worthy man. Paulinus albeit he appointed Evagrius to be his successor, yet
such forms manifestly repugnant to the approoved order of the Church could
take no place. The Bishops of Rome, Theod. l. 5 c. 23.
Damascus, Siricius, and Anastatius, were great adversaries to him, and
misinformed the good Emperor Theodosius against him: but when he appeared
before the Emperor, he spoke before him, both freely and wisely, words that
liked the Emperor well, as they are reported by Theodoretus: O Emperor, if
any man do blame my Faith as perverse, or my life as unworthy, I am content to
be judged by my very adversaries: but if the disputation only be concerning
principality, and eminent places, I will not contend with any man, but denude
my self of all superiority, and commit the chair of Antiochia to whom ye
like best. The Emperor admired his courage and wisdom, and sent him back
again to govern his own Flock, and was slow to hear frivolous accusations
in time to come against Flavianus. This was that worthy Bishop, who associated
John Chrysostom to be his fellow labourer in Antiochia: Sozom. lib. 7. cap.
23.
and who mitigated the wrath of Theodosius conceived against the City of
Antiochia, for misusing the Image of his wife Placilla.

Bishops of Constantinople.
COnstantinople was builded by Constantine, Func. Chron.
Anno, 336. in a place where Asia and Europe nearly confines: being separated
only by a narrow river, called of old Bosphorus Thracius. The cause wherefore
this Imperial City was builded in this place, was not to resign the town of
Rome, and the government of the West to the Bishop of Rome: but, as Sozomenus
writes, that Constantinople or new Rome, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 3.
might be as a sovereign Lady to all those who in the East, West, North, or
South, were obedient to the Roman Empire.

Learned men in our days are ashamed to maintain all the foolish fables of
the Roman Church, for they see clearly the cause of the building of this great
City, was to keep firmly both the East and the West under the Sovereignty of
Constantine, and his successors.

Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, Alexander.
prooved a worthy man, in the days of the Emperor Constantine. The Arrians
finding themselves to be utterly rejected by Athanasius, they addressed
themselves to Constantinople, under the conduct of Eusebius, Bishop of
Nicomedia: and threatened Alexander, that in case he would not receive Arrius
into the fellowship of the Church, Theod. l. 4 c. 4.
then they would bring him in, authorized with the Emperors command, to the
grief of his heart. Alexander clothed himself with the armor of God* and
all the night long prayed in this sense: Lord, if Arrius be to be received to
morrow into the communion of thy Church, then let thy servant depart in peace,
and destroy not the just with the wicked: but Lord, if thou will spare thy
Church, whereunto I am assured thou will be favorable: then Lord, turn thine
eyes toward the w^rdes of the Eusebians, and give not thine inheritance to a
desolation and reproach: and cut off Arrius, Note.
lest while he enters into the Church, his heresy also seem to enter with
him, and so no difference seem to be betwixt Piety and Impiety.

The next day following the prayer of Alexander: Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia,
with his retinue, came with great confidence and pomp, to perform all which
they threatened they would do. Theod. ibid. The death of Arrius.
But Arrius was compelled to go to a secret place, where his bowels gushed
out: and he concluded his wretched life with ignominy and shame.

To Alexander succeeded Paulus: Paulus.
his lot was to govern this Church, under the reign of an Arrian Emperor
Constantius, who rejected him, and seated Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in
his place. But this great Patron of the Arrian heresy, scarcely was placed in
Constantinople, when he ended his life. The Homousians received again Paulus
to be their Bishop. Socrat. l. 2. c. 7.
The Arrians chose Ala^edonius. This was the cause of great strife in
Constantinople, and the people divided in factions, hatefully invaded one
another. the Emperor hearing of the tumult, sent Hermogenes, the General
Commander of his horsemen, to remove Paulus from Constantinople: Hermogenes was
very ready to execute the Emperors commandment, Sozom. l.3.6.7.
but the people being affectioned toward their Pastor, arose up with popular
tumult, compassed the house of Hermogenes, set it on fire, s^ew him, and
fastened a cord to his legs, and trailed him along the street. For this cause,
the Emperor Constantius willing to punish the authors of this tumult,
hastened to come to Constantinople. The people went forth to meet him, and with
tears confessed their fault, and craved pardon. The Emperor abstayned from
punishing them unto the death, but he cut off the one-halfe of the victual,
which the liberality of his father had bestowed upon Constantinople; ^oe. l, 2,
^, 16.
to be paid yearly out of the tributes of Egypt. He banished Paulus the
second tune, and seated Macedonius in Constantinople, not without effusion of
blood. Paulus was again restored by the means of the Emperor Constans: but
after the death of Constans, he was banished to Cucusus, a town of Armenia,
where he was strangled by the bloody Arrians.

The Church of Constantinople was miserably troubled with Arrianisme, under the
reigns of Constantius and Valens. The reigns of Gratianus and Theodosius, was
a breathing time to the professors of the true Faith. At this time Nazianzen a
constant defender of the Faith, was chosen Bishop of Constantinople, who
notwithstanding voluntarily left the great City, in regard the Bishops
assembled in the second general Council, gave not a full and universal
consent to his admission: Yet gave they all their consent to Nectarius, Ruff.
l.2.^.2 ^
a man of noble birth, of the country of Cilicia, at that time (...), and who
had received no Ecclesiastical preferment before that time.

N^^tari^^^.
This man (I say) they made Bishop of Constantinople, with full consent and
allowance, both of the Council and people; ouer-passing Nazianzenus: so frail
are the cogitations of men, even in general Councels, that they are often times
more ruled with affection then reason. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4 cap. 10.
Nectarius continued in that office until the third year of the reign of
Arcadius, that is, until the year of our Lord 401. In his time the confession
of sins done in secret, to presbyter Poenitentiarius, was abrogated in the
Church of Constantinople, upon this occasion as Socrates writes. Note.
A certain noble woman was confessing in secret her sins to presbyter
Poenite^tiarius, and she confessed adultery, committed with one of the Church
Deacons. Socrat. lib. 5. ^ap. 19.
Eudaemon (this was the name of the Father confessor) gave counsel to
Nectarius, to abrogate this custom of auricular and secret confession, because
the Church was like to be slandered, and evil spoken of by these means.
Socrates can scarce give allowance to this fact of Nectarius, in respect that
by abrogation of this custom, the unfruitful works of darkness were less
coargued and reproved. But Socrates considered not, that Christ, John 4.
when he talked with the Samaritane woman at the Well, sent away his Disciples
to buy bread, to the end the poor Samaritane sinner might more freely pour
out her secret sins in the bosom of Christ, who knew all things that were
done in secret. It is not my purpose to contend with Socrates, he is writing an
history, I am writing but a short Compend of an history: he takes liberty to
declare his judgment concerning this fact of Nectarius, in abrogating
confession of secret sins to presbyter Poenitentiarius.

No man can blame me to write my judgment concerning auricular confession.
Genesis 9.23. Simile.
It is in our days not like unto the mantle wherewith Sem and Iapheth covered
the nakedness of their Father Noe: but it is in very deed a lap of the mantle
of the Devil, covering the nakedness of his children, that is, the horrible
treasons that are plotted in secret by the children of the Devil, against
Christian Magistrates. Now is auricular confession for greater causes to be
abrogated, then of old presbyter poenitentiarius was discharged by Nectarius.

Bishops of Jerusalem.
Macarius.
TO Thermon succeeded Macarius, Anno 318. about the seventh year of the reign
of Constantine: In his time it is thought, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 8. Socrat. lib.
1. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 18. Ambros^^e obitu Theodos.
that Helena, the mother of Constantine, found the Cross of Christ: but
Ambrose writes, that she worshipped it not, for that, says he, had been
Gentili^ error, and vanitas impiorum, that is, an error of Pagans, and vanity
of ungodly people. But now to lay aside the inexcusable fault of adoration of
the tree whereupon our Lord suffered. What necessity had Helena to be so
earnest to seek out this tree, and to commit it to the custody of all
posterities? seeing that Joseph of Arimathea, who sought the body of JESUS at
the hands of Pilate, Math. 27.58.
to the end he might bury it honorably, yet sought he not the tree whereon
Christ was crucified, which with little ado might have been obtained.
Secondly, Note.
during the time that the Cross was easy to be found, and easy to have been
discerned from other Crosses. How could the blessed Virgin the mother of the
Lord, and holy Apostles, have committed such an over^sight, in not keeping that
precious treasure, if so be in the keeping of it there be so great devotion, as
the Roman Church now talks of? Thirdly, what is the cause, that the Roman
Church brags so much of antiquity? when as the worshipping of the cross, one
of the maine points of their Religion was unknown to the first three hundred
years of our Lord: and now in the fourth Centurie, the cross is found, but
not worshipped: yea, and the adoration of it is detested and abhorred, as an
error of the Pagans.

Maximus.
To Macarius succeeded Maximus, who had been his fellow laborer, as of old,
Alexander was to Narcissus. Macarius governed the Church of Jerusalem, in the
peaceable days of Constantine, Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 17.
but Maximus governed that same Church himself alone, in the days of
Constantius. He was present at the Council of Tyrus: but Paphnutius a Bishop
and confessor in Thebaida, pitied the simplicity of Maximus, whom the Arrians
with deceitful speeches had almost circumueened, and he stepped to him, and
suffered him not to sit in the assembly of ungodly people: whereupon followed a
bond of indissoluble conjunction, not only with Paphnutius, but also with
Athanasius, who was charged with many false accusations in that wicked Council
of Tyrus. This warning made him circumspect and wise in time to come: Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 8.
so that he was not present at the Arrian Council of Antiochia, gathered under
pretense of dedication of the Temple, which Constantine began to build, but his
son Constantius perfected the building of it.

To Maximus succeeded Cyrillus, Cyrillus.
a man greatly hated by the Arrians, in so much, that Acacius Bishop of
Caesarea Palestinae deposed him (no doubt by some power granted to him by the
Emperor Constantius, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 26.
with advise of Arrian Bishops). Notwithstanding Silvanus Bishop of Tarsus
received him, and he taught in that Congregation with great liking and
contentment of the people. The strife of Acacius against him in the Council of
Seleucia, I remit unto its own place.

In time of famine he had a great regard to poor indigent people, Sozom. lib.
5. cap. 25.
and sold the precious vessels and garments of the Church for their support.
This was a ground of his accusation afterward, Note.
because of a costly garment bestowed by the Emp. Constantine to the church of
Jerusalem, which Cyrillus sold to a Merchant in time of famine, and again, the
Merchant sold it unto a lascivious woman: and such frivolous things were
aggregated by the Arrians, who hated the men of GOD.

Of other Pastors and Doctors, in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
BEsides the Patriarchs of principal places, God raised up in this Centurie a
great number of learned Preachers, who were like unto the Ibides of Egypt,
Simile.
a remedy prepared by God, against the multiplied number of venomous and flying
Serpents. Even so learned Fathers, of whom I am to speak, were instruments of
God, to undo the heresies which abounded in this age, above all other ages.
Did not Nazianzenus undo the Heresy of Apollinaris? Basilius the Heresy of
Eunomius? Hilarious like unto a second Deucalion saw the ouer-flowing flood of
Arrianisme abated in France. Ambrosius, Epiphanius, and Ierom set their hearts
against all Heresies, either in their time, or preceding their days. It were
an infinite labor, to write of them all, who in this age, like v^^^ glistering
stars, with the shining light of celestial doctrine, illuminated the
darkness of the blind world: but the names of some principal Teachers (God
willing) I shall remember.

Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, lived under the Emperor
Constantine, Eusebius Pamphili.
with whom he was familiarly acquainted. He was desired to supply the place of
Eustatius Bishop of Antiochia, whose deposition the Arrians without all form
of order, had procured most unrighteously: but he would not consent to accept
that charge, so that the chair of Antiochia wanted a Bishop eight years.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 24.
Some expecting the restitution of Eustatius; others feeding themselves upon
vain hopes, that Eusebius would accept that place. The Emperor Constantine
commended his modesty, and counted him worthy to be Bishop of the whole world.
Nevertheless, he was not altogether free of the Heresy of Arrius before the
Nicene Council, and he was remiss and slack in the cause of ATHANASIVS. He
was so familiarly acquainted with Pamphilus, Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 2.
who suffered martyrdom in Caelarea, that he clothed himself with his name,
and called himself Eusebius Pamphili. Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10.
He died about the time that Athanasius first returned from banishment, by the
means of Constantine the younger, about the year of our Lord 342.

Nazianzenus lived in the days of Constantius, Gregorius Nazianzenus. Socrat.
lib. 5. cap. 6.
Julian, and Theodosius. He was borne in a little town of Cappadocia, called
Nazianzum, from which he received his name. He was trained up in learning in
Alexandria and in Athens; his familiarity with Basilius Magnus began in
Athens, and it was increased in the Wilderness: he Preached in Sas^ma, but
because it was a place unmeet for studies, Ruff. l. 2. c. 9.
he returned to Nazianzum, and was a helper to his aged father. After his
fathers death he went to Constantinople, where he found the town in a most
desolate condition, in regard the Arrian and Macedonian heresies had so
mightily prevailed, that all the principal Churches were occupied by them.
Nazianzenus only had liberty to Preach in a little Church called Anastatia,
because the truth of God, which seemed to have been buried, Sozom. lib.^. cap.
5.
now by the Preaching of Nazianzenus was revived again. In the second general
Council gathered by Theodosius, because some Bishops of Macedonia and Egypt
murmured against his admission, he counterfeited the fact of Jonas, Ruff. lib.
2. cap. 9
and was content to be cast out of his place, to procure peace and concord
amongst his brethren. He benefited the Church of Christ in the days of Julian,
by writing books of Christian Poesy, The^d. lib. ^. cap. 8.
whereby the Christian youth should have no harm by the interdiction of
Julian, prohibiting the Children of Christians to be brought up in the Schools
of learning. He detected the heresy of Apollinaris, and the abominations of
Heathen idolatry, whereunto Julian had sold himself, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. ^7.
more clearly then any other man had done. A man worthy for excellency of
gifts, to be called Theologus.

Basilius Magnus, Basilius Magnus.
Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was so united in heart and mind with
Nazianzenus, that the Pen of Socrates will not separate the Treatises of their
lives. His father Basilius, Socrat. lib. 4. ^ap. 26.
his mother Eumele, his nurse that fostered him, named Macrina, all were
Christians. His father was martyred under the persecuting Emperor Maximus. He
left behind him five sons: three of them were Bishops, namely, Basilius
Bishop of Caesarea, Peter Bishop of Seba^ta, and Gregorius Bishop of Nyssa. He
was instrusted in all kind of learning in Caesarea, in Constantinople, in
Athens under Himerius and Proaeresius, in Antiochia under Libanius. At his
second coming to Athens, he acquainted himself with Nazianzenus. They spent
too much time in searching out the deepenesse of humane learning: and it
repented Basilius, Basil. Eustatio, epist. 79.
that he had spent so much time in searching out things that are not necessary
to eternal life. He was ordained a Deacon by Meletius, B. of Antiochia, and a
Presbyter by Eusebius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia. The good carriage of
Basilius toward Eusebius is worthic of remembrance, albeit Eusebius conceived
indignation against him without a cause, yet he would not expostulate with his
Bishop, but he departed to a solitary place in Pontus, where he remained
until the days of the Emperor Valens. Then did the Arrian Heresy so
mightily prevail, that necessity compelled the Churches of Cappadocia to
entreat Basilius to turn again, left in his absence Arrianisme should get a
full vpper-hand. Basilius returned, not without the foreknowledge and good
advise of Nazianzenus his dear friend, Nazian. Basilis, epist. 19.
who counseled him to preueene Eusebius, and to overcome him in courtesy and
humanity: So was he reconciled to Eusebius, and after his death was ordained
B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia: whom God so blessed, that the Arrians and
Eunomians, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.
who seemed to be excellently learned, when they encountered with Nazianzenus
and Basilius, they were like unto men altogether destitute of learning. In the
persecution of Valens, he was led to Antiochia, and presented before the Deputy
of Valens, who threatened him with banishment and death: but he answered him
with invincible courage, so that the Deputy was astonished at his answers. He
was not afraid of banishment, Socrat. ibid.
because the earth is the Lords: neither was he afraid of death, but wished to
have that honor, that the bonds of his earthly tabernacle might be loosed for
the testimony of Christ. Note.
The Emperors son Galaces at this time was sick unto the death, and the
Empress sent him word. that she had suffered many things in her dream for the
B. Basilius, so he was dismissed, and suffered to return to Caesarea.

The provident care of God ouer-ruling all humane cogitations, kept before hand
some sparkles that were not quenched in the fervent heat of this persecution.
The multiplied number of his Letters sent to the Bishops of the West, whereof
he received no comfortable answer, gave unto Basilius just occasion to suspect
affectation of supremacy in the West, as his own words do testify, which I
cite out of the Latin version as most easy to be understood: Nihil nos
fratres separat nisi animi proposito, Basil. transmarinis, epist. 77*
separations causas roburque demus: vnus est Dominus, vna Fides, Spes eadem.
Sieve caput vniversalis Ecclesiae vos ipsos esse reputatis, non potest pedibus
dicere caput, non est mihi opus vobis, etc. That is, There is nothing,
brethren, that separates us, except the purpose of our own minds furnish both
cause and strength to separation: There is one God, one Faith, one Hope. Or if
ye suppose your selves to be head of the universal Church, yet the head
cannot say unto the feet, I have no need of you.

Nyssa, Gregori^^ Nyssenus.
is a City of Mysia, of old called Pythopolis. The brother germane to
Basilius Magnus, named Gregorius, was Bishop of this town. In the second
general Council, to him was committed the ouer-sight of the Country of
Cappadocia. Albeit the volume of his Books be not extant, Socrat. lib. 5. cap.
8.
yet he is renowned in the mouths of the learned: and the fragments of his
writings declare that he has been a man of note and mark. Concerning sin,
he said, that albeit the Serpents that stinged us, Note.
were not slaughtered, yet we have sufficient consolation in this, that we are
cured from their venomous bits and stings. Numb. 21.6
Concerning pilgrimage to Jerusalem, Mount Olive^, and Bethlehem, he said, that
a pilgrimage from carnal lusts, to the righteousness of God, is acceptable to
the Lord; but not a iourneying from Cappadocia to Palestina: Hist M^gd. Cent. 4
cap. 10.
and that God will give a reward in the world to come, Note.
only to things done in this world, by warrant of his own Commandment.

Epiphanius. Sozom lib. 6. cap. 32.
Epiphanius was borne in a little Village of Palestina, called Barsanduce, in
the field of Eleutheropolis. He was brought up amongst the Monks of Palestina
and Egypt. In the end he was ordained Bishop of Salamina, the Metropolitan
town of the Isle of Cyprus. He refuted the Heresies preceding his time in his
book called Panarium, and set down a sum of the true faith in his book
called Anchoratus. He had a great regard to the poor: in so much, that he was
called Oeconomus pauperum. And like as Cyprus was naturally situated in a place
near approaching to Asia the less, and to Syria, and to Egypt, and
Pentapolis, and not far distant from Europe: so it fell out, that Christians,
who were disposed to support their indigent brethren, they sent their
collections to Epiphanius, and he distributed them to the poor. Socrat. lib.
6. cap. 10.
With all these commendable virtues, there was mixed a reproueable simplicity
in him: he was circumveened by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and took a
dealing against John Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, because he would not
be sudden in damning the Books of Origin. Also he taught in Constantinople,
with endeavor to alienate the hearts of the people from their own Pastor, and
celebrated the communion, and ordained a Deacon in Constantinople, without the
foreknowledge and consent of Chrysostom, and contrary to the Church order.
Chrysostom on the other part sent him advertisement, that in case he received
any disgrace or harm in the fury of popular commotions, he should blame
himself, who by his own inordinate doings was procuring the same. After this,
Epiphanius ceased from such doings, and entered into a ship, of purpose to
return back again to Cyprus, but he died by the way. It is reported of him,
that when he entered into the ship, he said, Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 15.
he left three great things behind him, to wit, a great town, a great
palace, and great hypocrisy.

It were a matter of infinite labor, Note.
and not agreeing with the nature of a Compend, to write of all the worthy men
of God in the Eastern parts, who did fight a good fight, run a good race,
Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
and kept the Faith. Asclepas in Gaza, Luci^^ in Adrianopolis, Basilius
presbyter in Ancyra, a mighty adversary to the Arrians, under the reign of
Constantius, and to the Pagans under the reign of Julian, in whose time he was
martyred: The^d. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Philogonius Bishop of Antiochia, Hellanicus Bishop of Tripolis, and Spyridion,
who of a keeper of cattle, became Bishop of Trimythus, Hermogenes Bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, who was present at the Council of Nice, James Bishop
of Nisibis, in Mesopotamia, in the days of Constantius, Theod. lib. 2* cap. 30.
by whose prayers the army of Sapores King of Persia was miraculously
disappointed. Paulus Bishop of Neocaesarea: this town is situated upon the
banks of Euprates, and Paphnutius Bishop in Thebaida, two notable Confessors,
who were both present at the Council of Nice. Eusebius Samosatenus, Theod.
lib. 2. cap. 32.
to whom many of Basilius Epistles are directed, and who refused to redeliuer
unto the Emperor Constantius the subscriptio^s of the Arrian Bishops, who
consented to the admission of Meletius to be Bishop of Antiochia, which
subscriptions were put in his custody. And albeit the messenger sent from the
Emperor, threatened to cut off his right hand, in case he delivered not the
subscriptions aforesaid, yet he constantly refused to deliver them: and the
Emperor both admired and commended his constancy: Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Barses Bishop of Edessa in Mesopotamia, Eulogius and Protogenes presbyters
there, Idem, lib. 4. cap. 18.
under the reign of Valens were banished to Antinoe in Thebaida, whose
travailes God wonderfully blessed, to the conversion of many souls to the
kingdom of God: Theodulus Bishop of Trianopolis, Amphilochius Bishop of
Iconium in Lycaonia. Pelagius Laodicenus, whose name is the more famous for his
insolent fact; Note.
for he married a young woman, T^^od. lib. 4. cap. 13.
and the first night after her marriage, he persuaded her to prefer Virginal
chastity, to matrimonial copulation. Antiochus the brother son of Eusebius
Samosatenus could not abide the imposi^on of the hands of an Arrian Bishop.
Letoius Bishop of Meletina in Armenia, who burnt the Monasteries, or rather as
Theodoretus writes, Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11.
the dens of thieves, wherein the Heretics called Massaliani had their
abiding Ephem Syrus a man borne in Nisibis, brought up in the wilderness, was
counted a famous Writer in the Syrian Language. The books shrouded under his
name, are thought for the most part to be supposititious. Sozom. lib. 7. cap.
27.
Aeas who lived in company with Zenon Bishop of Maioma, near unto Gaza, is
much reported of, because he married a young woman, procreated three children
with her, and in the end left her, and entered into a Monastery, forgetting
his matrimonial covenant. Zebe^nius Bishop of Eleutheropolis in Phaenicia, to
whom Sozomenus affirms, that by divine revelation, Sozom lib. 7. cap. 28.
the places were manifested, wherein the bodies of the Prophets, Habacuk and
Micheas were buried: So superstitious are Ecclesiastical Writers already
become, that the searching out of things nothing appertaining to eternal life,
are ascribed to divine revelations. The judicious Reader will pardon me, that I
write not in particular of the lives of all the fore mentioned Bishops and
Pastors, because the nature of a short Compend cannot permit it to be done.

Bishops and Doctors in Afric.
Didymus. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 15.
IN Afric, over and besides the Bishops of Alexandria, was Didymus, a Doctor
of the school of Alexandria, who through occasion of a dolor that fell into
his eyes, became blind from his very youth: Yet by continual exercise of his
mind, he became excellently learned in all Sciences: But above all things the
exact knowledge of divine Scriptures made him a terror to the Arrians. Many
do write, that the very last period of time, wherein Julian the Apostate
concluded his wretched life, Sozom. l^b. 6. cap 2.
was revealed to Didymus in a dream, and that he again told it to
Athanasius, who lurked secretly in Alexandria, during the time of the reign of
Julian.

Arnobius was an Orator in Afric, Arnobius,
afterward he became a Christian, and craved to be baptized. Christian Bishops
lingered to confer the holy Sacrament to a man, who had been a hater of
Christian Religion of a long time. Yet Arnob. freed himself from all suspicion
of Paganism, by writing Books wherein he confuted the Idolatry of the
Pagans, Ierom. chron.
and was baptized about the year of our Lord 330. About the suffering of our
Lord he writes very judiciously: That like as the beams of the Sun, that
shine upon a tree, when the tree is cutted, Simile. Arnob. in Psalm. 129.
the Sunne-beames cannot be cutted: Even so, in the suffering of Christ, the
divine Nature suffered no pain.

Lactantius F^rmianus, was the Disciple of Arnobius. In eloquence he was
nothing inferior to his Master: Ierom ad Paulinum.
yet it is thought, that he impugned errors with greater dexterity, then he
confirmed the Doctrine of the Truth.

Optatus Bishop of Meleuitanum in Afric, Optatus Meleuitanu^.
in the days of Valentinian and Valens, set his Pen against the Donatistes,
especially against Parmenianus, whose absurd assertion he clearly refutes.

First, Whereas the Donatists affirmed, that the Church of Christ was only to
be found in a corner of Afric. He refutes it by Scripture, Psalm. 2.^.
wherein it is written, Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the ends of the world for thy possession: This place proves
the Church to be Catholic.

Also whereas they said, that Baptism was not available, except some of
their sect had been present at the administration thereof; he answers, That
when God first created the Element of water, the presence of the Trinity was
powerful in operation to create water, albeit none of the Donatists were then
present: Even so the Trinity can work effectually in Baptism, albeit none of
the Donatists be present: Yea, and that it was God (the author of Baptism, and
not the Minister) that did sanctify, according as it is written, Wash me,
Psalm. 51.7.
and I shall be whiter then the snow, etc.

Bishops and Doctors of Europe.
Acholius.
ACHOLIVS Bishop of Thessalonica, baptized the Emperor Theodosius, after he
returned from the slaughter of Maximus. The Emperor fell sick by the way,
before he came to Constantinople, and was desirous to be baptized: Socrat. lib.
5. cap. 6.
Nevertheless, he would not suffer Acholius to baptize him, until he was
assured that Acholius was not spotted with the Arrian Heresy. After Baptism
the Emperor recovered his health again. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 4.
Acholius was brought up in Monasteries, like as Epiphanius, and many other
worthy men were brought up.

Hilarious.
Hilarious Bishop of Poitiers in France, lived under the reign of Constantius:
a man in Religion constant, in manners meek and courteous. Ruffin. lib. 1.
cap. 31.
He was banished immediately after the Council of Millane, to Phrygia, as some
suppose. Theodoretus writes, that he was banished to Thebaida: and relieved
again from banishment under Julian. But it is more apparent, Theod. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
that he remained in Phrygia, until the Council of Seleucia; unto which
Council he was brought from banishment: not by any special commandment from
the Emperor, but by a general commandment given to his Deputy Leonas, to
assemble together the Bishops of the East. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
Under pretense of obeying this commandment, Hilarious being banished in the
East, was brought to the Council of Seleucia: from Seleucia he went to
Constantinople. The Emperor refused to hear him reason with the Arrians in
the matters of Faith, but gave him liberty to return to his own country
again. He took great pains to purge the country of France from the poison
of Arrian heresy: and he prevailed so far, that Ierom compares him to
Deucalion, Ierom. in Chron.
who both saw the flood of waters ouer-flowing Thessalia, and the abating of
them also: Even so Hilarious saw both the growth and decay of Arrianisme in
France. Similie.
He lived six years after his returning from banishment, and concluded his
life under the reign of Valentinian.

Ambrose the son of Symmachus, Ambrosius.
was a man of noble parentage: under the Emperor Valentinian he was governor
of Liguria. At this time Auxentius Bishop of Millane (an Arrian) died. Great
sedition was in the Town, for the election of a new Bishop, Ruffin. lib. 2.
cap. 11.
every man contending to have a Bishop chosen of that faith which he himself
best liked. Ambrose fearing the undoing of the Town by this intestine
contention, exhorted them to unity and concord, with words and reasons to
perswas^^e, that the people with one consent cried out, they would be all of
one mind, if that Ambrose were appointed to be their Bishop. Socrat. lib. 4.
cap. 30.
The Emperor thought this inexpected consent of the people came from GOD, and
he consented to the desire of the people. So was Ambrose ordained Bishop of
Millaine. After the death of Valentinian, he was grievously troubled by
Iustina, the mother of Valentinian the second: for she was infected with
Arrianisine. Ambrose was favored by the people, and would not betray the
sheepe-folde of GOD to Wolves. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 13. Ambrose ad Marcellinam
epist. 33. August. Confess. lib. 9. c. 7. Theod. lib 5. cap. 14. Hist. Magd.
Cent. 4. cap. 10.
The particular description of the broile of Iustina may be read at length in
the Epistle that Ambrose writes to his sister Marcellina.

The miracle wrought at the sepulchers of Protasius and Gervasius, mittigated
somewhat the fury of Iustina. But the dolorous tidings of the slaughter of
Gratianus compelled Iustina to fly from Italy to Illyricum for safety of her
own life, and her sons life. He sustained also great trouble under the two
Tyrants Maximus and Eugenius: so that he was compelled in the time of Maximus,
to fly to Aquileia: and in the time of Eugenius, to fly to Hetruria, He lived
also under the reign of Theodosius, whom he sharply reproved for the
slaughter of the innocent people of Thessalonica: Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18.
and died in the third year of the reign of Honorius, after he had governed
the Church of Millane twentie-two years.

Prudentius.
Prudentius, a man of Spain, a Lawyer at some times, and a Warrior at other
times in his young years. In his old age he writ of divine matters. He lived
under the reign of Valentinian the second, of Theodosius, and his sons. He
set forth his knowledge in Books of Latin Poesy, albeit Greek inscriptions
be prefixed unto them, such as (...), which entreats of the fight betwixt the
spirit and the flesh: Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
(...), which entreats of the works to be done in the day time: (...),
entreats of Divinity and divine things: (...), entreats of Original
sin, against Cerdon and Marcion, the Authors of two beginnings: (...), a
book containing the praises of victorious Martyrs. Psalm. 50.58.
In this Book is frequent invocation of Saints, express against holy
Scripture: (...), containing Histories, both of the old and new Testament. The
verses, wherein he argues the Heresy of the Manicheans, who attributed unto
Christ, not a true, but a fantastical body made of air, are very
judiciously conceived: Restat vt aeriam pingas ab origin gentem^.
Aerios proceres, Leuim, Iudam, Simeonem,
Aerium DAVID, magnorum corpora Regum
Aeria, at que ipsam foecundae virginis alvum
Acre fallaci, nebulisque and nube tumentem.


The Ecclesiastical Writers, whom I have chiefly followed in this Compend,
make no mention of him.

Osius.
Osius Bishop of Corduba, was a Confessor, in the Persecution of Dioclesian and
Maximianus. He was regarded by the Emperor Constantine, for the marks of the
rebuke of Christ. The Emperor employed him in the schism in Egypt, Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
betwixt Alexander and Arrius. Likewise he sent him to the Bishops of the East,
who differed in opinion from the Bishops of the West concerning the keeping of
Easter day. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16.
He was present at the Council of Nice, where he damned the heresy of Arrius:
And at the council of Sardica, he absolved Athanasius, Paulus, etc. Neither
was he terrified with the menacing Letters of Constantius, but answered
courageously, that Athanasius was an innocent man, and that the Emperor did
not well to hearken to the calumnies of Versatous and Valens, men who had by
writ confessed to Julius Bishop of Rome, Th^od lib. 2. cap. 19.
that the accusations intended against Athanasius, were but forged calumnies.
And this they did of their own accord freely, and not compelled. In his
decrepit years (for he lived an hundredth years) some weakness was found in
him. At the council of Syrmium, he was compelled to be present in that
assembly of Arrian Bishops, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 31.
to whose wicked constitutions (fearing torture and banishment, from which he
was lately reduced) he subscribed.

Ierom was borne in a town of Dalmatia, Hieronymu^.
called Stridon, and was instructed in the Rudiments of Learning at Rome. From
Rome he went to France, Ierom. epist. ad Gerons.
of purpose to increase his knowledge, and to diverse other places, and he
returned again to Rome, where he acquainted himself with honorable women,
such as Marcella, Sophronia, Principia, Paula, and Eustochium, to whom he
expounded places of holy Scripture, for he was admitted presbyter: He was
counted worthy to succeed Damasus B. of Rome: his gifts were envied at Rome:
therefore he left Rome, and took his voyage toward Palestina. By the way he
acquainted himself with Epiphanius B. of Cyprus, with Nazianzenus B. in
Constantinople, with Didymus Doctor in the School of Alexandria, and sundry
other men of Note and Mark. In the end he came to Judea, and made choice of
the place of the Lords Nativity to be the place of his death. At Bethlehem,
Paula a Noble woman (who accompanied Ierom, Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10.
and his brother Paulinianus from Rome) upon her own charges builded four
Monasteries. Ierom guided one Monastery, wherein were a number of Monks. The
other three, wherein there were companies of holy Virgins, she guided her
self. Ierom was a man of stern disposition, and more inclinable to a solitary
and Monkish life, then to fellowship and society. Neither Heliodorus in the
Wilderness, nor Ruffinus out of the Wilderness, August. epist. 17.
could keep inviolable friendship with him. The Letters that passed betwixt
August. and Ierom declare, that Ierom knew not how great a victory it was in
love, in humility, and friendship to overcome them, Ierom. Aug. epist. 13.14.
who seemed to contend against him. Ierom wanted not his own gross errors.
Concerning the creation he thought, Ierom. auar. in tit. cap. 1. Ierom. lib.
18. Comment. in Isaiam. Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10.
that Angels, Thrones, Dominations, were existent before the world was created.
In his Books written against Iouinian, he writes not reverently of Marriage,
and he seems to condemn the second Marriage. He ended his life about the
twelfth year of the reign of Honorius, in the year of his age 91.

Ecclesiastical Writers have filled their Books with excessive commendations
of Heremites and Monks: of whom (God willing) I shall write in a particular
Treatise of Monastical life.

CENTVRIE. V.
Patriarchs of Rome.
AFter Stricius succeeded Anastatius, Anastatius. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Pla^na, de vit. Pontif. Innocent^us 1. Socrat lib. 7. cap. 9.
and governed the Church of Rome three years. About the year of our Lord 401.
he entered into his office, under the reign of Honorius. He made a
constitution, that men should not sit, but stand when the Gospel was read.
After him succeeded Innocentius, and continued in his office fifteen years:
he was an adversary to the Novatians, and Pelagians, and was friendly to John
Chrysostom, whose deposition Eudoxia the Emperors wife had procured.
Innocentius sent to Honorius, and Arcadius; five Bishops, and two Presbiters,
to procure the appointment of a Council, wherein the cause of Chrysostom
might be examined: for he counted the gathering of an Ae cumenicke Council
the only remedy whereby the vehement tempest of so great commotions as followed
the deposition and banishment of Chrysostom, Sozom. 1.8. c. 26.
could be settled: but the adversaries of Chrysostom procured the messengers
of Innocentius to be ignominiously entreated, and sent back again. Ibid. cap.
28.
Here let the judicious Reader mark that the power of conuocating general
Counsels appertained to the Emperor, and not unto the Bishop of Rome. Note.
In this man's time (according to mine opinion) the Roman Church began to swell
in pride, and to usurp jurisdiction over other Churches, having no better
ground than a personal and temporal act of the council of Sardica.

Zosimus the successor of Innocentius continued not above the space of a year
and 5. months in office, Zosimus.
or 2. years, as Socrates writes. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11.
To him Platina ascribes this constitution, that no servant should be assumed
into the clergy: but he lamenteth, that not only servants, but also the sons
of strange women, and flagitious persons, were admitted to spiritual offices
to great detriment of the Church. He sent Faustinus a Bishop to the Council of
Carthage, with 2. Presbyters of the Roman Church to crave that no matter of
moment and importance should be done without advise of the Roman Bishop.
Platin. de vit. Zosu^^.
He pretended an act of the council of Nice allotting this dignity to the
Roman chair: but after diligent search of the principal register no such act
was found. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
I expected that Onuphrius now should have compeared, and in so maine a point
said something to the cause, which with tooth and nail he defends, but in
his annotations I see nothing except a diversity of cou^ting of years for in
his reckoning Zosimus continued 3. years 4-months.

Bonifacius 1.
To Zosimus succeeded Bonifacius 1. and governed 3. years. At his election
there was a schism in Rome. Some elected Bonifacius, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11.
others Eulalius to be their bishop. The Emperor Honorius ba^ished them both
from Rome, but after 7 months Bonifacius was restored, and was Bishop of Rome:
at this time they were bishops of Rome, to whom the Emperor gave allowance,
but they were not Emperors, to whom the Bishop of Rome gave allowance.

Coelestinus 1. Socrat. l. 7. c. 11.
After Bonifacius, Coelestinus governed the Church of Rome, eight years, ten
months, and seventeen days. He was an adversary to the Novatians, Pelagians,
and to Nestorius and his adherents. Socrates takes him up, right, that he was
bitter against the Novatians, for desire of pre-eminence. In Constantinople
they who professed the true faith, had liberty to meet together, ^albeit in
matters of discipline their opinion was not found: but Coelestinus silenced
Rusticola the Bishop of the Novatians For desire to have all Bishops stouping
under his soueraignitie. Mark the words of Socrates in the Latin translation
bearing these words: Socrat. ibid.
Romano Episcopatus iam ^dim peri^de atque Alexandrin^ ultra sacred^^^ lu^^tes
and exterum dominatum progr^ss^: Note.
that is, the bishopric of Rome, even of old having stepped beyond the limits
of Priesthood to an external domination, as the Bishopric of Alexandria had
done before. Pelagius had propagated his heresy in the Isle of Britain. But
Coelestinus hindered the propagation of a wicked heresy, by sending Germanus to
the Britains, and Palladius to the Scots. Coelestinus more impudently than
his predecessors, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
Innocentius, Zosimus and Bonifacius, urged a submission of the Churches of
Carthage unto the Roman chair, and that they should accept in favor
Appiarius whom they excommunicated for his appellation from his own Bishop to
the Bishop of Rome: but the fathers of the sixth Council of Carthage would
neither absolve Appiarius before his repentance were known, neither would they
stoup under the jurisdiction of the Roman Church.

To Coelestinus succeeded Sixtus the third, X ystus or Sixtus.
and continued in office eight years, ninteene days. He was accused of the
crime of Adultery by Bassus; but Sixtus was found innocent, Platina de
vitispontif.
and Bassus was found a calumniator and a false accuser: therefore he was
banished by the Emp. Valentinian the third, and his goods were appointed to go
to the use of the Church. Bassus after his banishment desired to be received
again in favor with Sixtus: but his petition was rejected as if he had sinned
against the holy Ghost. Notwithstanding the flatterers of the chair of Rome
writes that Sixtus buried Bassus his accuser with his own hands; Hist. Magd.
cent. 5. cap. 10.
which seems to be repugnant to his unmerciful form of dealing in his
lifetime.

After Sixtus, Leo.
Leo a deacon in Rome, and absent out of the town, was chosen the bishop of
Rome, and ruled 21. years, 1. month, 13. days: Platina de vit. pontif.
he stirred up the Emperor Theodosius 2. to appoint a council for suppressing
the error of Eutyches, wherein it was rather confirmed than suppressed by the
craft of Dioscorus B* of Alexandria, whereof I shall speak hereafter, God
willing, and how Eutyches was condemned in the council of Chalcedon under the
reign of Martianus. His wisdom and eloquence in mitigating the surie of
Attila has been handled in the preceding history. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap.
10.
Amongst his constitutions none is more commendable then his constitution
against ambitious men, Note.
who presume continually to high places. He ordained that they should be
deprived both of the higher, and the lower place: of the lower place for their
pride, because they had proudly despised it: of the higher, because they had
auaritiously suited it. In discipline nothing is better than to bear down
those place mongers, whereby it comes to pass, that prerogative of place is
referred to prerogative of gift. Hilarious.
Hilarious followed and continued seven years, three months, ten days. To whom
succeeded Simplicius, Simplicius.
and continued fifteen years, one month and seven days. Foelix. 3.
Foelix the third was the successor of Simplicius, and continued eight years,
eleven months, and seventeen days. He governed the Church of Rome in the
time of the Emperor Zeno, Platin. de vit. Pontif.
and in the time, when Odoacer and Theodoricus contended for the superiority
of Italy: he was nothing inferior to his antecessors in zeal to advance the
Supremacy of the Roman Chair: for he excommunicated Acatius Bishop of
Constantinople, because he craved not his advise in receiving P^trus Moggus in
favor, like as he had craved his advise at the first when he excommunicated
him. This Petrus Moggus was an Eutychian heretic, and was justly
excommunicated by Acatius, who used the advice of Foelix Bishop of Rome, in
exco^municating him. Hist. Magd. c^nt. 5. cap. 10.
But when Petrus Moggus testified his repentance by his supplicant bill,
containing the recantatio^ of his error, Acatius absolved him. This grieved the
proud stomach of Foelix, because his advise was not craved in all things.
Therefore he excommunicated Acatius, as is said. Acatius little regarding the
pride of the Roman Bishop, gave to Foelix an hard meeting: for he both
excommunicated Foelix, and razed his name out of the roll of Bishops. Ambition
was the first great cancker-worme that consumed and defaced the beauty of the
Church of Rome.

Gelasius the successor of Foelix, Gelasius.
an Africane borne, ruled four years, eight months, and seventeen days. The
estate of Italy was so troubled by the incursions of barbarous people, that
the manners of the people were altogether dissolute (for he ministered in the
last year of Theodoricus King of Italy) therefore he endeavored to establish
discipline in the Church: Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
he claimed superiority over all Churches more manifestly than any of his
predecessors had done, for he affirmed that the Church of Rome should judge all
Churches, and should be judged by no Church, and that the right of Appellation
to the Bishop of Rome from all parts in the world, was not a supposititious act
of the Nicene Council, as the Council of Carthage had determined, but that it
was authentike, and a Right given by them indeed to the Roman Church: neither
would h e be reconciled with the Oriental Bishops in any case, except they
would first allow the excommunication of Acatius, Platina, de vit. Pontif.
and raze his name out of the roll of Bishops. Platina writes that he did
excommunicate the Emperor Anastatius a favorer of the Eutychian heresy, but
this example once begun, was practiced in most prodigal manner by the Bishops
of Rome against Emperors, who maintained no heresy.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
John Chrysostom succeeded to Nectarius in the days of Arcadius, John
Chrysostom.
and Honorius: he had been an helper to Flavianus Bishop of Antioch, from
whence he was transported by the authority of the Emperor Arcadius, Theod.
l. 5. c. 27.
and ordained Bishop of Constantinople, sore against the hearts of the people
of Antiochia. In Oratory he had profited in the school of Libanius, S^zom. l.
8. c. 2.
in Philosophy in the school of Andragathius beyond his fellows. His
liberty in reproouing of sin both in Court and Clergy, procured against him
the hatred of Eudoxia the Empress, and hatred of the Clergy, who could not
suffer their corrupt manners to be reformed. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria was
opposed to Chrysostom from the very first time of his ordination: for he
endeavored to have Isidorus a Monk brought up in the wilderness of Schethis,
and afterward a Presbyter in Alexandria to be seated in Constantinople: but
when his plotted course failed, he became an enemy to Chrysostom, and gladly
embraced all occasions, whereby he might procure his deposition: how he was
justly deposed, banished, and iourneyed to death by the malice of Eudoxia, and
Theophilus it has been sufficiently declared in the preceding history. Other
things (God willing) shall be handled in the description of the life of
Theophilus. Chy^. ^^r^n.
Chrysostom governed the Church of Constantinople. 7. years.

Arsatius.
After Chrysostom, Arsatius the brother of Nectarius an aged man (for he was
fourscore year old) sat in Constantinople scarce 2. years.

Atticus.
Atticus the successor of Arsatius sat 21. years. He was admitted to this
office in the time of the minority of Theodosius the second: Socrat. lib. 7.
cap. 1.2. Sozom. l. 8. c. 27 Theo. lib. 5. cap. 34. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 4.
at what time Anthemius his counselor (a man in wisdom inferior to none who
lived in his time) governed the affairs of the Kingdom. Atticus was not
unlearned: he was godly and prudent: he inserted the name of Chrysostom into
the roll of Bishops, and in the public Liturgy made an honorable
commemoration of his name, and persuaded Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria to do
the like. Socrates affirms that God by his ministry wrought miraculous
works, and that a Jew sick of the Palsy was baptized by him in the Name of
Jesus, and immediately after Baptism was healed of his disease. In staying the
progress of superstition, wherein people, even at this time were inclined,
^^st. Magd. ^^nt. ^. cap. 10.
he carried himself prudently: for some of the people of Constantinople
resorted to the sepulcher of Sabbatius to pray, and to do some worship to the
defunct: but Att^^us caused his body in the night season to be raised, and to
be buried in another place unknown to the foresaid superstitious people, Note.
and so they left off their resorting to the sepulcher of Sabbatius.

Sisinnius after Atticus ministered 2. years. Sisinnius.
Nestorius followed him in office, but his name is to be read in the catalogue
of heretics. Maximianus. Proclus.
Next to Nestor^us was Maximianus, who continued not above, 2. years, and 5.
months. To whom succeeded Proclus, and continued 12. years.

Fla^ianus after Proclus governed that sea, Fla^ianus.
in the days of Theodosius the second: a faithful man in his calling, but
scarcely did he complete 2. years in his Bishopric. He deposed and
excommunicated Eutyches an Abbot in Constantinople, the author of a pernicious
heresy. He was cruelly trodden under foot in the second council of Ephesu^
called (...), that is, a council of brigandrie. Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria, Evag. l. ^. c. 10.
in that council favored the opinion of E^tyches, and by tumultuary dealing,
so oppressed Flavianus, that he procured his death. They who attribute too much
to the authority of Councels, Note.
let them fasten their eyes upon this council, and learn, that possibly
councels may err, and that Patriarchs, such as Dioscorus was, may err, even
in matters of faith.

To Fla^ianus succeeded Anatolius, and governed eight years. Anatolius.
Ge^^adius. Acatius.
And after him Gennadius thirteen years. Acatius the successor of Gennadius
governed seventeen years under the Emperor Ze^o. He gave a good proof of
his constancy in the true faith, at that time when Basiliscus (who drove Zeno
from his Kingdom) condemned the Council of Chalcedon, and compelled bishops to
subscribe to the error of Eutyches. The great dissension that fell out bewixt
him and the Roman Bishops, for Petrus Moggus Bishop of Alexandria, and Petrus
Cnapheus Bishop of Antiochia, it was, not for communicating with them before
they renounced their error, as some learned men do affirm, but for plain
emulation; Funct. Com^^nt inchr^nol.
such as was of old betwixt Pompeius and Caesar, the one could not abide a
companion, the other could not abide a superior. The Roman Church manifestly
co^tended for superiority: the Church of Constantinople on the other part
perceiving what advantage the Roman bishops took of this that their counsel
was craved, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
they left off the doing of it. And this moved the proud stomach of Gelasius
(after the death of Acatius to burst out in these arrogant words, Gelasius in
epist. a^ Dardan. 11.
that the church of Rome had power to judge of all other churches, but no
church had power to judge of the church of Rome; yea, and Platina a late writer
groundeth the supremacy of the B. of Rome upon this, Platin. de vit. Simplicii.
that Acatius B. of Constantinople wrote unto him, to damn the heretical
opinion of Pe^rus Moggus B. of Alexandria: albeit the faith of Peter was
grounded upon a sure rock, Math. 16.
yet the supremacy of the Roman Bishops is grounded only upon such sandy
ground, as Platina and other flatterers of the Roman chair do cast out in
their writings.

Pharauitas.
After Acatius succeeded Phrauitas, otherwise called Flauitas, and continued
scarce 4. months: some think that God in wrath shortened his days, Hist. Magd.
cent. 5. cap. 10.
because that by unlawful means he attained to that dignity to be Bishop of
Constantinople. The Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus Bishop of Alexandria
written to Flauitas, and pondered by his successor Euph^mius, wherein Petrus
Moggus accurseth the council of Chalcedon, it will clearly prove
inconstancy in Petrus Moggus, but not a fault in Acatius: for many are like
unto dogs, Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 23.
who return unto their vomit again, and this blame must rest in the bosom
of fickle and unconstant men, Simile.
and not in the bosom of honest men who are deceived by them.

Euphemius.
Euphemius succeeded to Flauitas, and governed under the reign of Zeno and
Anastatius, and would not complete the ceremonies of the inauguration of
Anastatius until the time that by his oath and hand-writ, Hist. Magd. cent. 4.
cap. 10.
he promised to be a defender of the true faith and of the acts of the
council of Chalcedon. The hand-writ Anastatius craved to be delivered back
again to him, which when he could not obtain, Euphemius was compelled to fly
for safety of his life. When he pondered the Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus
he abhor^ed his name, and inserted against the name of F^^lix B. of Rome into
the catalogue of Bishops, which was razed and cancelled by Acatius one of his
predecessors.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
THeophilus ministered in Alexandria in the days of Theodosius, Theophilus.
and of his sons Arcadius and Honorius: a man both reproovable in his life,
and inconstant in his faith. He sent Isidorus a Monk, to Rome* there to lurk
secretly, and to expect the event of the battle that was to be sought betwixt
Theodosius and Maximus, and to congratulate the victor. When he returned from
Rome, he endeavored to promote him to the Bishopric of Constantinople: but
John Chrysostom, was preferred before him. After this, he cannot keep
friendship with Isidorus, whom he intended once to have preferred, but upon a
light occasion cast him off, and excommunicated him; because he would not
deliver to him the money left in testamental legacy to be distributed to the
poor. This money which Theophilus sister had left to the use aforesaid; Sozom.
l. 8. c. 12.
Theophilus craved that it might be put in his hands, to be employed to
building and repairing of Churches. But Isidorus answered, that the money put
in his custody, should be bestowed according to the will of the defunct. And
that it was a work more acceptable to God, to support the poor, who are the
living temples of God, then to build old and ruinous walls. Therefore
Theophilus hated, and excommunicated Isidorus: for this cause Isidorus left
Alexandria, and addressed himself to the wilderness of Schethis, where he
complained to Ammonius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and Enthymius, called Long
f^atres, of the injury that Theophilus had done unto him; who entreated
Theophilus to receive Isidorus in favor again, and to admit him to his
communion: but Theophilus gave unto them an evil reward for their travels; for
he hated them, and finding that there were diverse opinions amongst the Monks
of Nitria and Schethis, he put fuel to the fire, to the end that diversity of
affection might be added to diversity of opinion: a man in all his courses
malicious and deceitful. Longifratres fled to Constantinople, to complain to
the Emperor Arcadius, of the malice of Theophilus, and they were humanely and
courteously received by Chrysostom; but not admitted to the participation of
the holy mysteries, until their cause had been first judged. To the rest of
the Monks who dwelt in Nitria and Schethis, the malice of Theophilus was not
unknown. And five hundred of them (especially such as were Anthropomorphite)
came from the wilderness of Nitria, with intention to have slain Theophilus,
Socrat. l. 6. c. 7.
but he met them, and with gentle and flattering words, lenified their anger,
for he said unto them: Brethren, I see your faces as the face of God. They
took his words in this sense, as if he had said; that God was fashioned
according to the likeness of a man's body. Therefore they desired him to abjure
the doctrine of Origin, which thing he willingly did, for he hated the books
of Origin: and so he escaped the danger.

The next practice of his malice, was against John Chrysostom Bishop of
Constantinople, whom he hated, because he had received and courteously
entreated Isidorus and Longifratres, who came to Constantinople, with intention
to accuse him. In this matter he dealt deceitfully, like unto a crafty fox
lying in wait, until he found occasion to set on. First, he reconciled
himself to Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamin in Cyprus, and moved him to gather a
Council in Cyprus, for damning the books of Origin; and to write to John
Chrysostom, that he would do the like in his bounds: but Chrysostom took
little regard of the counsel of Epiphanius, other things were more necessary,
then to trouble the memorial of a man that was dead long ago. Theophilus was
glad to have this advantage, that Epiphanius a man of great account, was on his
side; and so soon as he found that E^doxia, the Emperor Arcadius wife, with
Courteours and some of the Clergy, were incensed against Chrysostom, he was
in readiness as a firebrand of Satan, to execute all evil turns. So the man
of God (as has been declared) was deposed, banished, and unjustly put to
death, by Eudoxia and Theophilus, two chief procurers of it.

Cyrillus, Cyrillus
the nephew of Theophilus, on his brothers side, succeeded to Theophilus, and
governed two and thirty years; A man learned, zealous, and active: his
ministration was under the reigns of Theodosius the second, and Valentinian
the third. He was an adversary to Heretics in his days, especially to
Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who denied the personal union of the
divine and humane Nature in Christ: whose opinion as heretical, was damned in
the Council of Ephesus.

Cyrillus took too much upon him: for he revenged the injury that the Jews
had done unto Christians in the night time, by setting upon their Synagogues
slaying a great number of them, banishing others, and distributing their
substance, as a prey to the multitude that followed him. Soc. l. 7. c. 13.
The Jews had dwelt in Alexandria from the days of Alexander the Great, to
that time; but now by the fury of Cyrillus, they were utterly undone and
scattered. Orestes the Deputy of Theodosius the second, was in the town, to
whom Cyrillus would not complain of the injury done by the Jews, against the
Christians: but at his own hand usurping the office of a civil Magistrate,
he set upon the Jews, slew, scattered, and spoiled them, as has been above
mentioned. This was the ground of unsupportable discord betwixt Orestes and
Cyrillus; in so much, that five hundred Monks of Nitria, came out of the
wilderness to Alexandria, to support Cyrillus their Bishop. Soc. l. 7. c. 14.
One of them called Ammonius, wounded the Governor Orestes, and when he was
taken and punished unto the death; Cyrillus called him a Martyr, buried him in
the Church, changed his name, and called him (...), that is, admirable.

The Roman Bishops claimed a superiority over their brethren; but Cyrillus
Bishop of Alexandria, plainly pretended a superiority over civil Magistrates.
This moved Socrates writing of Coelestinus the first, to say, that the Bishops
of Rome and Alexandria, Soc. l. 7. c. 11.
had stepped beyond the limits of Priesthood, to the affectation of an
external domination. The Bishops of Rome kept their own pride, and borrowed
from Alexandria a proud usurpation of domination over civil Magistrates: but
the wise providence and provident wisdom of our God, would have the mouths
of the Bishops of Rome opened to condemn that civil domination, which their
successors afterward most proudly usurped.

Gelasius de anathematis vinculo.
Mark what Gelasius writes, that before the coming of Christ, some persons,
such as Melchisedecke, were both Kings and Priests. This (says he) Satan
imitating in his members, would have Pagan Emperors to be called Pontifices
maximi, and Imperatores: but when he came who was indeed both King and Priest,
to wit, Christ, neither did the King take upon him the priestly dignity,
neither the Priest kingly authority.

Dioscorus, who succeeded Cyrillus, his name is to read in the catalogue of
Heretics; Proterius.
but Proterius was the true successor, in regard he kept the true Faith: but
he was cruelly slain by the favorers of Di^scorus, immediately after the
death of the Emperor Martianus. Hist. Magd. Cent. 5. cap. 10. Timotheus
Salophaciolus. Evagr. lib. ^. cap. 11.


Timotheus Salophaciolus, governed as Bishop in Alexandria, 23. years, six
months, in the days of Zen^ and Basiliscus. Albeit Basiliscus advanced
another Timotheus, surnamed Aelurus to be Bishop of Alexandria, yet when Zeno
was restored to his soverainty again, Salophaciolus received his place again.

After Timotheus Salophaciolus, followed Johannes Tabennesiota, whom the
Emperor Zeno justly hated for his perjury: for he came Ambassador to the
Emperor, Johannes Tabennesiota.
and craved, that when their Bishop were dead, the Church of Alexandria might
have liberty to choose their own Bishop: the Emperor suspected that he was
ambitiously suting the place to himself, and therefore did bind him with an
oath, that when the place should happen to be void, he should make no means
to possess himself of that room: but he did the contrary, and accepted the
place: therefore the Emperor Zeno banished him: he fled to Felix Bishop of
Rome, who being misinformed by Johannes Tabennesiota, made him to think, that
he was persecuted for the true Faith, as Athanasius was, who fled to Julius
Bishop of Rome: but the Emperors letter assured him of the contrary, that
he was banished for perjury. Petrus Moggus, who followed, is to be reckoned
in an other Catalogue.

Patriarchs of Antiochia.
TO Flavius, Porphyrius. Soc. l. 7. c. 9.
in Antiochia succeeded Porphyrius, whose ordination was more secret then
becomes the ordination of Bishops to be, in absence of the people, when they
were delighting themselves with the sight of Stageplayes in Daphne. He
consented to the deposition of John Chrysostom. No man whom I have read,
makes reverent record of him; except Theodoretus, who possibly does not
examine him narrowly, but for the dignity of his place, Theod. l. 5. c. 35.
lets him pass with a note of commendation.

After Porphyrius succeeded Alexander, Alexander.
a man much commended by Theodoretus for eloquence, but more for peace: for he
was not only an instrument to quiet the estate of his own Church of
Antiochia, but also to quiet the estate of other Churches, and he was the first
who inserted the name of John Chrysostom into the catalogue of holy Bishops,
and persuaded others to do the same. Theodotus.
Theodotus was his successor four years, of whom little is written.

To Theodotus succeeded Johannes Grammaticus, Johannes Grammaticus.
and ministered eighteen years. In his time the Council of Ephesus was
assembled by Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third. In it there was
a pitiful distraction, betwixt John Bishop of Antiochia, and Cyrillus Bishop
of Alexandria, for a light cause. Not because John Bishop of Alexandria
favored the heresy of Nestorius: but in respect he gave out definitive
sentence before the full number of his brethren were assembled together. This
dissension was afterward reconciled, and Johannes sent to Cyrillus, Paulus
Emisenus; and craved his friendship, and was reconciled unto him.

Domnus.
Domnus the successor of Johannes, was an unconstant man. He consented to the
deposition of Eutyches, and afterward in the Council called (...), he
consented to the reposition of Eutyches. He received a just recompense of his
inconstancy: for the second Council of Ephesus deposed him, and ordained
Maximus Bishop af Antiochia.

Maximus.
Maximus was admitted Bishop of Antiochia, by the second Council of Ephesus.
He was presented at the Council of Chalcedon; wherein, albeit the second
Council of Ephesus was damned as heretical, and all the acts of it were
abrogated; yet they gave allowance to the deposition of Domnus, Evag. l. 2. c.
vlt.
and to the admission of Maximus, which thing came to pass by this occasion;
Leo Bishop of Rome had received Maximus to his communion, before the Council
of Chalcedon (albeit he had received ordination from an heretical Council)
and the Ambassadors of Leo were presidents in the Council of Chalcedon: Hist.
Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10.
therefore they overpassed lightly, and with allowance, any fact that was done
by the Bishop of Rome. But all the world was set in business, when Acatius
received in favor Petrus Moggus, because it was done without foreknowledge of
the Bishop of Rome.

To Maximus succeeded Martyrius, who being absent at Constantinople for
necessary affairs of his own church, Martyrius.
Petrus Gnapheus stole away the hearts of the people from him, so that at his
returning he was compelled to leave Antiochia, with this good night: I forsake
a disobedient Clergy, a rebellious people, Theod. l^ct^. l. ^.
and a defiled Church, reserving unto my self the dignity of Priesthood.

Petrus Gnapheus, Petrus Gnapheus.
for his deserts is worthy to be reckoned in the roll of Heretics. First, he
supplanted Martyrius by dishonest means in the days of the Emperor Le^.
Secondly, he obtained a clause to be added to that part of the Liturgy, which
is called Trasagios, sanctus Deus, sanctus fortis, sanctus immortalis. Hist.
Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
To this (I say) he added, qui crucifixus est pro nobis, which form of
speaking (albeit (...), may tolerate it to be spoken) was said by him in an
heretical sense, as if the Divinity had suffered pain. Thirdly, he attributed
divine honor to the Virgin Mary, and ordained that her name should be called
upon, in the public prayers of the Church. He was banished by the Emperor
Leo, and restored by Basiliscus. He damned the Council of Chalcedon, and was
banished the second time by the Emperor Zeno, and excommunicate by Felix Bishop
of Rome, Stephanus.
and Acatius Bishop of Constantinople. Stephanus succeeded in his room, and
was incontinent made out of the way, Calandion.
by the faction of Gnapheus. Calandion succeeded Stephanus, and he likewise
was banished by the Emperor Zeno. In the end Petrus Gnapheus subscribed the
henoticke letters of Zeno (these were letters containing a sum of the true
Faith, an approbation of godly Councels, and a protestation of unity with
godly Bishops) (...), in the Greek language signifies unitive or
coniunctiue, and henoticke letter were written to procure peace, and union in
the Church. By these means Gnapheus obtained his place again, and is reckoned
in the catalogue of Bishops, only for the subscription of the Emperors
henoticke letters.

Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
TO Cyrillus succeeded Johannes Nepos. Johannes Nepos. Polythronius.
After him Polythronius ministered in Jerusalem. He was often accused, and
oftentimes absolved. His chief accusation was this, that he counted himself
the supreme Bishop of all Bishops. Sixtus the third Bishop of Rome was
serious in this turn, because he thought that the apple of his eye was
touched when supremacy was spoken of. Therefore he sent eight Ambassadors to
Ierusasem: a Council of 70. Bishops was gathered, and Polythronius was found
innocent. Notwithstanding he was convict of some other faults; namely, that he
refused to consecrate a Church, until ten pounds of gold were paid unto him:
for this cause he was ordained to dwell without the town, a Vicar to supply
his room, and and a portion to be allotted to him for his sustentation. This
portion appointed for his sustentation, when he saw the people of Jerusalem
pinched with famine, he sold it, and supported their necessity, and was for
his loving affection to his flock, restored to his office again.

Iuvenalis.
To him succeeded Iuvenalis, whose inconstancy God justly punished. He was
present at the first Council of Ephesus, and consented to the excommunication
of Nestorius. He was present likewise at the second Council of Ephesus, and
consented to the restitution of Eutyches. Evagr. lib. 11. cap. 10.
He was deposed in the Council of Chalcedon, and received into favor again,
after the humble confession of his fault. This is that famous Author, whom the
Roman Church cites for the fable of the Assumption of the Virgin Marie. When
he returned to Jerusalem, a number of turbulent Monks rose up against him, and
desired him to accurse the Council of Chalcedon, which when he refused to
do, they chose another Bishop, called Theodosius: but the Emperor Martiaxus
commandment was, straight to fetch Theodosius alive unto him: therefore he
fled, and Iuvenalis returned again unto his place. Anastatius. Martyrius.
The names of Anastatius and Martyrius, who followed Iuvenalis, for their
assenting to Basiliscus, and to Petrus Gnapheus, are not worthy to be inserted
in this Catalogue.

Of other Pastors and Doctors.
THeodoritus was Bishop of Cyrus a town in Syria (whose builder seems to have
been Cyrus King of Persia) a man of excellent learning, Theodoritus.
he lived under the Emperors, Theodosius 2. Valentinian 3. and Martianus. He
had the oversight of eighty parishes lying within his ample diocie. He is
bold to affirm in a certain Epistle written to Leo Bishop of Rome, that by
his travails a thousand souls within his bounds were reclaimed from the
heresy of Marcion. He fell into many lamentable troubles. The ground of all
was the extraordinary love he carried toward his own Patriarch John Bishop of
Antiochia. For like as he accompanied him to the Council of Ephesus, so
likewise he concurred with him in the deposition of Cyrillus Bishop of
Alexandria, and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus: but the Council gathered at Ephesus
took trial in the cause of Cyrillus and Memnon, and absolved them, and damned
John Bishop of Antiochia, and his accomplices. Theodoritus was one of the number.
The second trouble followed upon the neck of the first: for by instigation of
patriarch John, he wrote against the twelve heads or twelve Theses of
Cyrillus written against Nestorius, wherein he mistaketh the doctrine of
Cyrillus, as if he had fallen into the error of Apollinaris: but after that
Cyrillus wrote a declaration of his own meaning, it was found that both
Cyrillus and Theodoritus professed one faith, and they were reconciled.
Nevertheless Theodoritus was damned in the second council of Ephesus for
writing against Cyrillus, neither being cited, accused nor convict of any
fault. Theodoritus complained to Leo Bishop of Rome, of the outrage of
Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, who had damned him in a Council before he was
heard. Leo absolved him, and the council of Chalcedon, after he pronounced
Anathema against the errors of Nestorius and Eutyches, they in like manner
absolved him. And finally after his death in the fifth general council, his
writings against the twelve heads of Cyrillus were damned. All these troubles
proceeded from one and the self same ground, to wit, upon the extraordinary
love he carried toward his Patriarch John. This one thing laid aside, he was
nothing inferior to the most wise, accurate, and learned writers of the
ancient time. In the first of his learned dialogues called (...), he proves
that the Word became flesh without changing of the divine Nature into the
humane Nature, Theod. dialogo. 1 c. 8.
or the humane Nature into the divine. Even as in the Sacrament of the Supper
of the Lord the bread becomes the body of the Lord, not by changing the
substance of it, but by assuming by grace an other use than it had, the very
symbol obtains the name of the thing represented by the symbol. When Papists
do read the dialogues of Theodoritus, let them leave off to brag of the
antiquity of the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and take them to the Monk
Damascene the first author of their (...): Note.
he continued at least thirty years in his ministry, and ended his life, as
is supposed, under the reign of Leo the first.

Augustinus.
Augustine in his young years was infected with the error of the Manicheans.
His mother Monica watered her face many times with tears, in her prayers
begging at God his conversion to the truth. God heard her prayers: he was sent
to Millan to be a teacher of Rhetoric, by the preaching of Ambrose Bishop of
Millan, and the deuote behavior of the people in singing Psalms to the praise
of God, The manner of Augustines conversion.
the like whereof Augustine had never seen in any place before: for men in
earth praising God with ardent affection seemed to represent the Angels of
heaven, who incessantly praise God with unspeakable desire. Also with the
reading of the life of Antonius the heremite, he was wonderfully moved, and
began to dislike his former conversation, which he had spent in worldly
pleasures, and went unto a quiet garden, accompanied with Alipius: with many
tears he bewailed the insolency of his bypast conversation, wishing the time
to be now come, wherein without farther delay his soul should be watered with
the dew of the converting grace of God. August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. ^ ^
And as he was pouring out the grief of his wounded heart to God with a flood
of tears, he heard a voice saying unto him, toll and lege, and again, toll
and lege, that is to say, take up and read, take up and read. At the first
hearing, he took it to have been the voice of boys or maids speaking in
their play such words one to another: but when he looked about, and could see
no body he knew it to be a celestial admonition warning him to take up the
book of holy Scripture (which he had in the garden with him) and read. Now the
first place that fell in his hands, Romans 13. ver. 13.14.
after the opening of the book, was this: Not in gluttony, nor drunkenness,
nor in chambring, nor wantonness, nor in strife, or envying: but put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought of the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. At the reading whereof he was so fully resolved to forsake the
vanities of the world, and to become a Christian, that immediately thereafter he
was baptized by Ambrose Bishop of Millan, with his companion Alipius and his
son Adeodatus. After this he returned to Afric, and was coadiutor to
Valerius Bishop of Hippo, as Chrysostom was to Flauianus in Antiocha: and
after the departure of Valerius: he was Bishop of Hippo: his incessant travels
in teaching Gods people, and in stopping the mouths of heretics and
gainsaiers of the truth of God, specially Donatists, Pelagians and Manichean
heretics, his learned writings do testify. When he had lived 76. years, he
rested from his labors, before the Vandales had taken the town of Hippo,
which in time of Augustines sickness they had besieged.

In this Century flourished worthy preachers in France, Bishops of France.
such as Eutherius Bishop of Lions. Saluianus B. of Marseill, who lived at that
time when the nation of the Goths oppressed France, and many began to doubt
of the providence of God, in respect that wicked men had so great vpper-hand.
Salvianus in his godly and learned books does declare that it is a just thing
with God to punish men, who knows their duty best, with greatest punishments,
in respect that often times they are most negligent doers of it. Clauaianus
Mammertus Bishop of Vienne is praised by Sidonius with excessive commendations,
as if all the graces of Ierom, Augustine, Basilius, Nazianzenus, and many other
fathers had been incorporated into his person. Hilarious first Bishop of Arls,
and afterward (as appears) of Vienne, opposed himself directly to Leo Bishop
of Rome, Leo ad Gal. Episcop. epist. 77. and epist. 89.
and would acknowledge no jurisdiction, nor domination of the Bishop of Rome
over the Churches of France: for this cause Leo accused him as an usurper of
supremacy, only because he would not stoop under his feet: but Hilarious
came to Rome, nothing regarding the anathems and cursings of the Roman B. and
in his face affirmed, that neither did Christ appoint Peter to be head of the
rest of the Apostles, neither had the Bishop of Rome a sovereignty over the
Churches of France. All the grandeur of Leo his speeches was, to talk of
those few words: Math. 16.
Tu es Petrus, and super ha^ petra, etc. that is, thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock, etc. as if Christ had breathed upon him, and had bidden him receive the
holy Spirit, so confidently did he affirm that in these words was allotted a
supremacy to the Bishops of Rome the successors of Peter. But this grandeur
(I say) of his proud conceits, and vain interpretation of Scripture made not
men of understanding incontinently to stoup under the feet of a proud Prelate.

Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.
Vincentius Lirinensis a mighty impugner of heresies. Prosper Aquita^icus.
Sido^ius B. in some part of Ouernie. Martinus Turonensis is commended for the
gift of many miraculous works that were wrought by his hands. He compared
virginity, marriage, and fornication to a meadow, a part whereof was eaten by
the pastoring of beasts, another part was hollwed by the rudenes of rooting
swine, and the third part was untouched, but flourishing in the per^ect growth
of grass near to mowing time. Fornication he compared to the part of the
meadow that was hollowed, and misf^shioned with Swine. Marriage to that part of
the meadow that was pastored, Note.
so that the herbs had then roots, but wanted the beauty of their flowers:
but virginity is like unto that part of the meadow that is untouched,
flourishing with root, blade, flower, and all kind of perfection. In counting
marriage good, but virginity better, he follows the doctrine of the holy
Apostle Paul. R^^ gius Bishop of Rhemes, (by whom Clodo^eus the first Christian
king of France was baptized, 1. Cor. 7.
and the whole country of France was purged from Paganism and Arrianisme:
whereby it was miserably polluted by the Goths, and Vandales) was a man of
great account.

Concerning Aurelius and the Bishops of Carthage, Memnon, and the Bishops of
Ephesus, some occasion will be offered to speak of them in the head of
Councels, neither will the nature of a Compend and brevity whereunto I study,
permit me to write of every worthy man of whom I read in this Centurie.

CENTVRIE VI.
Patriarchs of Rome.
Anastatius.
TO Gelasius succeeded Anastatius the second and governed 1. year 2. months 24.
days; he ministered in the days of the Emperor Anastatius: he was hated of
the Clergy, because he admitted to his fellowship Photinus a Deacon, whom
Foelix and Gelasius had excommunicated as a friend to Acatius Bishop of
Constantinople. Platina de vitispontif.
Platina writes of him, that he ended his life as Arrius did, and that his
bowels gushed out, when he was doing his secret business. The very flatterers
of the Bishops of Rome are compelled to say, that some of them were favorers of
heretics, and for that cause punished by God with extraordinary judgments:
but I ground nothing upon the words of Platina, but so much as makes against
the^, whom he intends to flatter.

Symmachus.
To Anastatius succeeded Symmachus, in the days of the Emperor Anastatius: and
when Theodoricus king of Goths reigned, in Italy, great sedition was among
the people, at his election. The one part of the Clergy and people choosing
Symmachus, the other Laurentius to be Bishop of Rome: but with common consent,
Platina de vit. pontif.
a Synod was appointed at Ravenna, and there the election of Symmachus was
ratified, he continued in office. 15 years, 6 months, 22. days.

Horm^sda the successor of Symmachus sat 9. years, 18. days: who by
commandment of Theodoricus king of Goths, and reigning in Italy, gathered a
council at Rome and damned the error of Eutyches of new again.

Likewise Ambassadors were sent to the Emp. Anastatius, and to John B. of
Constantinople to exhort them to forsake the wicked error of Eutyches, and to
acknowledge two natures in Christ, to wit, the divine and humane nature. But
Anastatius answered with proud words, Nos imperare volumus, nobis imperari
nolumus. That is we will command, but we will not be commanded. Likewise the
B. of Constantinople puffed up in pride by the assistance of the Emp. despised
the counsel of Hermisda. Moreover against the law of nation, they dealt in
humanlie with the Ambassadors of Hormisda, Platin. de vit. Pontif.
and thrust them into an old and broken ship, with strait commandment that
they should not arrive at any harbor in Grecia, Note.
but kept a direct course toward Italy. Notwithstanding by the providence of
God that ship arrived safely at the coasts of Italy.

The error of the Manicheans began again to be ouerspread in Rome. But
Hormisda took their books and burnt them in the porch of the Church called
Constantina.

John the first governed the church of Rome in the days of Justinius the elder,
John 2.
to whom also he was sent Ambassador by Theodoricus, to crave that the Arrian
Bishops whom he had banished out of his dominions might be restored to their
places again: else the catholic Bishops of Italy should expect all kind of
rigor at his hands. The B. John with many tears persuaded the Emperor
Justinius to condescend unto the petition of Theodoricus. Nevertheless when he
returned back again to Italy he was cast into prison, where he ended his
life, after he had governed the church of Rome 2. years, 8. months.

Foelix 4. the successor of John 1. continued in office 4. years 2. months,
Foelix. 4. Platina.
13. days. he excommunicated Athanasius Patriarch of Constantinople for
heresy, he ordained that Christians before their departure out of this life
should be anointed with oil. Comment. Funct. lib. 7.
This custom is now kept in the Roman church, and is called the Sacrament of
extreme unction.

Foelix 4 succeeded Bonifacius 2. whom the Graecians called Agathon,
Bonifacius. 2.
but both names sounds to one and the self same thing. The schism that was
among the people at his election ceased, by the death of his co^petitor
D^se^^u^: he ministered 2. years, 2. days. In his time Eulalius B. of
Carthage, submitted himself unto the chair of Rome: whereupon Bo^ifacius took
occasion of insolent insulting, in so far, that he is not asha^cd to writ of
Aurelius B. of Carthage, August. B. of Hippo, and of the rest of the fathers,
who were present at the 6 counsel of Carthage that through the instigatio^ of
the devil they swelled in pride against the Roman church and against his
predecessors Bonifacius. 1. and Coelestinus who^ his predecessors most justly
had excommunicated: Hist. Magd. cent 6. cap. 10.
but now (says he) Eulalius has confessed the fault of Aurelius, and of the
counsel of Carthage, and submitted himself in humble manner to the chair of
Rome: therefore he and the church of Carthage are received again unto peace
and communion of the Roman church. Mark here how they who would impair a jot
of that supre^acy whereat the church of Rome aimed, were forthwith delivered to
the devil, how holy, modest, and learned so ever they had bin; Note.
and a vain, timorous and beastly body Eulalius is preferred to Aurelius B. of
Carthage, to Aug. B. of Hippo, and to a grave counsel of motha^ 200. fathers:
only for this, that he submitted himself to the chair of Rome. The time is now
approaching, wherein it will be clearly ma^ifested, that supremacy was the very
aple of their eye, and touch that once, there is nothing but curses to be
thu^dred out of mount Tarpeius even against August. himself and against
reverent cou^cils.

Ioannes 2.
John 2. was successor to Bonifacius: he ministered in the time of the Emperor
Justinian, 2. years, 4. months: he was called for his eloquence Mercurius, or
nuntius Iovis.

Agapetus.
Agapetus the successor of John 2. v^der the reign of Iustinia^ had scarcely
liberty to attend upon his own flock: for immediately after he was ordained B.
of Rome, he was sent to the Emp. Iustinia^ by Theodatus king of the Goths, to
pacify his wrath: for the Emp. intended to make war against him, for the
cruel slaughter of Amalasunta his wife: this was an dishonest cause, and an
unseemly message to the B. of Rome to undertake. It is affirmed by
Historiographers, that Justinian secretly solicited Agapetus to the error of
Eutyches, and that Agapetus answered unto him courageously, Platin. de vit.
Pontif.
that he supposed he was sent to a most Christian Emperor, but he found him
to be Dioclesian.

This liberty is thought to have done good to Justinian, and that he embraced
the true Faith more seriously then before, and deposed Anthemius Bishop of
Constantinople, an Eutychian Heretic, and placed Menas a Bishop professing
the true Faith, in his room. Afterward Agapetus died at Constantinople, after
he had been chosen Bishop of Rome eleven months, and one and twenty
days, and his body was put into a chest of lead, and transported to Rome.

Silverius the son of Hormisda, Silverius.
sometime Bishop of Rome, was successor to Agapetus. Theodatus King of Goths,
compelled the Clergy to subscribe to his election: he governed the Church of
Rome at that time, when Justinian sent Belisarius to fight against Vitiges.
Theodora the Emperor Justinians wife, sent to Silverius, desiring him that he
would condescend to the restitution of Anthemius an Eutychian Heretic, and to
the deposition of Menas, Bishop of Constantinople. Silverius refused to obey
such impious commandments. Therefore Theodora sends a commandment to
Belisarius to banish Silverius, and to appoint Vigilius Bishop of Rome, who had
promised to fulfill her desires. Thus was Silverius banished to the Isle of
Pontia, after he had ruled the Church of Rome one year, and five months.

Vigilius succeeded Silverius, Vigilius.
and ruled seventeene years and six and twenty days. His entry to this office
is inexcusable: for by open force, secret bribes, and promises to perform the
impious desires of the Empress, he obtained the chair of Rome: so that
Onuphrius cannot find out an excuse for his unlawful entry. Theodora the
Empress, urged him to perform his promise, and to restore Anthemius. But
Vigilius, as appeared, repenting of his great temeritie and rashness,
answered, that evil promises were not to be kept: for this cause he was led
away violently to Constantinople, Note.
and a cord was fastened about his neck, and he was drawn through the streets,
and cast into prison: he endured all this contempt the more patiently, because
he confessed, that for his sins he had deserved greater punishment at the
hands of God, Platin. de vitis Pontif.
then this man. In the end he was delivered out of prison, by the earnest
request of Narses Captain of Justinians army in Italy, but he dyed by the
way: and he whom so many cares could not destroy, the sickness of the travel
destroyed him at Sicrl^e, and his body was transported to Rome, and buried
there. But now let us consider the fondness of Baronius, who keeps no
measure in his History; but as the Poet speaks of a Ship rossed with a
vehement tempest: Tollimur in coelum subtato gurgite, and idem,
Subducta ad manes imos descendin^us vnda.


Baron. tom. 7. ann. 538.
When Baronius speaks of the entry of Vigilius, he calls him a thief, a
brigand, a man who entered not by the door of the sheepfold, a false Bishop,
an Antichrist: yet soon after he calls him the Vicar of Christ as though by
the cruelty whereby he drove his predecessor Siluerius to death he were worthy
of the name of the Vicar of Christ. Albeit he restored not Athemius, according
to his impious paction with Theodora, yet he wrote unto the Heretics,
Anthemius, Theodosius, and Severus; and confirmed their error by his secret
missiue letters, as Morenus in his book called Misterium iniquitatis,
prooveth. His carriage in the fifth general Council, he being present in the
town of Constantinople, shall be declared God willing, in its own place, the
cord that was lapped about his neck, and drew him through the streets of
Constantinople, could not draw out of his proud stomach the conceit of
supremacy: for he sent his opinion in writing to the Council, but would not
be present to sit in a lower place then Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople,
and Moderator of the Council.

Pelagius.
After Vigilius succeeded Pelagius the first: he ruled the Church of Rome
eleven years, twelve months, and twenty eight days. In a very perilous time
this charge was committed to him; namely when the Nation of the Go^^s had
chosen Toul^ to be their King, who was a fierce and cruel man, and was called
for his fierceness, Flagellum Dei; that is, the scourge of God: he led a
great army from Tarvisium through Italy, destroying and wasting the country,
whithersoever he went, but he set his face chiefly against Campania. By the
way he addressed himself in the habit of a simple soldier to mount
Cassinates, where was Saint Benedict, the father of Monks; not because he
invented the Monasticke life, but because the most part of Monks adhered to the
form invented by him: he was but lately sprung up, in the days of the
Emperor Justinius the elder, and of Pope John the first; Platin. de viz. Joan.
1.
yet was his name in great account, so that Totilas in a disguised habit went
unto him, and conferred with him. Platina writes that Saint Benedict knew him,
notwithstanding of his deep dissimulation, and with terrifying words dissuaded
him form using cruelty against Christians.

The counsel was good, but Totilus was not obedient unto it. He was slain in
battle by Narses, near to Brixellum: and Teias whom the Goths chose in his
room, was slain in battle at Nuceria: so the Kingdom of the Goths in
Italy, was utterly undone by the valor of Narses. After the first coming of
Theodoricus into Italy, they reigned in Italy seventy two years. Now their
name, dominion, and all their might is utterly quenched. Pelagius depended much
upon the friendship of Narses, And when Macedonius Bishop of Aquileia died,
Honoratus Bishop of Millan ordained Paulinus to be his successor. Pelagius
Bishop of Rome grieved at this. Nevertheless he complains not to Narses,
that Paulinus was Bishop of Aquileia without his consent, but rather, because
this was done without the foreknowledge of the most noble Emperor Justinian;
who like as he had delivered Istria and Venice, Pelag 1. Epist. ^
from the grievous bondage of Totilas; so likewise it became them to expect the
Emperors answer, before they had appointed a Bishop in Aquileia.

Mark the hypocrisy of the Bishops of Rome, Note.
under color of obedience to the civil Magistrate, secretly creeping to their
own sovereignty, the chief mark whereat they continually aimed.

Iohannet 3.
John the third succeeded Pelagius, and governed twelve years, eleven months,
and twenty six days. In the days of Justinius the younger, who was successor
to the Emperor Justinian, did he minister in the Roman Church; and at that
time when Alboinus King of the Longobards came into Italy, with a great army,
with their wives and children, and settled their abode in that part of Italy
which lies about the river Padus. Platin de vit. Pontif.
The Empress Sophia, had irritated Narses that valiant captain, with
contumelious words; and he gave to her, and to the estate of the Empire, this
hard meeting, that he possessed the Longobards in Italy, weaving a web unto
her (according as he promised) which she was not able all her time to undo
again. The Deputy of the Emperor of Constantinople, kept a part of Italy,
which was not conquered by the Lombards, and this was called Exarchatus
Ravennae; and the Bishop of Rome, with the assistance of the country, kept
Rome free from the dominion of the Lombards for a short time.

At this time did John the 3. govern the church of Rome. He brought in new
constitutions into the church, that Chorepiscopi, otherwise called Vicarij
Episcoporum, Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10.
would have no power at all of imposition of hands: which constitution he
confirmed with a foolish reason, because none of the 70 disciples, whom Christ
adjoined as helpers to the Apostles, had power by imposition of hands, to
confer the gift of the holy Spirit. Now the time is come, when every man
endeavors, with some novelty, and new toy, which has not been heard of
before, to go beyond his predecessors.

Benedictus 1.
Benedict the first, continued in his charge 4. years, one month, 28. days.
He had great grief in his time, because the prevayling power of the Lombards
oppressed the country of Italy, and the town of Rome was sore pinched with
famine. The heart grief he conceived for the calami^^e of the country, is
thought to have hastened his death. Nevertheless he had this comfort, that the
Emperor Tiberius the second, in whose time he ministered, sent ships loadned
with corn from Egypt, to support the distressed estate of the Romans.
Tiberius was endued with many good qualities, and princely gifts: he was
valiant, godly, and liberal; and the more bountiful he was to the poor,
Platin. de vit. Pontif.
his riches so much the more abounded: for besides the treasures of Narses,
that were brought to him from Italy, when Narses dyed; he found also in his
own palace under a cross of marble (which he commanded to be raised, and not
to be trod under foot any longer, but to be set in a more honorable place)
there I say, he found an infinite treasure of silver and gold. Finally, when he
overcame the Persians, such quantity of gold, silver, and precious things were
achieved, as none of his predecessors had obtained the like: so that the
Proverb, he who sows largely, shall reap largely, had lively performance in
the person of the noble Emperor Tiberius.

After Benedict succeeded Pelagius the second, Pelagius 2
and ministered under the reigns of Tiberius and Mauritius, 10. years, 12.
months, 10. days. He was elected without the foreknowledge of the Emperor,
contrary to the custom observed in those days; but he excused himself to
the Emperor Mauritius, by sending Gregorius Ambassador unto him, and
declaring that the town of Rome was besieged by Lombardis, so that no
messenger could be sent from Rome to Constantinople, to acquaint the Emperor
with his election. The form of the siege of Rome was this: The Emp. Mauritius
had hired Sigibertus King of France, to make war against the Lombards, and to
drive them out of Italy, but his army was overthrown by Eucharis King of the
Lombards. With this victory the Lombards were puffed up, and they besieged the
town of Rome, they had also taken it, if they had not been hindered by great
inundation of waters. The inundation of Tiber was extraordinary, it overflowed
the walls of the town of Rome, and brought with it a multitude of Serpents,
which afterward putrefying, corrupted the air, whereof arose a vehement
pestilence in Rome, and Pelagius the second, in this contagious sickness ended
his life.

Gregorius. 1.
Gregorius the first, called Magnus, succeeeded Pelagius 2. and ministered 13.
years, 6. months, 10. days. He was chosen with consent of the Clergy and
people, but he was unwilling to accept the office. And he wrote to the Emperor
Mauritius, that he should not assent, neither to the desire of the Clergy,
Platin. de vitis Pontif.
nor people: but his letters were intercepted by the Governor of the town of
Rome, and rent in pieces. And other letters were written unto the Emperor,
requesting him to condescend, that Gregorius might have the office, whom both
Clergy and people had elected. The Emperor agreed willingly to his election,
for he had been acquainted with him in Constantinople, when he came Ambassador
from Pelagius 2. to excuse his oversight in accepting the office of Bishop of
Rome, before the Emperors knowledge of that purpose. He brought into the
Roman Church the form of the Greek Letanies, and ordained that in their
prayers, (...) should be nine times repeated. This prayer is thought to have
been uttered by multiplied repetitions, in the days of the Emperor
Iustinius, when Antiochia was terribly shaken with a vehement earthquake, the
little number that were alive said; Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, which in
Greek Kyrie Eleison; he borrowed also from the Liturgy of the Jews,
Allelu-iah; and added these words unto the Latin service, Diesque nostros in
pace disponas, that is, In peace dispose our days. He was the first that
devised the style of Servus servorum Dei, that is, the servant of the servants
of God: taking occasion (as appears) so to do by the arrogant attempt of
John Patriarch of Constantinople, called (...), or ieiunator, who had usurped
the style of Ocumenicke, or universal Bishop, to whom Pelagius the second,
and Gregorius the first, mightily opposed themselves, Lib. 6. Indici. 16.
Epist. 30.
and called him the forerunner of Antichrist, who durst usurp such an
arrogant style.

Note.
But mark now, I pray you, how far ambition prevailed both in the Chair of
Constantinople, and in the chair of Rome. The humility of Christ was now laid
aside, notwithstanding of their humble styles, Servus servorum Dei: and the
first occasion that was presented unto them of usurpation, of the style of
universal Bishop, it was greedily embraced.

First, John called Ieiunator, Patriarch of Constantinople, saw that the
Imperial seat was in Constantinople, and that the town of Rome was besieged
by the Lombards. Now he thought it was time to stir, and to advance his own
chair above all chaires. And incontinent after Bonifacius the third, finding
himself in favor with the Emperor Phocas, gladly accepted the same
pre-eminence in his own person, which his predecessors had damned in the
person of Johannes Ieiunator: so they were all for the most part a nest of
ambitious Prelates, preaching the humility of Christ, but hunting for the
supremacy foretold of Antichrist. Read the Epistles which Gregorius writes to
Mauritius, detesting and abhorring this supremacy, whereat the Patriarchs of
Constantinople aimed. Amongst other things, he says; Exclamare compellor,
Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32.
ac dicere, O tempora, o mores: ecce cuncta in Europae partibus, barbarorumiuri
sunt tradita. Destructae vrbes, eversa castra, depopulatae provinciae, nullus
terram cultor inhabitat, and tamen sacerdotes, qui in pavimento, and cinere
flentes iacere debuerunt, vanitatis sibi nomina experiunt, and novis ac
prophanis vocabulis gloriantur: that is to say, I am compelled to cry out, O
times, O manners: behold, in all the parts of Europe, all things lie under the
reverence of barbarous people: towns are destroyed, castles are overthrown,
provinces are spoiled, no labourer inhabiteth the land. Notwithstanding, the
Priests, who should lie in ashes upon the ground, weeping, they are seeking
unto themselves names of vanity, and they glory in profane styles.

Now apply these words of Gregorius the first, unto Bonifacius the third, and
it shall be found that he embraced the name of vanity, and the glory of
profane styles, at that same time, when it became him better to be lying in
sackecloth and ashes, and to be mourning for the prevailing power of barbarous
people, and for the barbarous butchery of Phocas the Emperor, Note.
who conferred unto him that eminent style, to be called Bishop of Bishops.
Gregorius flattering Epistle written to Phocas, after he had traitorously
murdered his master Mauritius, his wife and children, will be a perpetual
blot to the name of Gregorius. Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10.
The constitution he made concerning prohibition of marriage, to men in
spiritual offices, he was compelled in his own time to abrogate again;
because it was not only the occasion of uncleanness, but also of secret
murders of innocent babes, and whereas the Apostle Paul said, It was better to
marry then to burn: Gregory was compelled to say, It was better to marry
then to murder. The sending of the Monks, Augustine, Melito, and Johannes, to
Britain, was not so much to reduce them to Christian religion, which they had
embraced in the days of Lucius King of the Britains, and of Eleutherius
Bishop of Rome, as has been declared, in the second Centurie, the second
chapter: as to conquer them to the ceremonies and rites of the Roman service.

Gregorius was the first, of whom we read, that writes of sacrifices to be
offered, Note.
for relieving of souls tormented in Purgatory, and he leans upon such
ridiculous fables, which he heard of one Foelix Bishop of Centum-cellae, as it
is a shame to rehearse them, but seeing they are not ashamed of lies, Hist.
Magd. Cent. 6. cap. 10. Greg lib. 4. cap. 55.
let the dung of their own inventions be cast into their own faces: he
writes, that a Presbyter of Centum-cellae went to the bath-house to wash
himself, where he found a man uncouth and unknown to him, but very humble
and serviceable, and after he had served him sundry days, the Presbyter to
requite his kindness, brought unto him two consecrated hosts, as a blessing
and a reward for him who had served him so dutifully, but the man with sad
countenance, answered: This bread is holy, and I am not worthy to eat it. I
was sometime Master and Proprietare of this house, but now for my sins I am
appointed to this servile occupation: if thou would do a benefit to me, offer
them to the Almighty God, as a sacrifice for my sins, and think that ye are
heard of God, when ye cannot find me in this place any longer. Surely, Popish
Purgatory, and soule-Masses are first grounded upon foolish fables, and
afterward confirmed by dreams of foolish Monks.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
EVPHEMIVS before he would anoint Anastatius to be Emperor, Euphemius.
(who came to that honor by Ariadne the wife of the Emperor Zeno, whom he
married) he craved a confession of his faith, with a promise sealed by his
handwrite, that he should make no novation in Religion during his time. Theod.
lector. lib. 2.
The Emperor craved his hand-write again, which seeing that Euphemius refused
to render back again, the Emperor procured his deposition, and banished him,
and placed Macedonius in his room.

To Euphemius succeeded Macedonius, Macedonius. Hist. Magd. Cent. 6 cap. 10.
Timotheus.
to whose custody the hand-write aforesaid was committed by Euphemius: which
when he would not render, the Emperor banished him also, and commanded to slay
him at Gangra, the place of his banishment.

To Macedonius succeeded Timotheus, an unconstant man, and justly compared to
the narrow sea, that runs betwixt Baeotia and Calchis, which flows and
ebbeth seven times in 24. hours; so was this Bishop wavering minded, and more
bent to please men, than to be approved of God. In witness whereof I have set
down one example. The Abbot of the Monastery called Studitum, refused to be
ordained by imposition of his hands: for he said, the hands of that man, An
example of Timotheus his inconstancy.
who has damned the Council of Chalcedon, shall not be laid upon me:
whereunto Timotheus answered, whosoever accuses, or damneth the Council of
Chalcedone, let him be accursed, and when this was reported to the Emperor
Anastatius, to eschew his indignation, he said the contrary, whosoever
accepts the council of Chalcedone, and allows of it, let him be accursed.

Johannes Cappa^^^.
John of Cappadocia is not worthy that his name should be inserted in this
Catalogue, a proud, avaritious, and ambitious heretic, who could never behave
himself dutifully, neither in a civil, nor in a spiritual calling. He was
first the Emperor Anastatius his Deputy, and was deposed for aspiring to an
higher place. Next, he became Patriarch of Constantinople, and aspired to the
dignity of Oecumenicke and universal Bishop. It is true, that Johannes (...)
usurped the title of pre-eminence, therefore this Johannes Cappadox was laid
aside as an Eutychian heretic, and the great invectiues against this usurped
authority, are chiefly set against Johannes Ieinnator. But mark how Pelagius
the second, ere Gregorius trod upon this pride, with a proud mind, as Diogenes
did upon the covering of Plato his bed, he is not content to damme the decree
of the Council of Constantinople, Tom. 2. Council.
but also he affirmed that it was not lawful to him to assemble a Council
without liberty first obtained from the Bishop of Rome, which thing no man
spoke before him: so Satan wrought mightily in them both, as he does in the
children of pride and disobedience.

Johannes Scholasticus.
After him succeeded John called Scholasticus, and continued not above one
year. Evagrius calls him Johannes Sirmiensis, lib. 4. cap. 39.

Epiphanius.
To John succeeded Epiphanius, in the days of Justinian, who blessed his army
which went to fight against the Vandales, under the conduct of Belisarius: he
ministered sixteen years, as Chytreus writes.

Anthimus.
The name of Anthimus is worthy of the roll of obstinate heretics. He was
Bishop of Trapezus, but by the means of Theodora the Emperor Justinians wife,
he was promoted to be Bishop of Constantinople. Theodora was too busy in
Church affairs, and Sophia the wife of Justinius the second was too busy in
civil affairs. The estate both of Church, and Kingdom had been in better
plight, if both of them had been less busy.

Anthimus being deposed and banished for heresy, Menas.
succeeded Menas, who kept the true faith, and governed the Church of
Constantinople sixteen years. Lib. 4, cap. 9.
Evagrius reckons Basilides in the roll of Bishops of Constantinople, and
Anthimus to be Bishop of Alexandria.

To Menas succeeded Eutichius, Eutychius.
of whom occasion will be offered to speak in the fifth general Council,
wherein he disputed iudiciously in the question, Whether or no it was lawful
to excommunicate heretics after their death. His opinion concerning the
bodies of the Saints after their Resurrection, that they should be subtle, like
unto the air and wind, and not solid and palpable, was refuted by Gregorius
the first, who proved by the example of Christ his body after his Resurrection,
that the body of the Saints should not be like unto the air, and the wind:
for Christ says, Handle me, Luke 24.39.
and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

After Eutichius followed John called (...), Johannes Ieiunator.
or Ieiunator: this name he obtained by the sobriety, and temperancie of his
life. Notwithstanding when his stomach was empty of meat, his heart was full
of pride, and he followed the footsteps of Johannes Cappadox, and would be
called universal Bishop, against whom Gregorius the first contended mightily,
even as Lactantius of old contended against the Pagans, impugning the error
more mightily, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 32. Vsque ad epist. 40. Cyriacus.
than solidly confirming the truth. It is supposed that he ministered 13.
years, under the Emperor Mauritius. To whom succeeded Cyriacus.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
AFter John called Tabennesiota, Johannes.
succeeded another John, who kept the true faith, and was banished by
Anastatius, because he would not damme the Council of Chalcedone.

Theodosius.
To John succeeded Theodosius an obstinate defender of the error of Eutiches.
He was familiarly acquainted with Seuerus of Antiochia, and Anthimus of
Constantinople, whereby the misery of these days may be easily es^ied, wherein
three notable heretics governed principal Towns, such as Constantinople,
Alexandria, and Antiochia. He was so obstinate in his error, that he was
rather content to be banished under the reign of Justinian, than to renounce
his error.

Zoilus. Apollinarius.
After him succeeded Zoilus, and after him Apollinarius, who was present at the
fifth general Council. To whom succeeded Eulogius, Eulogius. Petrus.
and after him Petrus, who ministered under the reign of Mauritius.

Patriarchs of Antiochia.
Flavianus.
AFter Palladius succeeded Flavianus, who suffered great troubles for the true
faith, namely, by the cruel persecution of the Emperor Anastatius, and the
calumnies of Xenaeas B. of Hierapolis (a stranger indeed from the covenant of
God, as his name imports) for he blamed Flavianus most unjustly of the
heresy of Nestorius, but when Flavianus both by word and writing had cleared
himself of that calumny, the malice of Xenaeas ceased not: for he brought
with him to Antiochia a great number of Monks to compel Flavianus to abjure
the Council of Chalcedon. The town supported their Bishop against a rascal
number of seditious and heretical Monks. Notwithstanding the Emperor
Anastatius infected with the heresy of Eutyches, counted Flavianus, who was
most unjustly persecuted, to be the author of this tumult, and banished him,
and placed Severus in his room.

The Emperor Justinius the elder displaced Severus, and punished him, Paulus.
and appointed Paulus to be Bishop of Antiochia.

To Paulus succeeded Euphraesius, Euphrasius.
who died in that fearful calamity of the Town of Antiochia, when it was
shaken and overthrown with earthquake, Lib. 4. cap. 5.
as Evagrius witnesses.

Euphraimius was a civil governor in the East parts, Euphraimius.
who pitied the decayed estate of the town of Antiochia, and furnished all
necessary things for the repairing of the town of Antiochia: for which cause
the people were so affectioned to him, that they would have him to be their
Bishop. So Euphraimius becomes Bishop of Antiochia, or Theopolis, for at this
time it had both these names. Lib. 4. cap. 6.
Evagrius writes, that he undertook the charge of the Apostolic chair, in
which words, it is manifest, that not only the chair of Rome, but also the
chair of Antiochia was called the Apostolic chair. The town of Antiochia
at this time was taken by Cosroes King of Persia, set on fire, and many of the
people were cruelly slain. Evag. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Euphraimius their Bishop at this time left the town, a perilous example,
except the people had been in safety, and he only persecuted, yet he left
behind him so much as might redeem all the Church* goods.

After Euphraimius followed Domnius. Domnius. ^nastatiu^.
And after him Anastatius. He ministered under the Emperor Justinian, at what
time the Emperor fell into the error of them, who said, that our Lord Jesus
in his very conception adjoined unto his divine nature an immortal body, which
was subject to no humane infirmities. Anastatius opposed himself to the
Emperors opinion, and the Bishops followed Anastatius, and not the Emperor:
for this cause Justinian was purposed to have banished him, but he escaped this
trouble, by the Emperors death. Nevertheless, he was banished by Justinius the
younger, for some alleged cause of dilapidation of Church goods: and Gregorius
was placed in his room.

Gregorius ministered in Antiochia 23. Gregorius.
years, under Iustinius 2. Tiberius and Mauritius: he was in great account
with Mauritius, to whom he foretold, that he would be promoted to the
Imperial dignity. And Mauritius employed him in great and waghtie business,
such as in pacifying the tumult of his army, which made insurrection against
Germanus their captain. Also he sent him Ambassador to Cosroes King of
Persia, Evag. lib. 6. cap. 18.
who was astonished at the grace that was in his speeches. Notwithstanding, he
was accused by Asterius a Deputy of the East, of the filthy sin of incest:
but he cleared his own innocence so evidently, that his accuser was with
ign^minie scourged and banished. He died of the gowtes infirmity, Euphemius.
and after his death, Anastatius, whom Justinius banished for dilapidation of
Church-goods, being yet alive, was restored to his own place again. To whom
succeeded Euphemius.

Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
Helias.
AFter Martyrius succeeded Helias, a fervent defender of the true faith. Neither
would he condescend to the banishment of Euphemius, Bishop of Constantinople,
nor to the admission of Seuerus to be Bishop of Antiochia: therefore the
Emperor Anastatius banished him.

Johannes.
To him succeeded John, of whose politic dealing in circumueening Anastatius
the Emperors captain, I have sufficiently declared in the preceding history.

Petrus. Macarius. Eustochius.
To John succeeded Peter, and after him Macarius, and after Macarius,
Eustochius, who impugned the Books of Origin, and drove out of his bounds the
Monks of Nova Laura, defenders of the opinions of Origin: Theodorus Ascidas B.
of Caesarea in Cappadocia, took this in an evil part. The Emperor Justinian
caused a general Council to be gathered at Constantinople, wherein not only
the books of Origin were damned, but also Theodorus himself the defender of
them. This displeased the Emperor Justinian, because he loved Theodorus
dearly: therefore he procured that Eustochius B. Johannes. Neamus. Isicius.
of Jerusalem should be removed, and Macarius restored again. After whom
succeeded Johannes, Neamus, and Isicius.

In this Centurie, whereas I pretermit the names of other Pastors and Doctors
in the Church, I have done it upon this consideration. I find in this Centurie,
that by the irruption of barbarous people, Note.
such as the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, Auares, Schythians, Lombards, youth was
hindered from studies, many memorable books were burnt, ancient Languages were
utterly spoiled, learning was greatly diminished, flattery of prevailing powers
increased, ambition in the West, heresy in the East, turned the estate of the
Church vpside-downe, so that scarcely could men of good gifts, and keeping
integrity of faith, be furnished unto the principal Apostolic chaires. Now
after a manner the sun is going down, the shadows wax great, the
darkness approaches, the Antichrist is at the door, worthy to be welcomed
with darkness, and decay of knowledge. What shall I now write of other
Pastors and Doctors? shall I follow the foolish conceits of Historio graphers,
in whose opinion the gift of miracles increased, Acts 2.
when the gift of knowledge decayed: but the contrary is known by Scripture,
that the holy Apostles, whom Christ endued with extraordinary gifts of working
miraculous works, he endued them also with extraordinary gifts of knowledge:
but the writers of this time, especially Evagrius who concluded his History
with the death of Mauritius, brings in many famous men in this Centurie,
gifted with power to work miraculous works. But when I consider the end of
these miraculous works, they are brought in, either to confirm the
sanctimonie of the Monasticke life, the adoration of the Cross, or some other
gross superstition. Zosymas a monk is commended by him for his prophericall
foreknowledge of the ruin of Antiochia, and for the miracle of the Lion, who
slew the Ass that carried his victualing to Caesarea, and likewise the Lion by
his mandate was compelled to bear that same burden which the A^^e had borne to
the ports of Caesarea. Evag lib. 4. cap. 26.
No man is so senseless, or ignorant, but may perceive that this lying miracle
is brought in, to the confirmation of the excellency of the monastical life.

The miracle of Thomas B. of Apamea, tends to the adoration of the tree of
the Cro^^e. The miracle of the fire that came out of Barsaunphius shop at Gaza,
Idem lib. 4. cap. 33.
and consumed the most part of them who were in company with Eustochius B. of
Jerusalem, is a notable lie, and tends only to confirm superstition. The
miracle of the Image of the Virgin Marie, detesting Anatolius an hypocrite, an
Idolater, and a sorcerer, and yet insinuating himself in familiar acquaintance
with Gregorius B. of Antiochia, in the days of the Emperor Tiberius, any man
may perceive that this miracle is forged, not so much for detestation of
hypocrisy, Idem lib. 5. cap. 18. Idem. lib. 6. cap. 22.
Idolatry, etc sorcerie, as for worshipping the Image of the Virgin with a
devout mind. The miracle of Simeones, who in his yo uth miraculously tamed a
Pard, and fastened his girdle about the neck thereof, and brought it like a
Catte into the Monastery, and afterward lived upon the tops of pillars, and
mountains, Idem lib. 6. cap. 21.
fed with branches of trees 68. years: this fable whereunto it tends all men
do see. And finally the golden Cross sent by Cosroes to Sergiopolis, tends
not only to the invocation of Saints, but also to put our trust and confidence
in them, as the last words of the Epistle of Cosro*es, and his wife Sira,
clearly imports. Now let the judicious Reader pardon me in pretermitting
many things written by others, left I should weary them by filling their ears
with fables and lies.

CENTVRIE VII.
Of Popes, Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors.
AFter Sabinianus succeeded Bonifacius the third, Bonifacius the third.
and continued only nine months in his Popedom: finding opportunity of
time, by the disliking that the Emperor Phocas had of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Bonifacius insinuated himself in the favor of the Emperor,
and obtained at his hands, that the Church of Rome should be called the supreme
head of all other Churches.

To him succeeded Bonifacius the fourth, Bonifacius the fourth.
and governed six years, eight months, and thirteen days: He obtained from
Phocas a Temple (of old builded to the honor of all the gods of the Gentiles,
Platina in vita Bon. 4.
called Pantheon): this he purged from the abominations of Heathen people, and
dedicated it to the Virgin Marie, and to the Saints. Likewise, he instituted a
Festival day, to be kept in honor of all the Saints, in which day the Bishop
of Rome himself should read the service. Funct. comment. in chron. lib. 8.
He esteemed much of the Monasticke like, and gave unto the Monks equal
honor with the Clergy, in privilege of Preaching, ministering the Sacraments,
binding, and loosing, etc. so were the Monks associated into the tribe of the
Priests.

After him succeeded Theodatus, Theodatus.
otherwise called Deus dedit, and governed three years, and three days: He
made an Ordinance, that no man should marry the woman, to whom, or with whom he
had been witness in Baptism, because this was counted spiritual
consanguinity.

This was an undoubted note of Antichrist, to make laws in the matter of
marriage, Levit. 18.
not agreeable to the law of God. Many do write, that he cured a leprous man
with a kiss: But from this time forward let us beware to give hasty credit
to miracles, which are brought in for none other cause, but only to confirm a
lying doctrine: and in holy Scripture they are called (...), 2 These. 3.9.
that is, Miracles of lies.

Bonifacius the fifth.
To him succeeded Bonifacius the fifth, and ruled five years and ten months: He
made a constitution, that no man who ran for safety to a religious place,
should be drawn out of it by violence, how grievous soever his offense had
been: A law-Antichristian indeed, and much impairing the authority of the
civil Magistrate.

Honorius the first.
Honorius the first succeeded Bonifacius the fifth, and ruled twelve years,
eleven months, and seventeen days: He was infected with the heresy of the
Monothelites, and was damned in the sixth general Council assembled in the
days of the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus, and has bin touched in the
Treatise of Succession.

Seuerinus the first.
To him succeeded Seuerinus the first, and continued one year, nine months,
and eleven days: He was confirmed in his Popedom by Isacius Exarche of
Italy: for at that time, the election of the Clergy, and consent of the
people, was not much set by. Isacius also spoiled the treasures of the Church
of Laterane, Platina in vita Seuerini.
being offended with this, that the Church-treasures were so rich, and that
they bestowed nothing to the support of Soldiers who were in great necessity.

John the fourth.
After him followed Pope John the fourth, who exceeded not the space of one
year, one month, and nineteen days in his government.

Theedoretus.
Theodoretus the successor of John the fourth, was the son of Theodorus
Bishop of Jerusalem. If the Roman Church so much detested marriage in the
persons of men in a spiritual calling, how came it to pass that they admitted
Theodoretus to be Pope, who was the son of a married Bishop? He ruled six
years, five months, and eighteen days. He excommunicated Pyrrhus Patriarch
of Constantinople for the heresy of the Monothelites: but after the death of
the Emperor Heraclius, Pyrrhus returned from Afrike, where he had remained a
space in banishment, he came to Rome, recanted his error, and was absolved
from excommunication: but like unto a dog he returned again to his vomit,
and was excommunicated of new again by Theodoretus: but Pyrrhus was slain by
the Senators of Constantinople, before he was possessed into his former
dignity, as partaker of the vile treason intended by Martina and Heracleonas
her son, Platina in vit. Theod.
against Constantine the son of the Emperor Heraclius.

After him succeeded Pope Martinus, Martinus.
and governed six years, one month, and twentie-sixe days: He sent
Ambassadors to Paulus, Patriarch of Constantinople, exhorting him to forsake
the error of the Monothelites: but he misvsed the messengers the more
confidently, because he saw the Emperor Constans altogether addicted unto the
heresy of the Monothelites. Martinus on the other part, assembled a Council
at Rome of 150. Bishops, wherein he renewed the excommunication of Syrus B. of
Alexandria, Sergius and Pyrrus, Bishops of Constantinople: likewise, he
excommunicated Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, for the error of the
Monothelites. The Emperor Constans highly offended against Martinus, sent
first Olympus the Exarche of Italy, either to take Pope Martinus prisoner, or
else to kill him: but his attempts were frustrate, not without a miraculous
work of God, as Platina records. And afterward he sent Theodorus Calliopas,
who under pretense of friendship came to salute the Pope, and cast him in
bonds, and sent him to Constantinople, where Constans the Emperor caused his
tongue to be cut out, and his right hand cut off, and banished him to
Chersonesus Ponti. The chair of Rome was vacant for the space of fourteen
months, Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10.
because they had no certainty of the time of the death of Pope Martinus.

Next unto him, Eugenius the first.
Eugenius the first was chosen Pope, and governed two years, and nine months:
He was the first that made an Ordinance, that Bishops should have
prison-houses, for correcting the enormitie and contumacie of the Clergy.

Vitalianus the first.
After him succeeded Vitalianus the first, he continued fourteen years, and
six months in the Popedom: to the singing of Psalms in the Church by vive
voice, he added Organs.

Adeodatus.
Next after Vitalianus followed Adeodatus, and ruled four years, two months,
and five days: of a Monk he was made Pope. In his time there were terrible
apparitions in Heaven: a great Comete continuing for the space of three
months: terrible thunders, the like whereof had not been heard in any
preceding time: great abundance of rain, fastening the Corn to the ground, so
that they grew again, and in some places of Italy came to maturitie and
ripeness: Great incursions of Turks and Saracens, who spoiled the Isle of
Sicilie. In all these calamities (says Platina) Adeodatus multiplied
supplications for preventing the fore-signified wrath to come. If repentance
and abolishing of horrible Idolatry, which had now taken deep root, had
been joined with prayers, the Lord might have been the more easily entreated.

Donus. Platina in vit. Doni. 1.
Donus, or Domnus, his successor, ruled five years, and ten days: he reduced
the Church of Rauenna, after long reluctation, to the obedience of the chair
of Rome. It is to be noted, that all the time they were not subject to the
Bishop of Rome, they were called by the Romans (...): so bent were they to
vindicate all declining from their authority with opprobrious names of
Heresies imposed to the decliners thereof.

Agatho.
Agatho, successor to Donus, ruled 2. years, 6. months, and 15. days: of
whom Platina writes, that he cured a leprous man with a kiss, as Pope Deus
dedit had done before. In his time, Constantinus Pogonatus, Emperor, gathered
the sixth general Council at Constantinople, wherein the heresy of the
Monothelites was condemned, and Macarius, Patriarch of Antiochia, for his
obstinate perseuering in that error, was excommunicate: and Theophanius,
sometime an Abbot, was placed in his room. But this I remit unto its own
place. The epistle of Agatho, written to the sixth general Council, is full of
Antichristian pride, wherein he affirms, that the chair of Rome never erred,
and that it cannot err: that every soul, that is to be saved, must profess
the Roman traditions, and all the constitutions of the Roman Church are to be
received, as if they had been delivered by the divine voice of Peter. Hist.
Magd. cent. 7. cap. 10.
Likewise, he damned the marriage of men in a spiritual calling: he commends
the Mass, impudently alleging a writing of Chrysostom concerning the Mass,
whereas in all the writings of Chrysostom, this word of the Mass is not to be
found.

After Agatho, Leo the second.
succeeded Leo the second, who continued only ten months, and seventeen
days: He was the first author of the kissing of the Pax.

To him succeeded Benedictus the second, Benedictus the second.
and ruled ten months, and twelve days only. In his days Constantinus
Pogonatus, Emperor, ordained, that in time to come, the consent of the
Emperor, and Exarche of Italy, should not be expected, but he whom the
Clergy and people did elect, should forthwith be counted the Vicar of Christ.
In so doing the Emperor very unadvisedly put an hurtful weapon into the Popes
hand, whereby the estate of the Empire was encombered, and hurt afterward.

Johannes the fifth, John the first.
his successor, continued not above one year and nine days.

And Conon the first, Conon the first.
the successor of John the fifth, ended his course after the issue of 11.
months, and 3. days.

After the death of Conon, the election of the Pope was like to be decided by
weapons, rather than by Suffrages and Votes: some favored Theodorus, others
promoued Paschalis: and neither of the parties would yield to the other. In the
end, the people thought expedient to reject them both, and to choose some third
person to the Popedom: So they elected Sergius the first, Sergius the first.
and carried him upon their shoulders to the Church of Laterane. In his time
Justinian the second gathered a Council at Constantinople, to perfect and
finish the work which his father had begun. Sergius refused to subscribe the
Acts of the sixth general Council, albeit his Ambassador, who was present at
the Council, had subscribed them. Platina de vita Serg^.
Of the consecrated Host, he ordained one part to be put into the Chalice, to
represent the body of Christ, which was risen from death: another part to be
eaten, to represent the body of Christ walking upon the earth: Note.
the third part, to be laid upon the Altar until the end of the Mass, to
represent the body of Christ lying in the Sepulcher. He governed thirteen
years, eight months and twentie-foure days.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
COncerning the Patriarchs of Constantinople, in this Century little mention
is made of them, because for the most part, they kept not the right faith, but
were entangled with heresy. After Cyriacus, Thomas, and Johannes, and
Constantinus, succeeded, whose faith (as unspotted with any blame of heresy)
has an honest testimony in Church rolls, called Sacra diptytha. Sergius,
Pyrrhus, and Paulus, were miserably infected with the heresy of the
Monothelites. Pyrrhu^ once recanted his heresy, and was absolved from
excommunication by Pope Theodorus: but he returned incontinent again as a dog
to his vomit. Pope Theodorus when he excommunicated him the second time, used
a new and insolent form of doing, Hist. Magd. Cent. 7 cap. 9.
the like whereof was never heard at any time before: for he infused some drops
of the consecrated cup into ink, and writ a sentence of cursing against
Pyrrus. Paulus also obtained at the hands of the Emperor Constans, edicts to
be affixed in diverse places, whereby all men should be compelled to subscribe
to the error of the Monothelites. After them Petrus and Theodorus, albeit they
maintained not the forementioned heresy with so high and proud attempts as
others had done, yet they were addicted unto it. Gregorius successor to
Theodorus, in the sixth general Council, had defended the error of the
Monothelites, but when he was clearly refuted by testimonies of Scripture, and
by places cited out of the Fathers, he yielded, and embraced the true faith.
Callyni^us ministered under the reign of Justinian the second, who demolished a
Church near approaching to his palace, and builded an house of presence,
wherein the people might cherish the Emperor. Callynicus was compelled to
consecrate the house by prayer: but in regard he was enforced against his heart
to pray, he made his prayer short, in this manner, Glory be to God, who
patiently comporteth with us, both now, and for ever, Amen. For this cause
Justinian hated Callynichus, and when he returned back again from his ten
years banishment, he caused the eyes of Callynichus to be put out, and sent him
to Rome, there to remain in banishment.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
IN Alexandria, before the Saracens (under the conduct of Mahomet) conquered
the country of Egypt, few of note and mark were to be found in that chair.
After Eulogius, Johannes scribo continued in office only two years. After him
Johannes Eleemosynarius is highly commended for his liberality toward the
poor. Cyrus his successor was an heretic, following the error of the
Monothelites. Paulus Diaconu^, lib. 18. rerum Romans
He paid tribute to the Saracens: but when the Emp. Heraclius was wearied of
the payment of tribute, then all the country of Egypt was possessed by the
Saracens: which incursion of the Mahumetans, albeit it cutted not off the
personal succession of the Patriarchs of Alexandria, yet it obscureth the
clear notice of their succession unto us, who are far distant from them.

Patriarchs of Antiochia.
IN Antiochia Anastatius Sinaita is found to have been Bishop of Antiochia, in
the days of the Emperor Phocas: He obtained this name to be called Sinaita,
because he had macerated himself with long fasting, and with hard exercises of
an heremiticall life upon mount Sina, Anno 610. he was slain in a seditious
commotion, stirred up by the Jews, who dwelt at Antiochia, who slew many other
Christians: but they uttered great cruelty, joined with vile in humanity,
against Anastatius, in whose mouth they cast the very excrements of his own
body, Nicephorus. lib. 18. cap. 44. and 45.
as the Magdeburg History records, citing the testimony of Nicephorus.
After him another of that same name called likewise Anastatius, succeeded, and
was B. of Antiochia: He was a Syrian, a man of a subtle spirit, who
circumuented the Emperor Heraclius: for at the Emperors command he subscribed
the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon, only simulately, and for desire of
preferment: but after he had subscribed, that two natures personally united
were to be acknowledged in Christ, he demanded of the Emperor, what he thought
of the will and operation of Christ, whether was two wills and operations in
Christ, or one will, and one operation only? The Emperor troubled with the
novelty of the question, consulted with Sergius B. of Constantinople, who
returned this answer to the Emperor, that one will and one operation was to
be acknowledged in Christ. The Emperor Heraclius being circumvented by false
and deceitful teachers, was ashamed to forsake that opinion, which he had once
condiscended unto. So this heresy of the Monothelites took deep root in the
East, until the time that God, punishing the contempt of his truth, suffered
the Saracenes, with their blasphemous Mohammedan doctrine to be universally
ouer-spred in the East.

To Anastatius succeeded Macarius, a most obstinate defender of the heresy of
the Monothelites: for the which cause he was excommunicated and deposed in the
sixth general Council, and Theophanius, an Abbot in Sicilie, was made bishop
of Antiochia. After him are reckoned Petrus, Thomas and Ioannes, without any
further discourse, except a bare commemoration of their names.

Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
THe Church of Jerusalem in this age was pitifully defaced, as lying nearest to
the incursions of strong enemies, both Persians and Saracens. Zacharias Bishop
of Jerusalem was carried captive by Cosroes king of Persia, and remained a
prisoner for the space of fourteen years. In the end he was restored to his
former dignity, at that time when the Emperor Heraclius overcame Cosr^es in
warre-fare, and recovered the ^rosse of Christ again, which the Persians had
spoiled, and taken out of Jerusalem. This came to pass in the year of our
Lord 624.

To Zacharias succeeded Sophronius; Note.
of a Monk, He was made Patriarch of Jerusalem: He lacked not his own
commendation in the sixth general Council, as one who kept the true Faith
iuuiolable: He was present in Jerusalem when Haumer Prince of Saracenes entered
into the Town and Temple: and he was a beholder of the last desolation of the
Church in the town.

Other Pastors and Doctors.
IN this Centurie there is great scarsitie of learned men, yet that which was
lacking in learning, it must be supplied one way or other: Some were
politic, others (in the opinion of ignorant people) were so devout and holy,
that miracles were wrought by their hands, and at their sepulchers: namely,
lying miracles, advancing the kingdom of the Antichrist. The most remarkable
Bishops of Rauenna in this Centurie were Theodorus, Reparatus, and Foelix, all
of contrary dispositions, and so flat opposite one to another as possible
could be. Theodorus was terrible, and covetous: and when he saw that he was
despised by the people and Clergy, being desirous of revenge, Hist. Magd.
cent. 7. cap. 10.
he betrayed the liberty of the church of Rauenna, in the days of the Pope
Donus. Reparatus being ignorant of that which Theodorus had done, and finding
the Church of Rauenna, subjected to the chair of Rome, for very heart grief
incontinent he ended his life. Foelix refused to pay unto Constantine the
sum of money which he demanded as a testimony of subjection. For this cause
Pope Constantine desired support from the Emperor Justinian the second, for
subduing the Bishop of Rauenna. Foelix on the other part, hearing, that the
Emperors army was approaching to Rauenna for the cause aforesaid, he
instigated the people to fight for the liberty of their Church: Both the armies
fought with martial courage: In the end the Emperors army prevailed, the
Town of Rauenna was taken, many were slain, others were carried captive to
Constantinople, the eyes of Foelix were put out, the rest were banished to
Bithynia. What can be found in this history but pride on the one part,
ambitiouslie seeking superiority: and on the other part policy, sometimes
yielding, sometimes despairing, and sometimes with bellicous hardiness
presuming to plead a spiritual cause with weapons of a corporal warre-fare.

In this Centurie many miracles are attributed to the persons whom the people
counted to be deuote.

Piatina, in ^ita Ivan. 5.
Ioannes, Bishop of Bergomum in Lombardie, was a man of so great reverent
account, that Princes were wont, by rising our of their Thrones, to do honor
unto him. It happened upon a time, that he reproved I^^ipe^tus king of
Lombardis freely and sharply, in time of a banquet. Iunipertus willing to be
revenged of him, provided, that he should be sent home upon a strong, fierce,
and lofty horse, which was accustomed to cast the riders, Note.
and to tear and lacerate them: But when the Bishop of Bergomum was mounted
upon him, he left his fierceness, and carried him peaceably and calmelie unto
his own house.

Ioannes ^gn^^, bishop of W^recht, in whose hand a piece of dry timber budded
and flourished, Note.
yet was he an idiot and an unlearned man.

Remaclus Bishop of the same Town, and borne in Bordeaux of France, left his
Episcopal office, and went to the Wilderness, where he led an Heremiticall
life, defending his insolent fact by the example of Moses, Abraham, Elias
Heliseus, and Christ himself, who were all found to have been in the
Wilderness. But if he had been a man of deep understanding, he might have
alleged more pertinently the example of Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem, who in
going to the Wilderness, forsook his Episcopal office for a time, than the
example of Christ, who went unto the Wilderness to enter into the holy office
of Preaching, after preparation of fasting, praying, and fighting with
spiritual armor against the prince of Darkness. Notwithstanding, he is
thought both in his life time, Matthew. 4. Platin. in vitae Joan.
and also after his death to have wrought miracles.

In Austume a Town of France, called in Latin Augustodunu^, Leodegarius is
thought to have retained his voice, and the benefit of distinct speaking after
that his tongue was cut out, Note.
and that many miraculous works were wrought after his death, if credit can
be given to Vincentius.

The miracles of Andoenus Bishop of Rowen, who also writ a book of the
miraculous deliverance of the soul of Dagobertus king of France, and an
infinite number of other lying miracles, all confirming superstition, of
purpose I leave them as fables superaboundant in the writings of Vincentius.

Concerning Isidorus Hispalensis, occasion will be offered to speak of him in
the sixth Council of Toledo.

The vain disputation concerning the diversity of the keeping of Easter day
in Scotland and England, betwixt Colmannus and Wuilfridus it is as unnecessary
to be written, as it was unnecessary with heat and contention to have been
disputed.

CENTVRIE VIII.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Pope Sergius succeeded John the 6. and continued 3. years, and 3.
months. John. 6.


After him Pope Ioannes 7. continued 2. years and 7. months: John. 7.
he lived in the days of Justinian the 2. who sent Ambassadors unto him for
procuring an union betwixt the churches of the East and west, because they
differed in opinions concerning the Canons of the sixth general Council,
wherein prohibition of marriage to men in spiritual offices was dissallowed,
and the Patriarch of Constantinople was equalled in authority to the Patriarch
of Rome. These Ambassadors aforesaid returned from Pope John the seventh
without any answer, with proud carriage, or as others think, a cowardly
form of dealing all writers do reprove.

After him succeeded Sisinius who continued not about 20. days in his
Popedom. Sisinius.


After Sisinius succeeded Constantine the first and governed 7. years,
Constantine the first.
and 20. days: his Popedom was under the reign of Justinian the second,
Philippicus, and Anastasius. The Emp. Justinian supported him against Foelix
Bishop of Ravenna, who had refused to pay to the B. of Rome the sum of money
imposed unto him in time of his ordination, so that Foelix was taken prisoner
by the Emperors admiral, and sent to Constantinople, where his eyes were put
out, and he was ba^ished to Pontus. Against the Emp. Philippicus he contended,
as one having authority to raze the name of the Emp. out of charters, as had
bin already declared. This is the Pope who was Judge betwixt the B. of Ticinum
and Millane who contended for superiority, and Constantine exemed the shop of
Ticinum from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Millan: but in such way, as he
should be subject to the Church of Rome. The Emperor Justinian the second,
sent for Pope Constantine, who came to Constantinople, and from thence went to
Nicomedia, Note.
where he met with the Emperor, and the Emperor kissed his feet. Mark the
growing, and daily increasing pride of the Roman Antichrist.

After Constantine succeeded Gregorius the second, and continued sixteen
years, Gregorius, the second.
nine months, and eleven days. He lived under the reign of the Emperor Leo
Isaurus, whom he rashly excommunicated for abolishing of images. Also he drew
away from the obedience of the Emperor, the countries of Hesperia, Aemilia,
Liguria, and other parts of Italy, forbidding them to pay tribute to the
Emperor, express contrary to Christ's commandment, Matthew. 22.21. where He
says, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, etc. and this Christ spoke
concerning paying of tribute.

Gregorius the third.
Gregory the third governed ten years, eight months, and twenty four
days: and followed the foot steps of his predecessor, both in advancing the
doctrine of worshipping of images, and in withdrawing the people of Italy
from the obedience of the Emperor. More-ouer, he gathered a Council at Rome,
wherein the worshipping of images had allowance. And the Emperor Leo was both
excommunicated, and likewise, so far as in him lay, deprived of his Imperial
dignity. So early did the beast of Rome, even in civil matters, vsurp
authority over the Princes and Monarchs of the world. In his days the town of
Rome was besieged by Luitprand king of Lombardis. But Carolus Martellus, a
noble prince in France, being solicited by letters of Gregory, to support
the distressed estate of the Church of Rome, he persuaded Luitbrand to desist
from molesting and besieging the town of Rome.

Zacharias the first.
After Gregory the third succeeded Zacharias the first, and continued ten
years, four months, and four days: In antichristian pride he surpassed all
his predecessors, distributing the Kingdoms of the world at his pleasure: For
he procured, Func. Comment. in Chron. lib. 8.
that Pipinus, the son of Carolus Martellus (who was but a subject, and ruler
of the kings house) should be anointed king of France: and that Childericus,
the lawful successor of the kingdom, should have his head shaven, and be
thrust into a Monastery. Likewise he procured, that Carolom^nnus, the elder
brother of Pipinius, should be a Monk of the Order of Saint Benedict, in the
Monastery of Cassinates. Rachis also, king of Lombardes, after he had reigned
4. years, gave over his kingly authority, and entered to a Monastery, and
exhorted his wife and children to do the like: and so his brother Aistulphus
obtained the kingdom. Pipinus was anointed king of France, by Bonifacius, at
the commandment of Pope Zacharias, anno. 750. or as Platina reckons Anno,
753. What recompense of reward Pipinus rendered to the chair of Rome, for this
beneuole^ce, or rather this manifest iniquity of Zacharias, it will be
declared in the description of the life, gouernememt, and carriage of Stephanus
the second, if the Lord please.

After Zacharias succeeded Stephanus the second, Stephanus the second.
and ruled five years, and one month. In his time Aistulphus, King of
Lombardes besieged Rome, at two diverse times, and Stephanus implored the aid
and assistance of Pipinus, King of France, at both times. At the first time
Pipinus besieged Aistulphus in Papia the chief City of residence of the
kings of Lombardes, and compelled him to restore to the chair of Rome all the
towns and lands which by violence he had taken from them. But at his second
coming, he not only relieved Rome from the siege of the Lombardes, but also
bestowed upon the chair of Rome the dominions of Rauenna and Penta-polis,
appertaining to the Emperor of the East, and which they enjoyed since the
death of Narses, Platina in vita Step. 2.
170. years. In so doing, there was such bargaining betwixt the kings of
France and the Popes, Acts 12.
as was of old betwixt Herod and the Jews, he gratified them with the blood
of Christ's Apostles, and they gratified him on the other part by giving to him
the glory of God: Even so, Zacharias, bishop of Rome, bestowed upon Pipinus the
kingdom of France, which duly appertained to another: and Pipinus again
bestowed upon the chair of Rome the dominion of Rauenna, and Pentapolis, which
duly appertained to the Emp. of the East.

It shall not be amiss to make a particular rehearsal of the towns and
territories bestowed upon the church of Rome, by the donatio^ of Pipinus, but
not of Constantine, as they have rumored most fabulously many years ago: In
primis, Rauenna, Bononia, Imola, Fauentia, Commaclum, Hadria, Pompilii Forum,
Leuii Forum, Cesena, Bobium, Ferraria, Ficoclas, and Gabellum: all these towns
were under the dominion of Rauenna. And in Pentapolis, Ariminum, Pisaurum,
Concha, Fanum, Senogallia, Ancona, Auximum, Hummanam, Aesium, Sempronij Forum,
Mons Feretri, Vrbium, Balmense territorium, Callas, Luceolos, Engubium,
together with the Castles and lands appertaining to these towns, to wit, the
Provinces called in our time Romandiola, and Marca Anconitana, and of old
Aemilia, Flaminea, and Picenu^. Thus we see what a rich reward the chair of
Rome obtained for their defection from the Emp. of the East, and their favor
toward the kings of France. Also, for further confirmation of friendship
betwixt the bishops of Rome, and the kings of France, Pope Stephanus the 2.
procured, that he should be invited to be witness at the baptism of the king of
France his young son, at which time, as a man covetous of vain glory, Note.
he suffered, Pipinus, and Charles his son, to kiss his feet, and to hold his
stirrope, and to lead his horse by the brible: and finally, he was content to
be mounted up, and carried upon the shoulders of men, leaving behind him an
example of stinking pride to the posterity after following.

Paulus the first.
After Stephanus the second, succeeded his brother Paulus the first, who
continued 10. years, and one month. In antichristian pride he was nothing
inferior to his predecessors, for he sent Ambassadors to the Emperor of the
East Constantinus Copronymus, to exhort him to restore again the images of the
Saints, which he had demolished, with intermination of cursing, if he refused
to be obedient to the popes counsel. In his time A^stulphus King of Lombardes
dyed, and Desid^rius the last King of Lombards reigned in his stead.

Constantine the brother of Desiderius King of Lombardis, succeeded to Paulus
the first, Constantinus 2.
a man admitted to the Popedom, before he received Ecclesiastical orders:
therefore he was hated of the people of Rome, and denuded of his Papal
dignity, after he had continued one year and one month. Some writers affirm
that his eyes were thrust out, and that he was sent to a Monastery: others
affirm, that he was burnt with fire, by the hateful malice of the Romans.

To him succeeded Stephanus the third, who ruled four years, Stephanus 3.
five months, and twenty seven days. He gathered a Council at Rome; in the
which twelve Bishops of France, sent thither by Charles de Maine, were present,
with the Bishops of Italy, who disauthorized Constantine his predecessor, and
annulled all his decrees. Likewise, they damned the seventh general Council
convened in Constantinople, by Constantinus Copronymus, wherein the worshipping
of Images was disallowed. But in this Laterane Council, assembled by Stephanus
the third, the worshipping of Images got allowance. And it was thought, that
God and the Saints were in worser case then mortal Princes, in case that
Images might be made to represent mortal Princes, but not to represent God and
his Saints. Platin. in vit. Steph 3.
It was rumored in this Popes time, that Charles King of France, was of
intention to marry Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius King of Lombards.
Stephanus fearing left this marriage should undo the friendship lately tracted
betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the King of France, dissuaded Charles from the
marriage aforesaid; as if the marriage of a woman of the kindred of the
Lombards, were a mixing of darkness with light, and of Belial with Christ.
And the menacing letter of Stephanus the third, prevailed so far at the hands
of Charles the Great, that he repudiated Bertha the daughter of Desiderius, his
lawful married wife, after he had cohabited with her one year: and he married
another woman, named Hildegarde, of the Dukerie of Sweue. These are the fruits
of Antichristian pride, Note.
to threaten the torments of hell against the Princes of the world for
marriage, if so be they foresee any damage may redound to the chair of Rome,
by the marriage of Princes.

After Stephanus the third, succeeded Adrian the first, and governed twenty
three years, Adrianus. 1. Platin. in vit. Adri. 1.
ten months, and seventeene days. In his days Charles the Great came into
Italy with an army, and Desiderius King of Lombards, his wife, and children, to
Lions in France, and utterly subdued the kingdom of the Lombards; which had
continued in Italy 204. years. Now in the year of our Lord, 776. this
kingdom was abolished and undone, by Charles the Great, king of France, for
the favor he carried toward the chair of Rome. Likewise, he augmented the
donation of his father Pipinus, and he bestowed upon the Church of Rome, the
Isle of Corsica, and the places lying betwixt Luca and Parma, with the
Dukedomes Spoleto and Benevento. This being done, Func. comment. in ob^on l. 8.
Charles returned back again to France, carrying with him Bertha his brothers
wife, and her children, who came to Adrian Bishop of Rome, hoping for favor at
his hands, and that he should have anointed her sons to be Kings of France,
seeing Carolamannus their father was now dead: but he delivered them into the
hands of Charles, and so Charles the Great reigned without exception, as
absolute Commander of France. Irene the Empress of the East, during his
Popedom, assembled a great Council at Nice in Bythinia, where the adoration
of Images was allowed. In this Council the Popes Ambassadors were present, and
his own letter was read in the Council: no man gave greater allowance to the
worshipping of Images, then Pope Adrian did, as shall be declared, God willing,
in the head of Councels. It is to be marked, that Platina, writing of the death
of Constantinus Copronymus, is compelled to bear witness to the truth; and
testify, that the opinion of the leprosy of Constantine the Great, was a
notable fable, and that it sprung up by occasion of the disease of Constantinus
Copronymus, the father in law of the Empress Irene.

To Adrian succeeded Leo the third, Leo 3.
and governed one and twenty years. He was hated by Pascalis and Campalus, who
lay in wait for him at the Church of S. Silvester, threw him down to the
ground, spoiled him of his pontifical garments, beat him with many strokes,
and finally, cast him into prison and bonds: but he escaped by the means of a
cubiculare, named Albinus, and lurked in the Vaticane, until the time that
Vnigisius, Duke of Spoleto, conveyed him safely unto his bounds. At this time
Charles King of France, had wars against the Saxons. The Bishop of Rome, who
came to him to complain of the injuries which he had received, was sent back
again very honorably, accompanied with the soldiers of Charles King of
France: and with promise that he should without delay, address his journey
toward Italy. When Charles came to Italy, the Popes enemies were so dashed
with fear, they durst not appear to accuse him: and the Clergy of Rome
thought meet, that no man should judge of the Apostolic chair, but the Bishop
of Rome should be his own judge. Leo took the book of the Gospel in his
hands, Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap 10.
and swore that he was innocent of all the crimes objected against him: and so
he was absolved: and Pascalis and Campulus, the friends of the late deceased
Pope Adrian, were counted worthy of death: but Pope Leo interceded for safety
of their lives: so they were banished to France. For this benefit, Leo caused
Charles to be declared Emperor of the West, and crowned him with the Imperial
Diadem. And from that time forwards, the custom began, that Emperors should
receive their Coronation from the Bishop of Rome. Notwithstanding of this, it
was ordained, that no man should be elected Bishop of Rome, Note.
without advise of the Emperor of the West, and without receiving investment
from him.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
THe Patriarchs of Constantinople in this Centurie, placed and displaced,
according to the changeable conceits of the Emperors. Under th reign of
Justinian the second, Cyrus was Patriarch, whom Philippieus removed, and
advanced one named John, who had foretold, that he should be made Emperor.
This John was infected with the heresy of the Monothelites, and was remooved
by Artemius, by whom Germanus was advanced to the chair of Constantinople.
Germanus continued until the reign of Constantinus Copronymus: He was
deposed and excommunicated by the general Council assembled by Constantinus,
Note.
because he allowed the worshipping of Images.

To him succeeded Anastatius, who albeit he disliked Images, yet he was
unthankful to the Emperor, and favored the seditious attempts of the people
of Constantinople, who advanced Artabasdus to the Imperial dignity. Moreover,
he slandered the Emperor, as if he had spoken against the divinity of
Christ. He received a just recompense of his unthankfulness: for he was
deposed, and scourged, and set upon an Ass, with his face toward the Asses
tail, and made a ridiculous spectacle to the people.

After him, Constantine a Monk, was made Patriarch, who at the first seemed to
condemn Images: but afterward he was found to be a maintayner and allower of
them. The Emperor banished him to Iberia, where he spoke contumeliously both
of the Emperor, and of the Council holden at Constantinople: therefore he was
brought back again from banishment, and was beheaded, and his body was drawn
through the town with a cord, and cast into a pit, where the bodies of
malefactors were accustomed to be cast.

After him succeeded Nicetas, a man unlearned, and advanced by the Emperor
Constable. Copron. for none other cause, but only for his zeal against the
worshipping of Images. After him succeeded Paulus Cyprius, who in the days of
Constable. Copron. damned the worshipping of images: but afterward changed his
mind: and under the reign of Irene, entered into a Monastery, and lamented,
that he had consented to the abolishing of images. The vain inconstancy of
this timorous and superstitious man, was the chief occasion of the convocation
of the second Council of Nice, by the Empress Irene. To him succeeded
Tarasius, who was present and gave allowance to the adoration of Images.

The prevailing power of the Saracens in Alexandria, Antiochia, and Jerusalem,
did so obscure the names of the Patriarchs of there cities, that I have no
remarkable thing to write of them in this Centurie.

Of Pastors and Doctors.
IN this declining age, wherein spiritual grace daily decayed, and nothing
increased, except an heap of earthly treasures, which God permits to be
poured into the bosoms of them who love the wages of iniquity. Always, even
at this time, some men of good literature and learning, did manifest themselves
unto the world; such as Bonifacius Bishop of Mentz, Damascene, a learned Monk,
Paulus Diaconus a learned writer of histories, and Beda a man counted venerable
in his time: yet all these were miserably infected with the superstitions of
their time, such as the opinion of Purgatory, invocation of Saints, worshipping
of Images, and prohibition of Marriage.

Bonifacius was a man borne in England, Bonifacius.
in place near adjoining to Excester: he was familiarly acquainted with five
Popes, to wit, with Pope Constantinus the first, Gregorius the second,
Gregorius the third, Zacharias the first, Stephanus 2. And by them he was
advanced to many honors: First, to be the Popes Legate in England, Germany and
France, and afterward to be Archbishop of Mentz. All his studies and travailes
tended to this, to bring the people of England, Germany, and France, to the
subjection of the Roman Bishop, and to a conformity of the superstitions of
the Roman Church. In the name, and at the commandment of Pope Zacharias, he
disauthorized Childericus King of France, thrust him into a Monastery, and
anointed Pipinus the son of Carolus Martellus, to be King of France. So zealous
was he to perform all the desires of the Roman Bishops, by whom also his
name was changed: for he was first named Vinofridus, but the Bishops of Rome
who delighted in his service, called him Bonifacius. After he had served the
Roman Bishops in slavish subjection 36. years, he was slain by Pagans,
because he had anointed Pipinus King of France, and for hope they had to enrich
themselves by his coffers: Note.
in the which, when they had opened them, they found nothing except books, and
relics of Saints, whereof they made no account. And his body was buried in
the Monastery of Fulda.

Johannes Damascenus.
Damascene, a superstitious Monk, the disciple of Cosmas, lived under the
Emperors Leo, and Constable. Copron. he was a long time in company of the
Saracens, and with the Prince of Saracens he went to the sepulcher of Mahomet,
and like unto a timorous body, Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10.
worshipped the bones of Mahomet, fearing to have been put to death, if he
had not done such homage. He was a patron of worshipping of Images, and was
excommunicated in the general council assembled by Constable. Copron. Note.
It is written by John Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the History of Damascenes
life, that the Prince of Saracens was moved to indignation against him, by a
deceitful letter, sent from the Emperor Leo Isaurus, in the which Damascene
was charged as a man willing to have betrayed the town of Damascus into the
hands of the Emperor Leo. Upon this occasion (says John Patriarch of
Jerusalem) the Prince of Saracens cut off the hand of Damascene: and on the
other part, Damascene, by humble kneeling before the Image of the Virgin Marie,
was miraculously cured, and restored again to the power of his hand. But this
is like to the rest of popish fables, and lies: For Damascene writes many
notable fables, for confirmation of adoration of Images. And in case a miracle
had been wrought in his own person, by prostrating himself before an Image,
Damascene had no manner of way ouer-passed with silence the memorial thereof.
But we have to do with adversaries, who are not ashamed of lies. Damascene was
a diligent reader of the books of ancient Fathers, as appears by his four
books, De Orthodoxa fide: but not so diligent a reader of holy Scripture,
which is the ground of manifold errors. His history of Iosophat, King of India,
is known to be a Monkish fable.

Paulus Diaconus, Paulus Diaconus.
of the kindred of the Lombards, became a deacon in Aquileia: he was carried
captive into France, in the days of Charles the great, who besieged Papia,
banished Desiderius, and made an end of the Kingdom of the Lombards.
Afterward he was accused of treason and conspiracy, against Charles King of
France. His malicious and hateful accusers, were bent to have had his hands
cut off, or his eyes put out: but King Charles pitying him for his learning,
was content that he should be banished to the Isle of Diomedes. From thence
he fled, and came to Beneventum, where Arachis was dwelling, who had married
Adelporga, the daughter of Desiderius. In his palace it is thought he writ his
six books, De rebus gestis Longobardorum. After the death of Arachis, he
came to the Monastery called Cassinense, where he ended his life.

Beda, Beda.
a man borne and brought up in England, was called venerable, and was in great
account in his time. Only, he was miserably entangled with deceitful
Antichristian errors, universally overspred in his days. In writing, reading,
and praying. he was a man of incessant pains. Nothing is found in him more
commendable, then his patient suffering of the agonies immediately preceding
his dissolution, with a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Albertus Gallus, Albertus Gallus, with some learned men of Scotland, witness
to the truth of God.
a Bishop in some part of France, a learned and godly man, opposed himself
mightily to Boniface, the foot-groom of the Roman Antichrist, with whom
concurred two learned men borne in Scotland, named Clemens Presbyter, and
Samson, and offered to prove both by word and writing, that Bonifacius was an
author of lies, a troubler of the peace of Christians, and a corrupter and
deceiver of the people. But Pope Zacharias excommunicated them before they were
heard in lawful Assembly, and gave power to his foot-groome Bonifacius, Hist.
Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10.
to depose them, and procured at the hands of the King of France, that they
should be cast into prison, and bound with bonds, as schismatickes, false
teachers, and sacrilegious men. Such reward men received, who were witnesses to
the truth of God, and reprehended any corruption of the Roman Church. In like
manner Johannes Mailrosius, and Claudius Clemens, learned men of Scotland, sent
by King Achaius, to Charles King of France, and the first professors of
learning, in the Academie founded by Charles the great in Paris: these two
likewise were disliked of the Roman Church, because they could not assent to
all the superstions of that Church in this age so miserably deformed.

CENTVRIE. IX.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Leo the third succeeded Stephanus the fourth, Stephanus the fourth.
and ruled seven months. He was not elected with consent, and allowance of the
Emperor, but only by the Clergy and the people of Rome. Here it is well
marked by Functius, that the Roman Church does observe their own laws so
inuiolably, Func comment. lib. 9.
that the privilege granted to the Emperor by Pope Leo the third, it is
undone again even in his first successors time: to wit, in Pope Stephanus the
fourth his time. In the third month of his Popedom, he journied toward France,
for what cause it is not certain: but it appears he would try the Emperors
mind, whether or no he was griued for this, that he had been elected Pope
without the consent and foreknowledge of the Emperor. When he returned
again, finding that Ludouicus Pius the Emperor, was not greatly grieved at
the matter, but accepted his excuse, he began to make Commentaries upon the
Decrees of Hadrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit, that they meaned not
that the Emp. should be first acquainted with the election of the Pope: but
rather, that after his election, the Emperor should be acquainted with the
business, before the Pope were anointed. By such false Glosses and
Commentaries, they were by degrees excluding the Emperor from all kind of
meddling with the election of the Pope.

After Stephanus the fourth, Pascalis the first.
succeeded Pascalis the first, who was elected without consent of the Emperor.
He sent Ambassadors to excuse himself to the Emperor Ludouicus Pius,
because the Clergy and people had compelled him to accept the Popedom. The
Emperor Ludouicus Pius on the other part, seeing how this matter went, and
that he was troubled with the inconstancy, ambition, and obstinacy of the
Roman Church, he gave them liberty to choose their own Bishop, Note.
without the foreknowledge and consent of the Emperor in time to come. And
Pascalis, after he had ruled seven years and seventeen days, he ended his
course.

Eugenius the second.
Eugenius the second succeeded Pascalis, and ruled four years. His Popedom
was in the time when Lotharius was appointed to govern Italy. His
commendations are these, great Learning, great Eloquence, with a mixture of
great Hypocrisy.

Valentinus the first.
Valentinus, the successor of Eugenius, within the space of forty days
after that he was elected, (of a Deacon) to be Pope, he concluded his life.

To Valentinus, succeeded Gregorius the fourth, and ruled sixteen years.
Gregoriethr fourth.
Ludouicke and his son Lotharius were Emperors at this time: without whose
consent he would not accept his Popedom. Gregory would have seemed to have
been a mediator betwixt Ludouicke and his sons: but he is marked with a note
of shame in the Magdeburg history, as a man who increased discord, Hist. Magd.
cent. 9. cap. 10.
rather than quenched it. What he did in the Conuention at Aken, which was
conueened by the authority of the Emperor, it shall be declared, God willing,
in its own place.

To Gregory the fourth succeeded Sergius the second, and ruled three years.
Sergius the second.
He seemed to be the first Pope, who changed the name given unto him in
Baptism: for he was called Os porci, that is, the mouth of the Sow: and for
the baseness of the name, he called himself by the name of one of his
antecessours. Lotharius sent Ludouick his eldest son, accompanied with many
Noble persons, to be crowned Emperor: for Lotharius thought meet to enter
into a Monastery, and to lament for his bypast sins, especially, for
grieuing the heart of his father Ludouicus Pius. He augmented the liturgy of
the Mass, with the addition of Agnus Dei, and ordained, that the Hostia should
be divided in three parts.

To Sergius the second, succeeded Leo the fourth, and ruled 8. years, Leo the
fourth. Sergius a man of many trade.
3. months. He was a man of many trades, a builder, a warrior, and a Bishop.
He compassed the Vatican with a wall, and made it in the similitude of a Town:
and builded bull-warkes in the passages of Tyber, as it issued from the town.
He was a warrior, and fought against the Saracenes: against whom also he
prevailed. And finally, at some time he was a Bishop: and he gathered a
Council of 47. Bishops, in the which Athanasius, a Cardinal Presbyter was
damned, for negligence in the work of his calling. This is the first time, in
the which mention is made of a Cardinal in the History: for the Decretall
Epistles, as I have already declared, are but fabulous and lying writings. In
this Popes days, Edelwulphus, King of England, came to Rome, for performance
of a vow that he had made. He was courteously accepted by Pope Leo: for which
cause he ordained a tribute yearly to be paid to the bishop of Rome: to wit,
a penny Sterling out of every house, in England that kindled fire. It is well
remarked by Philip Morney, Lib. Mysteiniquitatis.
that Leo the fourth, in a certain Epistle, written to the Bishops of
Britannie, derogateth credit to all the Decretall Epistles assigned to the
bishops of Rome, preceding the days of Pope Siricius, except only to the
Decretall Epistles of Pope Syluester. So all the authorities that are alleged
by the Roman Church, out of the Decretall Epistles, for the space of 384
years, are of none effect, by the confession of Pope Leo the fourth.

After Leo, Ioane the eight.
the fourth, succeeded Pope Ioane the eight, an English woman, Note.
borne in the town of Mentz. She went to Athens, clothed with the apparel of
a man, accompanied with a Learned man: and she profited in learning beyond her
fellows. When she came to Rome, she was regarded for her learning, and was
promoted to the dignity of the Popedom, Marian. Scon. lib. 3. chron.
and ruled two years, five months and four days. About the year of our Lord
854 (being Pope) she played the Harlot: and by the providence of God, this
villainy of the Roman church, which cannot err, was manifested to the whole
world: For, in the time of a solemn Procession, as she was going to the church
of Latera^, she traveled in birth, and died, and was buried without honor.
Onuphrius, the Advocate of all evil causes, cannot ouer-passe this matter with
silence: but he brings an argument from the authority of Anastatius, a writer
of Chronology, to infringe the credit of this history, in this manner:
Anastatius (says he) lived about this time, and knew best who succeeded to
Leo the fourth and he makes no mention of Ioane the eight, but of Benedictus
the third, as successor of Leo the fourth. To this Philip Morney answers,
That an argument taken from authority, negatiuely, has no force. Anastatius
makes no mention thereof: ergo, it was not done: It follows not, for he
brings in the testimony of Ranulphus, Ranulp. lib. 5. cap. 32.
declaring the cause wherefore Anastatius omitted the name of the foeminine
Pope: to wit, Propter deformitatem facti: that is, For the deformity of the
fact. The nature of a short Compend permits me not to insist: but let them,
who are desirous accurately to try out the verity of this matter, read that
worthy Book of Philip Morney, called Misterium iniquitatis.

Benedictus the third.
Then followed Benedictus the third, and ruled two years, six months, and nine
days. A man in honoring the Funeralles of the Clergy, with his presence,
ready at all times: and desirous likewise, that the Funeral of the Bishop
should be honored with the presence of the whole Clergy.

Nicolaus the first.
To Benedict the third, succeeded Nicolas the first, and governed seven years,
nine months, and thirteen days. He subdued the Bishop of Rauenna to his
obedience. He suffered the Emperor, Ludouicke the second, to light from his
horse, and to lead his bridle, until he came to the Campo, which was the space
of a mile. He permitted diuorcement betwixt married persons, Hist. Magd. Cent.
9. cap. 10.
for Religions cause, without consent of parties. And that persons in
spiritual offices, should not be subject to the justice seats of civil
Magistrates. He ordained also, that no man should receive the holy Sacrament
from a married Priest. And that the Emperor should not be present at
Ecclesiastical Conuentions: except when questions concerning Faith should be
entreated. Likewise, he ordained, Func. comment. lib. 9.
That the service of God in all countries, should be celebrated in Latin:
dispensing in the mean time with the Solauonians and the Polonians, to have
the service of God in their own Vulgar Language. He added unto the Liturgy of
the Mass, Gloria in Excelsis.

Hadrianus the second, succeeded to Nicolas the first, and ruled 5. years,
Hadrianus the second.
nine months, and twelve days. He used Antichristian authority, not only
against Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, but also against Carolus Caluus, king of
France, whom he commanded imperiously to present one Hincmarus, Bishop of
Laudunum, and nephewe to Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, to the end that his
cause might be judged by the Apostolic seat. The King took these letters in
a very evil part, and writ unto the Pope. That the Kings of France had ever
been Sovereign Lords, in their own country, and not vice-gerentes and
vassales to Bishops: and, That he would not permit any man, who had been
damned in a lawful Council, in his own country, to wit, in the Council of
Acciniacum, to make appellation to Rome. In this Popes time the eight general
council was assembled, whereof I shall speak in its own time, God willing.

Ioannes the ninth, Ioannes the ninth.
succeeded to Adrianus the second, and governed ten years, and two days. This
is he who for rewards crowned Carolus Caluus to be Emperor: and was cast into
prison, because he was more affectionated to Ludouicus Balbus, son to
Carolus Caluus, and king of France, than to Carolus Crassus, king of Germany.
Nevertheless, he escaped out of prison, and fled to Ludouicke, king of
France: whom also he crowned to be Emperor. But Balbus, after his coronation,
incontinent died: and Pope John the ninth must seek new acquaintance, because
his old friends were gone: Note.
therefore, he crowned Carolus Crassus to be Emperor. This was the first Pope
who in time of his Popedom crowned three Emperors.

Martinus the second.
Martinus the second, ruled one year, and five months.

Hadrianus the third.
Hadrianus the third succeeded to Martinus: the time of his government was also
short: for he continued not above one year, and two months: yet nevertheless,
men who are busy, may make much stir in short time. He perfected that work
which his predecessors had been busied in bringing to pass many years
preceding: namely, That the Clergy and people of Rome should not attend upon
the allowance of the Emperor, but they should freely choose whom they thought
meetest to be Pope. He took the greater boldness to do this, because the
Emperor Carolus was occupied in warre-fare. The Nation of the Normandes were
now so sauadge and mighty, and molested France with an huge Army, that the
Emperor was compelled to transact with them in manner as is above rehearsed in
the History of the life of Carolus Crassus.

Another constitution was made by Pope Hadrian: to wit, That after the death of
Carolus Crassus, who died without succession, the Imperial Title, together
whth the government of Italy, should belong to one of the Princes of Italy.
This was the ground of unsupportable debate, and of factions, in Italy, every
man according to the greatness of his power, contending to be King and
Emperor: But chiefly Albertus, Marquis of Tuscia, Berengarius, Duke of
Forouilium, and Guido, Duke of Spoleto.

This seditious plotte also perturbed the Ecclesiastical estate: For, after
this, every one of the Princes of Italy strove with all their might, to have
such a man seated in the Popedom, as could best advance his faction, as will
clearelie appear in the election of Pope Formosus.

Stephanus the fifth.
To Hadrian the third, succeeded Stephanus the fifth, and ruled six years,
and eleven days. The less Holiness, Learning, and Virtue that he had, the
greater audacitie and boldness was found in him: for he made a constitution,
whereof Gratian records ( Distinct. 19. Cap. Enim vero Quicquid Ecclesia
Romana statuit, Note.
quicquid ordinat, perpetuo quidem, and irre-fragibiliter obseruandum est: that
is, Whatsoever the Roman Church does statute and ordain, it is perpetually,
and without all contradiction, to be observed.

After Stephanus the fifth (whom others do call the sixth) succeeded Formosus,
Formosus.
and continued five years, and six months. He obtained the Popedom, not
without strife: For one Sergius, a Deacon, was his competitor, supported with
the Tusculan faction. Always, Formosus prevailed. It was supposed, that he
was one of them who conspired against Pope John the ninth, and cast him into
bonds. After this he feared the authority of Pope John, and fled into
France: but Pope John denuded him of all Ecclesiastical office, and put upon
him the habit of a Laicke person: which indignity done unto him, he took it
so grievously, that he bound himself by an oath, Platima, in vita Forma.
That he should never see the Town of Rome, nor return again to his
Bishopric: for he was Episcopus Portuensis. But Pope Martinus absolved him
from his oath, and repossessed him into his Bishopric again, and in the end
he was made Pope, as is said.

Nevertheless, the faction of his competitor, Sergius, ceased not to vex and
molest Formosus: so that he sent secret aduertiseme^t unto Arnulphus, the
Nephew of Carolus Crassus to come to Rome: who came with an Army, and was
crowned Emperor by Formosus, as has been already declared.

To Formosus succeeded Bonifacius the sixth, Bonifacius the sixth.
who concluded his course, after he had continued twenty and six days.

After Bonifacius the sixth succeeded Stephanus the sixth, Stephanus the sixth.
and ruled one year, and three months: He not only annulled all the Decrees
of his Predecessor Formosus: but also caused his dead body to be taken out of
his grave, and cut off his three fingers, wherewith he was wont to consecrate
persons admitted to spiritual offices, and threw them into Tyber: and caused
all them, Note.
who had received ordination by Formosus, to receive new ordination.

This fact of Stephanus the sixth, is so full of uncouth and unnatural
inhumanitie, that Onuphrius denies that any such thing was done: whose
impudency Morneus discovers by the testimony of Luitprandus, who lived at
that same time and was a Deacon of the Church of Ticinum, and makes mention of
this vile fact, not without horror and detestation thereof. Baronius is not so
impudent as Onuphrius, and will not deny the fact, but extenuateth the
atrocitie and vileness thereof: for he says, Non fuit error in fide, sed
violenta tyrannis in facto: that is to say. It was no error in the faith, but
a violent tyranny in the fact.

And likewise, he annulled the inauguration of the Emperor Arnulphus, and
anointed Albert, or Lambert, Marquis of Tuscia, who followed the Popes course
to be Emperor. Now is the Popedom increased to the measure of a full
strength, when they dare authorize and disauthorise, place and displace,
Emperors at their own pleasure. So that there remains nothing, but to enter
into gripes with the Emperor, throw him down to the ground, and to tread
upon the excellent honor of his Sovereignty, which in the next Centurie will
follow.

(...) Note.
To Stephanus, succeeded Romanus, and continued only three months. He abrogated
the Decrees of Stephanus, his predecessor.

Theodorus the second.
Theodorus, the successor of Romanus, continued in his Popedom twenty days
only. In this short time he allowed the Decrees of Formosus.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
Patriarchs of Costantinople, in this Centurie, were changed according to the
disposition of the Emperors, favoring or disliking the worshipping of Images.
Nicephorus was a defender of adoration of Images, and was banished by the
Emperor Leo. Theodotus again, Antonius, and Syngelus, who had bin
Schoole-maisters to the Emperor Theophilus, were haters of Images. But after
the death of Theophilus, Theodora, his wife, advanced Methodius, a
superstitious man, and an obstinate defender of adoration of Images, and
intercession of Saints. Concerning Ignatius and Photius, and the great troubles
that arose about placing and displacing of them, occasion will be offered to
speak of these things in the head of Councels.

Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
IN this corrupt and backsliding age, wherein the Roman Antichrist had so
great an vpper-hand, the head of Councels will compel me to make mention of
the names of a number of learned men. At this time, the name of Claudius
Taurinensis, puts a great number of the refront of my remembrance, because
he was a faithful witness unto the truth of God, in a troublesometime. He
was a man borne in Spain, under the reign of Ludovicus Pius, he was made
Bishop of Thurin, in Pi^mont. As his first entry to his Bishopric, he threw
the Images out of his Church, affirming, that the Saints, who in their
lifetime were not content to be worshipped, much less could they be content
to have their pictures worshipped after their death. In special, he condemned
the worshipping of the cross: affirming, that if it should be worshipped,
because Jesus died upon it: then the Ship, in the which Christ sailed, the
Ass, whereupon Christ did ride into Jerusalem, and infinite things, which
Christ touched, by the like reason, ought also to be worshipped. Concerning
the Bishop of Rome, he said, that he was not to be counted an Apostolic
Bishop, who sat in the Apostolic chair: Note.
but he who fulfilled an Apostolic office.

Hinemarius, Bishop of Rhemes, lived under Carolus Magnus, and continued in
office almost until the reign of the Emperor Arnulph. He had great strife
with his nephew Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum, who refused to be under his
Diosis: and appealed from him unto the Bishop of Rome. Likewise, in the cause
of Rhotardus Bishop of Soission, whom Hincmarus deposed, and removed from his
office. Nicolaus the first Bishop of Rome, absolved him. Hadrian 2. gave him
commandment to excommunicate C. Calvus King of France, his sovereign Lord:
but he refused to perform such an unlawful commandment: and writ unto the
Pope, to be circumspect, and not precipitate rashly his sentences of
excommunication.

The question whereunto Hadrian 2. was so serious, was about division of lands,
betwixt C. Calvus, and his brother Lotharius. C. Calvus denied, that he did
unjustly invade any of his brothers lands, but lands duly belonging to
himself by paction and covenant. And the Nobles of the country said, that it
was a strange and an unaccustomed thing, that the Pope would take, upon him to
be judge in a controversy, concerning the Titles and Rights of kingdoms:
because he could not be both a Bishop and a King.

CENTVRIE X.
Popes of Rome.
TO Thedoricus succeeded Pope John the tenth, Johannes 20.
he abrogated all the decrees of Pope Stephanus the sixth, and allowed the
decrees of Formosus: whereupon great tumult and uproar arose in Rome. For this
cause, the Pope fled to Ravenna, and gathered a Council of 74. Bishops, also
Carolus Simplex King of France, was present at this council. There he
ratified the decrees of Formosus, and damned the decrees of Stephanus. Here let
us mark that the Bishops of Rome do both mock God and the world, Note.
in saying, that their Councels are guided by the holy Spirit, and cannot err;
in the mean time one of their Councels damning another, and being altogether
opposite one to another. After he had come back to Rome, he concluded his
life, having ruled two years, and fifteen days. To him succeeded Benedictus
the fourth, and continued three years, and four months. Benedictus 4.


After Benedictus ruled Leo the fifth, Leo 5.
and continued not in his Popedom above forty days: for he was cast into
prison and bonds, by Christophorus his own domestique servant. Christophorus
by unlawful means attained to the Popedom, Christophorus.
and lost it again unworthily, in the seventh month of his government, for
he was thrust into a Monastery, as the only refuge of all disasterd people.
Those monsters says Platina, God permitted them not long to live.

After Christophorus, Sergius 3.
Sergius the third, ruled seven years, four months, and fifteen days. He
raised again the body of Formosus out of the grave, wherein he had lien
buried eight years, and beheaded it, as if it had been alive, and cast it
into the river Tyber, accounting it unworthy of a burial place. Note.
Platina does mark, that Formosus had been his competitor, and hindered
Sergius from attaining to the Popedom, they who are so overtaken with ambition
and hateful malice, that they cannot moderate their own affections, how shall
they govern and rule, the universal Church of God. Beside this barbarous
cruelty, he was a vile whoremonger, and begat John the twelfth (who afterward
was made Pope) with Marozia the wife of Guido, a famous harlot.

Anastatius 3.
After him Anastatius the third, ruled two years, of whom nothing worthy of
memory is written, except this, that he was not so malicious in damning the
memorials of other men, as his predecessors had been.

Landus.
Landus succeeded to Anastatius, and ruled six months, and 21. days.

^ohannes. 11.
To Landus succeeded John the eleventh, and ruled thirteen years, two months,
and three days. He was more martial in exployts of warfare, then religious
and expert in knowledge of heavenly things. For he fought against the
Saracens, who had been brought into Italy by the Grecians, and discomfited
them. But when he returned again to Rome, he incurred the hatred of
Albericus, Marquis of Hetruria, who had fought with him against the Saracens,
and could not abide the pride of a presumptuous Bishop, who in his triumph
ascribed the whole praise of the victory to himself only. This variance was
the occasion of great trouble in Italy, for Albericus allured the Hungarians to
enter into Italy, who did greater damage to the Country, then the Saracens had
done before. On the other part, the Italians, who could not avenge themselves
by rendering like evil to the Hungarians, they poured out their wrath upon
Albericus, and killed him. The Pope also by the soldiers of Guido was cast in
prison, and strangled, by stopping a pillow in his throat. The villainy between
him and Theodora a notable harlot: I have overpassed with silence, fearing to
be prolixe.

Leo the sixth followed, and continued seven months and fifteen days. Leo 6.


After Leo, followed Stephanus the seventh, and ruled two years, Stephanus 7.
one month, and twelve days.

The two preceding Popes, are supposed by Italian heights to be made out of the
way, by Marozia, a notable harlot, to the end that her son John the twelfth,
Johannes 12.
whom she had borne to Pope Sergius the third, might be promoted to the
Popedom; who ruled four years, ten months, and fifteen days. Marozia was
an incestuous harlot, who like unto Herodias, was not ashamed to marry two
brethren, namely, Guido and Hugo: according as the verse made thereof
witnesses.

Nubere Germanis satagens Herodia binis.
Herein appears the terror of the wrath of God, punishing the ungodliness
of the Roman people: they were guided by the Popedom, Note.
and the Popedom was guided by notable harlots.

After him succeeded Leo the seventh, Leo 7.
and ruled three years, six months, and ten days.

Stephanus the eight, Stephanus 8.
was a Germane, and ruled three years, four months, and ten days. He was
mightily troubled with the seditions of the people of Rome, and was so
miserably wounded, that he was ashamed to come forth unto public places to
be seen.

Martinus the third, Martinus 3.
succeeded to Stephanus the eight, and governed three years, six months, and
ten days. Platina calls him a devout man, and altogether bent to religion,
because he repaired old Churches, that were tending to ruin and decay, Note.
the substance of religion being lost, the care of the fabric of the Church,
and such other external things, was counted the only devotion.

Agapetus the second, Agapetus 2.
successor to Martinus, continued in his Popedom nine years, seven months,
and ten days. In his time Berengarius King of Italy, and his son Albertus,
tyrrannously abused the country, not sparing those of the Clergy. So that
Agapetus was compelled to send messengers to Otto the first, whose fame was
spread abroad in all Nations: and Otto without delay, addressed himself to
Italy, and suppressed the insolency of Berengarius, and his son Albertus, as
has been already declared, in the history of the life of Otto the first.

Johannes 13.
To Agapetus succeeded John the thirteenth, and governed nine years, three
months, and five days. A man from his very youth replenished with all kind
of abominable vices, a libidinous beast, a monstrous varlet, of whom I have
made so frequent mention already, and the head of Councels will cast up the
filthiness of his infamous name of new again: so that for the present I write
the less. He was deposed in a Council gathered by Otto the first, and Leo the
eight was placed in his room. Pope John had such an end as his most wretched
life deserved, for he was deprehended in adultery, Note.
and the husband of the woman whom he defiled, wounded him to the death, so
he concluded his unhappy life.

Leo 8.
Leo the eight was chosen Pope, with advice of the Emperor Otto the first, and
he ruled one year, and 4. months: albeit the seditious people of Rome
rejected him, and accepted again John the thirteenth; and after his death they
chose another, called Benedictus the fifth: notwithstanding the Emperor Otto
subdued those insolent and seditious people, and took Benedictus 5. prisoner,
and banished him to Hamburg, where for very heart-griefe he ended his life. Leo
loathing the manifold seditions of the Roman people, conferred again the
choosing of Popes to the Emperor.

Johannes 34.
Pope John the fourteenth, ruled six years, eleven months, and five days.
Against whom conspired Godfredus, Count of Campania, and Petrus the chief
Captain of the city, with two Consuls, and twelve Aldermen of the town. They
laid hands upon the Pope, in the Church of Laterane, and detayned him prisoner
eleven months. The Emperor Otto and his son, made haste to come to Rome,
and after due examination of this seditious attempt, he banished the two
Consuls to Germany, he commanded the twelve Aldermen to be hanged, and Peter
the chief Captain to be bound upon the back of an Ass, his face turned
toward the Asses tail, and his hands bound under the same; thus he was
carried through the whole city, and scourged with rods, and banished.

Godfredus and his son, before this time, were dead and buried, but the
Emperor caused their bodies to be raised out of their graves, and to be cast
into unhallowed places. The abusing of Pope John was punished with the greater
severity, because he was hated by the Romans, for the love he carried to the
Emperor. The beginning of the abuse of baptizing of Bells.
In this Popes time began the vile superstition of baptizing of Bells, and
giving unto them peculiar names; and the Pope called the great Bell of the
Church of Laterane, John, according to his own name.

Benedictus the sixth, was successor both to the place, and calamities of Pope
John. Benedictus 6.
Cynthius a man of noble birth in Rome, imprisoned the Pope in the Castle of
Saint Angeli, where he was strangled, after he had continued one year and
six months, in his Popedom. Platina writes, that of all things there is a
vicissitude, even so the Popes now do include the noble citizens of Rome, into
that same Castle called Saint Angeli, whereinto of old, they were incloased
themselves.

Donus the second of that name, Donus 2.
dyed in the first year of his government: nothing worthy of memory is written
of him.

Bonifacius the seventh, Bonifacius. 7.
continued not above seven months and five days in his Popedom: a man famous
for sacrilegious theft. For when he perceived that the Roman citizens
conspired against him, he took with him all the jewels of the Church of Saint
Peter, and fled to Constantinople, where he sold the Jewels, and acquired to
himself a great sum of money, wherewith he intended to corrupt the minds of
the people of Rome, but incontinent he was cut off by death.

While Pope Bonifacius the seventh was in Constantinople, John the fifteenth
was chosen Pope, Johannes. 15.
and in the eight month of his Popedom, he was enclosed in the Castle of
Saint Angeli, called of old Moles Adriani, where he miserably ended his life.

Benedictus 7.
Benedict the seventh ruled eight years. He was Pope at that time when Otto
the second dyed at Rome, and great deliberation was had about the successor of
the Empire. The Pope consented to the Germans, whose opinion was this, that
the son of Otto the second, albeit young in years, should be declared
Emperor. Other things (and namely, the process of the deposition and
restitution of Arnulphus Bishop of Rhemes) I refer to the head of Councels.

Johannes 16.
After Benedict the seventh, succeeded Pope John the sixteenth, who hated the
Clergy, and dilapidated all the Churchrents upon his friends and kinsmen, he
dyed in the eight month of his Popedom.

Johannes 17.
To him succeeded, John the seventeene, and continued ten years, six months,
and ten days. He was not free of popular seditions but fearing the cruelty of
Crescentius, whom the Romans wished that he should reign, as Emperor and
King of Italy: the Pope fled to Hetruria, from thence giving advertisement to
the Emperor Otto the third, to support the distressed estate of the chair of
Rome. Crescentius fearing the power of the Emperor Otto, allured Pope John to
return back again to Rome, which done, Crescentius with the chief authors
of the foresaid sedition, kissed his feet, and craved him pardon.
Notwithstanding of this, the Emperor Otto set forward with his army toward
Rome, and when he heard that Pope John was dead, he presented to the Romans
one Bruno a Germane, and of his own consanguinitie, whom, the Romans (fearing
the Emperor) durst not refuse, and called him Gregory the fifth.

Gregorius 5.
Gregory the fifth, governed two years, and eight months. The Romans more
seditious then wise, incited Crescentius again, to take upon him authority,
and to eiect Gregory the fifth, and to choose another whom they called John the
eighteenth, Gregory fled to Germany and complained to Otto the third of the
injuries done to him.

The Emperor led an army to Rome of intention once to be avenged of the
continual sedition of the Roman people.

Crescentius fortified the Town of Rome and the castle of S. Angeli, which
after that time received the third name, not only to be called Moles Adriani,
and the Castle of Saint Angeli, but also the Castle of Crescentius: but all
this preparation was made in vain. Otto circumvened Crescentius and the new
made Pope, putting them in hope of Pardon, but when they came forth, the new
made Pope had his eyes thrust out, and was spoiled of his life, and Crescentius
was hanged before the walls of the City. Gregorius was restored again and
made that constitution, about the choosing of the Emperor in time to come by
the seven Electors of Germany, whereof I have spoken in the life of the
Emperor Otto the third.

After Gregory the fifth, Sylvester. 2.
Sylvester ruled four years, one month, eight days. He was first a Monk of
Floriake: when he left the Cloister he went to Spain, and learned Sciences,
in the Town of Sivill. Of a Disciple he became in short time a Master, and had
the honor to be an instructor of Otto the third, who was made Emperor, and
Robert King of France, and Lotharie a noble man who afterward was Bishop of
Senon. It was an easy thing for his Disciples being so potent and noble to
advance him to all the honors he obtained: first to be Bishop of Rhemes,
secondly to be Bishop of Ravenna, and last of all to be Bishop of Rome. But his
name is filthily spotted with Magical arts, and he was so familiar with the
Devil, that he enquired of him (as Platina writes) how long he should
continue in his Popedom, and the Devil answered, even, until the time he
should say Mass at Jerusalem.

Now there was in Rome a Chapel, called, S. Crucis, and vulgarly it was
called Jerusalem. In this Chapel in time of Lent the Bishop of Rome was
accustomed to say Mass, and when Sylvester the second, Note.
(who before was called Gilbertus) was saying Mass in that place, he found
himself attainted with a vehement fever, and remembering that the place was
called Jerusalem, he knew that he was deceived, and put in vain hope of long
living by the devil. He called for the Cardinals and confessed his fault, and
desired them to cut his body in pieces (as it justly deserved) and to lay it
open upon a Coach to be buried in that place wherein the horses of their own
accord should draw the Coach. So the horses carried the Coach to the Church of
Lateran, where he was buried.

Onuphrius is weak in this, that neither can he be silent, neither can he
defend the name of Pope Sylvester, with reason, but says he was a learned man
well acquainted with mathematical sciences, and therefore unlearned people
counted him a Sorcerer. By such frivolous excuses all the Necromancers and
Sorcerers in Europe might be excused, against the testimony of wise and
learned Historiographers, who give to cuerie man such praise as their doings
deserve.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
AFter Nicholaus and Euthymius, succeeded Stephanus Amasenus who continued
above three years. Stephanus. Amasenus. Tryphon.
To whom succeeded Tryphon, admitted upon this condition, that when
Theophilactus the youngest son of the Emperor Romanus should come to perfect
age, he should give place to him. But when the Emperors son was 16. years
old, Tryphon would not give place unto him, until he was circomuened by the
craft of the Bishop of Cesarea, who pretending to be his friend said to him in
this manner.

Seeing that the Courteours are in hope to have you displaced in respect of
your want of learning. I will give you, faith he, my counsel, to write your
own name, together with all the titles and dignities of your calling in
presence of many witnesses, and send this letter aforesaid to the Emperor, to
let him understand that ye are not so void of learning as they talk of. To
this Counsel Tryphon agreed, not foresmelling the subtilitie of the Bishop who
gave unto him this Counsel: Note
But the Courteours so soon as the letter came in their hands subioyned to the
words; Tryphon Archbishop of new Rome, and Universal Patriarch, the words
following, that he voluntarily ouergaue his Patriarchship in favor of
Theophilactus the Emperors youngest son. So was Tryphon by his own
handwritting displaced, Theophilactus.
and Theophilactus seated in his room. He was a young man of 16. years old
when he was made Patriarch, and ruled 23. years. He was riotous, Note.
and full of youthly conceits, and in hunting his horse so bruised his body,
that he vomited blood and ended his life.

To Theophilactus succeeded Polyenctus in the days of Nicephorus and Zimisces,
Polyenctus.
of whom God willing more shall be spoken in the head of Councels, and to him a
Monk Basilius, Antonius Siudites.
who ruled 4 years, and after him Antonius Studites.

Of other Pastors and Doctors.
LVitprandus a famous Historiographer lived in the days of Hugo and
Berengarius kings of Italy, Luitprandus.
and in the days of Otto the first Emperor of the west, and Constantine
Emperor of the East. His learning and skill in Music brought him in credit
with Hugo King of Italy. Also Berengarius king of Italy found no man so meet
to be employed Ambassador to Constantine Emperor of Constantinople as
Luitprandus, who did his message faithfully upon the charges of his own father
in law. But Berengarius rendered unto him evil for good, for he banished him.
In time of his banishment he writ his history of things done in Europe from
the year of our Lord 858. until the 30. year of Otto Magnus, and dedicated
it to Reginomundus a Bishop of Spain.

It is not certain in what age Theophilactus lived: always his name is
enrolled in this Centurie. He was Bishop of Bulgaria, and writ in the Greek
Language fruitful Commentaries upon the four Evangelists, and upon all the
Epistles of Paul, and upon some of the small Prophets, such as Habacuk, Jonas
and Nahum. He followed Chrysostom in his writings, so that his books are
thought to be a short abridgement of the writings of Chrysostom. He sharply
refuteth old Heretics, but the defection of his own time he does not so
nearly touch. Of the Antichrist, 2 These. 2.
he thinks that he should spring up in the decay of the Roman Empire; and
of marriage that it was honorable, and a step to the chair of a Bishop. Tit. 1.
The names of other men who were more famous then others, either for good or
evil, will be found in the head of Councels.

CENTVRIE XI.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Silvester ruled Pope John nineteen years, John. 19.
four months, and twenty days: of whom no memorable thing is written.

To him succeeded Pope John 20. John 20.
and continued four years, four months. Platina for lack of some remarkable
thing in the history of his life is compelled to remarke, the wisdom,
magnamitie, learning, and devotion of Robert King of France who was worthy to
govern others, because his own heart was governed and ruled with reason, Note.
but of Pope John he read nothing worthy of commendation.

To him succeeded Sergius the fourth who governed 2. Sergius 4.
years and 15. days.

To Sergius succeeded Benedict the eight and continued a eleven years,
Benedictus 8.
one month and thirteen days: in his days the pestilence so mightily
abounded that the number of them who died in. Note.
the plague surpassed the number of them who were alive. Which calamity was
signified by a fountain of wholesome water in Loraine converted into blood.

The factious Romans removed him from his Popedom and seated another in his
place: but afterward they were reconciled to him, and received him with great
Pomp and honor, to his Popedom again. Note.
These are the people who call the B. of Rome the vicar of Christ, the
successor of Peter, the universal Bishop, the ministericall head of the
Church, yet will they make insurrection against him when they please, and they
call others schismatics, when they fall from the obedience of the Bishop of
Rome. But the Town of Rome is the mother of scismes, no less is she the
mother of all spiritual whoredoms.

John. 21.
John 21. succeeded to Benedict the 8. in the days of the Emperor Conrad the
second and ruled eleven years, nine days. Platina commends his life, but
without any particular commendation of his commendable virtues.

Benedictus 9.
Benedict the ninth succeeded to Pope John and governed ten years, and four
months, and nine days: a man unlearned and vicious in his conversation, who
allured women to his lust by Magical arts, therefore he was thrust out of his
Popedom: Silvester. 3.
and Silvester the third was placed in his room, who continued not above
forty days in his Popedom; for Benedict by force intruded himself again
into the Popedom, and fearing, to be expelled of new again from his Papal
dignity, he made merchandise of it and sold it to Gregory the sixth,
Gregory 6.
for a thousand, and five hundredth pounds weight of Gold. Many Historians, such
as Martianus Polemus, Damianus and Platima, do report, that after his death
he appeared in a monstrous similitude, more like unto a beast, then a man, to
represent the effigy of his beastly conversation. The Emperor Henry the
third entered into Italy, gathered a Council at Sutrium, wherein all these
three monsters were deposed and Suidigerius Bishop of Bamberg was made Pope
whom they called, Clemens the second.

Clemens 2.
After the Emperor Henry the third had placed Clemens the second in the
Popedom, he returned to Germany. The seditious Romans returning to their
wonted vomit poisoned him when he had continued only nine months in his
Popedom, because he was not elected by themselves, but by the Emperor with
advise of the council of Sutrium.

Damasus 2.
After Clemens the second, succeeded Damasus the second, and continued not in
the Popedom above 23. days.

Leo. 9.
After the death of Damasus the second the Romans sent Ambassadors to the
Emperor Henry the third to send unto them a worthy Pope. The Emperor made
choice of Brun^ Bishop of Tullus, who being on his journey toward Rome in his
Pontifical garments, the Abbot of Cluniake and Hildebrand a seditious Monk
met him by the way, and persuaded him to lay aside his Pontifical garments,
and to enter into Rome with the habit of a private man, lest he should seem
to have received the Popedom from the Emperor, and not by the election of the
people, and Clergy, to whom rightly appertained the election of the Roman
Bishop. Bruno obeyed their council, and was the more gladly accepted of the
Romans, who called him Leo the ninth: he ruled five years, and assembled
councels both in Rome and Vercellis against Borengarius, as shall be declared
(God willing) in the head of Councels.

Victor the second succeeded to Pope Leo, Victor 2.
and governed two years, three months, and fourteen days. He was chosen
Pope with the advice of the Emperor Henry, whom they feared to irritate by
presenting unto him new occasions of wrath and anger.

After Victor succeeded Stephanus the ninth, Stephanus 9.
who died in the seventh month of his Popedom.

To him succeeded Benedict the tenth, Benedictus 10.
who continued not above nine months in his Popedom. He was compelled to
denude himself of his Papaldignitie, because he was elected without the
consent of Hildebrand: to whom the whole number of Cardinals and Clergy had
promised, that no new Pope should be elected before he had returned to Rome,
for he had taken a journey to Florence.

Nicolaus the second followed and ruled three years, Nicholaus 2
six months, and twenty six days. This is the Pope who gathered a council
at Rome against Berengarius, and forced him to make recantation of his opinion
of the Sacrament of the supper of the Lord as shall be declared God willing in
its own place, To this Pope, Godfrid D. of Apulia, and Calabria, reco^mended
Bagallardus his son. But the Pope favored Robert Bagallardus his uncle, the
just heir of the Dukedom; and couenanted with Robert, surnamed Guiscard, that
he should be authorized to be Duke of Apulia and Calabria, providing he would
bend up al his forces to subdue the rebels of the Roman church which thing also
Duke Robert seriously performed: and rendered to the chair of Rome the towns
of Beneventum, and Troia, which he had added to his dominions, when he first
eiected his brothers son from his inheritance. Also the Pope honored Robert,
by giving unto him a baner and standard, in token of confirmation of his
Dukedom, which authority belonged to the Emp. and not unto the Pope. But now
as Funchus writes, Note.
Fur furem, Latro latronem iuvat, that is one thief helps another, Hist.
Magd. Cent. 9. cap. 10.
and one brigand supporteth another. In the end Pope Nicholaus the second
tasted of Brazates cup, this Brazutus was the familiar friend of Hildebrand,
who within the space of 13. years empoysoned 6. Note.
Popes, to wit Clemens 2. Da^asus 2. Leo 9. Victor 2. Stepha^us 9. and
Nicholaus 2.

Alexander 2.
After Nicholaus succeeded Alexander the 2. whose name before his election to
the Popedom had bin Anselmus B. of Luca, and he ruled 11. years, 6. months.
His competitor was Candalus B. of Parma, whom the Lumbards assisted with all
their might and procured to him the allowance of the Emp. This was the ground
of cruel wars between Alexander the 2. and Candalus, but the faction of
Alexander prevailed. The Emp. sent Otto Archbishop of Colen to pacify th
vprors and tumults of Italy. At his first coming he sharply rebuked Pope
Alexander because he had entered in the Popedom without the emperors consent.
But Hildebrand according to his form inclinable to fury and madness, could
not abide until Otto had made an end of speaking, but he interupted him, and
answered, that the election of the Bishop of Rome belonged not to the Emperor,
but to the clergy and people of Rome. Otto on the other part (bearing as it
appears more with the Clergy of Rome, then favoring the Emperors cause)
condisoended that this question should be entreated in a lawful assembly at
Mantua.

In that council Alexander was declared to be Pope, and Candalus had pardon
granted to him. In the end Pope Alexander finding that he was set up in the
Papal dignity to prepare a way to Hildebrands Popedom, he said unto the
people in the time of the solemnity of the mass, that he would not sit in the
chair of Rome, except he had license of the Emperor. Note.
The angry humor of Hildebrand, a man borne for sedition, was so overcast with
fury, that scarcely he could abstain from outrage, and putting hands unto
Pope Alexander, until the mass were ended. The mass being finished, he drew
him by force into a chamber, where he bussed him, before he was divested of
his pontifical garments, because he said, he would seek the Emperors
favor. Finally, he was cast into prison and bonds, and under the miserable
indurance of Hildebrands wrath, he finished his life.

To Pope Alexander the second, Gregorius 7.
succeeded Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand before his Popedom, who
continued twelve years, and one month. He was crafty and subtle in bringing
to pass, that thing which he had imagined a long time before, to wit, in
treading down under the fe^t of the Roman Bishop, all civil authority. In
the Council of Mantua, by Hildebrands special advice, it was decreed, that no
man should be admitted to a Prelacie, Benefice, or Eclesiasticall office, Note.
by a secular person: and that it should not be lawful for Priests to marry.
These grounds being laid by Hildebrands advice, before he came to the
Popedom, he labored with all his might to put them in execution, when he
was Pope. For this cause he called the marriage of the Priests; the heresy of
the Nicholaitans; and the acceptance of Prelacies from the hands of secular
Princes, Note.
Simony. And under color of extirpating two heresies, he most craftily
traveled to bring under his soveraigntie all men who were clothed with civil,
or spiritual offices.

And first, for the abolishing of the marriage of Priests, he sent strict
commandment to the Bishops of France and Germany, and other places, that they
should depose married Priests from their offices, under pain of cursing, and
that they should accept no persons in their places, but those who would bind
themselves by a solemn oath, to perpetual continency. The Priests made
greater reluctation to the Popes commandment, then the Bishops did; in so much
that in the Council of Mentz, convocated by the Archbishop for obeying of the
Popes commandment: the Archbishop accompanied with the Popes Ambassador,
could find no other means to save their lives, but only by flying from the
incensed wrath of married Priests. As concerning his other enterprise, in
extirping the heresy of Simony (as he called it) that no Prelat should
receive investment from Emperors and Princes, but only from the Bishop of
Rome. This could not be brought to pass without the thunderbolts of
excommunication, whereby he so subdued the noble Emperor, Note.
Henry the fourth, that he was compelled in sharp winter weather to journey
to Italy, and to seek absolution from the Popes cursing.

It were too long to discourse of his sorceries, lying prophecies, and
treasonable attempts against the noble Emperor. And the weak apology of
Onuphrius, will never be an vmbrage to cover the craft, malice, and divellish
pride of this seditious Pope.

Victor 3.
To Gregory the seventh, succeeded Victor the third, who only continued in his
Popedom, one year and an half.

Vibanus 1.
After Victor the third, succeeded Pope Vrbanus the second, and ruled twelve
years, four months, and eighteen days. He assembled a Council at Clermont
in France, and incited Christian Princes to undertake a dangerous warfare
against the Turks and Saracens, for recovering of the holy Land; and for
supporting of distressed Christians in those parts. A certain Monk called
Peter, who had gone on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, deplored to the Council in
most lamentable manner, the pitiful estate of Christians in Jerusalem. And
many Christian Princes were moved to undertake an hazardous war, against the
Turks and Saracens, under the conduct of Godfrey Duke of Loraine, Robert, Duke
of Normandy, Robert Count of Flanders, and diverse other noble Princes, an army
of three hundred thousand Christian people, set forward toward Jerusalem, which
they conquered out of the hands of Infidels, with great effusion of blood, and
Godfrey was crowned King of Jerusalem, with a crown of thorns, An. 1099. as
Functius records.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
BEcause I read of no memorable thing done by the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, it shall suffice shortly to point out their names only, and to
set forward. In this Centurie we find the names of these Patriarchs following,
to wit, Antonius, Nicolaus, Sisinnius, Sergius, Eustachius, Alexius, Michael,
Constantinus Lithudes, Johannes Xiphilinus, Cosmas Eustratius, and Nicolaus.

Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
PEtrus Damianus, Damianus.
was brought up in the Monastery of Cassinates, and was made a Cardinal and
Bishop of Ostia, by Pope Stephanus the ninth. He was deposed by Benedict the
tenth, and deprived of his living, because he disapproved his entry to the
Popedom. He was cast into prison and bonds, and when he was set at liberty,
he sought not restitution to his Bishopric again, but he lived an
heremiticall life. And when Pope Nicolaus the second, and Hildebrand an
Archdeacon, objected this fact against him opprobriously, he writ an apology,
and defended himself by the example of 36. Fathers, who had done the like.
Note.
He was very superstitious, and approved the custom of Monks who began to
scourge themselves, very impertinently cyting the examples of Christ, Mat.
27.26. 2 Cor. 11.24.
who was scourged by Pontius Pilat, and of the Apostle Saint Paul, who was
thrice beaten with rods, and five times received thirty nine stripes; as if
it were all one thing to scourge our selves, and to be scourged by others. He
was present at the Council of Millan, as substitute of Pope Nicholaus the
second.

Ino.
Ino Bishop of Charters in France, was counted learned in his time; nothing
is more commendable in all his life then this, when he was cast in prison for
disprooving the marriage of Philip King of France, the Noblemen dwelling about
Charters, would have by force delivered him, but he dissuaded them from any
such attempts, only willed them to pray to God for him. Note.
His books are miserably spotted with the errors of his time, such as
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Intercession and
merits of Saints in prayer, and diverse other errors.

L^^francus.
Lanfrancus was borne in Papia, a town of Italy, and became Archbishop of
Canterbury: he was much reverenced for his learning. He writ against
Berengarius, and defended the opinion of Transubstantiation. He was in great
credit with William the Conqueror, King of England, in so much that all
spiritual and civil affairs, seemed to be ordered according to his appetite
and pleasure. This great credit procured against him the hatred of many
Noblemen, notwithstanding they could not prevail against him all the days of
King William. Rufus the son of King William, was of a more stern and angry
nature, and albeit Lanfrancus had taken pains upon his education,
notwithstanding his emulous competitours alienated the Kings heart somewhat
from him, whereby he fell into a sharp fever and dyed. Ranul. in polychron.
l. 7. c. 6.
Ranulphus writes of him, that he wished to conclude his life either by fever,
or dysenterie, because in these sicknesses, Hist. Magd. cent. 11. cap. 10.
the use of a man's tongue continues oftentimes to the last breath. He
continued in his Prelacie nineteen years, and dyed in the third year of King
Rufus.

Anselmus.
Anselmus succeeded to Lanfrancus, both in place and learning; for he was
Bishop of Canterbury, and a singular learned man. He was borne in a town
called Augusta, in the confines of Burgundy. He was the disciple of
Lanfrancus: he was first a Monk, and afterward an Abbot in a Monastery of
Normandy, called Bettense; and four years after the death of Lanfrancus, the
King of England promoted him to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury. Anselmus in
his admonitions to the King (who at that time converted to his own use, the
rents of defunct Bishops and Abbots) was free and plain, and for his freedom
incurred great indignation: in so much that he compared himself unto an Owl.
Simile.
For, says he, like as she has pleasure when she remains in her own
nest, and with her own brood, but when she flies abroad she is miserably
misused and beaten, with ravens, crows, and other souls that forgather with
her. Even so, says he, when I am in company of you my familiar friends, Note.
I live in pleasure, but when I go to Court, and am conversant with secular
men, I am discontented, and as it were dilacerate with a multitude of secular
cares. He was a stout defender of the authority of the Bishop of Rome, in so
much that he was content to forgo the favor of his Prince, and to be
banished for the excessive love he carried to the privileges of the Roman
Chair.

After the death of Rufus, Anselmus was received from banishment, by King
Henry. But because he would not admit and consecrate those Bishops who had
received investment from the King, but called them bastards, and abortiue
births, whosoever received investment from secular men: Note.
great contention arose between the King and the Prelat, the issue whereof was
this; that the decision of the question was referred to the Bishop of Rome,
who gave sentence in favor of Anselmus, because Anselmus suffered trouble, for
maintaining of the Popes authority. The King was irritate and exasperate with
the Popes decree, and spoiled Anselmus of all his dignities. Who remained for
the most part in Lions, during the time of his second banishment.

But the King reduced him again from banishment, and was reconciled with him.
After his returning from his second banishment, he lived three years, and
died in the yeer^ of our Lord, 1109. having continued Bishop of Canterbury
thirteen years. Anselmus de excellen. beata Mariae.
In his books no error is more intolerable then this, that he equalleth the
Virgin Mary with Christ, attributing to her all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge, as the Apostle Paul atiributeth them to Christ our Savior. Col. 2.3.


CENTVRIE XII.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Vrbanus the second, Pascalis 2.
followed Paschalis the second, and ruled eighteen years, 6. months, and 7.
days. Called before Reginerus, a man brought up in the Monasteries of Italy:
he seemed to shun the high preheminencie of the Popedom, but the acclamations
of the people, often repeating, that Saint Peter had chosen good Reginerus to
be Pope, bowed his flexible mind, and inclined it to the Popedom: he then
putting on a purple garment, and a Diadem upon his head, was brought unto the
Church of Lateran, upon a white pamphrey, where a Scepter was put in his hand,
and a girdle tied about him, having seven Seals, and seven Keys hanging
thereupon, for a recognizance of his sevenfold power, and sevenfold grace of
God resting upon him: to wit, of binding, loosing, shutting, opening, sealing,
resigning, and judging. He excommunicated the noble Emperor Henry the fourth,
following the example of three of his predecessors; to wit, Gregory the
seventh, Victor the third, Vrbanus the second. He stirred up Henry the fifth,
against his natural father, Henry the fourth: and caused the body of the noble
Eemperour Henry the fourth (who died at Leodim) to be raised out of his
sepulcher, to be carried to the town of Spire, and to want the honor of
Christian burial five years. Note.
O Antichristian pride! O barbarous inhumanity! O cruelty and rage, ranscending
the cruelty of Pagans, who persecuted the Church of Christ for the space of
three hundred years.

In his time the Bishop of Florence taught, that Antichrist was already borne
and manifested to the world. Upon which occasion Paschalis assembled a Council
at Florence, and with terrible threatenings put him to silence, and damned his
books. Also he assembled another Council at Tretas, a famous town in
Campanie in France, where he ratified the decrees of his Predecessors, in
condemning the marriage of Priests, as the heresy of the Nicolaitans, and
receiving Ecclesiastical rents from Lay persons, as Simonie. Of his revocation
of the privilege of investment of Bishops, granted to the Emperor Henry the
fifth: I have spoken already in the history of the life of the Emperor. His
Competitors were Albertus, Theodoricus, and Maginulphus, whom he easily
subdued.

Gelasius 2.
To him succeeded Gelasius the second, and ruled one year and five days. He
was elected without consent of the Emp. Henry 5. which procured unto him great
grief. For Cincius a noble man of Rome, of the family of Frangepanis, invaded
the Pope and Cardinals, and trod the Pope under foot, and cast him in prison
and bonds, but the citizens of Rome relieved him, and threatened to destroy the
family of Frangepanis, if they set not the Pope at liberty. After this
trouble, another followed; the Emperor sent an army to Rome, and authorized
another to be pope: whom they called Gregorius the eight. The Pope fled to
Caieta, the place of his nativity: but when the army returned to Germany, he
came to Rome, where he found his estate to be ieoperdous. Therefore he fled
to France, and dyed of a plurisie, in the Abbey of Clumack.

Calixtus 2.
After Gelasius succeeded Calixtus the second, sometime Bishop of Vier, and
kinsman to the King of France, he governed five years, ten months, and
thirteen days. He compelled the Emperor Henry the fifth, to agree to his
election: albeit Mauritius Burdinus, otherwise called Gregory the eight (whom
the Emperor himself had authorized) was yet alive. Also he compelled the
foresaid Emperor to ouergiue all right, which he claimed to investment of
Bishops, and election of Popes: so much did the Roman Antichrist prevail by
the thunder bolts of his curses, that he compelled the Emperor by these means
to stoop under his feet. Also he besiedged Sutrium a Town of the Romans,
wherein Mauritius Burdinus his Competitor had his remaining. He took the
Town, and his Competitor he carried Captive to Rome: setting him upon a
Camel, with his face toward the hinder-parts thereof, and in the end thrust him
into a Monastery. He assembled a Council at Rhemes, wherein he renewed the
ordinance against married Priests, ordaining that not only they should be
spoiled of their livings and offices, but also that they should be debarred
from the communion of Christian people. Like as these verses do testify.

O bone Calixte, nunc omnis clerus odit te.
Quondam presbyteri, poterant vxoribus vti.
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti.
Also he held another Council at Rome, where it was statute and ordained that
it should not be lawful to the people to repudiat their Bishop, or to choose
another during his lifetime: Romans 7.
grounding their ordinance upon a place of Scripture, a wife is bound to the
law of her husband, so long as her husband is alive. After he is dead she is
loosed from the Law of her husband. Note.
So learnedly did these Aecumenique Asses expound places of holy scripture.

After Calixtus succeeded Pope Honorius the second, Honorius 2*
and ruled five years, and two months. In his time Arnulphus, an eloquent man,
and a famous Preacher came to Rome: whether out of the wilderness, or out of
any other place wherein he had exercised a ministerial office it is
uncertain, always it is thought of all men that he was sent of God: he
sharply rebuked the dissolute Loosnesse, incontinencie, avarice, and pride of
the clergy of Rome; so that he incenced their hearts against him, specially
for this, that he said it was no wonder, Note.
that they sought his life, for if Saint Peter himself were alive and did
rebuke the lewdness of their conversation, they would not spare to take Saint
Peter's life also.

Moreover he said they were full of uncleanness, and were blind guides
leading the people headlong to Hell: but the Lord would have in remembrance
their iniquities, and call their wickedness to account. Thus the hateful
indignation of the Clergy being kindled against him for preaching the truth,
they laid wait for him secretly, and took him and drowned him.

Platina alleges that this fact displeased the Pope: always there was no
inquisition to know the authors of this fact, not punishment of malefactors
who shed innocent blood in secret, that manifested unto the world the Popes
indignation. About this time was a book written called Opus Tripartitum the
author whereof was unknown, but it is supposed to have been compiled by
Arnulphus. It contained great complaints of the manifold abuses of Churchmen.

Innocentius 2.
After Honorius succeeded Innocentius the second, and ruled fourteen years,
seven months, eight days. He was a man of a military spirit, albeit not
fortunate in warfare. For he made war against Rogerius Duke of Sicilie whom
he besieged also in a certain Castle. But William Duke of Calabria Rogerius
his son, not only relieved his father, but also laid hands on the Pope and
his Cardinals and made them Captives and prisoners. Rogerius dealt friendly with
the Pope and his Card^nals and set them at liberty, and obtained at the Popes
hand whatsoever he pleased, except the name and title of a king. At this time
when the Pope was busied in warrefare, the Romans advanced one called Peter the
son of Leo, a man of noble birth in Rome to be Pope. And when Innocentius
adressed himself to Rome, he did find the faction of his Competitor to be
strong and mighty therefore he sailed to Pisca, and from thence to Geneua, and
from thence to France, where he assembled Councels at Clermont and at Rhemes,
and delivered his Competitor to Satan. In the end he was restored to his
chair again by the Emperor Lotharius the second. In his time, the Town of
Rome being wearied with the tir^nnie of the Popes, Note
took resolution to be governed by Consuls. The Pope to obviat this conceit
of the people, made an ordinance, that whosoever did violently put hands on any
person of the Clergy, he should be excommunicate, and no man should have
power to absolve him but only the Pope.

After Innocentius, Coelestinus 2.
succeeded Coelestinus the second. He was chosen Pope without the consent of
the people, as witnesses Onuphrius, he ended his course in the fifth month of
his Popedom.

To him succeeded Lucius the second, Lucius 2.
and governed the Pestilentius chair (as the Magdeburg history records) in
a time when the Pestilence had great vpperhand in Rome. He concluded his
course in the eleventh month of his Popedom.

After Lucius succeeded Eugenius the third, Eugenius 3.
sometime disciple to Bernard, and ruled eight years, four months, and
twenty days. He so bestirred himself against the Senators of Rome, that
partly by cursings, and partly by force, he brought them in subjection and
compelled them to receive such Senators, as the Pope by his authority pleased
to assign unto them.

But it came to pass that he who was desirous to be terrible and awful to
the Romans, Note.
he feared them in like manner, that they were conspiring secretly against
his estate. Therefore he fled to Tybur, and from thence to France, to lead
an army to the East, for the support of distressed Christians.

But this voyage had no good success, notwithstanding that the Popes blessing,
and Bernards Council (who was Abbot of Clarauall, and much regarded at that
time) were both interposed to advance this often reiterated warrefare against
the Turks. When the Pope returned from France to Rome accompanied with great
forces, the people of Rome were afraid, but the Pope soon after concluded his
course at Tybur.

Anastatius 4.
Anastatius the fourth succeeded Eugenius who continued in his Popedom one
year, four months, and twenty four days.

Adrianus 4.
To Anastatius succeeded Pope Adrian the fourth, a Monk of the English nation,
employed by Pope Eugenius to go to the people of Noroway, whom he brought
under the Roman superstition, and therefore was advanced by Pope Eugenius to
the dignity of a Cardinal, and after the death of Anastatius the fourth, he
was promoted to the Popedom. He would not go to the Church of Lateran to be
consecrated, until Arnoldus Bishop of Brixia, was driven from the Town of
Rome: because he had counceled the Romans to claim to the ancient government
of their Town to be guided by consuls and Senators. But the proud Pope
insisted so seriously against Arnoldus and the Romans, that he compelled
them by the force of his multiplied curses not only to expel Arnoldus out of
the Town of Rome, Note.
but also to submit themselves absolutely to the government of the Pope. The
proud carriage of this Pope, toward the noble Emperor Frederick the first,
his bad success in warrefare against the Duke of Sicilie, and his miserable
death in the Town of Anagnia, has all been touched in the history of the
life of Frederick. He ended his course after, he had ruled four years, and
ten months.

Alexander.
After Adrian the fourth, succeeded Pope Alexander the third, who had great
debate against his competitor Victor the fourth, (called before Octavianus,) in
respect, the Emperor, and the Princes of Germany and a great number of the
Clergy of Rome, adhered to Pope Victor. And on the other part to Pope
Alexander adhered the kings of England, France, and Sicilie. And this scisme
endured a long time, for removing whereof the Emperor Frederick appointed one
council at Papia, and another at Diuion.

To the first he would not appear, because he thought the Pope should be
judged of no man.

To the Second, he should not appear, because the council of Diuion was not
assembled by his own authority, but by the commandment of the Emperor.

This Litigious decertation took this effect, that the Emperor and Bishops
conuened at the foresaid Councels: decreed Victor who appeared and was ready to
submit h^s cause to the judgment of a lawful assembly, him (I say) they
decreed to be Pope lawfully elected. Pope Alexander fled to France, and in the
council of Clermont he excomunicated both the Emperor, and his Competitor
Victor, these were the weapons of their warrefare against the Emperors and all
others, whom they supposed to be their adversaries.

After the death of his Competitor Victor, Pope Alexander being at Rome the
Emperor Frederick came with a strong army thereto and Pope Alexander fled to
the Venetians. What Tragedy fell out in Venice forcing the noble Emperor, to
stoop under the feet of the Pope for excessive love that he carried toward
his son, has been declared in the History of the Emperor Frederickes life.

In this Popes days was Thomas Becket Bishop of Canterbury slain, Note.
Henry king of England, purged himself to the Pope that he was innocent of
his slaughter. Notwithstanding seeing his indignation against the foresaid
Bishop was the occasion of his slaughter: Hist. Magd. Cent. 12. cap. 10.
It was enjoined to the king of England, that he should hinder no man in his
kingdom from appealing to the chair of Rome. And that in time to come, no man
should be declared king of England without the Popes consent. Thus are the
necks, kingdoms, honors, and lives, of the mighty Monarchs of the world
trodden under the feet of the Roman Antichrist. After this proud Prelat had
tyrannized 21. years, and 29 days he ended his course.

After Alexander the 3. Lucius 3.
succeeded Lucius the 3. and governed four years, two months, and eighteen
days. He was no less desirous to abolish the consults of Rome, then his
predecessors were; but his attempts succeeded not so well. For he was driven
out of Rome with his accomplices, and a number of his fauorits were punished, by
thrusting out their eyes. Others were carried through the streets upon Asses
having their Miters upon their heads, and their faces toward the hinder part
of the Ass. The Pope fled to Verona, where he Lurked until he died.

Vrbanus 3.
To him succeeded Vrbanus the third, and continued one year, ten months, and
twenty five days. In his days was Jerusalem recovered by Saladin a Prince of
the Turks, and commander of Egypt; which tidinges so pierced the Popes heart
with grief that he ended his life at Ferrara.

Gregorius 8.
Gregory the eight followed, who continued not in his Popedom above the space
of fifty days.

Clemens 3.
To him succeeded Clemens the third, and ruled three years, and five months. In
this time died William King of Sicilie without children, and the people of the
Isle elected Tancredus a bastard son of Rogerius to rule over them.

After Clemens, Celestinus 3.
succeeded Pope Celestinus the third, and continued six years, seven months,
and eleven days. In his time died Saladin a mighty Prince of the Turks. And
Pope Celestinus thinking it was a meet time to fight against the Turks for
the recovering of the holy Land, incited the Emperor Henry the sixth, and the
King of France to undertake the ieopardous warfare against the Turks, wherein
many had spent their blood and seldom with good success.

The Emperor Henry sent the Duke of Saxony and the Bishop of Mentz with a
well appointed army to the foresaid warrefare, but went not himself. The King
of France was willing to have undertaken a journey toward the East, but was
stayed by the irruption of the Saracens who dwelt in Mauritania.

They had passed the straites, and invaded that part of Spain, which was
called Betica, and conquered it. The king of France then fearing left the
Saracens should be puffed up in pride for their late victory, and that they
should invade his dominions, kept his army at home in France for safegarde of
his own country. The Germane army returned again within short time, as has
been declared in Henry the sixts life.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
TO Nicolaus succeeded Leo Styppiota, and Michael, and Theodosius, and
Basilius, Nicetas, and Leontius, and Dositheus: of whom I think not expedient
to write any further, except simply to insert their names.

Patriarchs of Alexandria.
IN this age the army of Christians which went to fight against the Turks,
conquered out of their hands, not only Jerusalem, but also Antiochia, and the
region round about it. Whereupon it followed that the Patriarchs were
established of new again after long intermission in Antiochia and Jerusalem.
Not such as were accustomed to be of old, having equal power with other
Patriarchs within their own bounds, but rather vassals and slaves to the
Bishops of Rome, as may appear by the Catalogue following.

The first of these Latin Patriarchs was Bernardus who ruled that church
thirty six years. Bernardus.
After him succeeded Radulphus who would not be subject to the Bishop of Rome,
Radulphus.
but affirmed that both Antiochia and Rome were the chaires of S. Peter, Note
Antiochia was before, and a more ancient chair, and therefore should have the
prerogative above Rome. Notwithstanding of all this, he was cited by his
Adversaries to appear before the Bishop of Rome: and to answer to the
faults that should be objected against him. Namely for violent usurpation of
jurisdiction over churches belonging to the Archbishop of Tyrus, as Biblus,
Tripolis, and Aradus.

This citation Raymond Prince of Antiochia compelled him to obey. He was sent
back again to Antiochia, but the people and Clergy received him not.
Therefore he lurked in Monasteries, and in the end was deposed from his
office by a council assembled in Antiochia.

Raymericus.
After him succeeded Raimericus and ruled twelve years. He was hated of
Raynoldus governor of Antiochia, because he disallowed his marriage bound up
with Constantia. Note.
Likewise he was misvsed by him, and the balde part of his head was ouerlaied
with honey, and he was compelled to sit in the time of the fervent heat of the
summer day, to be molested with the flies and waspes.

The king of Jerusalem hearing of this pitiful demeanor of the Patriarch of
Antiochia sent Ambassadors to Raynold, and so the Patriarch, was set at
liberty, who dwelt at Jerusalem, forsaking Antiochia all the rest of his
lifetime.

Sotericus.
After him Sotericus was Patriarch, who continued in office short time.

Theodorus.
To him succeeded Theodorus Balsamus, a very ambitious man, whom Isacius Angelus
Emperor of Constantinople put in hope that he would promote him to be
Patriarch of Constantinople, if the Canons of Church did not hinder. When all
was done, the ambitious Prelat stayed still at home, for the Emperor did not
solicit him seriously, but was only trying him to see if for hope of further
preheminencie he would violate the Canons of the Church. To whom succeeded
Almericus. Almericus.


Patriarchs of Jerusalem.
THe first Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, after it was conquered from the
Turks, was Dabertus, Dabertus.
sometime Bishop of Pisa. He crowned Godfrey the first King of Jerusalem, with
a crown of thorns.

To him succeeded Gibelinus, Gibelinus.
sometime Bishop of Arls. He was sent to Jerusalem to decide the question that
fell out between Dabertus and Ebremarus; but it happened that Dabertus about
the same time dyed: and Ebremarus was remooved, because he had intruded
himself in office. Therefore with uniform consent, Gibelinus was made
Patriarch of Jerusalem.

To whom succeeded Arnulphus, Arnulphus.
who for his vicious life, was called Mala corona. Pope Pascalis the second,
hearing of his bad conversation, sent to Jerusalem the Bishop of Aurange, who
deposed him from his office. Notwithstanding hereof, this vicious Prelat took
journey to Rome, and with flattering speeches, and largition of money, prevailed
so much at Rome, that he obtained his office again.

After him followed Guarimundus, Guarimundus.
a man more expert in warfare, then in his own calling. For he supplied the
place of King Baldwin, who was detained captive by the Turks. And he was a
courageous Warrior at the siege of Tyrus.

To him continued Stephanus, Stephanus.
who continued not in office above the space of two years.

And after him Gulielmus ruled fifteen years. Gulielmus.


After whom succeeded Fulcherus, Fulcherus.
and continued Patriarch twelve years. He was hated of Raymond, master of the
Templaries; who caused the bells to be rung in the time when he preached to
the people, so that the people could not profit by hearing his Sermons. For
this cause he went to Rome, to complain of the injuries done unto him, but
some of the Cardinals were corrupted with money, so that he obtained nothing
at the hands of Adrian the fourth, who was Pope at that time: and so returned
again with shame.

Amalricus.
After him followed Amalricus, and ruled two and twenty years. In whose days
Saladinus a Prince of the Turks recovered Jerusalem out tht hands of the
Christians.

Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
FRom the beginning of this Compend, I have kept this order, that I have not
overcharged a little book with mention-making of all things that are written,
neither have I pretermitted in the heads which I entreat, matters of greatest
importance, so far as my memory and understanding could comprehend.

In this age the Scholastique Doctors began to arise, of whom Petrus Lombardus
was the first, Lombardus.
who afterward was made Bishop of Paris: but I supersede to write of them
until the next Centurie.

Arnulphus.
Arnulphus was an eloquent man, and a mighty preacher, who reprooved the
Clergy of Rome, for the lewdness of their conversation. Wherefore the Clergy
hated him, and drowned him secretly in the night time, as has been declared in
the history of the life of Honorius the second. At this time was set forth a
book called Opus Tripartitum: Arnulphus was supposed to be the Author
thereof. It contained an heavy complaint of the enormities and abuses of the
Church, of the number of their holy days, and all lusts of uncleanness,
according to the saying of whores and naughty women, who bragged that they
gained more in one day, then in fifty other days. Likewise it complained of
the curious singing in Cathedral Churches, whereby many are occasioned to
spend much time in singing, which might be better spent in more necessary
sciences. It also complained of the rabble and multitude of begging Friars,
showing what idleness and uncomely behavior, has proceeded thereof. Also it
touches the unchaste and voluptuous behavior of Church men, aggravating their
faults by the similitude of storks, who are accustomed to beat those storkes
out of their number, that having a mate join themselves unto another: Note.
What then is to be done with Churchmen, who professing chastity, do defile
other men's houses; so that the stink of their uncleanness is known to the
whole world. Finally, it wishes reformation to begin at the Sanctuary, Ezech 9.
as the Prophet speaks.

In this age also was Vualdus, Vualdus.
a Merchant-man of Lions in France, whom God enlightened with the true knowledge
of his word, and remooved from the eyes of his mind the common veil of
ignorance, that overcovered the eyes of the most part of men, who lived at this
time: in such sort, that albeit Antichrist was sitting in the chair of Christ,
yet very few either perceived him, or abhorred his tyranny. This man Vualdus,
Note.
was stirred up by God after this manner. Some of the chiefest heads-men of
Lions were walking abroad, and it chanced one of them (the rest looking on) to
fall down by sudden death. This Vualdus being one of the company, and a rich
man, beholding the matter more earnestly then the rest, was touched with a
deep and earnest repentance, whereupon followed a careful study to reform
his former life: in so much that he first begun to distribute large alms to
the poor, and to instruct his family in the knowledge of the Word of God, and
to exhort all them who resorted unto him to repentance, and amendment of life.

The Bishops envyed the travels of Vualdus, nothing regarding the words of holy
Scripture. Let the Word of God dwell plentifully in you, Col. 3.16.
and edify one another with Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs. And
being moved with great malice against him, threatened to excommunicate him, if
he ceased not from catechizing those who resorted to him. But Vualdus
neglecting the threatenings of the wicked, said; he must rather obey God then
men. Whereupon followed cruel persecution of him, and of all his adherents. So
that they were compelled to fly from Lions, and the Bishop seized upon their
goods. These were called Waldenses, or Pauperes de Lugduno. The articles of
Vualdus, which he professed.
The doctrine and articles which they professed, were these.

1. That only the holy Scripture is to be believed, in matters pertaining
unto eternal life, and that it contains all things necessary to salvation.
2. That there is only one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus: and
that Saints ^re not to be invocated as Mediators. 3. That there is no
Purgatory fire, but all men are either justified by faith in Christ, or else
they are in the state of condemnation. 4. That all masses, namely, such as are
sung for the dead are wicked, and to be abrogated. 5. That all men's traditions
are to be rejected, at least not to be accounted necessary unto salvation. 6.
That constrained and prefixed fasts bound to days and times, difference of
meats, such variety of degrees and orders of Priests, Friars, Monks, and
Nuns, superfluous holy days, so many sundry benedictions and hallowing of
creatures, vows, peregrinations, with all the rablement of such rites and
ceremonies brought in by man, should be abolished. 7. The supremacy of the
Pope, usurping above all Churches, and especially above all politic Realms,
and Governments, or for him to usurp both the swords, is to be denied. 8. That
no degrees are to be received into the Church, but only Priests, Deacons, and
Bishops. 9. The Communion under both kinds to be necessary to all people,
according to the institution of Christ. 10. That the Church of Rome is Babylon,
spoken of in the book of the Revelation, and the Pope the fountain of errors,
and the very Antichrist. 11. The Popes pardons and indulgences to be rejected.
12. The marriage of Priests and men in spiritual offices, they hold to be
lawful and necessary. 13. Such as hear the true Word of God, and believe it,
are the true Church of God, to whom the keys belong; to drive away wolfes, to
institute true Pastors, to preach the Word, and to administer the Sacraments.
These are the most principal articles of Vualdenses, to the which, the rest
may be reduced.

14. Concerning the Supper of the Lord, their faith was, that it was ordained
to be eaten, and not to be showed and worshipped; for a memorial, not for a
sacrifice; to serve for the present ministration, not for reservation; to be
received at the table, not to be carried out of the doors in pomp. And this
they prove by an old Chronicle, called Chronica gestoru^: and by the testimony
of Origin, who writing upon Levit. says thus. Whosoever receives this bread
of Christ's Supper upon the second or third day after, his soul shall not be
blessed, Joshua 9.
but polluted. Therefore the Gibeonites, because they brought old bread to the
children of Israel, it was joined them to hew wood and bear water.
In this age also are found some learned men who detested the pride of the
Bishop of Rome, Hildebertus.
such as Hildebertus, Archbishop of Towrs, a disciple of Berengarius, and an
excellent Poet, who made this distinchon of the town of Rome.

Vrbs foelix, si vel dominis vrbs illa careret.
Vel dominis esset turpe carere fide.
Bernard, Bernardus.
Abbot of Claravall, borne in Burgundy, was respected in his country above
others, who although he lived in a most corupt age, yet he was found in the
doctrine of justification: as may appear by the words which he uttered on a
time being diseased, after this manner: I grant (says he) I am unworthy, and
that I cannot obtain the kingdom of heaven by mine own merits,
nevertheless, my Lord has a double right to it: First, by this right, that he
is his fathers heir. Secondly, by right of the merit of his suffering. With
the first right, Note.
he contenteth himself. The second he bestows on us, by whose free gift I
claim a right thereto, and am not confounded. He detested the corruption of
manners, which abounded in his time, as may be known by the words of Hugo
Cardinalis. Hugo in postil. super. 1 Ioh.
It seems (says he) good Jesus, that the whole university of Christian
people, have conspired against thee, and these are the chief persecutors, who
have the principal rooms in thy Church. He admonished Count Theobald, who
bestowed great cost in building of Abbeys, Note.
and Churches, that he would rather support them who were of the household of
faith, and that he would be careful to build the immortal and everlasting
tabernacles of God. He subdued his body by fasting, beyond all measure;
whereby his stomach became so diseased, that oftentimes it rendered again the
small portion of food which it had received. He was very superstitious in
receiving the relics of the Saints. In so much, that when he came to Rome,
and the head of the Martyr Casarius was offered to him, to take of it what part
he pleased, he was content to take one tooth only. And when his associates
could not draw out the tooth (it was so fast fastened unto the Iawbone) Bernard
counseled them to pray, Note.
that the Martyr would willingly confer unto them one of his teeth. Many
visions and miracles are attributed to him, but they smell so much of
superstition, as it is easily known, that the most part of them are invented
and forged by the deceiving teachers of this age. He died in the 64. year of
his age, leaving them that were about him three testamentall lessons. 1. That
they should offend no man. Bernards testamental lessons.
2. That they should give less credit to their own opinion, then to the
judgment of other men. 3. That they should not be vindictiue, nor desirous of
revenge for wrongs done unto themselves. He esteemed much of the prophecies of
Hildegardis, a Prophetess in France, whose words Bernard thought to be
indyted by divine inspiration.

Anselmus Ha^elburgensis.
In this age also flourished Anselmus Bishop of Havelburg, whom the Emperor
Lotharius 2. sent to Calowannes Emp. of Constantinople. He disputed with
Nichetes Bishop of Nicomedia, Anselmus his disputations against Nichetes.
in the temple of Sophia, about the old error of the Grecians, who affirmed
that the holy Spirit proceeded only from the Father, and not from the Son.
He refuted very learnedly, the objections of Nichetes, who objected that two
fountains and beginnings were set up in the Godhead, if the holy Spirit
proceeded both from the Father and the Son. Whereunto Anselmus answered, that
when the Council of Nice said, Note.
Deus de Deo, lumen de lumine: They established not two Gods, nor two lights in
the Trinity. Even so, when it is said, Principium de principio, there is not
brought in two beginnings, but one only. And whosoever (says he) denies that
the holy Spirit proceeds from the Son, Ioh. 17.21.
denies also that he proceeds from the Father. For the Scripture says, I
and the Father are one, I am in the Father, and the Father in me: and again,
He that sees me sees the Father.

From this argument they went to another, concerning the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome. Anselmus prooved the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome by three
arguments. 1. Because the Council of Nice had preferred the chair of Rome, to
all other chaires, 2. Because Christ assigned superiority to Peter, Mat.
16.18.19
when he said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church:
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
is bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed
in heaven. 3. The chair of Rome was free of heresies, when Constantinople and
other Churches of the East were defiled with heresy.

To the first argument Nichetes answered, that the Council of Nice called the
Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of the principal chair, but not the principal
Bishop, for that dignity he received from the Emperor Phocas, but not from
the Council of Nice. To the second argument, he answered, that the power of
binding and loosing was not given to Peter only, but also to all the rest of
the Apostles. And like as they were all partakers of that same heavenly grace,
Acts 2.
whereof Peter was partaker in the day of Pentecost: so likewise they all
received that self same power of binding and loosing. And Peter alone received
not the power, like as he received not the grace alone. Thirdly, whereas it was
alleged, that the Roman Church remained unspotted with heresy, when as other
Churches were defiled with it, Nichetes answered, that it was true, that
Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, did spring up among the Grecians,
and they likewise were chiefly refuted and suppressed by the the Grecians. And
the fountain of all heresies being humane Philosophy, it was no marvel that
greatest heresies sprung up, where men of greatest learning and understanding
were found, and it is likely that the fewer heresies sprung up in the West,
because they were men of less learning, and not of so deep understanding as
the people of the East.

CENTVRIE XIII.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Caelestinus succeeded Innocentius the third, and ruled eighteen years,
he excommunicated John king of England, for not receiving of Stephen Langtowne
Archbishop of Canterbury being approved by the Pope, he brought the said king
so low that he was in the end constrained to resign his crown of England and
Ireland to the Pope, and to receive the same back again from the Pope to him
and his heirs for yearly payment of a thousand marks, He confirmed the order
of the Dominike or black friars, and the order of Franciscans or begging
Friars.

To him Henry the sixth when he departed this life left the tuition and
protection of his son Frederick the second. But Innocentius followed the
footesteps of Judas, but not of Saint Peter, made Otto Duke of Saxon Emperor
in prejudice of Frederick who was committed to his protection. But through the
providence of God, the spirit of dissension fell between the Emperor Otto and
the Pope, so that he was excommunicated by the Pope, and the Empire was given
to Frederick. Also he gathered a general Council at Rome called Lateranense,
whereof hereafter.

After him succeeded Honorius 3. and ruled ten years, Honorius 3.
7. months, 13. days: he excommunicated the good Emperor Frederick 2. and in
this age it is to be noted that almost no Pope can be found, Note.
who set not out his thunderbolts of cursings against kings and Emperors.

Next to him succeeded Gregorius the ninth, Gregorius. 9.
and ruled one year, and three months, he caused the book of the Popes
decretalls to be compiled, and had cruel wars against the Emperor
Frederick whom he excomunicated diverse times, as has at length been
declared in the life of Frederick.

Caelestinus 4.
Caelestinus 4. followed after him, who lived not in the Popedom above the
space of 18. days.

Innocentius 4.
To him succeeded Innocentius 4. and ruled 11. years 12. months 12. days: he
held a Council at Lions, wherein he excommunicated the Emperor Frederick of
new again and deposed him from his Imperial dignity, and gave the same to
William Count of Holland. He died miserably, for he invaded the kingdom of
Sicilie with an army, hoping to bring it under his subjection after the death
of Frederick, but was disapointed and repulsed by Manfred, king of Sicilie.
And as he was in Naples a voice was heard in the Popes Court saying, Surge
miser ad iudicium, that is, rise, O wretched person, and appear to judgment,
Note.
and the day following he was found lying dead in his bed.

Alexander 4.
To him succeeded Alexander the fourth who did fight against Manfred king of
Sicilie vnprosperously, but being overcome in battle, he had refuge to his
old armor of cursing, and excommunicated Manfred. He damned the Book of
William de Sancto amore, which he writ against the order of begging Friars,
and died in the seventh year of his Popedom.

Vrbanus 4.
After him followed Vrbanus the fourth, and ruled three years; and one month.
He stirred up Charles Duke of Angeow against Manfred, and gave unto him the
kingdom of Sicilie and Calabria, with the Dukedom of Apulia to be holden of
the Pope as superior, for yearly payment of a certain duty to the Church of
Rome; which was the occasion of great troubles which after followed.

Clemens.
To him succeeded Clemens, 4. and ruled 3. years 9. months 21. days. He
finished the work which Vrbanus begun, for he gave to Charles Count of Angeow
not only the Dukedom of Sicilie, but also the style of the kingdom of
Jerusalem; providing always he should pay yearly in few-farme to the church
of Rome forty thousand crowns. This Charles by instigation of the Roman
Bishop first slew Manfred king of Sicilie, and afterward slew Conradinus son
to Conrad who came to Italy to possess the kingdoms duly appertaining to
him. So was the kingdom of Sicilie taken from the posterity of Frederick,
and put in the hands of Frenchmen.

After him Gregorius the tenth ruled four years, Gregorius 10.
two months, ten days. He held a general council at Lions whereat Michael
Palcologus Emperor of Constantinople was present as will be hereafter delared,
God willing.

He made peace beweene the Venetians and the Genuans who not only at home, but
also in Asia had bloody wars one against another to the great encouragment
of the Infidels. Also he interdyted the Florentines from all holy service,
because they eiected the Gibelius out of their town, whom the Pope being in
France had received in favor and brought back from banishment. He was so
highly displeased with them, that (passing by the town of Florence upon a
time) being required of his fatherly clemency to lose them from the foresaid
interditment he utterly refused to do it.

Next after him Innocentius the fifth, Innocentius 5.
died after he had ruled six months, ad two days.

After him Hadrianus the fifth died, Hadrianus 5.
having ruled forty days.

Ioannes 22. who succeeded to Adrian, Ioannes 22.
died after he had ruled 8. months. He was smothered by the sudden fall of a
chamber newly built in the place of Viturbium for his solace and pleasure: and
this judgment fell upon him immediately after he had foolishly promised to
himself long life, Note.
and said to his friends that he knew by the position of the stars that he
would live a long time in this world.

After him followed Nicolaus the third, Nicolaus 3.
and ruled three years, three months, and fifteen days. He was a mortal
enemy to Charles king of Sicilie, whom his predecessors, Vrbanus and Clemens
advanced. He took from him the lieutenanrie of Hetruria and the dignity of a
Roman Senator.

Likewise he stirred up Peter King of Arragon to claim the kingdom of
Sicilie as justly pertaining to him by right of Constantia his wife, Daughter
to Manfred king of Sicilie.

And finally by his craft and wickedness the countries of Flaminea and Bononia
with the exarcht of Rauenna which had remained a long time under the Emperors
jurisdiction were brought under the dominion of the Pope of Rome. In Religion
he was very superstitious and caused cases of silver to be made wherein he put
the skulls of Peter and Paul.

Note.
Next, unto him followed Martinus the fourth, and ruled four years, and one
month. He received Charles king of Sicilie in favor, and restored unto him
the dignity of a Roman Senator, Nicolaus. 4.
which Nicolas his predecessor had taken from him, and was so contrarious in
all his doings to Nicolaus, that whereas Nicolaus stirred up Peter king of
Arragon to claim the kingdom of Sicilie as belonging to him by right.
Martinus by the contrary excommunicated the king of Arragon as a spoiler of
the Church-goods, because he invaded the kingdom of Sicilie. Notwithstanding
in this Popes time the Frenchmen, who were in Sicilie being hated of the people
were pitifully destroyed: For they had agreed among themselves that upon a
certain day at evening time when a sign was given by ringing of a bell that
they should cut off in one hour all the French blood that was found in
Sicilie: Note. The Sicilians cruelty.
which thing also they performed with such cruelty that they ripped up their
own countrie-women that were with child by the Frenchmen: to the end there
should no remnant of French blood remain among them, and from this excessive
cruelty the Proverb yet remains Vesperae Siculae. Vesperae Siculae.


This Pope also took the Concubine of his Predessour Nicolaus, and caused to
abolish all the pictures of Vrses and Bears that were found in his palace:
fearing left his harlot by a deep imagination and impression of these Pictures
should bring forth children rough like Bears as she had done before. Note.


Honorius 4.
Honorius 4. followed and ruled 2. years and one month, he ratified the
sentence of excommunication given out against Peter king of Arragon for
invading the kingdom of Sicilie.

After him followed Nicolaus the fourth; Nicolaus. 4.
and ruled four years, one month: after whom the Chair of Rome was vacant
for the space of two years, and three months, because of the intestine discord
of the Cardinals who could not condescend among themselves who should be chosen
to succeed.

In the end Caelestinus, Caelestinus 5.
the fifth is chosen and ruled one year and five months: he was an Heremit and
had lived such a solitary life that he was altogether unmeet for government in
great and weighty affairs. Nevertheless he was a notable Hypocrite and
pretended a reformation of the abuses of the court of Rome, and namely in this
that the Cardinals and Bishops should ride not upon horses and mules with
Pompous trains, but upon Asses following the example of Christ, who did ride
to Jerusalem upon one of them. But the Cardinals were so far from yielding to
this ordinance, howbeit the Pope in his own person gave them example so to
do, that they counted him an old doting fool, and finding him to be a very
simple man so abused his simplicity that they caused him voluntarily resign
and give over his office. Note.
For Caietanus a certain Cardinal dug a hole through the Popes chamber and
sounded in a voice admonishing him to resign his office to another who was
more fit to govern then he was: which the Pope supposing to be an Angelical
voice and an heavenly admonition, willingly resigned his office, desiring the
Cardinals to choose another man more fit for the Popedom then himself was,
who choosed thereafter this same Cardinal Caietanus, Bonifacius 8.
and named him Bonifacius 8. who ruled 8. years 9. months, 17. days. Besides
the subtle policy whereby he attained the Popedom he joined Barbarous
cruelty, for his predecessor Caelestinus having dimitted his Popedom he
returned again to the wilderness to live a solitary life as before. But
Bonifacius brought him by force back from the wilderness, and emprisoned him
where he died for heart-griefe. This Pope renewed the old factio^s of the
Gibelines and Guelses, and hated the Gibelines to the death, in so far that
he deposed the Cardinals that were found to be of the families of the
Gibelines, and disposed their dignities, rents, castles, and heritages to
others, and proceeded in hatred and cruelty against them, that he could abide
no man that was of the stock of the Gibelines. Insomuch that Porthecus
Archbishop of Geneua coming unto him, and falling down at his feet Die
cinerum: he would not lay the Ashes upon his head, nor say to him, Memento
homo quod cinis es, and in cinerem reuerteris, as the custom was but he threw
the ashes in his eyes, Note.
and said Memento homo quod Gibellinus es, and cum Gibellinis in cinerem
redigeris, that is, remember O man that thou art one of the Gibelines, and with
them thou shall be turned to ashes. The institution of the Jubilee.
He instituted the first Iubily that was kept at Rome, promising a full
remission of all their sins to so many as would take pains to visit the
Apostolic Sea. In solemnising whereof the first day he showed himself to the
people in his Pontifical garments with S. Peter's keys carried about him; but
the second he showed himself unto them in royal apparel, with a naked sword
carried before him, and an Harold proclaiming Ecce potestas vtrinsque, gladij,
that is, behold the power of both the swords, to wit both civil and spiritual,
claiming to himself a sovereign authority in all things both civil and
ecclesiastical. He excommuincated Philip king of France and his posterity to
the fourth generation, because he made an ordinance that no money nor revennue
should be carried out of his country to Rome. But Philip assembled a Council
at Paris and appealed from the Bishop of Rome to the first general Council to
be holden. And sent William Nogaretius steward of his house together with
Scarra Columnensis one of the noble men of Rome whom the Pope persecuted
because he was a Gibeline. These two I say he sent to Rome to publish his
appellation against the Pope, but they had another purpose in hand as the event
declared. For Scarra disguised himself, entered in Italy with a servants
habit, and secretly gathered a number of his friends and Gibelines; and set
upon the Pope by night as he was lying at Anagnia the town of his nativity.
Nogaretius also co^curred with 200. horsemen, who brake in upon him by night and
spoiled al his rich treasures, and put himself upon a wanton Colt with his
face toward the tail, and made him a ridiculous spectacle to all the people.
Soon after he went to Rome and died for displeasure that he had loosed his
riches, Note.
and sustained so great shame. This is he of whom it was truly said, that he
entered in as a Fox, lived as a Lion, and died as a Dog.

Patriarchs of Constantinople.
AFter Georgius Xiphilinus succeeded Ioannes Cametarus, Ioannes Cametarus.
Thomas Maurocenus.
after him Thomas Maurocenus, who being made Patriarch took his journey to
Rome, and received confirmation of the Roman B. Innocentius 3. He was also
present at the counsel of Lateran, holden at Rome in the year of our Lord,
1215.

Next to him succeeded Pantoleo Iustinianus, Pantoleo Iustinianus. Germanus and
Arsenius.
and after him Germanus and Arsenius, to whose tutorie the Emp. Theodorus
committed his young son Ioannes, but Michael Paleologus being chosen Emp.
plucked out the eyes of the young Emp. for the which he was excommunicated by
Arsenius. Paleologus on the other part gathered a Council of Bishops against
him, and accused him for suffering of Azetines the Sultan to be present at the
holy service, Note.
and for conferring with him in the temple. In this council Arsenius was
deposed, because he appeared not to answer to the foresaid accusation, and
immediately after was ba^ished by the Emp. and Nicephorus placed in his room.
After whom succeeded Germanus, Josephus.
and after him Josephus, to whom the Emperor confessed his sins of perjury
and cruelty, in plucking out the eyes of Ioannes the son of Theodorus
Lascaris, and received absolution from him.

But when he perceived how the Emperor was purposed to make an agreement with
the Bishop of Rome, he would not consent thereto, but voluntarily dimitted his
office and entered into a monastery where he ended his life.

Becus.
After him followed Becus whom the Emp. traueled to persuade to give his consent
to the foresaid agreement with the B. of Rome, but all in vain, for which
cause the Emp. imprisoned him, there giving him many books to read, confirming
the opinions of the Latin church, which made Becus change his opinion, and
both by word and writ defend the doctrine of the Latin church. Hugolinus.
To whom succeeded Hugolinus.

Of other Doctors.
IN this age many were found who taking example of Petrus Lombardus invented
subtle and intricat disputations: questionin^g, reasoning, and calling all
things in doubt after the manner of the Academik Philosophers, Note.
insomuch that there was no head of doctrine howbeit plain in it self which
they did not obscure and darken with the mist of vain Philosophy, and curious
disputation. And that which was more lamentable the pure foundations of the
word of God were utterly forsaken, and Theologues began to reverence
Aristotle, and his writings as if he had bin a Prophet of God, and the Apostle
of Jesus Christ. Yea things contained in the holy scripture were counted
vulgar, common, base and of little importance, but they who were deeply learned
in Aristotle's Philosophy and in the volumes of the ancient doctors were
counted excellent teachers, Angelical and Geraphicall Doctors. Then were set
out prolixe commentaries upon the master of Sentences by Albertus, Aquinae,
Alexander, and Scotus, and all the schools were filled with contentious
disputations. Albertus Magnus.
This Albertus was a Dominik friar, who for his great learning was called
Magnus, and was made B. of Ratisbon by Pope Alexander 4. but he being wearied
with the painful travels of that calling returned home again to Colen to
spend his time more quietly in reading and writing of books. Where he writ
those commentaries upon the Master of Sentences, and upon Aristotle with many
other volumes. Also he defended his own order of friars against Guil. de S.
Amore who impugned the same as shall be hereafter declared God willing: before he
died he pointed out a place for his own burial and daily visited it, Thomas
Aquinas.
Et vig^lias pro se ac si vita s^nctus esset, legit. Thomas de Aquino
otherways called Angelicus Doctor, was disciple to Albertus Magnus, and
profited in Theology and Philosophy beyond others, while he was young at the
school he was quiet and still more inclined to hear al men then to speak, and
was called by his condisciples Bos, that is a kow because he was so silent.
Nevertheless afterward by his pen this kow lowed louder then all his
co^disciples, and filled al nations with the sound of his Doctrine. He was of
the order of the Dominike or preaching Friars, and defended his order against
William de S. Amore as Albertus his Master had done before. He died in the way
as he was iourneying to the counsel at Lions, and was canonised by Pope Ioannes
22. and was supposed to have wrought miracles after his death, because this age
was full of lying miracles. Alexander Neckam otherwise called Ingenij Miraculum.
Alexander Neckam was learned in Philosophy, Poetry, Oratrie and Theology,
and obtained a glorious name to be called Ingenij Miraculu^, he was made Abbot
of Excester in England, upon whose Sepulcher when he died were written these
Barbarous verses. Eclipsin patitur sapientia, Sol sepelitur:
Cui si par vnus, minus esset flebile funus.
Vir been discretus, and in omni more facetus,
Dictus erat Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam.
Ioannes Duns otherwise called Scotus Subtilis was a man borne in Dunce a town
of Scotland, Scotus Subtilis.
who departed from his native country and joined himself to the company of
the gray friars in Oxford, from thence he passed to Paris, and from thence to
Colen, where he died being yet young in years. He was called Subtilis from
the subtilitie of his wit. In his commentaries upon the Master of Sentences he
entreats largely of the head of the Sacrament of the supper, where it may be
seen that he would never have condiscended to the opinion of
Transubstantiation, if he had not been induced thereto by the authority of
the church of Rome.

Alexander de ales.
Likewise in this age lived Alexander de Ales an English man brought up in Paris
and expert in Philosophy and Theology, who amplified the doctrine of Petrus
Lombardus with many subtle arguments and was called Doctor irrefragabilis. In
the end he took upon him the habit and order of the Graye Friars upon this
Occasion. He had vowed, that he should do all things which he was required
to do in the name of the blessed Virgin, Note.
if so be they were possible to be done, and upon a time he forgathered with a
begging Friar, seeking alms who besought him for the Love of our Lady to join
himself to their order, because they had no Master to govern and rule them.
Thus Alexander de Ales without delay took upon him the habit of a graye friar
and became their doctor. He died at Paris and was buried in one of the
Abbacees of the graye friars.

Now in this time of most palpable darkness the Lord lacked not witnesses of
his truth, but stirred up many who damned the gross ignorance and superstition
of those times. Of this number was Arnoldus de Nova Villa a Spainard, Arnoldus
de noua villa.
a man famously learned and a great writer, whom the Pope with his Clergy
condemned among Heretics, for holding and writing against the corrupt errors
of the Popish Church. His teaching was that Satan had seduced all the world
from the truth of Christ Jesus.

The articles which he maintained.
First, That the faith which then Christian men were commonly taught, was such a
faith as the Devils had.

Secondly, That Christian people were led by the Pope to hell.

Thirdly, That all Cloisters are void of Charity, and that they do all
falsify the doctrine of Christ.

Fourthly, That the Divines do evil in mixing Philosophy with Divinity.

Fifthly, That the Masses are not to be celebrated, and that they ought not to
sacrifice for the dead. Certain other opinions there be which the slanderous
sects of Monks and Friars do attribute to him (as is their custom) rather of
envious taking then of any just cause given.

In this number also was the worthy and valiant Champion of Christ and
adversary of Antichrist Guilielmus de S. Amore a Master of Paris, Gulielmus de
S. Amore.
and a chief ruler then of that University. He in his time had no small ado,
writing against the Friars and their Hypocrisy, but especially against the
begging Friars, both condemning their whole Order and also accusing them as
those that did disturb and trouble all the churches of Christ, by their
preaching in churches against the will of the Ordinary Pastors, by their
hearing of confessions, and executing the charge of ordinary preachings in
their churches. All the testimonies of Scripture that make against the
Antichrist, he applied them against the Clergy of Prelates and the Popes
spirituallie.

The same Guilelmus is thought to be the author of the book which is
attributed to the school of Paris and entitled De Periculis ecclesiae, where
he proves by 39. arguments that Friars be false Prophets. Moreover he does
well expound this saying of Christ. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all
that thou have and come follow me, declaring there, poverty to be enjoined us
of Christ, non actualem sed habitualem, not in such sort as stands in outward
action when no need requires, but in inward affection of heart when need
requires, as though the meaning and precept of our Lord were, not that we
should cast away actuallie all that we have, but that when the confession of
the name of Christ and his glory shall so require, Note
that then we be ready to leave all things for his sake, as when he
requires in us after the like phrase the hatred of father and mother and of
our own lives, he bids us not to dishonor our father or mother, much
less to hate them, but that then when it is required we set all things behind
the love of Christ.

Many other worthy works he compiled wherein albeit he uttered nothing but
what was truth, yet notwithstanding he was by the Antichrist and his rabble
condemned for an heretic, exiled, and his books burnt.

Laurentius Anglus. Petrus Ioannis.
Of this number also was one Laurence an Englishman and Master of Paris, and
Petrus Ioannis a Minorit who taught and maintained many things against the
Pope, proving that he was Antichrist, and that the Synagogue of Rome was great
Babylon, whom because the Pope could not burn alive, after his death his bones
were taken up and burned. Also Robertus Gallus is to be added to those before
mentioned, who being borne of a right noble parentage, Robertus Gallus.
for devotions sake, was made a Dominik Friar about the year of our Lord 1290.

This man (as appears by his writings) had diverse and sundry visions al
tending against the spirituallitie of Rome: for he called the Pope plainly an
Idol, who having eyes neither saw nor desired to see the abominations of his
people nor the excessive enormitie of their voluptuousness, but only to heap
up treasures to himself. And having a mouth did not speak himself but said,
I have set good men over them which is sufficient, to do them good either by
himself or others.

He notably describes in one of his visions the curiosity and vanity of the
Scholastig, Doctors who flourished in this age, comparing them to a man, who
having good bread and good wine hanging on both his sides was notwithstanding
gnawing hungerly on a flint stone: thereby signifiyng that they leaving the
wholesome food of their souls contained in the Scriptures, busied themselves
with subtle questions, containing no edification in them nor comfort to the
soul of man.

Robertus. Gostred.
In this age also is reckoned Robert Gostred Bishop of Lincoln in England, a
man of great learning, godliness, and constancy: who lived in the days of
Pope Innocentius the fourth and constantly resisted his unlawful request. For
this Pope had recommended unto him a young Italian boy, to be admitted to the
first vacant prebendry of his diosie.

But Robert Gostred would not agree to the ungodly desire of the Pope, but did
write back an answer to him, declaring that next after the sin of Lucifer
there is not nor can be any kind of sin so repugnant and contrary to the
doctrine of the Apostles and holy Scripture, and to our Soueraigue Christ
himself more hateful, detestable, and abominable, then to destroy and kill
men's souls by defrauding them of the mystery of the Pastoral office, which
by the ministry of the Pastoral cure ought to save and quicken the same.
Which sin by most evident places of Scripture such men are descerned and
known to commit, who being in the authority of that Pastoral dignity do
serve their own carnal desires with the benefit of the milk and wool of the
sheep and flock of Christ, and do not minister the same Pastoral office to
the benefit and salvation of those their sheep. And whereas he perceived
that the Bishop of Rome dealt in all his requests imperiously, rather
commanding, nor requesting any thing to be done, he answered in the end of
this letter that the power which was given by God to any Bishop was to build
the house of God, and not to destroy it, hereby blaming the Bishop of Rome, as
one who abused his authority to the destruction of the Church of God, by
placing young boys in offices neither apt to teach nor well acquainted with the
manners and language of the people.

This ans^^re being returned to the Pope he was greatly moved with
indignation, and swear that except he had been restrained by his own
natural clemency, he would hurl him down to such confusion as to make him
afable, a gazing stock, and a wonder to the world.

Not long after thus it pleased God to visit this reverend father with
sickness, in the time whereof he called to him a Friar of the preaching
Order, named Master John Giles, a man expert and cunning both in Physic and
Divinity, partly to receive from him some comfort to his body, and partly to
confer with him in spiritual matters. Thus upon a certain day the said
Bishop conferring with the said Master John, and reciting to him the doings and
proceedings of the Pope, did grievously rebuke his fellow brethren the
Preaching Friars, and the other Order also of the Minorites. Because their
Order being planted in wilful poverty of the Spirit, to the intent they
should more freely, carpe and repro^e the vices of the mighty, and not to
flatter or to spare them, but sharply to rebuke and reprehend the same: yet
the said Friars contrary to their profession did not boldly enough cry out and
invey against the abuses of their superiors and men of power, not did uncover
nor detect their faults and wickedness. And therefore the B. said I judge them
to be no better than manifest heretics. And added moreover (demanding of
Master John what is heresy) that he would give him the true definition of it.
Whereat when the Friar did stay and pause not remembering the solemn
definition of that matter, the Bishop thereupon infers, giving this
definition in Latin by the true interpretation of the Greek word. What
heresy is.
Heresis grace, Latin electio, est sententia humano sensu electa scripturae
sacrae contraria, palam docta, pertinaciter desensa; that is, heresy is a
sentence taken and chosen of man's own brain contrary to holy Scripture,
openly maintained and st^flie defended. And this definition especially he
applied against the Romans who commit the charge of souls unto their
kinsfolks being, both in age unworthy, and in learning insufficient, and so
stiflie defend this their wicked opinion that if any dare presume to withstand
the same, he is suspended and excommunicated, and open war proclaimed
against him.

Therefore he to whom the whole definition of an heretic does agree, he is a
very heretic. And every Christian man ought to set himself against an
heretic as far as he may yea and that person who can resist him, and does
it not, he sins, and seems to be a favorer thereof according to the
saying of Gregory. Note.
He lacks not conscience of secret society, who cease to resist open
impiety, and the Apostle writes to the Romans, saying not only they who
commit such things, but also they that consent, are worthy of death. Therefore
it may be concluded that as well the Pope (Unless he cease from that vice) as
also the same Friars, unless they show themselves more earnest and studious in
repelling the same, are both worthy of death, that is, perpetual damnation.

Item says the Canon Decretall that upon this vice of heresy the Pope both
may and ought to be accused. He reproves the enormities of the Church of Rome.
After this the vehemency of his disease more and more increasing and because
the nights were somewhat longer, the third night before his departure the
Bishop feeling his infirmity to grow upon him, willed certain of his Clergy
to be called unto him, thereby to be refreshed with some conference or
communication, unto whom the Bishop (lamenting in his mind for the loss of
souls through the avarice of the Popes court) said on this wise, as by
certain Aphorisms.

Christ came unto the world to save and to win souls, Ergo he that fears
not to destroy souls, may he not worthily be counted Antichrist.

The Lord created the world in six days, but in the restoring

These and many other enormities of the Roman Church when the Godly Bishop had
reproved, as all kinds of Avarice, Usury, Simonie, Extortion, and all kinds
of filthiness, fleshly lust, gluttony and their sumptuous apparel, then
says he this old verse may be truly verified of the* Court of Rome.

Eius avaritiae totus non sufficit Orbis.
Eius Luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
Afterward he went about more to prosecute; how the foresaid Court like a
gulf never satisfied, ever gaping so wide that the flood of Jordan might run
into his mouth, aspired how to usurp the goods of them that die vntested, and
of Legacies beq^e^hed without form of law, whereby more licentiously to bring
this to pass they used to join the king to be fellow and partner with them,
in their spoils, extortions, and robbings.

Neither says he shall the Church be delivered from the seru^tude of Aegyp^,
out by violence and force, and with the bloody sword. And albeit says he,
those be yet but light matters, yet shortly more great and grievous things then
these shall be seen. And in the end of this his prophesying, which he scarcely
could utter with sighing and weeping, his tongue and breath begun to fail. And
so the Organ of his voice being stopped made an end both of his speech and
life.

This is that Bishop who not only in his lifetime resisted the pride and
insolency of the Bishop of Rome, but also after his death God made him a
terror to the Pope, who dreamed that Robert Gostred came to him and with his
staff struck him on the side and said unto him; Surge miser, veni adiudicium,
Note.
after the which dream within a few days he ended his life. Others do add
that a voice was heard in the palace where the Pope lay at Naples, saying Surge
miser, vem adiudicium, as has been declared in the life of Innocentius
Quartus.

Of Monks.
BEcause the orders of Monks most abounded in this age, albeit they begun long
before, therefore have we casten in this treatise in this Centurie, howbeit
we declare the Order of Monks that sprang up before or at this time.

Of the Benedi^u^ Monks.
About the time of the reign of Justinius the elder (as has been declared in
the seventh Centurie) Pope John the first being Bishop of Rome, Benedict a
father and fauourrer of Monks gathered together all scattered religious
persons and begun a peculiar order upon the Mount Cassinus, where he built a
most renowned Cloister giving them there, a rule, prescript, and form of
living.

Afterward the same Bennet having much people resorting to him built 12. other
Monasteries, and filled them with religious men. Of this order is reported to
have been 24. Popes of Rome. 182. Cardinals, 1464. Archbishopps and Bishops.
15000. and 70. renowned Abbots as says Pope John the 22. There has been of
this Order 5655. Monks canonised and made Saints.

This Bennet also invented an order for his sister Scolastica and made her
Abbess over many Nuns. Her clothing was a black coat, cloak, coule, and
veil, and lest the scripture should deceive her, and Hers, it was commanded
that none should read it without the consent and permission of their superior.
Here is to be seen how God is sought in all monastical orders when as amongst
them his holy word is expelled. Note.
This order of Bennedictin monks, when it was nerely decayed in shadow of
Godliness, was quickened again by one Otlon or Otho and was called the order of
Clumacensis. Of the Clumacensis order.
Howbeit their clothing and rule was according to the appointment of Bennet.
And this monkish order was richly endewed with great substance and yearly
rents by a certain Duke of Aquitania called Guillidinus in the year of our
Lord 913.

In the year of our Lord 850. Pope Leo the fourth governing the Sea of Rome:
Of the Camaldinensis order.
the monkish religion of Camaldinensis was devised by Romoaldus of Rauenna in
the mount Apenninus. Their coule and cloak and all their clothing was white.
They kept perpetual silence. Every wednesday and fry day they fast on bread
and water, they go bearefooted, and lie on the ground. Of the Hieronimians
order.
Pope Innocentius the 7. being B. of Rome the monkish order of Hieronimians
began under the name of S. Jerome, who leaving his native country went unto
Jury and there not far from Bethele^ builded him an house where he lived very
devoutly in the later end of his life.

Those Apes and counterfeites of S. Ierom wear their clothes of white and a
cope platted about their coat girded with a lether girdle. The order was
endewed with diverse privileges and liberties by certain Bishops of Rome, as
Gregory the twelfth and Eugenius the fourth.

Of the Gregorian Order.
Pope Gregory the first, borne of a noble stock and very rich, forsaked all
and became a Monk. After the death of his father he builded six religious
houses in Sicilie, giving them a form and rule of living.

He built another within Rome in the name and honor of S. Andrew, wherein he
dwelt with many monkish brethren which from time to time keeping his rule
diligently are called Gregorians. Their habit is a copper-colloured cloth
according to their rule.

Of the shaddowed valey order.
Pope Gregory the sixth bearing rule, Ioannes Gualbertus, a Knight, begun this
order in a certain mountain called Vallis Vmbrosa that is to say a shaddowed
valley under Bennets rule, with adding thereto and changing of black clothes
into gray, In the year, 1038.

Of the Grandimontensis order.
Pope Alexander the second being B. of Rome the sect of the Grandimontensis
Monks was invented by Stephen of Auernia. Their order is to lead a strict life
as Monks use to do, to give themselves to watching, fasting, and praying, to
wear a coat of Mailes upon their bodies, and a black cloak thereupon.

Of the Cistertiensis order.
Pope Urban the second bearing rule. Robert, Abbot of Molisme in Cistert in a
wilderness, or forest in Burgundy did institute the order of Cistertians,
albeit some ascribe this to one Ordingus a Monk that persuaded the aforesaid
Monk to the same. They wear red shoes, and white Rotchets on a black coat,
all shaven except a little circle. In the year of the Lord 198. Of this
Religion was that great Clarke S. Bernard.

Of the Humiliats order.
Pope Innocentius the third, confirmed and allowed the Order of Humiliats, first
of all devised by certain persons exiled by Fredericus Barbarossa: who when
they were restored to their country apparelled themselves all in white and
promised to go in lowly and simple clothing. The men and women to be
separated each from other, and to labor every one in that wherein he was
most skilfill. They had one commune purse amongst them. They professed S.
Bennets rule. This Order in process of time has increased so both in goods
and persons, that it was confirmed and endewed with many privileges of diverse
Bishopps of Rome in the years of our Lord, 1166.

Pope Celestinus the fifth, Of the Celestines Order.
willingly gave over his Bishoprike and returned again to his solitary life,
wherein he quietly lived before his Papacy. Certain superstitious persons
counterfeited this Bishop, taking upon them an order of S. Bennet in a
wilderness, and called themselves Celestines after Celestine. The garment
which they wear, cloakes, coule and cape are blew: in the year, 1297.

Pope Eugenius the fourth bearing rule: Of the Gilbertines order.
S. Gilbert in England at Sirington and Semphring hame began an order of Monks
called after him Gilbertines, in the year, 1148.

Pope Eugenius the fourth, confirmed the religion of the Justinians, Of the
Justinians order.
adorning the same with many liberties and privileges. It was first of all
invented by Jews Barbus a counselors of Venice, and practiced in the parts of
Treuisa in the Cloister of S. Iustine by the city of Padua. They profess
Monk Bennets rule, but in habit and apparel they differ.

Pope Gregory the seventh being Bishop of Rome; Of the Charterhouse Monks.
Bruno of Colen that Philosopher and divine, whom Bernard calls a fair
pillar of the church, did institute the Order of charterhouse Monks in the
Diocese of Gratianopolis at a place named Curtusia: Their life was outwardly
full of painted holiness in forbearing flesh, in fasting with bread and water
every Friday, in wearing hairie clothes next to their body, solitary, much
silent, never going out, refusing all women's company, etc.

Pope Gelasius the second bearing rule: Of the Templars order. Their original.
the order of the Templars begun in Jerusalem and continued almost 200. years,
whose beginning was thus. Templars begun in Jerusalem continued almost 200.
years whose beginning was thus.

After that Godfrey Duke of Loraine had conquered Jerusalem, certain Knights
perceiving that such Pilgrims as came to them of their devotion were robbed
and murdered by the way, made a band among themselves to serve God in
chivalry. At the beginning they were but few and gave themselves to wilful
poverty, and their chief master was the keeper of the Temple door, whence
they were called Templary. They dwelt together not far from Christ's Sepulcher
lodging the Pilgrims, keeping them from mischief, and showing them much
kindness, bringing them from one holy city to another. The badge of their
order was a white cloak with a red Cross. S. Bernard made them a rule
according to the appointment whereof they framed their lives. Afterward they
became very rich through the gifts of noble men and Pilgrims. But Pope
Clement the fifth put them down, and destroyed them all in one day, Why they
were put down.
partly because (as they writ) they renounced the faith of Christ, and
conspired with the Turk, and partly for other notable crimes. Notwithstanding
some say that this rooting out of them, was more because of envy of their
prosperity and royalty, then for their faults. For when their grandmaster
James Burgonion was burnt at Paris with many of his brethren he affirmed that
he was never guilty of the accusation laid against him. Thus perished this
order of Templars, all in one day, their lands and possessions being
distributed and given to others, in the year of our Lord, 1110.

Of the premonstratenses order.
Pope Calixtus the second, allowed and approved the monkish order of
premonstratenses, which was first of all devised by a certain man borne at
Colen called Notorobertus a Priest: they be under the rule of Bennet the Monk,
they be clothed all over in white to declare their unstained virginity Anno,
1119.

Of the order of the white Monks of Mount Oliuet
Pope Gregory the 12. reigning: the Monks of Mount Oliuet sprung up through
the device of Bernardus Ptolomeus.

Their clothing is all white, their rule is Bennets, with some additions unto
it. In the year of our Lord, 1406.

Pope Gregory the 12. reigning, Of the Georgian Monks.
confirmed and established also the order of S. George of Alga by Venice, which
was begun by a spiritual man, the Patriarch, Laurence Justinian, a man of an
incredible strictness of life. These Monks are under S. Peter's rule and the
first order, with certain ordinances joined thereto. In the year, 1407.

Pope Urban the second bearing rule, Of the white Monks.
the order of white Monks begun, first devised by one Stephen Harding, and
afterward in the year of our Lord, 1135. it was brought into England, by a
certain man called Waiter Especk: who built an Abbey of the same order called
Meriuale.

Pope Honorius bearing rule, Of the Ioannitts order.
Raymound, a man of Nobility first of all invented the Order of S. John
Baptist at Jerusalem about the year, 1130.

Pope Clement the sixth being Bishop of Rome, Of the order of scourgers.
a certain Pestilent sect of false religious persons, sprang up in high
Almaine, who called themselves Penitentes Cruciferi, seu flagellatores, that is
patient crosse-bearers, or scourgers of themselves. Their manner was to go from
place to place, having a banner upon the Crucifixe borne before them, and never
to tarry in one place, but upon the Sabbath: every day also they did penance
both morning and evening, by scourging themselves before the people with a
great whippe, of three coards full of knotts upon their bare bodies, affirming
that it was reveiled unto them by an Angel from heaven, that they thus
scourging themselves, should within thirty days and twelve hours, through the
suffering of those pains, be made so clean and free from sin, as they were
when they were Baptized. Anno. 133.

CENTVRIE. XIIII.
Of Popes.
Benedictus 8.
AFter Bonifacius the eight, succeeded Benedictus the eleventh, and ruled eight
months, and seventeen days.

Clemens 5.
To him succeeded Clemens the fifth, and ruled eight years, ten months, and
fifteen days, who translated the Popes Court from Rometo Aviniogue in France
where it remained 74 years. At the Coronation of this Clement, Philip king of
France and Charles his son, and John Duke of Britain were present, who being
in the middle of their Pomp and Procession, a great wall brake and fell upon
them, Note.
by which Duke John and 12. others were slain, king Philip hurt, the Pope
stricken from his horse, having lost out of the miter on his head a carbuncle
esteemed to the value of 6000. The order of the Templars abolished.
florence. By him also the order of the Templars were put down at the counsel
of Vienne who for better collowring of so cruel an act, was not ashamed to say
these words in the council, Etiamsi non licet per viamiustitiae, tamen licet
per viam expedientiae, that is, although it be not lawful by way of justice,
yet is it meet to do it, as a thing expedient to be done.

Andr^nicus Paleol^gus excommunicated by the Pope.
He exercised his tyranny and power of excommunication against Andronicus
Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, declaring him a schismaticke and
heretic, because he neither would nor durst suffer the Grecians to make their
appeal from the Greek Church to the Pope, neither would acknowledge him for
his superior. For the Grecians ever constantly refused to be subject to the
Roman bishop, except in that short time wherein the Frenchmen had the Empire,
of the East, and in the time of Michael Paleologus who in the Council at Lions
submitted himself to Gregory the tenth, whereby he procured unto himself
such hatred, that after his death the Grecians denied unto him the honor and
place of burial, as has been declared.

In like manner he excommunicated the Venetians for preferring Azada to the
estate of Ferrare, The Venetia^s excommunicated by the Pope.
yea Francis Da^dalus Ambassador from the Venetians to the said Clement for
pacifying his fury, and obtaining that absolution, suffered a chain of iron
to be tied about his neck, Note.
and to lie down under the Popes table, there like a Dog to catch the bones
which fell from the table, until the Popes fury was assuaged.

And lest he should be inferior to his predecessors in subduing all powers
under his feet, he ordained that the king of the Romans should not enjoy the
title and right of an Emperor without confirmation given by the Pope.

Next to Clement followed Pope John the two and twentieth. Ioannes 22.
After that the chair of Rome had been vacant for the space of two years,
and three months; he ruled nineteen years, and four months: and was very
much given to heap up riches, so that he proclaimed them to be heretics who
affirmed that Christ and his Apostles had no possessions in the world.

He would not condescend to the Coronation of Jews the fifth, Duke of Bauaria,
to be Emperor, because he used the Emp^^ all dignity in Italy before he
was authorized by the Pope^^ which cause Jews took his journey to Rome, Two
Popes at once.
and the^^ crowned by the Cardinals, and set up another Pope in (...) called
Nicolaus the fifth, against John who was then resid^^ at a Auiniogue in France,
and so the church of Rome (...) begun to have two heads.

Pope (...) the twelfe followed, Benedict 12.
and ruled seven years, (...) and seuen^^eene days.

(...) Pope Clement the sixth; Clement 6.
and ruled ten, (...) twenty eight days: he reduced the (...) was kept on
the hundred year to the fiftieth year: and to allure men to go to war for
recovering of the holy land he set forth blasphemous bulls, commanding the
Angels to convey every man's soul to Paradise who died by the way, Note.
giving also power to all and singular persons signed with the Cross to
deliver three or four prisoners whom they pleased best, out of the pains of
Purgatory.

Innocent 6.
After Clement the sixth, followed Innocentius the sixth, and ruled nine years,
eight months, and six days. He imprisoned a certain friar called Ioannes de
rupescissa, because he Prophesied of the fall of the Pope and his Cardinals,
by the parable of a bird, clothed with other birds feathers, which in respect
of her pride were all plucked from her.

Vrbanus 5.
After him succeeded Vrbanus the fifth, and ruled eight years, and four months.
In whose time the order of the Jesuits begun.

Gregory 11.
Next to Pope Urban succeeded Gregory the eleventh, who reduced the Papacy
again out of France to Rome, after it had continued there above 70. years,
moved hereunto upon this occasion. He had reproved a certain Bishop who
stood by him from long absence from his charge, Note.
to whom the Bishop replied again, that the Bishop of Rome himself who ought
to be a pattern to all the rest was longer absent from the place where his
Church did tie him, whereby the Pope took occasion to remove his court from
France to Rome.

When he returned he found the estate of Italy greatly disquieted with
cruel wars, and specially betwixt the Venetians and the Genoans, whom the
Pope threatened with excommunication if they both desisted not, but before he
was able to accomplish this work he ended his life after he had ruled seven
years, and five months; after whose death followed a great schism in the
Church of Rome. For the Cardinals of Italy choosed an Italian Pope whom they
called Vrbanus the sixth, and the Cardinals of France choosed a Pope of the
French nation whom they called Clemens the seventh. This scisme continued for
the space of 38. years, until the general Council holden at Constance,
during which time were found at least two Popes reigning at one time, the one
in Auiniogue and the other in Rome.

In the days of this Pope Vrbane sprang up John Wickliffe in England (of whose
doctrine somewhat shall hereafter be spoken God willing) whom Pope Vrbane (such
was the providence of God) could not attend to suppress, John Wicklisse.
being otherwise busied in suppressing his Competitor Clement the seventh,
insomuch that this little sparkle which begun in England, enkindled forth with
flames in the kingdom of Boheme, and many other places to the great hurt of
Antichrists kingdom.

To Vrbane after he had ruled unhappily (as Platina writes) a eleven years
and eight months, Platina.
succeeded Bonifacius the ninth, Bonifacius. 9.
and ruled fourteen years, and nine months, he was impudent in selling of
Pardons that he brought Peter's keys into great contempt.

After him succeeded Innocentius the seventh, Innocentius 7.
and ruled two years.

Of other Doctors.
IN this age God raised up many witnesses of his truth, as also made the
knowledge of letters and the study of tongues to spring up again, after it
had bin suppressed many years in the Roman church: for some learned men of the
Grecians fearing the cruelty of the Turk fled unto Italy, by whose fruitful
trauaills, learning begun again to revive and spread it self through all parts
of the West. Of this number was Emmanuell Chrysoloras of Byzantium, Emmanuel
Chrysoloras, Theodorus Gaza, Georgius Trapezuntius*
Theodorus Gaza of Thessalonica, and Georgius Trapezuntius, with many more,
whose names are worthy to be kept in good remembrance, because they brought a
good treasure with them out of Grecia where with many afterward were enriched.

Marsilius Patavinus opposes himself against the Pope maintaining these
Articles.
Amongst those witnesses of the truth Marsilius Patavinus is justly numbered:
who taking the defense of the Emperor Jews against the Pope who did
excommunicate him, affirms in his book called defensor pacis that the Pope
has no authority over other Bishops, much less over the Emperor.











S. Peter was never at Rome.





In another treatise he disputes of free justification by grace, and that
works are no efficient cause of Salvation, Sed causa sine qua non, for the
which doctrine he was condemned by the Pope.

Diverse others discover the Apostasy of the Roman Church.
I pass by a great number, who clearelie discovered, the corruptions and
Apostasy of the Church of Rome, such as Ioannes de Gunduno, Gregorius
Ariminensis, Andreas de Castro, Dantes an Italian, Taulerus a Preacher of
Argentine in Germany, Franciscus Petrarcha a man famouslie learned, who in his
works in Italian verses, speaking of Rome, calls it the whore of Babylon,
the school and mother of error, the Temple of heresy, the nest of
treachery, growing and increasing by the oppression of others.

Likewise Ioannes de rupe scissa, who was cast in prison by Pope Innocentius
the sixth, also Conradus Hager a Germane of the city of Herbipoli, Gerardus
Ridder, Michael Cesenas Provincial of the Gray friars, Petrus de Corbaria,
with one Ioaxnes de P^liato. This foresaid Michael general of the gray friars
writ against the tyranny, pride, and primacie of the Pope; accusing him to be
Antichrist, and the Church of Rome to be the whore of Babylon, drunken with
the blood of the Saints. He affirmed there were two Churches, one of the wicked
flourishing wherein reigned the Pope, the other of the Godly afflicted: also
that the verity was almost utterly extinct, and for this cause he was
deprived of his dignity and condemned by the Pope. Notwithstanding he stood
constant in his assertions, and left behind him many favorers and followers of
his doctrine, of whom a great part were slain by the Pope. Some were condemned
as William Ockam who writ both in defense of the Emperor Jews whom the Pope
excommunicated, and likewise in defense of Michael general of the gray friars
whom the Pope had cursed for an heretic, and some were burned, such as Ionnes
de Castellione, and Franciscus de Arcatara. Likewise Armachanus a Bishop in
Ireland, and Matthias Parisiensis, Ioannes Montziger, rector of the University
of Vlme, Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica, Iacobus Milnensis, and one Milezius,
Henricus de Iota, and Henricus de Hassia.

Likewise in this most desperate time when the estate of religion was utterly
corrupted, and the only name of Christ remained amongst Christians, his true
and lively doctrine being utterly unknown, and turned into an heap of
shadowed Ceremonies which so increased that there was no end of heaping up of
ceremonies invented by man: at this time, John Wickliffe opposes himself
against the Pope.
I say, the Lord raised up John Wickliffe, a professor of Divinity in the
university of Oxford, who seeing that error by long use and custom had been
so deeply rooted in the hearts of men, that it could hardly be plucked out,
he meddled not with all at once, b^^ first b^g^^nne to touch the matter of the
Sacraments, and disco^er (...) ^rrours that men were fallen into, in this head
of (...), but this byle could not be touched without the great grief and pain
of the whole world.

For first of all the whole rabble of Monks and begging Friars were set on
rage and madness against him, and after them the Priests, and then after them
the Archbishop, Simon Sudburie took the matter in hand, who for the same cause
deprived him of his benefice which then he had in Oxford. Notwithstanding being
supported by the friendly assistance of the Duke of Lancaster son to king
Edward the third, and some other friends whom God raised up for his protection,
he bare out the malice of the Friars and Archbishop. Likewise Pope Vrbane was
so busied with suppressing of another, Pope Clement the seventh, set up against
him, that he could not spare any time to suppress John Wickliffe, and so it
came to pass, through the providence of Almighty God, that the enemies of the
true light with fretting minds were compelled to see the sparkles thereof, not
being able to quench them.

The heads of Wickliffes doctrine.
The chief heads of doctrine which he maintained against the Roman church were
these.







Paul there were only two orders of Clerks, to wit Elders and Deacons,
neither was there in the time of the Apostles any distinction of Popes,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, but these the Emperors pride did find out.





If corporal unction were a Sacrament then Christ and his Apostles would not
have left the ordinance of that untouched.

Whatsoever the Pope and Cardinals do command which

That it is but a folly to believe the Popes Pardons.

That it is not necessary to salvation, to believe the church of Rome to be
supreme head of other Churches.

A Deacon or Priest may Preach the word of God, without

The Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan, neither is the Pope immediately
the vicar of Christ, nor of the

That the Emperor and Secular Lords are seduced, who

If any man enter into any private religion (whatsoever it

Of Monks.
POpe Clement the sixth, bearing rule: John king of France son of Philip
invented the sect and order of those Monks which in Latin are called
Stellati, whose manner is always to wear a star upon their breast, signifying
thereby that there is nothing in them but the light of perfection, and the
clear shining of good works. Yea that they themselves are the light of the
world, according to the saying of Christ, vos eslis lux mundi, yea are the
light of the world. Item, That they shall rise again at the later day all
shining and glistering as the most clear and pleasant stars, Dan.
according as it is written by the Prophet. They that inform many into
righteousness shall be as the stars world without end, In Anno, 1336.

Pope Boniface the ninth reigning: a certain man called Gerardus being of
great learning, and virtuous conversation, ordained a certain fraternity or
brotherhood of learned godly men to teach scholars, and to bring up youth,
not only in good letters, but also in good manners, that by those means there
might be learned men always in store to bear rule in the Church of Christ,
and to govern the commonwealth according to the praescript and rule of Gods
word.

This Gerardus being but a Deacon preached the word of God purelie and
fervently, and when he was moved by his friends to be a Priest, he always
answered, that he was unworthy to have such an high office, Note.
affirming that he would not have the cure of souls not so much as by the
space of one night for all the gold of Arabia, In Anno, 1379.

Of the order of the Jesuits.
Pope Vrbane the fifth, greatly allowed the order of Jesuits, and gave unto them
many great and singular privileges, commanding the Monks of that order to
wear a white kirtle, and a russet coule, and that they should be called of all
men Clerici Apostolici, that is the Apostles clerks.

This order of Jesuits was the invention of Ioannes Columbinus in Se^a a city
of Hetruria. They were not at the beginning Priests or consecrated persons, but
were men of the lay sort given and addicted willingly and freely to prayer, and
to labor, getting their living with the travel of their hands and sweat of
their brows, living as it were in common, after the example of Christ and his
disciples. They are called Jesuits, because the name of Jesus should be often
in their mouths, In Anno, 1368.

Of the order of white-Dawbet Monks.
Pope Boniface bearing rule: the order which is called Ordo Dealbatorum, was
invented by a certain Priest in Italy, who pretended such a modesty, and
gravity, both in words and countenance, that every man took him for a Saint.
The professors of this order were clothed with long white linne^ even down to
the ground, having coules upon their heads like unto Monks. The chief point
of their profession was to lament the state of mankind, to bewail the sins
of the people, to pray for redress of the same at the hands of God. They never
went abroad without a Cross with the Image of the Crucifixe carried before
them, which Cross the Lucenses keep at this day with great reverence, as a
most precious relike, and daily make vows, and offer gifts thereunto.

But Pope Boniface aforsaid conceiving that they should do no good to his
honorable estate if they continued, Note.
forasmuch as they all appeared before men righteous, good and Godly, and the
Pope with his accomplices most wicked, evil and ungodly, caused the author of
this order a seditious person to be beheaded at Viterbium. Some say that he
was burnt as a superstitious Hypocrite and attainted of some heresy, In Anno,
1400.

CENTVRIE. XV. Of Popes of Rome.
The Cardinals labor for unity in the Roman church.
AFter the death of Innocentius Sephinus, the Cardinals perceiving the great
schism that was in the Church of Rome, by reason of diverse Popes ruling at one
time, bound themselves together by horrible oaths that they would endeavor by
all their might, to have the Church of Rome restored again to her wonted
unity, and for this cause they elected Gergorie the twelfth to be Pope, after
they had caused him to swear that he would by all possible means travel to
restore the peace and unity of the Church.

Gregorius 12.
But Gregory although he writ to Benedict the thirteenth Pope in Avinion,
exhorting him to unity and peace, and Benedict on the other part with pleasant
words protested his earnest desire of peace and unity, Note.
yet both the one and the other kept their dominions and Popedomes, and
continued the Schism. A Council at Pisa.
So that the Cardinals thought it expedient to gather a Council in the town
of Pisa, wherein they deposed the two aforesaid Popes, Gregory and Benedict as
persons who by conclusion amongst themselves sought rather their own gain then
the unity of the Church of God, and they elected Petrus Cretensis Cardinal of
Millan to be Pope, Alexander 5.
whom they called Alexander the fifth, but he continued not above the space of
eight months, in his Popedom. He was counted very liberal, and gave so large
and ample benefices to others, that he left almost nothing to himself, and was
accustomed to speak of himself that he was a rich Bishop, Note.
a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope.

After whose departure Ionnes 23. is chosen Pope, howbeit the two other Popes
who were deposed in the Council of Pisa were yet alive, and had great sway,
and nothing reguarded the decrees of the Council of Pisa, because that
Council was convocated by a number of Cardinals only, who had no lawful
power to appoint a general Council. Thus was the scisme augmented* rather
then empaired by the Council of Pisa, and in stead of two Popes then, three
afterward were ruling at one time.

In this Popes days the Emperor Sigismund, took great travel to quiet the
estate of the Church and to remove the scisme, but found none other way how
this matter might be brought to pass, At the Council of Constance Ioannes 23.
Gregory. 12. and Benedict 13. were deposed.
but only by gathering a general Council in the Town of Constantia. At this
Council Ioannes 23. was personally present, and was required to give over his
Popedom far contrary to his expectation, for he looked for ratification of
his Papacy, because he was more obedient to the Council then the other two,
but finding that the Council was fully bent to depose all the three Popes, and
to set up one whom they should chose in place of them all, he begun to be
grieved at his own proceedings, that he had hazarded to come to the Council,
and to their judgment to submit himself and his honorable estate, wherefore
he thought best secretly to fly out of the town, but flying could not avail
him any thing, for he was brought back again by the Emperor from Friburge
to Constantia, and cast into prison and deposed by the Council: after he had
ruled four years, and ten months.

The other two Popes, Gregory the twelfth, and Benedict the thirteen,
although they were absent yet sustained the like sentence of deposition,
Martinus 5.
and Martinus 5. was chosen Pope: after whose election, the Emp. Sigismund was
so filled with gladness, that the scisme was now taken away and peace restored
to the Church, that forthwith he did remove to the conclaue (where the
Cardinals and Commissioners of countries were assembled for election of the
Pope) and fell down before him and kissed his feet. After his election earnest
suit was made for reformation of the corrupt manners of Ecclesiastical persons,
and that Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelates, might be compelled to attend
upon their own callings, that superfluous feastings, and abuses of fasting,
and canonisation of Saints, might be abrogated, and that the orders of Monks
daily multiplying might ^ee reduced to a more tolerable number. But no
reformation at all was obtained. Only Pope Martine thought meet to dissolve
the Council of Constance. And for satisfaction of the hearts of all men, and
to put them in hope that some reformation was intended, the Pope consented in
the Council of Constance that immediately after the issue of the Council,
another should be kept in Papia within the space of five years, immediately
following the same, and again after the issue of that Council seven years
after an other general Council should be kept, and after that third Council
an ordinary form should be observed of assembling general Counsels every
tenth year, whereby reformation of abuses in the Church might be more easily
obtained. This Pope Martine after he had governed 14. years, and 3. months,
died at Rome.

Eugenius 4.
After him succeeded Eugenius the fourth and governed sixteen years. In his
time was the Council of Basile kept, which the Pope with advice of his
Cardinals was minded to translate to Bononia. But the Emperor Sigismund and
other Princes and Prelates assembled at Basile, were so highly offended against
the Pope, that they warned himself and his Cardinals to appear before the
general council otherwise they would proceed against them, as persons
contumacious and disobedient to the voice of the Church.

This warning so terrified Eugenius, that he gave out his Apostolic letters
to ratify and approve the Council of Basile: nevertheless after the
Emperors death, the authority of the Council being greatly empaired, he
took upon him greater boldness to transfer the Council to Ferraria, and
from thence also to Florence, pretending that the Emp. of Constantinople
Paleologus and the rest of the Grecians who were now to be present at the
general council, would not travel beyond the Alps, but would abide in some
nearer place.

The Council of Basile on the other part, proceeded to the deposition of
Eugenius 4. For his contumacie, and placed Amecdeus Duke of Sauoy in his room,
whom they called Foelix 5. Thus was the peace of the Roman church troubled of
new again, Foelix 5. Dissension in the Roman Church.
some following Eugenius and others followed Foelix, and the third sort being
Neutralls neither following the one nor the other, because they were so tossed
with the contrary decrees of the council of Basile and Florence, that they
knew not what to follow.

This Pope as Platina writes was bent to wars, not being seemly in a
Bishop: for besides those which he made in Italy, he stirred up the Dolphin
of France to invade the town of Basile with an army of horsemen, of purpose to
dissolve the Council there, and finally he stirred up Vladislaus King of
Poloma to fight against Amurathes King of Turks; contrary to his promise and
truce taken between them, Note.
to the great shame and hurt of Christianity as has been declared.

After his death, Nicolaus 5.
Nicolaus the fifth, was chosen to be Pope and ruled eight years.

To him Foelix quintus, who was elected Pope in the Council of Basile was
content to submit himself, providing always that he might have the dignity
of a Cardinal, and that he should be appointed the Popes Legate in Germany,
and in his own country of Sauoy. The Cardinals also whom he had made in his
time should keep their dignities and honors. This he did at the earnest
desire of Frederike the Emperor, in the year of our Lord, 1449. In the which
year also Nicolaus the fifth set forth a decree of approbation of the Council
of Basile, howbeit neither this Pope nor any other following him will, be
subject to the auth^^itie of general Counsels, yet did he approve the
Council of Basile, wherein it was ordained that the Bishop of Rome should be
subject to the Council, as a child is subject to the voice of his mother.

Calixtus 3. An ^nemie to the Turks.
After Nicolaus succeeded Calixtus the third, and governed three years, three
months, sixteen days: he was very bent to fight against the Turks, and
sent Messengers to all Christian Princes in Europe to stir up their hearts to
make war against the Turk with one consent of mind, and to stay his further
progress and conquest in Europe, but all his trauailles were spent in vain,
for the Princes harkened not to his Council.

Likewise he sent messengers to Vsumcassanus king of Armenia and Persia, whom
with supplications and gifts he stirred up to make cruel wars against the
Turk, which wars also have since that time continued until our days, to
the great disturbance of the cruelty of the Turk intended against Europe.

Pius. 2.
After him succeeded Pius the second, who before his Popedom was called Aen^as
Syluius, a man of great wit, learning, and eloquence, and governed six years.
He was no less bent to make war against the Turks, then was his
Predecessor before him, but his enterprise was stayed by the dissension which
was amongst Christian Princes, for then and long after was great war between
Ferdinand of Naples and the Duke of Angeow, and in diverse other parts of Italy
Likewise.

These wise and worthy sentences uttered by him declared that he had a great
gift of understanding and knowledge.





the marriage of Priests, there was now greater reason to permit it.

Also, that he who gives too great liberty to his

That lust dishonors in every age, but vndoth him utterly

After Pius succeeded Paulus the second, Paulus 2.
and governed six years, ten months. Likeas he was not very learned in his own
person, so was he also an adversary to learning, and counted all men that
were learned, in humanity, to be heretics: as Platina (who writes this of
the Pope) had good proof in his own person, for he was cast in prison, and
cruelly tormented by the Pope without a cause, and in the end lest his
cruelty against many learned men should make him to be hated of the people,
he accused them of heresy, Note.
having no better ground for it then this, that they accounted much of the old
Academique Philosophers. For he laid this as an infallible ground, that who
soever would once make mention of Academia, either in earnest or jesting words,
he was to be reputed an heretic.

Of other Doctors.
IN this age sprung up John Husse in the country of Bohemia, John Husse.
who by reading of the books written by Wickliff, attained to knowledge and
deprehended many gross errors of the Roman church: Alaxander 5. and Ioannes
23 seek to suppress John Husse.
in so much that Pope Alexander 5. hearing thereof begun at last to direct his
bull to the Archbishop of Suinto requiring him to see to the matter in due
time, and to provide that no man in churches, schools, or other places should
maintain any such doctrine, citing also John Husse to appear before him.

After whose death Pope John 23. in like manner sought by all means to
suppress John Husse, because he seemed more willing to teach the Gospel of
Christ then the traditions of Bishopps, and therefore by his Cardinal de
Columna John Husse was cited to appear at Rome, where he appearing by his
procurators was notwithstanding, excommunicated as an obstinate Heretic,
because he appeared not personally at the appointed day. The Bohemians
notwithstanding cared little for all this, but grew in knowledge daily.

John Husse excommunicated by the ^ope.
In the mean time it happened by the occasion of Ladislaus king of Naples, who
had besieged the Popes towns and territories: that Pope John raising up war
against the said Ladislaus gave full remission of sins to all them who would
war on his side to defend the Church.

When this Bull of the Popes indulgences was come to Prague: John Husse and his
fellows not able to abide the impiety of those pardons began manifestly to
speak against them. And albeit Winceslaus king of Bohemia who then favored
the Pope gave out strict commandment that no man should speak against those
indulgences, yet of John Husses company were found three Artificers, who
hearing the Priest speaking of the forsaid indulgences did openly speak
against them, calling the Pope the Antichrist; wherefore they were brought
before the Senate and committed to prison.

But the people joining themselves in arms required them to be let loose. The
magistrates one the other part albeit they satisfied the people with gentle
words and fair promises for a time, yet when the tumult was assuaged they
sent to the prison, and secretly beheaded the three foresaid artificers: whose
names were John, Martine, and Staston.

The people hearing of this, took their dead bodies and with great solemnity
buried them in the Church of Bethleem, at whose funeral, diverse Priests
favoring that side did sing thus.

These be the Saints which for the testimony of God gave their bodies,
Division in the city of Prague about the death of three Artificers: some
favoring the Pope others John Husse.
etc. Thus the city of Prague was divided.

The Prelates and greatest part of the Clergy, and most of the Barons who had
any thing to lose, did hold with the Pope, especially Steven Pallats being
chiefest doer of that side. On the contrary part the communes with part of the
clergy and students of the university went with John Husse. Winceslaus the
king fearing lest this should grow to a tumult, being moved by the Doctors, and
Prelates, and Counsel of his Barons, thought best to remove John Husse out of
the city, who had been excommunicated before by the Pope.

The people on the other part began mightily to grudge and to cry out against
the Prelates and Priests, who were the workers hereof, accusing them to be
Simonits, covetous, whoremasters, adulterers, proud, not sparing also to lay
open their vices to their great ignominy and shame, whereupon it came to pass
that the king seeing the inclination of the people, being also not ignorant of
the wickedness of the Clergy, under pretense to reform the Church, began to
require great exactions from such Priests and men of the clergy as were
accused, and known to be wicked livers. And thus the Popish clergy while they
went about to persecute John Husse were intrapped themselves in great
tribulation, brought in contempt, and hated of all men.

At this time were three Popes reigning together, by reason whereof a general
Council was ordained and holden at Constance in the year of our Lord 1413.
And this council being called by Sigismund the Emperor for the taking away of
the schismatic dissension of so many Popes, ruling at one time to the great
disturbance of all Christian nations it pleased the said Emperor to send unto
John Husse, Bacheler of Divinity in the country of Bohemia, John Husse
desired to appear before the council of Constance.
his safe conduct, and letters of protection: inviting him to come to the
Council, and promising him a liberty of safe returning unto his own country,
without any manner of empeachment, trouble or vexation. John Husse imprisoned.
Notwithstanding as soon as he came to Constance he was cast into prison
before he was heard. And when he was brought forth to the Council there befell
a strange and shameful matter, for his adversaries had scarsly read one
article, and brought forth a few witnesses of the same, against him, but as he
was about to open his mouth to answer, all that were about him began so to cry
out, that he had no leisure to speak a word. John Husse by reason of the noise
could not be heard.
The noise and trouble was so great and vehement, that a man might well have
called it a noise of wild beasts and not of men, much less was it like a
congregation of men gathered together to judge and determine so grave and
weighty matters. The next time he was brought foorh to the convent of the
Franciscans, John Husse desired by the Emperor to submit himself to the
Council. His answer.
where the Emperor himself was present, and exhorted John Husse to submit
himself to the general council, otherwise (said he) my safe conduct cannot
nor should not be a protection to any who maintain heretical doctrine.

The day after which was the eight of June, he was brought out again to the
same place, and in his presence there were read thirty nine Articles, the
which they said were drawn out of his books, which were judged by the
council to be heretical, and he of new again was required by the Emperor
to submit himself to the council.

John Husse answered that he would not maintain any opinion with obstinate
mind, but if the Council would instruct him clearlie that any of his Articles
were repugnant to the holy scriptures of God, he would renounce and forsake the
same, affirming also most constantly that the most part of all those things
that were alleged against him were falsely forged, and never thought nor
uttered by him: when they saw that by no exhortation John Husse could be moved
to acknowledge his doctrine to be erro^eous, and to recant the same, upon the
sixth day of Iulie he was brought to the head church of the city of Constance,
and there in presence of the Emperor and council was degraded of all Priestly
orders and dignities, and a definitive sentence was given out against him
wherein he was condemned as an heretic, for that he preached and openly
defended the articles of John Wickliffe which were condemned by the Church of
Rome, and likewise had appealed to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the most high
Judge, which appellation they counted a great contempt of the Apostolic Sea,
and the Ecclesiastical Censures and Keys. John Hus condemned to be burnt as
an Heretic.
After this he was put into the Secular Judges hands to be burnt as an
Heretic, having upon his head a crown of paper, with ugly pictures of devils
painted thereupon. Which rebuke, as also the torment of fire, he most
patiently sustained, with Psalms and spiritual Songs, lauding God until the
wind drove the fire upon his face, and choked his breath. And after his body
was consumed with fire, they cast the ashes of the burnt body into the river of
Rhene. Thus died John Hus the faithful Martyr of God, the sixth of July, 1516.
Now while as John Hus had been lying in prison, and so hardly handled, his
faithful companion Ierom of Prague, came to Constance the fourth day of April
anno 1415. who there perceiving that John Hus was denied to be heard, and that
watch was laid for him on every side, he departed to Iberling a City of the
Empire, a mile distant from Constance, and from thence caused a letter to be
directed to the Council, Jerome of Prague writes to the Council.
and to be affixed upon the doors of the chief Churches, Cloisters, and
Cardinals houses in Constance, bearing in effect that he was ready to come to
the Council, and to answer unto any of his accusers, who would stand up to
accuse him of erroneous and heretical doctrine, providing always that he
might have sure and safe access. But when he saw that through such
intimations, being set up, as is before said, he could have no safe conduct,
he thought meet to return back again to Bohemia, taking with him the
letters patents of the Lords of Bohemia that were at Constan^e, for a
testimony and witness of the premises. As he was in his journey, by treason
and conspiracy of his enemies, he was taken in Hirsaw by the officers of Duke
John, and sent back to the Council, Ierom imprisoned by the Council.
bound with chains, where he was cast into prison, and so hardly used, that
he fell sore sick almost to the death. But after he was recovered, and John
Hus was already put to death, they brought forth Master Jerome, whom they had
long kept in chains in the Church of Saint Paul, and threatening him with
death, being instant upon him, Recanteth, being compelled thereunto.
they forced him to abjure and recant, and consent unto the death of Master
John Hus, that he was justly condemned and put to death by them.
Nevertheless, his enemies perceiving that this abiuration was not made
sincerely from his heart, but only for fear to escape their hands, they gave
in new accusations against him. And in the year of our Lord, 1416. the 25. day
of May, the said Master Iereme was brought forth unto open audience before the
whole general Council, unto the great cathedral Church of Constance. Where
many things were laid to his charge that day, as likewise the third day after
(which was another Diet assigned to him for answering) where he refuted his
adversaries with such eloquence and wisdom, that the hearts of all the Fathers
of the council were marvelously bent and moved to mercy toward him. But in
the end he entered to the praise of John Hus, He maintains the doctrine of
Wickliffe and Hus.
and affirmed that whatsoever John Hus and Wickliffe, had holden and written
specially against the pomp and pride of the Clergy, he would affirm even to
the death. And likewise he added, that of all the sins that ever he had
committed, the sin of his recantation did most grievously gnaw and trouble
his conscience, especially in consenting to the wicked condemnation of that
good and holy man, John Hus, which fault as he did it through weakness of
faith, and fear of death; so did he utterly deny and revoke that wicked
recantation.

After this, he was led away again to prison: and the Saturday before the
ascension day, he was brought to the Cathedral Church before the Congregation,
where the sentence of his condemnation was given out against him, and a paper
with pictures of red devils was brought to be put upon his head, which he
himself receiving, put it thereupon, saying; Our Lord Jesus Christ when he
suffered death for me, most wretched sinner, did wear a crown of thorns upon
his head, Note.
and I for his sake will willingly wear this miter, and cap. Afterward he was
laid hold on by the secular power, Ierom of Prague condemned and burnt
and carried to the place of execution, where his body was burnt with fire,
which pain he suffered, with a loud voice praising God in the midst of the
fire, and commending his soul to the gracious custody of the Lord Jesus. And
finally, his ashes were diligently collected, and thrown into the river of
Rhene.

In this age also was Hieronimus Savonarola a man, Hieronymus Savonarola,
preaches against the evil life of the Spiritualty.
no less godly in heart, then constant in profession, who being a Monk in
Italy, and very learned, preached against the evil life of the Spiritualty,
and specially of his own order. Which thing the Pope perceiving, and fearing
that the said Hierom (who was already in great reputation amongst all men)
should diminish and overthrow his authority: he ordained his Vicar or
Provincial to see reformation in those matters, who with great superstition
began to reform them: But the said Hierom did always withstand him, whereupon
he was complained of to the Pope, and cursed by him. Notwithstanding he
continued preaching in the town of Florence. And albeit he was cited to
appear before the Pope, he made his excuse, and came not. Then was he again
forbidden to preach, and his doctrine pronounced and condemned as pernicious,
Hironimus silenced by the Pope.
false, and seditious. Thus Hieronimus forseeing the perils and dangers that
might come, for fear left off preaching.

But when the people which sore hungered for the word of God, were instant upon
him that he would preach again: he began again to preach in the year 1496.
and albeit many counseled him, He again preaches.
that he should not so do without the Popes commandment, yet did he not
regard them, but constantly went forward of his own good will. When the Pope
and his shavelings heard news of this, they were grievously inflamed and
incensed against him, and now again cursed him as an obstinate and stifnecked
heretic. He is cursed by the Pope as an heretic.
Notwithstanding all this, Hierom proceeded in preaching and instructing the
people, saying, men ought not to regard such curses as are against the true and
common profit of the people.

In all his teaching he desired to teach none other thing, but the only pure
and simple word of God: making often protestation, that all men should certify
him if they had heard him teach or preach any thing contrary thereunto. For in
his own conscience, Note.
he knew that he had not taught any thing but the pure Word of God. What his
doctrine was, all men may judge by his books which he has written. After
this, in the year of our Lord, 1498. he was taken and brought to Saint Marks
Cloister, and and two other Friars with him, named Dominicke and Sylvester, who
favored his learning, and were carried to prison, and from thence were brought
forth by the chief Counselors of Florence, and the Popes Commissioners, who
had gathered out certain articles against them, whereupon they should be
condemned to death, which were these:

1. The first article was, as touching our free justification through faith in
Christ. 2. That the Communion ought to be ministered under both kinds. 3. That
the Indulgences and Pardons of the Pope, were of none effect. 4. For preaching
against the filthy and wicked living of the Cardinals and Spiritualty. 5. For
denying the Popes supremacy. 6. And that he had affirmed that the Keys were
not given to Peter alone, but unto the universal Church. 7. That the Pope did
neither follow the life nor the doctrine of Christ, for that he did attribute
more to his own pardons and traditions, then to Christ's merits, and therefore
he was Antichrist. 8. That the Popes excommunications are not to be feared, and
that he who does fear or fly them, is excommunicate of God. 9. That the
auricular confession is not necessary. 10. That he had moved the Citizens to
uproar and sedition. 11. That he had neglected and contemned the Popes
citation. 12. That he had shamefully slandred and spoken against the Pope. 13.
That he had taken Christ to witness, of his naughtiness and heresy. 14. That
Italy must be cleansed through Gods scourg, for the manifold wickedness of the
Princes and Clergy.
These and such like articles were laid to their charge and read before them.
Then they demanded of the said Hierom and his companions, whether they would
recant, and give over their opinions. Whereunto they answered, that through Gods
help, they would steadfastly continue in the manifest truth, and not depart from
the same. Then were they degraded, one after another, by the Bishop of Wasson,
and so delivered to the secular rulers of Florence, with strict commandment to
carry them forth, and handle them as obstinate and stifnecked Heretics.
Hieronymus with two others, hanged and burnt as heretics.
Thus was that worthy witness of Christ, with the other two aforesaid, first
hanged up openly in the market place, and afterward burnt to ashes, and the
ashes gathered up, and cast into the river of Arum, the 24. day of May, 1499.

In this age likewise, Lauren, Valla. Picus Mirandula Comes. Angelus Politianus.
sprang up many men of great erudition and learning; as namely, Laurentius
Valla, Picus Mirandulae Comes, Angelus Politianus, with many others, whose
names, for learning are worthy rememberance.

The mean whereby learning so exceedingly increased in this age, seems to
be the Art of printing, found out in Germany by a certain Gold smith, The
invention of printing.
named John Faustus, in Strausbrugh, and Guttemberg his copartner, as some
write: but whosoever was the inventer of it, it is certain that this faculty
was given to the use of man by the providence of almighty God, at what time the
Bishop of Rome, with all the whole and full consent of all the Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Lawyers, Doctors, Provosts,
Deanes, Archdeanes, assembled together in the Council of Constance, and had
condemned poor John Hus, and Ierom of Prague to death for heresy, and after
subdued the Bohemians, and in a manner the whole world, to be under the supreme
authority of the Romi^h Sea. In the very time, so dangerous and desperate,
where man's power could do no more: The blessed wisdom and omnipotent power
of God, began to work for the Church, not with sword and target, to subdue his
exalted adversary, but with printing, The benefit of printing.
writing, and reading, to convince darkness by light, error by truth, ignorance
by learning. So that by this means of printing, God has heaped upon the proud
kingdom of Antichrist, a double confusion. For whereas he could not abide to
have the enormity of Prelates lives to be condemned by John Hus, who neither
denied his Transubstantiation, nor his Purgatory, nor yet spoke any thing
against his Mass, but only exclaimed against his excessive and pompous pride,
his unchristian, or rather antichristian abomination of life. Now of late
days God has found a way by this faculty of printing, not only to confound
his life and conversation (which before he could not abide to be touched) but
also to cast down the foundation of his standing, that is, to examine,
confute, and detect his doctrine, laws, and institutions, in such sort, that
albeit his life were never so pure, yet his doctrine standing as it does, no
man is so blind, but may see the Pope to be Antichrist. For by this Art,
Tongues are known, knowledge grows, judgment increases, books are
dispersed, the Scripture is seen, the Doctors are read, the stories be
opened, times compared, Note.
truth decerned, falsehood detected, and with the finger pointed at, and all (as
I have said) God has wrought by the benefit of printing.

CENTVRIE XVI.
Popes of Rome.
AFter Paulus the second, Sixtus 4.
succeeded Sixtus the fourth, and ruled thirteen years, and four days. He
changed the custom of keeping the Jubilee every 50. year, and would have it
kept every 25. years.

After him succeeded Innocentius the eight, Innocentius 8.
and ruled seven years, ten months, and twenty seven days.

After him Alexander the sixth, Alexander 6.
ruled eleven years, and eight days. He was a notable tyrant, and a scourg
of God to all Italy, and in special to that corrupt College of Cardinals,
which had chosen him to be Pope; not for his good graces and virtues, but for
the heaps of gold which he had distributed amongst them, Note.
of whom some he banished, others he caused to be impoysoned, and cruelly
slain.

In his time Charles the eight, King of France, clayming right to the Kingdom
of Naples, entered into Italy with a mighty army, and without great resistance,
came to the town of Rome, and from thence to Naples. Alphonsus King of Naples,
at this time finding himself to be hated of all men, had denuded himself of
the Kingdom, and given it to his son Ferdinand, and he himself was fled
into Sicilie. Also his son Ferdinand not being able to resist the puissant
army of King Charles, Charles King of France conquereth the Kingdom of Naples.
was likewise compelled to fly to the little Island of Istria, for safety of
his life: and the whole kingdom of Naples was in short time ouer-run, and
subdued to the King of France.

This victorious conquest so hastily achieved, made the name of Charles to be
terrible to other Princes, even to the Duke of Millan, and Estate of Venice,
who had been his confederate friends, and assisters in this warfare.
Notwithstanding, fearing lest his increasing power should in time be the
overthrow of their Estates, they conspired with the Pope, and the Emperor, and
the King of Spain against him: and as he returned back again to France,
fought against him at Fornovo, not far distant from the town of Parma. The
victory was uncertain: notwithstanding Ferdinand King of Naples, Ferdinand
recouereth the kingdom of Naples.
was so encouraged with this encounter, that he recovered again all his
kingdom which he had lost.

Likewise in this Popes time, Lewis the twelfth, who succeeded to Charles the
eight, came into Italy, claiming right not only to the kingdom of Naples, but
also to the Dukedom of Millan. He had before bound up a covenant with the
Pope, the King of Spain, and the Venetians upon these conditions that having
possessed himself first in the Dukedom of Millan, Lewis King of France,
obtains the dukedom of Millan.
he should give Cremona a famous town in the Dukedom of Millan, to the
Venetians: and he should assist Caesar Borgia Duke of Valentinois, and son
to Pope Alexander the sixth, to eiect out of Romagna the Lords presently bearing
sway in that Country; to the end, that all might come under the Sovereignty
and commandment of this Duke of Valentinois only: and finally, that he should
divide the Kingdom of Naples, betwixt himself and Ferdinand King of Spain.
Upon these conditions, was King Lewis assisted by the Pope, the King of Spain,
and the Estate of Venice; and so with little ado obtained the Dukedom of
Millan, and carried away Lodovick Sforce Duke of Millan, with his brother
Askanius, captives and prisoners to France.

This Pope as he was fraughted with many great faults in his own person,
Alexander the sixth, a favourer of his childrens vices.
so is he likewise noted to have been a fosterer of the wicked vices and
villainous behavior of his children: namely, of Caesar Borgia his son, who
not only cast off his Religious apparel, and became of a Cardinal a Duke and
warrior, but also most unnaturally slew his own elder brother Duke of Gandia,
and became captain and leader of his fathers army in his brothers place.

Also the vilde conversation of Lucretia his Daughter, and her familiar
conversation both with her father and brethren, makes this Pope to be more
famous for wickedness then many other. The just judgment of God upon the Pope
in his death.
His end in the righteous judgment of God answered well unto his life, for as
he had destroyed the lives of many by poison, so upon a certain time through
the oversight of the Butler the empoysoned wine, that was prepared for to
destroy the lives of some Cardinals who were bidden to the banquet, was put in
the hands of the Pope and his son Duke of Valentinois. The Pope immediately
thereafter died, and the Duke although he used many conterpoysons and other
remedies, yet fell he into a sharp and dangerous disease, and carried about
all his time the remembrance of that nights banquet.

To Pope Alexander succeeded Pius the third, Pius 3.
who immediately after his admission to the Popedom finished his course the 26.
day after his inauguration.

After him followed Julius the second, Julius 2.
and ruled nine years, and a eleven months: he was a sharp warrior and not
only recovered from the Venetians the towns of Ariminuim, Faventia, He
warreth against the Venetians, and recouereth many towns from them.
and Ravenna, which towns belonged to the Church, but also by cursing them and
making a covenant with Maximilian the Emperor and the king of France and
Spain in Cambrey against the Venetians, he brought them so low that in short
time they were spoiled of all the Dominion which they had by land in Italy.
For Verona, Vicentia, and Padua, and the territories of Carinthia, were alloted
to Maximilian the Emperor, also Bergama, Brixia, Cremona, and Crema, were
possessed by Lewis king of France, also the towns of Tranmu, Monopolis, and
Barletta in Apulia, were given over to the king of Spain. Also the Duke of
Ferrare recovered Rodigium, and the Duke of Mantua recovered Asula from the
Venetia^s. Thus was the flourishing estate of Venice in this Popes time
utterly abandoned and brought to naught. Notwithstanding he received again
the Venetians into favor and relieved them of his interditment and cursing,
The Venetians received in favor.
and thereby procured against himself the great hatred and indignation of the
king of France and the Emperor: The king of France and the Emperor hate the
Pope.
who both being willing to abandon the pride of the Pope, and to abrogate his
authority, and to substitute another in his room, appointed a general
Council to be holden at Pisa, and warned the Pope to be present thereat the
first day of September.

But the Pope on the other part to frustrate all the attempts of his
adversaries, appointed a general Council to be holden at Rome in the Church
of Lateran, wherein all things that were done in the Council of Pisa were
disanulled and abrogated. Also he stirred up the kings of Spain and England to
make war against the king of France, and the Pope with the Venetians and
Switzers joined their forces together to eiect him out of Italy.

The king of France by the Popes means be set with enemies.
Thus the king of France being beset with enemies on all sides, thought meet to
try his cause by the sword first in Italy, and gave commandment to the
General of his army named Gasto Foiesseius a valiant Captain and an expert
warrior to give battle to the enemies. Thus was a cruel battle fought, near
unto Ravenna, wherein the number of 20000. men were reckoned to have been
slain. The Frenchmen put the Popes, and confederats army to flight.
And although the army of the Pope and the confederates was put to flight, yet
the Frenchmen bought their victory dear with the loss of their Chieftan
Foiesseius, and an hundredth and fifty more of the noble men of France, besides
a great number of others that were slain in this battle. Yea this victory
was with so great damage to the forces of the king of France in Italy, that
within the space of 70. days after the victory, they were compelled to retire
back out of Italy: The Dukedom of Millan recovered from the Frenchmen.
So was the Dukedom of Millan in a very short time plucked out of the hands
of the Frenchmen and was possessed by Maximilian Sforce son to Lodonike
Sforce. In the end this restless Pope breathing battles and wars even unto
the day of his death, conspired of new again with the Emperor against the
Venetians, because they would not render unto the Emperor the Towns of Verona
and Vicentia, and the Venetians on the other side, entered in league and
covenant with Lewis king of France, who stirred up a new faction of Cardinals
and Bishops against the Pope, and this Pope Julius assaied all possible means
to divert the Venetians from their new league bound up with France. But when
he perceived that his trauells availed nothing, and fearing the power of his
adversaries, he fell sick and died; in the very time of the Council of
Lateran which was begun under Pope Julius, and ended under Leo 10. his
successor. Pope Leo the tenth was a learned and eloquent man, Leo 10.
of the house of Medices, and ruled eight years, eight months, and twenty
days. He delighted in Music; and loved, and advanced learned men. The
Council of Lateran which was begun in his Predecessors days was ended by him.
He received in, those Cardinals who were degraded by his Predecessor (after
they had abiured their schism, and damned their couventicles, at Pisa, Millan,
and Lion) and restored them to their former dignities.

In this Popes time, The king of France again obtained the Dukedom of Millane.
Francisse de Valloise king of France came into Italy for recovering of the
Dukedom of Millan, and overcame his enemies in battle. Sforce the Duke of
Millan rendered himself to the king, and was sent prisoner to France, and the
Dukedom was again recovered, and the Towns of Parma and Placentia were
recovered out of the Popes hands, The Pope and Emperor recover it again.
and joined to the Dukedom again, yet within a short time after, the Pope and
the Emperor banded themselves together for expelling of the Frenchmen out of
Italy. For restoring the Dukedom to Francisse Sfortia, and finally for
restoring of the towns of Parma and Placentia to the Pope, and when the
enterprise succeeded well and the Victory was achieved, the report of those
glad tidings so exhilarated the Popes heart that for heart that for excessive
gladness he died, Note.
or as others write he contracted an ague, whereof immediately after he died He
sent Caietanus his Ambassador to Germany, Caiesanus sent to suppress Luther.
to suppress the Doctrine of Martin Luther, but by the providence of God, his
rigorous dealing against Martin Luther made him to search out the scriptures
better, and to discover greater impieties in the Church of Rome, then he did
at the beginning.

Adrianus 6.
After him succeeded Hadrian the sixth, a man of Holland and Schoolmaster to
Charles the fifth, Emperor. He endeavored to correct some abuses of the Church
of Rome in manners, but not the abuses and errors of Doctrine, for he also
sent his Ambassador Cheregatus to Germany, with menacing letters to the Duke
of Saxony because he maintained Martin Luther. But his time was short, for
he died before he had ruled two years in his Popedom.

Clemens 7.
To him succeeded Clemens the seventh, and ruled ten years, ten months, and
seven days. He was a man very inconstant in his friendship to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, but secretly bound up friendship with the king of France,
but this deceitful doing redounded to the Popes great hurt. Rome taken and the
Pope besieged by Charles Duke of Burbone.
For Charles Duke of Burboune, chief Captain to the army which the Emperor
had in Italy, besieged the town of Rome and took it, and albeit the Duke
himself was slain, yet the rest of the army invaded the Town, slew great
numbers of men, defloured women, spoiled houses and temples, and besieged the
Pope himself and his Cardinals seven months, till at length the Pope was free
from his Captivity by command of the Emperor.

About this same time of the Popes besieging, Charles the Emperor was
banqueting and rejoicing for the Nativity of his son Philip, but he stayed
all banqueting, playing, and rejoicing, when the tidings of the Popes besieging
was carried unto him, and commanded to set him at liberty. Many great sins
are imputed to him by writers, and amongst others that he destroyed the lives
of many by poison, and that in end he received the same recompense himself.

After him followed Paulus the third, Paulus 3.
who ruled fifteen years, and twenty nine days. It grieved him to see the
Gospel take so deep root, and to be ouerspred in many nations, and namely
in England by king Henry the eight, who abrogated the authority of the Bishop
of Rome in England, and called himself supreme governor over Christ, in all
Ecclesiastical causes within the bounds of his own country.

The Pope being destitute of all other revenging weapons, drew forth the old
accustomed weapon of the chair of Rome against Princes, King Henry the eight
cursed by the Pope.
and cursed king Henry the eight. This Pope ratified the order of the Jesuits
and appointed a general Council to be kept in Trent, a Town of Italy
bordering near to Germany. This Council began to be kept in Trent in the
year 1546. but hereafter was transferred to Bononia as shall be declared, A
Council ordained at Trent.
God willing.

The Protestants of Germany were desired both by the Emperor and the Pope to
be present at the Council, but they would not acknowledge it to be a lawful
general Council wherein the Pope or his deputy did sit as a judge, Note.
who was indeed party, and whom they were to accuse of false and erroneous
doctrine, of abusing of the Church of God, and usurping the honor which was
only due to Christ, before this Council ended, he concluded his days.

Julius the third succeeded in his place: Julius 3.
who ruled three years. one month, and sixteen days. He reduced the
general Council of Bononia, back again to Trent where it began, but the
sudden report of the army of Maurice Duke of Saxony (who took arms against
the Emperor Charles, for detaining the Lantgraue of Hesse his father in law in
prison) dissolved the Council again for a time, because they feared lest the
Dukes army should have come to Trent, and set upon them.

England embraces Popery in the days of Queen Marie.
In this time the Church of England returned back again to the Popes obedience
in the reign of Queen Marie, and the Pope sent Cardinal Poole to England, to
absolve that country from that curse and interditment which was laid upon it
in the days of Paulus tertius.

Marcellus 2.
After him succeeded Marcellus the second, and ruled twenty two days.

Paulus 4.
After him followed Paulus the fourth, and ruled four years, He opposed
himself against the Emperor Charles.
two months, and twenty four days. He was very contentious, and hated the
Emperor Charles, and brought into Italy 1000. footmen and 2000. horsemen of
the french nation, under the conduct of the Duke of Guise. Also he brought
into Italy an army of Swizers. Notwithstanding the Emperor had sent to
Italy the Duke de Albe, who had taken a great number of towns belonging to
the Pope, before the Duke of Guise entered into Italy. And in the end the Pope
was well content to accept conditions of peace, and to receive back again the
towns, which he had lost in the war.

In his time the Emperor resigned the Imperial crown to his Brother
Ferdinand, and entered into a Monastery, where he concluded his days: but
the Pope neither approved nor ratified this election of Ferdinand, and
Ferdinand on the other part made light account of the Coronation which his
Predecessors had received from the Pope, and was obeyed in Germany, although
he wanted the Popes blessing and coronation.

Pius 4.
After him ruled Pius the fourth, who continued five years, two months, and
fifteen days. In his time the council of Trent (which was begun in the days
of Paul the third) was finished. Queen Elizabeth would not permit the Popes
Ambassadors to enter into her Realm.
He sent an Ambassador to England to invite the learned men of that country
to the Council. but Queen Elizabeth would not permit the Popes Ambassador to
enter into her Realm. Likewise he sent Ambassadors to the Dukes of Germany
professing the reformed Religion. They entertained the Ambassadors honorably,
but sent them back with this answer: that they marueled how the Pope could
send an Ambassador to them, who acknowledged not his authority in such
matters.

From the first meeting of this Council to the dissolution thereof, intervened
the space of eighteen years, but the time of meeting, consultation, and
sitting, of the fathers of that Council was only the space of five years,
namely under Paulus the third, two years; under Julius the third, one year;
and under Pius the fourth, two years.

In this Popes time the reformation of religion in Scotland began, The
beginning of the reformation of religion in Scotland.
images were broken and burnt, altars cast down, Monasteries dimolished, and
the mass abolished. The noble men, who were the principal authors of this
reformation, were assisted by Elizabeth Queen of England, and defended from
the intended persecution of the Frenchmen.

This Pope made a bloody massacre in a Town of Italy called Montalto, A
Massacre in Montalto a town of Italy by the Pope.
against a number of Christian people secretly met together, for hearing of
the word of God, so that one after another were drawn out of the house where
they met and their throats cut with a knife in the hand of a bloody
executioner. In this massacre were martyred 80. persons and not one of all the
number for the fear of death did forsake the true faith of Christ.

The Islie of Malta invaded by the Turks.
In this Popes time was the Isle of Malta invaded by the Turks, but they were
strongly resisted, and left the siege of the Isle, after they had lost 23000.
of their number in that siege. The disputation of Poissne, and grievous
commotions in France after that disputation, began in this Popes time, whereof
is spoken before.

Pius 5. The Isle of Cyprus taken by the Turks.
After him followed Pius the fifth, and ruled seven year. In this time the Isle
of Ciprus was taken by Mustapha Captain of Selims army, but with so great
effusion of blood (for it is supposed that 80000. Turks were slain in the
siege of Nicosia and famogusta two principal towns of the Isle) that Mustapha
considering the number that were slain, violated his promise made to
Bragadinus, chief captain and defender of the Isle of Cyprus, and cruelly
martyred that valiant Captain. This calamity of Cyprus made the Venetians
very much bent against the Turk, and they banded themselves with Philip King
of Spain, and with Pius the fifth Bishop of Rome, by whose support and
assistance a Navy was set forth to the Sea; The battle of Lepanto.
and a notable victory was achieved under the conduct of John de Austria at
Lepanto, of which before.

Gregory 13.
Gregorius the thirteenth followed, and ruled thirteen years, one month, and
three days. He founded a new College for Jesuits in Rome, A new College for
Jesuits in Rome.
and bestowed great revenues upon it, chiestie for this cause, to be a
Seminary of Learned Scholars, to convert the country of Germany to the
Roman religion again.

The massacre of Paris.
In this Popes time fell out that horrible murder of Paris in the year of our
Lord 1572. which was well liked of by the Pope, who also sent to Charles the
ninth king of France the sum of 40000. Ducates to maintain and set forward
the war against the Hugonits, as they called them.

The king of Portugal slain.
In his time Sebastian king of Portugal was slain in Mauritania beyond the
straits, and Philip king of Spain who was his nearest kinsman, obtained the
kingdom after him by strong hand, and by driving out of the land Duke Anthony
whom the people had chosen to be king. A new Calendar set forth by Gregory.
Sixtus 5. He excommunicateth the king of Navarre and Prince of Condie. The Pope
intends a process of excommunication against Henry the third.
Gregory also set forth a new Calendar, and corrected the old Roman Calendar,
which new alteration bred many contentions specially in Germany.

To him succeeded Sixtus 5. who in the beginning of his Popedom, excommunicated
the king of Navarre and Prince of Condie: fearing that which indeed came to
pass hereafter to wit that king H. 3. dying without children the kingdom
should come to the house of Burboune. Likewise he intended a process of
exco^municatio^ against H. the third king of France for slaying of the Cardinal
of Lorain, and his brother the D. of Guise at Bloyes, and for detaining
Captives the Cardinal of Burbon and the Archb. of Lions. This proceeding of the
Pope encouraged others against the King, so that a Iacobin Friar called
Clement, came out of the town of Paris, when the king was besieging it, K.
Henry the third killed.
and killed the King with an impoisoned knife, as has been declared before.
Yet after the death of the King, when H. the fourth, King of Navarre succeeded
to the kingdom, and besieged the town of Paris, this Pope gave no subsidue to
those of the League, that were banded together against the King, fearing that
if the King prevailed in France, Note.
he would be a strong adversary to him, if he had supported his enemies:
whether this was the cause as Onuphrius writes, or another that moved him so
to do, yet this matter so displeased Philip King of Spain, and the Leaguers,
that they were minded to have made a solemn prorestation against the Pope, if
he had not prevented their intention, by excusing himself in the Consistory of
his Cardinals. He was a very vigilant and active Pope, and used often to make
mention of that speech of Vespasian, That a Prince should die standing on his
feet, meaning that a Prince should be vigilant, and ever doing some part of his
calling. He died after he had ruled five years, four months, and three
days, and left behind him five millions of gold.

After him succeeded Vrbanus the seventh, Vibanus 7.
and ruled only thirteen days, for he died before his inauguration.

To him succeeded Gregorius the fourteenth, Gregorius 14.
and ruled nine months, and ten days.

After him Innocentius the ninth, Innocentius 9.
and ruled only two months, and one day.

After him Clemens the eight: Clemens 8. The King of France absolved by this
Clemens.
he absolved the King of France from the sentence of excommunication,
pronounced by Pope Sixtus the fifth, against him. For that the Kings Orators in
his name, had renounced and abiureed that doctrine, which the King in his young
years had so long prosessed: and after they had accepted such conditions, as
it pleased the Pope to impose to the King; namely, that he should receive the
Council of Trent, and make it be obeyed in all parts of his kingdom: also that
he should deliver the young Prince of Condie, a child of nine years old, to
be brought up by Bishops or Abbots, in the Roman religion, and that he should
certify by his letters, all Catholic Princes, of the abiuration of his
former religion, with many other conditions, which were all accepted by the
Kings Orators, and ratified by the King himself.

Of other Doctors.
IN this age God having compassion of the misery of his poor sheep, led out
of the way by blinde-guides, raised up many faithful and learned men, by whose
labors the clouds of gross ignorance, was remooved: the usurped authority of
the Bishop of Rome, that was counted the mother Church of all others, was
discovered to be the Synagogue of Satan. Martin Luther.
Amongst whom Martin Luther a German borne in Islebia in the County of
Mansfelt, steppeth forth as it were a courageous Captain in the forefront of
the army, whom God drew forth out of the very Cloister of the Augustinian
Monks, to be an instrument to reform his house. The bitternesle of Pope Leo
the tenth, and Pope Adrian the sixth, and their Ambassadors, who would not
suffer the corruption of the Roman Church to be pointed out afar off in
selling of pardons, made this man of God more diligent in searching, and more
courageous in defending the truth of God; so that at last the Pope took it to
heart, that his kingdom should fall, The Duke of Saxony Martin Luthers friend.
if Martin Luther were not rooted out, yet the Lord raised up the Duke of
Saxony to be his friend; by whose favorable assistance the Gospel was
deeply rooted in Germany, and Martin Luther himself was preserved from the fury
of all his enemies, till at last he dyed in Islebia, the town of his nativity,
in the year 1546. and in the 17. day of the month of February.

John Calvin Preacher at Geneva.
John Calvin was borne in Noyen, a town of Picardie, anno, 1509. the tenth day
of the month July, and was a Preacher of Christ's Gospel, in Geneva, three and
twenty years. His learning, and painful travels, in writing are known by his
books. The blessing, accompanying his travels, is known by the reformation of
many Churches in France, by his advice and counsel, as also of the kingdom of
Scotland. The power of the grace of God in him, is known by the malice of
adversaries, who railed against him in his lifetime, and after his death; as if
he alone, and none other had troubled the kingdom of Antichrist: and finally,
his painful travels, in teaching his own flock of Geneva, is known by the
disease which he contracted, by great fasting, watching, writing, and teaching,
whereof also he dyed, anno, 1564. on the 27. day of May.

I pass by the rest of those learned and holy men of God, by whose labors the
kingdom of Christ has been prorogated in Europe, because their names, like as
they are worthy of perpetual remembrance, so likewise are they registered in
sundry volumes, namely, by Theodorus Beza, in his book entitled Icones.

Here ends the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY of the Church, containing a short sum of all
the Heretics and Heresies, which sprang up since the days of Christ, until
this present.
CENTVRIE I.
AS it is the accustomed dealing of Satan, to pervert men by drawing them from
the simplicity of Gods truth: So it stands well with the justice of God, to
give over men to strong delusions, who will not believe the truth of God.
Therefore in the third head we are to speak of Heretics, that sprang up in
this age. What heresy is.
Heresy I count to be an opinion repugnant to the grounds of our Christian
faith, obstinately maintained by those that profess the name of Christ. As
touching them who lead an evil life, yea and in effect deny the Son of God,
by a profane conversation, but maintain an opinion that it is lawful so to
do, they may be counted Atheists, or carnal Gospellers, and not Heretics. A
difference betwixt carnal Gospellers, Infidels, weak Christians, and
Heretics.
Jews and Turks also who deny the divinity of Christ, because they do not
profess the Name of Christ, we call them Infidels, but not Heretics. And the
Corinthians, who erred in some fundamental points of the Christian faith; yet
seeing they maintained not their error with obstinate minds, but yielded to
the wholesome doctrine of Paul, no man does count the Corinthians Heretics,
but infirm and weak Christians. And the Apostle himself writing to them,
calls them Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9.
and Gods husbandry. But when these three things concur together, that men
profess the Name of Christ, and yet they maintain opinions repugnant to the
very grounds of true faith, and will not receive instruction, but obstinately
persevere in their error, they are to be counted Heretics. Of this number was
Simon Magus the father of Heretics, Simon Magus.
who being confounded in Samaria, by the great power of God which appeared in
the Ministry of Philip, Act 8.
and of Peter; he fled from the East to the West, and came to Rome, where he
prevailed so far, in short time he was counted a god, and an image was set
up for him, with this superscription, Simoni deo sancto, that is, to Simon an
holy God. Thus the Romans who, in the days of Tiberius, refused to
acknowledge the divinity of Christ, in the days of Claudius they honored a
Sorcerer, Note.
and a seducing Heretic with divine honors. He taught them who followed him,
to fall down before pictures and images, and in special to worship his own
image, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 13. and 14.
and the image of Helena, a certain woman who accompanied him in his journey
form Asia to Rome.

After Simon sprang up another Suppost of Satan, called Menander, Menander.
like to his master Simon in many things; for he was both a Samaritane, and a
Sorcerer, but in absurdity of monstrous opinions, he was far beyond Simon:
for he said that the world was created by Angels, and that he himself was
sent from above to save the world, and by virtue of his Baptism, men should
be made immortal, even in this world; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26.
in such sort, that they should neither wax old, nor taste of death. This
heresy Epiph^^ius compares to Aspido-gorgon in Egypt, a great Serpent
enclosed into a vessel of Earth, with many other Serpents; Simile.
after he has devoured all the rest of the Serpents, he begins to gnaw
his own tail for hunger, Epiph. contra here is.
and to destroy himself: so did this heresy undo it self, by promising
great things, which Menander could not perform, neither in himself, nor in
others.

In this age also sprang up Ebion, Ebion.
who denied the divinity of Christ, and said he was only a man, begotten
between Joseph and Marie, and that the observation of Moses Law was necessary
to eternal life: his followers were called Ebionites, either by the name of
their master Ebion, or else as Eusebius thinks, for their poor and beggarly
opinion they had of Christ, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 27.
supposing him only to be a man: for Ebion in the Hebrew language, signifies
one that is poor. These Ebionites damn all the Epistles of Paul, and count
him an Apostate from the law, and they admit no part of the New Testament for
Canonicke Scripture, except the Gospel of Matthew.

Cerinthus about the same time was the author of strange revelations, Cerinthus.
which he said he received from the Angels, that after the resurrection from
the dead, Christ should have an earthly kingdom in this world: and that the
subjects of Christ's kingdom should eat and drink, and marry, and keep holy
days, and offer sacrifices; for he himself was a man given to fleshly lusts,
and he imagined that the pleasures of Christ's kingdom should consist in
fulfilling the concupiscence of the flesh. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18.


Likewise in this age sprang up the error of the Nicolaitans, upon this
occasion, Nicolaitans Strom. 3. act. 6.
as Clemens Alexandrinus does write. One of the Deacons chosen by the Apostles
to have the oversight of the poor, had a beautiful woman to his wife, and was
accused of over much jealousy. To purge him self of all suspicion of that
fault, he brought his wife into the midst of his brethren, and said, he was
content that any man should marry her. Of which words many took occasion to
live promiscuously like beasts, no man having his own proper wife, but making
them all common.

Howbeit, Nicolaus is said to have lived himself in matrimonial chastity,
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 29.
contenting himself with his own wife alone. Nevertheless his foolish and
unadvised speech, were the occasion of a most wicked and damnable error of the
Nicolaitans, whereof the Lord speaks in the Revelation of John, Apoc. 2.
that he hated it. This is that heresy which Gregory the seventh imputed to
all married Priests, but with what equity, marriage ordained by God, and
honorable among all men, can be called an heresy, or hated of the Lord, Let
the Christian Reader judge.

CENTVRIE II.
IN this second Centurie Satan envying the propagation of the Gospel, sent
forth a pernicious swarm of heretics, such as Saturninus of Antiochia, and
Basilides of Alexandria, the one of them through Syria, and the other through
Egypt dispersed the venom of their heretical doctrine. To whom Eusebius adds
Carpocrates, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7. Gnostici.
most properly counted the father of the heretics called Gnostici, they
received this name, because they professed a knowledge of dark and hid
mysteries. The golden age of the Apostles and Evangelists was now spent, and
false teachers took the greater encouragement to teach a doctrine of devils,
disallowing marriage and commanding fornication, and practizing abominable and
filthy things, which mine own heart abhors to think upon. What necessity
drove Epiphanius in particular to manifest to the world the detestable and
execrable mysteries of those Heretics I cannot tell, Epiph. contra here is.
One thing I know, that it should not be comely in my person to offend the chaste
ears of Christians by renewing the memorial of that beastly vnclea^^es whereof
Epiphanius expressly writes. August. Index haeres ad quod vult deum.
They were justly called Borboritae or Caenosi because they were filthily
pollued in the mire of vnclea^nes. The followers of Carpocrates had in secret
places, images of gold and silver, which they called the images of Jesus and
therewith all the images of Pithagoras, Plato, and Aristotle; and they
worshipped the^ al. Epiph. contra here is.
So that the worshipping of images and the adoration of the image of Jesus
himself is not a custom borrow^d from the ancient fathers of the first 300.
years, but rather a custom borrowed from old heretics, such as Carpocrates
and his follower Marcellina. By their dishonest and filthy conversation it came
to pass, that the true professors of the Gospel were vilely slandered by
persecuting Pagans, objecting to Christians the bankers of Thyestes, and the
chambering of Oedipus as is said before. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7.
This superlatiue degree of excessive uncleanness could not endure long,
because every one of these Heretics; Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates,
with augmentations of new invented absurdities, changed the fashion and
countenance of their error, and so in the end it euanished. But the beauty of
the true Church of Christ, Note.
ever like unto it self, in gravity, sincerity, liberty, temperancie, and
holiness of unreprovable conversation, brightly shined among the Grecians and
Barbarians.

Eusebius. ibid.
The country of Valentinus was unknown to Epiphanius. He was brought up in
learning in the schools of Alexandria. Valentinus.
In his foolish opinion of the plurality of Gods as well masculine as
feminine, the multitude of heavens, and ages or eternities, which he called
(...) thirty in number, deepenesse and silence being beginning of all the
rest. In this his opinion (I say) Epiphanius conjectureth that he has followed
Hesiodus in his Theogonia: August. Index haeres.
yet the man, being ambitious, by permutatio^ of names, he would seem to have
bin the author and finder out of these mysteries. Against whom Ireneus has
written five books wherein he both discovers and also refuteth the vanity
of his error. Marcus
Marcus one of his disciples a notable sorcerer invented a new form of
Baptism, to baptize in the name of the unknown father of all things, and in
the name of the verity the mother of all things, and in the name of him who
descended upon Jesus. Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 4. cap. 11.
All the disciples of the school of Valentinus are called Gnostici with the
forenamed Heretics, Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates, they all denied
the resurrection of the body, and supposed that salvation did belong only to
the soul of man. Valentinus and his disciple Marcus, with Colorbasus and
Heracleon, all their opinions were so intricate and obscure, that men of mean
understanding could not conceive them, and men of deep judgment would not
conceive them, because they had not spitted out their brains (as Epiphanius
speaks) that is, their head was not so void of wisdom as to hearken to the
new invented toys of braine-sicke men.

Cerdon. Marcion.
Cerdon and Marcion were authors of the opinion of two gods, or two beginnings,
the one they called the author all good things, the other the author of all
evil things. They denied the verity of Christ's humane nature and the verity
of his sufferings, whereupon of necessity follows this conclusion, that we
are not saved indeed, but only (to use Marcions own words) putative, that is in
fantasy or supposition. The death of Christ is the true ground of our
salvation, if he only seemed to die, and died not indeed, then we seem to be
saved but are not saved indeed. They denied also the resurrection of the body.
August. Index haeres.
Marcion was justly called by Polycarpus Primogenitus diaboli, Eusebius. l. 4. c.
14.
that is, the first borne of the devil. This heresy by the work of that old
serpent was dispersed in Italy, Egypt, Palestina, Arabia, Syria, Cyprus,
Thebaida, Persia, and in many other places. This is the cause wherefore
Tertullian, and after him, Epiphanius inveighes so sharply against this
pestilent heretic Marcion. He was the inuenter of a strange and new custom in
Baptism, that after a man has bin once baptized he may be baptized again the
second time, and third time also. This he did to wash away and put in obliuio^
the foul fault of whordome committed by him. His father was a Preacher of Gods
word in Pontus, and he himself had vowed chastity, and afterward polluted
himself with whoredom, and was cast out of the church by his own father, and
when he came to Rome at the time when Hyginus (the ninth B. after the
martyrdom of the two great Apostles) was lately departed this life, he was not
admitted to the fellowship of the Church of Rome: therefore he joined himself
to the fellowship of Cerdon and augme^ted his error. To the two beginnings of
Cerdon he added the third in this manner. First he said there was one supreme
and universal God, and him he called the good God, who created nothing that is
in this world. Secondly there was a visible God who was Creator and maker of
all things, and thirdly there was the devil as mid-thing between the visible
and invisible God. Epiph. contra haeres.
No heresy sprang up in this Centurie that was so universally ouer-spred in
many nations and countries as the heresy of Marcion was. So bent is the
corrupt nature of man to follow a doctrine of lies, when it is colored with a
show and pretense of reverence toward God. For they feared to attribute the
making of any thing that is evil to God, who is infinite in goodness. But
this was needless fear, because creatures which now are evil, they have not
this wicked disposition by the creation of God, but by their own voluntary
defection from the first estate whereunto God created them. Lucianus and
Apolles were the disciples of Marcion whom many did follow, in so much that
Marcionists were called Lucianistae and Apelleiani. Nevertheless Apelles could
not agree with his master Marcion in all things: for he granted that Jesus
Christ the son of the good God had a true body, yet not made of the substance
of the Virgin Mary, but of the four elements, and that he died and rose again
not putative as Marcion said, but truly and in very deed, yet he thought that
this true body of Christ like as it was composed of the elements, so likewise
after his resurrection he dissolved it into the four elements, and afterward
returned to heaven from whence he came. This error Epiphanius abhors for
many great absurdities. First (says he) did Christ build up again that
Tabernacle which men destroyed, to the end that he himself incontinent after
the building of it should destroy it again by a dissolution of it into the
elements? Secondly if Christ dissolved his own body, why would he not let his
disciples see at least the relikes of his body resolved into elements, to the
end they might have honored the relikes of his dissolved body, as the woman
came to the sepulcher with precious ointments to have honored his dead body.
Thirdly (says he) Apelles speaks of Christ's body after his resurrection,
that which neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever spoke of that blessed body.
This is the right way to undo heresies, to bring them to the right balance of
the mouth of Christ, Note.
and writings of his holy Apostles, and then heresies cannot consist and stand.

In the days of Antoninus and L. Verus the authors of the fourth persecution;
Tatianus.
Tatianus a Syrian came to Rome and was converted to the true faith by Justinius
Martyr, during whose lifetime he maintained no error openly: but after the
death of Justinius he became the author of the sect Encratitae, Encratitae.
who were so called, because they abstained from wine, eating of flesh and
creatures quickened with a sensitive life. They damned marriage and blasphemed
the Epistle of PAVL. Eusebius. l. 4 c. 28.
This they did no doubt, because Paul in his Epistles calls the prohibition
of marriage, and the prohibition of meats appointed by God for the use of men
with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.
to be a doctrine of Devils.

Montanus a man of Phrygia seduced two women, Montanus. Cataphryges. John 14.
Priscilla and Maximilla to leave the company of their husbands, and to be his
prophetesses. He called himself the holy Spirit, whom Christ sent to instruct
his disciples in all truth. He instituted laws concerning fasting, and damned
the second marriage, and affirmed that Paul gave liberty to widows to marry,
August. Index haeres. Eusebius. lib 5. cap, 14 and 16.
because he knew the will of God, but only in a part.

I purposely pass over the rabble of obscure Heretics, such as Ophitae,
Caiani, Sothiani, and such like: of whom notwithstanding Epiphanius vouchsafes
to write at length, no doubt to manifest the corruption of man's nature,
stouping sometimes so basely, that not only they hearken to the counsel of the
old serpent the devil, but also they worship the very instrument of the
Devil, viz. the serpent, as these Ophitae did. Again, some Heretics
magnified Cain and called him their father. Simil.
And others gave to Seth the honor due to Christ. So it comes to pasle, that
men destitute of the grace of God that comes from above, are like unto
drunkards staggering on the right hand, and on the left hand, and falling on
their faces, and beating out their own brains. Sometimes they extol wicked
men like unto Cain, and fall at the left hand: at other times they praise good
men like unto Seth with excessive praises, and with derogation of the glory of
Christ, and fall at the right hand. And at sometimes are so benumbed, that they
spare not to set the very devil and his instruments in the chair of God, and
fall like drunken fools on their faces, and knock out their own brains.

Let no man marvel wherefore the name of Aquila a man of Pontus and Theodosion
of Ephesus, Aquila and Theodosion rather Apostats then Heretics
are not reckoned in the roll of Heretics in this age. True it is that they
once professed the faith of Christ, and made defection again, but this
defection made not a division into the Church which is the body of Christ,
because they joined themselves to the unbelieving Jews, who utterly denied the
divinity of Christ, and therefore of Christians became infidels rather then
heretics. Like as no man calls the Emperor Julian an heretic, but an
apostate: so Aquila and Theodosian were notable apostates from the faith of
Christ. How they labored to pervert by sinistrous translations of places of
Scripture giving clear testimony of Christ who was borne of a virgin, Eusebius
declares. Eusebius. l. ^. ^. ^.
The translation of the Septuagints (...), that is, Behold a virgin shall
conceive, Isa. 7. was translated by them, (...), Behold a young woman shall
conceive. But this bad translation of Apostat christians and Proselites of the
Jews so well liked of the Jewish nation, could never take place in the Church
of Christ: because the Propher Isaiah in that chapter is speaking of a
miraculous sign which God will give unto his people to confirm their faith,
such as is the birth of a virgin, which indeed is a miraculous work, but the
birth of a young woman that has an husband is no miracle.

CENTVRIE III.
IVstly did Epiphanius compare an heretic to a Moul; Simile.
a beast in quantity little, h^rking in subterraneall holes, and yet working
great harm to well labored ground. nevertheless when it hapeneth that this
noisome and blind beast creeps out of her hole, and runs upon the
superfice of the earth, she is a ridiculous, wandering, and feeble, beast; she
cannot see the hole out of which she has crept forth, and she is easily taken
and slain. Even so heretics so long as they lu^ke in secret, they pervert the
hearts of many simple and ignorant people: but when they set out their heads,
and their doctrine is examined by the light of Gods everlasting word, Note.
they are found to be ridiculous and feeble beasts. In the former Centuries by
way of preterition I passed by many obscure heresies, the like order I intend
God willing to keep in this Centurie also.

The heretics called Artotiritae who added unto the administration of their
Sacra^ent cheese unto the bread. Artotiritae. Alogi.
Alogi who rejected the writings of the holy Apostle John, and said they were
written by Cerinthus: although, the Evangelist John of purpose, wrote the
History of his Gospel against Ebion and Cerinthus.

Adamiani, Adamiani.
who had their conventicles in subterraneal places called Hypocausta, because
that under the place of their meetings, a furnace of fire was kindled to warm
the place of their conventions: for they unclothed themselves when they entered
into it, and stood naked, both men and women, according to the similitude of
Adam and Eua before their fall.

Theodos^^^ who denied the divinity of Christ, Theodos^^^.
taking the name of their sect, from a miserable man in Constantinople called
Theodatus, who in time of persecution for love of temporal life, denied the
king of glory Jesus Christ, and when this filthy denial was objected to him
as a reproach of a cowardly heart, he answered that he denied not God, but man;
by this answer signifying that Christ was man only, and not God ma^ifested in
our nature. Melchised^ciani Bardesianistae Valesii.
Melchisedeciani magnified Melchisedecke above Christ. Bardesianistae were but
a branch of the heresy of the Valentinians and Gnostici, who denied the
resurrection, as is already declared in the second Centurie. Valesii, who
gelded themselves. Angelici, whose name was better known to Epiphanius then
the original of their sect. Apstolici, who would have possessions, Apostolici.
but rejoiced in voluntary poverty, and detected marriage, giving out a
sentence against themselves, that they were unclean, because they were
procreated by marriage. Origeniani, Origeniani.
and Turpes. These were vile and filthy beasts, not abhorring from whordome,
but from procreation of children, to the end they might seem to be chaste.
Genesis 38.9.10 Epiphaen contra haeres. lib. 2.
They were like to Onan the son of Judah whom the Lord destroyed Al these
heresies mentioned by Epiphan. I pass by almost with silence, because they
were like unto abortiue birthes, and continued not long to perturbe the peace
of the Church.

Now concerning other Heretics, by whose venomous doctrine the Church of
Christ had great strife and perturbation. Artemon and Beryllus Bishops of
Bostra in Arabia denied the divinity of Christ, Artemon.
and affirmed that he was not existent before he took flesh of the Virgin.
With Beryllus Origin conferred, and reduced him back again to the true faith
and therefore I set not his name in the Catalogue of Heretics, because he
added not unto the fault of his bad opinion an obstinate defending of the same.
Euseb^l. 6. c. 33. Helcesa^tae.


The heresy of Helcesaitae otherwise called Sampsei, because of the short
continuance of it, is scarce worthy to be reckoned. They mixed the religion of
the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians, together; but were more addicted to the
supperstition of the Jews, Epiph contra ^eres lib. 2.
then to any one of the other two. They rejected the writings of the Apostle
Paul, and affirmed that a man who denied the Lord with his mouth, in the time
of persecution, if so be he adhered to the faith in his heart, he had
committed no sin. They carried about with them a singular book, which they
said was sent down from heaven, Coment. Funt. in Chron.
and they promised remission of sins to every man who would hearken to the
words of that book.

Novatus a Presbyter at Rome, The nature of contentious spirits.
was a man of a contentious spirit, and men that are humorous, high-minded, and
contentious, they are wise to do evil, but they can do no good. Such a man
was Novatus, who disquieted with schism, and heresy, two of the most notable
Churches in the world at that time, viz. Carthage and Rome, by giving out a
rigorous sentence against those, who in the time of persecution had fallen,
albeit they had repented after their fall, and all outward tokens of unfeigned
repentance had been seen in them; yet his opinion was, that they should not
be admitted again to the fellowship of the Church. This opinion was not only
repugnant to the words of Isai, Ezech. 18. Mat. 11. and to innumerable more
places of sacred Scripture, but also it was a foolish opinion, advancing the
kingdom of the devil, and not the kingdom of God. For the two great wheels
of the cart of the devil, Note.
whereby he carries men headlong to hell, are presumption and desperation: and
merc^lesse Novatus teaching a doctrine that strengthened not the knees of the
weak, he did what in him lay to move sinners to despair. There Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage, who excommunicated him, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
who did the like, with the advice of a grave and worthy Council, gathered at
Rome, are to be counted wise men: because they endeavored timely to suppress
those errors that weakened the hearts of the children of God.

I read of no heresy preceding the heresy of Arrius and Eutiches, Reasons
why the Novatian heresy continued long in the Church.
that continued longer time in the Church of God, then the heresy of Novatus;
partly, because it crept in under pretense of zeal, to the glory of God, and
under pretense of a detestation of sin: partly also, because the Novatian
Heretics, in the question concerning the divinity of Christ, ^oto^. ^ib. ^
^^p. ^^.
were conformable to the opinion of the true Church. Thirdly, because in the
time of the Arrian persec^^ion, the Novatians were banished, and troubled with
no less hat^full malice and despite, then the members of the Church were: yea
and the true Catholics and Novatians, being companions of one and the
selfsame suffering, were content also to give their lives one for another.
And the foresaid author says, Parumque abfuit quin coadunarentur, that is,
(...)
They were neere-by united, and agreed together, to wit, the true Catholics
and Novatians. But what was the impediment that hindered their union? Read the
History, and it shall not be found in the true Catholics, but in the
obstinacy and wilfulness of the Novatians. And so it falls out at all times,
(...)
that men who are the authors of heresies and schisms, are also the principal
hinderers of the redintegration of the union of the Church.

The razing and demolishing of the Temple of the Novatians, in Cyzicum, a
famous town of Bithynia, together with the calamity of the people of
Mantinium, a town of Paphlagonia, clearly prooveth, that the Novatian heresy
continued until the days of Constantius the son of Constantine, an Arrian
Emperor, and a persecuter of the true faith. The favor that they obtained in
the days of Julian, I pass over with silence. But in the days of the reign
of Theodosius, the Novatians by the Emperors edict, were permitted to have
public conventions in Constantinople, to enjoy such privileges as other
Christians had, and to possess the Oratories and Temples, wherein they were
accustomed to ser^e God. All this toleration and liberty was granted to them by
the good Emperor Theodosius, because in the head of Doctrine concerning the
divinity of Christ, they damned the Arrians, Soc. l.^. c. 10. Hi^. Magd. C^nt.
3. (...). ^.
and agreed with the Homousians. The Magdeburg history says, that this
heresy continued in Constantinople to the time that it was conquered by the
Turks, I have written of this heresy at great length, to admonish all true
Christians, that it is not enough to adhere to some points of the true faith,
Note.
and to suffer persecuion for righteousness at sometimes, and to love brotherly
fellowship at some times, so that we are content to sacrifice our life for our
brethren: all these things did the Novatians, and were favored by the Emperor
Theodosius, as is said, yet they were both Schismatics and Heretics, because
they would be wiser then God, and debar them, from the bosom of Christ's
compassions, whom Christ inviteth to come unto him, Mat. 11.^8
saying; Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.

Let the example of the Novatians admonish men who study to singularity, and
to bring in new customs or opinions in the Church of God, to take heed that
their opinions be not repugnant unto the written Word: Notes
left, after they have continved a long time, in the end they be rejected as
opinions, foolish, vain, heretical, and not agreeing with the Scriptures of
God. His followers were called (...), or Puritans. Enseb, ^^. c. 43 Hist.
(...). cen^. 3. cap. ^
Let this name rest in the bosom of Heretics. And men who are not guilty of
the faults, that were in the Novatians, if they be vndeservedly charged with
this name given of old to Heretics, let them say with humble hearts, that in
one sense they are (...), because they are purged from sin in the fountain
of the blood of Christ. 1 Ioh. 3.^.
But in no other sense and meaning, can true Christians be called (...),
except only in this, because their sins are freely forgiven in Christ, and
God has begun the work of sanctification in them, to be a testimony that
they are planted in the stock of Christ, In this sense speaks the Evangelist
John, Ioh. 15.3
(...), that is, Now are ye clean, through the word that I have spoken unto
you.

The heresy of Sabellius began to show it self unto the world, Sabellians
about the year of our Lord 257. under the reign of Gallus. It was set forth
by Nortus in Ptolemaida, afterward by Hermogenes, and Prazeas, and last it was
propagated by Sabellius the disciple of Noetus. Always the heresy rather
takes the name from the disciple, then from the master. They confessed that
there was but one God only, but they denied that there were three distinct
persons in this one Godhead, viz. the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. By this
their opinion, they confounded the two Greek words, (...) and (...), as if
there were no difference between them. No man dare presume to say, that in God
there are three distinct substances, therefore Sabellius and his adherents
said, that there were not three distinct substances or persons in the Godhead,
but the three names of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, were given to one
person only, but pointed not out distinction of persons or substances in the
Godhead. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 29.
By this opinion they were compelled to grant, that it was the Father who
clothed himself with our nature, and dyed for our sins, and they were
called Patrispass^ani, because their opinion imported that the Father suffered.

In the reign of Gallienus, and about the year of our Lord, Nepotiani.
264. a certain Bishop in Egypt, called Nepos, began to affirm, that at the
later day the godly should rise before the wicked, and should live with Christ
here in the earth, a thousand years, in abundance of all kind of delicate
earthly pleasures. The ground of this error, was the misunderstanding of the
words of the Revelation of John, chap. 20. verse. 5.6. In refuting of this
heresy, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, bestowed his travels with good
success: for he disputed against Coracion, a man professing this error in
Arsenoitis, a place of Egypt, whom he refuted in presence of many brethren,
who were auditors of that disputation, for the space of three days, from
morning till evening. So that in the end Coracion yielded, Eusebius l. 7 c. 24.
and promised that he should not maintain any such opinion in time to come.

About that same time, that is, in the time of the reign of Gallienus,
Samosatenus.
Claudius, and Aurelianus: Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antiochia, a pestilent
fellow, denied the divinity of the Son of God, and affirmed that Christ
obtained the name of the Son of God, through his virtuous behavior and
patient suffering; but he was not naturally and truly the Son of God,
begotten of the substance of the Father. His life correspondent to his
doctrine, was wicked and profane. He was so covetous of vainglory, that he
built unto himself in the Church a glorious seat, according to the similitude
of a princely throne, and from this seat he spoke unto the people, whom he was
accustomed to reprove with sharp words, if they had not received his words
with cheerful acclamations and shoutings, such as were wont to be used in
Stage Plays. The Psalms also that were sung in Church, Eusebius. l. 7^ c. 30.
to the praise of God, he abrogated, and was not ashamed to hire women, to
sing his own praises in the Congregation of the Lords people. For this his
damnable doctrine and lewd life, he was most justly deposed by the Council
convened at Antiochia, and excommunicated by all Christian Churches in the
whole world, and was so detested by all good men, that F^rmilius Bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, and Dionysius Alexandrinus, who for his old age might
not travel, and be present at the Council of Antiochia, yet they both damned
the Heretic Samosatenus, by their letters sent to the Congregation of
Antiochia, but not to the Bishop thereof, because he was not worthy that any
man should salute him, either by word or writ.

Manes a Persian, Manes, and Manichei.
otherwise called Manicheus, a man furious and mad, answering well unto his
name, set forth the venom of his heresy, in the time of the reign of
Diclesian, a man both in speech and manners, rude and barbarous, in inclination
divelish: Eusebius. l. 7. c. 31.
yet he durst to call himself the holy spirit, as Montanus had done before,
and to represent Christ's actions in chusig unto him twelve disciples, whom he
sent forth to propagate his errors, into diverse parts of the world. His
heresy contained a mass, or venomous composition of old extinguished errors,
which he renewed and massed together; such as the error of Cerdon and Marcion,
concerning two beginnings. The error of Encratitae, in prohibition of meats,
which God has appointed for the use of man with thanksgiving, specially flesh
and wine. He utterly rejected the old Testament, as many other Heretics had
done before him. He ascribed not sin to the free will of man, and his
voluntary defection from the estate of his first creation, but to necessity,
because man's body was made of the substance of the Prince of darkness. This was
that heresy wherewith Augustine was infected before his conversion, but the
Lord who brought forth light out of darkness, and made Paul, sometime a
Persecuter, to be a Preacher of his Gospel, and Cyprian a Sorcerer, to be a
worthy Preacher and Martyr: this same gracious Lord, I say, in the multitude of
his unspeakable compassions, drew Augustine out of this filthy mire of
abominable heresy, and made him list unto a bright star, sending forth the
beams of light to comfort Gods house. The opinion of Manes concerning the
creation of the world, and the creation of man, the manifestation of Christ in
our nature, rather in show and appearance, then in verity; and the horrible
abomination of their vile Eucharist, no man can be ignorant of these things,
who has read but a little of the books of Augustine, written against the
Mani^heans. In the end, like as Manes exceeded all the rest of the Heretics
in madness of foolish opinions: even so the Lord pointed him out among all the
rest, to be a spectacle of his wrath and vengeance. For the King of Persia
hearing of the fame of Manes, Gods justice against Manes.
sent for him to cure his son, who was deadly diseased: but when he saw that
his son died in his hands, he cast him into prison, and was purposed to put
him to death: but he escaped out of prison, and fled to Mesopotamia.
Nevertheless the King of Persia understanding in what place Manes did lurk,
sent men who pursued him, took him and excoriated his body, Soc. l. 1. c. 22.
and stopped his skin full of chafe, and set it up before the entry of a
certain City of Mesopotamia. If any man be desirous to have greater
knowledge of this remarkable Heretic, both in respect of his life and death,
he may read the forementioned chapter of the Ecclesiastical history of
Socrates, and he shall find, that the first man called Manicheus, who renewed
the error of two beginnings, was a man of Scythia. He had a disciple, first
called Buddas, afterward Terebynthus, who dwelt in Babylon. This man
Terebynthus, was the composer of these books which Manes gave out under his
own name. Manes was but a slavish boy, bought with money by a woman of
Babylon, in whose house Terebynthus had lodged, and she brought up the boy at
school: his name was Curbicus when he was bought, but when this woman died,
she left in legacy to Curbicus, the money and books of Terebynthus, and he
went from Babylon to Persia, changed his name, and called himself Manes, and
set forth the books of Terebynthus, Note.
as if they had been composed by himself, so that he added unto the rest of
his villainies, this fault also, that he was from his very youth a dissembling
and deceitful fellow.

After Manes, Hieracitae.
sprang up Hierax, who spoke of the Father, and the Son, as of two lights
different in substance. He damned marriage, denied the resurrection of the
body, and excluded infants from the kingdom of God. Mark in this Catalogue
of heresies of the first three hundred years, Epiph. contra here is. Hist. Magd.
how many of the devils trumpeters sounded the doctrine of the prohibition of
marriage. The Nicolaitans, Gnostici, Encratitae, Montanistae, Apostolici,
Origeniani, called Turpes, Note.
Manichei, and Hieracitae. Satan hates marriage, to the end that his kingdom
might be advanced by fornication, and all kind of uncleanness.

CENTVRIE IV.
OLd heresies before mentioned, such as the heresies of the Novatians,
Sabellians, and Manicheans, did more hurt in this Centurie, then in the time
wherein they were first propagated; as appears by the books and Sermons of
learned Fathers, seriously insisting to quench the flame of heretical
doctrine, which was kindled before their time.

Meletiani.
In this Centurie the plurality of Heretics did most mightily abound. Soc. l.
1. c. 6. Theod. l. 1. c. 8. Aug de here is. Theod. l. 1. c 9.
Meletius a Bishop in Thebaida, was deposed by Peter Bishop of Alexandria (who
suffered martyrdom under Dioclesian) because he was found to have sacrificed
to Idols. After his deposition he was factious and seditious, raising up
tumults in Thebaida, and practizing tyranny against the chair of Alexandria:
and his disciples were found to have communicated with the Arrians. The
Council of Nice suffered Miletius to enjoy the name of a Bishop without power
of ordination.

Arriani.
In the year of our Lord 324. sprang up Arrius a Presbyter in Alexandria, who
denied that the Son of God was begotten of the substance of the Father, but
that he was a creature, and made of things not existent, and that there was a
time wherein the Son was not. Theod. l. 1. c. 4.
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, dealt with him to reclaim him from his
heretical opinions: but his travels were spent in vain. Therefore Alexander
was compelled to use the last remedy, to depose and excommunicate Arrius, with
his accomplices, to wit, Achilles, Euzoius, Aethalus, Lucius, Sarmata, Julius,
M^nas, Arrtus alter, and Helladius. This excommunication had allowance by the
Bishops of Thebaida, Pentapolis, Lybia, Syria, Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia,
Cappadocia, and many other places. But Arrius an head strong heretic was
incorrigible: neither the letters of the good Emperor Constantine, nor the
trauelts of Osius Bishop of Cordubae, could work any amendment in him. He
labored to fortify himself in his heretical opinion, especially by the
assistance of Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, a perilous and deceitful man. Arrius
was condemned by the Council of Nice, and was banished by the Emp. Constantine.
Albeit he was reduced again from banishment by the means of Constantia, the
Emp. sister, and of an Arria^ presbiter, whom she commended to the Em. her
brother when she was concluding her life: Socrat. l. 1. c. 38
Yet the Lord punished the insolent pride of this heretic, with a shameful
and vnquoth death, as has bin already declared. This heresy was propagated by
Constantius, by Iustina, and her son Valentinian the second, by the Emp.
Valens, and by the kings of Goths and Vandalles. The principal defenders of
the heresy were Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, Socrat. l. 2. c. 18
Menophantes, B. of Ephesus, Theogonius B. of Nice, Vrsatius B. of Sygdonia,
and Valens B. of Mursa, in upper Panonia, Theonas B. in Marmarica, Secundus B.
of Ptolemaida in Egypt, Maris B. of Chalcedon, Narcissus B. in Cilicia,
Theodorus B. of Hearaclea in Thracia, and Marcus B. of Irenopolis in Syria. In
the number of most impudent Arrian Bishops, was Ishyras, the chief accuser of
Athanasius, to whom the Arrians gave the wages of iniquity, and ordained him B.
of Mareotis: Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 25.
The ouer-throwing of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup, the burning
of the holy books, the slaughter of Arsenius, and many other accusations were
all forged against Athanasius by Ishyras, for hope of reward. Eulalius,
Euphronius, Placitus, Stephanus, Leo^tius, Spado, and Eudoxius, Bishops of
Antiochia^all these were defenders of the Arrian heresy, with many others of
whom I will have occasion to speak hereafter.

Albeit Anomaei were a branch of the stock of the Arrians, Anomaie.
yet they differed from other Arrians in this, that they abhorred from the word
(...), which other Arria^s embraced. The principal authors of this heresy
were Acatius Ennomius, and Aetius, whereof it came to pass, that some called
them Acatiani, others Eunomiani, and some Aetiani. Acatius in the Council of
Seleucia manifested the Hypocrisy of his deceitful speeches, Sozom. lib 4.
cap. 22.
because in his books he had called the Son of God (...), that is of like
Substance with the Father: he was demanded in what sense he had so written? he
answered, that the Son of God was like unto the Father in will, but not in
substance. Eunomius bishop of Cyzicus in Bythynia, was the inuenter of this
miserable Heresy of Anomaei, a man who delighted in multitude of words as
many Heretics do. Sozom lib. 6. cap. 26.
Sozomen blames him for altering the custom of thriee dipping the water in
Baptism. The people of Cyzicus complained to the Emp. Constantius, Theod. l.
2. c. 29.
of the bad and reprobate opinion of Eunomius. The Emperor was offended
against Eudoxius bishop of Constantinople who had placed him in Cyzicus. Basil
contra. Eunomium. Numb. 25. ver. 14.15.
Hereof it came to pass, that Eudoxius (who was of that opinion himself, but
durst not auow it) sent secret advertisement to Eunomius to fly out of
Cyzicus. Basilius Magnus in his five books written against Eunomius, as it
were filled with the spirit of Phineas, who with one spear killed Ombri and
Cosbi: even so Basilius with one pen, confounded both Eunomius, and his
master Aetius. This Aetius was a Syrian, admitted to the office of a Deacon by
Leontius Spado: he spoke vnquoth things of the Trinity, and was justly called
an Atheist. The Emp. Constantius, albeit he loved other Arrians, Theod. l. 2.
c. 28.
yet he disliked Anomei, and procured his deposition and excommunication, by
the Bishops who came to Constantinople from Ariminum and Seleucia. Eudoxius
first Bishop of Germanitia, in the confines of Cilicia, after Bishop of
Antiochia, and last Bishop of Constantinople, a hunter for pre-eminence of
place: he was a favorer of the sect of Arrians, Theod. l. 2. c. 25.
called Anomei, or (...): yet he had the heart of a beast, for neither would he
embrace the true faith, neither durst he defend the lie whereunto his heart was
inclined. But in the Council of Constantinople, holden after the Councels of
Ariminum and Seleucia, he transferred all the blame upon Aetius, whom the
Emperor banished: so that it is a strange thing, Theod. l. 2. c. 27.
that this error should have had the name also from such a feeble patron as
Eudoxius was, to be called the error of Eudoxiani.

Macedonius, Macedoniani, or (...).
rather by the authority of the Emp. Constantius, then by the consent of the
people, was made Bishop of Constantinople. Paulus lawful Bishop of
Constantinople, was banished to Cucusus, a town of Armenia, and there he was
strangled by the Arrians, also. 3150. of the people were slain and trodden
under feet, at his violent entry. This bloody Tyrant denied the divinity of
the holy Ghost. He was deposed by the Emperors procurement, Soc. l. 2. c
because he durst presume at his own hand to transport the bones of the Emp.
Constantine from one Church to another. His followers were abhorred more then
any other branch of the Arrian heresy, Soc. l. 4. c. 12.
for their inconstancy. They sent Messengers to Liberius Bishop of Rome, and
consented in all points to the Nicene Faith: but afterward, like unto dogs,
they returned to their vomit a gain. He was damned, as a notable heretic, by
the second General Council gathered at Constantinople, by the Emperor
Theodosius, Anno. 386. He died in a little Village near to Constantinople, and
Eudoxius obtained his place.

Photinus Bishop of Sirmium in Illyria, Photiniani.
was the Disciple of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia: These two renewed
both the heresy of Sabellius and Samosatenus, and augmented the blasphemous
opinion of Samosatenus, with this addition. Secrat. l. 2. c. 19
That the kingdom of Christ was not everlasting, but it had a beginning, when
he was borne of the Virgin, and should have an end at the latter day. This
heresy has the name from the disciple, and not the master, in regard that
Marcellus continued not so obstinately in his error, as did Photinus his
disciple, but renounced his error, and was received into the fellowship of the
Church, Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 11.
in the Council of Sardica: but Photinus was deposed at the Council of
Sirmium, and banished by the Emperor Constantine Nevertheless, after his
deposition and banishment, he continued obstinately in his error, and wrote
books both in Latin and Greek, in defense of his heresy: whereby his name
became infamous, and he was counted the author of this heresy.

Audaei, or Anthopomorphitae.
Audaeus was a man of Syria, under the reign of Valentinian, and his brother
Valens: He published an error, That God was like the similitude of a man's
body. This error he conceived through wrong understanding of the words of
Scripture, wherein it is said, Let us make man in our own Image, Genesis 1. verse
21.
according to our likeness. With this error many unlearned Egyptian Monks
were entangled. They pretended great innocence and chastity in their lives,
and separated themselves from the society of the Church, Theod. compend.
beresium.
covering their impiety with this pretext, that they saw usurers and unclean
persons tolerated in the Church.

Messaliani.
About this time, says Theodoretus, that is, in the days of Valentinianus and
Valens, sprang up the heresy of Messaliani. Albeit this name be vnquoth, yet
the Greek names given unto this heresy are more significatiue: they were
called (...), because they counted prayer the only exercise necessary to the
children of God, even as if a man could talk with God by prayer, Note.
before he has first heard God talking with him by the preaching of the Word.

Likewise they were called (...), that is, men ravished in the spirit, Theod
lib. 4. cap. 11.
after long continuance in prayer. When they were transported, and out of their
wits, then they supposed, that the holy spirit was sensibly infused into them,
whereby their bodies were made free of all perturbation, and their souls were
auerted from all inclination to evil, in such sort, that they had no need of
fasting to subdue their bodies, nor of Doctrine to restrain the disordered
affections of their souls. Theod. ibid.
This Pestilent heresy was ouerspred in many places: but it was mightily
suppressed by Letoius B. of Meletina, Amphilachius B. of Iconium in Lycaonia,
and Flania^us B. of Antiochia, who with great dexterity drew out a confession
out of the mouth of Adelphius, an aged man, and a propagator of this heresy in
Edessa. This Heresy, albeit it had many patrons, such as Dadoes, Sabas,
Adelphius, Hermas, Simeones, yet from none of them it received the name, but
rather from the actions and passions whereunto they inclined.

Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, Appollinaris.
gloried in the quickenesse of his wit, and delighted to make contradiction to
every thing that any man could speak: and so it came to pass (as Ruffinus
writes) Heresim ex contentione generauit, Ruffin. l. 2. c. 20.
that is to say, Through contention he procreated an heresy: affirming that in
the dispensation of Christ's Incarnation, he assumed the body of a man only,
but not the soul of a man because his divinity supplied the place of his
soul. And when he was argued by evident places of Scripture, that Christ in
his humane nature was a perfect man, having not only a body, but also the
soul of a man: as when he said, His soul was heavy unto the death: Mark, 14.
verse, 34.
left he should have seemed to be utterly convinced and overcome: he
confessed that Christ's body was quickened with a natural life: but the
divinity o f Christ was in place of a reasonable soul. This heresy was
damned in Councels conueened at Rome, Alexandria, and Constantinople. He
augmented the schism at Antiochia, where there had been already three
factions, to wit, Eustatiani, Meletiani, and Pauliniani. Now Apollinaris
dwelling in Laodicea a town of Syria, Theod lib. 5. cap. 3.
near approaching to Antiochia: he was the author of the fourth faction. In
the days of Julian he compiled histories of Scripture, in Greek Poesy. In
the days of Valentinian and Gratian, Itrom in Catal. Theod l. 5 c. 4. Soz^m.
lib. 6. cap. 25.
he defended his Heresy. In the days of the Emperor Theodosius he concluded
his life. His son, in name, learning, and bad use of excellent gifts, was
like unto his father. Vitalius presbiter in Antiochia was a serious defender of
the heresy of Apollinaris, in so much, that the followers of Apollinaris were
called Vitaliani.

Donatus was a Bishop in Numidia, Donatista.
who contended with unsupportable hatred against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage,
challenging him, August Epist. 152.
that he had received ordination from Foelix Altungensis, who was proditor:
that is, who in time of persecution had delivered the book of holy Scripture
to be burnt: or, as others say, because he admitted to an Ecclesiastical
office, a Deacon, who had committed the like fault. The cause of Cecilianus was
often agitat before the Council of Carthage, before Miltiades B. of Rome, before
the Council of Arles, and by the Emp. Constantine: but the Donatistes at all
times succumbed in probation. Therefore they were enraged, because they could
not accomplish their wicked designs against Cecilianus: and they fell from the
unity of the Church. Inueterate schisms often times turn to Heresies. So the
Donatists in the end were defenders of Heretical opinions: namely, that the
Catholic church was no where else to be found, but only in that corner of
Afric, wherein they themselves dwelt: and that Baptism was not effectual,
except it had bin ministered by one of their society. Of all the branches of
this heresy, August de here is. ad quod vult Deum.
Circu^celliones was the most reprobate branch: a people cruel and savage, not
only against others, but also against themselves, throwing themselves headlong
from high places, or casting themselves in fire and water: and this sort of
death they counted Martyrdom. The diversity of names wherewith this Heresy
was pointed out, clearly declares, that the Donatistes wanted not a great
number of favorers: for they were called Parmeniani, Rogatistae, Cirtenses, and
Maximianistae. Against this Heresy, and the Heresy of the Pelagians, August.
Bishop of Hippo, contended with mighty grace, as likewise against the Heresy,
of the Manicheans, wherein he had bin nursed himself.

Collyridiani.
Collyridiani were a sort of superstitious people, who worshipped the Virgin
Marie, the mother of our Lord, with divine adoration, and with baking little
pasties (which in the Greek language are called (...)) which they offered to
the Virgin Marie, Epiph. contra beres.
as to the Queen of Heaven. Epiphanius counts them Heretics, because the
Virgin Marie, albeit she be a blessed woman, yet is she not God.

Many late heresies are nothing else, but a renewing of old and decayed
heresies. Priscillianistae.
Such was the heresy of Priscillianus, a man of Noble birth in Spain, very
eloqvent, rich temperate, with great show of humility, who easily insinuated
himself in the favor of the people. In his youth he was inclined to Magical
Arts, Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 11.
and renewed the heresy of Gnostici, who disallowed Marriage, and commended
fornication. Some Bishops of Spain were entangled with this heresy: such as
Iustantius, Salvianus, and Helpidius, whom Adygimus Bishop of Corduba damned in
a Counsel gathered at Caesaraugusta. This was done in the days of the Emp.
Gratianus and Valentinian. The great City of refuge to heretics, was to
address themselves to the Bishop of Rome, and to lean under his shadow: But
Damasus, who was bishop of Rome at this time, would not admit these Heretics
to his presence: Neither would Ambrose Bishop of Millane, to whom they
addressed next, in any wise accept of them: when al other means failed them,
last of al with buddes and bribes they solicited the Emp. cubiculers, and were
sent back again to enjoy their own places. Nevertheless, God suffered not
Priscillianus to escape punishment, for he was convict of sorcery, and was
punished to the death, after the death of Valentinian the second, whether by
Maximus an usurper of the Imperial Soueraintie, or by Theodosius, I am not
certain.

Lucifer was Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia. Luciferiani.
He was present at the Council of Millan, and was banished by Constantius,
because he would not consent to the deposition of Athanasius. He was reduced
from banishment by the Emperor Julian. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 13.
He visited Antiochia a town miserably distracted with Schisms, and by
ordaining Paulinus Bishop of Antiochia, he rather augmented then lessened the
schism: he perceived that this his fact was disproued by Eusebius. Bishop of
Vercellis, and many others, therefore he and his followers, did not communicate
with such as disproued the ordination of Paulinus. This seems rather to be
reckoned in the catalogue of schisms, Theod. compend. heresium.
then of heresies: and Theod. disprouing Lucifer, says, that he made faith to
be (...), but he says not (...), that is, a weapon of contentions, but not a
weapon of heresy.

These who supposed, Antidicomarianitae.
that after the Nativity of the Lord, the Virgin Marie companied with her
husband Joseph, and did bear children to him, were called Antidicomarianitae.
In this opinion was Helvidius, August de haeres.
a man more curious then wise. The opinion of the Fathers of the Church, not
repugnant to Scripture, was this, That like as no man did lie in the sepulcher
wherein Christ was buried before him, Even so in the womb wherein he was
conceived, no man was conceived after him: so the Fathers took the words of
the Apostolic symbol, (...), as if it had been said, (...), that is, borne
of Mary a perpetual Virgin. In holy scriptures by the brethren of our Lord is
meant the kinsmen of the Lord according to the flesh, to which exposition the
consent of Ancient and Neotericke writers for the most part agrees.

Metaugismouisa
Augustine cites out of Philaster a sort of heretics, called Metangismonitae,
whose heresy sounded to this. That the son is in the Father, according to
the similitude of a little vessel comprehended within the compass of a greater
vessel: (...) in the Greek Language signifies a vessel, Note.
and (...) signifies the entering of one vessel within another, which in our
language cannot be expressed by one word, as it is in the Greek.

Seleuciani or Hermiani.
From Seleucus and Hermias this heresy had the name: where they dwelt, or in
what Emperors days this heresy was propagated, August. makes no mention:
their opinions were most abominable: namely, that the Mass, whereof God
created the elements, was coeternall with him: and that the Angels, and not
God, created the souls of men: that Christ in his ascension unclothed
himself of the flesh of man, and left it in the Globe of the Sun. They
received not baptism by water. They denied the resurrection of the dead,
supposing that by new generations, one succeeding to another, that is performed
which in Scripture is written concerning the resurrection.

The rest of heresies of this age, were all obscure, and had few followers,
Proclianitae.
such as Proclianitae, who denied that Christ was come in the flesh: Patriciani.
Patriciani, who affirmed, that the body of man was formed by the devil,
Ascitae.
and not by God: Ascitae, who carried about with them the new vessels, to
represent that they were vessels filled with the new wine of the Gospel:
Patalorynchitae, Patalorynchitae, or (...). Aquar^^.
foolish men, who counted it religion to stop their breath with their fingers,
and to utter no intelligible speech: Aquarij, who in stead of wine received
water in the holy Sacrament. The beginning of this error seems to have been
in the days of Cyprian. Coluthiani denied, Coluthiani.
that any evil, either of sin or punishment, came of God. Floriani.
Floriani, who by the contrary affirmed, that God created creatures in an evil
estate. The eight heresies which Philaster co^memorates without any name,
either taken from the Author, or from the heresy it self, Augustine scarcely
will reckon them into the roll of heresies.

CENTVRIE V.
Pelagiani.
PElagius, Brito, and his followers, Iulianus, and Coelestius, mantained
damnable heresies, in the days of Arcadius and Honorius. Their pernicious
heresies may be easily known by the learned writings of Augustine, who
directly impugneth the Pelagians, and by the Councels of Arausio in France, and
Milivetanum in Numidia, which damned the error of the Pelagians. They affirmed
that men by nature were able to fulfill the whole law of God, howbeit more
easily and better, if they were supported by the grace of God. They denied
moreover, that there was original sin, and said, the posterity of Adam were
sinners by imitation of Adams sin, but had not received sin by carnal
propagation. They said moreover, that children had not need to be baptized for
remission of sins, and that godly fathers in Scripture, when they confessed
their sins, they did it rather for example of humility, then for necessity
and guiltiness of sin. This pestilent heresy was spread abroad in many
places, but chiefly in the Isle of Britain, because Pelagius being driven
from Rome, came to the Isle aforesaid, and infected it with his error, but by
the diligent travels of Germanus Altisidorensis, and Palladius, sent from
Coelestinus Bishop of Rome, both England and Scotland were freed from that
error.

Nestorius.
Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, lived in the days of Theodosius the
second. He was an eloquent man, but his head wanted brains, when he spoke
against the personal union, Evag. l. 1. c. 7.
of the divine and humane nature of Christ. He denied that the Virgin Marie
could be called (...), or Deipara, that is, the mother of God, but only (...),
that is the mother of Christ. He was condemned as an Heretic in the Council
of Ephesus, and banished by the Emperor Theodosius, to the wilderness of
Thebaida, and was plagued by God with extraordinary judgments, as other
Heretics had been before: Note.
for his blasphemous tongue was consumed with worms, and rotted in his mouth,
and so he ended his wretched life most miserably.

Eutyches was an Abbot in Constantinople: Eutychiani.
he fell into an error far different from the heresy of Nestorius: for
Nestorius would not grant the personal union of two natures in Christ, Euag.
l. 1. c. 9.
but Eutyches confounded the natures, and would have the humane nature so
swallowed up by the immensitie of the divine nature in Christ, that there was
nor two natures in Christ, but one only, to wit, the divine nature. He was
condemned in the Council of Chalcedon, as will be declared hereafter (God
willing). This heresy much perturbed and troubled the Church, in respect of
the fautors, and favorers thereof, both in Policy and Church. Chrysaphius, a
principal ruler in the Court of Theodosius the second: Basiliscus and
Anastatius Emperors, were favorers of this heresy, and of Bishops not a few;
such as Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria: Timotheus Aelurus, who entered into the
chair of Alexandria like unto a Wolf, with sheading the blood of Proterius
the true shepherd, and Petrus Moggus Bishop of Alexandria, and Petrus
Gnapheus Bishop of Antiochia: all these maintained the heresy of Eutiches a
long time. And now appears the fruit of humane wisdom, who chose
Patriarchs to suppress heresies, and yet they are the principal maintainers
of it. Likewise a multitude of wicked men, specially Monks cried out against
the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon (which were assembled by the authority
of the Emperor Martianus) these were called (...), Note.
because they had no principal head, upon whom they depended: all these
countenanced the heresy of Eutiches, whereby it became the more pernicious to
the Church.

It is to be understood that old heresies, such as the heresy of the
Manicheans, and the heresy of the Donatists sprung up of later time, were in
vigor and strength as yet, whereby it came to pass, that Augustine is
compelled to write in his time against many Manicheans, such as Faustus,
Fortunatus, Felix, Secundinus; and against Donatists, such as Gandentius,
Parmenianus, Emeritus, Ticonius: so that it is evident, that the Church in this
Centurie, and in the former, was chiefly perturbed with the multitude and
diversity of heresies.

CENTVRIE VI.
IN this and the next Centurie, I find, that the error of Eutyches is like
unto a root of bitterness, Simile..
which budding out with new branches not seen before, but fostered with the
venomous sap of the old root, that seemed to be abolished, did mightily
perturbe the Church. The error of the Monothelites was but a branch of the
error of Eutyches, of which hereafter.

In this Centurie a great number of people, especially of Monks, favoring the
heresy of Eutyches, spoke against the Council of Chalcedon: These were called
(...), because they had no principal head, Acephali.
upon whom they depended, and they were anterior to Anthimus, or Anthimius
Bishop of Constantinople, and to Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria, and Severus
Bishop of Antiochia: therefore they were not called Anthimians, Theodosians, or
Severites, but indeed, they might have been called Eutychians, but the vulgar
name given unto them, was (...).

Another branch which sprang up from the root of Eutyches heresy, (...).
was the error of those who supposed that the flesh of Christ was void of all
kind of humane infirmity, expressly contradicting holy Scriptures, which
attributes unto the body of Christ, Mat. 4. John 4.
hunger, and weariness, and other infirmities, which he voluntarily accepted
for our sakes. And where it is said, that the Lord Jesus did eat and drink: to
this they answered, that he seemed to eat and drink, as he did after his
resurrection; but he had no necessity of eating and drinking. But the verity
of his death, stops the mouth of all these Heretics: for Christ was
content to taste of all our infirmities (death it self not excepted) that we
might know he will be a merciful high Priest, Heb. 5.2.
because he has tasted of our infirmities, and can have compassion on those
who are in trouble. In this opinion was the Emperor Justinian in his old
days, whose vices did almost equal his virtues, especially, in comporting so
much with Theodora the Empress, to the great advancement of the error of
Eutyches, and hinderance of the Gospel.

Originesta.
In this Centurie, the defenders of the books of Origin, were Theodorus
Ascidas, Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia, and the Monks of No^a Laura, whom
Eustochius Bishop of Jerusalem, eiected out of their Monasteries, as shall be
declared hereafter.

Agnoita.
Finally, there were some Heretics, who durst derogate perfection of knowledge
to the son of God in his divine nature: Note.
These were called Agnoitae, whom I leave as buried in the dust, and according
to their name, never worthy to have been known in the world.

CENTVRIE VII.
IN this age, partly through the malice of Satan, and partly through the power
of the wrath of God, punishing the contempt of his truth, heresies did mightily
abound: Platin. in vit. Joan. 4.
for the heresy of Arrius began to reviue again, and many of the Kings of
Lombardis were addicted unto it: in special, Rhotaris, the son of Arioaldus,
who appointed, that in every town of Lombardie there should be two Bishops,
having equal authority, the one a Catholic Bishop, the other an Arrian. In
England and Scotland, the heresy of Pelagius was renewed, as Beda testifies.
The Monks of Syria propagated the heresy of Nestorius, as Platina records
in the life of Donus the first. The heresies of Severitae, Apartodotitae,
Momphysitae, Acephali, Theopafcitae, Iacobitae, Armenij; all were Eutichian
Heretics, differing one from another in some ceremonies, in absurdity of
speeches, in authors whom they principally admitted and followed, in places
where the heresy chiefly increased, and in their carriage. Likewise
Staurolatrae were Eutychian Heretics: but the worshipping of the Cross, was
a note distinguishing them from other Heretics, of their own opinion.
Priscillianistae were Heretics, who borrowed absurd opinions from
Samosatenus, and Photinus, from Cerdon, and Marcion, and from the Manicheans:
but all these ancient errors, were sufficiently refuted in ancient times.

The heresy of the Monothelites, Monothelitae.
was a branch of the heresy of Eutyches, by a secret and crafty conuoy,
insinuating it self into credit again, after it was condemned in the
Council of Chalcedon. The authors of this heresy, were Sergius, Pyrrhus, and
Paulus, Patriarchs of Constantinople; and Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia;
Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria; Petrus Bishop of Nicomedia, with many others.
They denied not directly the two natures of Christ personally united: but only
affirmed, that after the union of the natures, there was only one will, and
one operation in Christ: whereas the holy Scriptures attribute unto Christ, as
he is man, the action of sleeping: and to Christ in respect of his divine
nature, the action of compescing and calming the rage and stormy tempest of
blowing winds, and swelling Seas. This heresy was damned in the sixth general
Council, as we shall hear (God willing) in its own place.

CENTVRIE VIII.
MAny were accounted heretics in this age, because they worshipped God
sincerely according to the rule of his own blessed word, and would not give
consent to the fond errors of the Roman Church. But some were counted
heretics justly, and without all controversy, as namely they who call Christ
in his human nature the adoptiue son of God. Falician^.
This wicked heresy repungeth unto the celestial Oracle, which the three
Apostles heard in the holy mountain, This is my wellbeloued son in whom I am
well pleased, we are adopted in Christ to be the sons of God. But Christ, even
in his manly nature is the son of God by the excellent prerogative of personal
union with the divine nature. It is not certainly known, whether Elipandus
Bishop of Hispalis, or another named Foelix, with whom some affirm that
Elipandus consulted about this damnable opinion, was the author of this
damnable heresy.

CENTVRY IX.
Iconolatra.
THey who of old were accustomed to condemn Heresies, now they are become the
chief patrons and maintainers of adoration of Images, a notable heresy: whose
Pusillanimitre argues, the weakness of their cause: For under the reign of
Lodouicus Pius Claudius Taurinensis wrote books against the adoration of
Images: and the Emperor by a public edict commanded them who were disposed
to answer to his books, to answer whilst Claudius was alive. But Jonas
Bishop of Orleans concealed and obscured his books, during Claudius lifetime,
but after his death with impotencie of railing words, rather then with power of
solid arguments he endeavored to refute Claudius Taurinensis.

Let the judicious reader without partiality, peruse the books of Jonas
Bishop of Orleans, and the very stinking breath of the adversary of the
truth, shall give great allowance to the truth of God.

Godescalcus.
Godescalcus, a man of the low Countries, is reckoned in the number of
Heretics of this age, about the year of our Lord, 849. Because he spoke of
Predestination perilouslie, to wit that these who were Predestined to life
by the decree of Gods Predestination, were forced to do well: and those who
were Predestined to condemnation, were forced by the decree of God to do
evil. Concerning old extinguished heresies, as the Manicheans, Arrians,
Donatists, and such like, who preased to build up the walls of Jericho, which
God had destroyed, there is no necessity to speak; because these were vain
attempts wiihout any success.

CENTVRIE X.
IN this age darkness had gotten such upper hand that the eye it self was
darkened as our Lord speaks. The Spirit of error so possessed the very
teachers, Most part of ^ this age Idolaters.
that the most part of them worshipped Images, yea the very elements in the
holy Sacraments of the Supper. Churches were replenished with the bones of dead
men, whereunto the people kneeled, worshipping dead bones in place of the
living God. And the small spark of knowledge which remained not extinguished
seems to be in the people, rather then in the Pastors: for the people saw
that the Preachers entered not at the right door, Ioh. 10.
but rather like unto thiefes and robbers they entered by bribes and gifts into
spiritual offices, and therefore the History records that Henricus Auceps
when he did fight against the Hungarians made his vow to God, Note.
that if the Lord would give him victory against his enemies, he would purge
his country from Simonie, which was an evident token, The heresy of Simon
Magus renewed.
that the vilde heresy of Simon Magus in buying and selling spiritual things
did at this time mightily abound.

CENTVRIE XI.
IN this Centurie the Pope had such vpper-hand both over Princes and Pastors:
that they accounted every thing that displeased them to be heresy. The
inuestment of Bishops by secular men, Note.
was called Simonie; and marriage of Priests was called the Heresy of the
Nicolaitans: Likewise between the Latin and Greek Church fell out such
contention for a matter of small importance, that they accounted one another to
be heretics.

The Greek Church called the Latins Azymitae, Azymitae.
because they celebrated the Lords supper with unleavened bread, and the Latin
Church on the other part called the Greek Church Fermentarij, Fermentarij.
because they used leauened bread, yea and the Roman Church in this age so
obstinately maintained the error of Transubstantiation, that they accounted
all them heretics who dissented from their opinion.

CENTVRIE XII.
Petrus Abelardus.
IN this Centurie is found a French man, Petrus Abelardus an accurat
Philosopher, who uttered uncouth things concerning the blessed Trinity. That
the holy spirit was the soul of the world, and that he was not of the
substance of the father, whose opinions were damned by the Theolgues of Paris,
and by Bernard of Clarauall, in the Counsels of Seison and Senon; as also by
Pope Innocentius the second: after he had received this foil, he entered into
the Monastery of Cluniacke, where he concluded his life.

CENTVRYE XIII.
AMongst Heretics in this age were reckoned Albigenses, Albigenses.
so called from the name of the part in France where they dwelt. They were
favored and assisted in many parts of France, but namely in Tolosa, not only
by the inferior sort, but also by the Count himself. It is to be lamented that
the heads of their doctrine are not acuratly set down by the writers of this
age. For it is very likely that they have taught otherwise then their
adversaries do report of them, who attribute unto them the errors of the
Manichea^s, who supposed that there were two Gods, the one author and creator
of good things, and the other of evil things. Always it is certain that they
counted the Clergy of the Roman Church a corrupt rabble. The Pope pursues the
Albigenses.
And for this cause Innocentius the third sent unto France twelve Abbots of the
Christian order with Didatus Bishop of Oxfurd, and Dominicus who was afterward
the author of a new sect of Dominike Friars. All those came to France for
co^futation of Albigenses. But when the Pope perceived that they yielded not to
his foresaid Ambassadors, he pursued them with cruel wars, and sent out an
army against them under the conduct of Leopold Duke of Austria, and Simon
Count of Montfort; who used great cruelty against the towns of Bitera,
Carcassus, Vaurus, Careum, Apistaginum, Galliacum, Causacum, Funum Marcelli,
Fanim Antonij, Modacum, and diverse others, wherein Albigenses had their
residence. Note.
In the town called Castra Mineruae an hundredth and twenty were burnt quick.

In Paris about the same time 14. Priests were accused as guilty of this sect,
and ten of them were burnt with fire, one at London. At Penuense, Agenois
Castrum which was long besieged, 74. Soldiers were hanged, the rest who would
not recant their opinions were burnt with fire. Yet after this the French army
being troubled with other wars, the Albigenses increased of new again, and
were supported by Raymond Count of Tulosse, and Peter king of Arragon, against
whom Simon of Montfort leading out his army slew of their host twenty
thousand men.

In Avinion Lewis the eight, for suppressing of their sect dimolished the walls
of the town, and razed from the ground 300 houses in Avinion, and was minded
to have used greater rigor, if he had not bin prevented by death.

Almaricanus.
Almaricus a man of Carnotum a town in France, uttered strange opinions
concerning God, whom he affirmed to be the essence of all creatures, and the
soul of heaven, and that all creatures should be counerted into the substance
of God again, with many other foolish things, who was refuted by the School
of Paris, and after that he had appealed to the B. of Rome, was sent back
again to recant his error, which thing also he did, rather with his mouth
then with his heart. Likewise about Tullouse sprang up certain heretics
called Patereni and Gazari from the authors of this sect, Patereni. Gazari.
who affirmed that married men were not in the state of grace, and could not be
saved. This opinion was damned in the Council of Lateran.

Fratricelli.
In this age also sprang up Begardi, Beginae, and Bizochi, who are all reckoned
to be of the sect of Fratricelli, who imagined that a man might attain in this
world to the estate of such perfection that he might be altogether void of
sin. And that he who had attained thereto, was neither under subjection to
civil nor spiritual governors, but was freed from all subjection to mortal
men, and that they had no need of prayer and fasting, and such other exercises
whereby increase of grace is obtained.

CENTVRIE XIV.
POpe John the 23. of that name, An heresy of Pope John the 23.
taught that souls so soon as they were dispoyled of the body, should not
see God before the last judgment. Against whom Thomas Wallafe a Iacobin, an
Englishman, opposed himself, but was thrust in prison. Afterward Pope Benet
who succeeded Pope John, made a decretall, wherein he confuted, and condemned
as heretical, the doctrine which his predecessor John had publicly preached,
touching the happy souls; and it was determined and declared, that the souls
which had nothing to purge, incontinent as they are departed from the body do
see the face of God.

CENTVRIE XV.
An heresy of the Council of Basil.
THE Council of Basil confirmed that the Virgin Marie was conceived without
original sin.

CENTVRIE XVI.
The heresy of the Anabaptists.
WHen the Gospel began to spring up in Germany, through the malice of Satan
sprang up also a Sect of pestilent Heretics, called Anabaptists: so called by
reason they think that Infants should not be baptized until they come to
perfect age, and can give a confession of their own faith. They maintain
wicked opinions concerning Christ himself, The Anabaptists opinion.
his Word, his Church, his Magistrates. Concerning Christ, that he took not
flesh and blood of the Virgin, but brought it from heaven: concerning the Word,
that God not only reveals his will, by the written Word, but also by visions
and dreams, whereunto the Anabaptists do lean more then to the Word:
concerning the Church, that it is not a true Church wherein there is any spot
or wrinckle: concerning Magistrates, that their office under the New Testament,
is not a calling approved of God. Some other wicked opinions they maintain,
but these are the chief. And it was no wonder, that men who had laid such
grounds of seditious doctrine, were also found in their lives to be authors of
very seditious commotions, and insurrections against Princes. Tho. Muntzerus an
Anabaptist makes insurrection, is overcome and beheaded.
Like as Thomas Muntzerus, one of the first Fathers of this sect, gathered a
great number of common people, who made insurrection against their superiors;
and albeit this first attempt of the Anabaptists succeeded very vnprosperously
(for the Princes of Germany overcame in battle those seditious people, and
tocke Thomas Muntzerus himself, and beheaded him, whose memory was so
perturbed with beastly fear, that he could not recite the belief (but the
Duke of Brunswicke was constrained to recite it before him, and he followed
after him for lack of memory) yet others would not take warning by him to
abstain from the like seditious attempts. For in the year of our Lord, Ioh.
Leidensis an Anabaptist, usurps a kingly authority, banisheth the Citizens of
Munster. Cniperdolingus a false Prophet
1533. Johannes Leidensis a Tailor of Holland, came to a town of Westphalia,
called Munster, and he had seduced many, and increased the number of his
faction, he expelled and banished the Citizens of Munster, and usurped to
himself a kingly authority, being assisted with the support of Cniperdolingus,
a vain man, and a false Prophet, who affirmed that it was revealed to him by
God, that Johannes Leidensis should have the dominion of the whole world, and
that he should raise up a mighty army, and destroy the Princes of the world,
and should only spare the simple multitude, so many of them as would forsake
impiety, and embrace righteousness. Likewise he affirmed that it was the will
of God, that Johannes Leidensis should send throughout the whole world eight
and twenty Apostles, Leidensis sends 28. seditious Apostles, who were all
destroyed one excepted.
to exhort the world to repentance, and to receive the doctrine of the
Anabaptists, which thing Leidensis was willing and ready to perform.

But the Princes of Germany, and the Princes of other Countries, took those
seditious Apostles, and gave unto them the reward which seditious Preachers
justly deserved; so that of all the number of his Apostles only one (who by
fleeing conveyed himself away) escaped the punishment of Death. Thus Johannes
Leidensis, was called King of new Jerusalem, and took unto himself many
wives, of whom also he beheaded one in the open marketplace, because she had
compassion of the poor besieged people of Munster, of whom many died through
famine. For the Bishop of Munster assisted with the Princes of Germany,
besieged the town very strictly, and in the end prevailed, and took this new
made King, Ioh. Leidensis and his false Prophet taken and condemned to death.
Cniperdolingus, his false Prophet alive, and adjudged them not only to be
hanged in chains of iron, but before their hanging, to have their flesh seared
with hot iron pincers. Thus came the authors of this most unhappy sect, unto a
most miserable and shameful destruction.

Of this Sect of Anabaptists, sprang up in Holland an impudent fellow David
Georgius, David Georgius an Anabaptist, affirmed himself to be Christ, flies
to Basil, and there seduceth many, whose body was raised out of the grave and
burnt.
who affirmed that he was Christ, the Messiah and Savior of the world, yet
for fear of punishment he fled out of the Low Countries, and came to Basile,
where he remained until the day of his death; all which time, he not only
obscured his blasphemous errors, but also behaved himself in outward show so
humbly, and modestly, that he was in good account, and became wealthy also.
Yet after his death, it was known that he had seduced many, with his
blasphemous errors. Therefore the Council of Basile commanded, that his body
should be raised out of the grave, and burnt with fire, in token of their
detestation of his abominable errors.

Servetus a Spaniard, renueth the doctrine of Arrius
About the same time also, sprang up Michael Servetus, a Spaniard, who renewed
the blasphemous doctrine of Arrius; affirming that God the Father, is only the
true God, and that neither the Son nor the holy Spirit is eternal God: but
that the Son is a creature, and had the beginning of existence when God
created the world. He was taken in the town of Geneva and cast in prison; but
he would not be reclaimed from his blasphemous errors. Therefore the Council
of the town thought meet with flames of fire to stop the breath of this
blasphemous man, The Council of Geneva condemned him to be burnt.
who durst set his mouth against the heaven to blaspheme the Son of God.
After his death, many were found who maintained his errors, as namely,
Valentinus Gentilis, Gregorius Blandrata a Physician in Italy, Matheus
Gribaldus a Lawyer, and Paulus Alciatus, with many others. Amongst whom
Valentinus Gentilis was bold to put in print his blasphemies, and he called the
sum of faith set forth by Athanasius, Symbolum Satanasi, calling Athanasius
himself Satanasius; but after he had blasphemed the Son of God a while,
Vallent. Gentilis a maintainer of the doctrine of Servetus, condemned to death
at Berne
both by word and writ, in the end he was taken in the town of Berne, where
he suffered the just deserved punishment of death.

Many other sprang up in this age, who were teachers of false and heretical
doctrine; but because they had few followers, so that the error died with the
author thereof, we have no great need to enroll their names and errors in this
book at large, but shortly to point them out.

Gasper Suenkefeldius, Gasper Suenkfeldius.
a man borne in Silesia, maintained this error, that the outward ministry of
the Word and Sacraments was not necessary to eternal life, because that by
the illumination of Gods holy spirit, without the ministry of the Word, men
might be saved.

Andreas Osiander thought that Christ was our Mediator only in respect of his
divine nature: Andreas Osiander.
and on the other part Stantcarus (refuting Osiander) fell into the contrary
extremity, that Christ was Mediator only in respect of his humane nature.
Stancarus.


Flaccius Illiricus, Flaccius Illyricus.
supposed original sin was a substance.

Huberus believed that all men were elected unto eternal life: Huberus.
Fancis. Puccius.
and Franciscus Puccius, defended this opinion, that all men of whatsoever
religion they were, should be saved, if they led not a very impious life, and
evil conversation.

Finally, in this age was clearly discovered that he who sat in the chair of
Christ, Antichrist and his adherents Heretics.
as Christ's Vicar, was the very Antichrist; and they who depend upon the Pope,
as general Bishop of all Christ's sheep, were notable Heretics, giving the
glory of Christ to Antichrist: denying the sufficiency of the written Word,
bowing and kneeling to Images, praying to creatures, and accounting them
mediators of their intercession, sacrilegiously imitating the holy Sacrament of
the Supper, and taking from the people the use of the Cup, offering daily a new
propitiatory sacrifice for sin, as though Christ's sacrifice once offered up
upon the Altar of the Cross, were imperfect; damning marriage in some persons,
and forbidding meats, which God has allowed to be eaten with thanksgiving:
with many other errors which the Lord has clearly detected to have been a
long time bypast in the Roman Church.

Here ends the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY of the Church, containing a short Compend of
all the Councels, together with their several Canons, since Christ's days to
this present.
CENTVRIE IV.
COuncels may be divided in General, National or Provincial, Of the
Apostles and Elders convention, read Acts 15.6.
and Particular Councels. General, were called Oecomenicke Councels ((...) in
the greek language signifies the world) because from all quarters of the world
wherein Christ was preached, Commissioners were sent to these Councels, and
they were gathered by the authority of the Emperor. National or Provincial
Councels were such as were gathered by the authority of the Emperor in one
Nation, with the assistance of other near approaching Nations, for suppressing
of heresies, deciding of questions, pacifying of ^chismes, and appointing
Canons and Constitutions, for decent order to be kept in the Church. The third
sort of Councels were particular Counc^ls, by Bullenger called (...) or (...).
Such as the Councels of Gangra, Neocaesaria, and many others, gathered usually
by Patriarchs, and Bishops, in a corner of a Country, but for the like causes
that national Councels were assembled. Let no man expect a recital of
particular Councels, except at such times as some matter of great moment
enforces me to speak of them.

The Council of Ancyra Tom. 1. Council.
ANcyra is a town of Galatia: in this town were assembled Bishops of diverse
Provinces, about the year of of our Lord, 308. as is supposed. The principal
cause of their meeting, was to constitute a form of Ecclesiastical
discipline, according to which, they who either willingly or unwillingly, had
sacrificed to Idols in time of persecution, should be received into the bosom
of the Church again, when they were found penitent. There were many rancks of
persons, who had defiled themselves with Heathenicke Idolatry: such as
Libellatici, Thurificati, Sacrificati, and Proditores. The Council of Ancyra
took order chiefly with those, who were called Thurificati, and Sacrificati,
that is, with them, who either had cast up incense upon idolatrous Altars, or
else had eaten of meats sacrificed to Idols: to whom it was enjoined to
testify their repentance, a long time before they were received to the
communion of Gods people, some one year, some two years, others three or
four years, some five or six years, and above, according to the heaviness
of their transgression. In this Council it was ordained, that Deacons, who in
time of their ordination did protest, that they had not the gift of continency,
but were disposed to marry, if they married, they should remain in their
Ministry: but they who in time of imposition of hands by their silence had
professed continency, if afterward they married, they should be removed from
their Ministry. Also it was ordained, that Chorepiscopi (these were Country
Bishops, in the Latin language called Vicarii-Episcoporum) These, Canon. 13.
I say, were commanded to abstain from ordination of Elders and Deacons, and
from usurping of do^inion over the preaching Elders, who were in Cities. Canon.
14.
Likewise it was ordained, that whosoever did abstain from eating of flesh, as
from a creature in it self unclean, he should be deprived of his dignity.
Tom. 1. Council.
This Council was subscribed by ^8. Bishops.

IN the year of our Lord 330. The general Council of Nice.
and in the 20. year of the reign of Constantine, as Eusebius reckons
(others refer it to the 333. year of our Lord, for there is great diversity
in this counting) The Council of Nice in Bithynia was gathered not by
Silvester, nor by Julius, but by the authority of the Emperor. Eusebius. de. vita
Constane. lib. 3.
The name of the town answered to the success of the Council, for (...) in
the Greek language signifies victory: and when the verity encountered with
the lie in this Council, the verity prevailed and got the victory. The
matter entreated in the Council, Note.
was concerning the opinion of Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, who denied
that the Son of God was consubstantiall with the Father, but affirmed there
was a time wherein the son was not, and that he was created of things not
existent. This opinion was so vnquoth and abominable to the Fathers conueened
in the Council of Nice, that they utterly damned and anathematized the opinion
of Arrius. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Only 17 Bishops adhered to his blasphemous opinion. The Emperor liked well
the determination of the Conncell, and threatened to punish them with
banishment, who did refuse to subscribe the determination of the Council: for
they had concluded, that the son of God was (...), that is consubstantiall
with the Faith. Of the number of feuenteene, who were favorers of Arrius,
Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 16.
only two, to wit, Secundus a B. of Ptolemaida in Egypt, and Thomas Bishop of
Marmarica, adhered to Arrius until the end of the Council, with a a few more,
Theod. l. 1. c. 7.
whom the Fathers conueened at Nice, delivered unto Satan, and the Emperor
banished them: the rest for fear of punishment subscribed to the deposition of
Arrius with their hands, Socrat. l. 1. c. 14.
but not with their hearts: such as Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, Theogonius of
Nice, Menophantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopo^is, Narcissus of
Neronias, otherwise called Irenopolis of Cilicia: these (I say) and some
others, subscribed the sum of Faith set down by the Nicene Council, and the
deposition of Arrius.

Exodus 12. verse, 2. Russin. l. 1. c. 6.
About the controversy of keeping the festiuitie of Easter day, a conclusion
was taken, that it should be kept upon the Lords day, and not upon the
fourteen day of the first month of the Jews called Nisan. And this was done
for keeping of unity and peace in the Church: for it was expedient, that that
thing which was universally done, should also be uniformly done, for avoiding
of schisms in the Church. Nevertheless Socrates grants, that it is but an
ancient custom, not authorized by any Apostolic commandment.

Socrat. l. 5. c. 22
About Marriage many were in the opinion, that Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who
were married before their ordination, should in time to come abstain from the
company of their wives. But Paphnutius a Bishop in a town of Thebaida, a
chaste man who never companied with a woman, Socrat. l. 1. c. 11
entreated the Council, that they should abstain from making such an
ordinance, because Marriage is honorable, and the cohabitation of a man with
his married wife, is chastity. Likewise it was a diffiicult matter to be
performed, and it opened a door to unchaste living. Yet Paphnutius inclined too
much to this opinion, That Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who were unmarried,
Sozom. l. 1. c. 12.
should abstain from marriage. The Council would make no constitution about
such matters, but remitted marriage as a thing indifferent to every man's free
arbitriment.

The Canons of the Nicene Council pertaining to matters of discipline, in
number 22. (read them in the history of Russin.) The appointing of three
Partiarches, Russin. l. 1. c. 6.
one in Rome, another in Alexandria, the third in Antiochia, with power to
conuocate within their own bounds particular Councels, for timous suppressing
of heretics: It was like unto a fair morning presenting unto the world the
countenance of a fair day, but at Even, the face of the Heaven is covered with
black clouds, troubling the earth with the tempest of changed weather. Even
so, these Patriarchs, for the most part, became in the end chief propagators
of notable heresies, as the history following God willing shall declare.

THe National Council of Tyrus was gathered by the commandment of the
Emperor Constantine, The Council of Tyrus.
in the thirtieth year of his reign. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constan. Socrat
lib. 1. cap. 23.
Eusebius by ouer-passing with silence a due commemoration of the malice and
falsehood of the Arrians against Athanasius, gives occasion to Socrates to
suspect, that Eusebius Pamphili was not a sound follower of the Nicene
Council. To this National Council conueened threescore Bishops, from Egypt,
Lybia, Asia, and Europe. The most part of them were Arrians, Socrat. l. 1. c. 27
who had sold themselves to iniquity, of purpose, with false accusations to
oppress the innocent servant of Christ, Theodor. lib. 1: cap. 29.
Athanasius. The crimes laid unto his charge, were fornication, the slaughter
of Arsenius, and cutting off of his hand, the overthrowing of the holy Table,
the breaking of the holy Cup and burning of the holy volumes. No assembly was
so full of partiality, confusion, clamor, and unrighteous dealing, as this
assembly at Tyrus: in so much, that Paphnutius a Bishop in Thebaida, arose, and
left the Council of ungodly men, and drew with him Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem, fearing lest his simplicity should have been circumueened by the
subtlety of deceitful Arrians.

How Athanasius fled to the Emp. and declared the unrighteous proceedings of
the Council of Tyrus, it has bin declared already. In this assembly Pota^ion
Bishop of Heraclea, a man full of spiritual liberty, Hist. Magd. Centur. 4.
cap. 19
finding Eusebius Pamphili sitting as a Judge, and Athanasius standing,
outbraided Eusebius as a man who in the persecution of Dioclesian was enclosed
in that same prison with himself: but Eusebius escaped out of prison without
the marks of the rebuke of Christ, which Potamion and other faithful
Confessors could not get done. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 27.
In like manner, Athanasius refused to compeare in Caesarea Palestinae, where
Eusebius was Bishop, as a place suspect for favor carried to Arrians. All
these things brought the name of Eusebius. Pamphili in some disliking. The issue
of the Council of Tyrus was this: the Arrians in his absence deposed him, and
amongst the rest Arsenius was one of them, who subscribed the deposition of
Athanasius with that same hand that the Arrians had alleged was cut off by
Athanasius: Socrat. l. 1 c. 32.
so effronted are Heretics, defenders of false and lying doctrine. The
Emperor Constantine commanded the bishops assembled at Tyrus, to address to
Constantinople: but when they came thither, they durst make no mention of the
fornication of Athanasius, of the hand of Arsenius, of the Table, Theod lib. 1.
cap. 30. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 35. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant.
Cup and books above mentioned: but they forged new accusations against him,
whereunto the Emp. gave too hasty credit, and banished Athanasius to Triere.
Immediately after the Council of Tyrus many Bishops were assembled at
Jerusalem, for the dedication of the Temple, which the Emperor Constantine had
builded at the place of the Lords sepulcher.

Concerning the Council of Antiochia, wherein the Arrians deposed Eustatius,
and the Council of Arles, wherein Cecilianus was absolved from the accusation
of the Donatists, no further discourse is needful then is contained in the
history of the lives of these two Bishops.

The Council of Gangra.
GAngra is a town of Paphlagonia. In this town were assembled certain
Fathers, to the number of 16. about the year of our Lord 324. The occasion of
their meeting was the heretic Eustatius, who admiring the Monasticke life, or
(as others affirm) favoring the heresy of Encratitae, and the Manichea^s, he
spoke against Marriage, against eating of flesh; and he damned the public
Congregations of Gods people in Temples: Tom. 1. Council.
and said, a man could not be saved, except he forsook all his possessions,
and renounced the world after the form of monkish doing. These opinions were
damned in the Council of Gangra. The subscriptions of the fathers of this
Council after their Canons, are worthy to be remarked. These things (say
they) have we subscribed, not vituperating them, who according to Scripture
chooses unto themselves an holy purpose of a continent life: but them only,
who abuses the purpose of their minds to pride, extolling themselves against
the simpler sort: Yea, and damn and cut off all those, who contrary to
Scripture and Ecclesiastical rules, bring in new commandments. But we admire
humble Virginity, and we approve continency that is under taken with chastity
and Religion: And we embrace the renounciation of secular business, with
humility: And we honor the chaste bo^d of Marriage: And we despise not riches
joined with righteousness, and good works: And we commend a simple and course
apparel, used for covering the body without Hypocrisy. Likewise we reject
loose and dissolute garments: And we honor the houses of God, and assemblies,
that are in them, as holy and profitable, not debarring men from exercises of
piety in their own private houses. But places builded in the name of the
Lord, we honor, and Congregations assembled in the places for the common
utility we approve: And good works, which are done to poor brethren, even
above men's ability, according to the Ecclesiastical traditions, we bless
them: And we wish all things to be celebrated in the Church, according to holy
Scriptures, and the ordinances of the Apostles.

IN the time of the reign of Constantine in Eliberis, The Council of Eliberis.
a town of Spain, were assembled nineteen Bishops, and of Presbyters, thirty
six. The end of their meeting was to reform horrible abuses, both in Religion
and manners, which in time of the ten Persecutions had prevailed in Spain: And
now in time of peace such enormities and festered manners could hardly be
amended. Many Ecclesiastical Canons were made in this Synod to the number of
81. Whereof we shall rehearse but a few, and such as clearly points out the
principal end of their meeting.

Canon 4.
They ordained, the Hea^hnicke sacrificing Priests (called of old, Flamines) if
they were content to abstain from sacrificing to Idols, and to learn the
grounds of Christian Religion, after three years repentance, they should be
admitted to baptism.

Canon 15.
Likewise they ordained, that Christian Virgins should not be given in marriage
to Pagans, lest in the flower of their youth they should be entangled with
spiritual whooredome.

Canon 28.
In like manner, that Bishops should receive no reward from men that did not
communicate with the Church.

Canon 36.
They ordained, that nothing that is worshipped, should be pictured on the wall.

Canon 41.
And that in private houses no Idols should be found: And in case the masters of
houses were afraid of the violence of their servants, at least, they should
keep themselves pure and clean: which if they did not, they should be counted
strangers from the fellowship of the Church.

Canon 60.
And that if any man happen to be slain, in the action of breaking down
images, his name shall be enrolled in the catalogue of Martyrs, because it is
not written in the history of the Gospel, that the Apostles used any such
form of reformation: whereby they signify, that by wholesome doctrine images
should be cast out of the hearts of men, rather than broken with popular
violence, and with the tumultuary attempts of private men. Any judicious man
may perceive by these Canons both the time when, and the cause wherefore this
Council was assembled.

The first Council of Carthage.
THey who count the first Council of Carthage, to be that Council whereinto
Cyprian, with advise of many other bishops of Numidia, Lybia, and other parts
of Africa, ordained men who were baptized by Heretics, Tom. 1. Council.
to be rebaptised again: they commit a great over sight, to reckon the first
Council of Carthage to be holden under the reign of Constantine, whereas it
is certainly known, that Cyprian was martyred, in the days of Valerian the
eight persecuting Emperor. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 9.
But the first Council of Carthage, that was kept in Constantines days, was
that Council whereinto the Donatistes condemned Caecilianus, Bishop of
Carthage, whose innocence afterward was tried by many Judges. In it there was
no matter of great importance concluded, and therefore I ouer-passe it with few
words, as an assembly of little account. All these Counsels above mentioned
were assembled in the days of Constantine the Great: Now follows Counsels
gathered in the days of his sons.

The cause pretended for the gathering of the Council of Antiochia, The first
Council of Antiochia holden by Arrians under the reign of Constantius.
Socrat. l. 2. c. 8. S^zom. l. 3. c. 5. Hist. Magd. Centur. 4. cap. 9.
in the days of Constantius the son of Constantine, was the dedication of
the Church of Antiochia: which albeit Constantine had builded, yet five years
after his death, and in the seventeenth year after the foundation of the
Temple was laid, Constantius his son finished, and perfected the work. And
under pretense of dedication of this Temple (as said is) this Assembly of
Antiochia was gathered. Anno, 344. but indeed of purpose to supplant the true
Faith. To this Assembly resorted many Bishops, to the number of 90. But
Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, and Julius Bishop of Rome, neither came they to
the Council; neither sent they any messenger in their name, fearing as the
truth was, that they were gathered for evil, and not for good. At this time
Placitus, the success out of Euphronius, governed Antiochia. Now when they were
me^ together, many accusations were heaped up against Athanasius: First, that
he had accepted his place again, without advise of other Bishops: Secondly,
because at the time of his returning back again to Alexandria, there fell out
great commotion amongst the people, and some were slain, others were
contumeliouslie beaten, and violently drawn before justice seats. Mention also
was made of the decrete of the Council of Tyrus, against Athanasius. It was an
casie matter for the Arrians to imprint into the vlcerate mind of Constantius,
Sozom. l. 3. c. 5.
an hatred against Athanasius. In this Council they set down diverse sums of
Faith: first secretly covering the venom of their heresy, but afterward, as
it were repenting, they manifested themslues more clearly in their own
colors. After this Council followed terrible earthquakes in the East,
wherewith many towns were shaken, especially the town of Antiochia, with
continual earthquakes was shaken for the space of a whole year. Hist. Mag.
Cent. 4. cap. 9.
The principal design of the Council was to eject Athanasius, out of his
chair, and to alter the sum of Faith set down in the Nicene Council: as
evidently appeared, by sending of Syrianus to destroy Athanasius, and to place
Gregorius in his room: but Athanasius escaped the danger by the great
providence of God, and fled to Julius Bishop of Rome: and the Arrians displaced
again Gregorius, and appointed Georgius a man of Cappadocia, and more fit for
their purpose, to be bishop of Alexandria.

Other two Councels holden in Antiochia by the Arrians.
THe favor that Julius Bishop of Rome showed to Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and
Lacius Bishop of Adrionopolis, was the cause moving the Arrians to have so
frequent meetings in Antiochia: Very sharp letters passed betwixt Julius and
the Oriental Bishops: Socrat l. 2. c. 15
Julius blamed them, because they had both rashly and unrighteously deposed the
forenamed bishops. They on the other part expostulated with Julius, because he
had received to his fellowship men deposed by the^, whereas none of the East
Church had admitted Novatus to their communion, whom the Bishop of Rome had
excommunicated.

Socrat. l. 2 c. 19 Hist, Magd.
After the issue of three year, another Council was conueened in Antiochia,
about the year of our Lord 348. wherein the Arrians set forth a new sum of
their Faith in very ample and prolix manner, and different from all other
forms set down before: the copy whereof they sent to the Bishops of Italy,
by Endoxius Bishop of Germanicia, and Martyrius, and Macedonius: but the
Bishops of Italy would not receive it, contenting themselves with the sum of
Faith set down in the Nicene Council.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Sardica.
351. by the commandment of Constantius, and his brother Constans, a great
national Council was gathered in Sardica, a town of Illyricum, of Dacia.
Soc. l. 2 c. 20.
Many Bishops of the West, to the number of three hundred, resorted to this
assembly, but from the East only seventy six. They who came from the Eastern
parts, would not vouchsafe to be present in the Council, except Protogenes
Bishop of Sardica, and Osius Bishop of Corduba, had separated from their
fellowship Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria. But the cause of their absenting themselves from the Council,
indeed, was this (as Theodoretus prudently records) because the forgers of
salse accusations against the men of God, Theod. l. 2. c. 8.
whose cause was appointed to be judged in this Council, durst not abide the
trial of honest Judges, and men of unsuspected credit. The Council finding
that the Arrians couvicted in conscience, durst not compeare to accuse Paulus,
and Athanasius (whom notwithstanding they had deposed in the Councels of Tyrus
and Antiochia) proceeded to the trial of their cause: and finds all the
accusations of the Arrians against Panlus, Athanasius, Asclepas, and the rest,
to be but a mass of forged calumnies and lies: Arsenius was found to be
alive, whom, the Arrians had alleged, Athanasius had slain: As concerning the
overthrowing of the holy Table, and breaking of the holy Cup, by Macarius (whom
Athanasius had employed, and therefore the blame was laid upon him) it was
found to be a notable lie: because when Macarius entered into the Church of
Mareota (where this fact was alleged to be done) (...) were present in the
Church. And such kind of persons were not permitted to be present at the
celebration of divine mysteries. Ishyras also, who was the principal forger of
all the aforementioned calumnies, was found to have been tied to the bed by
infirmity, at that time, when Macarius was alleged to have done all these
things. And finally, it was found, that Ishyras had received a Bishopric, as
the wages o^ iniquity from the Arrians, before he had been admitted Presbyter
in any Church. Also the supplicant bills of Paulus, Ascl^pas, Marcellus, etc.
were read, tried, and examined, and they were all found honest and upright men,
and they were all recommended by the letters of the Council of Sardica, to
their own flocks.

On the other part, the Bishops, whom the Arrians had intruded in the places of
the forementioned brethren, they deposed them, and abhorred their memory:
such as Gregorius in Alexandria, Basilius in Ancyra, and Quintianus in Gaza: of
whom they discerned, that they were not worthy the name of common Christians,
Theod. ibid.
much less to be called Bishops: commanding all people to forsake their
fellowshippe, and neither to send letters to them, nor to receive letters from
them. The like sentence they pronounced against Theodorus of Heraclea,
Narcissus of Neronias, Acacius of Caesarea Palestinae, Stephanus of Antiochia,
Vrsatius of Sigidun in Mysia, Valens of Myrsa in Panonia, Menophantus of
Ephesus, and Georgius of Laodicea, principal patrons of the Arrian heresy.

The Arrians on the other part assembled themselves in Philippopolis, a town
of Thracia, and there they damned of new again, Paulus and Athanasius.
Likewise they damned Julius Bishop of Rome, Sozom. l. 3. c. 11 and 12.
Osius Bishop of Corduba, Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, Maximinus Bishop of
Triere, and many others, whom they cursed also, because they had admitted to
their fellowship those Bishops, whom they had deposed.

Sozomenus is in that opinion, that the Council of Philippolis succeeded the
Council of Sardica. From 35. Provinces did Bishops resort unto the Council
of Sardica. From this time forward, there was added diversity of affection,
unto diversity of opinion: A^hanas. epist. ad solitar. vit. argente^. Theod. l.
2. c. 8.
and those who dwelt in the East, did not communicate with them who dwelt in
the West. Some Arrian Bishops dwelt in the West, such as Auxentius Bishop of
Millan, and Vrsatius, and Valens: But by the vigilant travels of the Bishop
of Rome, and other godly Bishops of the West, it came to pass, that these
Seminaries of errors did not prevail much in the Western parts. This is that
Council, Canon 4.
wherein Julius Bishop of Rome, for his good carriage, and good deservings, was
appointed to be Judge of Appellations, when the like case fell out, that
righteous men were oppressed with the unrighteous dealing of Heretics. But
remember, that this is a constitution of the Council of Sardica, and not of
the Nicene Council: And this was a privilege both personal and temporal, for
extraordinary causes, conferred to Julius: but not to be extended to all his
successors, nor yet to continue at all times.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Sirmium.
356. and five years after the Council of Sardica, by the commandment of the
Emperor Constantius, a Council was gathered in Sirmium, a town of Illyria (
Bullenger calls it a town of Pannonia) Photinus Bishop of Sirmium, Bullen.
de Conciliis. Soc. l. 2 c. 29.
had renewed the heresies of Sabellius, and Samosatenus. A disputation was
instituted betwixt Basilius Bishop of Ancyra, an Arrian Heretic, and Photinus
a Sabellian Heretic: in which disputation Photinus was thought to be
overcome, and was damned by the Council as an Heretic, and banished by the
Emperor. In this Council they set down sums of Faith, one in Greek, and
two in Latin; wherein, albeit they abstained from the word (...):
nevertheless they gave great glory to the Son of God. Sec. l. 2. c. 30.
But in the end they repented, and by the Emperors authority, would have
recalled back again the copies of the sums of Faith, set forth at Sirmium:
but the mandates of the Emperor commanding, in most rigorous form, to deliver
back again the copies that were past abroad, could not bring to pass, that,
that thing which was once divulgated, should be again suppressed. The
weakness of Osius Bishop of Corduba kythed in this Council, has been touched
in the history of his life.

The Council of Millan.
AFter that the Emperor Constans, was slain by Magnentius, the whole
Sovereignty both of the East and West, was in the hands of Constantius alone.
The Arrians moved him to assemble a Council at Millan, partly for ratification
of the sentence pronounced against Athanasius in Tyrus, Theod. l. 2. c. 15.
amd partly for the subversion of the Nicene Faith. The Occidentall Bishops to
the number of three hundredth, at the Emperors commandment assembled at Millan.
Soc. l. 2. c. 36.
But neither would they ratify the deposition of Athanaesius, nor yet alter
the sum of faith. And some of them with liberty and freedom, Sozom. l. 4.
c. 9.
accused the Emperor of unrighteous dealing. For this cause many worthy
Bishops were banished, such as Liberius, Ruff. l. 1, c. 20.
Bishop of Rome, Paulinus B. of Triere, Dionysius B. of Alba, Lucifer B. of
Calaris in Sardinia, Eusebius B. of Vercellis in Liguria. If in this Council
Osius B. of Corduba, was banished, as The^doretus records, it would appear
that the Council of Millan preceded the Council of Sirmium: Sozom. l. 4.6.
because that Osius immediately after he was reduced from banishment, was
compelled to address to the Council of Sirmium. But I have followed the order
of Ecclesiastical writers.

The Council of Ariminum. Soc. l. 2. c. 39. Theod. l. 2^ c. 26
IN the year of our Lord, 363. and in the two and twentieth year of the reign
of Constantius, the Arrians having a great vantage of the flexible mind of
Constantius moved him to appoint a place wherein a general Council should be
gathered, for confirmation of their Faith. Whether this place was the town of
Nicomedia, or Nice, always it was shaken with earthquake, and the God of
heaven hindered the purposes of their minds.

The next course was, that two national Councels should be convened, Soc. l.
3. c. 37.
one at Ariminum in Italy, as a meet place for for the Bishops of the West to
convene at, and another in S^l^^cia, of Isauria, as a meet place for assembling
of the Oriental Bishops. To the Council of Ariminum, more then four hundred
Bishops did resort. Sozom l 4.17.
In this national Council compeared Vrsatius and Valens, with Germanus,
Auxentius, and Caius, and Demophilus, desiring that the words (...), and
(...), as words not found in Scripture, and grounds of unsupportable contention
in the Church, should be cancelled, and razed out of the sum of Faith: and
that the Son of God should be called (...), that is, of like substance with
his Father. The Fathers convened at Ari^ninum, Theod. l. 2. c. 19.
altogether disliked this proposition of Vrsatius, and Valens, and adhered for
the most part of them closely to the Nicene Faith, and excluded from the
fellowship of the Church, Sozom. l. 4. c. 18.
Vrsatius, and Valens, with their accomplices above men^ioned, as the letter of
the Council written to the Emperor, clearly bears. With the letter the
Council sent twenty Ambassadors, chosen and selected men, who should give
further instruction to the Emperor, concerning the matter of Faith. But
Vrsatius, and Valens prevened the Ambassadors of the Council, and by
sinistrous informations, hindered them from access to the Emperor: only
their letter was read, whereunto the Emperor turned a differing answer,
bearing, that for the present he was busied with weighty affairs of the
kingdom, but when he should find any breathing time, he would hearken unto
them. The Council sent the second time to the Emperor, Soz. l 4. c. 19.
desiring they might have liberty, before the winter season, to return to
their own flocks: and herewithall they assured the Emperor, that in the
matter of Faith, they would adhere to that which was comprehended in the former
letter. To this second message no answer was returned: Therefore the Bishops
wearied with long attendance, returned every man to his own flock: the Emperor
counted this dissolution of the Council, without warrant of his anthority, to
be a contempt of his Sovereignty: Therefore he gave charge to Valens, to
publish the sum of the Arrian Faith read in Ariminum, albeit it was both
disapproued and rejected: with power also to Vrsatius and Valens, to eiect
those bishops out of their places, who would not subscribe to the Arrian Faith,
and to ordain others in their room. Vrsatius and Valens, being strengthened
with the Emperors commandment, not only troubled the Churches of the West;
Soc. l. 2 c. 37.
but also went to Nica, a town in Thracia, where they gathered a number of
Bishops of their own faction, and approved the sum of Faith read by Arrians
(in Ariminum, being first translated into the Greek language) and this they
called the Nicene Faith, deceiving themselves with vain hopes, as if men had
been so senseless, as to be altogether deceived by the similitude of words,
Nica in Thracia, and Nice in Bithinia. Moreover, Athanasius was as yet alive,
who could have discovered both the blasphemy of the Arrians at Sirmium, and
the falsehood of the Arrians at Nica: for at Sirmium, in the first Session of
the Council, it was written by the Clerk of the Council, Present Constantio
sempiterno, and Magna Augusto, Consulibus Eusebio and Hypatio. Sozom. l. 4. c.
17
Lo, says Athanasius, writing to his friends, the Arrians will not call the
Son of God everlasting, but they say, there was a time, wherein he was not:
but they call the Emperor Constantius, being a mortal man, everlasting
Emperor.

The Council of Seleucia. Acts 13, 4^ Soz. l. 4 c. 22.
SElucia is a town of Isauria, or Cilicia, from whence Paul and Barnabas sailed
to Cyprus. Isauria lies betwixt Lycaonia and Cilicia, and in an ample
signification it comprehends Cilica. In this town convened 160. Bishops of
the East, in the month of December, of that same year of our Lord, wherein
the Council of Ariminum, was assembled. Leonas one of the Princes of the
Emperors court, and Lucius, otherwise called Lauritius, Captain of the bands
of soldiers in Isauria, were appointed to attend the peace of the assembly,
and that all things should be done decently, and in order. The Emperor gave
commandment, that the matter of faith should be first entreated: but
afterward he gave commandment, that the lives of them who were to be
accused, Soc. l. 2. c. 29.
should first be examined: Whereupon arose contention in the assembly: some
urging the matter of Faith to be first entreated: others craving that the lives
of such as were accused or deposed, should be first examined: and both parties
grounded themselves upon the warrant of the Emperors letters. The principal
ring leaders of the one faction, were Acacius Bishop of Caesarea Palestinae,
Georgius Bishop of Alexandria, Vranius of Tyrus, Eudoxius of Antiochia, and
their followers exceeded not the number of two and thirty. On the other side
were Georgius Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis in
Paphlagonia, Eleusius of Cyzicus: and the greatest number of the Council
followed the opinion of these Bishops. So it came to pass, that the most part
thought it expedient, that the matter of Faith should be first entreated.

After this, the Council was of new again divided into three factions.
Acacius, and his accomplices thought meet, that the form of Faith should be
altered. The most part were in a contrary opinion, that the sum of the Nicene
Faith should be kept, only the word (...), should be left out. Sylvanus
Bishop of Tarsus, was in the third opinion, that the sum of Faith compiled
in Antiochia, at the dedication of the Temple, should be kept. Plurality of
voices prevayled, that the Son of God should neither be called (...), nor yet
(...), but rather (...), that is, like unto his Father, because in Scripture
he is called the image of the invisible God. And they consented to
excommunicate all those, who called the Son of God (...), that is, unlike
unto the Father. Now Acacius, and his accomplices, who were indeed Anomaei,
would have seemed to accord with the rest of the Council: but when it was
demanded of them, in what sense they counted the Son alike unto the Father?
They answered, that he was like in will, but not in substance. After that much
disputation and little agreement had been, Leonas a secret favourer of
Acacius, dissolved the assembly. Nevertheless, the Fathers of the Council
convened, Soz. l. 4. c. 22.
to judge the cause of Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem (whom the Acacians had
deposed) and warned the Acacians to be present, but they would not compeare.
Therefore the Council proceeded to the deposition of Georgius Bishop of
Alexandria, Acacius Bishop of Caesarea, Vranius Bishop of Tyrus, Patrophylus
Bishope of Schythopolis, and Eudoxius Bishop of Antiochia, in whose place they
substituted Avianus, a Presbyter in Antiochia, others call him Adrianus. The
Acacians laid hands on Avianus, and delivered him into the hands of Leonas and
Lauritius, and they banished him. The Council protested against Leonas and
Lauritius, and the Acacians, that they violated the Decree of the Council: and
without further delay, they address to Constantinople, to give information to
the Emperor. But the Acacians prevented the rest, and misinformed the
Emperor, and accused the Council, and persuaded him to reject the sum of
Faith agreed upon in Seleucia.

The Council of the Acatians at Constantinople.
THe wrath of the Emperor against the Fathers of the Council of Seleucia, made
the rest to be dispersed: only the Acacians remained still in Constantinople,
and they gathered together fifty Bishops, out of Bithynia, and other near
adjacent places. In this Synod they confirmed the sum of Faith read by
Vrsatius, and Valens, in Ariminum. It is iudiciously observed by Socrates, that
after the Council of Nice, Soc. l. 2. c. 41.
the Arrians in the multiplied conceits of their wavering minds, set forth nine
diverse sums of faith, to wit, in the dedication of the Church of Antiochia,
two forms. The third by those who adhered to Narcissus, was exhibited to
Constance in France. The fourth was sent by Eudoxius to Italy. In Sirmium three
forms were indicted: whereof one was read in Ariminum, with noting the names of
the Consuls, in whose time it was written. The eight was the sum of Faith set
forth in the Council of Seleucia. The ninth was the sum of faith, set down in
Constantinople, with this addition, that the words (...) and (...) should be
silenced when Preachers spoke of God. Thus we see, that there is no end of
wandering, when men have once forsaken the narrow path of the truth of God.

THe Emp. Constantius, The fourth Council of Antiochia, gathered by
Constantinu^.
and the rest of the Arrians, were like unto a troubled sea, that cannot take
rest: yet another counsel must be gathered in Antiochia, for abjuring both the
word (...) and the word (...), so that in time to come no man shall call the
Son of God consubstantiall with the Father, nor yet of a different substance
from the Father. The bishops conueened thought expedient, before they entreated
concerning the Faith, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 31.
that the chair of Antiochia, vacant at that time without a B. should first be
provided: choice was made of Meletius, some-time B. of Sebastia, in Armenia.
He received ordination by Arrians, who subscribed also to his admission, and
their hand-writs were delivered into the custody of Eusebius Samosatenus. But
when Meletius disappointed the expectation of the Arrians, they procured his
banishment, and that Euzoius should be placed in his stead. Theod lib. 2. cap.
32.
Likewise Eusebius Samosate^us for no minassings and threatenings of the Emp.
would deliver back again the subscriptions of the Arrians: so that the Emp.
both commended and admired the magnanimous courage of Eusebius. This Counsel
was holden in the 25 year of the reign of Constantius. In it the Arrians
could not perfect their intended purpose to invent a new sum of faith, which
would have made not the tenth form of faith indicted by the^, because
Consta^tius got knowledge of the seditious attempts of Julian, and he left the
Council to preueene the enterprises of Julian, but he fell sick by the way,
and died at Cilicia.

Under the reign of Julian and Iouinian some particular councels were
assembled: Hist. Magis.
such as a Council in Alexandria, gathered by Athanasius and Eusebius
Vercellensis, for da^ning old heresies, and confirming the Faith. Sozom. lib.
5, cap. 3.
Another in Palestina, for ordaining a B. in Maiuma. Another in Antiochia by
the Acacians, under the reign of Iouinian. These wandering stars, accustomed
to accommodate themselves to times, Socrat lib. 3. cap. 25.
places, and persons, to gain favor at the Emperors hands, they subscribe
the Nicene Faith. But I set forward to the rest.

The Council of Laodicea. Apocal. 3.
LAodicea is the Metrapolitane town of Phrygia, and one of the seven Churches
of Asia, to whom the Apostle John, when he was banished in Pathmos for the
word of God, did write his Epistles. This description I have premitted, to
distinguish Laodicea of Syria, a city near approaching to Antiochia, and
whereof frequent mention is made in the Ecclesiastical History, from Laodicea
of Asia. In this town, Laodicea of Asia, a Synod was gathered, after the
death of Iovinian, Hist. Magd.
about the year of our Lord 368. Nothing was determined in this Council
concerning matters of Faith: Gratian. distinct. 16.
but only constitutions concerning Ecclesiastical policy were made in number
59. In this assembly the worshipping of Angels is damned, as horrible idolatry,
and a forsaking of Christ. Canon 35.
And the books of holy Canonicke Scripture which are to be read in time of
holy Conuocations of people, are particularly reckoned out, both of old and
new Testament. And in this Catalogue of canonicke books, Canon 59.
no mention is made of the books of the Machabees, of Ecclesiasticus, and
other Apocreeph books.

A Council in Illyricum.
Under the reign of the Emperors, Valentinian and Valens, and about the year
of our Lord 370. With advice of both the Emperors a Council was gathered in
Illyricum, wherein the Nicene Faith had confirmation and allowance. Sozom. lib.
4. cap. 8.9.
The Emperor Valens was not as yet infected with the poison of the Arrian
heresy.

The Council of Lampsacum
LAmpsacum is a town situated about the narrow passages of Hellespontus. The
Macedonia^ heretics sought liberty from the Emp. Valens, to meet in this
town, who granted their petition the more willingly, because he supposed that
they had accorded in opinion with Acacius and Eudoxius: but they ratified the
Counsel set forth at Seleucia and damned the Council holden at Constantinople
by the Acacians. Socrat. l. 4. c. 6. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7.
The Emp. Valens being deceived of his expectation, commanded them to be
banished, and their Churches to be given to the favorers of the opinion of
Eudoxius. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 11. and 12.
This dash constrained the Macedonians to take a new course, and to aggree with
Laberius Bishop of Rome. But these Camelions when they had changed many
colors, they could never be white, that is, sincere and upright in Religion.

Under the Emperor Valentinian in the West, The Council of Rome.
Damasus bishop of Rome gathered a Council in Rome, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Sozom. lib. 6: cap. 23.
wherein he confirmed the Nicene Faith, and damned Auxentius Bishop of Millan,
with Vrsatius, Valens, and Caius. Likewise he damned Apollinaris, and his
disciple Timotheus.

IN the year of our Lord 38.3. or as Bullinger reckons, The second General
Council.
385 in the third year of the reign of Theodosius, a General Council was
gathered at Constantinople, consisting of 150. Bishops, of whom 36. were
entangled with the heresy of Macedonius, who called the Holy Spirit a
creature, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8.
a minister, and servant, but not consubstantiall with the Father and the Son.
In this Council the Macedonia^ heretics were lovingly admonished to forsake
their error, and to embrace the true faith and that so much the more, because
they had once already sent messengers to Liberius, and professed the true
Faith. But they continued obstinately in their error, and departed from the
Council. The heresy of Macedonius was damned, the Nicen faith confirmed, with
amplification of that part of the Symbol which concerned the holy Spirit, in
this manner: I believe in the holy Spirit our Lord, giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father, and with the Father, and the Son, is to be
worshipped, and glorified. They ordained Nectarius B. of Constantinople; and
that Constantinople should have the prerogative of honor next to Rome. Theod.
ibid.
Great care was had of Provinces, that they should not of new again be
infected with Heresies. For this cause the name of Patriarchs in the Council
of Nice appropriated to a few, in this General Council is communicated to
many. Theod. ibid.
To Nectarius Megapolis and Thracia was allotted: Pontus to Hellodius,
Cappadocia to Gregorius Nyssenus, Meletina and Armenia to Otreius. Amphilochius
attended upon Iconium and Lycaonia, Optimus upon Antiochia and Pisidia, Sozom.
lib. 7. cap. 7.8.9.
Timotheus upon the Churches of Egypt. Laodicea was recommended to Pelagius,
Tarsus to Diodorus, and Antiochia to Meletius, who was present at the Council,
and ended his life in Constantinople. To other Bishops a care and solicitude
of their own bounds was committed, with this caveat, that no man should
invade the bounds belonging to another, but if necessity so required, Synods
should be assembled, and every one being desired, should mutuallie assist his
neighbor.

Another Council at Constantinople.
THe great affairs of the Church, and the care of their brethren in the West,
compelled them to meet again in Constantinople, where they wrote a Synodicke
letter to Damasus B. of Rome, to Ambrose, Britto, Valeria^us, Acholius,
Anemius, Basilius, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.
and to the rest of the Bishops co^ueened at Rome, Wherein they declare the
ma^ifold troubles they had sustained by heretics: and now albeit in the mercy
of God they were ejected out of the sheepe-folds, yet like unto ravening wolves
they were lurking in woods, seeking oportu^ity to devour the sheep of Christ.
They excuse their absence, because the infirmity of their Churches newly
recovered from the hands of heretics, could not permit many of their number to
journey to Rome. Always they sent their beloved brethren Cyriacus, Eusebius,
and Priscianus, to countenance the assembly at Rome. In matters of Discipline
they recommended unto them the Canons of the Council of Nice: Theod. ibid.
namely, that Ecclesiastical honors should be conferred to persons worthy,
and that with the special advice and consent of the Bishops of that same
Province, with assistance of their confining neighbors, if need required.
After this manner was Nectarius B. of Constantinople, Flauianus B. of
Antiochia, and Cyrillus B. of Jerusalem, ordained. Here mark, that the
consent of the Bishop of Rome was not necessary to the ordination of the
Bishops of the East. And the usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome smells
of Novelty, and not of Antiquity. This Synodicke letter sent from
Constantinople, would seem to import, that the Council which Damasus gathered
at Rome, was assembled in the days of Theodosius, or else that he had gathered
two assemblies in Rome at diverse times, and yet for own purpose.

GOdly Emperors and Kings, The third Council holden at Constantinople, under
the reign of Theodosius. 2 Samuel 5. Psalm. 122.
such as Constantine, Theodosius, and David, were very careful of the unity
of the Church, that it might be like unto a compact City, as Jerusalem was
when the tower of Iebus was conquised, then the people worshipped one God, were
obedient to one Law, and subject only to one Sovereign. Theodosius in the
fifth year of his reign, caring for the peace of the Church, conueened a
great National Council at Constantinople, not only of Homousians, but also
of Arrians, Eunomians, and Macedonians, hoping that by mutual conference
possibly they might in end accord. The good Emperor consulted with Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople, Socrat. l. 5. c. 10.
Nectarius with Agelius a Bishop of the Novatians, Agelius with Sisinius, an
eloquent man, and a mighty Teacher, and a Reader in his Church. Sozom. lib. 7.
cap. 12.
This man considering, that by contentious disputations, Schisms were
increased, but not quenched, gave this advice to Nectarius, that he should
counsel the Emperor to demand of Heretics, in what account they had the
holy Fathers, who preceeded their time. The Heretics at the first spoke
reverently of the Fathers: but when they were demanded, if in matters of Faith
they would give credit to the testimony of the Fathers, the Heretics were
divided amongst themselves: Therefore the Emperor rent in pieces the sums of
the Arrian, Eunomian, and Macedonian, faith: and ordained the Homousian Faith
only to have place.

THe second Council of Carthage was assembled under the reign of Theodosius,
The second Council of Carthage.
near unto the time of the General Council holden in Constantinople. In it,
first the sum of the Nicene Faith is confirmed. The continency of Bishops,
Tom. 1. Council.
Elders, and Deacons, is recommended, with abstinence even from matrimonial
society: so early began men to be wiser then God: But in the twelfth Canon
of the third Council of Carthage, it may be perceived, that this constitution
(as disagreeable from Gods word) was not regarded, because Bishops in Africa
married, and had sons and daughters: and these are inhibite to marry with
Infidels and Heretics in the Canons a fore-saide. The making of Chrisme, and
consecrating of holy Virgins, is ordained only to belong to Bishops. The
Canons of this Council, for the most part, tend to this, to advance the
authority of their Bishops, fore-smelling (as appears) the usurpation of
pre-eminence in the Bishops beyond sea.

The third Council of Carthage.
THe third Council of Carthage was assembled in the year of the Lord 399.
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage seems to have bin Moderatour of the Council:
Augustine Bishop of Hippo was present. Many good constitutions were accorded
upon in this Council: Canon 6.
as namely, that the Sacraments should not be ministered to the dead.

Canon 12.
That the sons and daughters of Bishops, and others in spiritual offices,
should not be given in marriage to Pagans, Heretics, or Schismatikes.

Canon 15.
The men in spiritual offices should not be entangled with secular business,
according to the precept of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2. verse, 4.

Canon 16.
That men of the Clergy should practice no kind of usury.

Canon 18.
That no man shall be ordained Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, before he have brought
all persons of his own family to the profession of Christian Religion.

Canon 19.
That Readers, who are come to perfect years shall either marry, or else
profess continency.

Canon 24.
That in the ministration of the Sacrament, or Sacrifice, (to wit, Eucharistike)
nothing should be offered, except bread and wine mixed with water, of the
fruits of the Corns and Grapes.

That the Bishop of Rome should be called the Bishop of the first seat, Canon
40.
but not the high Priest, nor the Prince of Priests.

That nothing, Canon 47.
except holy Canonicke Scripture, should be read in the Churches, under the
name of holy books.

ABout the year of our Lord 401. The fourth Council of Carthage.
under the reign of Honorius, was assembled again a great national Council
in Carthage, of 214. Bishops. Augustine Bishop of Hippo was also present at
this Council. Many Canons were set down in this Council, almost equal with
the number of conueened Bishops.

That persons married, Canon 13.
for reverence of the blessing pronounced to the marriage, should not company
together the first night after their marriage.

That the Bishop should have his dwelling place near unto the Church, Canon 14
and 15.
his house-holde-stuffe should be vncostly, his fare should be course, and
vndelicate, and that he should conquiese authority unto himself by fidelity
and uprightness of an holy conversation.

That a Bishop should not spend time in reading the books of Pagans: Canon 16.
the books of Heretics, if necessity required, he might read.

That a Bishop entangle not himself deeply with household business, Canon 20.
to the end he may attend upon reading, Prayer, and Preaching.

That a Bishop admit no man unto a spiritual office, Canon 22.
without advice of the Clergy, and consent of the people.

That a Bishop without advice of his Clergy, Canon 23.
pronounce no sentence, else it shall have no force, except they confirm it.

That a Bishop sitting, Canon 34.
shall not suffer a presbyter to stand.

That an assembly of Heretics conueened together, Canon 71.
shall not be called Concilium, but Conciliabulum.

That he who communicates with an Heretic, Canon 73.
shall be excommunicate, whether he be of the number of the Laikes, or of the
Clergy.

Canon. 95.
That such as refuse to give unto the Church, the oblations of defunct persons,
shall be excommunicate, as murderers of the poor. Here mark what is meaned
by Oblationes Defunctorum, not soulmasses, said for the defunct, but the
charity which they have in testamentall legacy to the poor, Canon. 100.
That no woman shall presume to baptize.

CENTVRIE V.
COncerning Councels gathered in the days of Arcadius and Honorius, Councels
at Constantinople against Job. Chrysostom.
by Epiphanius in Cyprus, and Theophilus in Alexandria, under pretense of
damning the books of Origin; and in Constantinople, first and last, by the
malice of Eudoxia, the Emperor Arcadius wife: to the deposition of John
Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople: I hope I have not need to make a new
declaration of things, which are amply declared in the preceding history.

ABout the year of our Lord, The fifth Counsel of Carthage.
419. a great number of Bishops were assembled in the Town of Carthage, whose
names are particularly expressed in their Synodicke letters, sent to
Innocentius the first, Bishop of Rome. In this assembly, Aug. Epist. 90. and
91.
they damned the opinions of Pelagius, and Coelestius (which has been above
rehearsed) as heretical. The answer that Innocentius returned to the Council,
is intermixed with words of swelling pride, as if no Decree could be firm,
until it had allowance of the Roman chair: yet the fifth Council of Carthage
had pronounced Anathema against the opinions of Pelagius, and Coelestius,
before they sent their letter to Innocentius.

Amongst the canons of this Council, the two last are to be remarked: namely,
the fourteenth, and fifteenth canon. The one declares, Canon 14.
that no Church was consecrated without the relics of the Martyrs: Canon 15.
the other declares, that adoration of relics at this time, was the custom
of Ethnickes: supplication is appointed to be made to the Emperors, that
relics which are found in Images, groves, or trees, or such other places,
should be abolished.

The first Council of Toledo.
THe first Council of Toledo in Spain, was assembled under the reigns of
Arcadius and Honorius. The year of our Lord wherein this Council was
gathered, is much contraverted: therefore I overpasse it, contenting my self
with some notice of the time of the Emperor, in whose time the Council was
gathered. It seems to have been assembled for confirmation of the Nicene
Council, and refutation of some errors. The canons concerning prohibibition
of marriage to some persons, Canon 17.
are foolish, and the admitting of a man to the communion, who wants a wife,
and contenteth himself with one concubine only, is foolisher: so perilous a
thing it is, in a jot to depart from the certain rule of the written Word of
God.

The Council called Mileuitanum.
MIlevitum is a town of Numidia: in it many Bishops were assembled under the
reign of Arcadius, whose names are particularly expressed in the letter sent
from the Council to Innocentius Bishop of Rome, which letter is inserted in
the Epistles of Augustine, together with the answer of Innocentius the first.
Epist. 92. and 93
Two principal causes moved them to assemble together. First, to finish the
work they had begun, in the fifth Council of Carthage, in condemning the
heresies of Pelagius, and Coelestius, by whom, as yet, many were deceived, and
perverted from the true faith. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, was not only
present, but also President. The opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius,
concerning the power of man's nature, not supported by the grace of God, and
free will of man to do good of it self, is so solidly refuted, and that by
arguments taken out of holy Scripture only; that it is to be wished, that
other Councels had followed the example of this Council, wherein Augustine was
President.

The other cause of the meeting of this Council, was to constitute canons
concerning Ecclesiastical discipline, specially, that no man should make
appellation from his own Bishop to Bishops beyond Sea, but in case his own
Bishop did him wrong, Canon 22.
then he should appeal unto an assembly of African Bishops, but he who would
needs appear to Bishops beyond Sea (meaning chiefly of the Bishop of Rome)
let him be secluded from the communion of all African Bishops. The cause of
Apiarius, and his Bishop Vrbanus Siccensis seemed already to be wakened, and
the Fathers of this Council fore-smelled that he was to appeal to the Bishop
of Rome; like as he did indeed, to Zosymus the successor of Innocentius: and
therefore, like wise men in due time, they made this constitution. Innocentius
received the Councels letter from a brother named Julius, and approoved the
condemnatory sentence, pronunced against Pelagius and Coelestius: but mark the
words of Innocentius letter, Frater, and Coepiscopus noster Julius dilectionis
vestraeliteras, quas ex Milevitano cura fide^ propensiore misist^s,
mihi^nopinanter suggessi^: that is to say, Our brother and fellowship Julius,
brought unto me unawares your brotherly letters, which ye sent unto me from
the Council Milevitanu^, with a care very bent for the Faith. The word
inopinanter, declares, that he received their letter before he knew that any
such Council was gathered, for the Bishops of Rome as yet took not upon them
that authority, to be the only appointers of general and national Councels.
Pelagius after this Council, compeared before a Council in Palestina, and
seemed to renounce his errors, but he spoke deceitfully, as Heretics are
accustomed to do: but he set forth nothing in writing to destroy the error
he had builded, and to procure the safety of them whom he had entangled with
the snares of deceitful errors, Aug. Epist. 95.
as the Epistle of Aurelius, Alipius, Augustinus, Evodius, and Possidius,
written to Innocentius, does declare. Obscure Covncels I have not overpassed
with silence, and do mind, God willing, to keep the like order in time to come.

IN the year of our Lord, The sixth Council of Carthage.
402. and under the reigns of Honorius, and Theodosius, the second, a great
national Council was assembled in Carthage: two hundred and seventeene
bishops were present at this Council, Hist. Magd. cent 5 cap. 9.
and it continued for the space of six years. Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, was
Moderator. Three Bishops of Rome, to wit, Zosymus, Bonifacius the first, and
Coelestinus, endeavored with all their might to persuade the African Bishops,
that they were under the sovereignty and jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome:
but all in vain, as the issue of this Council will prove. The ground of the
great controversy betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the sixth Council of
Carthage, was Apiarius Presbyter Siccencis, a wicked man, and justly
excommunicate, not only by his own Bishop Vrbanus, but also by a Synod of
other near approaching Bishops. He appealed to Zosymus Bishop of Rome, a
City of refuge to all villainous men, as appeared by the insolent form of his
carriage, toward his brethren in Afric: for before he had heard the causes
wherefore they had excommunicated this wicked man Apiarius, he absolved him,
and admitted him to his communion. Moreover, understanding that a Council was
to be convened in Carthage, he sent thither Ambassadors to plead the cause of
Apiarius, to procure the excommunication of Vrbanus; and in case this succeeded
not, to desire that this question might be remitted to the determination of the
Roman Bishop, as undoubted Judge of appellations, according to an act of the
Council of Nice. The Fathers of the Council of Carthage answered with great
modesty that they knew no such act, to have been made in the Council of Nice.
Always time is granted to the Bishop of Rome, to prove that such right
belongs to him by an act, of the Council of Nice. Zosymus the first
alleadger of this false act, Soc. l. 7. c. 11.
continued short time in office: for he ended his course within the space of
one year, and few months. Bonifacius the successor of Zosymus, seriously
urging the same prerogative, to be judges in all causes of appellation,
according to the act of the Council of Nice. When all the acts were read, both
in the Latin and Greek exemplars, and no such act was found, the Ambassadors
of Bonifacius returned to him with this answer, that the principal Registers
ought to be searched, which were to be found in Constantinople, Alexandria,
and Antiochia: and in the mean time no man should be challenged for appealing
to the Bishop of Rome, until this question had an end, by viewing of the
authentic Registers. Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, sent to the Council of Carthage, the just copies of the acts
of the Council of Nice: but no such act was found, Soc. l. 7.11.
as was alleged by Zosymus and Bonifacius: and by this time Bonifacius also
ended his life: for he sat not above three years. The Epistle sent from the
sixth Council of Carthage, declaring that they found the act aforesaid,
alleged by the ambassadors of the Bishop of Rome, to be supposititious and
false, this Epistle (I say) was directed to Bonifacius: but seeing he had
ended his life, it came into the hands of Coelestinus, the successor of
Bonifacius, who insisted by the same ambassadors, who were employed before, to
wit, Faustinus a Bishop, and Philippus and Asellus, two Presbyters, to have
Ap^arius received into favor, and the African Bishops to be subject to the
Bishop of Rome: but their travels were bestowed in vain. The last period of
this controversy was this, that Ap^arius despairing of help from the Bishops
of Rome, confessed his faults, and humbly submitted himself to the Council of
Carthage. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 9^
And the Ambassadors of Coelestinus returned with this answer, that the Bishop
of Rome had no authority over the Bishops of Africa: but he who thought
himself to be wronged, let him complain to a national Council, and if the
national Council also did him wrong, then let him complain to the general
Council, but no appellation to be made in time to come from Africa to the
Bishop of Rome.

Under the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, The Council called Bagiense
and about the year of our Lord, 433. The Donatists assembled themselves in a
town of Africa called Bagaia, in frequent number: for they are counted 310.
who were present at this Council. The principal purpose of their meeting, was
for deposition of Maximianus Bishop of Bagara, who fell from their society,
and drew many others from their heresy: him they deposed and accursed. I have
made mention of this unhappy Council for two causes: First, to declare the
incessant diligence of Heretics, in advancing a doctrine of lies, for it was
a strange thing, that for the deposition of one man, so many should assemble
themselves in one town: seldom were so many present at Occumenicke Councels,
as were at this convention. Secondly, to declare the effromed peartnesse of
Heretics, when they are met together, all that they do is ascribed to the
holy Spirit: for in their definitive sentence against Maximianus, they borrow
the words of the holy Apostles, Acts 15.
Placuit Spiritui sancto qui in nobis est: that is, It has pleased the holy
Spirit, who is in us. Yet were they guided by Satan, and not by the holy
Spirit, in all the actions of this Council.

The first Council of Ephesus general.
IN the eight year of the reign of Theodosius the second, was a general
Council assembled in Ephesus, against the Heretic Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople, of whom Socrates writes, that the first ground of his heresy
was the speeches of a Presbyter in his Church called Anastatius, whom he had
in reverent account. This Anastatius upon a time teaching in the Church, Soc.
l. 7. c. 32.
said, let no man call the Virgin Marie the mother of God, whereupon ensued
great trouble in the Church, for they were assured of the divinity of Christ.
And Nestorius not willing that the man should be disesteemed, whom he so much
regarded: he chopped often in his Sermons, upon the word (...), not willing to
give unto the blessed Virgin so great an honor. When the Council of Ephesus
was assembled, consisting of the number of two hundredth Bishops and above, and
Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, was appointed Moderator, by the ordinance of the
Emperors, who commanded the Council to be gathered; Cirillus began to
embarke, and to agitate the question, before John Patriarch of Antiochia, and
his company could be present at the Council. At the first meeting, Nestorius
being present, in the town of Ephesus, utterly spoiled his cause, and added to
his former opinion borrowed from Anastatius, that they thought it an indignity
done to the only begotten Son of God, to speak of (...) and (...), and the
words (...), Acta Synodi Ephesina.
were all reproachful words to be spoken of the Son of God, that is, that
he was nourished upon milk, that he was borne of a maid, that he was two
months or three months old, all these words he counted to be reproachful
words to be spoken of the Son of God. The Fathers of the Council were all
highly offended at these words, and warned him to be personally present at
the Council, but he refused to appear, until the time that John Patriarch
of Antiochia, should be present at the Council. Cirillus Bishop of Alexandria,
was a man prompt, and forward in all causes, both good and bad, and he would
not linger until the coming of John Patriarch of Antiochia, and his company,
but forthwith he caused his books and writings to be examined, wherein it was
clearly found, that he said the Son of the Virgin Mary was not God, but
only that God was with him: so he denied the personal union of the divine
and humane Nature. The Fathers of the Council upon this ground damned
Nestorius as an Heretic, Soc. l. 7.32.
and Nestorius on the other part gathered the Bishops of his ownefaction, and
damned Cirillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus.

After this, John Patriarch of Antiochia came to Ephesus, whose coming rather
increased, then diminished the schism: for he was so angry against the
precipitation and hastiness of Cirillus, that he would not adioyne himself
to the Council: hereupon followed mutual excommunications: John Patriarch of
Antiochia, excommuicated Cyrillus and Memnon: and they* on the other part
excommunicated him, and his (...) who came not to the Council: yet in the
mercy of God, this schism that fell out last amongst good men was cured, and
they were reconciled, and the Heretic Nestorius was banished to Oasis.

The first Council of Ephesus.
BEfore Theodosius the second had ended his life, Flavianus Bishop of
Constantinople, had gathered a particular Council, and damned Eutyches an
Abbot of Constantinople, because he affirmed, that in Christ, after the union
of the divine and humane natures, there was no longer two natures. This absurd
opinion Flavianus damned as heretical. Notwithstanding, Chrysaphius, the
chief Governor of the Emperors Palace, was a friend to Eutyches, and a
favourer of his heresy. And he procured at the Emperors hands, Eva. l. 1. c.
9.10
that Eutyches cause should be judged in a more frequent assembly, to be
gathered at Ephesus, and wherein Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria should be
Moderator. In this assembly Dioscorus dealt imperiously, like unto an
headstrong Heretic. He called upon Eutyches, and required a confession of
his faith, which when he had given, not expecting the votes of others, who
were present, with clamor and out-crying, he gave allowance unto it, as if no
more were requisite in a Council, except only the suffrage and vote of the
Moderator. Likewise he suffered not the letters of Leo Bishop of Rome, sent to
the Council, to be read. Thirdly, he absolved Eutyches, and 300 Monks, all
entangled with this heresy, Hist. Magd. cent. 5. c. 9.
whom Flavianus had justly excommunicated: and last of all, he excommunicated
Flavianus, and caused him by the tumult of his factioners, to be so rudely and
discourteously entreated, that he was trod under foot, and was so wounded, that
within three days after he ended his life: for this cause, this Council was
called a Council of brigandrie.

The Council of Berytus.
THe Council of Berytus in Phoenicia, wherein the cause of Ibas Bishop of Edessa
(whom Dioscorus had deposed) was wakened, and he was justified and absolved, I
purposely pass by, because the controversy against Ibas, will be discussed in
a greater assembly.

And the Council called Agathense in France, The Council called. Agthense.
wherein albeit there be a great number of Constitutions, yet nothing is more
remarkable in it than this; that they grant they had liberty to meet together
by commandment of Alaricus king of Goths, who at that time had sovereignty
in that part of France called Gallia Narbonensis where the Council was
gathered: so that in all countries, Councels, both general and national, were
conueened by the authority of Princes.

IN the year of our Lord 454. and in the third year of the reign of the
Emperor Martianus: The general Council of Chalcedon. Funct. chron.
a general Council was assembled at Chalcedon a town of Bythinia, lying
directly over against Constantinople. Martianus the Emperor was in person
present at the Council, and of Bishops, and reverend Fathers, from all parts
of the world six hundredth and thirty. The like whereof happened not in any
general Council preceding this time. The Patriarchs were all present at
this Council, Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 4.
either in proper person, or by their Ambassadors. Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, Maximus Bishop of Antiochia,
Iuvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem: and in stead of Leo Bishop of Rome, his
Ambassadors Pascasianus a Bishop, Lucentius, Bonifacius, and Basilius
Presbyters, with a Christian brother Iulianus.

Martianus entreated all the Fathers of the Council to think that he gave his
presence to the conuention, not for ostentation of his power or virtue, but
only for desire that the true faith should be confirmed and established, and
that by his authority all tumults of men disobedient to the Council, might be
repressed. Above all craving of them, or rather charging and commanding them,
that they should decerne nothing repugna^tto the acts of the Council of Nice.

The Ambassadors of Leo Bishop of Rome craved that Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria should not sit in the Council as a judge, Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 4.
but that he should stand, and answer to things that were to be objected unto
him. Which petition being granted, Eusebius B. of Dorileum stood up, and
accused him of three things. First, that he had been an adversary to the true
faith, in absoluing Eutyches a notable heretic in the second Council of
Ephesus: Secondly that he was a murderer of Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople
a constant defender of the true faith: and thirdly that he had done himself
wrong in deposing him without a cause, and therewith he desired his letter to
be read. The Council not only read his letter accusatorie, but also read all
the acts of the second Council of Ephesus, and heard the reports of Bishops,
who were present at the Council of Brigandrie, and consented against their
hearts to the deposition of Flauianus, because Dioscorus had bands of soldiers
sent by Chrysaphius in the name of the Emperor Theodosus 2. to compel simple
men to obey all his desires. All this being considered, together with his
unmannerly rudeness, who would not suffer the letter of Leo Bishop of Rome to
be read in the Council aforesaid, and finally that he had most unjustly and
unadvisedly excommunicated Leo Bishop of Rome.

The Council of Chalcedon cited Dioscorus, the ground of this controversy,
but he appeared not: therefore he was condemned as an heretic, Evagrabid.
together with Eutyches and Iuvenalis Bishops of Jerusalem, and it was ordained
that men should believe that the natures of Christ, albeit they were united,
yet were they not confounded, as Eutyches heretically had affirmed. Likewise
all the acts of the second Council of Ephesus were abrogated and rescinded,
except the deposition of Dam^us Bishop of Antiochia, and substitution of
Maximus in his place. Moreover Theodoretus Bishop of Cyns and Ibas Bishop of
Edessa, who had been unjustly deposed in the second Council of Ephesus, were
both restored to their places, after they had clearly damned the heresies of
Nestorius, and Eutyches. In the cause of Bassianus and Stephanus, who contended
both for the Bishopric of Ephesus, it was ordained that both of them should
be removed from that dignity, as men who by unlawful means had aspired to
ecclesiasticke offices, and a third person should have the office. Finally, it
was appointed and ordained in this Council, that Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, and his successors should have the chief dignity next unto
the chair of Rome. It is to be marked that Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, to
whom the place of old belonged, albeit he was present in the Council, yet he
made none obstacle unto this ordinance; but the Ambassadors of Leo Bishop of
Rome spoke against it, fearing left the increasing magnificence of such an
Imperial town, should in end bring Constantinople to the pre-eminence of the
first seat. Supremacy was long ago the apple of their eye, and they could not
abide that afar off a diminution of this should be once pointed at.
Nevertheless this ordinance had allowance of the Council, notwithstanding of
the contradiction of the Roman Ambassadors. Incodice Romano, Mysterium
iniquitanis.
says learned Morneus, all this action is left out.

In the sixth Session of this Council the Emperor Martianus with Pulcheria the
Empress, were both present, and craved of the Council, that ordinances should
be made for restraining the filthy lucre, Canon 6.
and ambition of Monks and Clergy, who entangled themselves with secular
business for desire of gain and riches: whereupon followed this constitution,
that men who addicted themselves either to the Monastickelife, or the Clergy
men, they should not be promoted to other dignities, meaning, mere civil
offices, because that that is a distraction of them from their calling.

CENTVRIE VI.
The Council of Rauenna.
THE schism that fell out in the election of Symmachus was the cause of the
gathering of the Council of Rauenna, Laurentius, was his competitour. In this
Council it was found that Symmachus was first ordained, and that the most part
both of Clergy and people adhered to him: therefore he was declared to be
Bishop of Rome, and Laurentius was ordained Bishop of Nuceria.

Six Councels holden (...) Rome in Symmachus time.
The multiplied number of Councels in Symmachus time, al conueened by the
authority of Theodoricus king of Goths, who reigned in Italy. All this number
of Councels (I say) was assembled for matter of little importance, except the
fourth and fifth Council, wherein a libel of accusations was given in against
Symmachus, but he compeared not before the Council to answer; yet was he
absolved by the most part of the Council (being his own favorers) chiefly for
this reason; because they thought that the high Priest should be judged by no
man, Hist. Magd. cent. 6 cap. 9.
but his doings should be examined only before the Tribu^al of God. Mark how
this matter goes: the B. of Rome are lying under the feet of the Goths,
neither have they liberty to assemble themselves together, except that license
be sought, and obtained from Theodoricus king of Goths. Notwithstanding
supremacy that great Idol, whereat they aimed continually, runs so high in
their heads, that the flatterers of the B. of Rome would absolve him, as a man
whose actions came not under the indicature of mortal men. His accusers
protested in write, that if the successors of Peter should be protested in
writing that if the successors of Peter should be judged by no man, then with
the rest of the privileges of their chair, they had also a privilege to
sin, and to do what they please.

THe Councels of Spain called Ilerdense, The Councels in Spain called
Ilerdense and Valentinum.
and Valentinum assembled in Valentia, are very obscure Councels. In the one
eight Bishops were present: in the other six Bishops. Many new and
needelesse-Canons were made in these assemblies, and farther I see nothing. In
the first called Ilerdense; a prohibition of marriage in time of Lent, and
three weeks before the festiuitie of John the Baptist, and betwixt the days
of the Aduent of our Lord, and the days called Epiphania. In the other
Council it was appointed, that in the ordinary service the Gospel should be
read after the Epistle, partly in respect that all the people of God have
entresse to hear the wholesome precepts of their Savior, and partly, in
respect that by such hearing, some were found to be converted to the faith,
whereof it may be perceived, that the Gospel was read unto the people in a
known and intelligible language, else it could not work faith in the hearts of
the hearers.

IN the 20. yeeere of the Emp. Anastatius a national Council was assembled at
Sidon of eighty Bishops, The Council of Sidon.
by the procurement of Xenaeas B. of Hierapolis, for undoing the Council of
Chalcedon. The Emperor had already banished Euphemius, and Macedonius Bishops
of Constantinople, Yet he found that Flavianus B. of Antiochia, and Helias B.
of Jerusalem altogether disliked and reproved his proceedings, neither could
they admit the law of oblivion, called in the Greek language (...), which the
Emperor would have brought in, to pacify controversies in the Church, as
civil controversies, at sometimes have bin pacified: for this cause the
Emperor Anastatius set himself directly against the truth of God, and
gathered this Council, to undo the authority of the Council of Chalcedon.
Flavianus, and Helias would not be present at this ungodly Council, wherein
they damned the Council of Chalcedon, yet they abstained from damning
Flaevianus and Helias, for a time. Nevertheless by continual accusations of
these two Bishops, as if they had been mockers of all the Emperors doings,
they procured their banishment, as has been declared in the preceding
history.

The first Council of Aurelia.
IN the 22. year of the reign of Anastatius, and under the reign of Clodoueus
King of France, conueened 32. Bishops in the town of Aurelia, of purpose to
settle some order in Ecclesiastical discipline, which through injury of time,
and irruption of barbarous people into the country of France, had been
brought to great dissolution and misorder. The Canons of this Council are
coincide^t for the most part, with the Canons of all other Councels.

The Council of Gerunda and Czsaraugusta.
THe two former Councels assembled in Spain, namely Ilerdense, and Valentinum,
were under the reign of Theodoricus. Now these two Gerundense and
Caesaraugustanum are celebrated under the same King, to wit, Theodoricus of the
nation of the Goths reigning in Spain. In Gerunda seven Bishops conueened,
made Ecclesiastical constitutions, chiefly about Baptism, that Catechumeni
should be baptized on Easter day, and at Pentecost, when most solemn
conuentions of people were gathered. Canon 4.
They who were under infirmity and sickness, might be baptized at any time,
Canon 5.
and the infant, which was likely to die, might be baptized the same day
wherein it was borne. In Caesaraugusta eleven Bishops seemed to have been
conueened. Canon 2.
They forbid fasting upon the Lords day, for superstition, or for respect of
times, or for persuasion. It would appear that this Council had a desire to
abolish the rites and customs of the Manichean heretics, who were accustomed
to fast upon the Lords day.

The Council of Rome.
IN the days of H^rmisda by the mandat of Theodoricus King of Goths reigning
in Italy, a Council was assembled at Rome upon this occasion. It was thought
meet by the Emperor Anastatius, Theodoricus King of Italy and many others,
that a Council should be assembled at Heraclea for deciding coutrouersies in
religion. Many Bishops resorted to Heraclea about the number of 200. but
Anastatius suffered no Council to be holden, thereby incurring the great blame
of inconstancy, and carelessenesse in seeking out the truth: for this cause
Theodoricus willed Hormisda Bishop of Rome to gather a Council at Rome,
wherein the error of Eutyches is damned of new again, and Ambassadors are
ordained to be sent to Anastatius the Emperor, and to the Bishop of
Constantinople, to divert the^, if it were possible from the error of
Eutyches, but how inhumanely the Ambassadors were entreated, it has been
declared in the description of the life of Hormisda.

Under the reign of the Emperor Justinius a Synod was gathered in
Constantinople by Ioannes Cappadox. The Council of Constantinople.
Many grieuons accusations were given in against Severus Bishop of Antiochia,
Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 9.
such as sacrilegious spoiling of Temples, under pretense of eschewing causes
of Idolatry, he took away the golden doves that hung above the fontes, and
the altars, and he uttered many blasphemous speeches against the Council of
Chalcedon. Ioannes Cappadox, albeit he was of a bad religion himself, yet the
authority of the Emperor, and consent of the Council procured that Severus
should be damned of heresy, whom the Emperor also banished, and (as some
affirm) punished him also by commanding that his blasphemous tongue should be
cut out. In like manner the Monks of Apamea in a Council conueened in
Syriasecunda, The Synod Syria secunda.
accused Severus of bloody cruelty, and oppression, in besieging of
Monasteries, slaying the Monks, and spoiling their goods. The like accusation
was given in against Peter Bishop of Apamea, which accusations being
sufficiently proved by vnsuspect witnesses: this Council damned Severus, and
Petrus Bishop of Apamea.

The second Council of Toledo.
IN the fifth year of King Abnaricus was the second Council of Toledo
conueened, partly for renewing the ancient constitutions of the Church, and
partly for making new constitutions belonging to Ecclesiastical discipline. It
was ordained that children whom their parents had dedicated to the Church, they
should not be admitted to the office of a Subdeacon, until they were eighteen
years of age, neither to the office of a Deacon, before they were twenty five
years old, and at the beginning of their admission to the office of a
Subdeacon, namely, when they were full eighteen years old (and not before
that time) they should be presented before the Clergy, and people to make an
open declaration, whether they were of purpose to lead a continent life, or to
marry, and these who protested they had not the gift of continency, Canon 1.
are tolerated by the first Canon of the second Council of Toledo to marry.

The fifth general Council holden at Constantinople.
IN the year of our Lord 551. and in the 94. year of the reign of the
Emperor Justinian, was a general Council assembled at Constantinople. The
principal causes of this meeting are expressly set down by Euagrius lib. 4.
cap. 38. First in respect of the controversy betwixt Eustochius B. of
Jerusalem, and Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia: Eustochius cast out
the Monks of Nova Laura, who obstinately defended the errors of Origin.
Theodorus Ascidas assisted them, and said, that Eustochius Bishop of Jerusalem
had dealt cruelly, and inhumanely with his brethren; to pacify this
controversy was this Council conueened: Also great disputation was in the
Church about the books of Origin, of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuesta, and some
writings of Theodoritus Bishop of Cyrus, and Ibas Bishop of Edessa: this was
the second cause of this great conuention to put an end unto these contentious
disputations. At this time Menas was Bishop of Constantinople, but he ended his
life in the very time of the general Council. The first question moved in the
Council was this: Whether or no, men who were dead, and had ended their course,
might lawfully be cursed and excommunicated. To this Eutychius (a man before
this time of no great account) answered: 2. Reg. 23. verse. 16.
That like as Josias not only punished Idolatrous Priests who were alive, but
also opened the graves of them who were dead, to dishonor them after their
death, who had dishonored God in their lifetime: even so the memorialls of
men might be accursed after their death, who had harmed Christ's Church in
their lifetime. Euag. lib. 4 cap. 38.
This was thought by the Fathers of the Council to be pertinently spoken, and
when his answer came to the ears of the Emperor Justinian, he appointed that
he should be ordained Bishop of Constantinople, for Menas died suddenly in
time of the Council. Vigilius Bishop of Rome was in Constantinople in time of
this Council, but would not be present at the Council, left the dignity of
the Roman chair should be impaired, if the Patriarch of Constantinople had
been equalled with him in honor, for Eutychius, after Menas, was moderator of
the Council. The general conuention took this effect, That the writings of
Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuesta were utterly condemned, and the replies of
Theodoretus to the 12. heads of Cyrillus, with the letter of Ibas written to
Maris a Persia^ were damned. Finally the errors of Origin were damned, and
Theodorus Ascidas, together with the Monks of Nova Laura, who defended the
errors of Origin, all were excommunicated, and the 4. preceding general
Councels were confirmed with full allowance. The Council of Mopsuesta
immediately following, tended only to this, to know when the name of Theodorus
sometime B. of Mopsuesta a town of Cilicia, was razed out of the roll called
sacra diptycha. And the ancients both of Clergy and people, assured the
Emperor Justinian that the name of Theodorus was razed out of the roll of holy
Bishops before their time.

Under the reign of Childebertus king of France, The second, third, fourth and
fifth Councels of Aurelia.
were frequent meetings of Bishops in Aurelia a town of France commonly called
Orleans. Many superstitious constitutions were hatched amongst them, especially
about prohibition of marriage, for this doctrine of devils had now gotten the
upper hand in the West. The verse of Homer may be written in the frontispice of
these Councels (...): that is, It is a shame to tarry long, and to return
empty. If they meet so often, somefruites worthy of their meeting should have
been brought out to the world, but it is a wearisome thing to travel a long
time in the wilderness of Arabia, albeit in it there be large fields, yet it
is a barren ground, and the pain of wearisome traveling is not recompensed
with the delight of any refreshment that can be had there. This I write, not to
hinder any man from the reading of these Councels also: for some good things
are to be found in them, but to wish that the short time we have to live in
this world should not be unfruitfully spent.

Canon 4.
In the second Council Simonie is damned, and the receiving of money for
admitting a man to a spiritual office is utterly derested.

Canon 8.
In the third Council Perjury is abhorred in a man having a spiritual
calling, but softly punished by 2. years excluding of him from the communion.

Canon 4.
In the fourth Council, it is ordained that in the offering of the holy Calice,
nothing shall be presented, except wine only, unmixed with water, because it
is a sacrilegious thing to transgress the holy mandate and institution of our
Savior Christ.

Canon 10.
In the fifth Council it is condescended, that no man shall be ordained Bishop,
without consent of King, Clergy and people, according to the ancient
constitutions of the Church, and that no sprituall office shall be bought by
money.

The heap of constitutions about the keeping of Pasche day and Lent, about the
prohibition of marriage betwixt Christians and unconverted Jews, about
servants not to be admitted to Ecclesiastical orders, about assemblies to be
at the least yearly conuocated by Bishops, about Ecclesiastical rents not to
be dilapidated. The nature of a short Compend cannot permit me to insist in
such things.

Under the reign of Theodobertus king of France, The Council of Overnie. Canon
2.
the Fathers who were present at the Councels of Aurelia, conueened also in the
Council of Overnie, and ordained that no man should presume to the office of a
Bishop, by the favor of men in credit, but by the merits of an honest and
unreprovable life.

That the dead body of a Bishop in time of his funeral should be covered with
the pall, Canon 4.
otherwise called Opertorium Dominici corporis which covered the Altar, left
the honor done to the body, should be a polluting of the Altar, with many
other constitutions, which of purpose I ouerpasse with silence.

Under the reign of Aribertus king of France, The Council of Tours. Canon 5.
a Council was assembled at Tours. In this Council it was ordained, that the
Clergy and people in every Congregation should provide support for their own
poor, and not permit them to wander to uncouth places: for indeed this custom
of wandering has brought in Atheism amongst the poor, when they leave their
own Congregation, they leave also their own Pastor, who attended upon their
conversation, and they fall into the snare of the devil.

It was also statute and ordained that a Bishop should count his wife as his
sister, Canon 13.
and that he should no manner of way company with her: and for this cause he
should have Presbyters, and Deacons so familiarly conversant with him, that
they might bear testimony of his honest behavior, to wit, that he never
companied with his wife. The Romanists who count the prohibition of marriage to
be the soul of their religion, could not ouerpasse this Canon without a
censure. Now let us hear what Censura says. Intellige hunc Canonem iuxia vsum
Orientalis Ecclesiae, in qua coniugatus promouebatur ad sacerdotium: that is,
Understand this Canon according to the custom of the Oriental Church, wherein
a married man was promoted to the Priesthood: well excused. The B. of Rowen,
Burges, Tours, etc. are conueened in the town of Tours, to prescribe rules to
the Oriental Church, or at least rules unto their own bishops to live after
the form of the Oriental Church, which never came in their mind to do, as
may evidently be known by the sixth general Council.

Canon 15.
Moreover, it was ordained, that no Priest, or Monk should receive in bed with
him another Priest or Monk, to the end they might be, so vnreproouable, that
they would abstain from all appearance of evil.

Canon 25.
In this Council was set down very strict prohibitions, that no man should
oppress the Church, and convert unto his own use any thing duly belonging to
them, left he incur the malediction of Judas who was a thief, and kept the
bag, and converted to his own use a part of that money which belonged to the
poor.

The Council of Paris.
IN the Council holden at Paris, order was taken concerning admitting of
Bishops to their offices, that no man should be admitted Bishop, without the
full consent of Clergy and people, and that no man should presume by favor of
Princes only, without the consents aforesaid, to become Bishop in any place.

The third Council of Toledo.
REcaredus king of Spain, and of the descent of the Goths, who were miserably
infected with the Arrian heresy, assembled a Council of 62. Bishops at
Toledo, where he renounced the Arrian heresy, and embraced the true faith, and
the whole nation of the West Goths in Spain did the like, about the year of
our Lord 585.

Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 9. A Council at Constantinople.
Under the reign of Mauritius a Council was assembled at Constantinople, for
trying of the cause of Gregorius Bishop of Antiochia, whom Asterius Deputy in
the East had accused of incest: but Gregorius was declared to be innocent, and
his accuser was scourged with rods, and was banished. In this Council the
name of Oecumenick Bishop, was attributed to John Patriarch of Constantinople.

TThe first Council of Matiscon was assembled about the time of Pelagius 2,
Three Councels at Matiscon. Canon 8.
as the second Tome of Councils records. In it commandment was given, that
no man of the Clergy should cite another man having a spiritual office,
before a secular judge.

And that a Bishop or Presbyter should not entangle himself with carnal lust,
Canon 11.
after he is promoted to so high dignity, but the woman who before was his
wife, now let her be his sister, and let the husband be changed into a brother.
Mark how subtly Satan under pretense of lothing matrimonial chastity, is
bringing in, all kind of uncleanness into the Church.

THe second Council of Matiscon was conueened in the twenty four year of
the reign of Gunthranus king of France. Canon 3.
In it complaint was made, that Baptism was ministered usually upon every holy
day, insomuch, that upon Easter day, scarce were two or three found to be
presented to Baptism. This they ordained to be amended, and that no man
(except upon occasion of infirmity) presume to present his child to Baptism,
but to attend upon the festival days prescribed of old, that is, Easter and
Whitsonday.

Also it was appointed and ordained, Ca^^^ 6.
that the Sacrament of the altar should be ministered before any communicant
person had tasted of meat or drink.

That no person who flees to the Church as to a city of refuge, Canon ^.
be drawn back again by violence, from the bosom of the Church, or be harmed
in that holy place.

That a bishop must not be attached before a secular judge. Ca^^^.


That the houses of Bishops shall be kept holy with exercises of prayers and
singing of Psalms; Ca^^^
and shall not be defiled with the barking of dogs, and muting of hawks.

That secular men shall do reverence to those who are of the Clergy, Cano^ 1^.
even unto the lowest degree of the^; in such sort that if the secular man do
mere any of the Clergy walking on foot, he shall honor him by uncovering his
head: but if the secular man be riding on horseback, and the Clergy man on
foot, then the secular man shall light down from his horse, and shall do
reverence to the Churchman: this age smells of Antichristian pride.

In the third Council at Matiscon there is nothing to be read but a
contentious disputation betwixt two Bishops, Palladius and Bertramus, and
foolish questions scarce worthy to be disputed in Grammar schools. Whether or
no a woman may be called Hom^.

A Council at Rome.
IN the year of our Lord 595. and in the thirteen year of the reign of the
Emperor Mauritius: Gregorius first Bishop of Rome assembled a Council at Rome
of twenty four bishops, thirty four Presbyters, wherein first of all he
confirmed the first four general Councels.

He ordained that at the celebration of the Sacrament there should be less
singing and more reading of Psalms and Gospel: because weak people
transported with the delight of a sweet and delicate voice, marked not how men
of a lewd life drew near unto the Altar of God.

He ordained also that laicke boys should not be cubiculars to the bishops or
Rome: but that Presbyters, Deacons, or Monks should be witnesses of the
honesty of their conversation.

And that the Bear wherein the body of the Bishop of Rome is brought forth to
be buried; shall not be ouerspred with any covering above the Bear.

That for ordination of men in spiritual offices, no reward shall be craved.
For like as the Bishop should not sell the imposition of his hands, even so the
minister or notare should not sell his voice and pen. If he who is ordained,
voluntarily gives any thing as a testimony of his thankfulness, this is not
forbidden to be received.

Gregorius standing before the place where the body of Saint Peter is buried,
pronounced many Anathems, whereunto the rest of the assembly with uniform
consent, said Amen. Amongst the rest, the Presbyter or Deacon, who marries a
wife is delivered to the devil, and a man who marries his own spiritual
sister (whom in our language, we call his gossope) he is likewise delivered to
an evil Heard to be kept. Albeit Gregorius be not counted the worst amongst
the bishops of Rome, yet when he follows not the certain rule of the
written word of God, he is wandering in the mist as boldly as others did
before him.

THe Councels which I have ouerpassed with silence, such as Gradense,
Braccarense, Lateranense, Lugdunense, Pictaviense, Merense: lest I should
ouercharge a little book with an unnecessary burden, or trouble the reader of
superstitious rites, damning of old (...), and of every contentious
disputation, more (...) belonging to civil judges than to spiritual
conuentions, I refer mine excuse in this to the wisdom of the judicious
Reader.

CENTVRIE VII.
A Council at Rome by Bonifacius the third. Pl^in. in vit. Bonif. 3.
IN the year of our Lord 607. and under the reign of the Emperor Phocas, a
Council was assembled at Rome of 72. Bishops, 30. Presbiters, and 3. Deacons.
In this council the privilege of supremacy given by Phocas to the Roman
Church, was published. Likewise it was ordained under pain of cursing, that
during the lifetime of a Bishop, no man should talk of the election of
another: That no man by largition of money should purchase unto himself a
spiritual office, and that no man should consult concerning the election of
another Bishop or Pope before three days were expired, after the death of the
defunct: and that the Bishop should be elected by the Clergy and people, and
their election should be ratified by the Magistrate of the City and the Pope:
by these words, Volumus et iubemus, that is we will and we command, otherwise
the election shall be void, and of none effect.

Another assembly holden at Rome by Bonifacius the fourth. Note.
Bonifacius the fourth gathered another assembly in the eight (that is in the
last) year of the reign of Phocas: wherein he gave power to Monks to preach,
to minister the Sacraments, to hear Confessions, to bind and loose, and
associated them in equal authority with the Clergy.

The first Council of Bracara counted the second by Caranza.
BRacara or Braecara, vulgarly called Braga, is a town in Portugal. In the
year of our Lord 610. and under the reign of Gundemarus, king of Goths,
reigning at that time in the country of Spain, assembled some Bishops of
Gallicia, Lusitania, and of the Province called Lucensis of old. It was
ordained, That eu^rie Bishop should visit the Churches of his diosie, and see
that baptism was duly ministered, and that Catechumeni twenty days before
their baptism should resort to the purifications of Exorcismes, Canon 1.
and should be instructed in the knowledge of the Apostolic Symbol, and that
the people should be exhorted to beware of Idolatry, adultery, murder,
perjury, and all other deadly sins.

That Bishops should not lift up the third part of the oblations of the people,
Canon 2.
but that it should remain in the parish Church, for furnishing light, and for
repairing the fabric of the Church: and that the Bishop should compel noue of
the Clergy to attend upon him in servile works.

That Bishops, Canon 3.
for ordination of the Clergy, should receive no rewards.

That neither a little balm, Canon 4.
nor yet the price thereof should be exacted from the people for their
baptism, in any time to come: lest they should seem (with Simon Magus) to
sell the gift of God for money.

That Bishops, Canon 5.
before the dedication of Churches, shall see a charter, containing a
sufficient maintenance for them, who shall serve in the Church, and for a
substantial furniture of lights thereunto.

A Church builded for gain, Canon 6.
and contribution of the people, redounding to the vantage of the builder,
shall not be consecrated.

Parents, Canon 7.
who are poor, and present their children to baptism, if they offer any thing
voluntarily, it shall be accepted: but they shall not be compelled to pay any
thing, neither shall a pledge be required from them, left poor people fearing
this, withold their children from baptism.

If any of the Clergy be accused of fornication, Canon 8.
let the accuser prove his accusation, by two or three witnesses, according to
the precept of the Apostle, else let the accuser be excommunicate.

That Metrapolitane Bishops, Canon 9.
shall signify to others of the Clergy, the time of the observation of
Easter, or Pasch day: and the Clergy, after the reading of the Gospel, in
like manner intimate the day unto the people.

Canon 10.
That whosoever tastes meat or drink, before he consecrate the oblation of the
Altar, shall be deposed from his office.

The Council of Altissidoru^.
IN the year of our Lord, 613. assembled in a town of France, called
Altissidorum, otherwise Antissidorum, vulgarly Auxerre, a number of Abbots and
Presbyters, with one Bishop, and three Deacons. In this Council they damned
Sorcerie, and the seeking of consultation at Sorcerers, in the first, third,
fourth, and fifth Canons: whereby it appears, that Sorcery has been in
frequent use in France. Many superstitious constitutions were set down in this
Synod, concerning the number of Masses, prohibition of tasting meat before
Mass, concerning burial, prohibition of Baptism before the festivity of
Easter Day, except upon necessity, and fear of approaching death, prohibition
of Matrimonial copulation with their own wives, to Presbyters and Deacons,
after their blessing and consecration; with prohibition of marriage also, to
the widows of the defunct Presbyters, Deacons, or Subdeacons: this was a yoke
of Antichristian subjection indeed. Canon 31.
Brothers and sisters children are forbidden to marry.

Canon 34.
It is not lawful for a Presbyter to sit in judgment, when any man is
condemned to death.

Canon 35.
It is not lawful for a Clergie-man to cite another of the Clergy before a
secular Judge.

Canon 36.
It is not lawful for a woman with a naked hand, to touch the holy Eucharist.

Canon 38.
It is not lawful to take refreshment of meat, with an excommunicate person.

Canon 39.
If any of the Clergy receive an exco^mmunicate man, without the knowledge of
him who did excommunicate him, he shall receive the like sentence, that is, he
shall likewise be excommunicated.

Canon 40.
It is not lawful for a Presbyter in banqueting time, to sing or dance.

Many Canons, to the number of 45. were concluded in this Council: but I have
determined not to over-lade a little book, with commemoration of an heap of
unprofitable, unnecessary, and superstitious Canons.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Hispalis, under Sisebutus.
364. and in the 24. year of the reign of the Emp. Heraclius, a Council was
gathered in Hispalis a town of Spain, vulgarly called Civil la grand. It was
gathered by Isidorus Bishop of Hispalis, at the command of King Sisebutus, who
was both present and President, in this Council. For two principal causes was
this Synod convened: namely, for suppressing the heresy of (...), which was a
branch of the heresy of Eutyches: secondly, for decision of questions, which
arose amongst Bishops, concerning the marches and bounds of their dioceses,
with some other Ecclesiastical causes. They had 13. Sessions, or meetings, as
is declared, 2. Tom. Council.

In the first action Theodulphus Bishop of Malaca, complained,

In the 2. Session, the controversy betwixt Fulgentius B. of Honorius B. of
Corduba, concerning the marches of their dioceses, was debated: and men were
chosen to visit the bounds, and to decide the controversy.

In the 3. Session compeared Cambra B. of Italica, a town Passandus, that he
being brought up from his infancy in the Church of Italica, yet had fled
without any just cause to Corduba. It was ordained, that whosoever fled from
his own Church unto another, should be sent back again, and be put into a
Monastery, and should be divested of his honor for a time, to the end, that the
sharpness of discipline might correct the licentious liberty of vagring and
wandering.

In the 4. Session, it was complained, that some were consecrated married
widows: This ordination was annulled; and it was ordained, that none of these
Levites should be promoted to the honor of a Deacon.



Fragitanus, a Presbyter of the Church of Corduba, was most unjustly both
deposed and banished, by his Bishop. For remedy, that the like mis-order should
have no place in time to come, it was statuted and ordained, that a Bishop,
without advice of his Synod, should not presume to depose a Presbyter.

Formatae epistola: and finally, from baptizing, consecrating the Sacrament,
blessing the people, and teaching them, receiving penitents, when the Bishop
was present.

Heliseus, a servant, whom the Bishop of Agabra had set at liberty, and he on
the other part abused his liberty, so far, that he presumed by Magical Art
to cut off the Bshoppe who had been so beneficial unto him: he was ordained
to be redacted again to his former servile estate, that he might learn
obedience to his superiors, by the heavy yoke of servile subjection.

In the ninth Session, it is forbidden, that Bishops should Deuteronomy. 12.10.
because it is written, Thou shall not plow with an Ox and an Ass together.
By the way mark, that nothing was so miserably abused at this time, as
testimonies of holy Scripture.

In the tenth Session, the Monasteries lately builded in

In the eleventh Session, the Monasteries of Virgins are recommended

In the twelfth Session, one professing the heresy of Acephali

In the thirteenth Session, there is a prolix refutation of Isidorus seems to
be the compiler of this Treatise, against Acephali, given into the Council of
Hispalis: and many do think, Hist. Magd. cent. 7. cap. 10.
that he collected into one volume the Councels that preceded his time: for he
was a man more learned than his fellows, in his days.

IN the year of our Lord, The 4. Council of Toledo.
639. and under the reign of Sisenandus, King of Spain, by the Kings
commandment, more then 70. Bishops and Presbyters were convened in the town of
Toledo, upon occasion of diversity of ceremonies and discipline, in the
country of Spain.

First, Canon 1.
they set down a short confession of the true Faith, which they ordained to be
embraced and kept.

Canon 2.
Secondly, that there should be an uniform order of praying, singing of
Psalms, solemnities of Masses, Euen-song, service, throughout al Spain and
Gallicia, like as they all professed one faith, and dwelt in one kingdom, lest
diversity of ceremonies and rites should offend ignorant people, and make them
to think that there was a schism in the Church.

Canon 3.
It was statuted and ordained, That at least once in the year provincial
Councels should be assembled: and in case any controversy should fall out in
matters of Faith, a general Council of all the provinces of Spain should be
assembled. Here let the judicious Reader mark, that in process of time almost
all things are subject to alteration; and Councels, of old called National,
now abusiuely begin to be called General. The order of incomming of Bishops to
the Council, sitting in the first place, and of the Presbyters after them, and
sitting in a place behind the Bishops: and of Deacons, who should stand in
presence of Bishops and Presbyters, is described at length in the third Canon.

Canon 4.
That the Festiuitie of Easter, or Pashe day, should be kept upon the day of
Christ's resurrection.

Canon 5.
Concerning the diversity of rites used in Baptism, some using the ceremony
of thrice dipping in water, others one dipping only. It was thought most
expedient to be content with one dipping, because the Trinity is so viuely
represented in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that there is no
necessity by three dippinges in water to represent the Trinity: and for
eschewing all appearance of schism, and lest Christians should seem to assent
unto heretics who divide the Trinity: For all these causes it was expedient
to keep uniformity in the ceremonies of Baptism.

Canon 6.
It was statuted and ordained, That upon Friday immediately preceding Easter
day, the doctrine of the suffering of Christ, of repentance, and remission of
sins, should be clearly taught unto the people, to the end, that they being
purged by the remission of sins, might the more worthily celebrate the feast of
the Lords resurrection, and receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords body and
blood.

The custom of putting an end unto the fasting of Lent, Canon 7.
upon friday at nine a clock, as damned, because in the day of the Lords
suffering, the Sun was covered with darkness and the elements were
troubled: and for honor of the Lords suffering that day should be spent in
fasting, mourning, and abstinence: and he who spends any part of that day in
banqueting, let him be debarred from the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood
on Pashe day.

That the Tapers and Torches, Canon 8.
which shined in the church in the night preceding the day of the resurrection
should be solemnly blessed, to the end, that the mystery of the holy
resurrection might be expected with consecrated lights. Such voluntary service
invented by the brain of man, had great sway at this time.

That in the day lie Church-seruice the Lords prayer (vulgarly called Pater
noster) should be rehearsed, Canon 9.
because it is usually called Oration quotidiana, that is, a daily prayer.

That Alleluiah be not sung in time of Lent, Canon 10.
because it is a time of mourning, and humiliation, until the days of
resurrection be celebrated, which is a time of joy and gladness.

That after the Epistle a part of the Gospel should be read. Canon 11.


That Hymns and spiritual songs, Canon 12.
not contained in holy Scripture, may be sung in the Church.

The song of the three Children shall be sung in all Churches of Spain and
Gallicia. Canon 13.


In the end of Spiritual songs it shall not be simply said, Canon 14.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, etc. but, Glory and honor to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, to the end, that hymmes sung in
earth, may be correspondent to the song of the Elders in Heaven, (...), (...):
Apocal. 4.11.

In Responsories, Canon 15.
if it be a matter of gladness, the end shall be, Gloria, etc. and if it be
a matter of sadness, the end shall be, Principium, etc.

The book of the Apocalypse of Saint John, Canon 16.
is declared to be a book of Canonicke Scripture, and to be preached in open
audience of the Church, betwixt Easter and Whitsonday.

Canon 17.
It is forbidden, that the holy Communion should be celebrated immediately after
the saying of the Lords Prayer: but let the blessing be first given, and then
let the Priests, and Levites communicate before the Altar, the Clergy within
the Quire, and the people without the Quire.

Canon 18.
No man shall be promoted to the honor of Priesthood, who is infamous, who has
been baptized in heresy, who has gelded himself, who has married the
second wife, or a widow, who has had concubines, who is in a servile
condition, who is unknown, Neophycus, who is given to war-fare, or an attender
in Court, who is unlearned, or has not attained to the age of thirty years,
who has not proceeded to honor by ascending degrees, who by ambition, or
bribes, has presumed to honor, who has been elected by his predecessor, who
has not been elected by the Clergy and people of his own city: He who is
approved, shall be consecrated on the Lords day, by all the comprovinciall
Bishops, at least by three of them.

Canon 19.
Let Levites be of the age of 25. years before their admission, and Presbyters
of 30.

Canon 20.
Let Bishops be vnreproveable, according to the precept of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.

Canon 21.
Let Bishops not only have the testimony of a Good conscience in the sight of
God, but also the testimony of an vnruproueable conversation amongst men.

Canon 22.
Presbyters and Levites, whom infirmity of old age permits not to abide in their
secret chambers: yet let them have witnesses of their honest conversation and
remaining places.

Canon 23.
Youth-hood is prone and bent to evil: therefore let them that are young, be
all brought up in one conclaue, under the instruction and government of some
well approved Senior. But they who shall be found lascivious and incorrigible,
let them be thrust into a Monastery, to the end, that stricter discipline may
correct the proud minds of insolent youths.

Seeing that ignorance is the mother of all errors, Canon 24.
it becomes Presbyters, who have undertaken the office of teaching,
continually to meditate upon holy Scripture, according to the words of the
Apostle, Take heed to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. for by
meditation of holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church, men are made able
to instruct others in knowledge, and in precepts of good manners.

Presbyters shall receive from their own Bishops an official book, Canon 25.
to the end, that through ignorance they do nothing amiss, neither in
celebration of the Sacraments, nor in their Letanies, nor in their form of
coming to Councels.

When Presbyters and Deacons are admitted to their offices, they must vow
chastity, Canon 26.
and bind themselves to their Bishops, to lead a continent life: and after
such profession, let them retain the discipline of an holy life.

A Bishop, Canon 27.
Presbyter, or Deacon, who shall happen to be unjustly deposed, if they be
found innocent by the trial of the Synod, let them be restored to their
former dignities before the Altar, by the hands of Bishops, in this manner. If
he be a Bishop, let him be restored to his Orarium, with Staff and Ring: If
he be a Presbyter, to his Orarium and Planeta: If he be a Deacon, to his
orarium and Alba: If he be a Subdeacon, to his Plate and Chalice: and other
orders, let them receive in their restitution, that which was given unto them
in their ordination.

If any of the Clergy be found to have co^sulted with diviners and sorcerers,
Canon 28.
let him be deposed from his dignity, and put into a Monastery, to make
continual penance for his sacrilege.

Churchmen who dwell in borders, confining to a Nation that is under hostility
with their own country, let them neither receive from the enemies of the
country, nor direct any secret message unto the enemies.

If any Churchman sit in judgment, Canon 29.
or be judge in a sentence of blood, let him be deprived of his dignity in the
Church.

Let Bishops have a care of such as are oppressed, Canon 30.
to reproove the mighty men who oppress them: Canon 31.
and if the word of wholesome reproof profit nothing, let them complain to
the king, to the end, that by regal authority impiety may be subdued.

Canon 32.
Seeing avarice is the root of all evil, let Bishops so govern their
dioceses, that they spoil the^ not of their rightes: but according to the
determination of anteriour Councels, let them have the third part of Oblations,
Tithes, Tributes, and Corns: the rest let it remain unto the Paroches free,
and untouched.

Canon 33.
That thing which one Bishop possesses, without interpellation, for the space
of thirty years, let no man in that same Province be heard in an action of
repetition: But as concerning them who dwell in diverse Provinces, the case
stands otherwise, lest while Dioceses are defended, the bounds of Provinces
be confounded.

Canon 34.
A Church newly builded, shall appertain unto that Bishop, in whose diosie it
is known that spiritual conuentions have been kept.

Canon 35.
A Bishop shall visit yeerelie all the paroches of his diosie: and in case he be
hindered by infirmity, or by weighty business, he shall appoint faithful
Presbyters and Deacons, to take inspection of the fabric of the Churches, and
of their rentes.

Canon 36.
Whatsoever reward a Prelate promises to a man who undertakes any work
tending to the utility of the Church, let him faithfully perform his promise.

Canon 37.
Seeing that a part of Church-rentes is bestowed upon sustentation of strangers,
and of poor and indigent people, if it shall happen at any time, those
persons, or their children, to be indigent, who have rendered any rent to the
Church, let them render a just deserved retribution to their bene-factors, in
sustaining them, to whose benevolence they are addoted.

Canon 38.
The Deacons are decerned to be inferior to Presbyters.

Let the Levites be content to be clothed with their Orarium only upon the
left shoulder, Canon 39.
and not upon their right shoulders: and let it neither be beautified with
colors, nor with gold: Platina in the life of Zosinus, calls it Linostima.

Let Clergymen have the vpper-most part of their heads bare and shaven, Canon
40.
and the lower-part rounded, not following the example of the Readers of
Gallicia, who did shave only a little of the vpper-most part of the hair of
their head: Note.
conforming themselves, in so doing, to the custom of some Heretics; which
dishonor is to be removed from the Churches of Spain.

No strange women shall cohabite with Churchmen, Canon 41.
only their mother, or sister, or her daughter, or fathers sister, may dwell
with them, amongst which persons the bands of nature permits not to suspect
any sin, according to the constitutions of ancient Fathers.

Some of the Clergy, Canon 42.
who are not married, are entangled with the forbidden lust of strange women,
let the Bishop separate them, sell the women, and redact the men infected with
their lust, for a space, unto penance.

If a man of the Clergy marry a wife, Canon 43.
or a widow, or a deuorced woman, or an harlot, without advise of his Bishop,
let the Bishop separate them again.

Clergymen, Canon 44.
who have clothed themselves with armor voluntarily, and have gone to war
fare, let them be deposed from their office, and be thrust into a Monastery,
there to remain all the days of their life.

Churchmen, Canon 45.
who are found spoiling the sepulchers of persons departed, let them be
deposed, and be subject unto three years penance.

By the commandment of king Sisenandus, Canon 46.
Churchmen are exempted from all public indictions and labors, to the end
with great liberty they may attend upon spiritual service.

Let Bishops have some of their own Clergy to be rulers of their
house-holde-affaires, Canon 47.
according as the Council of Chalcedon has ordained.

A man is made a monk either by his parents devotion, Canon 48. Note.
or by his own profession: but whether he be embarked into the Monasticke life,
the one way or the other, there is no redress again unto a secular estate.

Canon 49.
Persons of the Clergy, who are desirous to enter into a Monastery, and to
lead a contemplative life, let not their Bishops hinder the purpose of their
mind, Note.
because they have intention to enter into a better trade of living.

Canon 50.
Bishops have power to constitute Abbots, to govern Monasteries, and to correct
enormities, that shall happen to fall out amongst them: but not to redact them
to servile offices, nor to convert the rents of the Abbie to their own use, as
a possession duly belonging to themselves.

Canon 51.
The Monks who leaving their Monastery, return again to a secular life, and
marry wives; let them be brought back again to their own Monastery, there
to do penance, and to lament for their by past sins.

Canon 52.
Religious men, who wander up and down in a Nation, and are neither members of
the Clergy, nor Monks of any Monastery; let the Bishops restrain their
licentious liberty, and appoint them either to serve in the Clergy, or in a
Monastery, except such as through infirmity, or age, have gotten an exemption.

Canon 53.
They who have confessed the committing of any deadly sin, cannot be promoted
to Ecclesiastical honors.

Canon 54.
Secular men, who in receiving their penance, have been content to be shaven,
and to put on a religious habit, if they revolt again, and will needs become
Laickes, and be incorrigible, then let them be counted apostates, and
excommunicate from the fellowship of the Church.

Canon 55.
Widows who have put on a religious habit, and vowed chastity, if they marry,
they have damnation, according to the words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.12.

Canon 56.
Jews are not to be compelled to receive the Christian faith: but these who
already by constraint, have received it in the days of the noble King
Sisebutus, seeing they have been already partakers of our Sacraments, let them
be compelled to persevere, left the Name of the Lord Jesus be blasphemed, and
the Faith, which they have embraced, be counted vile and contemptible.

They who receive the bribes and rewards from the Jews, Canon 57.
to cloak their ungodliness, and to foster them in their infidelity, let them
be accursed, and counted strangers from the Church of Christ.

Jews, Canon 58. and 59.
after their conversion to the Christian faith, if they be found to have
circumcised their sons or servants: by the commandment of the most religious
King Sisenandus, it is ordained, that the circumcised children of the Jews,
shall be separated from the fellowship of their parents, and the servants shall
be set at liberty, for the injury done unto their body, by circumcision.

Jews, Canon 60.
who are punished to death for any contempt done by them against Christ, after
their baptism, this punishment shall not preiudge their children from right to
enjoy their goods, if they be faithful, because it is written, The son shall
not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezech. 18.20.

Let not Jews, Canon 61.
after their conversion, haunt the company of other superstitious Jews, as yet
addicted to the abolished law of ceremonies, left they be perverted: if they
transgress this ordinance, such of them as have professed Christianity, shall
be given in service to Christians, others shall be appointed to be publicly
scourged.

Jews, Canon 62.
who have married Christian women, if they will not embrace Christian religion,
let them be separated from their wives company, and let the children be brought
up in the faith of their Christian mothers.

Jews, Canon 63.
who have once professed Christian Faith, and have sliden back again from it,
shall not be admitted witnesses before a Judge, albeit they profess
themselves to be Christians, because like as their faith is suspected, so in
like manner, their humane testimony is to be doubted of.

Let no Jew be preferred to any public office, Canon 64.


Let no Jew presume to buy a Christian servant, Canon 65.
which if he do, the servant shall be taken from him, and shall be set at
liberty.

Bishops, Canon 66.
who have not benefited the Church, by any proper donation of their own goods,
they should not impoverish their Church, by setting at liberty Church-servants,
which thing if he presume to do, his successor shall reduce those servants
again to the possession of the Church, whom iniquity without any just right
has absolved.

Canon 67.
A Bishop, who sets a servant at liberty, having first by permutation set
another of the like worth, and merit, in his place, shall deny liberty to the
foresaid servant, either to accuse or to bear witness against the Church,
wherein he was a servant; else he shall forfeit his liberty, and be reduced
to his former servile condition, in that same Church, which he would have
harmed; and in the mean time, the permutation before said, shall stand firm
and stable.

Canon 68.
He who has augmented Church-rents, either by conferring, or accquiring some
augmentation unto it, has some liberty to set Church-servants at liberty,
providing always, they abide under the patrociny of the Church.

Canon 69. and 70. and 71.
Because the patronage of the Church never dies, let those servants, whom the
Church has set at liberty, and their posterity, be obedient to the Church, and
depend upon their patrociny. If they be unthankful, let their liberty be
forfeit, and let the Church defend them, from all insolency and wrong.

Canon 72. and 73.
Servants, who are set at so full liberty, that their patrons have kept no band
of subjection over their heads, if they be unspotted, and unreprovable, they
may be promoted to Ecclesiastical offices. But it is unseemly, that any man
shall be received into a spiritual office, who is bound unto the servile
subjection of an earthly Master.

Canon 74.
In the end, earnest supplications are ordained to be made to God, for
preservation of King Sisenandus, and the Nation of the Goths: and many
Anathenus are pronounced against them, who shall presume to violate the oath of
allegiance, made to the King. In the end, the Acts of this Council are
subscribed, by Isidorus, Bishop of Hispalis, and seventie other Bishops.

IN the first year of Chintilla, The 5. Council of Toledo.
King of the Goths, and about the time of the reign of the Emperor
Heracleon, convened with Eugenius Bishop of Toledo, twenty other Bishops. In
this Council nothing was entreated, except a mandate was given, concerning the
yearly Letanies that should be made, three days immediately following the Ides
of December; and if the Lords day intervened these three days, Letanies should
be deferred, until the beginning of the next week. In these three days,
pardon for sins should be humbly begged at the hands of God, with tears. The
rest of the ordinances of this Council, appoint supplications to be made to
God, for the preservation of the King and his children: and that they shall be
accursed, who dare presume to seek the kingly authority, without the consent
of the whole country of Spain, and the Nobility of the nation of the Goths:
and that no man shall rail upon the King, or lie in wait for his life.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Rome in the days of Pope Martin.
652. or as others reckon, 650. Pope Martinus gathered a Council at Rome, of
more then an hundred Bishops. The error of the Monothelites, obstinately
defended by Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, was the occasion of this Council,
together with the impious edict of the Emperor Constans, set out in favor of
the heresy of the Monothelites.

In this Council, over and besides an ample confession of Faith, many decrees
and constitutions were made; all tending to damn those who denied the Trinity,
or the divine unity in the divine nature, or the manifestation of the second
person of the Trinity, and his suffering in the flesh, or the perpetual
virginity of the Lords mother, or the two nativities of Christ, one before all
times, and another in time, by the operation of the holy spirit, or the
distinction of the two natures after the ineffable unity, or the distinction of
wills, and operations in Christ. In like manner, all were damned who made
opposition to the five preceding general Councels. In particular, Theodorus of
Pharatrita, Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius Pyrrhus, and Paulus, Bishops of
Constantinople, were condemned, as patrons and obstinate defenders of the
heresy of the Monothelites. There is more frequent mention of Fathers, than of
Scriptures in this Council; a perilous example to the posterity.

The 6. Council of Toledo.
IN the year of our Lord 653. and in the third year of Chintilla, King of the
Goths in Spain, the sixth Council of Toledo was assembled, of 52. Bishops,
Eugenius Bishop of Toledo, being President. The occasion seems to have been
the renovation of old heresies, and contradiction to preceding Councels. After
a confession of the Faith, Letanies are ordained to be said, Canon 2.
as was appointed yearly, for preservation of the King.

Canon 3.
It was ordained, by the advice of the Council, with consent of the King and
his Nobles, that no man should be tolerated to dwell in the kingdom of Spain,
who did not profess the Catholic Faith, and that Kings in all time to come,
before they were placed in their royal seat, should be bound by the
obligation of a solemn oath, to interpose their authority, that this act might
be obeyed: Otherwise, let the King, refusing to put this act in execution, be
counted accursed, and be a faggot of the flames of everlasting fire. What
Ferdinandus, King of Spain, did, in driving out of his dominions, the Jews,
and the Saracens; some allege, that it was done upon the ground of this act:
but now it is not a fit time to examine that question.

Canon 4.
No man shall presume, by Simony or largition of money, to attain to
Ecclesiastical offices.

Canon 5.
If any of the Clergy obtain a pension, out of the Churchrents, let him
possess it under the title of Praecaria, lest by long possession, the Church
rents be diminished.

Canon 6.
If any person be clothed with a religious habit, which he has voluntarily
accepted, if afterward he forsake it, let him be excommunicated, if he
return not again unto his order.

Canon 7.
The seventh Canon, is a renewing of the four and fifty Canon of the fourth
Council of Toledo.

A married man, Canon 8.
who voweth chastity in time of sickness, if he recover health, and have not
the gift of continency, let him cohabite again with his wife: but if she
die, he is debarred from the second marriage, which notwithstanding is
permitted to the wife, if she have not vowed. This Canon is not set down by
precept and commandment, but permissiuely, through indulgence, and a
consideration of humane infirmity.

Servants, Canon 9.
whom the Church has set at liberty, when one Prelate dies, and another
succeeds, they are bound to renew the charters of their land which they
possess; else their charters shall be void, and of none effect, if they be
not renewed within the space of a year next after the election of the new
Prelate.

The children of them whom the Church has set at liberty, Canon 10.
if their parents bring them up in learning, they shall be brought up in that
same Church from which their liberty did arise, and shall serve the Bishop of
that Church, always without prejudice of their liberty.

Let no man, Canon 11.
upon occasion of an accusation, be punished, unless his accuser be presented:
and in case he be a vile and infamous person, let no sentence be given out upon
the ground of such accusation, except in an action of treason against the life
of the King.

He who has committed heinous offenses, Canon 12.
and fearing punishment, flees to the enemies of his country for refuge, let
him be excommunicated.

Let young men honor them who are in great credit and favor with Princes:
Canon 13.
And let Seniors lovingly cherish the younger sort, and present unto them
profitable examples of a good conversation.

The 14. and 15. Canon entreat of the reward due to them Canon 14. and 15.
who are found faithful servants to the King, in whatsoever estate, especially
in the Church: and that rentes and lands bestowed upon the Church, shall abide
firmly in their possession without reuocation.

Canon 16. and 17. 18. and 19.
In the 16.17.18. and 19. Canons, there is a commemoration of the bountiful
kindness of king Chintilla toward the Church, a provision, that no Churchmen
should be allured by no deceitful persuasion, to take a course against the
king: A protestation before God, his Angels, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and
whole Church. That no man should enterprise any attempt against the King and
his Noble estate: And they who shall presume to do to the contrary, are
appointed to eternal damnation. In the end, prayers are made to God to give a
good success to their meeting: and thanks are given to the King, by whose
authority they were assembled. So it is manifest, that by the authority of
Princes, National Assemblies were conueened at this time.

The seventh Council of Toledo.
IN the year of our Lord 662. as Functius reckons, and in the 6. year of
Chindasuvindus, king of Spain, the 7. Counsel of Toledo was assembled,
consisting of 4. Archbishops, 30. Bishops, and a great number of presbyters,
and messengers from them who could not be present. The occasion of this meeting
was Theodisclus Bishop of Hispalis, a Graecia^ borne: He had corrupted the
books of Isidorus, and dispersed many errors in his Church: and he contended
for supermacie with the Bishop of Toledo. In this Council Theodisclus was
removed from his office. The prioritie of dignity was conferred to the Bishop
of Toledo.

Canon 1.
In the second Tome of Councels, six Canons are referred to this meeting: First
Laickes, and men also in spiritual office, are forbidden to attempt any thing
against the estate of their country, either by sedition or treason.

Canon 2.
Secondly, it is appointed and ordained, That in case any man, ministering the
Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper, be hindered by any superuenient sickness,
that another shall be ready to finish the work which he has begun.

Canon 3.
Thirdly, That the Presbyters, and the whole Clergy shall be present at the
funeral of a bishop.

Canon 4.
Fourthly, It is forbidden, that Bishops in their visitation should extort or
oppress the Churches which they visit.

Fifthly, Canon 5.
That men enclosed into a Monastery, should first receive instruction in their
Monasteries, before they presume to teach others.

Sixthly, Canon 6.
A commandment is given, That the Bishops in near adjacent places, should be
obedient to the Bishop of Toledo, and at his commandment they should appear
in the town of Toledo.

CAbillonum, The Council of Cabillonum.
vulgarly called Chalon, is a town in Burgunnie, not far distant from
Matiscone. In this town, by the commandment of Clodoneus king of France
conueened 44. Bishops. Gandericus Bishop of Lions was President, and Laudilenus
Bishop of Vienne. Theodorus Bishop of Arls, because he refused to appear
before the Council, was suspended from his office, until the next Council.

In this Synod the Canons of the Council of Nice had great allowance. It was
forbidden, that two Bishops should be ordained in one town: That no man should
sell a Christian servant to a Jew: And, that two Abbots should not be chosen to
govern one Monastery: That no laboring of the ground, or other secular
work, should be done on the Lords day: with many other Canons, coincident with
the Canons of other Councels.

IN the days of the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus, A Council at Rome.
and under the Popedom of Agatho, a Council was gathered at Rome, about the
question of the wills and operations of Christ: wherein it was decerned, by
the suffrages of 125. Bishops of Italy, France, Lombardy, of the nation of the
Goths, of Britanes, and Sclauonians, That two wills and two operations were
to be acknowledged in Christ: And the opinions of Theodorus, Cyrus, Sergius,
Pyrrhus, and Paulus, defenders of the heresy of the Monothelites was damned.
The vaunting words of the letter of Agatho, written to the sixth general
Council, wherein he braggeth, that the Bishops of Rome never erred in matters
of Faith, I lay them aside at this time, for they are false, and untrue, as I
have already proved, and shall prove hereafter, if it please the Lord.

The eigth Council of Toledo.
IN the year of our Lord 671. and in the fifth year of Recesuvindus King of
Goths, the eight Council of Toledo was conueened.

To this Assembly resorted two and fifty Bishops: Great disputation was in
this Council, concerning perjurie. In end it was resolved; That no necessity
binds a man to perform an unlawful oath: For Herod and Iephthah sinned, in
making unlawful oaths, but they sinned more grieuouslie in performing
unlawful oaths.

Canon 4. 5. 6. and 7.
Marriage is utterly forbidden to Bishops: and places of Scripture are
miserably abused to confirm this interdiction of marriage. Be ye holy, as I
am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. And in another place, Mortify your members which are on
the earth, Coloss. 3.5. Miserable ignorance in this age counts marriage to
be (...), that is, uncleanness, a member of the body of sin, which the
Apostle commands to mortify. Yea, and the subdeacons, who pleaded for
retaining of their wives, in regard that in their admission, no such condition
was required of them, are in most severe manner interdited from the company of
their wives, or else to be thrust into a Monastery, to suffer penance until
the last period of their lives.

Canon 8.
Unlearned men are not to be admitted to the celebration of divine mysteries,
especially such as are not well acquainted with the Psalter.

Canon 9.
Eating of flesh is forbidden in Lent, for three principal causes: First,
Because the forty days of Lent are the tithes of all the days of the
years, and the tithes should be consecrated to God: Secondly, because that
Christ, by fasting forty days expiated the sins of mankind: Thirdly,
because it is convenient, that a man, made of the 4. elements, for breaking
the ten precepts of the decalogue, should afflict his body four times ten,
days.

In the 10. Canon, Canon 10.
the virtues where with the king shall be indewed, who shall be chosen to
reign in Spain, are rehearsed.

In the last Canon, Canon 11.
the ordinances of preceding Councels are to be obeyed: Canon 12.
and the Jews are to be deal with, according to the acts of the 4. Council
of Toledo. Can. 56. 57. 58. 59. and 60. etc.

IN the year of our Lord 673. and in the 7. year of the The ninth Council of
Toledo.
reign of Recesuvindus king of Goths, by the commandment of the King, 16.
Bishops conueened in Toledo, and made these ordinances following:

First, Canon 1.
That founders of Churches, and bestowers of rentes upon the Church, and their
posterity should have a sollicitous care, that Church-rents be not abused with
misorder; if it shall happen to fall out, let complaint be made to the Bishop,
to the Metropolitan, or to the king of the country.

Founders of Churches, Canon 2.
during their lifetime, have power to appoint men who shall attend upon the
fabric of the Church or Monastery which is builded, that it decay not.

If any Churchman bestow any part of Church-rent, Canon 3.
under the color of prestation, let the cause be clearly contained in an
evidence, or else it shall be void.

Let the goods of the defunct administrator of the Churchaffaires, Canon 4.
be equally divided betwixt his heirs and the Church.

If a Bishop build a Monastery, Canon 5.
let him not bestow above the fifty part of the rent of his prelacie in the
charges of building: and in case he build a paroch Church, for honor of his
burial place, let him not bestow above the hundredth part of his rent for
charges of building.

To the Bishop belongs the third part of rent of every paroch Church in his
diosie, Canon 6.
and whether he leave that third part to the Church it self, out of which it
is raised, or to any other Church, his gift shall stand firm without
reuocation.

Let no man, Canon 7.
under pretense of propinquitie, and because he is heir intromet with the
goods of the defunct Bishop, without the foreknowledge and consent of the
Metropolitan, and in case the Metropolitan depart this life, let no
intermeddling with his goods be made, without the foreknowledge of is
successor, lest by fraud and deceit the Church be damnified.

Canon 8.
If any man ministering in a Church-office, alienate a part of Church-rents, the
supputation of time shall begin to be reckoned from the hour of his death,
and not from the time wherein the charter was subscribed: and so after his
death, let the prescription run on.

Canon 9.
The ninth Canon measures the commodity which a Bishop shall receive, who has
taken pains to bury another Bishop.

Canon 10.
Children procreated by Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, etc. shall not only be
deprived of the heritage some time belonging to their parents: but also they
shall be mancipated to perpetual service of those Churches, wherein their
fathers served. Let the reader mark, that there is a greater business in
Councels to procure obedience to one Antichristian precept, concerning
prohibition of marriage; than to all the ten Commandments of Gods law.

Canon 11.
Let not a servant be accepted to serve in the Ministry of the Church, before
he be first set at liberty.

Canon 22.
When servants are set at liberty, let the supputation of time begin at the
death of him, who set them at liberty, and not at the time when the charter was
made.

Canon 13.14.15. and 16.
Servants set at liberty, shall neither marry a woman of the Roman, nor of the
Goths blood: and they shall be subject to the Church that set them at liberty:
and if necessity compel them to sell lands, let the land be first offered for
a competent price to one Minister in that Church, from which their liberty did
arise.

Jews, who are baptized, shall in time of solemn feasts attend upon the
Bishop of the parts where their dwelling is, Canon 17.
to the end, that he may bear testimony of the integrity of their faith: If
this co^mmandement be^ ansgresed, the Bishop shall ordain the Jew either to be
scourged, or to be subject to such abstinence, as he thinks most fit.

In the end, thanks being rendered to God for their meeting, and for the unity
of their judgments: and supplications being made to God for the weal of the
King Recesuvindus, in soul and body, the Council was dissolved.

IN the eight year of the reign of Recesuvindus, The 10. Council of Toledo.
King of Goths, assembled in Toledo one and twenty Bishops: They decerned
concerning the Feasts of the nativity of our Lord, and of the Lords mother, at
what times they should be kept. Punishments are appointed for men of the
Clergy, and Monks, who are not found dutiful to the King, and the Country:
That men unmeet for spiritual offices, should not be intruded into the
Church, neither for propinquity of blood, nor for hope of lucre and gain: That
widows, professing a religious order, shall receive an habit convenient for
that order: And that women, who depart again from their professed order, shall
be punished: That Parents shall not render their children to religious orders,
before they be eighteen years of age. Finally, Protamius Bishop of Bracara,
being convict of adultery, was removed from his office, and Fructuosus was
placed in his room.

IN the seventh year of the reign of Bamba, The 11. Counsel of Toledo.
King of the Goths, ninteene Bishops, and seven Abbots were assembled in
Toledo, by the Kings Commandment, Quiricus Bishop of Toledo, being President.
In the beginning, after a protestation of a decent order to be kept in their
Assembly, that no tumult nor contentious disputation, nor indecent laughter
should disturb the comely modesty of their Assembly: they set down a prolixe
confession of Faith, and Canons belonging to Ecclesiastical discipline, in the
form following:

1. That Bishops should be well acquainted with Scriptures, and apt to teach.
2. That Metropolitan Bishops should try how the Pastors of their Dioces
increase in knowledge^. That the form of singing, used in the Metropolitan
Church, shall be likewise used in other inferior Churches. 4. That persons who
have discorded, shall not stand at the Altar, until the time they be
reconciled again. 5. That Churchmen shall not judge in actions of blood. 6.
That Bishops should not give sentence before a sufficient trial of the cause.
7. Bishops, who commit adultery or murder, shall be deposed, and
excommunicated, beside the punishment to be inflicted by the secular Judge. 8.
No reward shall be taken for ministration of the Sacraments. 9. Bishops,
before their ordination, shall give their oath that they have not acquired that
dignity by rewards either given or to be given. 10. He who is to be preferred
to any Ecclesiastical office, let him first swear that he shall continue
constantly in that true Catholic faith, and that he shall be obedient to
Ecclesiastical Canons. 11. Let no man refuse to receive the Sacrament of the
Supper when it is offered by him who has a lawful calling to ministrate it.
12. Absolution should be pronounced when peril of death impendeth, albeit
complet satisfaction be not made. 13. The holy Sacrifice shall not be
ministered by persons possessed with devils, or transported with the passions
of madness. 14. He who ministers at the Altar, shall have other concurring
with him, to the end, that if he be suddenly oppressed with any infirmity, the
other assistant brother may supply his place. 15. Councels are ordained yearly
to be kept.

The second Council of Brac.
IF order of time be not precisely kept in commemoration of the Councels of
Bracara and Toledo, let no man marvel, some regard must be had to the memory
of the Reader: and it is not meet^ that the Councels of Toledo, being many in
number, and so frequently conueened, following upon the neck of another
(except the eleventh Council, conueened twelve years after the 10) should be
miserably disioyned: if such things be not comported with, by the favorable
Reader, it will be hard to abridge this head of Councels to the contentment of
a learned Reader.

This Council of Bracara, by Caranza, is called the first Council of Bracara.
In it many old opinions of the Priscillianists, and Manicheans, concerning
prohibition of marriage, and meats, are condemned, together with the heresies
of Samosatenus, Photinus, Cerdon, and Marcion. Canons set forth in this
Council, are so coincident with the Canons of other Councels, that there is no
necessity to make rehearsal of them.

In the 30. Canon of this Council, it is ordained; That no poesy shall be
sung in the Church, except the Psalter of the old Testament.

IN the 4 year of Bambas, The 2. Council of Brac.
King of Goths, eight Bishops were assembled in Braga. In the beginning of the
Council, for confession of their Faith, they made a new rehearsal of the
sum of the Nicene Faith. After this, they set down eight ordinances, in
manner following:

1. That all superstitious opinions being rejected, bread and wine mixed with
water, only should be offered in the Sacrifice, and not the liquor of milk,
nor pure unmixed wine, nor bread dipped in wine. Here mark, that the giving of
unmixed wine to the people, in the Sacrament or Sacrifice, is called
superstition: such bitter fruits do ensue upon magnifying the traditions of
men, that Christ's own institution, is called superstition. 2. That vessels
dedicated to God, be not abused, and employed to secular and humane uses. 3. A
Presbyter, when he says mass, let him be clothed with his Orarium on both
his shoulders, and be signated on his breast, with the sign of the Cross. 4.
Let no person of the Clergy cohabit with women, no not with their own sisters,
without witnesses of their conversation. 5. Upon Festival days, relics
enclosed in an Arc, shall be borne upon the shoulders of the Levites, as the
Ark of God in the old Testament was accustomed to be borne, 1 Chronicles. 15.15.
and not about the neck of a Bishop: and in case the Bishop will needs carry
them himself, then shall he walk on foot with the rest of the people, and not
be carried in a coach by his Deacons. Here mark how men's traditions are
equalled to the commandments of God. 6. Presbyters, Abbots, and Levites, for
the dignity of their calling, shall not be punished with stripes by the
Bishop, lest in dispersoning the principal members of his own body, he
bring himself into contempt of his subjects. 7. Let no honor be sold for
promise of rewards. 8. Let governors of Churches have a greater regard to the
weal of the Church, then to their own particular affairs.
In the end, thanks is given to God, and the King, for their meeting* and they
subscribe the fore named ordinances. Here mark, that in the country of Spain,
the King still keeps in his own hand, power of convocating Councels.

IN the year of our Lord, 681. and in the 12. year of the reign of
Constantius Pogonatus, The 6. Council holden at Constantinople.
a general Council was assembled at Constantinople, by the authority of the
Emperor, and not by the commandment of Pope Donus, nor Agatho his successor,
nor of Leo the 2. the successor of Agatho, as the Divall letter of Constantine,
directed to Pope Donus and received and obeyed by Pope Agatho, clearly
testifies. As for the number of Bishops convened, there is an infinite
discrepance betwixt the authors, who make rehearsal of their number: the least
number reckoned, is 150. The question discussed in this Assembly, was about the
wills and actions of Christ. Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, and Stephanus his
disciple, pertinaciously defended the error of the Monothelites: confirming
also their opinion by the testimony of Honorius, sometime Bishop of Rome, whose
letters written to Sergius, sometime Bishop of Constantinople, being read in
the open audience of the Council, made it clearly known, that he also was
infected with the erour of the Monothelites. For this cause Honorius Bishop of
Rome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus Bishops of Constantinople, Cyrus Bishop of
Alexandria, and Macarius Bishop of Antiochia, were all excommunicated: likewise
Polychronius, a ridiculous Monk, and his accomplices were excommunicated, and
with great shame and ignominy, rejected from the fellowship of the Church: For
he offered to prove the opinion of the Monothelites to be the truth of God, by
writing the sum of that opinion in a paper, and over spreading it upon a
beer, wherein a dead man was laid, he put the Council in hope, that he
would raise the dead man to life again: but after trial, he was found to be
a lying and a deceitful fellow, and he likewise was excommunicated.

This Council made no Canons and Constitutions concerning Church Discipline,
as other Councels had done before: For this cause Justinian the 2. the son of
Pogenatus, gathered these same Fathers, who had been in the preceding Council,
to perfect the work which they had begun.

They made many Constitutions, but two in special, which displeased the Roman
Church: First, they annulled the doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning
prohibition of marriage to men in spiritual offices. Secondly, they ordained
the Patriarch of Constantinople, to be in equal authority with the Pope of
Rome. These Constitutions and Canons, Pope Sergius refused to subscribe, albeit
his ambassadors in his name had subscribed them in Constantinople.

BAmbas King of the Goths, The 12. Council of Toledo.
resigned the title of his royal authority to Euringius, and he was content to
be shaven, and enter into a Monastery In the first year of the reign of
Euringius, 33. Bishops, with some Abbots, and 13. Noblemen of the Court,
convened at Toledo. The King, amongst many other things, protested, that he was
content, that whatsoever thing in his laws seemed repugnant to reason, it
should be corrected by the prudent advice of this Council.

The Fathers of this Council, for confession of Faith, adhered unto the
Council of Nice. After this, the hand-writings and seals of Bambas, and the
Nobles of his Court, and the testimony of Iulianus, ArchBishop of Toledo, are
presented: whereby it is known, that Bambas, had resigned his government in
favor of Euringius, willing them to choose him to be his successor. So it came
to pass, that Euringius was solemnly proclaimed to be King, and the people
were assoyled from the oath of allegiance made to Bambas, and were astricted to
the obedience of King Euringius.

In this Council it was forbidden, that new Bishoprics should be erected in
villages: and the Bishop of Emerita begged pardon for this, that he had
ordained a Bishop in a certain village, being compelled so to do, by the
commandment of King Bambas. They who stand at the Altar, and sacrifices, are
commanded to eat of the sacrifice, as often as they offer it. The acts, made
in preceding Councels, against the Jews, were renewed and amplified in this
Council: and thanks was given to God, and the King, for their meeting.

Other Councels of Toledo, under the reigns of Euringius, and Egita, seeing
there is little written of them, worthy of Commemoration, I over-passe with
silence.

CENTVRIE VIII.
IN the year of our Lord, 712. a Council was assembled at London, A Council
at London.
where Bonifacius was present, and Brithuvaldus the chief Prelate of England;
and the Kings of Saxons ruling in England, were commanded under pain of
cursing, to be present at this Council. The purposes entreated in this
Council were two; to wit, concerning the adoration of Images, and prohibition
of marriage to men in spiritual offices. About worshipping of Images no
disputation was heard, whether that service did agree with the written word of
God, or not. This was counted a sufficient wartant for bringing Images into
places of adoration, and for worshipping them (especially the Image of the
Virgin Mary) that Eguvinus, a superstitious Monk in England, of the order of
Saint Benet, who afterward was made a Bishop: affirmed that the Virgin
Marie appeared unto him in a dream, and declared, that it was her will, that
her Image should be set up in the Churches, and worshipped. These dreams once
confirmed by the oath of Eguvinus, and approoved by Constantine Bishop of Rome,
and obtruded by Bonifacius the Popes Legate, they were embraced in England,
with little contradiction in such a corrupt time.

The other purpose entreated in this Council, was prohibition of marriage, to
men in spiritual offices. This doctrine of the Roman Church, was not received
without reluctation of the Clergy. Only, a ground was laid, whereupon
followed a building of the doctrine of Devils.

The Council of Constantinople, under Philippicus.
ABout the same time, that is, about the year of our Lord 712. it is supposed,
that the Emperor Philippicus gathered a Council at Constantinople, for
undoing of the sixth general Council, in the which the error of the
Monothelites was condemned: and that he did this according to a promise made
to a Monk, named John, who foretold him that he would be made Emperor, and
craved this promise of him, that when he should be advanced to the Imperial
dignity, he should undo the sixth general Council. But the writers of this
History do not make particular mention of the Fathers, who were present at
this Council. The rest of the History is clear, that Philippicus razed the
pictures of the Fathers, who had been present at this Council, and were
pictured in the Temple of Sophia: and that on the other part, Pope Constantine
the first, not only caused the same effigies to be pictured in the porch of
the Church of Saint Peter at Rome, but also procured that the Emperors name
should be razed out of charters, and that his effigy should not be ingraved
in any kind of coined metal. Also it is clear, that Philippicus removed
Cyrus from his office, and placed in his room John, who foretold him that he
should be Emperor.

A Council at Rome, assembled by Gregory 2.
IN the year of our Lord, 714. Pope Gregory the second, assembled a Council,
in the which two Bishops of Britain, to wit, Sedulius, and Fergustus, were
present. It was ordained, that masses should be celebrated publicly in
Temples, which custom was not in use before. In the second Tome of Councels,
Sigebert. in. Chron.
this Synod is referred to Gregory the third. A great number of the Canons of
this Council do concern marriage, That no man should take in marriage a
woman, who was a relict of a Presbvter or Deacon, or a Nun, or his spiritual
sister, or his brothers wife, or his niece, or his mother in law, or daughter
in law, or his near cousens, or a woman whom by these or ravishing he has
led away. And that no man should consult with Iuchanters and Sorcerers. And
that no man should violate the mandates of the Apostolic Chair: no, not in a
matter of an hair.

Gregory the third, A Council at Rome, assembled by Gregory the third.
after he had received a mandate from the Emperor Leo, concerning abolishing
of Images, he assembled a great Council at Rome, of 903. Bishops: in the
which the Emperor Leo was excommunicated, and deprived of his Imperial
dignity. Here mark the tyranny and fierceness of Antichrist, Who gave such
authority to a Roman Preacher, to dismount the Monarchs of the world from
their royal thrones? Yet Gregory the third attempted such high matters,
because the Emperor Leo had disallowed the worshipping of Images. Likewise, by
his instigation the whole country of Italy refused to pay tribute to the
Emperor. Now is the banner of Antichrist displayed against the Emperor, and
this is a fore-running token, of the hateful enmity which is to ensue betwixt
the Popes and the Emperors, which (God willing) shall be declared in its own
time. Likewise, Anastatius Patriarch of Constantinople, was condemned and
excommunicated in this Council. To favor the Emperor, and to dislike the
worshipping of Images, were two irremissable sins, and meriting the great
Anathems of the Bishop of Rome.

IN the year of our Lord, A Council holden in France, by Boniface, Archbishop
of Mentz.
742. and in time of the reign of Charles the Great, and under the Popedom of
Zacharias the first, Bonifaoius Archbishop of Mentz, assembled a Council, of
the Bishops, Presbyters, and Clergy of France, for reformation of abuses in
that country: or rather, as the truth is, to bring the country of France (as
he had already brought many parts of Germany) to a conformity with the
superstitious rites of the Roman Church. It is to be marked, that this
national Council was assembled by the mandate of King Charles, howsoever
Bonifacius ordered the affairs of the Council.

It was ordained, that Synodes should be kept yearly, and that Clergy men
should not put on armor, Canon 1.
and go to warre-fare, except one or two Bishops, with their Presbyters and
Chaplens, to prescribe penance to them who should happen to confess their
sins: And that hunting and hauking, and such idle pastimes, should not be
used by the Clergy.

Canon 2.
That every Presbyter shall be ready to give account of his ministry to his
own Bishop, in time of Lent, especially concerning his ministration of
Baptism, the sum of his Catholic Faith, the form of his prayers, and the
order of his saying of masses.

Canon 3.
That no uncouth Bishop or Presbyter, be admitted without the trial, and
allowance of a Synod.

Canon 4.
That Presbyters and Deacons be not clothed as secular men, with short cloakes;
but with the habit of men who are in spiritual offices: And that no woman
cohabite in the house with them.

Canon 5.
That every Bishop have a care within his own bounds, to abolish all heathenish
superstitions.

IN the year of our Lord, 755. and in the thirteenth year of the Empire of
Constantinus Copronymus, The 7. general Council assembled at Constantinople.
a general Counsel of 338. Bishops, was assembled at Constantinople, by the
commandment of the Emperor. In this Council the worshipping of Images was
damned, and the placing of them in Oratories and Temples, where the divine
Majesty is worshipped, was forbidden, as a custom borrowed from Pagans, who
had no hope of the resurrection, and therefore solaced themselves with pictured
similitudes of their friends, as if they had been bodily present with them.
Yea, for three principal causes they damned the worshipping of Images: First,
because the worshipping of them is repugnant unto holy Scripture. Secondly,
because the divine and humane nature being unseparably united in Christ, and
the divine nature cannot be presented by an Image: therefore it is not meet to
represent his humane nature by an Image, left we should seem to separate the
two natures in Christ. And thirdly, because the writings of ancient Fathers do
utterly condemn the worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Eusebius,
Gregorius Theologus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Chrysostomus, and Theodorus
Bishop of Ancyra. It were a prolixt thing to make a rehearsal of the sentences
of all the forenamed Fathers: therefore, for breuities cause, I will here
only make choice of one place, which is this: Eusebius Pamphili, Hist. Magd.
cent. 8. cap. 9.
writing to Constantia the Empress, who was desirous that the image of Christ
should be sent her he returns unto her this answer: Because ye have
written unto me to send unto you the Image of Christ, I would gladly
understand what image of Christ ye are inquiring for: whether it be that true
and unchangeable nature, bearing the character and engraven similitude of the
person of the Father? or if it be the image of the shape of a servant, which
Christ took upon him for our sakes? As concerning His divine nature, I hope
ye are not sollicitous to seek the image thereof, being sufficiently
instructed, that no man knows the Father, except the Son, and on the other
part, no man knows the Son, except the Father. But if ye desire the
similitude of man's nature, wherewith He clad Himself for our sakes,
understand, that the splender and shining brightness of his glory cannot be
represented with dead colors, and shaddowed pictures: For even his Disciples
in the mountain were not able to abide the brightness of His shining face
(Mat. Chap. 17. verse. 1. Mark. Chap. 9. verse. 2. Luke Chap. 9. verse, 28.) how
much less are we now able to abide the celestial splender of his glorified
body?

In this Council Germanus Bishop of Constantinople, Georgius Cyprius, and
Damascene a Monk, who were principal defenders of the worshipping of images,
were excommunicated.

In the Canons of this Council, which were 19. in number; invocation of Saints
has allowance in the 15. and 17. Canon. So that in this Council also is
presented unto us a viue pattern of the weakness of Councels. Like as in
every sacrifice there was dungue, so likewise in every Council there is found
some note of infirmity and weakness. And it is a foolish thing to adhere to
all the ordinances of Councels, except they do agree in all points with the
written word of God.

The second Council of Nice.
IN the year of our Lord, 788. and in the eight year of the reign of Irene,
and her son Constantine, a Council was assembled at Nice in Bythania, of
three hundredth and fifty Bishops. The Ambassadors of Adrian the first, Bishop
of Rome, were present in this Assembly. Basilius, Bishop of Ancyra; Theodorus,
Bishop of Myra; and Theodosius, Bishop of Amorium; offered to the Council
their supplicant letters, confessing, that they had sinned in condemning the
worshipping of images in the Synod assembled by Constantinus Copronymus. These
reeds, shaken with the wind, and unconstant fools, were accepted in favor,
as a preamble unto this malignant Council. The Epistle of Adrian Bishop of
Rome, was openly read in the Council, approving the worshipping of images. His
letter was full of fables and lies, such as the fable of the leprosy of
Constantine, and of the shedding of the blood of innocent babes to procure
remedy against his sickness, and baptism of Constantine by Syluester, the
miraculous restoring of the Emperor to health after his Baptism, and of the
images of Peter and Paul, produced to Constantine before his baptism. Such a
Legend of lies no Council could have heard read in their audience, if it had
not bin a time in the which the mystery of iniquity was effectually working:
For the history of the life of Constantine, written by Eusebius, expressly
proves the contrary: to wit, that Constantine was not leprous, but rather a
man of a clean and unspotted body: and that he was not baptized by Syluester
in Rome, but by Eusebius in Nicomedia. Notwithstanding, the letter of Pope
Adrian was accepted and allowed by the Council. And it was ordained, That the
image of Christ, of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the Saints, should not
only be received into places of Adoration, but also should be adored and
worshipped: And the honor done to the image, is thought to redound to him (or
her) who is present by the image, according to the words of Basilius Magnus.
Basil. contra Eunomium, ^. 1.
But Basilius Magnus is writing in that place of Christ, the image of the
invisible God, and not of images made with men's hands.

THe Fathers of this Council, as it were bewitched by the delusions of the
Devil, were not ashamed to confirm the adoration of images, by lying
miracles, and by a foolish confabulation betwixt the Devil and a Monk, whom
Satan ceased not to tempt continually to the lust of uncleanness, and would
make none end of tempting him, except he would promise to desist from
worshipping the image of the Virgin Mary. But arguments taken from the fables
of Monks, and delusions of the Devil, are not to be hearkened unto, in a
matter expressly repugnant to the written word of God.

IN the year of our Lord 794. The Council of Frankford.
Charles the Great, King of France, assembled a great Council at Frankford:
partly in regard of the heretic Foelix, who called Christ the adoptiue Son
of God in his humane nature, and was condemned in a Council assembled at
Ratisbona, Anno. 742. but he was returned to his vomit again: and therefore
was of new again condemned, as a notable heretic, in the Council of
Frankford: partly also in respect of the great disputation that arose every
where concerning the worshipping of images, disallowed in the council of
Constantinople, and allowed in the second Council of Nice.

Not only the Bishops of France, but also of Germany and Lombardie, as
Provinces subdued to the King of France, were present at this Council.
Likewise, Pope Adrian sent his Ambassadors, Theophilactus and Stephanus, to
the Council. And Charles himself, King of France, was present in the Council
of Frankford. The Ambassadors of Pope Adrian produced, the acts of the second
Council of Nice, hoping that the Council of Frankford should have given
consent and allowance unto the same. But the Fathers of this Council
collationed the acts of the Council of Constantinople, with the acts of the
second Council of Nice. And they disallowed in the Council of Constantinople
the strict prohibition to picture images, either in Temples of other places.
And in the second Council of Nice they disallowed the Act of worshipping of
images, and of honoring them with garments, incense, candles, and kneeling
unto them: counting the afore-saide Act to be so impious, that the Council in
the which it was concluded, was neither worthy to be called Catholic nor
Oecumenicke. The arguments whereby the second Council of Nice endeavored to
approve the adoration of images, are all refuted in the Council of Frankford,
as I have declared already in a treatise concerning worshipping of Images.

Concerning the argument taken from the authority of Epiphanius, who in his
book called Panarium, reckons not the worshippers of images in the roll of
Heretics: it is answered by the Council of Frankford, that in case Epiphanius
had counted the haters of the worshippers of images, Heretics; he had
likewise inserted their names in the catalogue of Heretics: but seeing he has
not so done, the Council of Nice had no just cause to triumph so much in this
frivolous argument, which makes more against them, than it makes for them.

More-ouer, in the Council of Frankford, the Epistle of Epiphanius, written to
Ihonne Bishop of Jerusalem, was read; wherein he disalloweth the very
bringing in of images into Churches: and this Epistle was translated out of the
Greek into Latin language, by Ierom. The Epistle is worthy to be read. Read
it in the Magdeburg History, Cent. 8. Chap. 9.

CENTVRIE IX.
IN the year of our Lord, 813. by the commandment of Carolus Magnus, in the
Town of Mentz, were assembled 30. Bishops 25. Abbots, The Council of Mentz.
with a great number of Priests, Monks, Countes, and Judges, about reformation
of the dissolute manners, of Ecclesiasticke and Laicke persons. After three
days abstinence and fasting, joined with Litanies, public Prayers, and
imploring the help of God, they divided themselves into three companies: In
the first company were the Bishops, with some Noters, reading the history of
the Euangell, and the Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles, together with
the Canons and works of ancient Fathers, and the Pastorals book of Gregory,
to the end that by the Precepts contained in these books, the enormitie of
men's lives might be corrected. In the second company were Abbots and Monks,
reading the rules of S. Benedict, for the reformation of the lives of Monks.
In the third company were Lords and Judges, pondering the causes of all men,
who came to complain, that wrong was done unto them.

The 1.2. and 3. Canons of this Council, entreat concerning, Faith, Hope, and
Charity. 4. Concerning the Sacraments, to be ministered chiefly at Easter and
Whitsonday, except necessity and fear of death require preuening of these
times. 5. That unity and concord should be kept in the Church, because we
have one common Father in heaven: one Mother, to wit, the Church in earth: one
Faith, one Baptism, and one Celestial inheritance prepared for us: Yea, and
God is not the God of dissension, but of peace, according as it is said,
Blessed be the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. The
sixth and seventh Canons, entreat of Orphans, and poor people, whose weakness
is to be supported: but no man should take vantage of their poor and desolate
estate. The eight Canon recommendeth unity to be kept betwixt men in
spiritual offices, and civil Judges: a Canon indeed, if it had been
observed, very necessary for the estate of this time. The ninth and tenth
Canon, prescribes to the Clergy, Precepts of a modest and sober life, with
abstinence from the delicate pleasures of the world, and from Theatricall
Spectacles, from pompes, and dishonest banquets: and to be more ready to go
to the house of mourning, to comfort them who are heavy hearted, than to the
house of banqueting. Usury, avarice, ambition, and taking of rewards, for
the benefits of God, such as use to be taken for medicinal cures, is
forbidden. To beware of deceit and conjurations: to flee hatred, emulation,
backe-biting, and envying, wandering eyes, and an unbridled tongue: a petulant,
and proud gesture are forbidden: filthy words, and works, are altogether
abhorred: chastity is recommended: the frequent visitations of the houses of
Widows, and Virgins, is prohibited: due obedience is to be given to Seniors:
to take heed to doctrine, reading, and spiritual songs; as it becomes men,
who have addicted themselves unto divine service.

Precepts, concerning the behavior of Monks and Nuns, and the fabric of
their dwelling places, I ouer-passe with silence, left I should ouercharge a
short Compend with an heap of unnecessary things.

In the 32. Canon, the difference betwixt (...), and (...), is set down. 33.
The great Litanie or Rogations, to be observed three days, by all Christians,
with fasting, fackecloath, ashes, walking barefooted, and all kind of humble
carriage. 34.35. and 36. Public Fastings, and keeping of Festival days is
commanded. 37. The Sabbath day is to be kept holy. In it no Merchant Wares to
be sold, and no criminal cause to be judged. 38. and 39. Tithes are precisely
to be paid. And men, fleeing to Churches for safeguard, are not to be
violently drawn out of their refuge. 40. In Churches, and the portches
thereof, let no secular judgments be exercised. 41. Let no ancient Church be
spoiled of tithes and possessions, for the building of new Oratories. 42.
Concerning Church-rentes bestowed for reparation and upholding of Churches. 43.
and 44. That no Priest say Mass himself alone: for if he have no person
present except himself, how can he say, Dominus vobiscum, or Sursum corda, or
such other passages? Also frequent offering of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
presenting of the Paxe, is recommended to Christian people. 45. That every
person be acquainted with the Lords Prayer, and the Belief: and they who can
no otherwise comprehend these things, let them learn them in their own vulgar
language. 46. Drunkenness is detested: and they who continue in this sin,
without amendment, are ordained to be excommunicated. 57. Godfathers shall
attend, that their spiritual children be brought up in the true Faith. 48.
Filthy, libidinous, songs are not to be sung about Churches. 49. The
cohabitation with women is forbidden to all the members of the Clergy. 50. Let
all Bishops, Abbots, and Church men, have such Advocates and Agentes in their
affairs, who are men that fear God, and are haters of all unrighteous dealing
51. Let not the dead bodies of the Saints be transported from place to place,
without the advice of the Princes of the country, or the Bishop, and Synod.
52. No dead body shall be buried within the Church, except the body of a
Bishop, or of an Abbot, or of a worthy Presbyter, or of a faithful Laicke
person. 53. Incestuous persons are to be searched out, and separated from the
fellowship of the Church, except they be penitent. 54.55. and 56. Marriage, in
the fourth degree of consanguinitie, is forbidden: and that no man shall marry
his spiritual daughter, or sister, neither the woman, whose son or daughter
he has led to the Sacrament of Confirmation: and, in case they be found to be
married, they shall be separated again. And no man shall take in marriage his
wives sister: neither shall a woman marry her husbands brother.

IN the year of our Lord 813. a Council was assembled at Rhemes, The eigth
Council of Rhemes.
by the commandment of Charles the great: for it is to be remarked, that he
not only assembled that famous Counsel of Frankford, Anno. 794. in the which
adoration of Images was condemned: but also, when he was now aged, and saw many
abuses in the Church, he endeavored by all means possible, to procure
reformation of the lewd manners of Churchmen. Therefore, he appointed, at one
time, to wit. Anno, 813. five National Councils, to be conueened in diverse
places, for reformation of the Clergy and people: One was conueened at Mentz,
as has bin declared: Another at Rhemes: the third at Towrs: the fourth at
Cabilone, or Chalons: and the fifth at Arles. In all these Councels no
opposition is made to the Council of Frankford: neither was the adoration of
Images auowed in any of these Councels. So much avails the authority of a
Prince for suppressing of false doctrine and heresy. In this Council at
Rhemes, Wulfarius, Archbishop was president. 44. canons are rehearsed in the 2.
Tome of Councels made in this Council.

In the 1. Can. it was concluded, That every man should diligently acquaint
himself with the Articles of his faith. 2. That every man should learn the Lords
Prayer, and co^prehe^d the meaning thereof. 3. That every man, promoted to
Ecclesiastical orders, shall walk worthily, conform to his calling. 4. The
Epistles of Paul were read, to give instructions to subdeacons, how they should
behave themselves. Yet is there not one word in all the Epistles of Paul of a
subdeacon. 5. The Gospel was read to give instruction to Deacons, to minister
condingly in their office. 6. Ignorant Priests are instructed to celebrate the
Service with great understanding. 7. In like manner, they are instructed how to
prepare (...) to the Sacrament of Baptism. 8. The holy Canons were read out of
the Decretall of Innocentius, for ordering the life of Chanons. 9. The rule of
Saint Benedict was read, to reduce Abbots, and their Conuents, to a remembrance
of their order. 10. The Pastoral book of Gregorius was read, to admonish
Pastors of their duty. 11. Sentences of diverse ancient Fathers were read, to
admonish men of all ranks, both Prelates and subjects, to bring forth the
fruit of a good conversation. 12. These things being done, they set down a
form of receiving of confessions, and prescribing of penance, according to the
Canonical institutions. 13. They reasoned about the eight principal vices, to
the end, their diversity being distinguished, every man might know what vices
he should eschew, and teach others to beware of the same. 14. That Bishops
should take heed of the reading of the books of the Canonicke Scripture, and
the books of Fathers: and should attend upon the preaching of the Word of God.
15. That Bishops should preach the Sermons and Homilies of holy Fathers, in
such sort as all the people might understand them. The 16. Canon is coincident
with the 12. 17. That Bishops, and Abbots, permit no man to solace the company
with filthy gesting in their presence: but let poor and indigent people be
refreshed at their tables with lectures of divine Scripture, and praising of
God, according to the Precept of the Apostle, that whether we eat or drink,
let all things be done to the glory of God. 18. Gluttony and Drunkenness
forbidden to Bishops, and the Ministers of God. 19. Let not Bishops be rash to
judge in things secret, which are to be referred to the judgment of God, who
can manifest things hid up in darkness, and discover the secrets of the heart.
20. Presbyters shall not transport themselves from a low place to a greater.
21. Whosoever by paying money, procures a preferment in the Church, shall be
deposed. 22. No Churchman shall cohabite with a woman, except it be with his
mother or sister, or such like persons, by whose company no suspicion of
uncleanness can arise. Precepts given to Monks, and Nuns, I pass by, as I
did in the former Council.

Canon 35. The Sabbath day shall be kept holy, and in it no servile work shall
be done, according to the Lords commandment. 36. Let no man bestow upon the
Church that thing which by unlawful means he has fraudulently with-drawne
from others. 37. Nor yet by lies and deceitful means, withdraw any thing
duly belonging to the Church. 38. Let tithes be precisely paid. 39. Let no man
presume to receive rewards for his decree and sentence. 40. Let prayers and
oblations be made for the Emperor, and his noble race, that it would please
God to preserve them in all happiness, in this present life, and vouchsafe unto
them celestial joys in company of the Angels, in the life to come. In the 41.
Canon, mention is made of a certain rent, left by King Pipinus of Good memory;
which they wish the Emperor Charles, Pipinus son, should not alter, nor
transfer into another sum, in respect, that by so doing, many periuries and
false testimonies might ensue. 42. And that no man should be removed from his
mansion, to whom the Emperors alms is distributed. 43. And that the statute
may be confirmed by his Highness allowance, whereby all contentions and
strifes are ordained to have a decision, and end. 44. And that the statute made
in Bononia, concerning false witnesses, may be ratified and confirmed: with
augmentation, if need require, for eschewing of periuries, false testimonies,
and many other inconveniences.

The Council of Towrs.
IN the year of our Lord, 813. and at the commandment of the Emperor Carolus
Magnus, a Council of many Bishops and Abbots, was assembled, about
establishing of Ecclesiastical discipline, in the town of Towers.

In the first Canon, all men are admonished to be obedient to the Emperor
Charles the Great, and to keep the oath of allegiance made unto him, and to
make prayers, and supplications for his prosperity and welfare. 2. All
Bishops shall diligently read, and frequently peruse, the books of holy
Scripture, the histories of the Euangels, and the Epistles of Paul, together
with the books of ancient Fathers written thereupon. 3. It is not lawful for
any Bishop to be ignorant of the Canons of the Church, and of the Pastoral
book of Gregorius, in the which every man, as in a lively mirror might see
himself. 4. Let every Bishop feed the flock committed unto him, not only
with doctrine, but also with examples of good conversation. 5. A Bishop must
not be given to sumptuous banquets, but be content with a moderate diet, lest
he should seem to abuse the counsel of our Lord, saying; Take heed, that
your hearts be not surfeited with gluttony, or drunkenness: but let holy
lecture be at his table, rather then the idle words of flattering fellows. 6.
Let strangers and indigent people be at Bishops tables: whom they may refresh,
both with corporal and spiritual repast. 7. The delicate pleasure of the ear
and eyes, are to be eschewed, left by such pleasures, the mind be effeminate,
and enchanted. 8. Let not the Lords servants delight in vain gesting, nor in
hunting, nor hawking. 9. Let Presbyters and Deacons follow the footsteps of
their Bishops, assuring themselves, that the good conversation enjoined unto
their Bishops, is also enjoined unto them. 10. Let Bishops have a great
solicitude and care toward the poor: and be faithful dispensators of
Ecclesiastical goods, as the Ministers of God, and not as hunters after filthy
lucre. 11. It is lawful for Bishops, with consent of Presbyters and Deacons,
to bestow out of the Church treasure, to support indigent people of that same
Church. 12. A Presbyter is not to be ordained until he be thirty year old.
13. Let the Bishop make diligent inquisition in his own parish Church, that no
Presbyter, coming from any other parts, make service in his Church, without
letters of recommendation. 14. Let a Presbyter, leaving a low place, and
presuming to an higher, incur that same punishment, which a Bishop,
deprehended in the like fault, should incur. 15. A Presbyter, who attaineth
to a Church, by giving money for it, let him be deposed. 16. Let tithes
bestowed upon Churches, by advice of Bishops, be faithfully distributed to the
poor, by the Presbyters. 17. The families of Bishops shall be instructed in
the sum of the true faith. In the knowledge of the retribution to be given to
good men, and the condemnation of people, and of the resurrection and last
judgment, and by what kind of works eternal life may be promerited: and
that the Homilies, containing these instructions, shall be translated into
Rusticke-Latine-language: to the end that every person may understand them.
Mark in what estimation the Latin language has been at this time: that
instructions in Rusticke and barbarous Latin, are counted better then
instructions in good French language. 18. It is the duty of the Bishop, to
instruct his Presbyter concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, what it is that
they should desire the people baptized to renounce: namely, that they should
renounce the devil, and all his works, and his pomps. Now the works of the
Devil, are murder, fornication, adultery, drunkenness, and other such like
faults. But the pompes of the Devil, are pride, ostentation, swelling
conceits, vainglory, loftiness, and such other faults, as spring up from
such grounds. 19. Presbyters are precisely to be admonished, that when they say
the mass, and do communicate, they do not distribute the Lords body
indiscreetly, to children, and to all persons, who happen to be present, who if
they be entangled with great sins, they procure unto themselves rather
damnation, then any remedy to their souls, according to the saying of the
Apostle, Whosoever eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup unworthily, he
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: Let a man therefore try
himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. Note.
By this let the judicious Reader mark, that even in the days of Carolus
Magnus, private masses had no place: but they who were duly prepared, did
communicate with the Priest. 20. Presbyters shall not suffer the holy Chrisme
to be touched by every man. 21. Presbyters shall not resort to Tavernes, to
eat or drink. 22. Bishops and Presbyters, shall prescribe to sinners, who
have confessed their sins, penance, discreetly, according to the waightinesse
of their fault. 23. Chanons, who dwell in Cities, let them eat in one
Cloister, and sleep under one roof, to the end they may be ready to
celebrate their Canonical hours. From the 24. Canon unto the 32. are
contained constitutions concerning Monks and Nuns, which I ouer-passe with
silence, fearing to be prolix.

Canon 32. All men should study to peace and concord, but especially
Christians: forsaking hatred, discord, and envy. 33. Lords and Judges should
be obedient to the wholesome admonitions of their Bishops: and Bishops on the
other part, should reverently regard them, to the end they may be mutually
supported, every one with the consolations one of another. 34. Lords and Judges
are to be admonished, that they admit not vile and naughty persons to bear
witness in their iudicatories, because there are many, who for a contemptible
price, are ready to make shipwreck of a good conscience. 35. Let no man for
his decree, receive a reward: For divine Scripture in many places forbids
this, as a thing that blinds the eyes of the blind. 36. Let every man be
careful to support indigent persons of his own family and kindred: for it is
an impious and abominable thing in the sight of God, that men abounding in
riches, should neglect their own. 37. Christians when they make supplications
to God, let them in humble manner bow down their knees, following the example
of the Martyr Steven, and of the Apostle Paul: Except upon the Lords day, and
other solemn days, on the which the universal Church keeps a memorial of
the Lords resurrection: and at such times they are accustomed to stand and
pray. 38. Faithful people must be admonished, not to enter into the Church,
with tumult and noise: and in time of prayer, and celebration of the mass, not
to be occupied in vain confabulations, and idle speeches: but even to abstain
from wicked cogitations. 39. Let not the Consistories and Iudgement-seates of
secular Judges be in the Church, or portches thereof, in any time to come:
because the house of God should be an house of Prayer, as our Lord Jesus
Christ says. 40. Let it be forbidden, that Merchandise be used upon the Lords
day, or Iustice-Courts, because all men should abstain from servile labors,
to the end this day may be spent in praising and thanking God, from morning
till evening. 41. Incestuous persons, parracides, and murderers, are found,
who will not hearken to the wholesome admonitions of Churchmen, but persevere
in their vicious conversation, who must be reduced to order by the discipline
of the secular power. 42. Let the people be admonished to abstain from
Magical Arts, which can bring no support and help to the infirmities of men,
and beasts: but they are the deceitful snares of the Devil, whereby he
deceives mankind. 43. A frequent custom of swearing is forbidden, wherein
men, upon every light occasion willing to purchase credit to that which they
speak, they take God to be witness of the verity of their speeches. 44. Many
free subjects, by the oppression of their Masters, are redacted to extreme
poverty; whose causes, if our element Sovereign please to examine, he shall
find, that they are unjustly redacted to extreme indigence. 45. A false
measure, and a false balance, is an abomination unto the Lord, as Solomon
records.

The 46. Canon contains a regrate, that tithes were not duly paid to the
Church: notwithstanding, that the Church had given in, their complaint to the
civil Magistrate: whereby it came to pass, that not only lights in the Church,
and stipends to the Clergy, began to inlacke, but also the very parish
Churches became ruinous. 47. When general Fastings are appointed, for any
impendent calamity, let man neglect the fellowship of the humble Church, for
desire to feed his belly with delicate food. 48. Drunkenness and surfeiting are
forbidden, as offensive both to soul and body, and the ground of many other
sins. 49. Lords and Masters are to be admonished, not to deal cruelly and
unmercifully with their subjects: yea, and not to seek that which is due unto
themselves, with excessive rigor. 50. Let Laicke people communicate at least
thrice in a year, unless they be hindered by some grivous sins committed by
them. 51. In the last Canon mention is made, that they diligently examined the
cause of them who complained to the Emperor, that they were dis-inherited by
the donation of lands, which their Fathers and friends had bestowed upon the
Church: and in their bounds they found no man who did complain. Always, in
that matter, if any thing was done amiss, they humbly submitted themselves to
be corrected by their Sovereign Lord and King.

THe Council of Chalons was the fourth Council, The Council of Chalons.
convened in the year of our Lord, 813. by the commandment of Charles the
Great, for the reformation of the Ecclesiastical Estate. Many of the Canons of
this Council are coincident with the Canons of the former: therefore I shall
be the shorter in the commemoration thereof.

1. That Bishops acquaint themselves diligently with reading the books of holy
Scripture, and the Books of ancient Fathers, together with the Pastoral
books of Gregorius. 2. Let Bishops practice in their works, the knowledge
which they have attained unto by by reading. 3. Let them also constitute
Schools, wherein learning may be increased, and men brought up in them, that
may be like to the salt of the earth, to season the corrupt manners of the
people, and to stop the mouths of Heretics, according as it is said, to the
commendation of the Church, A thousand Targes are hung up in it, even all the
Armor of the strong, Cant. chap. 4 verse. 4. ^ 4. Let Churchmen show humility,
in word, deed, countenance, and habit. 5. Let Priests be unreprovable,
adorned with good manners, and not given to filthy lucre. 6. The blame of
filthy lucre, wherewith many Churchmen were charged, for this, that they
allured secular men to renounce the world, and to bring their goods to the
Church, they endeavor, with multiplied number of words, to remove. 7. Bishops,
and Abbots, who with deceitful speeches, have circumvened simple men, and
shaven their heads, and by such means do possess their goods, in respect of
their covetous desire of filthy lucre, let them be subject to Canonical, or
regular repentance. But let those simple men, who have laid down their hair,
as men destitute of understanding, who cannot govern their own affairs, let
them remain in that estate, which they have once undertaken: but let the goods
given by negligent Parents, and received, or rather reaved by avaritious
Churchmen, be restored again to their children and heirs. 8. If Church men
lay up provision of come in Victuall-houses, let it not be to keep them to a
dearth, but to support the poor in time of need, therewith. 9. Hunting and
hawking, and the insolency of foolish and filthy jests, are to be forsaken of
Churchmen. 10. Gluttony and drunkenness is forbidden. 11. The Bishop or
Abbot, must not resort to civil iudicators, to plead their own cause, except
it be to support the poor and oppressed. Presbyters, Deacons, and Monks,
having obtained license from the Bishop, may compeare in Civil
iudgement-seats, accompanied with their Advocate. 12. Let not Presbyters,
Deacons, or Monks, be farmers or laborers of the ground. 13. It is reported
of some brethren, that they compel the persons who are to be admitted, in time
of their ordination to swear, that they are worthy: and that they shall do
nothing repugnant to the Canons: Note.
and that they shall be obedient to the Bishop, who ordayneth them, and to the
Church, in the which they are ordained: which oath, in regard it is perilous,
we all inhibit, and discharge it. 14. Bishops in visiting of their
Parishioners, let them not be chargeable unto them, but rather comfortable, by
preaching the Word, and by correcting things that are disordered. 15. It is
reported, that some Archdeacons use domination over the Presbyters, and take
tribute from them, which smells rather of tyranny, then of due order. For if
the Bishop should not use domination over the Clergy, but by examplars to
the flock, as the Apostle Peter writes: much less should these presume to
do any such like thing. 16. Like as in dedication of Churches, and for
receiving of orders, no money is received: even so, for buying of Balm to make
Chrisme, Presbyters (keepers of Chrisme) shall bestow no money: but Bishops,
of their own rents, shall furnish Baulme for the making of Chrisme, and
Lights to the Church. 17. It has been found in some places, that Presbyters
have paid 12. or 14. pennies in yearly tribute to the Bishop: which custom
we have ordained altogether to be abolished. 18. The receiving of paunds from
incestuous persons, and from men who pay not their Tithes, and from negligent
Presbyters, is forbidden, as a thing which opens a door to avarice: but
rather let Ecclesiastical discipline strike upon transgressors. 19. Let
people give their Tithes to those Churches wherein their children are baptized,
and whereunto they resort all the year long, to hear Church-seruice. 20. Let
peace be kept amongst all men, but in special betwixt Bishops and Countes;
whereby every one of them may mutually support another. 21. Civil Judges ought
to judge righteously, without exception of persons, and without receiving of
rewards: and let their Officiars, Vicars, and Centenaries, be righteous men:
least, by their avarice and greediness, the people be grieved, and
impouerished. And let the witnesses be of vnsuspect credit: for by false
witnesses the Country is greatly damnified. 22. The Abbots and Monks, in this
part of the Country, seeing they have addicted themselves to the Order of
Saint Benedict: let them endeavor to conform themselves unto his institution
and rules. 23. The ordination of Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferiors, is
to be made at a certain prescribed time. 24. Concerning Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, and Monks, who shall happen to be llaine, let the Emperor give
determination to whom the satisfacton of blood shall belong. 25. In many
places, the ancient custom of public repentance has ceased: neither is the
ancient custom of excommunication and reconciliation in use. Therefore, the
Emperor is to be entreated, that the ancient discipline may be restored
again, and they who sin publicly, may be brought to public repentance: and
every man, according as he deserves, may either be excommunicated, or
reconciled. 26. It is reported, that in some Churches there is contention and
strife for diuidng of Church rents: It is ordained, therefore, That no Mass
shall be said in those Churches, until they, who are at variance, be
reconciled again. 27. Neither the Sacrament of Baptism, nor the Sacrament of
Confirmation, should be reiterated. 28. Concerning the decrees of affinity,
and in what degree Marriage may be bound up, every man is sent to the Canons of
the Church to seek resolution. 29. Seeing that the man and the woman are
counted in Scripture as one flesh, their Parentage is to be reckoned by like
degrees in the matter of Marriage. 30. The Marriage of servants is not to be
dissolved which is bound up with consent of both their masters, every servant
remaining obedient to his own master. Note.
31. It is rumoured, that some women by negligence, and others fraudulently,
do present their own children to the Sacrament of Confirmation, to the end
they may be separated from the company of their husbands. Therefore, we
statute and ordain, that such women as either negligently or fraudulently
present their own children to the Sacrament of Confirmation, they shall be
compelled to do penance all the days of their life: neither shall they in any
wise be separated from their husbands. 32. Let a sinner confess unto his
Father-Confessor, all his sins which he has committed either in thought,
word, or deed: because that hatred, envy, and pride, are such pestilentious
botches of the soul: and the more secretly that they are couched, the more
periculously they hurt. 33. Sins should not only be confessed to God,
according to the example of David, who says, I will confess against my self
my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin,
Psalm. 32. verse. 5. But also we should confess our sins to our
Father-Confessor, according to the precept of the Apostle, Acknowledge your
faults one to another and pray one for another, that ye may be healed, I at.
5.16.34. In pre^^^ibing of penance, let favor and hatred of any person be
laid aside, and let the injunctions be given according to the rule of holy
Scripture, and according to the Canons and custom of the Church, following the
example of the Physicians of the body, who without exception of persons do
adhibit cuttings, burnings, and vehement remedies, to perilous diseases. 35.
Many in doing of penance, are not so desirous of remission of sins, as of the
accomplishment of the prescribed time of their humiliaon: and being forbidden
to eat flesh, or drink wine, they have the greater desire of other delicate
meats and drinks: but spiritual abstinence, which should be in penitent
persons, excludes all bodily delights. 36. Let no man sin of purpose, to
the end he may abolishe his sins by Almes-deedes: for that is all one as if
a man should hyre God to grant unto him a liberty to sin. 37. Seeing all
Canons of Councels are to be diligently read, in special such as appertain
unto faith, and reformation of manners, should be most frequently perused. 38.
Books, called Libelli Poenitentiales, are to abolished, because the erroures
of these Books are certain, howbeit the authors of them be uncertain: and
they prepare pillowes to lay under the heads of them, who are sleeping in
sin. 39. In the solemnities of the Mass, Prayers are to be made for the
souls of them who are departed, as well as for them who are alive. 40.
Presbyters, who are degraded, and live like seculare men, neglecting
repentance, whereby they might procure restitution to their office, let them be
excommunicated. 41. A Presbyter, who transporteth himself from his own place,
shall not be received in any other Church, except he prove, both with
witnesses and letters sealed with lead, and containing the name of the Bishop,
and of the City which he lived in, that he has lived innocently in his own
Church, and had a just cause of transportation. 42. Let no Church be committed
to a Presbyter, without consent of the Bishop. 43. In some places are found
Scots-men, who call themselves Bishops, and they ordain Presbyters and
Deacons, whose ordination we altogether disallowe. 44. Presbyters must not
drink in Tavernes, wander in Markets, nor go to visit Cities, without advise
of their Bishop. 45. Many both of the Clergy and Laickes, go^ to holy places,
such as Rome, and Turon: imagining, that by the sight of these places, their
sins are remitted: and not attending to the sentence of Jerome, It is a more
commendable thing to live well in Jerusalem, than to have seen Jerusalem.
46. In receiving the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, great
discretion is to be used: Neither let the taking of it be long differred,
because Christ says, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: Neither let us come without due
preparation, because the Apostle says, He who eats and dri^keth unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation. 47. The Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ which in one day is accustomed to be received of all Christians: let
no man neglect to receive it, except some grievous crime do hinder him from
receiving of it. 48. According to the precept of the Apostle James, Weak
persons should be anointed with oil by the Elders, ( which oil is blessed by
the Bishop) these words enclosed in a parenthesis are added to the Text: for he
says, Is any man sick amongst you, let him call for the Elders of the Church,
and let them pray for him, and anoint him with oil, in the Name of the Lord:
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up:
And if he have committed sin, it shall be forgiven him, I am. cap. 5. verse.
14.15. Such a medicine as cures both bodily and spiritual maledies is not to
be neglected. 49. In the Council of Laodicea it was forbidden, that Masses
should be said, and Oblations offered by Bishops, or Presbyters, in private
houses. This question also was disputed in this Council. 50. The authority of
the Emperor, is to be interponed for reverent keeping of the Lords day. 51.
Because the Church is constituted of persons of diverse conditions, some are
Noble, others are ignoble, some are servants, vassalles, strangers, etc. It
becomes them who are in eminent rowmes, to deal mercifully with their
inferiors, knowing that they are their brethren, because God is one common
Father to both, and the Church is one common mother to both. From the 52. Canon
unto the 66. are contained precepts of chaste and honest living prescribed to
Prioresses and Nuns. which I ouer-passe, as I have done in the preceding
Councels. 66. It is ordained, that prayers and supplications shall be made for
the Emperor and his children, and for their welfare both in soul and body.
67. These things have we touched shortly, to be exhibited to our Sovereign
Lord the Emperor. He who desires a more ample declaration of all virtues to
be followed, and vices to be eschewed, let him read the volume of the holy
Scriptures of God.

IN the same year of our Lord, The Councel^ of Arles.
wherein the preceding four Councels were conueened, and by the mandate of the
Emperor Charles the Great, another Council was conneened at Arles. The Canons
of this Council were in number. 25.

1. They set down a Confession of their Faith. 2. They ordain, That Prayers
shall be made for the Emperor, and his children. 3. They admonish Bishops and
Pastors diligently to read the books of holy Scripture: To teach the Lords
people in all truth: and, To administrate the Sacraments rightly. 4. Laick
people are admonished, not to remove their Presbyters from their Churches,
without consent of their Bishops. 5. That Presbyters be not admitted for
rewards. 6. It is ordained, That Bishops shall attend, that every person live
ordinately: that is, according to a prescribed rule. The 7. and 8. Canons
belong to the ordering of Monks and Nuns. The 9. Canon pertains to the
payment of Tithes, and first fruits. 10. It is ordained, That Presbyters shall
preach the word of God, not only in Cities, but also in every Parochin. 11.
Incestuous copulations are to be v^terly abhor^ed. 12. Peace is to blee^ kep^
with all men, according to the words of the Apostle, Follow peace, and
sanctification, without the^ which no man shall see God, Heb. cap. 12. verse.
14.1^. Let Lords, Judges, and the rest of the people, be obedient to their
Bishop: and let (...) judg^ment be used: and no bribes received, nor false
testimony be admitted. 14. In time of Famine, let every man support the
necessity of his own. 15. Let all weightes and measures be equal and just.
16. Let the Sabbath day be kept holy, without Markets, Justice Courts, and
servile labor. 17. Let every Bishop visit his bounds once in the year: and
if he find the poor to be oppressed by the violence of the mighty, then let
the Bishop with wholesome admonitions, exhort them to desist from such
oppression: and in case they will not desist from their violence, then let the
Bishop bring the cause to the ears of the Prince. 18. Let Presbyters keep the
Chrisme, Note.
and give it to no man, under pretense of Medicine. 19. Parents and Witnesses,
shall bring up baptized children in the knowledge of God, because God has
given them unto Parents, and Witnesses have pawned their word for their faith.
20. Ancient Churches shall not be deprived of Tithes, nor of none other
possession. 21. That the constitution of ancient Fathers shall be kept
concerning Burial in Churches. 22. Civil Iudgment-seates shall not be in
Churches. 23. The goods belonging unto the poor, if they be bought, let it
be done openly in sight of the Nobles and Judges of the City. 24. Let
fugitive Presbyters and Churchmen be inquired, and sent back again unto
their Bishop. 25. He who has a benefice bestowed upon him, for helping the
fabric of Churches, let him support the building of them. 26. They who sin
publickely, let them make their public repentance, according to the Canons.
These things have we shortly touched, to be presented unto our Lord the
Emperor, and to be corrected by his Highness wisdom.

The eight general Council.
IN the year of our Lord, ^^^. and in the third year of the reign of
Basilius, Emperor of the East: and under the reign of Lewis the second
Emperor of the West^ the Ambassadors of Pope Adrian the second came to
Constantinople. Basilius the Emperor: gathered a Council against Photius, the
Patriarch of Constantinople. In this Council great policy was used, to have
all things framed to the contentment of Adrian Bishop of Rome: For no man was
admitted to the Council, except only they who had subscribed the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, above all other Bishops. They who refused to subscribe the
fore-saide supremacy, were contemptuously reject^d, and not admitted to the
Council. So did the authority of the Bishop of Rome proceed to further
grouth, by flattering of Basilius, who slew his associate Michael: as it was
founded in the flattery of Bonifacius the third, who flattered that vile
murderer Phocas, who slew his master Mauritius. In this Council Photius was
deposed and excommunicated, and his books which he wrote against the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome were commanded to be burnt. Photius was
accused for this, that he had accepted the office of a Bishop, before he he
received other Ecclesiastical orders. Photius alleadg^d, that this was no
sufficient cause of deposition, in respect that Ambrose, Bishop of Millan;
Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople; and of late days Tarasius; with consent
of the Bishop of Rome; of Laickes were made Bishops. The Ambassadors of Pope
Adrian the second answered, that Ambrose was endewed with extraordinary
gifts, Nectarius was called at an extraordinary time, to wit, when heresy
was so ouerspred, that it was an hard thing to find out a man who was not
spotted with heresy: and concerning the advancement of Tarasius to be Bishop
of Constantinople, to whose admission Adrian the first gave consent, they
answered, That it was done for a special cause, in regard he was a zealous
maintainer of the adoration of Images. This answer declares, that in case
Photius also had been a zealous maintainer of the adoration of Images, the
Roman Bishop and his Ambassadors could have dispensed with the want of
Ecclesiastical orders preceding his admission to his Bishopric, as they did
in the person of Tarasius.

In this Council also the Ambassadoures of Adrian, magnifying the authority of
the Pope, affirmed, that the Bishop of Rome might judge of the actions of all
other Bishops: but no man might judge of him. And albeit the Oriental Bishops
in the sixth General Council, cursed Pope Honorius after his death: yet it is
to be marked (say they) that he was accused of heresy: And in this case only
it is lawful for inferiors to resist their superiors, and to disclaim their
perverse opinions. In this point, also they said, That none of the Patriarchs
and Bishops proceeded against the defunct Bishop of Rome, Hist. Magd. cent. 9
cap. 9. Cara^za de Co^cil^^s.
without the consent of the Roman Chair going before them. Now observe (good
Reader) with what fidelity Onuphrius defends the name of Honorius the first:
as free of all suspicion of heresy: when as the Ambassadors of Adrian the
second, for very shame durst not presume to do it.

More-ouer, the worshipping of Images in this Council got a new allowance
again, and it was commanded, That the image of Christ should be holden in no
less reverence than the books of the Gospel.

The Bulgarians also were made subject to the Roman Bishop. And Ignatius
Patriarch of Constantinople, in regard he was restored to his place again by
the means of the Bishop of Rome, he made no opposition to the contrary.
Nevertheless, this alteration continued but short time: for the Bulgarians
drove out of their bounds the Latin Priests, and were served with Greek
Priests again.

Diverse Canons were constituted in this Counsel, but so coincident with the
Canons of other Councels, that it is a superfluous thing to make a rehearsal
of them. In the subscription of the Acts of the Council, great controversy
fell out: for the Grecians could not abide the name of Ludouicke, Emp. of the
We^, because they thought, that the honorable name of an Emp. only belonged to
their own Sovereign Lord, who was Emp. of Constantinople. More*ouer, a number
of them came to the Emp. Basilius, and requested him, that their subscriptions
might be redeliuered unto them again, wherein they had subscribed to the
supremacy of the Roman Bishop, or else the Church of Constantinople would be
in perpetual subjection to the chair of Rome. These subscriptions afore-sayd
were restored again, but with great difficulty.

CAarolus Caluus convocated a Council in France, The Council of Acciniacu^.
at Acciniacum, consisting of ten Bishops. The Bishops of Lions, Vason, and
Trier, were chief Presidents in the Council. Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes,
accused in this convention his own nephew, Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum, as a
man disobedient to his Metropolitan, and a man who for private injuries had
excommunicated all the Presbyters of his Church, debarring them from saying
mass, baptizing Infants, absolving of Penitents, and burying of the dead. And
Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, proponed unto the Council, 50. Canons, which he
desired to be read, in the Synod: and they allowed all the Canons written by
the Bishop of Rhemes. Also, they condemned Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum, of
petulancy, and compelled him to subscribe obedience to Charles his King, and to
his Metropolitan: he was also deprived of his office, and his eyes were thrust
out. But Pope John the ninth, under the reign of Carolus Crassus, Hist. Magd.
cent. 9. cap. 9.
restored him to his office again, being the more affectioned unto him,
because he had appealed from his own Bishop, and from the decree of a Synod
in his own country, to be judged by the chair of Rome.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Triburium, or Strasburg.
899. and in the eight year of the reign of the Emperor Arnulphus, in the
Town of Triburium, twenty and two Bishops of Germany, were assembled, who made
many constitutions, a great number whereof, Caranza is compelled to over-passe
with silence, lest he should make a superfluous repetition of Canons mentioned
before.

First, it was concluded in this Council, that excommunicate persons, if they
repent not, are to be subdued by the Emperor. Canon 10. That a Bishop shall
not be deposed, before his cause be judged by twelve Bishops: and a Presbyter
by six Bishops: and a Deacon by three Bishops. 11. A Churchman, who
commits slaughter, shall be deposed, albeit he has been enforced unto
it. 12. Baptism shall not be ministered, except at Easter and Whitsunday,
without necessity require. 13. Tithes are to be paid for the sustentation of
the Ministry, the support of the poor, and the fabric of the Church. 15.
Let men's bodies be buried in that Parish, unto the which they paid their
tithes. 16. No burial place shall be sold for money. 17. Let Laicke people be
buried in the Churchyard, not in the Church: but if they be buried already,
let not their bodies be remooved. 18. The vessels wherein holy mysteries are
celebrated, are Challices and Platters: whereof Saint Bonifacius, a Bishop and
Martyr, being demanded, if it was lawful to celebrate the Sacrament in vessels
of wood? He answered, that of old there were golden Bishops, and wooden
vessels: but now by the contrary, says he; the Bishops are wooden Bishops,
and the vessels are vessels of gold. And Sepherinus ministered the Sacrament in
vessels of glass. Nevertheless, this Council straightly inhibiteth the
Sacrament to be consecrated in vessels of wood. 19. Let not wine without water
be offered in the holy Challic^, because both blood and water flowed out of the
side of Christ. 20. Priests are shaven, to the end they may carry upon their
heads a similitude of the crown (to wit, of thorns, wherewith the Lord was
crowned) who is their lot and portion. 21. Let not Presbyters, who are called
before Iustice-seats, be compelled to swear, but let them be put in
rememberance of their holy consecration, in stead of an oath. 22. The trial of
persons defamed, by the burning iron is ceased: but let no man give out rash
judgment in secret matters. 27. They who have undertaken a spiritual office,
should not go to war-fare, nor accept upon them civil offices, according to
the seventh Canon, of the Council of Chalcedon. 31. A these, or a robber, who
is slain in the perpetration of his diabolical fact, let no man pray for his
soul, nor distribute alms for his relief. 35. Let no iustice-Courts be
holden on the Lords day, neither of Festival nor Fasting days. 39. A man who
marries a woman of a strange country, but not of a strange religion, shall
be compelled to cohabite with her. 40. It shall not be lawful for a man to
marry a woman whom he has polluted in adultery, during her husbands
lifetime. 45. He who has defiled two sisters, let him be subject to penance
all his days, and remain continent. 46. A woman that has committed adultery,
and for fear of her husband, who pursues her unto the death, she flees unto
Bishops to seek relief: let them travel seriously for the safety of her
her life: and if that can be obtained, let her be restored to her husband
again: but if that cannot be obtained, let her not be restored: but her
husband during his lifetime, shall not marry another. 54. A form of
external repentance is prescribed to them, who of precogitate malice, and of
purpose, have committed slaughter.

CENTVRIE X.
The Council of Ravenna.
IN the year of our Lord, 903. a Council was convened at Ravenna, of 74.
Bishops. It seems to be assembled by John the tenth, whereat was present
Carolus Simplex, the King of France. In this Council the acts of Pope Formosus
had allowance, and the Decrees of Stephanus the sixth were condemned and burnt.

The Council of Rhemes.
Under the reign of Carolus Simplex, King of France, a Council was gathered at
Rhemes apparently (for the place is not certain) for correcting the abuse of
Churchrents. Noblemen in Court, such as Hugo, and his brother Robert, Master of
the Kings horses, and Vinemarus, with diverse others, under pretense of
sustayning the Kings honorable estate, and paying wages to soldiers, had
converted to their own use, a great part of Church-rents, especially,
belonging to Abbeys. Fulco Archbishop of Rhemes, uttered his mind freely in
the Council. Vinemarus one of the notable oppressors in the Court, defiled the
Council with blood, and killed Fulco Bishop of Rhemes. The Fathers of the
Council returned unto their own Churches with great fear: for the like of
this was not heard, since the second Council of Ephesus, called (...), that
is, a Council of briggandrie, because in it, Flavianus Bishop of
Constantinople, was slain.

The Council of Rome.
IN the days of Otto the first, a great Council was assembled at Rome, against
Pope John the thirteenth, or as others do reckon, Pope John the twelfth. The
principal faults wherewith he was charged, besides perfidiousnes objected
against him by the Emp. were these following, to wit:

1. Peter a Cardinal Presbyter, affirmed he saw him say mass, and
communicated not himself. 2. John Bishop Narrien, and John a Cardinal
Deacon, affirmed they saw him ordain a Deacon in an horse-stable. 3.
Benedictus with the rest of Deacons, and Presbyters, affirmed he received money
for the ordination of Bishops. 4. Likewise they said, albeit they saw it not
with their eyes, yet they were fully persuaded, that he accompanied with the
widow of Rainer, and with Stephana his Fathers Concubine: and that he made the
sacred Palace like unto a bawdy house. 5. That he was an open hunter. 6. That
he thrust out the eyes of Benedict his spiritual Father, and by so doing
procured his death. 7. That he had gelded John an Archdeacon, raised fire, and
clothed himself with armor in military manner. 8. That he did drink to the
devil, all the Clergy bare witness. 9. And that in playing at dice, he
craved the help of Jupiter, and Venus, and the rest of the gods of the
Gentiles, whom the Apostle Paul calls devils. 10. That he said not Mattins,
nor kept his Canonicke hours, nor signed himself with the sign of the
Cross. 11. That he distributed the golden crosses and chalices of the Church,
to his harlots. 12. That he had consecrated one Zacheus a wicked man, and
unlearned, to be Bishop to the Hungars: to the end, Luitprond. hist. l. 6. c.
6, and 7.
that by his seditious Sermons he might concitate them against the Emperor.
Concerning the letter written to Pope John, by advice of the Emperor Otto,
and his proud answer sent back again to the Council, together with their
last good night to him, granting to him such power of binding as Judas had,
that is, to bind his own neck to the Gallows. Of these things I have spoken
in the Treatise of Succession.

The Council of Canterbury in England.
IN the year of our Lord, 975. a Council was gathered in England, at
Canterbury. The question debated in the Council, was concerning the marriage
of men in spiritual offices. Dunstanus at this time was Bishop of Canterbury,
and he was an adversary to the marriage of men in spiritual offices. But the
question was so well discussed by testimonies of Scripture, and the Fathers of
the Primitive Church, that Dunstanus had cause to be ashamed. For this cause
he implored the help of the Devil: for he was known to be a Sorcerer. Satan
compelled him to persist in his argument. And when they were convened again,
and in the heat of their disputation, a voice sounded from the Image of the
Crucifix (which was in the place of their convention) that Dunstanus his
opinion was the best.

This lying miracle so dashed the multitude of simple and ignorant Priests,
Hist. Magd. cent. 10. cap. 9.
that they thought it to be the Oracle of God; but in their next meeting
Falthodus, whom others call Ethelredus, a learned man of Scotland, so evidently
by testimonies of Scriptures, and Fathers, prooved that marriage was a thing
lawful to men in spiritual offices, that the answer which came from the
Crucifix, was counted the answer of the Devil, whom Dunstanus served, because
Christ would speak nothing repugnant to his own Word.

The Council of Constantinople.
Under the reign of Nicephorus Phocas, Emperor of Constantinople, and when
Polyeuchus was Patriarch, the Emperor assembled a Council at Constantinople.
The question disputed in the Council, was this. Nicephorus having obtained the
dominion of the East, took to wife Theophania, the relict of Romanus his
predecessor. This matter so displeased the Patriarch Polyeuchus, that he
debarred the Emperor Nicephorus from holy things, pretending these two causes:
First, because the Emperor had celebrated the second marriage. Secondly,
because Nicephorus had been witness in Baptism, to the children of
Theophania. This question being discussed in the Council, in presence both of
Prelates and Counselors, the Emperors marriage was allowed, and the acts
alleged by Polyeuchus was counted impious, and made by Capronimus, and that
they had no force to hinder the marriage. The proud Patriarch when he was
overthrown by reason, armed himself with obstinacy and stiff neckednesse,
until Bardas the Emperors father came to him, and affirmed by an oath, that
Nicephorus the Emperor was not witness in Baptism to the children of
Theophania. Thus were the Patriarchs of the East, serious in observing the
traditions of men, but remiss and negligent in observing the ordinances of
God. And this is a sure testimony, that defection from the faith had now
prevayled, both in the west and East.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Rhemes, against Arnulphus.
992. in the ninth year of the Emperor Otto, and in the fourth year of Hugo
Capeto, King of France, a Council was gathered at Rhemes, against Arnulphus
Bishop of Rhemes. His handwriting was produced, wherein he did bind himself
to be obedient to Hugo Capeto, King of France; and never to come in the
contrary, under pain of infamy, and perpetual malediction. Notwithstanding,
he had countenanced Duke Charles, who claimed the right of the kingdom, as
nearest heir thereto, being the brother of Lotharius. To Duke Charles,
Arnulphus had opened the ports of the town of Rhemes, and made him Commander
of the city. Great disputation was in the Council concerning Arnulphus. His
friends would have had this cause remitted to the judgment of the Bishop of
Rome. But many of the Bishops of France, mightily opponed to the contrary. The
discourse is very prolix, but the pains of reading is well recompensed with
the fruitfulness of the disputation. This Council took this end, Arnulphus
confessed his fault, denuded himself of his Episcopal honor, and Gilbertus,
who had been instructor of Robert the Kings son, was placed in his room.
Likewise, Arnulphus was sent to Orlience to be imprisoned there, together with
Siguinus Archbishop of Senon, because he consented not freely to the
deposition of Arnulphus, but thought that this matter was overswayed by the
tyranny of Courtiers, and usurpers of the kingdom unlawfully.

Another Council at Rhemes, restoring Arnulphus.
When the deposition of Arnulphus was reported at Rome, John the thirteenth,
was moved with great wrath, and incontinent, excommunicated all those Bishops
of France, who had consented to the deposition of Arnulphus. In so doing Pope
John kept the accustomed order of the Roman Church, to wit, to pronounce a
sentence before a lawful cognition, and trial of the cause. Also he sent an
Abbot called Leo, furnished with the authority of the Roman chair, to appoint
a new Council at Rhemes. Hugo King of France, was somewhat terrified with the
cursing of the Bishop of Rome, and feared to oppose himself to so many
bishops, agreeing in one mind: and therefore he suffered the council to hold
forward. The conclusion of this Council was, that Arnulphus was restored to
his former dignity. And left that either the Emperor Otto, or Hugo Capeto,
should be offended, Gilbertus was promoted to be Bishop of Ravenna.

CENTVRIE XI.
IN the year of our Lord 1026. and under the reign of the Emp. Henry the
second, a Council was assembled at Aken, by the authority of the Emperor; who
seeing the wrath of God kindled against the word, and manifold tokens of the
anger of God manifested in the Calamities hanging upon the head of all people
and nations, he gathered this Council: By the authority whereof Priests were
commanded to pacify the wrath of God by frequent saying of mass; the people,
by fasting and abstinence; and Princes by distributing of alms to reconcile
themselves to God. The Doctrine of repetance and amendment of life, was
forgotten in this time of horrible ignorance; and all religion was turned into
outward exercises of fasting; of distributing of alms; and of saying of
Masses. Also new fasting days were enjoined to be kept in most solemn manner
to the honor of John the Baptist and S. Laurence; Mat. 15.
so that by a multitude of human traditions, daily increased; the ordinance of
God (as Christ witnesses) was made null and of no effect.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Halignustat.
1023. and in the 21. year of the reign of the Emp. Henry 2. a Council was
assembled at Halignustat, wherein Harido Bishop of Mentz, was moderator; and
great pains were taken to make a conformity and unity in observation of
superstitious rites in Germany, such as statut times of fasting, and
abstinence from marriage at certain times of the year, and not casting of the
corporal into the fire to quench the fire kindled in a town, which was the
custom of foolish Priests at that time; and that no sword should be brought
into the Church except the Kings sword; and no meetings or confabulations
should be in the Church or the poarch thereof, and that women should not be
addicted to particular and select Masses, such as the Mass of the Trinity and
Saint Michael; but let them hear common Masses for the safety of the quick
and the dead. Also Laws were made in this Council concerning the reckoning of
the degrees of consanguinitie, and that no man should journey to Rome for
obtaining pardon for great sins, before he had first confessed himself to
his own Priest; and fulfilled the penance prescribed by him, with many other
constitutions, full of new invented superstition.

The Council of Triburia.
IN the year of our Lord 1030. and under the reign of the Emperor Conrad the
second: a Council was assembled at Triburia. The Emperor was present at the
Council. After some constitutions about fasting, one arose, and said that
certain Epistles were come from heaven concerning peace to be renewed on earth,
and he was commanded to write a coppie of these Epistles to be communicate to
other Bishops, to the end that nations and people might observe these new
laws following.

New laws.
1. That no man should wear armoure. 2. That no man should seek restitution of
things taken from him. 3. That no man should revenge the wrongs, done to his
blood and kindred. 4. That men should be compelled, to pardon them who smote
them. 5. That every Friday, a fasting shall be kept with bread and water. 6.
That on Saturday, there should be an abstinence from flesh and fat things. 7.
That men should content themselves with this kind of fasting for remission of
all their sins, so that they need none other kind of repentance.
That all men should be bound by an oath to observe these new laws, and they
who refused to swear obedience to these ordinances should be separated from
the Church, and they should neither be visited when they were sick, Hist.
Magd. cent. 11 cap. 9.
nor buried when they were dead.

These new laws which came not from heaven, but from the instinct of an evil
spirit, many were content to receive. Others who were of more sound judgment
specially the B. of Cambry, rejected them as repugnant, most part, to the word
of God, to the co^stitutions of the Church, to the peace of wel-ordered
commonwealths, and to charity. Always consider that this was a time of
horrible darkness and ignorance, wherein any durst affirm in face of a
Council, that such laws came from heaven, as were flatly repugnant to the
written word of God.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Sutrium.
1046. and under the reign of the Emperor Henry the third, an assembly was
gathered by the Emperor at Sutrium a town of Italy, for pacefying an
horrible schism in the Roman Church: for three Popes contended for the
Popedom, to wit, Benedict the ninth, Silvester the third, and Gregory the
sixth; when the fathers had conueened at Sutrium, and the Emperor had
considered the causes of the scisme, and the ambition of Prelates striving for
superiority, they thought expedient to remove all these three monsters, and to
choose one Sindigerus Bishop of Bamberg to be Pope, whom they called Clemens
the second. Moreover the Emperor did bind the Romans with an oath, Contract.
Vspergens. Platina.
that they should in time to come abstain from the election of the Pope.

ABout the year of our Lord, A Council at Rome against Berengarius.
1050. Leo the ninth assembled a Council at Rome against Berengarius Deacon at
Angiers; upon this occasion was the Council gathered. Berengarius saw that the
opinion of Transubstantiation was ouerspred in his time, to wit, that after the
words of consecration the substance of bread evanished, and the substance of
the body and blood of Christ was in the Sacrament, under the accidents of bread
and wine; which opinion he disaproued, and followed rather the opinion of
Augustine, and Ioannes Scotus, about the Sacrament of the supper. He writ also
letters to Lanfrancus B. of Canterbury about this question. The Messenger who
carried the letters did not find Lanfrancus in Normandy whether he was
directed. Therefore he deliuethe letters to some of the Clergy, who opened the
letters of Berengarius and sent them to Pope Leo the ninth. After the sight
whereof he assembled a Council at Rome, and read the letters of Berengarius,
and condemned him (though absent) as an heretic.

A Council at Vercellis against Berengarius.
LEo the ninth, assembled another Council at Vercellis against Berengarius, in
the month of September, of the year of our Lord, 1050, so that both these
Councels were holden in one year, against Berengarius. Berengarius was warned
to be present at the Council. Lanfrancus Bishop of Canterbury was also
present. In Berengarius name compeared two of the Clergy, who were taken and
cast into prison. The issue of the Council was this. The Books, of Ioannes
Melrosius Scotus de eucharistia, were read in the Council and condemned. Leo
likewise appointed in many Provinces, Synods to be assembled against
Berengarius, notwithstanding he persisted constantly in his opinion, until the
days of Pope Nicolaus the second.

A Council at Towrs against Berengarius.
IN the year of our Lord, 1055. Pope Victor the second, assembled a Council at
Towrs against Berengarius. The Popes Ambassadors were present at the Council,
and Berengarius answered that he adhered to no particular opinion of his own,
but he followed the Common doctrine of the universal Church, and that he
would not be contentious. This gentle answer mitigated the kindled affections
of his Adversaries, yet he persisted in his own opinion, and for this cause
Lanfrancus objected against him that he deluded the Council of Towrs with
general and doubtsome words.

Another Counsel at Rome against Berengarius.
IN the year of our Lord, 1059. Pope Nicolaus 2. assembled a great Council at
Rome of 100. and 13. B. Berengarius was present at the Council. Berengarius
through infirmity, submitted himself to be corrected by Pope Nicolaus 2. and
the Council. They prescribed to him a form of renounciatio^ of his error as
they called it, which Berengarius accepted and reca^ted. Notwithstanding
afterward he published in writing a refutatio^ of the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and damned his own recantation. Many other constitutions
were made in this Council, such as, that the election of the Pope should belong
to the College of Cardinals; that no man should hear a Mass said by a
married Priest; that no Laick person should be judge to a man in a spiritual
office; that no person should marry, any of his own consanguinitie, until
the seventh generation; with many other foolish constitutions.

IN the year of our Lord 1060. as appears, The Council of Millan.
Pope Nicholaus the second, sent Petrus Damianus to hold a Council in his name
at Millan. The questions disputed in the Council were two chiefly, to wit,
about Simonie, and the error of the Nicolaitans. It was accounted Simonie to
receive investment by staff and ringe from a secular man. It was counted the
error of the Nicolaitans when Priests married wives. And Damianus to bring
such marriages under the Compass of Heresy, he said that faults in manners,
if they were obstinatlie de^^nded they became Heresies. But suppose this was
true (as it is a false definition) how can it be called the heresy of the
Nicolaitans, seeing that Nicolaitans were not called Heretics in respect they
had wives, but in respect they made their wives common, as I have declared in
the first Centurie. The issue of this Council was, that the whole Town of
Millan both Clergy and people, was in an uproar, complaining that the Town
wherein Ambrose was Bishop should be brought in subjection to the Ordinances,
of any other Church. Damianus was in great fear to be rent in pieces, albeit
the Archbishop of Millan was sitting at his one side, and the Bishop of Luca
at his other. After that the tumult was pacified Damianus did speak unto the
Clergy and people, many things concerning the prerogative of the Chair of
Rome, and the Bishop of Millan standing before the Altar, did swear that he
should be obedient to the ordinances of the Roman Church, in extirping the
heresy of Simonie and of the Nicolaitans, and many of the Clergy following
his example did the like, and were content like inconstant fools to receive
penance for cohabitation with their own lawful wifes.

The Council of Mantua.
IN the year of our Lord 1066. The Emperor Henry the fourth assembled a
Council at Mantua, for pacifiing the scisme of the Roman Church which arose
between Alexander the second, and Candalus, who was called Honorius 2. They
contended one against another, with armoure, violence, shedding of blood, and
cursings. For Alexander conueened them who were of his faction at Rome, and
delivered Honorius to the Devil, as an ambitious and bloody man. On the other
part Honorius assembled his favorers at Parma, and cursed Alexander, because
he bought the Popedom by money from the Romans, and because he accepted the
Popedom without the foreknowledge and consent of the Emperor. For pacifying
of the outrage of these Roman vultures; the Emperor appointed a Council to be
assembled at Mantua, wherein Alexander was declared to be Pope, Candalus had
pardon, and Gilbertus by whose Council Candalus accepted the Popedom, was
made Archbishop of Rauenna.

1. In this Council, it was ordained that no man should hear Mass said by a
Priest who had a concubine. 2. The sons of Priests may be accepted to Church
orders; providing the authority of the Pope be interponed to give allowance
thereto. 3. He who is admitted to a Church-office, willingly and wittingly, by
a Simoniake person; shall be removed from his Order. 4. Monks destinat for
monastery, shall not be admitted to offices in the Clergy. 5. Members of the
Clergy shall not accept Ecclesiastical benefices from Laicke persons. 6. No
Ecclesiastical office or benefice shall be sold for money, but freely given
to them who are learned and godly. 7. No person excommunicat, shall have power
to excommunicate others.
POpe Alexander the second sent two Cardinals to England to pacify the
troubled estate of the Church: The Council of Wintomi^ in England.
there they conueened a Council at Winchester, wherein they deposed certain
Bishops and Abbots from their offices; and namely Stigandus Bishop of
Canterbury. Against whom these crimes were objected. First that he had
possessed the chair of Canterbury, Robert Archbishop thereof being alive.
Likewise that he possessed another Bishopric with it, as namely the
Bishoppricke of Winchester, and thirdly that he had received his pallium from
Benedict the tenth, a man unlawfully elected, and rejected by fathers.

THe Emperor Henry the fourth was young when his father died, Another Counsel
of Triburia or Friburg.
and it was couenanted amongst the Princes and Bishops of Germany, that during
the minority of the Emperor Henry, the Princes and Bishops by course should
attend upon the young Emperor, and should govern the estate of the country.
The Archbishop of Breme when he had ended his course, he gave not place to
others as it was couenanted, but insinuated himself into the favor of the
young king, by giving him Liberty to live according to all the youthly conceits
of his own heart. The rest of the Princes and Bishops were offended at this
imperious carriage of the Archbishop of Breme, and they assembled themselfes in
Triburia, which in our days is called Friburg. In this Council it was decreed
that the Bishop of Breme should be declared to be an enemy to the country,
except he delivered the king to be brought up according to the covenant
aforesaid.

IN the year of our Lord 1069. a Council was assembled at Mentz upon this
occasion. The Council of Mentz.
The Emperor Henry the fourth disliked his wife, and dealt secretly with the
Bishop of Mentz for divorcement from her, promising to be addicted to his
Council, and to interpose his authority to bring the people of Turingia under
the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Mentz; and to compel them to pay tithes unto
him. The Emperor Henry could not blame his wife of any fault. Only he carried
no good liking toward her, when the Counsel was conueened at Mentz. Petrus
Damianus came Ambassador from the Pope, and by many arguments dissuaded the
Emperor from the intended diuorcement. It agreed not with human laws, not
with the constitutions of the Church, nor with the Emperors honor, and it
would raise a great scandal in the Church. And it was the Emperors duty to
punish such faults in others, but not to give them example of sin in his own
person. Finally if the Emp. would not obey wholesome admonition, he had power
to use the Censurs of the Church against him, and to withhold him from the
honor of his coronation. The issue of the Council was this, the Emp. desisted
from his purpose of diuorcement, and honored his Lady with ornaments agreeing
to her Princely estate, but cohabited not lovingly with her.

The Council of Ersurd.
IN the year of the Lord, 1974. Gregory the seventh otherwise called
Hildebrand; having already prepared a way to execute Antichristian pride in
Councels of Millan and Mantua, before he was authorized Pope. Now in his
Popedom he begins to execute those unhappy decrees of Millan and Mantua.
And he commands the Bishop of Mentz to separat the Priests of his bounds
from their wifes, or else to depose them from their offices. The Bishop of
Mentz willing to obey the Popes commandment assembled a Council at Ersurd,
wherein he declared what commandment he had received. On the other part
married Priests said they had liberty to marry by the written word of God, and
in doing so, they followed the example of the men of God, and fathers of the
Church. Thirdly they confirmed by many reasons that it was lavefull to marry,
specially for avoiding fornication, and that it was an ancient custom in the
Church that men of spiritual offices married, wives. Finally, with humble
supplications and requests, they entreated the Bishop of Mentz, that he
would not separate them from the company of their loving wives, and dear
beloved children. But all these reasons and supplications mixed with tears,
prevailed nothing at the Bishops hand, because he said, a necessity was laid
upon him, to obey the Popes commandment. The married Priests arose, and
departed out of the Council, and consulted amongst themselves, what was
meetest to be done: Some of them thought it expedient to depart from the
Council, and not to return to it again. Others thought it better to return
to the Council again, and to put hands on the Bishop and spoil him of his
life, before he could promulgate the prohibition of marriage, which the
Apostle calls the doctrine of devils. 1 Timothy 4.
The Bishop being advertised of this conspiracy against his life, resolved with
faultering words, to mitigate their wrath, promising to write to the Pope, to
abstain from imposing such hard conditions to married Priests: so was their
fury assuaged. This tumult was scarce pacified, when another greater arose. The
avaritious Bishop exacted tithes from the people of Turingia, besides the
covenant that had past between him and them at Gerstundun, after great
contentention and effusion of blood: yet the Bishop overpassing the covenant,
claymed rigourously more then was covenanted. The people of Turingia being
enraged, were purposed to have revenged the injuries, which this avaritious
Prelate had done unto them, with shedding of his blood: and the fervent heat
of their rage was so great, that all the Bishops and members of the Clergy,
who were assessors to the Archbishop of Mentz, departed from him, fearing the
rage of commoued people.

This Council began with pride, and ended with fury and tumult. The Bishop of
Mentz in great wrath departed to Helegenstad, because he could hardly digest
the repulse which he gat in the Council.

Another Council at Mentz.
IN the year of our Lord, 1075. in the month of October, a Council was
assembled at Mentz, wherein the Bishop of Chur, as Ambassador from the Pope,
Gregory the seventh, was present; and straightly commanded the Bishop of Mentz
under pain of deposition from his prelacie, to proceed against married
Priests, according to the Popes commandment. The Bishop terrified with the
Popes threatening, convened a Synod at Mentz. The married Priests finding that
the Bishop again was willing to execute the Popes ungodly commandment, they
left supplications, which they had used in the Council of Erfurde, and with
their hands, and a vehement commotion of their bodies, so terrified the Bishop
of Mentz, and the Popes Ambassador, that they were glad by flying to escape
the danger of their life. Not daring to assemble any mo Councels, to that
effect.

The Council of Worms.
AFter this, Pope Hildebrand in the lofty conceits of his proud and
Antichristian heart, intended to gather a Council at Rome, in the time of Lent.
And he gave warning to the Emperor to compeare before him, and to answer to
such things as had bin objected against him. The Emperor thought it no time to
slumber nor sleep, when this seditious Pope threatened to cut him off from the
body of the Church, if he did not compeare before his Iudgement-seat.
Therefore the Emperor assembled all the Bishops of his kingdom, to the number
of 24. in the town of Worms: Many Abbots also were present. The question
entreated in this Council, was concerning the deposition of Pope Hildebrand.
As they were devising concerning this purpose in the Council, Hugo Blancus, a
Cardinal came from Rome, with letters from the Popes enemies, with many
accusations against him. These were read openly in the Council, Hildebrand was
accused of perjury, and ambition, of avarice, and of pride: and they desired
that Hildebrand might be displaced, and another seated in his room. The
determination of the Council was this, that Hildebrand, who called himself
Gregory the seventh, a forclopen Monk, an usurper of the Popedom, without
consent of the Emperor, and against his oath, a false interpreter and wrester
of holy Scripture, a renter of unity, a man who mixed all divine and humane
things so together, that he polluted them both, a man who heard the false
accusations of ungodly people, who in one cause would be an accuser, a
witness, a Judge, and an enemy: who separated husbands from their wives, and
preferred whoredom to lawful marriage: who stirred up the people against
their Bishops, and teachers: who counted no man consecrated lawfully, except
he had bought his Prelacie from his dependers, and begged it from himself, a
seeker of popular applause, and a deceiver of the people, under color of
religion ^ a man who like to Decius, and the rest of the persecuting Emperors,
and worshippers of false gods, usurped both Empire and the Priesthood.

For all these forementioned causes, the holy Emperor, the Bishops, and
Senators, and Christian people assembled with them, decerned that Hildebrand
should be removed from the Popedom, and that the sheep of Christ should not
be committed to a Wolf. This decree was subscribed by all the Bishops, who
were present at the Council.

IN the year of our Lord, Another Council at Triburia.
1076. another Council was assembled at Triburia. The Princes of Saxony and
Sweue, came to the Council with obstinate minds, setting their whole
endeavors against the Emperor, Henry the fourth. He approached near to the
town, but the river of Rhene was interiected between them. The Emperor in
all submissiue manner, promised to amend all the faults whereof they
complained. But their hearts being possessed with a superstitious favor to the
chair of Rome, and being inclinable to sedition and alteration of the State:
they returned a very hard answer to the Emperor, wherein they made a
commemoration of all his youthly infirmities, and how their expectation of his
amendment, had oftentimes deceived them. But seeing their consciences
witnessed unto them, that infirmities in Princes is no sufficient cause to
shake off the yoke of their obedience. Therefore in the end, they pretend that
in case they adhered any longer to him, they were in danger to incur the
condemnation of their own souls, because he was excommunicated by the
Apostolic chair. This Council is like unto a looking glass, wherein two
things may be evidently seen, to wit, the inconstancy of people, and pride of
the Roman Antichrist, bearing down the authority of Princes, for desire of his
own advancement.

THe Pope had appointed a day of compearance to the Emperor to be judged in
Lent, Another Council at Rome.
as has been declared heretofore. This Council was full of cursings,
flattering the Romans, and prodigal largition of money, to those who followed
the Pope. For in this Council Gilbertus Bishop of Ravenna was cursed. The
Emperor Henry the fourth, was not only cursed, but also denuded of his
Imperial dignity, as if the Bishop of Rome had power to confer the kingdoms
of the world to whom he pleases. The flattering words of the Pope to the
Roman Nobles, Senators, and People, are beyond all measure of moderation. For
he called them the head of the world, having power to confer all spiritual
and civil dignities to whom they pleased. Like as 270. years ago, they
transferred the Empire from the Grecians, to the Germans. And like as the
Emperor may displace an unworthy soldier, even so a soldier may forsake an
unrighteous Captain. After this, he distributed to his followers, 15000.
talents of silver; and so by cursings, flattery, and prodigality, he bewitched
the Romans, and engaged them against the Emperor.

The Council of Brixia.
IN the year of our Lord, 1080. the Emperor Henry the fourth, assembled of
Germany and Italy, 30. Bishops, in the town of Brixia-Notice, together with
many Princes of his kingdom. All these consented that Hildebrand should be
deposed from his Popedom, and Gilbertus Bishop of Ravenna should be placed
in his room, because Hildebrand was a subuerter of Ecclesiastical order, a
troubler of the Imperial estate, a perturber of peace, stirring up dissension
among brethren, contention among those who lived peacebly, divorcement among
married persons, and had troubled every thing that was settled in godliness,
and peace. The tenor of the Decree follows. We who are assembled together by
the providence of God in Brixia, decerne that Hildebrand, that obstinate
preacher of sacrilegious flames, and burnings; a defender of periuries and
murders; a Sorcerer, and Inchanter; a man who calls in question the true
Faith, concerning the body and blood of Christ. We (say they) decerne that such
a man should be deposed, and expelled from the Popedom, and except nee
forsake it after intimation of this Decree, that he is to be condemned
perpetually.

IN the year of our Lord, Another Council at Rome.
1081. the Emperor irritate with the incessant attempts of the Pope, against
his life and estate thought meet once to put an end to this labor, and to the
distresses of the Empire. Therefore he besieged the town of Rome and took
it. Hildebrand with the rest of the Wolfes who had troubled the sheepfold of
God, they fled. The Emperor with the advice of the Roman Senate, appointed a
Council to be assembled at Rome, wherein fugitive Hildebrand should appear,
and render an account of his adminstration, but he would not appear.
Therefore he was deposed as a profane and wicked man, a lover of discord, a
bloody man, and an invader of the Apostolic chair by Sorcery. And Gilbertus,
by some called Wigbertus, was placed in his room.

AFter the death of Gregory the 7. the Romans had no regard to Gilbertus, The
Council of Beneventu^.
whom the Emperor had made Pope, but they chose another, who was Abbot in
Cassinates, named Desiderius. He was not chosen by the Cardinals, nor by the
Pope of Rome, but by Mathildis, and the Normans, Commanders of Apulia (as
Functius records) all these were enemies to the Emperor. After his election
to the Popedom, he was called Victor the third. He assembled a Council at
Beneventum, which was his native soil. There he cursed Gilbertus Bishop of
Ravenna, as an usurper of the Chair, belonging to Gregory the seventh, his
predecessor. Likewise he cursed Hugo Archbishop of Lions, and Richard Abbot of
Marseil, because (as it seems) they had been his competitors. This man walked
closely in the footsteps of Hildebrand; but his time was short, for he died
before he could execute the proud conceits of his mind, after he had ruled
one year and six months, Platina attributes unto him only the continuance of
one year, and four months.

The Council of Clermont.
IN the year of our Lord, 1095. Vrbanus the second gathered a great assembly at
Clermont, in Overnie of France. The lessons of Hildebrand were forgot by his
successors. Therefore in this Council, and the Council of Placentia, and
other Councels which I have ouerpassed, studying to shortness. It was
ordained, that no spiritual office, nor rent annexed thereto, should be
received from the hand of a secular man: in this Council it was ordained, with
advice of many Christian Princes, that an army should be raised up, and march
toward Jerusalem, for support of distressed Christians, and recovery of the
holy Land, out of the hands of Infidels, as has been declared in the History
of the life of Vrbanus the second.

CENTVRIE XII.
THe multitude of Councels assembled in this Centurie, if they should all be
particularly rehearsed, I doubt not but the Reader would be wearied in reading
them, for they exceed the number of an hundred and fifteen Councels. So that
I am compelled to reduce them unto certain principal heads, and to produce
examples of every head; so shall the intention and design of them, who
assembled Councels in this time, be clearly known.

Some Councels were assembled for prohibition of Priests marriages, others for
excommunication of the Emperor; some for the question of investment of
Bishops, being most willing to extort this privilege out of the hands of the
Emperor, and to confer it to the Bishops of Rome: Some were gathered for
deciding the question which arose by plurality of Popes, contending hotly one
against another, for the Popedom. Many Councels also were assembled for
advancing of the war, called Bellum sacrum, and setting forward Christians,
to fight against the Saracens, for conquering the holy Land out of their hands.
Some few were assembled against men, whom they supposed to be Heretics, such
as Abelardus, and his disciple Gilbertus, and Vualdenses. When a few examples
of every one of these heads shall be commemorated, the luxriant superfluity of
the Councels of this Centurie, shall not be found inconvenienly abridged.

ALexius Emperor of Constantinople, A Council at Paris.
sent letters to Vrbanus the second, wherein he declared the rage of the
Turks, and implored support from the West. Vrbanus assembled a Council of all
Nations, at Paris, and was present himself at the Council, incitating the
hearts of all men, to drive out the barbarous Turks from the place wherein the
redeemer of the world did suffer. In this Council were appointed an hundred
thousand men, out of Aquitania, Normandy, England, Scotland, Ireland,
Brittannia, Galitia, Wastemia, France, Flanders, Lorane, and other Nations
toward the holy Land, with Hademarus a Bishop, who had power of binding and
losing in the Popes name.

IN the year of our Lord, 1110. the Bishop of Florence openly preached, A
Council at Florence.
that Antichrist was already come, which he clearly perceived by that
horrible change of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, into an earthly
Monarchy: for the Bishops of Rome were rather Warriors, then Preachers of the
Word of God. They opposed themselves to Emperors, and most contemptuously
abused them; they depraved the articles of Faith, profaned the Sacraments
instituted by Christ. Idolatry daily increased, hypocritical discipline
through propagation of Monastique orders, and humane constitutions, were out of
measure extolled. More were advanced to the Popedom by deceit, weapons, and
slaughter, then by free election. Matrimonial chastity was banished from the
order of Clergymen, who count themselves holy. And finally, the Bishop of
Rome was like unto a gulf, devouring and exhausting the substance of the
world, and administrating his turns rather by force, then reason. These
abuses, and others like to these, presented to the Bishop of Florence, a notice
that Antichrist was come already, and openly domineered in the Church.
Pascalis the second, who was Pope at this time, thought it was no time to
slumber or sleep, in such a matter. Therefore he convened a Council at
Florence, and called the Bishop of Florence to his accounts. The arguments by
which he proved, that Antichrist was already come, are buried in silence.
Only he was sharply rebuked, and commanded, that in time to come he should
utter no such doctrine.

IN the year of our Lord, A Council at London.
1102. and in the third year of the reign of Henry the first, King of
England: Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, a man much addicted to Pope
Paschalis, assembled a Council at London, for prohibition of the marriages of
Priests. This was an uncouth thing in England, and some counted it an holy
design, others, a matter perilous (as it was indeed) lest men attempting
things that were above their strength, should fall into the snare of the
Devil, and into horrible Lusts of uncleanness, which thing came to pass. For
horrible Sodomie had place among the Clergy, and the year following, Anselmus
was compelled to conuene another Council at S. Paul's in London, and to make
constitutions for punishment of those who were found to be polluted with that
vild lust of uncleanness. Nevertheless Anselmus was one of the number of the
Antichristian Clergy, who would be wiser than God, and find out better
remedies than marriage to stay the intemperat lust of men, who had not the gift
of Continency.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Mentz.
1106. a great Council was assembled at Mentz, against the Emperor Henry the
fourth, who attended at Ingelheme; looking to have been sent for to the
Council. But the Ambassadors of Pope Paschalis and the Bishops who were
present at the Council could not delay, until the Emperor was sent for. But
the venomous ulcer of their cankered hearts being ripe, behooved presently to
break forth, before the Emp. was heard to speak for himself. Therefore they
proceed against the noble Emp. being absent, and condemned him of heresy, and
excommunicated him. Now his heresy was Simony, because he would not resign the
right of investme^t of Bishops into the Popes hands. And not content with this,
they for the Bishops of Mentz, Cosen, and Worms, to Iugelheime, where the E.H.
4. was, and deuested him of his imperial ornaments. The E. could not resist the
violence of those headstrong Prelates, because his army and friends were not
about him. But he demanded the three Bishops in the sight of the eternal God,
to declare if he had taken any reward for admitting them to their Bishopriks.
The Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Worms, all affirmed; that he had received no
reward from their hands. How then (says the Emperor) am I condemned of
Simonie? I pray you fathers do not so wickedly (says he) violate your oath of
alledgance. Dishonor not mine estate and horehead. And incase I should resign
mine Imperial Ornaments to my son; let all the estates of Germany be
assembled, that I may do it willingly in a lawful assembly. But the Prelates
forementioned, stirring up one another, put hands to work and pulled the
Crown from his head, and denuded him of the rest of his Imperial Ornaments.
The Emperor with sighs and sobbs committed his cause to God who hates
iniquity, and in his own time can render a condign recompense unto it.
Moreover the Noble Emperor humbly craved at the Popes Ambassadors, and the
rest of the Bishops; to be absolved from excommunication, with promise to
satisfy them, whom he should be found after due trial to have offended. But
these Roman Vulturs answered him proudly that matter pertained to the Pope, he
must dress himself to Rome to be absolved by the Pope, after sight of his
condign satisfaction. Now let the judicious reader mark, if these Councels
had bin like unto the star, Mat. 2.
which led the wise men of the East to Christ; then it were good reason that we
should follow them. But since they lead from Christ, and from al due reverence
toward the anointed of the Lord; and from all kind of gentleness, meaknesse,
and humane behavior, toward our superiors, it is time to remember the words
of our Lord. If the blind lead the blind, Mat.
both shall fall in the ditch.

The Council of Troyes in Champani^.
IN the year of our Lord, 1107. Pope Paschalis the second, gathered a Council
at Troyes in France, willing to finish and perfect in France the work begun in
Germany. And to throw out of the hands of Henry the fifth, the right of
investment of Bishops, as he had done out of his fathers hands. The Emperor
Henry the fifth, approached near to the place wherein the Council was gathered,
but was not present thereat.

The subject entreated in the Council was about the investment of Bishops, by
all means possible they endeavored to spoil all Laicke persons of this
privilege; affirming that the election of Pastors should be free, and that the
presumption of Laicke persons, in conferring of Ecclesiastical dignities, must
be cut off. Therefore he promulgated the like mandars, as his Predecessors
had done before him, adding also against the co^traveners of his mandats the
like cursings, as his Predecessors had done before him. The Emperor Henry the
fifth, with advise of the Nobles and Bishops, who were about him, sent
Ambassadors to the Pope, and the Council calling to their remembrance that
the right of investment of the Bishops was conferred to the Emperor Charles
the Great, and that his successors had continued in possession of that right
until his time. Therefore he requested that the Pope and Council would do
nothing prejudicial to his right. This Message perturbed the cogitations of
the Pope, and the fathers of the Council, but this means was found out, that
this question should rest for the space of a year, after the issue whereof it
should be reasoned at Rome. And in the mean time, no investment should be
received from any Laicke person. This interim, together with the place
appointed for determination of the question, are manifest presages of the
event: to wit, that the Pope would not be at rest until he had trampled under
foot all civil domination, and until he had removed out of the way that
authority, which was a let to his usurped pre-eminence, as the Apostle
speaks: 2 These. 2.7.
when the year was exspyred, the Emperor addressed himself to Rome with an
army and took the Pope and his Cardinals prisoners. And albeit the Pope at
that time condiscended that the right of investment should consist in the
Emperors hand, yet afterward he revoked the same, and in the Council of Rome
assembled Anno, 1112. years, he utterly renounced that privilege conferred
to the Emperor, as has been declared in the History of his life.

The Council of Triburia.
THe question and controversy about investment of Bishops, was not like to take
an end. The Roman Chair, like unto a raging Sea, continually swelled,
frothed and stirred up sedition against the Emperor Henry the fifth, because
he would not ouer-giue the right of investment of Bishops into the Popes
hands. The Bishops of Germany the Popes footegroomes conueened at Triburia,
Anno, 1119. with exasperat minds, consulting how they might undo the estate of
the Emperor, as they had already undone the estate of his father. The
Emperor made have to return out of Italy to Germany, and finding none other
way to establish his own estate, but either by great effusion of blood, or by
yielding to the Popes desire. The Emperor after consultation with his Princes,
and friends, found no outgate, except to render to Pope Calixtus the second the
right of investment of Bishops. Also he was compelled to ratify the election
of Pope Calixtus, albeit Gregory the eight (to whose election the Emperor had
consented) was yet alive, so mightily prevailed the power of the Roman
Antichrist.

PEtrus Abelardus, was counted an Heretic in the Council of Soysson, and was
compelled to burn his own books. The Council of Senon.
Yet because he continued in his error, and many followed him, another
Council was conueened at Senon against Abelardus. Jews king of France the son
of old Lewis was present at the Council, and Theobald Count Palatine, and
Bernard Abbot of Clarauall, and innumerable people desiring to hear
disputation. Abelardus fearing popular sedition declined their judgment and
was willing to be judged by Innocentius the second who was Pope at that time.
Pope Innocentius after he had read the letters sent from the council, damned
Abe lardus, and ordained his followers to be excommunicat. Abelardus destitute
of Patrons and Protectors, entered into the Monastery of Cluniake. Concerning
his opinions I have spoken of them in the head of Heretics.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Papia.
1160. The schism that fell out betwixt two Popes, striving for the Popedom
after the death of Adrian the fourth, to wit Alexander the third, and Victor
the fourth; gave occasion to the Emperor Frederick the first (being at that
time in Italy) to appoint a Council to be assembled at Papia. For removing of
the scisme, and for deciding the controversy by declaring to which of the
contending Popes the Popedom should belong. Both the Popes were warned to
appear before the Council. The Emperor was present the first day of the
meeting of the Council, and declared to the Bishops that he was not
ignorant that to the Emperor belonged power to convocate Councels, like as
Constantinus, Theodosius, Iustinianus, had done before him; and of latter time,
Carolus Magnus, and the Emperor Otto. Notwithstanding since that matters
pertaining to divine worship ought to be judged by Bishops; he remitted the
judgment of this present controversy to the fathers met together in the
assembly. And he so departed out of the Council. Pope Alexander the third
refused to appear before the Council of Papia, for he would be judged by no
man. Pope Victor the fourth appeared, and was content that his cause should be
examined, and judged by the Council. The Council took this effect that
Victor the fourth, was declared to be Pope. Alexander the third on the other
part being full of indignation, cursed the Emp. and Pope Victor and their
adherents; and gathered a Council of his favorers at Clermount wherein he
openly delivered to Satan the Emp. Frederick and Pope Victor, and Count
Palatine, and all other principal favorers of Victor, so great patience was
in Pope Alexander, when his papal dignity was called in question. He mixed
as it were Heaven and Eartth together, not for zeal to the glory of God; but
for zeal to keep his papal pre-eminence. For beside the Council which he
assembled at Clermont, he gathered another at Towrs, Anno, 1164. and was no
less prodigal in his cursings, then he had been before in the Council of
Clermont against the Emperor and his Competitor Victor: yea and he sent an
Ambassador to Jerusalem and Antiochia, and to the Princes and Patriarchs,
Tyrius lib. 18. cap. 29.
of the East, for propagation of his own authority.

A Council at Rome.
IN the year of our Lord, 1180. and in the twentieth year of the government of
Pope Alexander the third, a great assembly was conveened at Rome, by the Popes
authority: an hundredth and fourscore Bishops were assembled together in the
Church called Constantiniana. Their consultation was about the form of
election of the Pope in time to come.

Canon 1.
And first it was appointed and ordained, that in case the College of Cardinals
did not with uniform consent agree who should be elected Pope; if the two part
of them did consent to the election of any person, the dissenting of the third
part should be no sufficient cause to reject him who was elected.

Canon 2.
Secondly it was ordained that all Ecclesiastical dignities conferred by
Octavianus, and Guido, who now are accounted schismatikes; shall be null, and
of none effect.

Canon 3.
And that no man be admitted to the office of a Bishop before he be 30. years
old, neither shall any man be admitted to be a Deacon, or Archdeacon, or to
have the government of a parish before he be twenty five years of age.

Canon 4.
That Bishops and Archbishops in their Visitations do not overcharge the Church
of their bounds with unnecessary charges and expenses specially: the Churches
that are poor.

If a Bishop admit any man to be a Presbyter or Deacon without the title of a
place that may affoorde unto him, Canon 5.
things necessary for the maintenance of his life: let the Bishop himself
sustain him, until he provide a living for him, except he be able of his own
patrimony to sustain himself.

That no man shall be excomunicat or suspended from his office, Canon 6.
before he be lawfully warned to appear, and answer for himself; except in
such causes as deserve summar excommunication.

That no reward be taken for admitting men to spiritual offices, Canon 7.
and that no money be taken for blessing them that are married, or for
ministration of any other Sacrment. For at this time marriage was counted a
Sacrament of the Roman Church.

That no Ecclesiastical office be pro^ised to any man before it be vaca^t,
Canon 7.
by the decease of the possessor. For it is an unrighteous thing to put any man
in expectation of another man's living, whereby he may wish his brothers death.
And when any place shall happen to be vacant, let it be planted again within
six months, or else he who has the right of plantation shall loose it at that
time; and the Chapitar, or Metrapolitan Bishop, shall have power to provide the
vacant place.

That the Brethren called Templarij or hospitales shall not abuse the
privileges granted by them to the Chair of Rome, Canon 9.
by receiving Churches out of the hands of Laicke people, by admitting to the
Sacraments in their Churches, and to burial, persons excommunicated; nor by
admitting and deposing Presbyters without the foreknowledge of their Bishops,
and by occasion of their fraternities which they have multiplied in many
places, they shall not weaken the authority of Bishops, but they shall do al
things with advice of their Bishops, and they who shall be found to have
disobeyed this ordinance shall undergo the discipline, and their actions in
the contrary shall be declared to be of none effect.

Canon 10.
That Monks shall not be received into a Monastery for gain, and that they
shall possess no goods as properly belonging only to themselves.

Canon 11.
Men admitted to holy orders, let them either live continently without the
company of women; or otherwise let them be deprived of their offices and
livings.

Canon 12.
Subdeacons and others in Law offices who are sustained in the Church, let them
not appear, as procurators and advocates before secular judges, except a
matter belonging to himself, 2 Timothy 2.4.
or to the Church, or to the poor, be questioned. Like as it is written, no
man that goes to war, entangleth himself with worldly business, etc.

Canon 13.
Let such men be preferred to Ecclesiastical dignities who will be actuallie
resident with their people, and undertake the cure of their souls, by doing
the work of the ministry in their own persons: otherwise let them deprive
them of the office and benefice conferred to Rome, and he who does confer
them without these conditions, let him lose the right of conferring offices,
and benefices.

Canon 14.
Plurality of benefices is forbidden, as a vice smelling of avarice and
ambition, and is perilous to the people whose souls are neglected by Pastors,
attentive to the world heaping up riches, and not careful to feed, the flock
of God. By this also many worthy men are ouer-seene, whose travels might be
worthily bestowed in feeding the flock of God. Moreover some Laickes are bold
without consent of Bishops to place and to displace Pastors, and to distribute
Ecclesiastical livings according to their pleasure And to burden Churchmen
with exactions, and taxations whenever they please. This form of doing is
ordained to be punished with excommunication. And he who receives a Church
from a Laicke person, without his own Bishops authority, is to be debarred
from the communion, and in case he persevere obstinatly in his sin, he is to be
deprived of Ecclesiastical orders. Also Laicke persons who transfer the right
of tithes to other Laicke persons, they who receive the^, and deliver them not
to the Church, shall want the honor of Christian burial.

Churchmen who have accquired riches by Church-rents, howsoever they die,
Canon 15.
let their goods pertain to the Church. Moreover because some Bishops are
found in some parts who permit them, whom they call Decani, for a sum of
money, to exercise Episcopal jurisdiction: it is ordained that he who so
does, shall be deprived from his office, and that the Bishop shall have no
power to confer any such office.

Let not the votes of a few persons in the Church, Canon 16.
hinder the ordination of them, who are thought meet by the most part to be
ordained to Eclesiasticall offices.

If a question arise, Canon 17.
concerning presentations of diverse persons to one Church, or concerning the
gift of patronage: if the foresaid question be not decided within the space of
three months, the Bishop shall place in the Church the man whom he thinks to
be most worthy.

Seeing that the Church as a provident mother, Canon 18.
should provide all things necessary for the souls and bodies of the people,
left the poor and indigent parents, want the benefit of good education in
learning. It is appointed and ordained, that in every Cathedral Church, a
worthy benefice shall be bestowed upon a Schoolmasters, to the end the teacher
receiving a competent reward, for his travels, a patent door may be opened to
the increase of learning.

Diverse Churches are so heavily over-loadned with tribute and taxations by
Consuls, Canon 19.
Governors of towns, and Rulers of Provinces: that the estate of Bishops is
worse, then was the estate of the Idolatrous Priests of Egypt, in the days of
Pharaoh; Genesis 47.22.
for the Priests had an ordinary of Pharaoh, and they did eat their ordinary
which Pharaoh gave them, wherefore they sold not their ground which Pharaoh
gave them. But now all charge of civil affairs are laid upon Gods Church:
Therefore it is ordained under pain of cursing, that Governors, and Rulers of
Provinces, desist in time to come from such doing, except the Prelates upon
consideration of the great necessity of the country, would voluntarily
consent to support the necessity of the Laiques.

Canon 20.
Seeing that Pope Innocentius the second, and Pope Eugenius the third, our
predecessors of good memory, condemned the spectacles on market-dayes, and
holy days, for ostentation of their valor and strength, skirmishing one
against another in sight of the people, whereby it came to pass, that some
were slain, and their souls were in ieopardie. These spectacles are also
damned by us, and if any person be slain in them, let him want the honor of
Christian burial.

Canon 21.
This contains a commandment of superstitious observation of days.

Canon 22.
Let no men presume to alter the ancient custom of exactions, without the
authority and consent of Princes.

Canon 23.
Persons diseased with leprosy, it is permitted to them, to have their own
Church, and their own Pastor.

Canon 24.
They who furnish armor to the Saracens, who fight against Christians, or who
take Christians prisoners who are busy in their lawful callings, or who
spoil them who have made ship wrack, let them be excommunicated.

Canon 25.
Manifest usurers shall be debarred from the communion: and if they repent not,
they shall want the honor of Christian burial, and no man shall receive their
offering.

Canon 26.
Jews and Saracens shall not be permitted to have Christian servants in their
houses, no not under pretense of education of their children. Also the
testimony of a Christian against a Jew shall be admitted; and if any Jew
through the mercy of God, be converted to the Christian religion, he shall in
no manner of way be secluded from his possessions.

Canon 27.
In the last Canon, after a smooth preface, that Pope Leo said, Ecclesiastical
discipline is content with a Priestly judgment; but uses not bloody revenges.
Always Pope Alexander in this Council thought it lawful, to borrow the power
of secular Princes, to persecute those whom he called Heretics in Gasconie,
Tholuse, and other parts. These he calls Cathari, Patrini, or Publicani, but
out of question they were Valdenses, who being driven out of Lions, Pope
Alexander would grant them no corner in the world to rest in: But meitated by
his cruel edicts, all Princes, Nobles, Lords, Governors, to pursue them with
fire and sword, and all kind of hostility; promising to them who so does, if
they be under Ecclesiastical censure, indulgence, and relaxation of two
years, of the complete time of their penance: and to those who do zealously
pursue them, such security in their persons and goods, as uses to be
conferred to such persons as visit the holy grave, and are taken under the
protection of the Church. Others of Aragon, Navarre, and other places, whom
also he calls Heretics, and who practiced against Christians, all kind of
merciless in humanity, neither sparing sex nor age: I cannot understand of
what kind of Heretics he means, for their heresy is not expressed.

CENTVRIE XIII.
Concilium Lateranense.
ABout the year of our Lord, 1215. Pope Innocentius the third, gathered a
general Council at Rome, wherein the doctrine of Transubstantiation was
ratified. Also the Grecians were ordained to turn to the obedience of the
Church of Rome, The conclusions of this Council.
to the end there might be one shepherd and one sheepfold, and that they
should desist from detesting the Priests of the Latin Church, whom the Grecians
so abhorred, that they would not say mass upon the Altar which the Latin
Priest had touched, until it had been cleansed and washed. Also that they
should not rebaptize such as were baptized by Latin Priests, and that all
these things should be observed under pain of cursing. And finally, it was
concluded, that an army should be sent unto Syria, for relief of the
Christians there, and the recovery of the holy Land, and that processions,
supplications, and fastings, should be kept monthly, for the more easy
obtaining of it.

Concilium Lugdunense.
LIkewise in the year of our Lord, 1273. Gregorius the tenth, gathered a
general Council at Lions; where Michael Paleologus Emperor of
Constantinople, was present, who by the slaughter of Theodorus Luscaris son,
committed to his custody, Note.
had usurped the Empire. This Michael (I say) being present at the Council,
acknowledged the superiority of the Church of Rome, whereunto the other
Grecians were so far from condiscending, that they abhorred the said
Emperor, and would not suffer his body to be buried amongst other Christians.

In this Council also was concluded, that the tenth part of all
Ecclesiastical rents for the space of six years, should be paid, to furnish
out an army to fight against the Infidels, for recovering of the holy Land; and
a full remission of sins, was promised to all them who would undertake a part
of this war-fare.

CENTVRIE XIIII.
The Council of Vienna.
IN the year of our Lord, 1311. Pope Clement the fifth bearing rule, a general
Council was assembled at Vienna, wherein he set forth a book of Papal
decrees, Liber Clementiarum, received by the Council.
called Liber Clementiaru^, which was received, allowed, and ratified, by the
Council. And albeit (as Nauclerus witnesses) Clemens himself before his
death, repented the setting out of this book, and commanded it to be burnt;
yet the Popes succeeding him, and namely, Johannes the two and twentieth, The
contents of this book.
confirmed and authorized the said book again, together with the Decretals
of Gregorius, and Bonifacius; because these books most highly advanced the
seat of Rome, exeeming the Bishop of Rome from subjection to general Councels,
and attributing power to him, to receive, or to reject the Emperor, after he
is chosen; comparing the Pope to the Sun, and the Emperor to the Moon:
finally, counting it a thing necessary unto eternal life, that every person
be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

The feast of Corpus Christi ordained.
In this Council it was ordained, that the feast of Corpus Christi should be
kept, with many indulgences granted unto them, who should celebrate this feast.

Likewise it was Decreed, that the way to reduce Infidels to the true faith,
was not by armor and shedding of blood, Note.
as the preceding Popes had done, for the space of three hundred years,
though in vain; but by preaching of the Word of God, to gain their souls to
the Lords Kingdom. And for this cause it was ordained, that Schools should
be erected, and foreign tongues should be learned, namely, the Hebrew,
Chaldaicke, and Arabique languages. Finally, it was ordained, that the name and
remembrance of the order of Templaries should be rooted out, The Templars
rooted out.
and this Decree was put in execution, by all Christian Princes, who in one day
utterly rooted out the said order of Monks, as formerly has been declared.

CENTVRIE XV.
The Council of Constance.
IN the year of our Lord, 1414. the Emperor Sigismund, and pope John the 23.
gathered a general Council at Constance, for pacifying of a Schism, The
occasion of this Council.
which was between three Popes striving for the Popedom; to wit, Pope John,
whom the Italians set up; Pope Gregory, whom the Frenchmen set up; and
Benedict, whom the Spaniards placed. In this schismatic, ambitious,
conflict, every one defended his own Pope, to the great disturbance of
Christian Nations. This Council endured four years space. The first
beginning of it (as the manner was) is with a mass of the holy Spirit. As they
were singing, according to their custom, the Hymn, Veni sancte spiritus,
there was at the same time, a certain paper set up in the Church, by some well
disposed persons, as it seemed, wherein was contained these words following;
Note.
Alys rebus occupatinunc, adesse vobis non possumus: that is, we are otherwise
occupied at this time, we cannot intend to come to you. In this Council, was
not only Pope John the 23. deposed, for many grievous and heinous crimes,
objected and prooved against him, but also Gregory and Benedict, All the three
Popes deposed
sustained the like censure; and Pope Martin was chosen, as has been
declared. Many wicked things were decreed and done in this Council; as namely,
in the eight Session thereof, a sentence of condemnation was given out against
the doctrine of John Wickliffe, A decree against John Wickliffe. Against the
Communion in both kinds.
and for the hatred of his memory, his bones ordained to be raised out of his
sepulcher, and to be burnt. In the thirteenth Session it was ordained, that no
Priest under pain of excommunication, should communicate unto the people under
both kinds of bread and wine. John Husse condemned.
In the 15. Session the Sentence of John Husse his condemnation was read and
published, and he was delivered to the secular power to be burned.

In the 19. Session it was decreed that notwithstanding the safe conduct given
by the Emperor and kings; inquiry may be made against a man for heresy, by a
sufficient judge, and process to be made according to Law.

In the 21. Session a sentence of condemnation was pronounced against Ierom of
Prague; Ierom of Prague condemned.
and he was delivered to the secular power to be burned. And finally nothing
was decreed in this Council or enacted worthy of memory, but this only that
the Popes authority is under the Council, The Council above the Pope.
and that the Council ought to judge the Pope, yet albeit Articles were given
in to the Council craving reformation of the Corrupt life of the Clergy and
namely of the Court of Rome, and Ioannes Gerson Chaunceller of the university
of Paris himself gave in 75. abuses which he willed to be corrected and
amended, no reformation was obtained; because the chief governors of the
Council themselves being men of corrupt and filthy conversation, hated above
all things the Articles of reformation.

But on the other part this new Pope Martine, Martin not having leisure to
reform the abuses of the Clergy erects an inquisition for repressing of the
Hussits.
although he could not find time and leisure to reform the abuses of the
clergy, yet found he time to devise a cruel and bloody inquisition against
the true professors of the Gospel whom he called Heretics, and for
repressing of the Hussites he devised a strict inquisitio^, which afterward
followed in many Countries, and namely in the country of Spain.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Basil.
was gathered a general Council at Basil; which as it endured longer then any
other Council before celebrat and holden in the Church (for this continued
almost 17. years) so likewise was it most troublesome, in respect that Julian
Cardinal and Deacon of S. Angel, being appointed president of the Council, by
Pope Martin the fifth and after his death being also approved by his successor
Eugenius the fourth.

A general Council above the Pope
This Julian (I say) suffered a certain question to be reasoned freely in the
Council, touching the authority of general Counsels; after which reasoning
it was concluded that the general Council is above the Pope, and that all
persons ought to be subject to the general counsels, as children are subject
to authority of their mother. This conclusion grieved the Pope the more, that
this matter being once concluded in the Council of Constants already; was now
again ratified and more amply discoursed in the Council of Basil, for this
cause he would have transported the Council to Bononie. Eugenius seeks to
translate the Council from Basil to Bononie, but by the Emperor is forced to
ratify the Council of Basil.
But the Emperor Sigismund (who was a great favorer and protector of the
Council) with advice of the fathers of the Council; admonished Eugenius that
he should not only leave off his intended purpose of transferring the place
of the Council, but also by his own appearance before the Council of Basil,
ratify his subjection to the same, which if he refused to do they would
proceed against him as a person contumacious, and obstinatly, rebelling
against the voice of the Church. The Pope was so dashed with this admonition,
that he was constrained to dissemble for a time, and to confirm the Council
of Basil with his Apostolic letters. Eugenius after the Emperors death holds
contrary Councels.
But after the death of the Emperor (who died in the sixth year of the
Council) Eugenius took upon him greater boldness, and first held a contrary
Council at Ferraria and afterward at Florence, pretending that he behooved to
meet with the Greeks for uniting of them to the West Church; who because they
would no ways pass the Alps, he was compelled for their commodity to keep
a Council in some nearer place. Eugenius deposed.
The Council of Basil although weakened by the Emperors death, proceeded not
the less to the deposition of Eugenius; and elected Amedeus Duke of Sauoy, to
be Pope whom they called Foelix the fifth. To this Council were the Bohemians
and Morauians invited, who after they had received sufficient surety and
pledges for their safe passage and returning again, sent Ambassadors to the
Council, by whose earnest travels it was obtained that the Bohemians and
Morauians should have the communion celebrat unto them under both kinds. The
Bohemians obtain to have the Sacrament under both kinds. Aeneas Syluius
changes his opinion with his state of life.


The History of this Council was written by Aeneas Syluius who was present at
the same, and liked well of the proceedings and determinations thereof, as may
appear by his own writings; and namely by a certain Epistle of his written
to the Rector of the university of Colen, wherein he rejoices for a certain
treatise of the said rectors which came into his hands: reproving the rudeness
and rashness of such as deny the Bishop of Rome and his consistory, to be
subject to the General Council, and that the supreme tribunal seat of
judgment stands in the Church, and not in one Bishop. Notwithstanding the
same Syluius who by his learned writings advanced the decrees of the Council
of Basil, yet afterward being promoted to that papal dignity himself, turned
his coat; and returned again to the old filthy pride of the Chair of Rome,
which magnifieth it self not only above the Church, but also makes it self
companion to God himself.

IN the year of our Lord, The Council of Florence.
1439. while as the Council of Basil was yet sitting undissolved; Eugenius the
fourth perceiving that matters went against him in Basil, he held a contrary
Council at Florence, where he brought to pass that the Emperor and Patriarch
of Constantinople with the rest of the Grecians there present, were persuaded
to receive the sentence of the Church of Rome concerning the proceeding of the
holy Ghost, also to receive the communion in unleavened bread, to admit
Purgatory, and to yield themselves to the authority of the Romish Bishop,
whereunto notwithstanding the other Churches of Grecia would in no wise assent
at their coming home; in so much that with a publict execration, they did
condemn afterward all those Legates which had consented to those Articles, that
none of them should be buried in Christian burial.

It is to be noted in this Council, that the Grecians who agreed to other
opinions of the Roman Church, yet could never be induced to believe their
doctrine of transubstantiation. Notwithstanding they were content to set forth
unto Note.
the people a Bull of agreement which they called Bulla Consensus, and the
difference of opinions in that point of doccrine was not thought a sufficient
impediment to stay the promulgation of this agreement. Howbeit afterward as it
were forgetting what they had done themselves in the Councils of Florence and
their Bulla Consensus, they cry out that there is no agreement and unity
amongst the Protestants, because there is some difference of opinions about the
Sacrament among them. In the time of this Council, Josephus Patriarch of
Constantinople died, and Eugenius required that presently before the
dissolution of the Council another should be chosen; but to this the Grecians
would not agree, affirming that it was not lawful to choose a Patriarch of
Constantinople, but only in their own Church there. The Emperor Paleologus
after his returning lived not long.

The agreement of the Grecian Church with the Roman, an evil presage of the
destruction of the Grecian Empire.
And finally this agreement was counted of the Grecians infortunat, and an
evil presage immediately before the utter ruin of the Oriental Empire and the
destruction of the town of Constantinople. For within 14. years after this
agreement at Florence, the famous city of Constantinople was taken by Mahomet
Emperor of Turks, the Emperor Constantine the Brother of Paleologus was
slain, and the Empire of the East was cut off.

CENTVRIE XVI.
THis Council of Trent begun in the year of our Lord, Concilium Tridentinum.
1546. the fourth of January, in the Popedom of Paulus the third. In the first
session thereof an oration was made by the Popes Legate, Sessio prima.
declaring the causes of the calamity of the Church. In the second Session the
Articles of faith were read and confirmed: Sessio secunda.
and that was kept the fourth of February. Sessio tertia.
The third Session was kept the eight of April, wherein it was decreed that the
old Latin translation of the Bible should only be used and accounted
authentike in Churches and Schools; and that the rule in expounding of the
Scriptures should be this, to expound them as the Church and the ancient
fathers have expounded them before. As also the number of the books accounted
holy and Canonicke Scriptures were rehearsed. Sessio quart^.
the fourth Session was kept the 17. day of June, where it was decreed that all
men should believe that original sin was utterly taken away in Baptism,
Concupiscence accounted no sin.
in such sort that the concupiscence which remains in our nature after
Baptism is not to be accounted a sin, until we give the consent of our
mind thereto. And because the Law of God plainly condemns it, and the
Apostle Paul in plain words says, I had not known concupiscence to have
been a sin, except the Law had said thou shall not covet; lest they should
seem to Proclaim to the world their manifest contradiction to the Scriptures:
they lenifie their decree again with this distinction that the Apostle calls
it a sin, not because it is a sin properly and indeed, but because it comes
of sin, and tends also thereto. Howbeit (with those fathers license) the
Apostle Paul declares his own sense and meaning, that he calls
concupiscence sin, because it is a transgression of the Law, so that he
accounts it a sin properly and indeed. Also in this Session they decerne,
that the mother of our Lord was not conceived in original sin.

Sessio quinta.
In the fifth Session was decerned, that even after the fall of Adam, and in the
nature of man before his regeneration, there remains a free will to do good;
which being wakened by God, and stirred up, is a fellow-bearer with his grace.

Sessio sexta.
In the sixth Session was concluded, that man is justified partly by faith in
Christ, and partly by works; and that our justification stands not in a free
forgiveness of sins, and a free imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
to all them who believe in him.

Sessio septima.
The seventh Session was kept the third of March, an. 1547. wherein was decerned
that all men should believe, that the Sacraments of the Church were seven in
number; to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Orders, and Matrimony. After this seventh Session, the Popes
Physician affirmed, that the air of Trent was corrupted; Diverse Bishops remove
from Trent to Bononia.
whereupon many of the Bishops were moved to depart from Trent, to Bononia;
only the Bishops of Spain remained still at Trent, being commanded by
Charles the Emperor, so to do. For the Emperor had gathered in Ausbrugh an
assembly of the States of Germany, and had induced the most part by menaces and
threatenings, and some also by alluring promises, to submit themselves to the
general Council of Trent.

And this being obtained of the States of Germany, the Emperor sent the
Cardinal of Trent, together with his Ambassador Mendoza, desiring that the
Pope would cause the Bishops that were retired to Bononia, to come back
again to Trent. Note. The Pope unwilling the Bishops should return to Trent.
But the providence of God pitying the weakness of Germany (whom the Emperor
had induced, to be obedient to the Council of Trent) hardened the Popes
heart, who would not consent that the Bishops should go back again to Trent,
but upon strict conditions: 1. That the Bishops of Spain who remained yet
still at Trent, should first come to Bononia. 2. The Emperor should make good,
that all the States of Germany should absolutely submit themselves to the
Council of Trent. 3. That the Fathers to be gathered again at Trent, might
have liberty to depart out of the town freely and safely, when they pleased,
and to make an end of the Council when they would think good. The Emperors
Ambassador protests against the Council of Bononia.
The Emperors Ambassador Mendoza, seeing that his Masters petition was little
set by, declared that the Council was not lawfully translated from Trent to
Bononia, and therefore protested, that all things that should be done there,
should be of no force. Thus the first meeting of the Council of Trent under
Paulus the third, had an end: and their remaining together at the Council of
Trent, was two years.

The second meeting of the Council of Trent.
THe second meeting of Bishops in the Council of Trent, was in the days of
Pope Julius the third, in the month of September, anno, 1551.

In the first Session of the Council, Sessio prima.
which was kept the first of September, Abbas Bollosanus, Ambassador of the
King of France, The King of France by his Ambassador protests against the
Council of Trent.
appeared, declaring that the King was so disturbed with wars within his
dominions, that he could not send the Bishops of his Land to Trent. Next, that
the King of France acknowledged not the convention kept at Trent, for a
general Council, but for a convention gathered for the weal of a few, not
for the common vtility of all the Church: and therefore neither he himself,
nor the subjects of his kingdom, were bound to be obedient to the decrees of
that convention.

The second Session was kept the eleventh day of October, Sessio secunda.
wherein the doctrine of Transubstantiation was confirmed, yet diverse
questions pertaining to those matters, were deferted till the coming of the
Protestants of Germany, to whom also they granted their safe conduct.

Sessio tertia.
The third Session was kept the 25. of November, wherein was confirmed, that
Penance, and extreme Unction, were Sacraments of the new Testament. The
Ambassadors of the Protestants, The Protestants confession of Faith ^eiected.
would have given in the confession of their Faith, and sum of their
doctrine, to the Council, but the Popes Legate repelled them; because they did
not signify in the title thereof, that they would submit themselves to the
Council. In the mean time there was war in Germany, between Charles the
Emperor, The wars betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Saxony, cause of the
Councels breaking up.
and Maurice Duke of Saxony, which was the cause of the hasty dissolution of
the second meeting of the Council of Trent, under Pope Julius. For the Bishops
of Mentz and Cullen, made haste to return to Germany. Likewise all the Bishops
of Italy, hearing that Duke Maurice had taken the town of Ausbrough, returned
home; and the Spanish Bishops alone, who remained a space behind the rest at
Trent, assembled themselves together the 29. of April, anno 1552. and put off
the Council till a new meeting, after the issue of two years, or more, as
should be found meet.

The third meeting of the Council of Trent.
THe Bishops of Spain supposed, that the Council should have met again
within two years. Nevertheless, there intervened nine years before it could
be gathered again. For after the death of Julius the third, under whom the
second meeting was, succeeded Marcellus, who lived not above the space of 20.
days in his Popedom: and after him Paulus the fourth, who governed four
years, two months, and 27. days. And after him Pius the fourth, in whose
time this last meeting of the Council of Trent was appointed. Sessio prima.
Their first Session was kept the 18. day of January, anno, 1562. wherein was
decreed, that the books written by diverse Authors, since the springing up of
heresies (for so they called the preaching of the Gospel) should be viewed and
revised: and that all who had fallen back from the unity of the Church of
Rome, unto any kind of heresy, should be exhorted to return again, with
promise of great clemency, and indulgence, if they would so do.

The second Session was kept the 26. Sessio secunda.
day of February, anno, 1562. wherein certain persons were specially nominated
and chosen, to examine those books which was suspect of heresy, and to report
their judgment back again to the Council. Likewise, all men were exhorted
to resort to the Council, with peaceable hearts, void of all contention and
heat, and safe conductors were promised to them, who would come thereto.

In the third and fourth Session nothing was done, Sesso tertta, and quarta.
but the time of keeping the next Session was appointed.

In the fifth Session kept the 26. Sessio quinta.
day of July, anno, 1562. it was decreed, that the Laike people were not bound
by an absolute necessity, to communicate under both forms of bread and wine.
But the Church had power to dispose concerning the outward ministration of the
Sacraments (providing the substance were kept) according as they should find
expedient for the good of the receivers.

The sixth Session was kept the 17. day of September, Sessio sexta.
anno, 1562. wherein was concluded that the whole Mass was a propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and the dead: and whosoever should say, that it was
only a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and a commemmoration of Christ's death only,
are pronounced to be accursed.

The seventh Session was kept the 15. day of the month Sessio Septima.
of July, anno, 1563. wherein certain Canons were set forth concerning the
Sacrament of Orders, and it was accounted a Sacrament of the new Testament.

In the eight Session, Sessio Octava.
it was not only decreed, that marriage is a Sacrament of the new Testament:
but also the Roman Church assembled at Trent, as a troubled Sea that can not
rest, but cast out her froth and filth to the shore, laying aside all shame and
due reverence to the Scriptures of God, they pronounce all men to be accursed,
Note.
who will not grant that the Church has power to dispense with the Law of God
contained in the 18. of Leviticus, not only to grant liberty to persons to
marry, who are forbidden there to marry, but also to interdite and forbid
marriage between persons, who have liberty by the Law of Leviticus to marry.

Sessio ^ona.
The ninth and last Session of this Council, was kept the third day of
December, anno 1563. wherein the doctrine of purgatory was confirmed with
invocation of Saints, keeping of Relics, kneeling to Images, giving of
Indulgences, superstitious Fastings, and keeping of festival days, to the end
that the Roman Church should seem in no point to have erred. All past through,
and all was allowed, by them; but the Lord will only allow that doctrine which
is agreeable to his blessed Word: To whom be be praise for ever Amen. (...).

FINIS.

