A CHRISTIAN REPROFE AGAINST CONTENTION

Wherein is declared and manifested a just defense of the Church against such
slanderes and reproaches which Sabine Staresmore has laid upon us in his two
books, the first being 16. Questions, called A loving tender. The second is
his Preface and Postscript before and behind Mr. Answorths last Sermon, and
making a pretense by that to set it out as a love token, he breaths out his
malice against us: and lastly her is an Answer to a Letter written by Mr.
Robinson, and sent to us with the consent of his Church, which now Mr.
Staresmore has published to the world.

To these things an Answer is given by A. T.

(...) us the foxes, the little foxes which destroy the vines, for our vines
have small grapes. Songs 2. 15. How long halt ye between two opinions* if
the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baals be he, then go after him. 1. Kings
18. 21. He that is first in his own cause, is just: then comes his neighbor,
and makes inquiry of him. Prou. 18. 17.

Imprinted in the year M. DC. XXXI.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I give thee to understand: We have not been forward to
publish to the world these our controversies, and this thou may take
knowledge of, because the first of these our opposites books, has been in
print so many years, being printed in the year 1623* being 16. Questions of
their own forming, in the which we have great wrong done unto us; yet have
we patiently borne both that, and also that which they have printed the last
year against us, vntell such time we heard by many witnesses, that our long
silence has turned to the hinderance of the truth, and also our own
discredit: for diners have been persuaded through our long silence, that we
are most in fault, or else we would have answered before this time* therefore
for the truth sake, and our own defense, we though it need full to set o^
this Christian Reprofe unto these our opposites, in the which thou may see
the great injury, they do unto the truth and also unto us, by their unjust
imputations and slanderes, which they have laid upon us: and althought for our
selves we could have born these injuries in silence: yet for the truth sake,
and that none that have a love unto the truth, should be hindered or stomble
thereat, therefore needful it is that they should be informed of the truth
of things as they are, in these our troubles, which by this short Answer, thou
may take knowledge of. And although it consists of co^trouersy, which it
not so profitable, as some more heavenly meditations are: yet not withstanding
the Lord does suffer such things to arise, for the approving of such as are
faithful: 1. Cor. 11. 18. 19 and that the people of God should not ly upon the
b^d of security: Songs the 5. 5. but keep their Christian watch, knowing that
Satan seeks too surprise us by many means and ways* 1. Peter 5. 8. Act. 20.
31. for when he can not retain us, in the broad ways of the world; then will
he send out the s^oods of his persecutions, to see if he can swallow us up in
it, Reu. 12. 15. but when he is restrained from his purpose by the Lord, then
will he seek to overthrow us by his ministers whom he seduceth, even in the
Church of God, and so turn the^ into shape, as if they were the ministers of
righteousness, 2. Cor. 15. Act. 20. 29. 30. And of these things, gentle
Reader, have we had our portion, diverse of us having been persecuted by
inprisonment, and many till death did ensue, and others banneshed, and some
loosing their right and inheirita^ce, and must leave it and be exsiled: yet
these troubles are not so dangerous, nor yet so greuious unto a sincere
conscience, as seducers which a^se in the true Church: and many that have gone
through persecutions, yet have been overtaken by seducers, and drawn away from
the true way of God; yet this is no new thing as thou may see by those
Scripturs before alleged: and as it was with the Churches of God of old, so is
it at this present time with us, for we having gone through many persecutions,
so have we had our part of trialls by decliners and seducers: and these our
opposites has greatly troubled us with their error, some they has corrupted
their with, and others they have so incumbered their minds, that they daily
trouble us with Contention: and to bring their porposes about, they came most
Lords days, diverse years and troubled us with great desturbance, many have
been the prouocations, which they have used toward us to provoke us: so that
we may truly say, that as Paul had fought with beast at Ephesus, so have we
at Amsterdam, fought with men of a beastlike condition, 1. Cor. 15. 32. and
although I could say mor in these things, yet for the present I spare, to see
if the Lord will work upon their hearts by this Christian Reprofe, which if it
take not effect, but that they go on to strive against the truth, the Lord
can give a fit opportunity that their deeds may be fully laid open, concerning
these things in question. And now Christian Reader, take thou heed, that thou
stomble not at these things to forsake the truth, for these things ought not
to be strange unto thee, seeing the Apostells of Christ has fortolde of these
things, Act. 20. 29. 30. 2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3. yea and themselves were troubled
with such trialles, whilles they were with the Churches, Acts 15. 2. Gal. 2.
4. 5. and some preaching Christ through envy and strife, supposing to add more
affliction too the Apostells bands, Phil. 1. 16. And has not the Apostell
told us, that in these last days shall come perilous times, and that all
sorts of sins shall abound? 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. which should teach us to be
more watchful, and to judge wisly of things, and not too be offended at the
truth, or any part thereof; for it is the truth that makes us free, John 8.
31. 32. and yet when the Lord of glory was upon the earth, which taught the
truth more excellent then ever did any, yet his own Disciples went back, and
walked no more with him, stombling at his heavenly doctrine: seeing it is thus,
that our corrupt nature is so soon carried a side: how should we desire of
God, to have the spirit of discerning, and of sincerity to walk in the truth;
and whereas we have been evil spoken of, too be co^tentious, and of fierry
spirits, with many such like reproaches: But what is the cause that we are thus
reproched? is it not because we withstand error and sin: and suerly,
although we are weak men, yet hearin we follow the examples of the Prophets
of God. Was not Moses the meekest man upon the earth* yet was he stored up
many times to great anger, because of the sins of the people: and who is more
ready to carpe at the zeal of Gods people, then louse persons, or luck warm
Christians, which are ready to say as Ahab, 2. Cron. 18. 7. that when the word
of God is spoken for their reprofe, they think it is never well spoken to
them, well for men's esteem we pass not upon it: but I turn my speech to such
as are faithful: if they have the love of the truth, and if they have a
desire too keep the Lords watch in his house, then I say to such as Iehu said
too Iehonadab 2. Kings 10. 15. ^f their hearts be upright to the Lord, and to
us as ours is unto them, then let them no^ stagger at these troubles: But come
and help us in our heavenly journey: for great are the hindrances by our
corrupt flesh and this world, and Satan he uses both these to ensnare us.

But for such as are corrupt, and under a pretense of peace, and lowlines of
mind, Col. 2. 18. will either broch error or plead for sin; unto such I say
with David, Psalm 119. 115. which says: Depart from me ye eu^ll doers, for I
will keep the commandments of my God. And this I speak not of singularity,
but because I find that our corrupt nature has not need of helpers into sin:
for we are subject of our selves to run into sin daily. And now Christian
Reader, for as much as the devil has in these our days revived a new his
ancient course, teaching of men to abuse the Name of God, in (...) upon them to
make a Covenant in their Antichristian estat, which is contrary to the word of
God, and is a means, not only to insnar themselves, but also to draye, and
ensnare the people of God, which are escaped out of their bounds: but
concerning this poinc^, I refer thee to the 16. 17. 18. pages of this book:
And now that which I have written, I commit it to thy judgment, in the which I
pray thee be not partial, but read with consideration, and then with Moses
to say to him that does the wrong: Why smi^est thou thy fellow. Exodus 2. 13.

A Christian Reprofe against Contention.
MR. Staesm: in the beginning of his book settet down as a cause of the
publishing of Mr. Answorth Sarmon: To be a love token of remembrance to his
Brethren to in kindle their affections to prayer that scandalles of many
years continuance may be removed that are bares to keep many godly wise and
judicious from us, whereby we might grow to further perfection again.

ANSWER.
THat all the people of God ought to pray both for the prosperity of the
truth and for the removing of scandalles, that none may be hindered from the
true walking in the truth, it is their duty so to do. But is not Mr. S. the
chief man which is the cause of the scandell now in question between us, who
all though we did bear with him in his error, and no doubt would so have
done until this day, and always he resting in peace yet was he so bussie
and vnrestty that he is the chief man that has brought this scandal or
offense, therefore I advertise him to remembare the saying of our Lord Jesus,
woe be to the world because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses
shall come, but woe to be two the man by whom they come; and as Mr. S. has
begone the offense: so he is the these man that may in part by the
acknowledging of his sin heal the breach, and so help to take away the
offenses which if God vouchsafe to give unto him, I shall be glad and I hope
all the people of the Lord also: Mr. S. instructs us how to remove scandal,
and in the mean time he runeth one sweftly two intrease the scandal by
publishing of his unjust writings He tells us that the setting out of Mr.
Answorths Sarmon is his love taken: But is this so in deed why then has he
placed such a swet flower between such bitter and poisoned earbes, placeing
before it his untrue preface, and be hind it his stoffing postscript where by
he abuses the word of the Lord, and belyeth his neybours as afterward I
shall show God willing: if this be the event of Mr. S. love. what may we
think will the event of his hattred be: But may (...) not be justly feared
such fruit as this that he tocke an occasion to set out Mr. Answorths Sarmon,
that so with it he might send abroad his unprofitable writings, and that he
might get the better sale which alone of them self would have, but littel
esteem; But let not Mr. S. pretend love in this: for love 1. Cor. 13. thinks
not evil: But he in this has done evil: love rejoices in the truth.

But he strifeth in error and contention, therefore let Mr. S. fear that he
is guiltye of this Scripture, Prou. 26. 18. 19. 21. which says: As a mad man
casts fire brandes arrows and death, so is the man that dece^ueth his
neighbor, and says am not I in sport, so he speaks of love, but he
casts untruths scandalles, and reproaches and error.

M. Staes. in the beginning of his Preface shows from the 1. Sam. 7. 2. how
that the people of God lamented after the Lord, and as he says, the same
affectione me thinks I perceive in many of you: to the which I answer, it
ought not only to be the affectione of many: But of all: Gods people to lament
the want of the Lords holy ordinances, and whereas he speaks of diverse
inconvenices for the want of the ministry, alas who will not grant it, and
more then he speaks of, but whereas he says; Being diverse times hurried and
^orne. with the loud out cries and hard handling of furious and unmerciful
spirits. These things will fall upon the head of Mr. S. himself: but first I
answer: that we are but weak mean and do sin in our best actions, how much
more in the handling of the matteres of controversy, in the which there is
always opposition, yea all though the cause be never so just.

And especially such subtle opposeres as Mr. S. and such as are with him be,
and not only subtle, b^t violent and vnresty and laboring daily to corrupt
others who should others ways think. But that in these troubles in many
things we have sinned, I speak it to Gods glory and our own shame* although
the chief matter in countrouersy must ly upon the head of Mr. S. where it is
due with all the evil euentes that does follow he being the cause of it. But
unto his clamours, I answer, although we be weak and subject to fail, yet
it follows not therefore that his clamours are true: for what be the outcryes
by the which he or any are torn with all, I hope in countrouersy men must be
answered, and if sin be committed it ought to be blamed, but have we done as
he has done, not only with his tongue and pene to send letters, but also in
print to send abroad his injurious writings by the which he slandereth his
neighbors, and not only once, but the second time as for example his 16.
Questions set out the year* 1623. would not any man that reads them think
that they are our grounds that he has set out by the way of question,
whereas in deed they are his own framing as they may fite his own turn
best, yea some altogether false as question the 5. and others the like may not
one of them are so set down as that we will approve of it: therefore as Mr.
S. has done evil in making such questions, so has the answerer, or made his
answer according as his mind was declined: and as Mr. S. has done us Injury
in them, so has he now as I shall show, if we had thus done unto him then
he might have complained of outcryes. But he is like a quarrelling man which
lays hard strokes upon his neighbors, and with all cries out that he has
the injury: and if he be so bold as to set out in print such untruths
against us: what may we think he has done in secret with his tongue and pene
where we cannot come to know it: a few words is convenient more to be spoken
concerning his 16. Questions, he says in his Epistle that he was much
provoked latly to further it by some amongst us, I am doubtful of it, although
he says that diverse can witness it because I know how vnresty he is, and
how small an occasion he will take to be provoked unto his end less strife,
nay was it not rather that he took an occasion both then and now to set his
Printery a work, for in deed if he goes one as he does begin he may make
great vollomes to idle contention: but I hope a Christian answer may satisfy a
descret reader and to keep to the main things that are different between us,
but if any did provoke Mr. S. I hope they did not provoke him to set down
(...) nor yet to pervert our reasons by his own formings. He says these
questions and answers were several times tendered to our sight which we would
not vouchsafe to regard: to the which I answer neither do we regard them now,
but do return them to the former of them to whom they are due, and desire
him as reason requires that he will give his leave to frame our own
grounds, as we have just occasions: and for our not receiving in to public
these questions and answers, by the answer allredye geven wherein is showed how
untrue they are, are sufficient, not to receive them, and also we had
experiance of his troublesomnes before: and should such things be read to the
congregation moreover it was signified that if they came with repentance we
were ready to hear it, and to receive them with gladness, but to read his forged
writings in the Church we have no warrant in the word of God, nor any example
nor costome: And whereas he says: In these to our understanding are
comprehended the marrowe and substance of the things in difference between us
arising, both from that letter writ to London, the cause of our misery and
other actions and dealinges occasioned from the same. To the which I answer
first he himself grants. Them to be collected and composed questions in
that he says: in these to our understanding are comprehended, which as he
says, did arise both from the letter and other actions and dealinges
occasioned: Answer. But does not our opposites known: that the (...) placeing
of words or the lacking of a word: or the adding of a word may change the
sense, and too whom made he these questions, was is not to one that was
corrupted with the same error that he held even as dipped as himself, and
should we not expect a good resolution: neither will the marrowe and substance
of the differences between us, appear by such questions and answers, for some
questions which he gathers, are amisshapen and wants that that should be
with it, and some are false and it is no marveile: for he says they arise
from actions and dealings occasioned: and who knows not that by such
compositions we may be very much wronged and so we are in deed. But where he
calls our letter the cause of our misery. To the which I answer his error
and his vnrestynes in his error is the cause of our misery in all these
troubles in questions, and for the letter although it is infearme as it is by
man composed, yet is it a work of God by his people against error and sin,
being the manifesting of our Judgment confermed by the word of God against that
Samaritanest Covenant: being there unto called: and have not we the Scriptures
plantyfull for our warrant, having the Prophets and Apostels for our example,
it being appart of our spiritual warfare against since and seed of the
serp^nte to witness against such counterfeit Covenant as the Prophet says:
Osea. 10. 4. They have spoken words swearing falsely in making a Covenant: and
as John says, Reu. 2. 10. I know the blasphemy of them which say they are
Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue or Satan: and have we not also an
example in a such like cause as this in the Church of Ephesus which was
commanded by the Holy Ghost Reu. 2. 2. for examining of them which says they
was Apostells, and are not: and have found them liares. And should we be
blamed for examining of them as say they are visible Christians, and have made
a true Covenant when in deed they are found to be liares and this man: who is
the chief cause of this our misery has bin found falty in this respect long
ago in London for he went to Mr. Lee, and his people and desired of them
Communion signifying to them that he was as they ware: being in the same
Covenant, and so got into their Communion: But when they came to hear that
Mr. S. had deceived them: there was a meeting appointed between Mr. Lee and
his people, and Mr. Iacobe and his people, at the which Mr. Sta. himself was
present and three other men which afterward (...) members of our Church
which testified unto us, how things was carried: so being come together, Mr.
Iacobe their manifested as the truth was that they never intented separation
from the Church of England: appearing to Mr. S. I for witness saying their
sittes Mr. S. (...) him gainsay it if he can: to the which speech, he had
not one word to gainsay: yet after this he coming over to us he carried
himself in the like manner toward us, and we being ignorante how things
did stand and he concealing the truth, he had almost drawn our teacher to
yield to let him communicate. But when these 3. Brethren had given in their
testimony how things did stand, then our teacher says: That them it was to
be considered other vvayes, and no doubt if the Lord had continued his life he
would have discovered that Covenant in question, and yet for all this did this
man continue in his untrue speaking a long time after this saying that they
were the most part separated, and when he was asked, why he did not then
except against Mr. Iacobe when he appealled to him for witness: and being
observed that your silence was a consent as in such causes it is offtentimes:
to the which he ansvvered that it did not follovv, that because he ansvvered
not, that therefore it was so: and yet behold besides M. Iacobes testimony we
sense have other witness of (...) R. B.
men, which was at the Covenant making, that none of them (...) D. P.
separated, and this is under there own hands ratified: and in one o^ their
testimonies which was don by their eldere he is blamed (...) as follovveth:
whosoever shall say that they were separated, may well take shame unto
themselves, yea though it should be M. S. himself, and unto this vvriting is
the hands of. Three more which testifye S. I.
that all of them went to hearing in the Church of England after E. H.
the Covenant making to there knowledge: and now seeing that these A. B.
things are so in the which this man has gone beyond himself in the special
ground from whence all these our troubles did arise, how should he fear
himself even in his error, and to take heed how he goes one in his
procedings least the Lord leave him unto hardness of heart, and to blindness of
eyes, as a just recompense for striuen against the truth: or to lay a snar in
Mizpach, to ensnare the souls of men, or to do as Balaam did, which taught
Balac to put a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, which this man
has done, and does in the maintaining of that Samaritanesh Covenant, as
through the help of the Lord, I shall prove in due time: And none to return
to Mr. S. Preface again he calls us unmercifully spirits, who under
pretense of godly zeal, and hatred against sin ungodly massacre the true and
living members of Christ body. First I answer that if I should follow him in
all his clamours and insinuations, and also his taking up of men's weakness let
fall in reasoning, and dispute which he uses to hide his own faults and
transgressions: then I say we might have work enough to do, and increase
unprofitable writtings. But let him know that all men of vvisdome will think
it apo^re shifte to help himself with men's sins, or infirmityes to cover
his own sins, and so to avoid the maine matter in difference therefore fit
it is: seeing he would not rest in his error in peace: that now he should.
Both justify his error and his vnrestynes in his error, which was the cause
of his casting out or else to fall under it: and to return with repentance,
but seeing he has written vntru^ ths I shall make a brief answer unto them:
But first vvher he says we are furious and unmerciful, with other
reproachful terms before named: he should have stayed himself in these
things until such time as he had made good his cause in question, for who is
not just in there own cause in their conceit which be in contention as he
is, and therefore the evil of his reproaches, and all the hindrances unto the
truth, which he speaks of must lie upon himself, except he could make his
error truth and his vnrestynes, with seeking to se^ to be good and lavvful,
which I know is more then he is abell to do. And for his quoting of
Scriptures how largly and fitly might they all be applied upon himself as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. might be applied to him to show his business before he came to us,
and vvhill he was with us: and since he was cast out being a raiser up of
contention so breaking those Scriptures Galat. ^. 15. and 1. Cor. 11. 16. also
for Romans 16. 17. How evidently does that Scripture reprove his factious
action, for the which he was cast out. But I leave the manifesting of it
unto his propre place. And for the other whom he says are thrust out of the
Church: which witness for them I hope all men of understanding may consider,
that men that have evil causes for the most part they lack not some partaker
to assist them: And for them were they not as forvvard as any to cast out
these two opposites, yea more forvvard then many, and I am suer more forward
then my self, and what has changed their minds they say the meeting of the
brethren afterward to be spoken of which I may say is lose then affige leave
to cover there shame: and therefore may it not be well feared that respects
have stolen away there affection seeing their reason of change is of so little
weight: and for this I can show reasons, but at this time I spare; because
that some although justly touched: yet would be to much moved, and although I
could say more yet I stay here, knovving that such things does, but tend to
vain ^anglinge. But this man has administered the cause to speak this. And
whereas he says we reject the word of God and all wholsome counsel for
our amendment countrary to the very letter of the 38. article, and why did he
not show vvherin also: was it not because he might doubt of the truth of his
affirmation and suer, if it be laid upon him for an untruth, I see (...) how
he can shifte it for our article speaks of the communion that all Churches
have for counsel, and help in all needful things in the common faith, and
this did we practice in that our letter to the Church at London, in the which
this man did so much oppose us, and has made all this troubell, and also we
practice that article as we have just occasion: But does he mean we break
this article because we do not at his pleasure his will or the wills of such
as h^ stoureth up to bring other Churches, to be judges whether he be
rightly cast out or not, if all that are cast out should have that right as I
know not why he should have more right then others: then t^ Churchs should
have work enough to do to look to others businesses and to neglect their
own. But we must learn to put a differance between that which concearneth
the common faith, and the proper power that every several Church has in it
self: as for example in Reu. 2. and 3. chap. every particular Church has
their commandation or reprofe as they deserved: and as the Church of Pergamus
was reproved for suffering of such as taught the Doctrine of Balaam, so needed
they not to ask another church whether they should restrain them that so
taught or, whether they should cast them out if they would not be restrained,
or when they had cast out any to call for other Churches to know whether
they had done well or not in so doing, especially to such Churches as were
corrupted with the same error, and hear observe: that when we did follovv
our article in the sending our letter to the Church at London at their
request, then we did evil as he accounts, because it was against his error.
But now we must follovv him although against reason, and bring our power in
to bondage or else he will tell us, we reject the word of God, and do
contrary to our own article, he tells us of our teachers speech upon his
deathbed concerning Christian moderation, suerly, the best of us does, come to
short of it often times, but why did he himself so soon forget it, seeing
he was so vnresty in his error: for he was their, and heard his words.
But they whom he aymeth at to my best remembrance was not their: upon whom
he takes this occasion, to speak things not convenient, and to bring in
another man's speech which helps not him in his matter to make it good or
evil: neither will vvismen think it wisdom in him, to set out men's
infirmities to the world thinking thereby to cover his own: And for the
causles troubles contrary to the Law and Gospel, which he speaks of that
is to be proved by him, or they that can: when we come to the point. He
says, the Church of Leyden has plainly proved it too us. I know not that
they have prove any such thing. But one thing I know that they take things for
granted that are not so: as for example Mr. S. says that we do contrary to
the letter of the 8. position in our Apology, where he would make others
believe that his sins in question are, but matters of suspected evils, and
not evils in deed, vvherin he shall sind himself greatly deceived when he
comes to the trial thereof: and where he says certain discontented brethren
made a meeting to change that solemn agreement of the church, the elder
consenting and acting with them. Answer: How can this man clear himself from
a wilful untruth in this thing, seeing their were diverse Brethren their and
all witness except one man, that they did nothing, but desired the elder that
in the writing of the letter that he should be careful to keep to the true
meaning and mind of the Church: in that their sentence and the reason why they
did so desir him was because as they told the elder that some of those fevv
contrary minded brethren did pervert the Churches meaning already: and that one
which endeavored to seek and make matter about this meeting, yet in the
public when the thing was in question he confessed and said, that their was
nothing done or concluded by the brethren. Now this man being one that was
present, and also being very willing to condemn the brethren, if he could have
don it, yet he thus confessing, and all the brethren testifying as before is
said, and denies Mr. S. accusation, and Mr. S. has bin told of these things
although he has thus written: and does he not know, that if a thing be
denied by on man, in any act done that he is accused of that one I say cannot
be condemned, but by the mouth of two constant witnesses: how then is this man
guiltles which would condemn many, and yet not having one constant witness:
and for that which he says the elder bringing the letter was blamed for
writing contrary to the Churches joint agreement, and his own promise would
not he make the reader believe that the Church blamed the elder; because their
agreement was altered an that therefore the letter was turned back again: But
was it not he that blamed the elder, and the other three brethren that stod
with him, for their was no more at that time that I can remember: But for the
Church they knew their own mind and excepted of it as their own mind to
condemn the Covenant. But because M. S. and another were produced for
witness, and he refused it and said the other would not do it neither:
therefore was it willed the elder to put that thing out: and this was the
tourning back of the letter. But how collerable does he set it down to
make it fayer for his porpose: much like the devils ancient oracle which
might (...) turned two vvayes, for he tells the reader, it was blamed, but
he tells not by whom it was blamed, he says it was turned back: But
he tells not wherefore the Church turned it back: and where he says, that
the elder was willed to writ the first peacable agreement: it may be he
might so plead or so speak, but that the Church did so, it is not true: But as
before it has bin signified, and why does he thus: is it not because he would
have the reader to understand it was because his error was condemned which
in deed was not so: and I am persuaded he dares not say otherwise although
he has thus written. But their is one thing more to be spoken of: which is
that he and some with him, would bear us down: that the Church did not
condemn the Covenant at the first, but left it vnjudged: to this I answer
diverse things briefly, and first I suppose that he knows, that upon his
clamours and some with him that then the sentence of the Church was called,
which gave their sentence: that they condemned the Covenant the first day: 2.
his own friends which as he said witnessed for him: they I say tourning
their minds about toward Mr. S. they made 6. or 7. weeks contention, saying
that the Churches sentence was altered, and why, said they, because the word
false was added in the letter: therefore said they the Church condemned the
Covenant sufficiently by other words. But the word false was avoided for
offense sake: thus it went on 6. or 7. weeks till the letter was looked into,
and then it was found that the word false was not their. But to the thing in
hand this is the testimony of his own friends, but that which we say or his
own friends have said is nothing with him for he will go one needlessly to
endless contention, 3. needless I say, for if it had bin as he says that
the Church had not condemned the Covenant the first day, because they would
not offend those few brethren: if then those few brethren, made an evil us of
it: I hope the Church had power to condemn it, afterward for their own
preservation both of their members, and of the truth: and who compelled the
Church to consent: was it not because it was their own mind to condemn the
Covenant. But had the Church don as he says in that thing: then I say had he
done as the Prophet says to lay a snar in Mizpha. 4. let not him think that
this Samaritanest Covenant should have that privilege which circoncision had
which was the Lords seal of old to be laid down in honnour, yet when it was
abused, the Apostell left the use thereof, and would not give place for one
hour: but is it a thing lickly that when the elder brought the letter to read
it, being but a week between that none of the Church could mind that the
sentence was altered, but he and them fevv with him for he knovvs their is
freedom of exception to ^ll, but one thing more is to be observed concerning
the difference betvveene the dealing of this men, and those brethren whom he
accuses in that meeting, for when his matter was in the public he refused
to debat the matter, but would have it turned to private, but those brethren
whom he accuses, did not only lay down what they did in that their meeting,
but offered themselfes to the trial of all that if any could show it to be
otherwise they should do it: and not only once, but diverse times was this in
question and always they offering themselfes to trial.

And whereas he speaks of a thing yet worse, for either the elder alone or
these privy counselors with him, stod not to this second agreement the Church
made, but vvrote another with alteration, addition, and diminishing: besides
the Churches knowledge and consent, and sent it for the churchs mind and act.
Answer first, vvher he speaks of the second agreement, I know but one
agreement, twice spoken of, and the occasion is manifested before, two if the
alteration which he speaks of, had bin by him set down: then it may be it
would appear to be, but that which he had commission from the Church to do,
as he himself grants in some thing, but vvheras he speaks of adding and
diminishing, these things are yet to prove, for I know not of any such thing:
neither any man that I know of did see the letter or gave any counsel
concerning it, after it came from the public, but the elder himself.

But vvheras he says that they were cast out upon a very suspicion that a
fevv of them met to writ to contradict the Churches action. Answer, I can not
but marueil at him, that he should thus ran into this untruth to say that it
was but suspicion, did not he himself confess, yea of himself manifest,
both to the elder, and also to others before it came to the Church besides some
that heard the letter read, and I hope he dares not deny. But that he did
grante in the public in the general, that his letter was the apposing of the
letter of the Church, although he would not in the particulars debat the
matters.

And after he was cast out he said, what did he, but take away the
erronist grounds which Mr. Delaycluce writ in the letter: and therefore he
thinking his error is a truth, it may be he thinks so to deceive the
reader, so likewise he calls the laying down of the matter in the Church
the false information of the elder, and that two of them were singled out,
and selected from the rest. First I answer, what does he call the false
information of the elder, I hope he knows that both himself, and to other
with him did manifest to the elder themselses that they had written in
opposition to the Church, and so consequently contrary to that truth, which
the Church maintained in the letter: was it not this that the elder informed
the Church of, he also says that two were singled out from the rest, in
which he would give the reader to understand, as if all that those two had
got to their meeting, were at the first known vvheras in deed it was
otherways: for although it was known that they had a meeting to that
porpose, yet every particular person was not then known, but those two
opposites made known themselses to the elder of the Church pretending to him
as if they would submit it to correction: the elder refused to meddle with it
himself, but told them that it parteined to the Church; they consented to have
it come to the church, but when it was propounded and laid down their, then
they refused to answer or to debat the matter, nor yet to deliver up the
letter: and the reason that they pretended was, because the elder in the
laying down of the matter said that that which they had done was a thing of
an evil not, and was this a sufficient reason to refuse to debat the matter:
what i^ the elder had done like Moses Numb. 32. ^4. or like the messenger of
the Church, Joshua 22. 18. or like Ely 1. Sam. 1. 14. all these were directly
charged with heavy charges and they were clear, yet did they Christi^lik
debat their matters, and cleared themselves, but these opposites ^ere, but
touched and presently they kiked, and so fullfilled the common proverb that
agalled horse back is soon heart: but they ought rather to have approved
themselse or to have submitted themselves to the means to come out of their
sin, as David says Psalm* 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil which shall not
break my head. Where was their pretended committing it to correction when upon
so little occasion they refused trial in the ^ght place where it should be
tried. And for that speech which he says the informer speak that it might be
holy, just and good: for ought he knew, this was a speech spoken to prouoque
him to answer ^hilles they were a reasoning together. And the best of us may
escape words some times in reasoning that will not stand: yet is not this man
the clearer for all that.

But where he says that the matter was follovved by interrogatories to find
out sin. Answer: sin was found when his vnrestynes in his error was found,
and this being now manifested, and laid down to the Church, we needed not
make much cerching to find the sin, but rather to use the best means we
could to draw them out of their sin which then did appear: and how could
this be done, but their must be questions or demandes, or as he terms them
interrogatories, and a little after he calls them intraping demandes, but
he must not shifte the thing so, for did not he altogether refuse to debat
the matter in the public, saying they were not according to the rull Matthew.
18. dealt with all, therefore they refused to debat the matter in the public,
and he knows well, that when any is asked a question, that is not meet or
reasonable they may, and do refuse to answer, and so might he have done if
he could have shevved unlawful questions, but in that he did refuse
altogether to answer or to debat, the matter therein was their sin of
opposing of government, and how contrary were they in this to the servants of
God of old: Numb. 32. 14. 15. 16. Joshua 22. 21. Who although they were charged
with heavy charges and had not sinned, yet they ansvvered and cleared
themselves. But these although they had sinned, yet they refused to debat or to
answer, and neglected the means to come out of their sin: and for his
saying it was contrary to Matthew. 18. I refer the reader to the answer of his
postscript. He says that they were cast out without knowledge of sins, and
also that they protested solemnly they had neither don the thing so suspected
nor intended it. Answer, I still except against his word suspected, for the
thing was plainly laid upon them: for although at the first it was carried with
a^low and safte words, saying that it was a thing of an evil not, and that
they ought to answer even to apparences of evil in such public matters of
the Church as this was, and seeing they did run unto such an action, they ought
to answer, and to that end was Joshua 22. and 1. These. 5. 22. brought the one
showing that Christians ought to keep themselves from apparances of evil: the
other Scripture showing that if a Christian does any thing that seems
contrary to the Law of God, they ought to clear themselves, and to this was
added Acts 11. wh^ Petter cleared himself, but all this could not persuad
them to answer and to debat the matter, so when they still refused: their
sin was condemned by Ephesians. 4. 3. 4. and 1. Cor. 3. 3. and other Scriptures,
and by these Scriptures was their factious or unlawful meeting condemned as
their refusal too answer was condemned, as before is showed: so then sin
was known before they were cast out: but what is that which he protested
they had neither done nor intended it before I have showed how they opposed the
Church in the truth, in that their unlawful meeting, to the which I ad
this: they that maintain an error do sin Reu. 2. 14. they that seduce to
error does sin verse. 20. they that sequester apart of the church against the
church, the church maintaining the truth does sin Romans 1^. 17. and all this
did they in that meeting, therefore when we knew of their meeting to conferme
that letter: we knew that all this was by them committed: but it may be he
will except, and say that the thing was not so laid down to them at the
first as now I do, that is true, but were not they the cause of that that it
was not, seeing they refused to debat, the matter or to answer as I have showed
therefore the sin was condemned in the generals, as I showed before. But
how shall we understand his protestation concerning his intendement, it may
be he did not intend any evil, and why because he minded it to be good, and
for the truth: but we meddle not with his intendement, but with his action.
Petter though he intended good when he parsuaded the Lord Jesus not to suffer
at Jerusalem. But therein he was an instrument of Satan to overthrow the
salvation of all Gods elect, if Satan could have prevailed by him, and as
Petter good intend could not bear him out, seeing his deed was evil, yea
although it was his ignorance, so will not his good intend help him, seeing his
deed was evil: He goes one with many clamours after his manner, to the
which I have given some answer before. But where he charge us with
partiallity for spearing of scandallous evils least our evil combination,
should be weakened discovered or broken. Answer, if all that ^ich this man says
were true, it might make us appear evil in the eyes of men: to the which end
he settes it out: that he might collar his own evils, but we must mind it
to be the fruits of his love, and his love token thus to do, for he has told
us in the beginning of his book that therefore he has set out Mr. Answorths
sermon.

But would he have done Mr. Answorth that injury, but upon this occasion he
might also power out his malice against us: but to the thing in hand, I
considered in my self what he did mean by those scandalous evils, but I
could not mind what he aimed at, so I asked M. S. what he did mean by
these scandallous sins he speak of in his book, but he shifted me of and
would not tell me; now what dealing is this that a man will set out to the
world such reproaches, and refuse to manifest them to one that might use means
to help them, if their be any: but let honnest men judge of this his doings.
He says further that irregular proceedings have made our brethren in all
places to hang down their heads, and he says we have bin plainly certified
from sundry churches. Answer that we have bin so certified from sundry
churches, I know no such thing. But it is his manner if on man let a word fall,
he will apply it to all, as see the answer to his Postscript: now true it is,
that one Church which received him to them by his Samaritanesh Covenant, they
in deed do take his part or else they must condemn themselves, but for any
more I know not any: But if it were so, it would not make him clear in his
matter; therefore let him leave these clamours, and stand to the cause in
differance, that ^o he may either approve himself or fall under it. And
whereas he says now for these, and the like offenses diverse that were of us
turn the back upon us, and betake themselves to live at large, as if now the
door of indifferency or libertinisme were set open, that it matters not whom
they hear or where they walk.

THE COVENANT EXAMINED.
ANSWER.
BUt can he spy the living at large of diverse that have received the ^rueth
which now have declined, and can he find no other occasion which they take
for their stumbling, but those things which he speaks of: for those which
he has set down, I refere the reader to the answer given, but I can nam some
friend of his, who has rathe^ opened the door of indifferances whereby many
has taken occasion to decline. But first I say to him, is not he the man
himself, which has made a pathe way for such libertins in the maintaining of
that Coue nant of desemblation in the which he would bring light and darkness
in to one habitation, in that he would make us believe that antichristians
never leaving their antichristian estat, are sit matter for to make a true
Covenant with God, and that they can make a true Covenant, and so become
visible Christians, and not only so, but also daily practice their pretended
Covenant and keep their communion in their antichristian assemblies whose in
deed they are, if these be not the right Samaritanes in their practice then let
the indifferant judge: But how contrary is this unto the Scriptures, Matthew. 3.
6. 2. Cor. 6. 14. 17. 18. Re^. 18. 4. which shows unto us: that God does
receive us into Communion upon this condition, to come out, and to separat from
the false vvayes of the world and least our corrupt flesh should put
differant, and so take an occasion to continue in any one false way more then
another, therefore says the Holy Ghost, and touch no unclean thing and I will
receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord almighty. If the Lord has made this condition, as it
is clear he has, who should not fear to plead the contrary or so to
practice: moreover did not they that were baptized confess their sins.
Matthew. 3. 6. And was not baptism to them in the true Church are newing of
their Covenant in Christ then come, and they that were not in the true Church
before did they not enter into a Covenant with God in Christ, when they were
baptized, and was it not don unto all upon the confession of their sins? how
comes it to pass then that these men before named being vnseparated, and
vvalking in their public sins should be pleaded for to be sufficient
Covenant makers, and that they have made a true Covenant with God, let not any
think that this distinction will help them in this cause to say that they
walk in the truth, so far as they see or understand: suerly this is a very
crooked, and a uneven measur to measure our obedience unto our creator. But
should the commandments of the blessed God be limited, and bounded unto the
blind understanding of sinful man, or as if the spirit of God had not left
sufficient derection unto us, either how far or with whom to walk in such
public matters of religion, in the which these antichristian idolaters have
less to say for themselves then those their predecessors which were before
them Exodus 32. which when they made the calfe they had not the Lords order or
direction, for the Lords ^ublique worship as yet given unto them: and therefore
they ran into that greuious sin: Moses staying long away as verse the 1.
shows: But the Lord has not only given plain order, and rulles in his word
to these men: but also has raised many faithful witnesses, both by voice, and
also by books to shovv the ways of God, and to declare their sin which
they neglect, and also reject: but to come too this man who prepares this
pathe way in the maintaining of this Covenant, how easy is it for Sattan to
prevail with any being possessed with this error whether they be in the
false Church then their to walk in this way of dessemblation, and think to
bless themselves as Naaman did 2. Kings 5. 17. with two mules load of earth
thinking to serve the Lord in the land of Sirian, and that he needed not to
trouble himself to go to Jerusalem: but this being contrary to the
commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 14. and the Prophet seeing it: and also his
soddan and confused motions which allthough he professed not to sacrifices to
any other God save only to the Lord. But yet he proposed and professed to bow
down in the house of Rimmon his masters God, and for that he would ask
pardon before he did it: now I say the Prophet seeing his sodden, and confused
motion bid him go in peace, that is so much as say, far ye well: as if the
Prophet saw it not fit to resolve his doubts, nor to direct him to go to
Jerusalem where the true place of worship was: and are not these
Couenantmakers much like unto him, who in their confused motions or
considerations, think they need not to leave or forsake their antichristian
estat. But their to remain, and think to bless themselves by a sequestered
meeting from their brethren the antichristians on part of the day, and to
communicate with them the other part of the day: but do these men think that by
sequestering themselves from their brethren to change their condition. Oh no,
for as the Prophet shows Haggi 2. 14. that if a polluted person touch any
hollowed thing, he is so far from making himself clean thereby, that he
makes the holy thing unclean, and so not acceptable: whereupon it will
follovv that their private gathering together, and taking to themselves the
ordinances of God is so far from sanctifying of them, that they polut the holy
things of God, whilles they stand in (...) antichristian estat: or do they
think they are the nearer to the Lord by using of words to make a Covenant,
they remaining in their antichristian estat, no allthough they do it with great
zeal and oath, yet it helps them not, as the Prophet says, Hosea 10. 4.
They have spoken words swering falsely in making a Covenant: neither let them
think, that it is a lowable for them to set up a ministry in that estat: for
as it was said unto their predecessor Esra. 4. 3. it is not for you, but for us
to build the house unto our God: and if the Lord did so detest the old Babylon
which was, but the tipe of this antichristian Babylon that their should not be
a ston taken, Ierem. 51. 26. neither for corner nor for foundation, who should
not be afeard to mannag the stones of this spiritual Babylone, to be ^it
matter for the Lords house. But how do these men bless themselves some thing
like unto Michah Judges 17. 13. who being in his idolatry said, I know that
the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuit to my priest. So these
men standing in their antichristian estat, think themselves well now, seeing
they have imitated the order of the church of God in their private meetings. But
that it may the better appear that these are the right successors of the
Samaritanes, I vvil compare them together. First the Samaritanes they took it
one them to serve the Lord, 2. Kings 17. 33. But they served their idols also.
So these Couenantmakers they took it on or pretended to serve the Lord in their
sequestered private meetings from their brethren the antichristians, and so
pretended to set up the Lords ordinances, but with all they would not forsake
the antichristian estat, but walk in both together, and so continue as the
Samaritanes did. 2. The Samaritanes thus abiding in their confusion or mixed
religion, yet when the people of God returned out of captivity they presented
themselves, unto them to be in union and communion, and proffered to build with
them, testifying that they did seek the Lord their God as they did, saying
also that they had Esra 4. 2. sacrificed unto him from their first planting in
Samaria: So likewise these men although abiding in their mixed religion and
confusion, yet esteem it to be the true way of God, and would be esteemed: of
those that are separated to be their brethren, and profess their way and
course to be the building up of the house of God; taking upon them the name of
a true Church. 3. Although these Samaritanes were not accepted, but refused,
yet did some of them indirectly creept into communion with the people of God: So
some of these creept into communion indirectly, pretending that which they
were not, in the which this man was the chief, first as I have before showed
when he creept into Mr. Lees people into their communion, and after that came
over hear, and would have had communion with us: but he seeing himself to
have resistance hear, after this he went to Leyden, and creept into that
Church, and so made of them a bridge to git in unto us. 4. The Samaritanes in
their corrupt estat fathered themselves upon the ancient Patriarchs of the
Church, John 4. 12. 20. and contended with the true Church as having the truth
with them: So likewise these account their mixed estat to be the true way of
God, and condemn us for wholy separating from the false Church: and contend
with us for it. 5. Although these Samaritanes were thus corrupt in their
estat, yet had they attained unto the chief points of faith concerning the
Messiah, as may appear by the speech of the Woman John 4. 25. which was one
not stricke in life, verse. 18. and conversation, I say, if she which was but
a Woman, could say so much, what may we think was amongst the other
Samaritanes; and also we may see how redily they received Christ, as verse. 39.
and 42. shows, and yet for all those points of Doctrine which they had
received, notwithstanding they were condemned by our Savior Christ, John 4.
22. as worshipping they knew not what: which teaches us how to judge, and
esteem of such mixed religions. And now these Couenantmakers allthough they
agree with us in the chief points of faith, yet seeing they continue in their
corrupt estat, being vnseparated from the false Church, we are taught of
Christ how to esteem of them, and so leave them to be the successors of the
Samaritanes, and their right heirs. Now this is the Covenant which Mr. S.
maintains, and for the which he so bestored himself when it was condemned:
and does not he lay afar ground to keep men in the way of desemblation, and
so to remain in the false Church by the maintaining of this Covenant: ye, and
to be a snare to such as have left them, if once they be possessed, with this
error, and let us take himself for an example, for although he had left the
Church of England, both as it was a national Church, and also the Parishes
holding, both to be false, and being come so far reason should have taught him,
never to have to do with such a Samaritanesh people again in Church
communion, seeing they remain^ as they did vnseparated: yet since he was cast
out from us, he went and had communion with them, and baptized his child with
them also: and why went he not rather to the assemblies, seeing that that is
their most proper Church estat, they being yet vnseparated, and for that their
private meetings it is, but a schism in Babell, and in that their doing they
make a breach in both estats, both in their antichristian estat, and in their
pretended serving of the Lord, 2. Kings 17. 33. 34. as the Holy Ghost
testifies of their predecessor. And further I say to him concerning ^is
clamours, who of our Church has turned their back upon us except those
which he is the cause of about these troubles in question, which he through
much laboring, and others with him has enticed: but if he means those of
the Church of Leyden, which has declined or apostated, is it not more
probabell or rather to plane that they have taken their ground from Mr. To.
their Pastor which has opened so many pathe ways: for them first in setting
out a book for private communion with the members of the false Church, 2. in
the maintining of hearing in the assemblies to be no communion, 3. in the
maintaining of this Samaritanesh Covenant: 4. in that book called Apology,
he does not only with smoth words darken the truth, which formarly he
Justification of separ^tion.
maintained. But also he says plainly speaking of the Church of England in
the 58. page, Observe this is the (...) which Mr St. (...) to have.
and he speaks it in the name of the Church of whom he is Pastor: that
their faith does not consist in the co^demning of others, and wiping their
names out of the bead roull of Churches. And a little after he says: neither
requier we of any ours in the confession of their faith that they either
renounce or in one word contest with the Church of England: in this it
appears that he is ashamed, and runeth from separation, and of this his
alteration has the adversaries of the truth taken nottise of, long before
this last book came out so as I. P. says, An a^row against the sep^ration of
the B^un. page ^9. line 25.
speaking of his book, called the justification of separation.

Which he set out in the defense of the truth, it being a good work, yet
thus he speaks of Mr. Rob. concerning it that he openly pluckes out some of
the bowels thereof with his own hands, and now seeing this is so, why does
this man endeavor to lay the fault upon us: which withstand these errors, and
therefore we are of him, and them evil spoken of: but as it is usually seen
that such as run from their masters do speak evil of them, so such as
decline, do speak evil of them that oppose them: and therefore let none
merueill that we are evil spoken of by Mr. S. and by those that assist him,
for it has bin thus always with the Lords people in former times, yea even
the Apostells of our Lord Jesus has thus bin dealth withal: and now to these
opposites I speak, whereas one of them two hertofor has spoken to this effect,
that if the Covenant could be desproued, that then they ought to acknowledge
their evil in the things, for the which they were cast out: and although but
one of them speak it, yet seeing he speak the truth, and as it ought to be
therefore, I wish them both to consider it, and for us if the Lord give
repentances unto them we shall be glad, and hold our arms open to receive
them: but alas what hope is their of it, seeing this man has so many times
imitated the practice of Absalom which went in to his fathers concubins, that
so all should have no hope of reconciliation between them: so the third time
has he printed his contention to the world, as if he did mean to continue
an adversary, and therefore by these he bideth battle: but if his cause were
better then it is, yet great is the evil he does therein in causing the name
of the Lord to be scandelled. Another pathe way which he makes for libertines
is in the maintaining of his refusing, to answer which is before spoken of, by
which president of his we see the evil effect that has followed, for suerly
by his example the lo^se ones of the Church, and such as are corrupted begin to
oppose that diligent watch as ought to be keept in the Lords house, and with
his example, and his bussie writing, and printing, and private corrupting of
men's minds laboring to corrupt all that he thinks, he can work upon as by
experiance we have seen, and in deed not keeping to the things as they are,
as I have showed before. Therefore that his sin in this point may the better
appear, I will briefly declare, and distingest betvveen private and public
matters, and then apply his cause unto that which it appertains unto. First I
find in the Scripture that the Lord both under the law, also in this time of
the Gospel did so provide, that all his people should be preserved from
giving themselves liberty to sin, both sins of private nature, and also of
public: the general of this I find in Leuit. 19. 17. which serves either
for public or private, the words are these: Thou shall not hate they brother
in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebucke they neighbor* and suffer him
not to sin. 2. Observe if the sin be of private nature and committed private
to the knowledge, but of one brother, then is that brother bound in private to
show the sinner his sin: and if he hear and repent, their it must stay, and go
no further: Matthew. 18. 15. and Prou. 25. 9. because he is wone and a sinner
converted from going a stray, and a soul saved from death ^ames 5. 20. Now I
purpose not hear to speak of all the degrees of dealing for sin: but only out
of the Scripture to show that which siteth the present purpose in hand.
Therefore 3. in the next place observe that some sins that are privately
committed, are not privately to be ended by that one that knows it, as for
example the intiser to idolatry Deuteronomy. 13. 6. And also the committer of idolatry
Deuteronomy. 17. 2. 3. which sins the Lord would not have keept secret, Deuteronomy. 13. 8.
and which sins was, and is the pleasure of the Eternal that they should not
be keept secret, because he would have his people keept in their obedience
unto him as it is most reason they should above all things, and to preserve his
truth: and for the preservation of his people, and therefore the sinner was to
be brought forth that his people should hear and fear, and do no more such
wickedness Deuteronomy. 13. 11. compared with 1. Timoth. 5. 20. and as in these
transgressions the public Church is to see the end thereof. 4. So likewise
concerning the breach of the ordinances that God gave to the Church, that they
parteine to the general to look unto as we may see in Acts 11. 2. for
having but heard that Petter had eatten with some uncircumcised, they thought
he had broken the ordinances, and therefore not knowing of his vvarrant they
looked unto it, and received his answer, yet was this done in a private house
far of them, to wit, in Cesaria. 5. Likewise for doctrine when any is
maintained which is against the faith in the general, or against the
ordinances pertaining to the Churches, this also belongs to the public
assembly to look unto, as we may see in Acts 21. 22. in the speech of the
elders unto Paul, which although their went a false report of him that he
taught the Jews that were amongst the Gentills to forsake Moses, yet we see
upon that report they had right to come together to be satisfied how it should
stand, but that it was prevented by Gods providence another way. Now these
examples I hope will be sufficient for the thing in hand: And now therefore I
will compare his sin with such of these causes as be of like nature. First
therefore his factious meeting agrees with the inticer to idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.
6. in that he endeavored to corrupt the minds of the brethren to that his
error before proved. 2. How do these two examples reprove his refusing to
answer, for neither of them had committed sin, yet had the public right to
hear the things cleared, ye although they were the Apostells of Christ, but
this man maintained an error in that his factious meeting, and such an error
which being received opens a way to libertins, and destroys separation:
and should not this belong unto the public to look unto and as a public
thing: if it be said their factious meeting was gathered in a private house,
was not Petters action don in a private house also, and that far of from them of
Jerusalem? therefore such things as these must not be limited, to a private
dealing. 3. Observe: how this had relation to the public naturally, for
first it was the error which the Church did bear with him in and therefore
he was to keep his judgment to himself, and not to corrupt other their with,
also it being in the Church, and the Church having condemned the Covenant: one
of them two professed to write: but presently the elder gave them to
understand, that if they did that then they must answer it: and in deed is it a
thing reasonable that that which was public, and communicated unto all the
whole body that one or two men should gather apart of the church to possess
their minds against the Church; the Church maintaining the truth: or in
common reason should not the Church know what they did i^ way of opposing in
that their letter, seeing they had seen, and known all that the Church had
don, suerly he lays upon some to be many masters, but in this they carried
themselves as if they were the Churches masters: and I suppose they would have
taken it to be very evil in the Church to have keept them out of the meeting,
and not to let them know what the Church did in that bussines: but they were
present as reason they should, and did disput to the uttermost of their power:
but what would these men have us to think of their doing, unless they would
have us, think that they have a privilege above others, if they have then,
let them show it unto us: but I suppose they can show no privilege or true
reason: for as all things of private nature may not be made public without due
order, so likewise that which is of public nature, and is in the public,
ought not to be opposed, and contredicted in the private in underhand dealing.
But that they ought, and should be ready to show what they do in such things,
of such nature as this is: and whereas he thus says concerning Pastor and
teacher: but what hope of ever such worthies coming in when their is such an
hideous noise in the house by such unruly masters, which cruelly smit some
wound others, and cast their dear brethren out at the windows. Answer, such
worthies as he speaks of, I hope through the mercy of God, when the Lord
calls them, will not be stayed, neither by such suttell oppossares as he is
knowing that in the Apostells days, and in all ages the Churchs has bin
troubled with such, nor yet with the weakness or sins, which break forth in
the Church: for all ought to know that the Churchs of Christ, are subject to
fail as no doubt, but we do in our best actions, but are these things true
which he speaks, of smiting and wounding, and casting our dear brethren out
at the vvindowes, I hope he means himself specially for one that is so
dealt withal: now for the matter of his casting out, I have before showed,
and for the manner of his casting out, how can he term it, a cast out at
the windows, seeing it was done by the free consent of the Church: yea and
those whom he now says witness for them, did not only consent, but some of
them hastened the elder to cast them forth, and then their own alliance had
not to speak for them: therefore if his cause had bin good against the Church
as it is not, yet might he not so to have written: for is not the going in or
the casting out at the window, opposite to the going in or casting out at the
dor, as we may see in John 10. 1. and is their any planner manner of proceeding
then by the free consent of the Church either to receive in or to cast out: and
was not the incestious person so cast out 1. Cor. 5. 4. yea and so was Mr. S.
cast out by this Church, and therefore cast out at the door, and not at the
window. And whereas he says that we have been bold to vent our worst, we
could imagine against him upon all occasion, how is this true that he says
when a^ we let him alone so many years, although he has don us great
injury, and that in printe as before I have showed, and much more I could show,
if I were of his disposition. But what shall a man git by such things, but
rather deshonner the Lord, and the truth, and therefore I let many of his
clamours alone unanswered, because I judge it not wisdom to contend in such
vain contention, being grieved that I am occasioned to do so much as I have
done by him; further he says and for your presumptuous determining my
Eternal estat, the Lord for give you. Answer, He would make the reader
believe that we judge him a cast away, and that no repentance shall be given
to him of God: but how euilly does he deal in this thing, it appears thus,
Mr. S. after he was cast out yet came he ordinarily every Lords day a great
whille and troubled us very much with heavy contention, where upon as I to my
best remembrance hard a brother say, that it was doubtful to him whether he
did not sin against the Holy Ghost in that his doings: now if the brother
had spoken never so absolut, yet was he but one man, why does Mr. S. speak
as if it were the general; but this is his manner: will I do desir that the
Lord will give him grace to shovv the contrary by repentance, but what an idle
thing is this that he will print such a thing as this: this was but a speech
spoken by one man, and he showing his judgment upon Mr. S. evil cariages then
present and also before; what may a wise man think of this man, how he
straineth other things for his porpose, seeing in this he deals so euilly:
for to set down one man's speech in such terms as he that reads, may
think it was the general: and now I have answered his Preface, wherein I
have let alone diverse of his clamours, and admonissions, for these reasons
follovvings first his clamours and admonissions do return upon himself, his
grounds being taken away, and so he being answered in the main differances.
2. I am unwilling to follovv a man of his disposition in such idle contention
in clamours and reproaches, and in laying open of the infirmities of men to the
world, for I have learned of David not to tell of such things in Gath, nor to
publish it in the streets of Ashekelon, lest the daughters of the Philistians
rejoice: and I could have rewarded him the like, but I spare such things, and I
am grieved that by him I was provoked to speak that little I have done, but I
could not well avoid it: let the indifferant Reader judge. 3. If I should go
one with him in such unprofitable strife, who would respect to read it, but
to cry the truth out in the maine things indifferant, may be profitable to
them that have a love unto the truth; and now to answer to Mr. S. Postscript
to the brethren absent, in the which he should have had more care to set
down the truth of things as they are, seeing he meant to send abroad his
unprofitable writings.

Brethren it may hapely seem strange to you, that the people hear complained of,
should be so irregular in their proceedings, and so singular as to reject the
help of all, but since they had their reasons, I thought it requisite to give
them their due herein, the reason why they proceeded not by the rulle Matthew. 18.
was because in this cause they had nothing to do with it, but with Joshua 22.
and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Answer, I say contrary to him that we refuse not the
help of any as their is just occasion, and therefore we have and do still
profess, that if any Church or Christian can show us vvherin we sin in any
thing, we are ready to hear them, but for this poinct see the Answer to his
Preface, vvher he charge us for rejecting of our 3^. Article, but let the
Reader observe, how he does skoffe with his own abusing of us, first
observe that he would take away strange conceits out of the minds of the
absent brethren, by the given to us our due in the shovving to them our
reasons, which reasons he minds to be very insufficient for the bussines in
hand.

Answer, and so do I mind also as he settes them down: therefore I will
observe his doings, first where he says the reason why we proceeded not by
the rull Matthew. 18. was because in this cause they had nothing to do with it.
Answer, but is this all that we have said, have we not showed wherein we had
to do also with Matthew. 18. in this bussines, for that rull has three degrees,
the first, the second, and the third, and their is no sin handled in the
Church, which is not comprehended in this rull, and this we hold which is
contrary to that that he has set down, whereas he says; but with Joshua 22.
and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. hear we are greatly abused also, for although Joshua 22.
is effectual for the bussines in hand, as after I shall show, yet that in the
Thesalo. is not of waighte for that he settes it down, neither was it to
that end brought; those Scriptures was aledged to him in the public when he
refused to debat the matter, the one proving that Christians ought to abstain
from all apparences of evil, but seeing he had run into it, this Scripture
being compared with Joshua 22. they prove that Christians ought to clear
themselves in such like causes as that was, and as their example reproves
them that would not follovv it, so likewise is the example of the Church of
Israel an example and rull for all Churches, to keep the watch of the Lord,
that his public ordinances should not be broken also. We find the like
example in Acts 11. where Peter submitted himself to the brethren at
Jerusalem, clearing himself and showed his warrant, that he was sent of God:
and now to ratify to the consciences of all these Scripture alleged, look in
the Phil. 3. 17. which says; Brethren be followers together of me: and
mark them which walk so as you have us for an example. Now the Apostells, I
hope, their writings are the commandments of the Lord: Who ought not to be
afraid to practice the contrary: now I say these Scriptures agree with Matthew.
18. concerning all public matters in the 3. place: therefore when that was
spoken by one, that we had not to do in this cause with Matthew. 18. it was to
be understood concerning private sins, and of private nature: therefore when
we saw how he perverted that parties meaning, then there were other answers
given to clear it, as I have showed: if he has given to us our due in this,
let the Brethren judge: and where he says and the reason why they reject all
others help, was because they said they were contrary to all men. Answer, for
rejecting of help I have answered before, but let it be observed how euilly
he deals hear with us, first he says, they said and he knows it was
but one man's speech, and therefore if it has bin altogether a mise spoken, yet
was it not the Churches: for he knows that nothing is the Churches, but
that which is taken by voice or consent with a space of silence: and that is
to be reckoned the Churches act, and he has bin told of this oftentimes, and
yet both hear, and in other places he thus abuses us, moreover although the
words were not formable, and therefore not proper, yet he knew his meaning
which was that all those which he stod to have to judge of his cause, were
contrary to us in this bussines: But to show his evil dealing, let it be
observed that he quoteth the 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. where the Apostell says of the
Jews who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us away, and God they please not, and are contrary to all men. Now
his quoting of this Scripture to his speech, before spoken of, and showing no
reason or distinction, should not men understand that that should be our also;
now observe first he takes hold of on man's speech, and makes that the
Churches. Secondly he quoteth a Scripture at his own pleasure, and that must
be our also: is this to give us or due, then let the Brethren judge. He says
thus, I refer my self to the indifferante present, whether I have not set
down their offenses sparingly. Answer, by the Reply that is given now unto
you, let the indifferant reader judge whether you have not spoken laifeshly and
very evil doing wrong unto your neighbors, and unto the truth by causing a
scandal by your unprofitable writing, and now let the brethren judge between
us, yea and any indifferant also, and as for us we do acknowledge our offenses
and sins are many, for the which the Lord may justly chastise us many ways,
and also it may be the Lord has bid Mr. S. to abuse us with his tongue, as
he bad Shimei to curse David, 2. Sam. 16. 11. But as Shimei was not guiltles
although David had provoked the Lord: neither is he guiltles although we
have many offenses; but how do I see Adam in him posting of his sin, nay I
would he did so much as Adam, for although Adam did say the Woman that thou
gave me, she gave me of the tree: yet he says this also, and I did eat:
wherein he did acknowledge he had broken Gods command. If this man did say so
much, I should have hope of him: but what shall I say, I do desir that he may
do it freely, and that is all the hurt I wish him.

Before this former answer was finished, this man has set out his third
engion into the world, in the which he plays the rowears part which
sets out other men's colleres, to the end they may the easier surprise the
merchants ships; the penner of this, after letter appears to be Mr.
Robinson, who was forvvard enought to help this man in his corrupt estat, as
it appears by this letter: yet now I suppose he writ by his information,
but whether he did or not, if now in the answer thereof, their be that spoken
which please not his friends, and those which consented unto this letter: then
let them thank this bussy man, which set it out to the world; and let them
know whosoever they be, that the truth must be preferred before the respect of
any, be they few or many.

The Preface to the letter has this title, an appeal on trueths behalf, what
he means by truth he gives to understand at the end of his Preface, and
refers the reader to the letter, vvherby I understand these 2. First his
refusing to answer, and his factious meeting which he calls lawful, but of
these 2. points let the Reader observe the answer before given, and then it
will appear that these desearueth no such title, but rather to be titled a
plaeye against the truth.

Here follow the Preface to the Letter.
OUr opposites after much and long struggling as vvild creatures taken in a
snar, perceiving neither friend nor forenner, know how to yield them any
relief, though they creept basely for it: being yet set to hold it out truth
failing them. Answer. Now this man begins to show himself in his kind, and
observe, I pray, his differant carriage in the beginning of his least book
before this, and also the first he comes with fare, shows and would make the
world believe that that which he does is all in love, and therefore he
calls us Brethren, although even then he did us great injury, but what
makes him to change his tune so quickly: it seems by his own words the very
hearing that we porpose to make answer to his clamours: and now how does he
bestore himself, telling to all to whom his writing shall come, that truth
fails us, and that we are taken in a snare, and that we can have no relief
with the rest of his vanting words, and all this and more he does, before such
time as we have put out any answer unto him: therefore he is more like unto a
vvild createur, or like unto a man that is vvilde in condition, which having
heard that his ennimy does porpose to meet with him, presently he drayweth
out his sorde, and their with smites round about him, and cries out to his
ennimy that he can not stand before him: but yet I think he should have
stayed himself, till one combat had bin tried, and not this to have vanted
himself. Well I will leave it to consideration whether Gaall Judges 9. 29. or
he be the greatest boasteres, and if we be as he says taken in a snare:
he wants not will to hold us fast, but I will grant him to be the devils
snare layare, as before I have showed, and I also grant: that he and some with
him has in snared and troubled the minds of some which has troubled us, and
now that he being a chief instrument in this our troubles, or struggling as he
terms it, let him take the shame of it unto himself, and let him and all
know, that we are commanded to strive ernestly for the faith once given to the
Saints, Jude 3. and for us I hope we shall have cause to say as the Psalm
says, Our soul as a bird is escaped out of the snare of the fowler, the snar
is broken, and we are escaped, Psalm 124. 7. And for to look for help at the
hands of men, we leave that unto him which does so labor for it; and it
shall be sufficient for us to have the word of the Lord for our warrant, to
satisfy the conscience of all that fears the Lord.

And whereas he says that we creept basely for help or relief. I know no
such thing, yet observe how contrary he is unto himself, one whille he says
we reject the help of all, and hear he says that we creept basely for
relief, and neither of them are true, as he would make the Reader to
understand, for I have answered before that we reject the help of none in due
order, and as their is just occasion.

And vvheras he says now they vnconsciennably invent slanderes hoping after
so long time past, they may now boldly change the causes of our differances,
and say we were cast out for a tempting to lead them to idolatry, and so all
we have published is no other then lies, which they now threaten to manifest
to all the world.

ANSWER.
We will leave the inuenting of slanderes unto himself, who has so
laueshly let his tongue, and pen run that way as has bin showed, neither will
we change the causes of our differances, and therefore I have laid it down
before that they were cast out, for a factious or unlawful meeting. 2. For
contempt of government in their refusal to answer or to debat their matter,
and 3. for contention in the manner of cariages, these were the heads of their
causes of their casting out: But now does he think by this his clamours to
stay us that we shall not speak, or lay open his sin in the perticulars as
we have just occasion, which is contained in chose general heads, and
seeing he would not debat his matter before he was cast out, but would have
it turned back in to private: therefore although he hear of it in the
public, we do him no injury, seeing he administers the occasion, and if
we should not lay open the perticulars to prove the faction, or unlawful
meeting, he I suppose would take the advantage thereof; therefore let the
Reader observe the answer before given, but that any has so spoken as he
settes it down, I know none, yet if there did any so speak, they shot some
thing nearer the mark, if the particular be looked into: And whereas he
says that vvee*euer have shuned trial to such clamours, I have ansvvered
before: But whereas he says that this letter does manifest it where also
contrary, to our saying is confearmed that they censered us for not,
acknovvledging intraping demandes, for Christ government and a lavvfull
peacable meeting for faction* Answer.

How this letter does manifest this which he says, it will in the
answering thereof appear in the mean time; to him I answer, we might
vvonder how Mr. Rob. can conferm that which he speaks of, seeing he was
altogether ignorant how things were carried, and then on the other hand
considering how he was corrupted with the same error, and more errors of
like nature, which also received him by that Samaritanest Covenant, and also
received for truth this man's information, and those that assist him;
considering of these things we may observe what carried away his affection: but
for answer, I give this man to understand that Solomon Proverbs 18. 17. has
told us the condition of such as he is, therefore the greatest and first
complainers are not always the most clears of evil: and therefore now let
such as know the truth judge and consider what is said betvveen us concerning
this matter.

Hear follovveth the answering of the Letter of the Church of Leyden.
We received your letter Brethren, but not answering either our expectation,
or the vvaightnes of the bussines in hand.
ANSWER.
THis weighty bussines which he speaks of, was a reconciling of those
persons, which was cast out for these things in question, and how should
we answer their expectation, seeing those opposites were so stiff in their
sinful course as that speech does manifest, which one of them spoke aluding to
Paul Acts 24. 14. in which speech he would seem to imitat Paul, but
although it was good in Paul to use that speech, and showed his fearmnes in
the truth: yet was it evil in Mr. S. to use that speech in the behalf of
his sin, and it showed his stifnes in the same, and therefore no hope of
reconciliation, they so standing in that mind: And vvheras Mr. Robin. would
seen to justify him for his stifnes, saying first touching the person intended
by you, I should not seem strange to any, if he were most forvvard who was
deeply interested in the bussines, and that so far as his Church estat and
membership must necessarily stand, or fall with that Covenant impugned by you,
as the branch with the root.

Answer, I deny that his membership should stand or fall by that Covenant, for
we received him to us one these two grounds, first as a member coming from the
Church of Leyden, with whom we were in communion. 2. As being a man
capable, because he was fully separated from the false Church, and this he
had manifested unto us before we received him: and although the Church of
Leyden which held the Covenant true, did so receive him by that Covenant, yet
we always rejected that Covenant: and did not receive him by that Covenant
unto us, for we having now another ground to go upon. First that he was a
man absolutely separated. 2. That he being now a member of a true Church,
which was in communion with us: and allthough Mr. S. was contrary to
himself in that he was now separated, yet held that Covenant true: yet else
how should we bear with him in the differance of his judgment according
these Scripturs, Romans 14. 1. and Phil. 3. 14. 15. always provided that he
keept his error to himself, and not to corrupt others their with, and this
will stand with the Scriptures that so we received him: yet if any can show
us other vvayes that it will not stand, but that we ought to have don more;
then there is a remedy by faith and repentance in Christ to help all our a
mise doings, and not to run unto such extreme conclusions as Mr. Robin. would
drive it, nay yet further I say, that if the Church of Leyden, who first
received him, and that by the virtue of that Covenant* if they had come to see
their error in so doing, yet would it not follovv that he should be
desmembered, seeing he was separated: but the Church ought to acknovvledge
their sin in so doing, and to see that he corrupted not other Reu. 2. 20.
with his error: and that reason helps him not from Genesis 29. 24. where he
says, As Zilpah was not, nor could be rightfully Leahs handmaide, except
she had bin Labanes first rightfully: by whose gift she was transmitted and
conveyed unto her. Answer, I grant that Laban could not rightfully give her,
except she had bin his rightfully before: but if Laban had stolen her, and
Zilpah had run away, and come to Leahs into the land of Cannan, then Leahs
might have bought her, or have hiered her, and yet Laban should have no injury
offered unto him, unless his stealling her, made her his rightfully which ne^
man ought to say. So likewise, neither the Church of Leyden, nor any true
Church, ought not to receive any from such an vnseparated people, seeing they
have but stolen the ordinances of God, and have no right unto them.

And whereas he brings these reasons to prove his deep intrest in the
bussines, let all know, that no conceited intrest will bear out any to
maintain an error: and therefore all his reasonings is of little weight. And
for that he says that the Covenant was by the Churches both here and there,
also in the time of those worthy governors, now at rest in the Lord esteemed
truly Christian, I pray let us examme the truth of this, that the Churches
both here and there did so esteem: for our selves I may say that the Church
never did receive it, and therefore not so esteem it: neither was the voice
of the Church ever taken concerning that Covenant, but when they showed their
mind to be contrary unto it, and condemned it: Or does Mr. Robin. think that
because our teacher, who was a mise informed, did a little whille esteem of
the Covenant; that therefore the Church must so esteem also, and thought that
we must do as these which consented to this letter, which followed o^
suffered him in all, or the most of his declinings: And for that Church which
is present in the place where those Couenantmaker are, as we are truly
informed by themselves, they did never receive it. How is this true then which
Mr. Robin. said: but if it had bin so, what weight is there in that reason, to
help the Covenant, much like unto the reason of the Pharisees John 7. 48. which
said against Christ, does any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believe in him, but
this people which know not the law, are cursed. Therefore I conclud, it is not
the esteem of Churches, nor of governors which gives authority to such
things, but the word of the Lord: and where he says the party intended by
you, should by your grounds not have bin cast out, but left out of the Church.

Answer, Our grounds enforce not that conclusion, seeing the person was now
become a separated person, and a member of the Church of Leyden, from whence
we received him, as before I have showed, in the next place there is a syd and
a half of the printed letter spent to excues, and to justify Mr. S. in that
speech, in the which he seemed to imitat Paul Acts 24. 14. but of that I
have spoken before, yet still I answer, that those his speechs did prove his
stifnes in that his former course, and therefore of reconciliation we had no
hope while he so stod and continued, and for Mr. Robinson profering to come
and to justify Mr. S. in that his former proceeding: to the which I answer, we
know well that he was ready to that bussines, and that he was one with him
in that his error, and therefore just cause we had not to be ready to give
him intertainment to come as a moderator to middle the matter, seeing we find
no such president in the book of God, yet this we hold and profess, that if
any can show that we have sinned in any thing, we ought and are ready to
hear them, and this have we signified unto the Church of Leyden by letter,
and therefore the way was open for them to come in that manner. In the next
place he says: And whereas the course well begone and tending to pacification,
was as we understand interrupted and broken of upon a ground taken from the
course of not calling again into question civil judgments, once passed by the
judge according to right; let it not be greiuious unto you, if we a little
warn you of that dangerous foundation upon which it seems you to much build
your manner of procedings in the Church.

Answer. To hold that matters being ended according to right, ought not at
men's pleasures to be called into question again, I see not this proved to be
dangerous, by all that which Mr. Rob. have said: For if matters rightfully
ended, should at men's pleasurs be called into question, when would their be
an end of contention, either in the Church or in the common wealths: and for
the distinction which he puteth between the ending of civil judgments, and of
the casting forth of the sinner by the Church: namly that repentance should
follow to these distinctions. We agree and signify withal, that if we could
see that good work in these persons in question* there would be quickly are
conciliation, but yet further I answer, to take away occasion from such as
take an occasion to cavil at things equal, that we hold it lawful although
a matter be rightly ended: yet we may go over it again, as the occasion may
be offered, yea and more then once: and this we have practiced in this matter
in the public with these men diverse times: but yet it will not follow, that
at men's pleasurs we must do this, and bring our liberty into bondage, and so
to uphold contention.

But where he says that a larger extent of discretion this way fevv causes in
any age can persuad to: then this in hand, considering both the ground and
carriage of the thing, and the number of the persons opposite, and with these
intrest of all other Church in the bussines.

Answer. The comparison of any age is more fit to shovv eloquence, and to set a
gloss upon the thing in hand, rather then to prove that for which it is
brought, and for the ground and carriage of the thing, I have before spoken of
it, to the which I refere the Reader; and for the number of the persons
opposite, I answer, although I am sorry they are so many, yet I am glad they are
so few, seeing these men are such suttell opposers and labor so much to
corrupt the minds of the simple: and having with them Ioab the captain, and
Abiather the Priest, I mean Mr. Robinson and his people to establish them in
their straying, and we having bin to backward to withstand them in these
their doings. These things considered, it is the Lords mercy that we are
preserved, but if these opposers were many more then they be: it is no
argument of weight to cause us to yield to any indirect course, whereby the
truth should be betrayed, but observe, I pray you, that one, if not more then
one of those persons whom Mr. Robin. would at aim have respected; yet a little
before he calls a light person, and I will not strive with him about it,
seeing his or their change was like the Barbarians, Act. 28. 6. and for the
intrest of all other Churches in the bussines. I answer, I know no proper
intrest that any Church had in this bussines, for the which they were cast out,
but our own in which they were members, for unto us it did appertain to look
unto their faction, in the which faction they endeavored to corrupt our
members with that their error, and has not every Church a particular right
to vvatch over their own members: therefore I conclude, that this is but a
gloss to deceive the mind of them that reads it. And vvheras he tells
that satisfaction for the manner of the carriage has bin tender by the parties
censured: Answer, We should have bin glad, if they did tender repentance for
the matters themselves, and had they not bin vpholden by these men in these
their errors, it may be before now, long they might have repented of the
matters also: for they were as stiff at the first, when they were cast out
for the manner as the matters.

And where Mr. Robinson says, that in a matter of mere counsel and advise,
more then which neither the Church of London requiered, nor you could afford
them, any particular person advised with, and having their reasons of
differances from the Church persuasion, may and in causes of weight such as
this was ought by speech or vvriting as their is occasion signify, that their
different judgment and advise to them whom it concerns provided the same be
done in good manner, and with due respect to the Church.

Answer, The truth ought to be respected, and also the Church which
maintained the truth, but neither of these was so respected as they ought, as
before bin showed, by those men in that their doings: Moreover I could except
against this, that it was not properly counsel, or advise in this point in
question, which that Church desired, but to let this pass. I answer, might
not any heriticke have such pretenses to broch their errors by such smouth
grounds or terms, as these be under the pretense of counsel or advise: what
if the Church of Smyrna, Reu. 2. 8. being solissited by a seducer to receive
the doctrine of Balaam, and should therefore send to the Church at Pergamos,
Reu. 2. 12. for their counsel to know whether they ought to receive it or
reject it, if then the Church of Pergamos did give them counsel not to
receive it, and that by the word of God: might those others which were
corrupted with that error in that Church, gather themselves apart from the
Church, and send their counsel to receive that error, and so oppose the
truth and the Church in their procedings? M. Robin. says yea in smouth
tear^es. But I say no: because that if the (verse. 14) Church of Pergamos and
Thyatira Reu. 2. 20. were blamed for suffering them before to teach and deceive
the Lords people, then their sin would be more, to let them go on to
corrupt the Lords people, although they should plead with Mr. Rob. smouth
terms of counsel or advise: and therefore the Scripture out of Prou. 11. 14.
is by him abused: neither is their any liberty taken away from any, seeing none
has liberty to broach error: and herein was the Church to use authority, and
also to show reason which we have done and when we did it, although it was
at the request of the Church to whom we writ: then this man took an
occasion thereat to make all this trouble. Further he says, That seeing both
Moses in the Law Deuteronomy. 19. 15. and Christ in the Gospel Matthew. 18. 15. 16.
17. ordains, that every matter should be established by two or three witnesses.

Answer. There were more then two vvitnesses which knew the fact which they
had done from their one mouth, besides some that were their: but what need is
here not to press for witness, when themselves always confessed the fact?
only here is the difference, they think it was well doing: and so Mr. Robinson
says also, but we say and know it to be evil: why then do they not lay
this contention a syd and stand to maintain their cause to make it good or to
acknowledge their evil: and for these Scriptures by him alleged we
acknowledge the force of them, that no man which denies a fact, can be
condemned under two witnesses, but what of this, I hope they should also
acknowledge, that if there be no witness, yet if a man do freely confess a
fact worthy of death, that then that man should dye, and yet those Scriptures
not in the least broken: for David which put the Amalakit to death, knew these
Scriptures alleged, and also he knew that he broke them not; because his
own mouth was as sufficient as many vvitnesses. Now if no more were said, it
were sufficient to gainsay that which Mr. Robin* says, that we do herein
against Moses and Christ, and the Law of the nature it self, where he
brings Acts 24. 8. 13. Yet further I answer, Mr. Robin. fails in his
ground, for he takes it for granted from Mr. S. information, that we went
upon suspected evils, and this Mr. S. runeth upon also bringing our 8.
position as before is showed: seeing then they mise in the ground, all falls
at once: and now you may see how well the Church of Leyden has made good their
charge, and which Mr. S. boasted of before: And therefore Mr. Rob. clamours of
that large liberty which he speaks of, and says he can maintain will here
fall to the ground. But where he says: And now brethren, what shall we
say more unto you, our and all other Churches advise you, reject in confidence
of your own unerring judgment, and proceeding in this matter. Answer, For us
we confess that we are subject to err, yet ought we not therefore to
forsake any part of the truth for tanting words, which Mr. Robinson herein
uses to reproach us withal, and also makes a show of that which is not
wherein he deals like Mr. S. with whom he is a brother in evil: But
what and where are those other Churches he speaks of, he should therefore
have keept himself to his own Church which had consented to this evil
Letter, which he has written, but if he could shovv other Churches, which
did so advise us, were it not a worthy argument to convince us. Therefore I
say to the Law, and to the testimonies of the Lord, if they can be brought to
ouersway our reasons, I trust the Lord will give us hearts to submit thereunto,
and where he wishes that we did see our weakness, and says then would you
not proceed with that confidence, in a matter and manner before ynheard of in
the Churches.

Answer: How true this is, it does appear by the answer to Mr. S. Preface
before: for their I have laid down the matter and approved our course by the
word of God, and have the examples of the Churches of God in the like causes,
which by the word of the Lord is approved: and for our weakness we know it,
and confess it, yet ought we not wilfully to cast away our obedience from
the least of Gods precepts, or commandes, which he has given us to walk in,
upon Mr. Rob* subtle inticements, yet we are ready to hear what any man can
inform us, by the word of the Lord: and therefore that sentence he might have
spared, where he says, As if the word of God either came from you, or unto you
alone, and who can not abuse Scripture phrases to effect their wills. Lastly
he ends his Letter with vpbrading of us, which is as, I suppose, a
principal cause that Mr. S. has set it out to the world, because it agrees
with his manner of reproching of us, as follows: And for the Church here
which is nearliest united unto you, what other use have you had of us since
the death of your wise and modest governors in all your differances and
troubles? save to help to bear part of the scandal and opprobry, wherewith
specially in the public carriage of matters, you have layden the ordinances of
God and professors of the same in the eyes of all within and without: but in
vain we speak unto you, whose ears prejudice has stopped.

Answer, In deed nearlist in dwelling, but fardist of in affection as it may
appear, not only by this bitter Letter, but also to strangers, as occasionally
they pass by their dwellings, by whom it comes to our ears, how bitterly
they inuay against us; and what is the cause, because we will not receive their
new found vvayes of declining, and because we deslike that they look not
better to the Lords vvatch in suffering their members to apostat: some
declining to the Church of England, and their living, other going a great
compase to new England to communicate with the Church of England: and some of
them that are in this Land profess to hear in the assemblies, as they have
occasion; and I make no doubt, but they have don it many times: and this their
negligent watch has effected so, that from a great company they are almost
come to nothing or fewer then those whom they despies, and have said
concerning us, that our contentions would break us to pieces.

And further I say that our troubles have by them bin increased in unjust,
taking part with our opposites; so that the proverb is in them fullfilled
which says, Prou. 27. 17. Iron sharpeneth iron: so does man sharpen the face
of his friend; for Mr. S. informs Mr. Rob. and his people a mise, and they
again sharpen his face, and harden him in his evil, and others that take his
part: and so increase our trouble and also the scandal, and herin they
fulfill this proverb: Prou. 28. 4. They that forsake the law, praise the
wicked: and therefore let it not be though contention, allthough we fail in
the manner of the doing of it: if we keep and observe the other part of the
Proverb which says; But they that keep the law set themselves against
them. And now my brethren that are absent, I speak to all that are faithful,
if all the Churches of God, Gala. 1. 7. Phili. 3. 18. 2. Peter 2. 1. or the
most of them have bin thus troubled as the Scriptur does plentyfully shovv,
why should it seem strange unto you, as if some strange thing had befallen us,
or as if it were other vvayes with us then it has bin with the Churches of
God, even in the days of the Apostells and in all ages, yea and has not the
Apostells Act. 20. 30. foretold that such things must be, saying, For their
must be heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest amongst you: 1. Cor. 11. 19. If therefore we strive for the truth,
and to abolish sin, we do herin the will of God: Therefore our Lord
teaches us to judge with consideration John 7. 24. saying, Judge not according
to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Neither let any stomble or be
offended at any weaknesses they see, or epsy in us, for we are but vveake men
compased about with the same infirmities even as other, yet desiring to be
helped by any; let therefore such as have a love unto the truth, rather set
their shoulder to the Lords work, and help to bear the burden, Gala. 6. 2.
which the Lord has appointed: and let all know that as it is evil to give
justly an offense for any to stomble, so is it dangerous to be offended in
Christ, as our Lord says, Matthew. 11. 6. And blessed is he that shall not be
offended in me. And vvher Mr. Rob. says that our cares are stoped with
prejudice. Answer, It has bin time for him to say this, if he had convinced
us of error or sin, but to run on thus upon an unjust ground, may rather be
judged prejudice in him.

And whereas he says, that they will bewail our state, which is in deed to
be bevvailed: to this I answer, Allthough he does mise the right mark in this
his bewayling of us, for he bevvayleth us because we withstand his error and
declining, yet for our selves I say we have cause to be sorry, or to bewail
our sins and vveakness^s, and also our troubles which our opposites has
made: and the more sorry we are that he and his people has unjustly helped
them as this Letter does manifest, and which I have noted before, yet more I
say bevvayle or weep not for us only, but for themselves in respect of those
evils and declinings before showed: and thus I end with the Letter of the
Church of Leyden, desiering all to consider of that which is written, in the
which their is no eloquence, for I want learning and am but a bab in Christ:
yet I pray consider that when a child, pleads reason, it ought the more to
be regarded, because it proceed from so simple an understanding: so look upon
the cause to be the more just and equale, because I am but weak, and have not
been hertofore so employed. And now as Elihu says Iobe 34. 3. The ear cries
words as the mouth casts meats; therefore try the reasons and Scriptures
alleged, and as Paul says 2. Timo. 2. 7. Consider what I say and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things.

FIN.
COncerning the public passages of things in the Church which ^re in this
book, I have been careful to keep to the truth of things, yet it may be in
some word or words which is not material, to change any sense may have
escaped, therefore for the more certainty of the truth thereof, I did first
reuise them with diverse brethren: and then I read it in the public, first
because all should take knowledge of the rightstanding of the cause
indifferant: secondly because I would not always strive about words and
things which concerns not the things indifferant: and so to fill the world
full of needless contention, which is neither to Gods glory, nor yet to the
comfort of him that does it.

Fault escaped.
In page 2. line 8. seeing is wanting. p. 4. l. 4. read us for his. p. 4. l.
21. a mise for inse. page 5. l. 2. read sin for sense. p. 5. l. 9. read were
for was. p. 5. lin. 23. read appealing for appearing. p. 5. l. 30. read said
for says. p. 8. l. 37. read proved for prove. p. 11. l. 2. read circumcision
for circoncision. p. 11. l. 23. read second for two. p. 12. l. 11. read the for
to. p. 13. l. 6. read provoke for prouoque. p. 13. l. 12. read scerching for
cerching. p. 15. l. 17. our is vvanting. p. 25. l. 33. read try for cry.


