THE FALSEHOOD OF THE CHIEF grounds of the Romish Religion.

Descried and convinced in a brief Answer to certain Motives sent by a
Priest to a Gentleman to induce him to turn Papist.

By W.S.

Printed for the Author Anno Dom. 1635.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL his much honored Uncle EDWARD SMYTH Esquire.
SIR,
THere are other reasons besides that common motive, and popular pretense of
the importunity of friends, which has now put this little manual into the
world. It was composed by the Author (for I cannot say that it was written by
him, but rather dictated as he spoke it) lying on his bed of sickness: and
therefore he intended to have kept it private, judging it unworthy other men's
approbation, because unworthy his own. Nevertheless it secretly crept into the
press, and returned from thence full of faults like the Printer of it, who had
as little authority to Print it at all, as Print it false. There was no other
way to suppress the old impression, but by a new, which I have here done,
setting it out the second time, but in a less volumne, and with less faults.

There is one motive more, and that more important then the former. The Author
since his death (for in his life time malice it self was never so audacious as
to dare eclipse the bightnesse of his integrity either in life or doctrine)
has had his faith branded with the name of apostasy, and his profession with
heresy. But whither he were a professed open enemy, or an hypocritical friend,
which has done him this wrong, I forbear to name. Whosoever he were, this
ensuing treatise will put him both to shame and silence; and therefore I need
not make any apology for him, whose own works speak in his defense.

Sir! it was formerly made solely yours by the Author, and therefore in the
dedication it now justly claims your patronage only. If it satisfy not the
more curious reader, yet he that made it, thought his pains fully recompensed
in that it gave you satisfaction; neither does the reward of my labor spread
it self unto others, but is wholly terminated in your acceptance. If it chance
to be condemned as imperfect, because he has not spoken all, that might have
been said on this subject; I add, neither has he spoken all that he could.
It was intended for a letter only, and therefore not to swell into a larger
volumne; yet I presume there is as much in the answer, as the Priests motives
require, and more peradventure then he ever expected, or at least thank't him
for. Such as it is, it is once more made yours by him, who desires to be
esteemed

Your dutiful Nephew and Servant WILLIAM SVTTON.
From Christ-Church in Oxon. Iun. 28. 1635.
Motives sent by a Priest to a Gentleman, to Induce him to turn Papist.
The rejection of the Jews and acceptance of the Gentiles.
I Have no will in you, How to know the holy Catholic. Church which all
Christians profess to believe.
says the Lord of Hosts, and gift I will not receive of your hands, for from
the rising of the Sun to the going down, great is my name among the
Gentiles, and in every place there is Sacrificing, and there is offered to my
name a clean oblation, because my name is great amongst the Gentiles, says
the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 1. verse. 11.

A Description of the true Christian Catholic Church Militant.

The holy Christian Catholic Church militant, which we profess in the
Apostles Creed to believe, is a visible Monarchy or Kingdom consisting of all
the true believers upon the face of the earth, confessing one God in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity, under one lawful visible head for the time being,
observing one Faith, Religion, and Sacraments, instituted by Christ.

Which holy kingdom and Society, is composed of a visible head, Clergy and
Laity, the head to govern, the Clergy to preach and administer Sacraments, the
Laity to learn and to obey in all things touching their faith and salvation:
For Christ says of the Pastors of his Church, He that hears you, hears
me, and he that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. verse. 16.

That our Savior Christ, being a Priest for ever secundum ordinem Melchisedec,
was the first visible head, and founder of the said holy Christian Catholic
Church militant composed of a head, Clergy, and Laity is apparent, first in his
sacred person, being the visible head, in his holy Apostles being the Clergy,
and in his Common disciples being the Laity, which small beginning is compared
to a Mustard Seed, and the increasing to a great tree, that birds may build in
the Branches thereof, our Savior saying to the Clergy his Apostles; and in
the^ to all their lawful Successors, To you it is given to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of God, but to the rest in Parables. Luke 8. verse. 10.

The increasing of the Church.

By the Preaching and Miracles of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, many
were converted to be members of the Church. At S. Peter's first Sermon after he
had received the Holy Ghost 3000. were added, and afterward 5000. Act. 2.
verse. 41. Act. 4. verse. 4. And Saint Paul affirms, that in his time the
Roman faith was renowned in the whole world. Romans 1. verse. 8. agreeing with
the words of Christ's But you shall receive the virtue of the holy Ghost coming
upon you, and you shall be Witnesses to me in Jerusalem, and in all Jury and
Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth. Act, 1. v. 8.

Of the Continuance of the holy Catholic Church in true Faith, by the Holy
Ghosts assistance.

This is my Covenant with thee says our Lord, speaking of his Church, my
spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth shall not
depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this present and for ever, Isay 59.
verse. 21.

All power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth, going therefore teach ye all
Nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you, and behold J am with you always to the Consummation of the World, Math.
28. verse. 19.20.

I will ask the Father and he will give you another Paraclet, that he may
abide with you for ever, the spirit of truth. Ioh. 14. verse. 16.17.

And if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen, and
as the Publican, Math. 18. v. 17.

All which promises of Christ, for sending the Holy Ghost to preserve his
Church in truth for ever, was visibly and miraculously performed on Whitsunday,
Act. 2. verse. 1.

That our Savior Christ did constitute Saint Peter to be Ministerial head of
his Church militant.

And I say to thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and J will give to thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth
it shall be bound also in the heavens, and whatsoever thou shall loose in
earth, it shall be loosed also in the Heavens, Math. 16. v. 18.19.

And our Savior said; Simon, Simon, behold Satan has required to have thee
for to sift as wheat, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and
thou being converted confirm thy Brothren. Luke 22. v. 31.32.

Our Savior Christ asking Peter, if he loved him more then these, said, yea
Lord, thou know I love thee, whereupon Christ said to him twice, feed my
Lambs and the third time feed my Sheep. Ioh. 21. v. 15.16.17.

That Saint Peter was chief of the Apostles and the first Bishop of Rome.

When all the holy Apostles are named, S. Peter is the first, Math. 10. verse. 2.

After the Apostles had visibly received the Holy Ghost, S. Peter made the
first Sermon thereof, whereat 3000. persons were converted, Act. 2. v. 41.

With his word and power, he killed Ananias and Saphira for their Sacrilege,
Act. 5. v. 5.

Saiut Peter called the first Council of the Apostles held at Jerusalem, and
first spoke therein, Act. 15. v. 7.

It is affirmed by old writers and some modern learned Protestants; that S.
Peter was 15. years Bishop of Rome, and by the ancient Ecclesiastical
writers, that S. Peter and S. Paul were both of them martyred together in Rome
under the Emperor Nero. Orig. apud Eusebius. Lib. 3. cap. 1. Eus. Cap. 24. Lib.
2. Hist. Eccliastic. Tertul. de praesc. c. 26. Aug. tract. 123 in Ioh.
Chrysostom. and Beda in hunc locum. S. Ambr. Sermon. 66.68. St Maximus.

Statu faelix Ecclesia, cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum suo fanguine pro
funderunt, vbi Petrus passioni Dominicae adaequatur, vbi Paulus Iohannis exitu
Coronatur. Tertul. de Praescrip. cap. 36.

That St Peter's Successors Bishops of Rome have exercised chief authority in
the Church Militant ever since to this day.

After the Martyrdom of St Peter, first Bishop of Rome, 32. of the succeeding
Bishops there were martyred for the faith of Christ. Eusebius.

Pope Victor in the first 200. years excommunicated the Asian Bishops about
the observation or keeping Easter day.

Pope Silvester 314. years called the first Council of Nice against the Arian
hereste.

Pope Damasus 367. called the second general Council at Constantinople
against Macedonius the heretic.

Pope Caelestine 414. called the third general Council at Ephesus, against
Nestorius the heretic.

Pope Leo 440. called the fourth general Council at Calcedon against the
heretic Eutiches.

And likewise ever since to the last general Council of Trent, the Bishops of
Rome have called them all, as heresies and false Prophets did arise in the
Church.

It is confessed by diverse learned Protestants that the Roman Church was the
true Mother Church, which Christ our Savior planted some for 300. years, some
for 400. years, some for 600. years and some for 800 years after Christ,
which being true, that it was once the true Church, and also true, that our
Savior Christ promised to be with it to the consummation of the world, and to
send the spirit of Truth to abide with it for ever, and that Hell gates should
not prevail against it; and Christ says, Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my
words shall not pass; How then can it be true that the Roman Church being once
the true mother Church should fall so foully from her first purity, as is by
some too too boldly affirmed?

It is so necessary for every one to know and beliene the holy Catholic
Church Militant, that whosoever is not a sound member of that society either in
act or desire cannot be saved, as all those which were out of Noah's Arc were
drowned.

And to end with a demonstration, all the Patriarchall and Episcopal Seas of
the Apostles be extinguished and worn out many hundred years since by
Heretics and Jnfidels, only the Church of Rome the Seat of Saint Peter
stands at this day most conspicuous, according to the prayer and promise of
Christ; that his faith should not fail, and that the gates of Hell should not
prevail against it.

Thus briefly is proved, the beginning, increasing and continuing of the holy
Christian Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church; as also the promised
continual assistance of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth to remain
therewith always to the Consummation of the World, that is for ever. Of which
Vine all Christians that shall be saved must be united lively branches and
members,

THE ANSWER to the Priests Motives.
GOod Brother? Whosoever he was that sent you these lines as motives to make
you a Romish Catholic, I must needs think him your friend, (and by that name
I mean to call him hereafter) because I think he did it out of a desire to
save your soul: although I am sure he goes the wrong way to work: And if you
should follow him (which God forbid) he will certainly lead you into the
ditch. Though his proofs be simple ones, (as I hope you will see by the
answer) yet it seems, he thought better of them, and they were the best he
knew; and therefore if he fail in his purpose (as I hope he shall) yet you
have some cause to thank him, in that he used the same arguments to persuade
you, wherewith he himself was persuaded. But for the validity of his reasons
do you judge your self, when you have heard us both speak, or if not, let it
be tried by God and the country. And whosoever he was he has placed a
sentence in the foot of his discourse, which for the importancie thereof
deserved to be set in a higher room: and therefore I will begin with that
first.

The true Catholic Church.
(It is so necessary (says he) for every one to know and believe the holy
Catholic Church militant, that whosoever is not a sound member of that
society either in act or desire, cannot be saved.) All this is true, and there
is great reason for it; for if it were once agreed among Christians which were
the true Church of Christ, other differences in Religion would more easily be
composed by the authority thereof. But so long as the doubt remains concerning
the Church it self (as in these days that is the capital controversy
between Protestants and Papists) there is small hope of any good accord
unless both sides could agree upon some third party to be vmpire: Who must be
such a one as is of sufficient understanding to discern where the truth
rests, and withal of that indifferency in affection, that he incline no way
to one side more then to another; For that either the Romish or reformed
Church, being themselves the parties litigant, that they should require to be
made Judges in their own cause (though some of our adver saries be not ashamed
to make such a proposition) yet I think there is no man that has his five
wits about him, but will detest the impudency thereof at the first hearing. Of
necessity therefore some third party must be thought upon, who being no way
intressed in either faction, is of sufficient Judgment to determine which of
the pretenders make the best claim; now though we should search the whole
world over with a candle, there is none such possibly to be found under heaven,
but only the holy Scripture: which being confessed by both sides to be the rule
of faith, cannot well be denied to be the most competent Judge for deciding of
all doubts in that kind arising among the faithful.

Scripture a competent judge of the true Church.
And for this question of the Church St Aug. is peremptory, that there is no
other way to determine it but by Scripture alone;

Jnter nos and Donatistas quaestio est vbi sit Ecclesia (just as it is now
inter nos and Papistas) quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis nostris eam
quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui? Puto quod in illius potius verbis came
quaerere debemus: lib. de unit.

Eccles. c. 2. That whole chapter together with the 3. and 4. following is
altogether to the same purpose; nay Bellar. himself denies not but in some
cases the Scripture is better known to us then the Church, and ex hac
hypothesi, when the Church is doubted of he is content to grant, that we must
seek for it in the Scripture, de Eccles. l. 4. c. 2. And yet notwithstanding
all this fair weather that he makes with Scripture, there is neither he, nor
any of the rest that are willing to accept it for Judge in this controversy;
the most they will yield, is to accept it for a rule of faith, and yet they
stand not to that neither, when they require tradition to be joined unto it, as
if without the help thereof it could not measure perfectly. For Regula and
regulatum debent esse adaequata. The authority of the scripture.
If Scripture alone be not sufficient of it self to measure the length of a
Christians faith, unless tradition be added to help, then it is no rule at
all, much less a perfect rule, but only a piece of one. But howsoever they are
content sometime for fashion sake to acknowledge Scripture for the rule of
faith in part, yet by no means will they allow it for a Judge, though that be
the very name, whereby S. Augustine, and the Fathers of those times, did
usually call it, Ista controversia Iudicem requirit (says he) lib. 2. de nup.
and concup. c. 33. Iudicet ergo Christus Iudicet cum illo and Apostolus: quia
in Apostolo ipse loquitur Christus: and again, de gratia and lib. arbit. c.
18. Sedeat inter nos iudex Apostolus Johannes. and Optatus contra Parmen. l. 5.
Quaerendi sunt iudices, says he: Jn terris de hac re nullum poterit reperiri
iudicium. (You see by this, that the Pope was not acknowledged in those days
for the judge of controversies, and if Optatus had been a Papist, he durst not
have spoken such a word) but mark how he goes on: De coelo quaerendus est
judex: sed quid pulsamus ad coelum, cum habemus hic in Evangelio Testamentum?
the place is too long to be all set down, and that which follows, is all to
that purpose. Our adversaries speak in another language now adays, then
Optatus or Augustine or any of those holy Fathers were wont to speak. When
they said so often, Judicet Christus and Iudicet Scriptura, they would have
said once at the least, Iudicet Papa, if they had imagined that any such power
had belonged unto him. Here was a fit opportunity for them to have declared
themselves true Catholics. But alas, good men, how could they speak of that
which they knew not, or how could they teach that doctrine to others that they
were never taught themselves? For this vpstart judge, it is a mere novelty of
a later edition utterly unknown to the Christian world in those days, like
that gibbrish tongue, which some mungrell Jews spoke, and Neh emias complains
of c. 13.24. In scripturis didicimus Christum: in scripturis didicimus
Ecclesiam. Aug. ep. 166. and de vnitat. Eccles. c. 16.

Now when we say, that the Scripture is judge, we do not refuse to hear the
voice of the Church, speaking in the ordinary Ministry of her lawful Pastors,
and interpreting the Scriptures unto us. We know that there are many texts
full of difficulty, and above the reach of common understanding: nay, there are
many which his Holiness himself, I am sure, understands not for all his
infallible chair. But we know withal, that there are other places of
Scripture, so facil and plain, as a man of ordinary capacity may safely be his
own interpreter: and there is nothing necessary to salvation, either
concerning faith or life, but that in some one place or other, it is delivered
in such plain manner, as every man may understand it: if Saint Augustine
deceive us not de Doctr. Christ. l. 2, c. 9. And many other of the ancient
Fathers, as well as he. And therefore if blind men see not the sun, it is
not the fault of the sun, but theirs, whose eyes the God of this world has
blinded.

A lawful Council the Church representative.
Now for those places of scripture which are of greatest difficulty, if we
seek for a vocal judge to interpret them unto us, it is certain that there
is none sufficient to inform upon earth the conscience of a Christian, but
only a lawful Council, which is fitly therefore called the Church
representative. The declaration of several Pastors though never so learned and
godly, ca^ induce no more the^ a probability: but the uniform consent of the^
all joined together in a lawful Council, does conclude a certainty of truth
in that that is declared. What conditions belong to a lawful Council I will
not now stand to inquire. Some such there have been heretofore (though not so
many as, would be thought so) and some there may be again.

In the mean time, A council the highest judgment upon earth.
I desire you to think that Protestants ascribe far greater authority by
many degrees to the voice of the Church speaking in such assemblies, then
Papists do for all their great talking; and yet you must know, that there are
diverse learned Papists of the same opinion with Protestants in this point;
namely, that the judgment of a lawful Council is to be reputed the highest
judgment upon earth, whether the Pope give his consent thereunto or no. The
Jesuits labor hard on the contrary side to draw all to the Papal chair,
affirming the sentence of a Council to be of no validity, unless the Pope do
approve it, which in effect is nothing else, but to abuse the name of
Councels, and of the Church, making them mere stales to serve the Popes turn;
Differences amongst the Papists.
see the differences that are among themselves about this matter in Bell, lib.
2. de conc. c. 14.17. and the base conceit the Jesuits hold of all such
Counsels as want the Popes confirmation: contrary to the judgment of Peter de
Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambry, John Gerson, Iacobus Almaine, Card. Cusanus,
Bishop Tostatus, Abbot Panormitan, with the Councels of Pisa, Constance, and
Basil, and generally of the whole French Church at this day. I know not to
which of these factions your friend enclines: if he think as the French
Papists do, I am of his opinion; if he be Iesuited, desire him to mend his
description of the Catholic Church; and where he names it (a visible Monarch)
let him sit down and write (a visible Monarch.) For that is Purus putus
Iesuitismus; Disput. Theol. To. 3. dis. 1.
By the Church we mean her head (says Greg. de Valent.) that is the Pope: in
whom there resideth the full authority of the Church, when he pleases to
determine matters of faith, whether he do it with a Council or without. His
words are these: Est in Ecclesia authoritas divinitus instituta, qua fideles
tum doctrina, tum praeceptis informentur: Haec authoritas, plene in Romano
Pontifice Christi Vicario, and S. Petri successore residet, qui scilicet de
fidei and morum controversiis vel per se, vel vna cum generali concilio
sufficienter constituat. Nomine Ecclesiae intelligimus eius caput, id est,
Romanum Pontificem per se --

I have stood thus long upon the authority of Scripture, because if the
question of the Church must receive its decision from thence, as Bell
confesses, me thinks it is but hard dealing in him and his fellows to keep
Lay People from the free reading of the scripture; unless they mean to keep
them from the knowledge of the true Church also; but for your friend though he
talk much of the Catholic Church, yet I cannot find by his description,
that ever he consulted either with scripture or any ancient lawful council,
when he went about it. And thereupon I would presently join issue with him,
but that I am bound to take knowledge first of a place of Malachy, which he
sets most eminently in the forefront of his writing.

I have no will in you says the Lord of Hosts, and gift I will not receive of
your hand; for from the rising of the Sun to the going down great is my name
amongst the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrificing, and there is
offered to my name a clean oblation, because my name is great amongst the
Gentiles, says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 1.11.

In the allegation of this Text I complain, that there are two notorious
faults committed by him. 1. That he alleges it to no purpose: any other text
in the Bible would have become the place as well as that. 2. That he falsifies
the words of the Prophet, and makes him to say that which he never meant.

1. If your friend in citing these words, did purpose to prove the reiectio^ of
the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles, I know it is true; but I know not to
what purpose alleged, to persuade any man to Popery more then the deposing of
Abiathar, and Sadocks advancement to the Priesthood, 1. Reg. 2.35. If his
meaning be to show that the Church of the Gentiles is of greater extent then
ever the Jewish Synagogue was, and that it is not now confined to any one
place, or people, as it was under the Law, but belongs indifferently to all
Nations upon earth, for my part, I know no Christian that ever denied it
besides the Donatists of old, and some Papists of later times, who seeking to
bring all Christians to a dependence upon Rome, and the Bishop of that place
(just as the Synagogue depended upon the Temple of Jerusalem and the high
Priest there) they turn the universal Church into a particular congregation,
howsoever for fashion sake they retain the name of Catholic. They themselves
do in a manner acknowledge as much, when as not contenting themselves with
those known marks of Vna, Sancta, Catholica, Apostolica, by which the Church
was wont to be notified in the ancient Creeds, and Councels, they foist in
Romana amongst the rest, which being but a late trick unheard of in antiquity,
and only devised to serve the present turn, it shows that the Church for
whose sake it was first devised, is but of a late edition, per Romanam
Ecclesiam nemo vnquam intellexit vniversalem nisi forte latini sermonis
ignarus, Pigh. hierar Eccl. l. 6. c. 3.

2. My second accusation is, that your friend deals not faithfully in setting
down the words of Malachy. For whereas he makes the Prophet to say ( that in
every place there is sacrificing) you may boldly tell him, that there is no one
word of sacrificing in the Hebrew text at all. God says that among the
Gentiles there should be incense offered to his name; that is, prayers and
supplicatio^s, as you shall findethe word interpreted by the holy Ghost
himself, Rev. 5.8. and therefore the Septuagint, renders it by (...), and
Arias Mont. The sacrifice of the Mass.
(who understood both the Hebrew and Greek very well) in his interlineary
Bible translates it incensum. As for Sacrificing, there is, Nec vola nec
vestigium, neither fell, nor mark of it, as we say, in all that saying of the
Prophet. You must think it was not without some special cause, that the name
of Sacrificing was drawn into the text, thus by the heels, but upon hope that
it should do some special service: which though your friend do not signify
(and so I need not take knowledge of it) yet I think good to make you
acquainted withal, because it may serve to discover some other of our
Adversaries mysteries. Cardinal Allen forsooth, Card. Allen.
has undertaken out of these words of Malachy, to prove the sacrifice of the
Mas, by six reasons (which would make my writing swell too big if I should set
them all down) lib. de Euch. c. 5. I would desire you to read both his
reasons, and the answer made unto them by Doct. Reinolds, in his conference
with Heart. p. 479. D. Reinolds and Heart.
And if you receive not full satisfaction in that point, besides many others,
blame me for commending the book unto you. Now what hope could he ever have
of proving the Sacrifice of the Mass by Malachy, unless the word Sacrifice it
self were first found in the Text.

And so I come to his description of the Catholic Church as he calls it,
though all things considered he has little reason to give it that name.

A description of the Catholic Church.
The holy Christian Catholic Church militant, which we profess in the
Apostles Creed, to believe, is a visible Monarchy or Kingdom, consisting of
all the true belieuers upon the face of the earth, confessing one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, under one lawful visible head, for the time
being, observing one Faith, Religion and Sacraments instituted by Christ. -- In
which words let it be no offense to say, that he deals as boatmen use to
do, when they look one way and row another; for whatsoever he talks of the
Catholic Church, you shall find presently that he means the Romish Church,
a mere particular one, though for the credit thereof he would feign yoke it
together with the Church Catholic in the same description. But see his ill
luck. For while he goes about to describe them both in one, he fails to
describe either of them as he should. For if the Catholic Church does
comprehend (as he says) the multitude of all true believers even from
righteous Abel (as Augustine speaks) to the end of the world, how can this
agree to the Romish Church? On the other side, if it comprehend no more then
such as are subject to one visible head, how can the name of Catholic in
right belong unto it? So this description is like a shoe that will serve
neither foot.

If we should grant that the Romish faith in these days were the true faith
of Christ: yet could not that make their Church to be the Catholic Church,
but only a part thereof, and that is the most that can be said of it, though
it were far better then it is; but the Pope looks higher then so, and Rome
scorns to be ranckt in the order of particular Churches. He must be the
universal Bishop, and she the universal Church of the World. For if that
should be denied, what right has either He, or She to claim subjection of
those, who have their several dependence upon other Bishops? Therefore to make
this good, and to bring all fish into St Peter's net, there were some
well-wishers to the Romish cause, who not finding how two such disparates in
nature, as universal and particular, Catholic and singular, might possibly
be joined together in one subject, they found a means at last to join them
both together in one word; and hence it comes to pass, that instead of Romana
fides, and Romana Ecclesia, which was wont to be the common language among all
Christians, we must call it henceforth, Romano Catholicam fidem, Romana
Catholicam Ecclesiam, or else they will complain that we allow them not their
full style; Thus still it falls out, that Portenta reru^ gignunt portenta
verborum. And if it were not a new and strange doctrine, it never needs to
coin such new and strange words. And yet, as if Romana Ecclesia did not speak
home enough to express their meaning, or, as if it were too large a term, and
they durst not trust that more then Catholica or Apostolica, Bellarmine de
effect. sacr. l. 2. c. 25. to be sure to fit the shoe to the Popes foot,
restraines it to nunc Romana Ecclesia: I know not what the spirit of giddiness
is, if this be not, or why we should not say of these men, as it was said of
the Arrians, Habent annuas and menstruas fides (Ecclesias.) If the ancient
faith of Rome were the same with the present, what means nunc Romana? if it
were not, how is the present faith Catholica? For that only is so, quae est
omnium temporum and locorum. The Counsels of Lateran or Trent will not be
guided by the Counsels of Basil or Constance. And therefore Cusanus speaks
plainly, and says, that there is fides temporum, a faith that alters with the
time, and that the true sense of the Scripture is that, which the present
Church gives. Non est mirum, si praxis Ecclesiae vno tempore interpretetur
scriptura^ vno modo, and alio tempore alio modo; nam intellectus currit cum
praxi: intellectus enim, qui cum praxi concurrit, est spiritus vivificans:
sequuntur ergo Scripturae Ecclesiam and non e converso, Epist. 7. Bohem.

The holy christian Catholic Church, No absolute Monarchy.
is a visible Monarchy under one visible lawful head, I complained before
that the Church of Rome being a mere Particular, he made it all one to the
Catholic Church of Christ. Here I find cause to complain on the other side,
of his wrong done to the Catholic Church, when he terms it a visible
Monarchy, under a visible Head: which is the placing of a bar in her arms,
and makes her no better then the Romish, or any other particular being of the
younger house.

1. When he names the Church a Monarchy, if he mean it in respect of Christ,
sole King and Monarch thereof, I will not contend with him about the name: or
if he mean it in regard of particular Churches we confess, that in as much
as they are subject to their several Bishops, their government in that
respect is a kind of Monarchy, though not an absolute Monarchy, but such a
one as is tempered with an Aristocrasie; because Bishops either do not or
should not impose laws upon the Church, but Ex communi Concilio Presbyterorum,
by the advice and with the consent of their Presbytery.

A visible Monarchy. Not visible.
) If the Catholic Church were a natural body, and not a mystical: If it
were some individual and singular subject, and not a mere universal (as the
name of a Catholic imports) Visibility might well be an adiunct belonging
unto it. Which otherwise, I confess, I understand not how it should, and I
believe, they that speak most of it understand it as little; if your friend
have ever seen the Catholic Church with his eye, let him say whether it be
Diaphanum or adiaphanum, luminosum corpus, or opacum; bid him tell you of what
color and complexion it is. And do not think I jest in moving such
questions, for in good earnest it must be qualified thus for in some such
sort, if it be subject to the eye of man. I grant he has seen some particular
persons that belong unto the Church, and are members thereof (and so have I
often) but for the Church it self, whose formality consists in a spiritual
conjunction with Christ the head, and of the members themselves one with
another, this mystical union I am sure he did never see: and therefore he did
never see the Church no not any particular Church, to speak properly, much
less the Catholic church. This is an article of faith, and not an object of
sense, far above the sphere of all optike learning; it is an Article to be
believed, not a thing to be descried, by a pair of spectacles, or any other
prospectiue glass; if he mean Video pro intelligo, by the old Grammar rule,
let him and the rest speak so a Gods name, and call it hereafter the
intelligible Church, that we may understand them: for then they shall begin to
speak somewhat more like Protestants: for otherwise, while they call it the
universal, yet visible Church, they interfeare at every word, and speak pure
nonsense.

The Pope not the head of the Church.
Under one lawful visible head.) It had been plain dealing to have named the
Pope, rather then to use such a circumlocution of words: for you must not doubt
but that he is that Visible head whom he means. Now it deserves a Quare, why
the Church being but one body, should need two Heads? Why being but one
Monarchy it cannot consist without two Monarchs? To say that one is a visible,
the other an invisible; the one a principal, the other a ministerial head, it
is all one in effect, as if they told us of two Christ's, a visible and an
invisible; and perhaps in time to come the world may hear of some such matter,
if this doctrine go on. In reason they ought to make two Churches; because the
body must be multiplied according to the multiplication of the heads; we are
sure that Christ now in heaven, is every way as able to govern his Church by
himself, as he was while he lived upon earth: if in regard of his bodily
absence they think it necessary that he should leave some deputy behind him:
Neither does this hang well together with some other popish Positions; for by
their doctrine Christ is not so ascended into heaven, but that they have his
body (as they say) remaining still among them upon earth; and that not only in
a spiritual manner, but most really and carnally. They have freer recourse to
Christ now by the help of Transubstantiation, Transubstantiation.
then they could possibly have with him while he conversed here in the flesh.
Nay they have not so free access to the Pope I am sure, as they have to him,
with whom they may speak, when they list, upon every Altar, and in every Pixe.
And what folly is it to seek to the foot, when we may go to the head? To set
up a ministerial head in the Church, where the principal himself is always
at hand? Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae.

Besides, No visible head necessary.
if this visible Head were such a necessary implement in the Church of God as
they would make us believe, it seems strange to me why his name should be
forgotten, and that in those very Scriptures, where the Governors, and the
government of the Church is purposely treated of; or how was it possible for
Saint Paul speaking of Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, of Pastors, and
teachers ordained by Christ for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry. etc. Ephesians. 4 11. and 1. Cor. 12.28. to forget the name of this
Pastor Paramont: who now takes upon him to be Dominus fac totum, and to rule
the roast throughout all Christendom.

There is another thing that makes me doubt much of this matter, namely that
whereas the Church has still bin known by the name of a Monarchy, yet the Pope
among all other his titles has not ordinarily taken upon him the name of a
Monarch, till of late. I know some such thing has been muttering a pretty
while in the Schools: but it never past for current Doctrine in the Church
till within these few years: nay, it is not so far past yet, but that the
Sorbonists of Paris, and generally the whole Church of France, oppose strongly
against it. In like sort, whereas the Church has ever been called the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. yet I never heard of a Pope so desperate that durst call
the Church his body: which yet in some sort he might be allowed to do, if it
be lawful for him in any sort to call himself the Head of the Church (by the
Doctrine of Relatiues.)

Moreover, I find the maintainers of this Doctrine much puzzelled in seeking
to express what authority it is, that the Pope may challenge in right of his
headship, and Monarchy, and what power is appendant to that name: whether it
be a mere spiritual power, or a temporal, or both, or some third mixed power
compounded of temporal and spiritual? Difference between the Papists
touching the temporal and the spiritual power of the Pope.
Here I see them at such deadly strife among themselves, as I hold it no safe
trusting either of them, until I shall first find that they trust one another
better. Card. Bellarmine himself within these few years knew not what to make
of that matter, as it appears by his latter writings compared with the former.

When he first set forth his books of controversies, he was of one opinion
concerning this point, which afterward he changed and became of another, as
you shall find by his recognitions, wherein he did not mend that which was
amiss, as Augustine did in his Retractations, but proficiens in peius, like
those, of whom the Apostle speaks, 2. Tim. 3.13. he made that worse which was
too bad before; even in the judgment of his own good friends. In his former
writings of this argument, though he had pleaded for the Papal authority,
Quantum honest potuit, Barclay. Sixtus Quintus.
and plus etiam quam debuit: says William Barclay a Papist, yet was Sixtus
Quintus the Pope so discontented with his book, that he was once of the mind,
to have damned all his writings, because he did not speak home to his
Holiness contentment: I mean, because he did not attribute such an
unlimited, and transcendent power unto him, as that proud and imperious
Praelate did challenge in right of his pretended Monarchy; because he did not
affirm him to have as direct a temporal power over Kings, as a spiritual
over Bishops, making all Kingdoms, as well as all Churches, subject to his
disposition. See Barclay de potestate Papae in Principes christianos, cap. 13.

They that contract the power of the Pope within the confines of a mere
Spiritual jurisdiction, though they speak more modestly then other of their
fellows; yet in as much as they extend this jurisdiction over the whole world,
(which in respect of him they make to be but as one Diocese) even this
Paradox of theirs is as false as the others, though not so impudent: and as
injurious to Christ and his Church, though it be not so pragmatically dangerous
to secular states, and Princes Crowns: for if the Spiritual Kingdom of
Christ be of no greater extent then the Popes jurisdiction, it follows that
none are Christians but Papists; which though some Popish Puritan in his fiery
zeal, will make no bones perhaps to affirm: yet all of them are not so
desperate, and he that speaks so in his heat, must recall it again in cold
blood, or else he will leave Christ but a poor Kingdom, and a few subjects
in respect of that multitude, which God promised unto him, Psalm. 2.8. and Psalm.
72. v. 8.9. etc. Nay how shall that Prophecy of Malachy be verified of the
Church, spreading it self from the rising of the Sun to the going down
thereof, if there be no more Christians in the world then there be Papists?
All the world knows that the Popes Kingdom never extended it self so far,
as that Prophecy speaks of, by many degrees, when it was at the largest. And
Papists have little hope ever to see it hereafter spread over the whole World.
Now because the Pope has no jurisdiction in those parts, nor ever had, shall
we think therefore that Christ has no kingdom there? Or that the Grecian,
Armenian, Jndian, Ethiopian, and other African Churches be no Churches at
all, because they are no Popish Churches? (I omit to speak here of Protestants
in Europe, whose multitude the Pope knows better then he loves.) But for
those other which I was speaking of, it is certain that either the Prophecies
mentioned before are accomplished in those Christians, or else they were never
accomplished hitherunto at all: either Christ now reigns in those Churches,
or else his kingdom was never so large as it was promised that it should be.
And although it cannot be denied, but that those Eastern and Southern
Christians are much degenerated from their primitive purity, and there be
diverse things amiss in their profession; yet, they are Christians still: and
whosoever denies them that name, because they are none of the Popes creatures,
he robs Christ of more subjects then he leaves him to reign over. Vbicunque
timetur, and laudatur Deus, ibi vera est Ecclesia August. in Psalm. 21.

The Church for the space of six hundred years was not only without this
visible head, but so far from desiring it, that when John Patriarch of
Constantinople, an ambitious Prelate began to affect this matter, he was told
by Gregory the Great that his course was Antichristian: and yet it is certain
the ambition of this Patriarch was no more, then that which has since broken
forth in ambitious Popes, under the name of their Supremacy: and the same
reasons which Gregory used against John, being many in number, they conclude as
strongly against Gregory's Successors now a days, as ever they did then
against the other. Read Greg. on that Argument, lib. 4. Ep. 30.32.36. and
alibi. If the same question were made now to the Pope, which was then made by
Gregory to that Patriarch. Tu quid Christo vniversalis Ecclesiae capiti in
extremi iudicij dicturus es examine, qui cuncta eius membra vibi conaris
vniversalis appellatione supponere? I think his Holiness would be to seek of
an answer. I am sure Gerson a learned Roman Catholic, was so far from
thinking such a visible Head to be any matter of necessity in the Catholic
Church, that he thought the body might do well enough though this head were
taken off from the shoulders: as appears by his book written, De
aufenibilitate Papae. And so I pass from this description of the Catholic
Church.

All that follows from thence to the end almost of the first page might well
have bin spared, neither can I devise to what purpose it is brought in.

1.
That our Savior Christ being a Priest for ever secundum ordinem Melchisedec,
Christ the head of the Church.
was the first visible Head and founder of the said holy Christian Catholic
Church, etc. -- He is no Christian that doubts of it: but when I hear him
say, that Christ (was the first visible head of the Church) me thinks he
speaks strangely, Unless he think that Christ is now ceased to be somewhat
that he was heretofore. For why else did he not say in praesenti, that Christ
is the head of the Church, as well as (he is a priest for ever) unless he were
afraid to hurt the Popes head? Primus semper dicitur in ordine ad secundum, and
secundus ad tertium. Now if the Church by the death of Christ her first head
got her a second head, which was S. Peter, why then upon his death she got a
third head, and so consequently has had as many Heads, as she has had Popes,
which is scarce good English.

2. How far the Clergy are to be obeyed.
That Christ did institute a Clergy and a Laity in his Church, the one to
preach and administer Sacraments, the other to learn and to obey, etc. -- I
hope he does not mean that the Clergy are freed from obeying the Gospel,
because they are bound to preach it; But that Christ did institute such a
distinction of people in his Church we know before he told us so. Here a man
might suspect that some Priest had his finger in the framing of this writing,
in as much as when he speaks of the duty of the Laity, he tells them, (That
they are bound to obey the Clergy in all things touching their Faith, --) a
speech too lavish for any Priest to speak, and too slavish for any ingenuous
Lay man to hear, except it be much circumcised, (they must obey in all things)
he means first the persons, then the doctrine. Ex personis fidem, non ex fide
personas. And Champnies, an English Sorbonist, professes as much, l. de vocat.
minist, c. 1. And so likewise Stapleton; In doctrina religionis non quid
dicatur, sed quis loquatur attendendum est. defens. Ecclesiasticae autorit. l.
3. c. 7. and demon strat. princip. doctrine. l. 10. c. 5. Which Tertullian
thought a great absurdity, and so disclaimes it, Veritas docendo persuadet, non
suadendo docet: adver. Valent. Hic est sacerdos de genere Aaronis, non decipiet
nos. 1. Mac. 7.14. so did some overcredulous Jews say of Alcimus; but yet they
were deceived. And so would your friend persuade you, to believe him, because
he is a Romish Priest, and to take up your faith upon his credit. But let it
first appear, that their Clergy are so privileged by special or common
grace, that either they cannot preach false doctrine, though they would, or
that they will not though they can, and then we are content they should be
obeyed in all things. Alfonsus a Castro tells indeed strange things that he
heard a Dominican preach concerning the privileges of his own order. l. 1. de
haeres. c. 9. but your friend goes beyond him, and says as much of every
popish Priest, such must be obeyed in all things, and therefore such cannot,
or should not err; and then vbi Papae infallibilitas? what pre-eminence shall
his holiness have more then every common Mass Priest? Either this Pontifex
maximus this high Priest must forbear to say his Pater noster, or forbid other
Priests to say theirs, or else they will go cheek by cheek with him: neque
sufficit dicere; neither can they say, that they are all equal potestate
ordinis only: for they will be so potestate iurisdictionis too, if they are to
be obeyed in all things. What will they say then? that the Pope alone is the
infallible Church to the learned Papist; but to the common people every parish
Priest is their Church: to this I may answer, that as Cotton seemed to
mistrust even the Popes infallibility, when he desired to know of the devil
the strongest proof in Scripture for Purgatory, Thuan. To. 5. fol. 1136.
(though he needed not have troubled the devil so far, when many of his own
friends can assure him, that there is no proof of it there) so have we also
just cause to mistrust the inferior Priests the feet, when the head begins to
fail; and when we hear S. Hierome crying out, that all heresies and
commotions both Ecclesiastical and Civil commonly came from Priests: nay, it
seems, they justly deserve to be thus stigmatized, when their own Canons have
laid this note upon them, which says, omne malum a Sacerdotibus: did. 50.
quod retentum a Gregorio, 13. expunxit Sixtus Quintus Jnd. expurg. Belg. fol,
306.

Besides by this rule of blind obedience, they that followed Luthers doctrine
are justified against the Pope, because he was their lawful Pastor: and they
did no more then their duty in harkening unto him; if it be true indeed that
the Laity are bound to obey the Clergy in all things touching their faith and
salvation.

The perpetuity of Christ's Church on earth.
That the Church increased by Preaching and Miracles at the first; That it
shall continue unto the end of the world by virtue of Christ's promise and the
assistance of the Holy Ghost,

All this is undoubted truth, and I pray you ask your friend, whether he know
any Protestant that does deny it? Stapleton and some other of the shameless
crew have gone about to persuade the world, that we believe not the perpetuity
of Christ's Church for ever upon earth; but it is so shameless a slander, that
Bellarmine himself stands upon our defense, and pleads our cause against all
such calumniators. Notandum est (says he) multos ex nostris tempus terere: and
let your friend note it (for he is one of those multi whom it concerns) dum
probant absolute Ecclesiam non posse deficere. Nam Calvinus and caeteri
Haeretici id concedunt. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eccl. milit. c. 13. in initio
capit. And though himself undertaking in the same place to set down the
Protestants opinion, do it very untowardly, yet you see what he thinks of
those other gamesters, who charge us to hold that the Church has at sometime
decayed, and consequently that Christ has failed in his promise made unto her,
Tempus terunt (says he) they are all but triflers. If your friend have any
such conce it of us, desire him to believe Bellarmine, and hereafter to have a
better opinion. If not, ask him to what purpose he cited Isa. 59.22. Math.
28.19.20. Joh. 14.16.17. Math. 18.18? Howsoever let him now know that we
believe the Catholic Church to be Regnum quod non dissipabitur, an
everlasting Kingdom that shall stand when all earthly Kingdoms fail. But we
do not believe that this is true of every particular Church, and we know that
the Romish Church is no more then a particular, and therefore as subject to
mutability and corruption, as any other of the same nature. Secondly, tell him
how we believe that the holy Ghost does, and ever will guide the same
Catholic Church into all necessary truth: but we deny first that all those
things are necessary to be believed, which Rome professes as truths. Secondly
that the guidance into such truths is a grace entailed to any one succession of
Bishops more then to other, or that the Popes chair has any greater reason to
presume of her infallibility, then any other Patriarchicall Seas had heretofore
of theirs. But we must talk more of this hereafter.

Saint Peter not the ministerial head of the Church.
That our Savior did constitute St Peter to be Ministerial of his Church --)
Well may the name of a Ministerial head be given to Saint Peter in respect of
his Apostleship, and there is not one of the twelve, but that in the same
respect, the same name belongs unto him; as they are called the twelve
foundations of the holy Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.14. so they may be called 12.
Ministerial Heads of the Church under Christ. But to appropriate these names
unto Peter alone, to make him not a Ministerial, but the Ministerial head, as
if the rest were no Heads at all, it is such a wrong done to the other
Apostles, as cruel Landlords sometimes offer to their Tenants, when they take
away their common from them, and make it their own enclosure. As for the
courtesy which perhaps they think they do unto Saint Peter, it is such a one
as he will never give them thanks for; that blessed Saint knows well enough,
that all this quarrelling about Supremacy is not for his sake, but for the
Popes, and that his name is used only for a leaping stock to help the other
to horse. He takes as much delight in this honorable supremacy, which they
would cast upon him, joined with the disgrace of his fellow Apostles, as Paul
and Barnabas did when the men of Lystra would have sacrificed unto them, Act.
14.14. Hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
praediti and Honoris and Potestatis: Cip. de unit. Eccles. And yet we do not
say that this equality between the Apostles was so equal, but that there was
ever a Prius and Posterius among them, as in all well-guided societies it is
fit there should be, for avoiding confusion; James, and Peter and John, are
termed Pillars, by which they are understood to be persons of special note
among the rest, Gal. 2.9. and like enough that Peter, in regard either of his
seniority in the Apostleship, or the fervency of his zeal to Christ, or some
other special grace, wherein he did excel, might be a more eminent pillar
then any one of the other; vt Plato Princeps Philosophorum, sic Petrus Princeps
Apostolorum. Hierom. adversus Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 4. Now as that name made not
other Philosophers subject to Plato, so neither does the like given to Peter
infer any Jurisdiction that he had over his fellows, or makes them any whit
inferior unto him that way. Saint Ambrose says of Paul, that he was not
inferior to Peter, or to any other of the Apostles that went before only in
time in 2. Cor. 12.9. And in his book de Incar. Dom. Cap. 4. speaking of that
Primacy that Peter had, he calls it Primatum Confessionis, wherein Peter was
preferred; a primacy of confession, faith he, not of honor, a primacy of
faith, but not of degree. Your friend is of another mind, and brings Scripture
to prove a greater supremacy given unto Peter then all this we speak of,
consider his proofs.

St Peter's supremacy.
And I say to thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and J will give to thee
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth,
it shall be bound also in the heavens: and whatsoever thou shall loose in
earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens, Math. 6. verse. 18.19.) Before
that ever our Savior spoke these words to Peter, you must understand that he
had proposed a certain question to them all in general. Vos autem quem me
esse dicitis, v. 15. Unto which question Peter making answer in the name of
them all, says. Tues ille filius Dei viuentis, verse. 16. Whereupon he
received the promise of the keys, and those other comfortable words spoken by
Christ unto him, verse. 18.19. yet not so spoken to him alone, but that it is
apparent that the substance of the promise did equally belong unto them all:
and there is nothing singularly belonging unto Peter alone throughout the whole
speech, but only an allusion between his name and the nature of his
confession, between Petrus and Petra; for the rest, it is all common, for
either we must say that the disciples did make no answer at all to their
Masters question, which had been a point of great incivility, and so not
likely; or else the answer that Peter made must be taken for their common
answer, and his confession the common confession of them all. Now if it be
granted that it was the common confession, and only delivered by Peter as the
foreman of the Jury, (...) lib. 2. Hist. Eccl. cap. 14. (...).
(for so Eusebius calls him) our Saviours-reply thereunto cannot with any
congruity be otherwise understood then to belong unto them all, though spoken
unto Peter; as judges use to direct their speech to the foreman, when they
would have the whole Jury take knowledge of it: Petrus pro omnibus dixit, and
cum omnibus accepit, Orig. tract. 1. in Mat. and Aug. de verbis Dom. secund.
Mat. Ser. 13. Quia tu dixisti mihi, Tu es filius Dei viui, and ego tibi, tu es
Petrus.

Upon this rock will I build my Church-). Whether by the rock we understand
Christ himself, or whether we understand the confession of Saint Peter made
of Christ, all comes to one; if there be any difference between them it is
merely verbal, and consists rather of a diverse manner of men's expressing
their minds, then in any matter of substance. But for the person of Peter, the
Church of Christ did never understand her self to be any otherwise built upon
it, then upon the rest of the Apostles; Apoc. 21.14. or then Saint Paul when
he says, it is built upon the foundation not only of the Apostles, but also
of the Prophets, that is upon their doctrine. Ephesians. 2.20.
Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, quam confessus es, super hanc Petram quam
cognovisti, dicens, tu es Christus filius Dei viui, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam:
super me aedificabo te, non me super te, Aug. vbi supra; I could cite twenty
places out of August. to the same purpose, besides Ambr. Ser. 84. Hill. de Trin.
l. 2. Hier. in Mat. l. 1. c. 7. Tert. adversus Marcion. l. 4. c. 13, Theod. in
Psalm. 47. But for August. he is so plain for us against the Popish
interpretation, that Bellarmine would feign quarrel with him upon the point,
and charge him with ignorance of the Hebrew tongue. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c.
10. and Stapleton calls it lapsum humanum in that holy Father, because he could
not think of the matter as they would have him; ( Princip. doctrinal. lib. 6.
c. 3.

And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it --) This makes it more
plain that the other part of the speech was not spoken to Peter alone, because
this cannot be understood of Peter alone, and so Origin collecteth Tr. 1. in
Mat. shall we dare to say (says he) that the gates of Hell shall not overcome
only Peter, and that the same gates shall prevail against all the other
Apostles? And again in the same Tract. 1. in Mat. If you think that the whole
Church was builded only upon Peter, what will you say of John the son of
thunder, and of every of the Apostles?

And I will give to thee the keys etc. Here is nothing promised in the Keys
to Peter, nor in the power of binding and loosing, but what is likewise
promised to all the Apostles, Mat. 18.18. Quaecunque ligaveritis in terra,
erunt ligata and in coelo, and when this promise came to performance Ioh.
20.22.23. you shall find that it was performed to all alike. Accipite Spiritum
Sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, remittentur iis.-Now it is certain that
remitting and retaining of sins is a power of the same extent with the power of
the keys, and that being given to them all, Ioh. 20. as well as unto Peter,
proves that there was nothing promised unto Peter, Mat. 16. but was intended to
them all, Cuncti Apostoli claves regni coelorum accipiunt. Hier. adversus
Iovinianum l. 1. and Origin. An vero soli Petro dantur claves regni coelorum,
nec alius beatorum quisquam eas accepturus est? Quod si dictum hoc tibi dabo
claves,- caeteris quoque commune est, cur non simul omnia communia Tract. 1. in
Mat. and Cypr. Christus Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem suam parem
potestatem tribuit l. 1. de vnitat. Eccl. and August. in Ioh. tractat. 124. --
quando Petro dictum est, tibi dabo claves -- and quodcunque ligaveris-
vniversam significabat ecclesiam vide eundem Tra. 50. and Theoph. upon Math.
16. Nay Anselme that was a child in comparison of the Fathers, yet he
understood this truth. Notandum est (says he) quod haec potestas non solum
Petro data est: sed siout Petrus vnus pro omnibus respondit, sic Christus in
Petro omnibus hanc potestatem dedit.

And our Savior said, Simon Simon, behold Satan has required to have thee for
to sift as wheat, but J have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and thou
being converted confirm thy brethren, Luke 22. verse. 31.32.) The first part of
this speech was spoken to all the Disciples, Satanas expetivit vos vt
cribraret: as the vulgar likewise translateth: and therefore it is no good
dealing in your friend to render it in the singular number (Satan has required
to have thee for to sift) as if these words had been spoken to Peter alone,
which is a mere falsifying of the Text: as if a man would pay his creditor
with counterfeit coin; but let that pass with his former citation of Malachy.
In the words themselves, 1. Christ signifies to his Disciples the malice of
Satan against them all, and consequently the danger wherein they stood, unless
his grace did stand by them. 2. Because he knew that Peter's danger was
greatest, and that he would prove the weakest in his performance, who had made
the greatest promises of love to his Master: Christ I say, foreseeing that
Peter's fall would be more dangerous in many respects then the fall of any of
his other fellows, therefore he turns the latter part of his speech to him
alone, promising to assist him with his special prayer, as the greatness of his
sin had speeciall need of; If Satan desire to sift them all (says
Chrysostom) why did not Christ pray for them all? it is evident that to touch
Peter more deeply and to show his fault to be more grievous then any of the
rest, Christ turned his speech to him in particular, in Math. Hom. 83. All this
proves no greater Monarchy, but rather a greater infirmity in Peter then in any
of the rest, and greater mercy in Christ toward him, whose sin did deserve a
greater judgment. As S. Paul inferres the like of himsele 1. Tim. 1.16. I am
sure the Pope will not be thought to succeed Peter in the sin of his
denial: why then does he claim the benefit of Christ's prayer, Ego pro te
oravi,- which was made purposely for Peter in regard of that sin? For as
Peter's denial was his personal fault, and is not derived per traducem to his
Successors, (for then not only many Popes should Apostatare, as Lyra in Math.
16. says, but all Popes should be Renegates which I believe not.) As therefore
it was a personal sin in Peter to deny Christ, so the prayer of Christ for
Peter was a personal favor bestowed upon him: and the Pope has no more right
to the one then the other; besides, let it be considered, that the faith which
Saint Peter obtained by Christ's prayer was not only fides notitiae, such as
Devils have and tremble, but it was fides fiduciae vera and salvifica sides:
such a faith as works with charity, and whosoever has it shall undoubtedly
be saved; and so Chrysostom understands it, Oraui proute ne deficeret fides
tua, hoc est, ne in fine pereas, Hom. 72. in Ioh. Now it is confessed by all
Papists, that all Popes are not furnished with this kind of faith. Pope Adrian
6. is said to have doubted of the salvation of many of his predecessors: and
Bellarmine (if the Seminary Priest belly him not) has passed a peremptory
judgment upon Pope Sixtus Quintus. Quia sine poenitentia vixit, and sine
poenitentia mortuus est, quantum sapio, quantum capio descendit ad inferos.
Watson in his Quodlibets. Now if this be true, that Popes may be damned, it
must needs follow, that either Christ's prayer did not prevail with God, (which
were impiety to think) or that the Pope was never thought upon by Christ, when
this prayer was a making. Now to his third proof.

3.
Our Savior Christ asking Peter if he loved him more then these, said yea
Lord, thou know J love thee: whereupon Christ said to him twice, feed my
Lambs, and the third time feed my sheep, Ioh. 21. verse. 16.17.) Here is some
mistaking of the Text again: for Christ did not say twice to Peter feed my
Lambs, and once feed my sheep: but twice feed my Sheep, and once feed my
Lambs. But let this pass for a peccadillo. I say farther, that in the words
there is nothing spoken more to Peter, then is elsewhere spoken to all the
Apostles: When they are commanded to go, and teach all Nations baptizing them,
Mat. 28.19.20. And if he think that there lies any special mystery in these
words, because there is such distinct mention of lambs, and sheep both
committed to Peter's charge, the like whereof we do not find in the mission of
the other Apostles: Let him not be too hasty to say so, till he have
considered the words of their general commission. Mark. 16.15. Go into all
the world (Saint Peter could not have a larger Dioces) and preach the Gospel
to every creature. Therefore whether they be Lambs or sheep, they belong to
the charge of every other Apostle as well as to Saint Peter's. But they will say
that Peter is commanded not only Pascere, but regere: and that (...) signifies
more then a Pastoral duty, even a kind of Regal authority to be given by
Christ unto him. Bellarmine stands much upon the word though there be little
cause. Lib. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 15. I know that Kings are sometimes called
Shepherds, as Homer calls (...), Nay God himself calls Cyrus so, Jsa. 44.28.
But I think it were harsh, because Kings are sometimes called shepherds, to
infer that Shepherds therefore are Kings, whether we speak of rustike or
Ecclesiastic Shepherds. But if (...) be such a mystical word, and does
imply such a sovereign authority, what meant Saint Paul to use that word
speaking to the ordinary Presbyters of Ephesus, whom he willed (...), etc. Act.
20.28.

You have heard his three texts of Scriptures: which if they be so clear for
the supremacy, as he would have you think: let him give you some reason why
Pope Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus, did not allege any of these
Scriptures in the 6. Council of Carthage, when their supremacy lay a bleeding,
but only made their claim by the Council of Nice. it is not likely that ever
such learned and wise Prelates as they, would have sought for humane proofs to
justify their cause, if they had known how to do it by divine authority:
which is to me an undoubted argument that these fore-alleadged places ( Mat.
16.18. Luke 22.31. Ioh. 21.16.) either were not thought on in those days to
imply any such Supremacy in Peter: or that Peter's supremacy (whatsoever it
be) was not thought to belong any whit to the Pope. Else why did they not
stand upon the Scriptures? Why did the Popes Legates urge the Nicene Canon? Or
rather why did they forge it to serve their turns? for so it is certain that
they did, and the forgery remains upon record in the Acts of the Council. And
though Cardinal Baron. Tom. 5. Annal have strained his wits hard to salve the
matter, yet it will not be. -- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo. But as I was
about to say: if these Scriptures make any good proof for the Popes Supremacy,
why were not they brought forth in that Council of Carthage, either by the
Pope or his Legates, rather then the Nicene Canon? Saint Augustine was one of
the Fathers present in that Carthagenian Council, when this cause was debated,
and is it likely that either the Pope would have stood then upon Canons, if he
had known any Canonical scripture for it, or that Saint Augustine and the rest
would have denied him any authority that was due to him by Gods word? I
conclude that either the Church in those days did not understand these places
of Scripture, or the Romish does not understand them now. But see whether these
proofs that follow do help his cause any better.

1.
When all the holy Apostles are named, S. Peter is the first, Mat. 10.2.-) That
is not so: for Saint Andrew is named before him, Ioh. 1.44. James is named
before him, Gal. 2.9. Paul and Apollos were both named before him, 1. Cor.
3.22. Nay see 1. Cor. 9.5. and Mark. 16.7. and you shall find him named last
of them all. 2. If it were so that Peter were still first named, yet what a
weak foundation is that, for so great a building as they would raise upon it?
The most that can be inferred thereupon is a primacy of order which no man ever
denied. If that will content the Pope when a general scrutinie of Bishops is
called, to have his name set in the first place, let him take it.

2.
After the Apostles had visibly received the Holy Ghost, St Peter made the
first Sermon thereof: whereat 3000. persons were converted Act. 2.4.) For Peter
to have his name placed first, or to preach the first Sermon, these are poor
proofs for a Supremacy, and it is but a poor Supremacy that can be drawn
from such proofs. Why should it argue any Supremacy more in him that he
preached the first Sermon, then in Mary Magdaalen, that she published the
first news of Christ's resurrection to the Disciples, even to Peter himself?
Mark. 16.7. Ioh. 20.2.

But how if Peter did not preach the first Sermon after the visible descent of
the Holy Ghost? Why then all that he urges is to little purpose. Consider the
text well, Saint Peter's sermon begins at the 14. Verse of the 2. Chap. of the
Acts: the effect thereof was the conversion of 3000. souls mentioned verse. 41.
It is plain in the 4. Verse. that all the Apostles had spoken publicly to the
people, before Peter stood up to begin his Sermon. The argument whereof they
entreated, was the same that Peter handled. they declared unto them Magnalia
Dei, the wonderful works of God, Verse. 11. and Peter declared nothing else.
That preaching of theirs was not without good effect, as well as S. Peter's,
though we know not the just number of the converts. Nay it seems that the
conversion of those 3000. was the fruit of all their preaching at that time,
and not of Peter's alone, and so it is said verse. 41. That upon the same day
were added unto the Church about 3000 souls: He does not say that all this
was the effect of Peter's one sermon: but that so many were converted upon that
day. To the next proof.

With his word and power he killed Ananias and Saphira for their Sacrilege,
Act. 5. verse. 5.) It was for their lying to the Holy Ghost that Peter slew them
(and so he tells them, verse. 3.4.) and so not for sacrilege alone. But let it
be as he would have it. I say it proves not that for which he brings it. S.
Paul by the like power smote Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness, Act. 13. Now
if at the same time Paul had slain Elimas outright, and in stead of taking his
eyesight from him, had taken away his life (as I think no man doubts but he
could have done) ask your friend, whether he think that such an act would
have made Paul head of the Apostles? Let him spit and speak out plainly. His
fourth proof follows with some more show, though of as little force as the
former.

4.
St Peter called the first Council of the Apostles holden at Jerusalem and
first spoke therein: Act. 15. v. 7. Bellar. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 22. says,
Petrus in concilio primus loquitur: and sententiam eius Jacobus omnesque alij
sequuntur. This is more then he should have said, because it is more then he
can prove: but yet he durst not say as your friend does, that Peter called the
Council (he knew it to be untrue) and if you read the whole Chap. you shall
not find one word to that purpose. Peter spoke first in the Council, so
Bellarm. says indeed: and your friend speaks it upon his credit. But yet the
Council it self says no. Act. 15. v. 7. When there had been much disputing
Peter rose up, and said; Men and Brethren, -- Therefore some other there spoke
of the matter before Peter. And what if he had been the first speaker in that
Council? would that prove his supremacy? Just as it was proved before by his
making the first sermon? Nay rather it is an argument that does overthrow his
supremacy altogether. For it is well known that in such kind of assemblies
the inferior do commonly speak first, and the President of the Council
having heard and gathered their opinions delivers his judgment last of all,
according whereunto the decree commonly passes. So I have heard that the Lord
Chancelour does in the Star Chamber, and the chief Judges upon other benches.
And in this very Council of Jerusalem, when Peter and Paul and Barnabas had
spoken their minds concerning the matter in question, James stands up and using
a special kind of authority, Men and brethren harken unto me, v. 13. -- he
concludes the business: which shows that he, and none but he was President in
that Council: and so Chrysostom terms him, calling his sentence the
definitive sentence, according whereunto the decre of the council was framed,
Chrysostom. Hom. 33. in Act. Apostolorum.

It is affirmed by old writers, and some modern learned Protestants, that S.
Peter was 25. years Bishop of Rome, and by the ancient Ecclesiastical
writers, that Saint Peter and S. Paul were both of them martyred together in
Rome under the Emperor Nero. Origin. apud Eusebium l. 3. c. 1. Eusebius. c. 24.
l. 2. Hist. Eccl. Tert. depraescrip. c. 36. Aug. Tract. 123 in Ioh. Chysostom
and Beda in hunc locum, S. Ambr. Ser. 66.68, S. Maximus. How Saint Peter was
Bishop of Rome.
When Peter is called Bishop of Rome, or James of Jerusalem or any other
Apostle of any other particular City, we must understand that in those
speeches, the name of Bishop is taken in a larger extent, then the strict
Ecclesiasticke use of the word will allow. As when Presbiters are called
Bishops, Act. 20.28. And the Apostleship it self is called (...) Act. 12.25.
Romans 11.13. For as in propriety of speech a Deacon is inferior to a Presbiter,
and a Presbiter to a Bishop: so is a Bishop unto an Apostle by many degrees,
though the names be often used promiscuously; the calling of the one is
extraordinary, and the whole world is within the compass of his commission:
the other is a mere ordinary vocation, and his Jurisdiction confined within
the limits of one Diocese. But because the Apostles, being sent by Christ to
preach the Gospel to all nations, made their chief abode in Cities of
greatest resort, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Rome,-hence it comes to pass
that they are often called Bishops of those Cities, not in that sense that in
times succeeding the chief pastors of every City were known by that name of
Bishops, but after a more large, or rather licentious use of the words: and
whosoever calls S. Peter Bishop of Rome in any other sense then so, he speaks
as wisely as if he should say, the King of England were Constable of
New Market, because his Majesty resides often in that place.

How long Saint Peter sat Bishop there.
You understand by this, that Saint Peter is called sometimes Bishop of Rome,
your friend adds, that he sat Bishop there 25. reeres as old writers assirme,
and some modern learned Protestants.-) Eusebius indeed says so in his
Chronicle, and withal that he sat 7. year before he came to Rome at
Antioch: both which cannot possibly be true, and is evidently contradicted by
the history of the Acts, and S. Paul's Epistle to the Galath. as Onuph. a
learned Papist proves in his Annot. upon Platina de vit. Pont. Romans I will not
enter into that discourse, but desire you to read what others have written. I
think there be few learned Papists now but think, that Eusebius was deceived
in that point of his Chronicle, or else they must think that Saint Luke and
Saint Paul were deceived. But it is generally agreed that he was first Bishop
of Antioch before he was Bishop of Rome; Now desire your friend to give you
some reason why the prerogative of Peter's Supremacy (if there were any such
thing in rerum natura) why it should not belong unto the Patriarch of Antioch,
as well as to the Pope of Rome, both being his successors alike in their
several places. Perhaps he will say because Peter was put to death in Rome,
and not in Antioch: and to that purpose it is likely that he cited Tertullian.
statu foelix Ecclesia, cui totam doctrinam Apostolicum sanguine suo
profuderunt, vbi Petrus passioni 'Dominicae adaequatur, vbi Paulus Iohannis
exitu coronatur, Tert. de praescrip. c. 36. For else I know not what those
words do there; but if that be his meaning he might well have spared that
quotation; for if S. Peter's Martyrdom at Rome be a good plea for the
supremacy of that Sea above Antioch; why should not Jerusalem claim it from
them both, seeing Christ the Son of God and Savior of the world was put to
death there?

St Peter's successors.
That S. Peter's Successors Bishops of Rome, have exercised chief authority in
the Church militant ever since to this day.-) And how does he prove this. 1.
Because that after the Martyrdom of S. Peter 32. of the succeeding Bishops
were likewise Martyred. This piece of his reading in old history might serve
for some use in another place, but I cannot see how it helps to prove that
Popes have ever exercised chief authority in the Church, to which end it is
brought here in this place. I am sure that Popes in these latter ages have
neither succeeded Peter in his Martyrdom, nor desire to be his successors that
way. All the world sees they have been more busy in making of Martyrs, then
in suffering of Martyrdom; and in that respect may better be called the
Successors of Nero, Decius, and Dioclesian: then of S. Peter and those 32. holy
Bishops that succeeded him. It is certain that by the cruelty of Popes, and
their Popish instruments there has been more Christian blood shed in the
world, then ever was shed by those heathen tyrants in the greatest heat of
their persecuting. What though the Pope succeeded in place to those 32. holy
Bishops and Martyrs: It is no otherwise then as corruption succeeds
generation, vinegar succeeds wine, as the Turk succeeds James in
Jerusalem, and other of the Apostles in other places.

Pope Victor, in the 200, year excommunicated the Asian Bishops about the
observation or keeping Easter day.-) So they say; but do you speak this to
his credit, or to disgrace his person? Certainly it was a foul fact that he
did commit therein, and so it was censured by most learned and godly Bishops of
that age, and namely by S. Ireneus, who wrote unto him purposely about the
matter, and reproved him sharply for it, as he well deserved. Jreneus in
Victorem per Epistolam graviter invectus est, says Socrates Eccles. Hist. l.
5. c. 21. And that it displeased other Christian Bishops besides Jraeneus you
shall find in Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 23.24.

The four first gener all Counsels not called by Popes.
Pope Silvester in the (314) year called the first general council of Nice
against the Arian Heresy.-) Baronius then is out in his reckoning of anno 325.
Eusebius who lived in that time, and was well acquainted with the business,
affirms that it was called by Constantine the Emperor, l. 3. de vit.
Constant. c. 6. and 7. And I think it were hard to name any ancient writer
that denies it. The Council it self acknowledges so much in a Synodicall
Epistle to the Church of Alexandria, Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis. Quoniam Dei
gratia and mandato Sanctissimi Jmperatoris Constantini, qui nos ex variis
civitatibus, and provinciis in vnum congregavit, magnum and sanctum Concilium
Nicenum coactum est. -- apud Socrat. l. 1. Hist. Eccles. c. 6. This case is so
plain that Pigh. Eccles. hier. l. 6. c. 1. calls general Counsels (Inventum
Constantinum) though Bellarm. chid him for it, l. 1. de Council. c. 13. To. 2.

Pope Damascus in the (367) year called the second gener all Council at
Constantinople against Macedonius the Heretic-) As true as Silvester called
the first. Sozomen Hist. Ecles. l. 7. c. 7. says directly that Theodosius the
Emperor called it: and the Council it self in a letter written to him, (...)
does acknowledge that it was assembled together by virtue of a writ directed
from his (Imperial) Piety.

Pope Caelestine (414) called the third general Council at Ephesus against
Nestorius the Heretic,-) It seems that Pope Caelestine himself was not
present at this Council: But for the Council it self it was called
Authoritate and nutu Theodosii junioris, qui tum oririent ale administravit
imperirium says Evag. lib. 1. cap. 6. And Literae Jmperatoris erant ad
Cyrillum and ad alios omnes vbique sanctarum Ecclesiarum Praesides missae)
Ibid. and the Canons of the Council in the very beginning do testify so much.

Pope Leo (440) called the Fourth genera all Council at Calcedon against the
Heretic Eutiches,-) Let the acts of the Council speak; which begin thus, In
civitate Calcedonensi Metropoli Provinciae Bythiniae facta est Synodus ex
decreto piissimorum Imperat. Valentiniani and Marciani: and he that reads the
Epistles of Leo, shall find in what humble and submissiue manner he wrote
diverse times to the Emperor to call a Council, not challenging any authority
therein to himself, but entreating it as a favor from his Lord the Emperor.
Vide Epistolam. 9. ad Theodos. and Epist. 12. and Epist. 23. ad Clerum and
Plebem Constantinop. and Epist. 24. and 26. And thus you see how the four
Popes did call the first, four general Councels.

For when your friend begins to speak of the Council of Trent, he begins to
draw upon the lees. And here Bellarmine, who thinks general Counsels
profitable and convenient, but not absolutely necessary for the Church l. 1 de
council. c. 10. when he comes to the Council of Trent, he pleades for the
necessity thereof, vt pro aris and focis, as Demetrius for Diana: Act. 19. Our
trade is like to decay and be undone, if that be touched. Si tollamus
autoritatem praesentis Ecclesiae and Concilij (Tridentini) then all will come
to nothing, de effect saor. l. 2. c. 35. q. d. Though all other counsels were
expunged, yet that may stand by it self, and so long we shall stand. One thing
more by the way I would have you take notice of in Bellarmine, how when he had
first endeavored to prove that the first four general Councels were all
called by Popes (just as your friend would have it) yet presently after in the
same chapter he sets down four reasons, why the Emperor did call call those
4. Councels and not Popes alone l. 1. de Council. to. cap. 13. to. 2.

It is confessed by diverse learned Protestants, that the Roman Church was the
true Mother Church, which Christ our Savior planted: some for 300, years,
some for 400. years, some for 600. years, etc.) Among other particular.
Churches planted by the Apostles, the Roman Church with the first was of
special note: and the faith of the Romans in the beginning renowned through
the whole world. Romans 1.8. But what does S. Paul say more of the Romans in
that place, The Romish Church not the mother of all Christians.
then he does of the Thessalonians elsewhere? Read 1. These. v. 7.8. 2. These.
1. v. 3.4. and you shall find as great praise if not greater given to them,
then to the other. What would he infer hence? Did he ever hear any
Protestant confess (because he would so feign work somewhat out of their
confession) that the Romish Church, when it was at the best, was the Mother of
all Christians? Or that the holy Catholic Church which we believe in our
Creed, was nothing else but the Church of Rome? Or, because that Church was
faithful in the Apostles days, does it follow that it must needs continue so
still? Egesippus an ancient Catholic writer says, that so long as the
Apostles lived, Virgo pura and incorrupta mansit Ecclesia, etc. apud Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 29. And whereas he talks of 300 and 400. nay of 800.
years, as if we did acknowledge Rome so long to have bin the Church of Christ;
tell him for his further learning, that we acknowledge her for a Church still
(though a most degenerate, and corrupted one:) Whose doctrine is full of
Novelty, and her practice as full of pride, and cruelty; and yet a Church in
respect of some truths that she teaches among many falsehoods, as a man that
is heartsicke and ready to dye, cease not for all that to be a man; so we
likewise think of diverse other Christians in the world: though there be many
errors in their doctrine, and much scandal in their lives, yet so long as they
hold the foundation, the name of the Church is not to be denied them; and if
your friend think otherwise tell him that his faith is never the better,
because his charity is worse then ours.

The corruptions of Rome.
But he will deny perhaps that there are any such corruptions, as we speak
of, grown into the Church of Rome. What then mean so many grievous complaints
made by men of special note in that Church long before Luther was borne?
Bernard. in ^antic. ^on. sermon. (...).
What meant Bernard to say that there was putida tabes, a filthy disease that
had spread it self throughout all the parts of the Church? and that Ministri
Christi, in his time did servire Antichristo? If nothing be amiss in the
Church of Rome, what meant Paulus Tertius to set certain delegate Cardinals
and others a work to give their advice how reformation might be made? Or what
meant those Cardinals to write such a book as they did (called Concilium
delect. Card. and aliorum Praelat.) which if you will read (as it is extant in
Tom. 3. Council. edit. per Crab. editionis Colon. 1551.) you shall find that
their Church has both rugas and maculas, Council. Trident. sess. 22. d^eret. de
O^ serb. and (...) vit. in cel bratione Missae.
as well in matter of doctrine as in manners. What meant the Council of Trent
to decree, that the Mass it self ought to be purged out of all such abuses,
as vel avaritia, vel superstitio induxit: if all were as it should be, what
needed such a reformation of your Breviary and Missal, and officium beatae
virginis? But that they were refertae superstitionibus, and so confessed in Pij
Quinti, constitut. super recitat. offic. Beat. virginis: Read also his preface
in Breviar, and Missale restitut.

Indeficiency of faith not promised to one particular Church.
Now let him answer himself, how it may be true that Rome was once a sound
Church of Christ, and yet is not so now. Let him remember what Isaiah said, c.
1. v. 21. How is the faithful City become a Harlot-) Desire him to read that
whole passage in the Prophet, and he shall find how changing of the name, the
words do as well fit Rome in these days, as ever they did Jerusalem then. And
whereas he talks of the promises of God, it is but the same vanity that the
Jews were possessed with, when they stood so much upon Templum Domini, Jer. 7.
v. 4. The promises that Christ made to his Church; that he would be with it to
the end of the world: That he would send the spirit of truth to abide with it
for ever: that Hell gates shall not prevail against it: They were made to the
Catholic Church, and not to any particular one, such as Rome is; and to that
Catholic Church they have been and ever shall be most truly performed. God
will have his Church upon earth though Rome were as deep buried under the
earth, as now she stands above it.

And to end with a demonstration-) He does well to end with one, for I am sure
that from the beginning hitherto such Arguments have been geason with your
friend and if this be one, Aristotle never knew what demonstrations meant: in
that kind of argument, the propositions ought to be evidently true: and the
conclusion to be drawn from the premises not by probable, but by necessary
consequence. And here is no such matter.

The Patriarchall and Episcopal seats of the Apostles not extinguished.
That all the Patriarchall and Episcopal seats of the Apostles.-) This is not
true; nay, in saying so he does unreasonably overlash: For it is well known to
the world, that there is at this day a Patriarch of Constantinople, to whose
Jurisdiction are subject all the Christians of Asia minor (excepting Armenia
the less, and Cilicia) besides Circassia, Mengrelia and Russia; moreover that
in Europe it self the Christians of Greece, Macedonia, Epirus, Thracia,
Bulgaria, Rascia, Servia, Bossina, Walachia, Moldavia, Podolia,- do
acknowledge the Jurisdiction of that Patriarch, and cannot endure the Bishop of
Rome; under this Patriarch there is the Metropolitan of Salonichi
(Thessolonica) and thirty Churches of Christians in that one City: and no
less then ten Suffragan Bishops subject to his Jurisdiction: besides this the
Metropolitan of Philippi, has 150. Churches under him: Athens as many: He of
Corinth has a hundred; besides all the Islands of the Aegean Sea,
Constantinople it self the very seat of the Turkish Empire has above twenty
Churches of Christians. Put all these together, and you shall see that Papists
have little cause to boast of their multitude, or to slight this Patriarch, as
if there were but few Christians subject unto him. There are likewise at this
day Patriarchs, though poor ones of Alexandria and Antioch, and great
multitudes of Christians that are subject to each of them; though nothing so
many in number as were wont to be heretofore, (by reason of the Turkish
tyranny and oppression, under which they are brought:) yet neither so few that
it can be truly said of the meanest of them, as your friend ventures to
affirm of them all. (That they be extinguished and worn out many years
since:) They be poor, and suffer much affliction under the Turk, and other
Infidels, and yet they may be never the worse Christians for all that. True
piety and godliness did never so much flourish in the Church, as when the
Church it self was most persecuted and afflicted by Tyrants. Schola Crucis,
est Schola Lucis, and semen Ecclesiae, est sanguis Martyrum; and therefore they
that make temporal prosperity a note to know the Catholic Church by, (as
generally our Jesuits do) speak more like Epicures, then Divines and
Christians.

Besides your friend shows himself very ignorant in the state of his own
Romish Church, if he do not know that the Pope at this day does usually create
certain titular Praelates; Whereof one is called Patriarch of Alexandria, the
other of Antioch, another of Jerusalem. It is true that these all are but mere
puppets and Idols, and possess not a foot of revenew or the least part of
Jurisdiction in those places whereof they bear names; yet your friend should
not have denied that there were any such Patriarchs, seeing they are Creatures
of the Popes own making, whose greatest use is to gull the world under those
names, as if those four Patriarchs did perform him obedience: when indeed
they be but four vizzards in comparison of the Patriarchs themselves.

Only the Church of Rome, the seat of Saint Peter stands at this day-) Let him
not stand too much upon the standing of his Church: Rome no sound Church of
Christ.
For sure the legs thereof are not so sound as they should be; a church may
be worn out as well by diseases bred inwardly in her body, as by the violence
of external persecution: If Rome be free from this latter, yet a great part
of the world thinks her ill affected in her inward, and vital parts. She
thinks not so her self: no more does many a dying man, but will say he is
well, when he is ready to give up the Ghost. Sacerdotium quod intus cecidit,
foris diu stare non potest, Greg. Mor. You see the falsehood of those
propositions upon which his demonstration is built, see now how loosely his
conclusion hangs upon those propositions, though I should grant them to be
true. If there be any sense at all in the connection of the parts together, this
it is. All the other Patriarchall Churches are fallen: Only Rome is not
fallen: Therefore it shall never fall. Let him take his answer from S. Paul
Romans 11.17. If some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive
tree, etc. Now let him remember to what Church Saint Paul there writes, and
what they were to whom he gave such earnest premonition to take heed least for
their infidelity God should cast them off, as he had done the Jews in their
sight. This had been a very needless admonition especially from the Apostle
to the Romans, if he knew certainly that God had promised them such
indeficiency of faith, that whatsoever became of other Churches, theirs should
never turn Infidel. Be not high minded but fear, says he unto them, verse.
20. and again, If God spared not the natural branches (the Jews) take heed
least he also spare not thee, v. 21. and again. Behold the goodness of God
toward thee (if you continue in his goodness) otherwise thou shall be cut
off, v. 22. And yet your friend would make you think that the Romans have no
cause to fear, and that they cannot be cut off, and all by virtue of an
imaginary promise which he supposes Christ made to the^: by which reckoning
all Saint Paul's (iffs) were but Panici timoris: He feared where no fear was:
and therefore might well have spared all the breath he spent that way.

To conclude let me now at the Parting, give him a demonstration out of these
words of the Apostle. That Church which may possibly be cut off from Christ
and fall into infidelity, is not the true Catholic Church. But it is possible
the Romish Church may be cut off from Christ, and fall into infidelity. Test
Apostolo vt supra. Therefore the Romish Church is not the true Catholic
Church.

FINIS.

