A REIOYNDER TO THE REPLY PVBLISHED BY THE IESVITES UNDER THE NAME OF WILLIAM
MALONE.

The First Part.

Wherein the General Answer to the Challenge is cleared from all the JESUITS
Cavills.

MATTHEW. XXIII. 9. 10. Call no man your FATHER upon the earth, for one is your
FATHER which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called Masters: for one is your
Master, even CHRIST. II. TIMOTH. III. 8. 9. As Iannes and Iambres withstood
Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly
shall be manifest unto all. DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers,
Printers to the Kings most excellent Majesty. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY LO: VISCOUNT FALKLAND, ONE OF THE LORDS OF HIS
MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
Right Honorable my singular good Lord,
IT was Tertullian's observation of Heretics, Nostra suffodiunt ut sua
aedificent Tertull de praescript a^ verse. haeret. cap. 42.
: Your Lordship is well informed by experience, that the Romish Clergy who
disdain the style of Heretics, are like Underminers, like Builders: For what
kind of Undermining is left unpractised to make way, ut sua aedificent, that
they may build up their Babell, and advance their ROMAN See? The Scripture the
Rule of Faith they undermine by their Vnde scis? allowing it neither authority
nor Command, but because their Chief Pastor declares it, expounds it. The
Church they undermine by assuming her Name, defiling her Doctrine. Councels, by
denying their lawfulness, unless called and approved by Rome: Bishops and
Priests, by making them Delegates to his supposed Holiness, rejecting their
Commission received from CHRIST. Neither cease they here, but Princes and
States they undermine also, sometime by raising open War, sometime by
Bosome-conspiracies, Powder-plots, and other secret attempts. Nor do these
Underminers look always like Faux in the Vault, but they will appear sometimes
as it were Angels of Light: Princes shall have Thousands of their Pens
Jesuit Fisher in his Epistle to the King.
, but I think rather Pen-knives: They will be strongly tied and united to his
Majesty's Crown, and the more familiarity they have with him by whom Kings do
reign, the more awful will they be found unto his Holy anointed The Jesuit
in his Epistle Dedicatory.
, and all this, as the Devil to our Savior, ut sua aedificent, that Princes
may fall down and worship their Beast. We may go further; None escape them.
They undermine and Populum and Primates Populi, by subverting their Estates,
Proselyting their Children: and yet the keeping back of these Underminers from
his Majesty's presence is censured by Mr Malone (our Jesuit) to be the fruit
of waspish emulation In his Epistle Dedicatory.
, as if these things might be done, and yet they remain faithful to their
Prince, his State and Dignity. But their Allegiance may well be discerned by
their Obedience: For, besides their immediate address to Rome, their
acknowledging a PROTECTOVR In a letter of LVD. CAR. LVDVISIVS S. R. E.
VICECANCELLARIVS, superscribed thus, Rev. PP^i.. Praefect^ p. P. Car^
Excalceaterum in Reg^ Hibernia. Dated. Rome 10. Kal. I^^ii, 1631. which is in
my hands, and concerns the quarrels of the Regulars and Seculars in the
points censured by the Doctors of S^^bon, ^5. ^an. 1631. Vt rei veritas
innotes^at scriptum est ad quosdam illius Regni Praelatos a qu. bus expectatur
informatio. Interim v^sum est sacrae Congreg.ni ut nos ex munere PROTECTORIS
quo fungimur admoneamus, and rogemus V. (...) ne ex dolor aut vindicta
illatae, ut praetenditur, calumniae quid quam agat erga tumultus authors, ne
maj^res ^xcitentur turbae, sed offensiones and injurias suas ^uorumque re^ittat
s^cr^ Congreg. (...) quae plene satisfaciet, and justa censura corripiet, ac
poena afficiet ^^^^mniae dum constire it Architectos.
there, and abusing his Majesty's Subjects by pressing their Consciences to
yield subjection (against his sacred Commands) to none but from thence, There
is daily resisting of his ROYAL Commands, in matters that are not absolutely
Spiritual: For there being Publication of His Majesty's ROYAL pleasure for
the changing of the Popish Calendar, which ever since the times of Rebellion
was observed in the Province of Vlster, Did they obey? This it may be they will
glory in; But for what other then Politic respects? How was the Titular
Primate advised by his Council learned Was he not pressed to disobey? Was it
not reputed inconvenient to alter the same? Did he not censure the receiving of
the Kings command against this their disobedient practice to be no otherwise
then to obey men more then GOD! That if obedience should be yielded herein,
their Adversaries (so he styles his sacred Majesty and Council) will be
encouraged to publish more severe edicts against them, and sic paulatim serpet
Cancer In a letter written partly in Irish, partly in Latin, to the Titular
Primate, superscribed, To his much esteemed assured loving fr^ind Mr William
Bitagh these in haste wheresoever. These are the points for which it were
inconvenient to alter the time here praes^rtim hoc anno. (...), quod videamur
obsdire hominibu^ magis quam Deo, recipiendo TEMPORALIVM Potestatum mandata
contra r^ceptam Ecclesiasticam lgem, idque (...) ^dium religionis nostrae; und^
ADVERSARII animentur ad alia magis nociva praecepta can^ra nos ^denda, dum
^iderent nos minoribus praeceptis ^^^emperare, and sic paulatim serpet Cancer
etc.
. Do they apprehend his Majesty and Council for Adversaries? Who can then
esteem the^ for Friends? Shall a rebellious intrusion be esteemed the Oracle
of GOD and check the Regal Power, as proceeding from Men, and yet Subjection
not violated, but their Obedience must remain firm?

Much more in this kind may be presented to your Lordship, if it were not
superfluous, but by this it may appear, how that (notwithstanding their
pretenses) Princes are relished or distasted by them in ordine ad spiritualia,
as they countenance, or exalt their Popish Faction. For to omit other things,
the Jesuit his contemptuous reproaching of the learned defense of his Majesty's
supreme power, made in the Castle-Chamber in the time of your Lordships
Government here, does declare how inviously they hear of his Majesty's eminent
and glorious Prerogatives. But the more they declare themselves enemies to our
Faith and her Defender, the more I doubt not, but all sacredly affected will
arm themselves to resist them, in these their contrivings and secret
imaginations.

I do not come with this Dedication to move your Lordship hereunto, for it
has been your Work; and who is or has been more Faithful amongst all the
Servants of my Lord the KING 1. Sam. 2^.
? And for your pious affection to the true Religion I could speak more then I
suppose your modesty would be willing to hear; so that I doubt not, but in
this way you will prosper and flourish, ( Vnus Deus and plures Amici) being
confident that there will never be wanting Blessings and Honor to him that
either walks with GOD or for him. Neither is it a light Argument of your love
to Piety and Religion, that in the time of your Lordships Government
(imitating herein BOTH your most glorious MASTERS) you were a Father to the
Clergy and Ministers of GOD; your last Act amongst us showing with how sacred
an esteem you reverenced their Persons; when by your practice you taught the
most Honorable of the Kingdom to acknowledge them for men appointed by GOD to
bless in his Name.

I will now draw to an end, excusing my presumption in offering this to your
Lordship; but I could do no less, in regard I have no other means to
acknowledge your liberal favors and bounty to me, and to give your Lordship
an Account, that although they can never be deserved, yet they are not
altogether misplaced or cast away. The LORD multiply his Blessings upon your
Lordship, and inflame your affections more and more to his Glory, that he may
crown you with his mercies here, and eternity hereafter; which he shall ever
pray for that is

Your Lordships most humble servant and Chaplain GEO: SING.

To the Reader.
I Am to give thee notice (Christian Reader) that M. Malone the Jesuit writing
a DEMAND, and sending it to the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Primate
of all Ireland his Grace, when he was Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of S.
Patrickes Dublin, received an ANSWER from him to the same, full of gravitie and
learning, when he was Bishop of Mead, having the first coppie that came forth
of the Press sent unto him. Since which time he has printed, A REPLY TO Mr
VSHERS ANSWER, so fully expressing an impatient and disquieted mind, that
scarce a page may be found, wherein he uses not a licentious liberty and
reviling tongue against the most learned Answerer. This book travailed long
before it could be espied by us, but having got it at last, we found it to
be as before is declared. Whereupon some Divines did labor to dissuade the
most reverend the Lord Primate from rejoyning thereunto, in regard of the
indignity of the raylor, and violence of the work, as also because it would
hinder him in other studies more necessary for the Church, and did offer their
endeavors to examine the same; Which being accepted by his Grace, the work
is now so far prepared, that it waytes at the Press. Only this Piece
prepares the way, which I have sent out of due course and order without the
rest, occasioned by the adverse part, who have reported it to be in answering
before many sheets thereof were printed, whereby I had reason to suspect, that
to get the coppie they used some deceit.

But before I leave thee (Christian Reader) I must first acquaint thee, that in
the examination of the General Controversy in the Jesuits Reply, I have
passed by sundry mistakes, solecismes, and false Quotations, casting them
aside, as the Israelite did the body of Amasa 2. Sam. 2. 20.
lest they should hinder me in a more necessary pursuit. Neither have I been
moved with every provocation of the invious Jesuit, knowing that the sin
which provoked him to this bitterness, is (as Cyprian observes) sine fine
peccatum, everlastingly extended, and without an end, set on fire by Hell,
Cyprian. de Zelo and Livore. Zelus terminum non habet permanent jugiter malum
and sine fine peccatum, quantoque ille cui invidetur successu meliore
profecerit, tanto invidus in majus incendium, livoris ignibus, in^r descit*
though the fuel that nourishes it come from Heaven, whereby the most learned
Answerer is justified, in regard that the more GOD has beautified him with
excellencies and admirable perfections, the more he is persecuted by this
fiery inflammation. Besides, his own have censured him for his rage herein,
admiring

-- Quae causa indigna SERENOS Foedavit vultus? and therefore he being
condemned by them, I did take liberty many times to spare my reproof. What
errors have passed in the Press, I have taken the best course I could for
their correction. I pray GOD bless and protect his Church against all the
proud holds that are erected against the Scepter of JESUS CHRIST.

A BREIFE VIEW OF THE IESVITES PREPARATIVES TO HIS REPLY.
IT is sufficient to procure jealousy, when an Adversary raves; But it is a
convincing Argument of desperate fear, when one flies upon a party, to
countenance his Cause. That this has been our Jesuits practice, I think
will easily appear.

In his first page, if Painters and Poets were to be believed, he In the
preface to the Reader.
Emblematically s^ts forth our private spirit, iarring Synagogues, and would
persuade the world, that there is amongst them, Page, 1.
the Unity of the spirit, in the bond of Peace. But all this in a shadow
only. I hope the Reader will not think we esteem our persons as our cause,
or that we conceit, we are as free from Passion, as our Faith from falsehood:
This humor were too Pharisaicall, and fit for a Jesuit. Some humors will
extend a gnat to a As Lutheranes etc.
mountain, and determine every thing damnable, which they conceive an error.
On the other side, others have consciences so largely capacious, that nothing
offends them, and therefore can as well receive a precept, or command from
Satan, as GOD; from Antichrist, as CHRIST; and obey with more obsequiousness
the I. Gordon Huntl. in epist. ad Paulum 5. ante epit: contr: Tu Petra firma
and immobilis in qua religio co^quieseit, Bell. de Romans Pont. lib 4. c. 5. Si
Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes teneretur Ecclesia
credere vitia esse bo na, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam
peccare.
Tyrant, then the Chrysostom. hom. 37. in Genesis Christus praecepit dicens; scrutemini
scripturas; yet I. Gordon Huntl. cont: epit: with other Papists except, that
we know not the Scriptures, neither their sense, but by the Pope and his
Church, that they are obscure, in the original ambiguous, the points ill
placed, the text corrupted.
Prince of peace, the only true Lord of the Conscience.

Let us now argue with the Jesuit, if our discourse do not interrupt his
Music, and enquire; If it be granted, that there have been some bitter
passages among our own, whether Discord of As Paul and Barnabas Act. 15. 39.
Paul and Peter Gal. 2 11. the Churches of Asia, and the Latin in Pepe Victor's
time. Eusebius. eccl. hist lib. 5. Chrysostom. and Epiphanius, Augustine and Jerome
etc.
Brethren, so it be not deadly, is not better then Concord of As Saul and his
Devil, as Bala^ and Balaam that agree to curse the Church, Number. 22. as Pilate
and the Priests, to crucify the Lord of Life.
Slaves? Or if there be Unity among Roman Proselytes, as he but pretends,
and cannot prove, whether they can discern it from the Chain of their
Captivity, by which they are bound? Are there not many that Scot. 4. d. 11. q
3.
captivate their Judgments? that cannot persuade their Understandings? And who
knows not, that their Aene: Sylv. in epist. ad Mogunt. capitulo ^. cit: per
Fl. Illyricum. Etiam verum dicere contra Papam, est contra juramentum
Episcoporum. Maldon in Math. 16. 6. Haereticos non magis audiendos esse etiamsi
vera, and sacris literis consentanea, dicant aut doceant, quam Diabolum.
Oaths with other obligations, and not the Truth tie them like Sampsons foxes
by the tail, to the Unity of their blind Subjection?

Is it not Council: Tridentin:
Heresy deserving a curse, to question Papal decrees? and in Roman
determinations to doubt, where they cannot believe, Is not this to be an Gloss.
Extravag: Johan: 22: tit. 14 cap. ^. Cum inter: Credere dominu^ deum nostrum
Papam, conditorem dictae Decretalis, and istius, sic non potuisse statuere
prout statuit, haereticu^ censeretu^.
Heretic? But I will forbear any further pursuit of these things, until a
fitter opportunity, and consider how he expresses this our Dissension, and
their Concord in his vainglorious Hieroglyphick.

The Roman Divines he makes Harpers, and turns our Heavenly Musicians, to play
on all kinds of Instruments, and this he thinks a ^est worth his whole
discourse.

But Instruments of a kind do not presuppose an harmonious consent; Neither
do Organs of different forms necessarily exclude a concord, as this Harper
would have it. Psalm 150.
God was praised in the sound of the Trumpet, upon the Violl, and Harp, with
Timbrell and Flute, Virginalls and Organs, and yet no horrid dissonancie, or
unreconcilable discord to be heard; So that although he make Knox Master of
our Quire, I cannot think him fit to be a Chorister in their own, for his
skill in Music.

He further proceeds, and gives Knox the Horn, when all. Scotland knows,
that he brought the To be brought to the Horn is as much as to be outlawed. m
Sleid: com: lib: 22: Hist: Conc: Triden:
Pope and his Clergy to it.

He puts our Private Spirit, as he terms it, in a Bagpipe, and forgets the
Spirit that travayled in a m Cloake-Bag, betwixt Trent, and Rome.

I will not trouble you with such other thoughts, as his piping has
occasioned, but will turn the leaf, and see whether his Pen, be better then
his Pensill, and first we find,

A Replye to Mr James Usher his Answer.

Your Father Parsons thought it an error in a Prince, to call your great
Cardinal, Mr Bellarmine: Shall it be justified in a Jesuit, to deal so
vnmannerlie with a Primate, and one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council? A practice usual to our hot oppugners, yet so little approved by
their wisest brethren, upon their second thoughts, that Mr Fitzherbert, Rector
of the English College of his own Society in Rome, retracted his unmannerly
usage in the same kind toward the Lord Bishop of Winchester. Neither let
this Jesuit think, that his pretense of Religion is Apology sufficient to
plead for his incivility herein, when as Replique a laresponse du se^enissime
roy de la grand Bretagne Card. du Person page 1010. etc.
wise as himself, or any of his order, gave that most reverend Bishop, the
honor of his Dignity and Sea.

He tells us further, that his Reply discovers how answerlesse Mr Usher
returns. Balaam, nor his Creature never spoke truer, for though the Jesuit
has presented to the world a Bulk pretending uniform consent of antiquity,
for the Romish Religion, and the vanity of the Answerer, it will appear only
that he has expressed good will, though little strength, whereby Master Usher
Responsa eius sine responsionibus.
returns, and remains answerlesse still.

Here is folly enough for a Page, and a Painting; but rests he here? no;
he urges 1. Cor. 4. 15: and makes it speak in this manner, If ye have
ten thousand Vshers in Christ, yet not many fathers.

Here is a Courtesy perforce, for though this Loyolist neglects the most
reverend Primate his honor in State, his dignity in Schools, and makes him
but a Master, though his exquisite knowledge, and eminency in Church, and
styles him but an Usher, yet his Sanctity bursts forth, and will not be hid,
for he is acknowledged in Christ. But let him glory in his conceit, as he
pleases, I am sure, though his faction have many Friars and Jesuits vulgarly
styled fathers.
fathers in Antichrist, yet they have neither many, nor any such Vshers in
Christ.

After his Painting and Title, we find an Epistle Dedicatory to His Majesty,
which any man reading and beleiving, may think a Jesuit a true Subject, for
he comes not with Antiq. Britan: in vita Thom: Becket.
salvo ordine, as their Canterbury Saint, but will undergo the trial of his
cause before His Majesty, and submit the right thereof to the censure of his
excellent wisdom: So that Ireland may rejoice she has found a Jesuit, that
gives Princes Judgment in spiritual matters, when the whole world besides,
cannot produce I think an other, that will allow them an Some give the Pope a
direct power to despose kings, Others an indirect power. Bellar: de Rom: Pont:
lib: 5: cap. 6. Quan^u^ ad personas non potest Papa ut Papa ordinari^
temporales Principes deponere etc. tamen potest mutare regna et vni auferre,
atque alteri confer, tanquam summus Princeps spiritualis si id necessarium
sit ad animarum salutem. et cap 7 Quod si christiani olim non deposuerunt
Neronem etc: id fuit quia deerantvires temporales Christianis.
vndependant temporal Jurisdiction.

He acknowledges his Majesty's virtues, which we commend in a Jesuit, though
it be but a Subjects duty, and could wish his Pen were as strong as his
Subject. But forgetting pistol, poison, and Gunpowder, he imputes their
scaring from his Maiesti^s presence to washpish emulation of Adversaries, which
truly proceeded from wel-grounded Jealousy, and loyal fear.

Did you never hear of Benedict Palmio, and Hanniball Codrett, two famous
Jesuits, that not only taught Parry that it was lawful to kill the Queen of
England, but also that it was an act meritorious? Williams, York, O Cullen,
Savage, and diverse others that were executed for the like attempts, Did not
they charge Holt, and other Jesuits, to be their instructors in that
practical devotion? where did Squire learn the lesson to empoyson the Queen,
but from your brother Wadpole? O^ E^in his breife reply to certain odious and
slanderous libells etc. 411.


These things, are not inventions springing from washpish emulation of
adversaryes, but they are the confessions of such as were made Martyrs by
Popish Doctrine. I will close all with that ugly Powder Plot, which was
impossible to have been invented, without the Devil, or a Jesuit, and
enquire, whether these be not sufficient to bar Jesuits from ever pretending
faith, or fidelity to Princes: and whether they do not justly occasion
Jealousy in true affected minds, and require them to keep back such Vipers
from their Masters presence?

Besides this, do Protestants fear Jesuitical treach^ries alone? do not your
own the same? what made the court of Parliament of Paris, upon John Chastells
attempt to murder King HENRY the fourth, to banish the Jesuits out of Paris
within three days, and out of France within fifteen, after notice given, but
Garet the Jesuits traiterous lessons? Was it the Jesuits Unity and
familiarity with God, or in truth, their confederacy with Hell, that made your
Catholics of France upon a Pillar O: E: ibid: 117.
, set up in detestation of Chastells attempt, to style your holy Brethren, mali
Magistri; their Colleges, Scholae impiae; and their Religion, Nova and
malefica superstitio?

Was it an Argument of your awful engagements to Gods holy anointed, that you
brought your Catholic children to such a bloody height in France, that it was
vulgarly received, That Popes may toss the French King his Throne like a
Tennis-ball, and that Killing of Kings is an act meritorious, not in an
inferior degree, but to purchase the Crown of Martyrdom: In so much that the
Deputies for the third Estate, desired the means whereby the People might be
vnwitched of this pernicious opinion? These are the words, not of light report,
but of our sacred deceased King King JAMES his remonstra^ce against an Oration
of the most illustrious Cardinal Perron, in the preface.
, who was a Star of the greatest magnitude in the Church of GOD. Can subjects
want fear of these prodigies, unless they want faith to their Prince,
fidelity to their Country?

He charge us further with vpbrayding them with the undeserved Epithites of
treacherous and disloyal Papists. Again, that we have altered our tune, and
by public attestations made it known unto the world, that their Religion
does not any way diminish, or weaken the force of their obliged duty to his
Majesty's sacred Crown, no not though the Pope himself should attempt to
withdraw them from the same.

Who knows not Papists have their kinds? there are Papists in faction,
Papists in devotion, some deceived by your Cheates, others embracing your
wiles. That some we term treacherous and disloyal, their deserts merit it.
That others we acknowledge loyal and faithful, our experiences approve it.
What do we acquit all, because we justify some? Or have we altered our
judgments, because we distinguish your persons?

Your Martyr Watson In his Quodlibe^.
has published Jesuits fidelity, and some of your selves have acted it. And
for your Clergy, the King In the preface to his Remonstrance.
deceased conceiueth that they deny themselves the rank of loyal Subjects
among the French, why should we think the Clymate alters them?

The most reverend Primate gives his dear Countrymen, the Irish Gentry of
the Pale, that which they deserve, the honor of their former fidelity, and
expresses his hope of their future faithfulness. The worthy Justice
acknowledges in temporal matters their present Conformity, and both of them
I think could wish, they were as tender of their own souls, as of the Kings
safety. Must this justify your Religion, in regard they will not generally
embrace it? And because their loyalty will not close with your doctrine, Is
there no Crown-shaving in your profession? That they have not revolted from
their obedi^^^e, we impute to their pious inclination, and native fidelity,
and not to Papal lines, or Popish doctrines, which in these particulars they
have scorned and abhorred. He proceeds.

And I not only for my self, but in the name of all my fellow laborers, your
Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects dar^ undertake, that not one of
these his words shall ever fall to the ground: but by GODS divine assistance
you shall find it daily more and more aessured, that the free exercise of our
Religion, is our strongest tie and union to your Crown.

We fear not their loyalty, what needs a surety? if we did, such knights of
the Post were poor caution for a regal Crown; who teach doctrines of
deposing Princes? are they not your Brotherhood, your fellowlabourers Marian
de Rege li. 1. ca. 6. Certe a republica, vnde ortum habet regia potestas, rebus
exigentibus regem in Ius vocari posse, et si sanitatem respuat, principat^
spoliari.
? who wills and commands Subjects to be armed against Princes, but your Holy
Father Vide* Buil. Pii 5. adver. Elizab. Regin.
? You will not kill a King those Perron styles Apostat cutthroats King* James
his Remonstr. page 2.
; but vn-king him first, or make him a Tyrant Suarez in* defens fid. ^^th*
advers^ (...) errc: lib 6. cap. 4. Rex haereticus statim per haeresin ipso
facto privatur aliquo modo dominio et proprietate sui regni, etc. At vero post
sententia^ lata^, omnino privatur regno, ita vt non possit iusto titulo illud
possidere, ergo ex tunc poter^ tanquam omnino tyrannus tractari, et
consequenter a quocunque privato poterit interfici.
, and this you shame not to commend Marian lo ^o su. cit: Ab omni memoria in
magna laud fuisse, quocunque tyrannos opprimere aggressi sunt.
. Parricide is a sin, this you grant, but while you persuade the* world you
can pardon Chreichton: Iesuita, ad Brusseum apud Hospinian: Hist: Ies: lib: 4:
cap: 4: Caede patrata, si ad se confessurus veniret, tum se ipsum absoluturum
esse.
it when it is acted, what can Princes conceive of this, but as of an
Invitation to their butchery?

His late Majesty demanded of Fisher, what subjects should do in case of
Papal deposition of their Prince? but dare a Jesuit resolve this in a Princes
ear? no: his General inhibites him to deal in politic matters, and
therefore he professes he will pray for Peace, that he will exhort others to
suffer patiently, and that he will dye himself rather then to be accessarie to
his Majesty's death, But for resolution of the question, ne vox quidem, he
vtters not a syllable. Now these vain complements our Jesuit forsakes, and
openly professes for him self, and in the name of his fellow laborers; That
the Pope himself shall not remove them one whit from their allegiance and
duty, which they owe unto their King and Country.

This were worth commendation, if a Jesuit could not equivocate Doli non doli
sunt, nisi astu colas, Plaut. in Capt. Prove. 1. 17.
, but I fear he thinks the debt of alleagiance and duty very small, that
he dare* where his Brethren at the best are tongue-tyed, so easily engage
himself unto it.

And it is not to be omitted, that with one breath he affirms their strongest
tie and Union to the Crown, to be the free exercise of their Religion.

So that if the King should but attempt to purge the Country of their
Idolatry, and suspend their presumption therein, they could quickly evacuate
their obedience, and as their mocke-Bishop of Chalcedon Doctor Bishops epistle
to the King.
says, God knows what the forcible weapon of necessity will drive them to
at last.

And now having presumed himself and his brotherhood for good subjects, the
next thing he intends to declare, is that they be true Christians also.

For my part, as one of their own spoke of the Queens supremacy, if she be
not Head of the Church, would she were; So I of Jesuits for their Religion, if
they be not Catholics, would they were; but I confess, I am as jealous of
their sincerity, as he was of the Supremacy; I distaste to swear it.

The means by which he would confirm it, is the general and uniform consent
of the fathers, which he affirms to be the assured touch stone to try all
controversies, and would persuade in some sort that we jump with them, forced
thereunto by our multitude of variances, and licentious wresting of the
Scripture.

What dare not impudency affirm? we never rejected Fathers, nor any other
testimony of antiquity, neither denied them their due reverence and respect;
nay, we have given them more then Papists Lud. Vives sch. in Aug. de civit. dei
lib: 20 cap: 26: Itaque illa demum eis videntur edicta et consilia quae in rem
suam faciunt, reliqua non pluris aestimanda quam conventum mulier cularum in
textrina vel thermis. Index expurg. Belgit: page: ^: edir: Antw^ 1571. Cum
igitur in Catholicis veteribus alijs plurimos feramus errores, et extenuemus,
excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe negemus, et commodum iis sensum
affingamus dum opponuntur in disputationibus, aut in conflictionibus cum
adversariis*
have done, not forced thereunto, as his brazen complexion would persuade, but
out of a due regard to their divine knowledge and learning.

Yet as we think, that none can know God, but by himself, neither how he will
be worshipped, but by his own revelation: So for confirming matters of faith,
and those things that pertain to his divine worship, no tongue can tell, nor
authority confirm, but virtually it must receive it strength from sac^ed Page.
This the most learned Primate has declared, and it is often repeated by the
Jesuit, and in fitting place shall be justisied against him.

He has not yet come to his Dixi, But craves his Majesty's Princely clemency
with patience to hear the evidences of each side, and hops withal to be
made happy by his upright doom.

What does this Jesuit dream of? does he think our royal Princes, like some
of their Popes to play fast and loose with religious decrees? what; are his
Arguments stronger then Gunpowder, that he hops to blow his Majesty from
his Religion? or would he beg the Defender from his faith? or persuade the
world, that his Highness knows not her innocence, that he protects and
defends?

He closes up, and promises fervent vows for his Majesty's complete
felicity.

And herein I am charitable to believe, that he could heartily desire that his
Majesty and all other Princes of his faithfulness were as great Saints in
heaven, as kings on earth. And so he remains his Majesty's most loyal
subject; which I will believe ad Graecas Calendas, when Jesuits leave to turn
Martyrs Aug: epist: ^^: Vivunt vtlatrones, moriuntur v^ Circumcelli ones, he
norantur vt Martyrs. Cyp: de simplicitate Praelat: Non erit illa fi dei corona
fed poena persidiae, nec religiosae virtutis exitus gloriosus, sed
desperationis interitus, occidi talis potest, coronari non potest.
, and Mr Malone imbraceth his Majesty's allegiance by his oath.

The next thing that is presented, is a Preface to the Christian Reader.

What will hereafter become of Anth: Possevin:
Atheismus-Protestantium, and Guliel: Reignald:
Calvino-Turcismus, for let this Jesuit speak in earnest, or in jest,
Permissu Superiorum; we are Christians in Print.

To excuse his long delay in sending us this Jewel, he uses many pretenses,
and at last, as to his bulwark, he flies to recrimination; as if it were
Apology sufficient for his unfashionable and long expected Reply, as he in
effect terms it, that the Answer he has replied unto, lay groaning six
whole years and more, under the Authors pen, and little less then four in
the Press.

Here we shall find news from Creet: Some ten years since at the entreaty
of a Protestant Knight, Mr Malone says, he penned a certain demand. Little
less then ten years the answer was in compiling and imprinting if we
believe the Jesuit: What shall become of the three or four years, since it
saw the light? surely, here is Crimen falsi, either Mr Malone, or the Jesuit
has read Graecia menda^.
Herododotus. Besides, it plainly appears by the In the beginning of the Lord
Primates Epistle to the Reader.
Epistle to the Reader, that there were not ten whole years from the
Jesuits Challenge, being sent 1618, to the time of the Jesuits answer,
printed 1627, which must needs convince the Jesuit of notorious falsehood in
this particular.

Now, as the Jesuit has many times kept back from the most reverend Primate
his deserved titles, so in relating the occasion of his proposition or demand,
he affords him one that was never his own, and of a Chancellor, makes him
a Deane, and of a new foundation, Deane of Finglas. What might cause this his
tender respect? shall we imitate him and enquire whether it was his charity?
Surely we can not be taken with such a thought: that pen which has endangered
his credit, has certainly crazed his Charity, it so violently raves. It may
be we inquire amiss, whilst we seek at home, did not the Jesuits
fellow laborers of an other clyme being ignorant of S. Patrick his foundation
give this courtesy by escape? think not such a thought; Master Malone is a
learned Divine It has been spread abroad by some of the Jesuits familiars,
that the most learned Primate was a good antiquary: but for a divine Master
Malone. etc*
, a transcendent Varro, and yet Dignitas Decani is a book was never in his
Library.

But howsoever he escape here, we have just ground from hence to suspect him
in his farre-fetched reports, his miracles especially, when truth forsakes
him within two miles of his own home.

He cease not here, but repeates his Articles, and cries out, Master Usher
has mistearmed his work, by calling it a Jesuits Challenge, when he
propounded but a simple demand.

I confess here, the most reverend Primate did mistake in taking him for a
Champion, when he proves but a Criple. Yet pardon his escape, hereafter he will
take him as he is, fitter to ask questions, then fight combats, to beg the
points controverted, then to purchase the glory and honor of a Triumph.

He declares the preparation to the war.

Mr Usher upon his receipt proclaims this, a Jesuits Challenge, prepares
himself to the fight, buck^ls on his harness.

What to do? to war with a Pigmie; you are deceived; A sling and a few
stones *will best answer currish 1. Sam. 17. 40.
Rhetoric, alicentious Rayler.

He desires to inform his Reader, that for as much as the maine controversy
concerns the fathers judgments for the first 500 years, in his proofs he
has kept compass, howsoever he has descended to disproove his Adversary.

Here let him know, that we will follow him, in the path, that he should tread;
in his extravagant collections, and descent from the rule prescribed we desert
him; and herein, we take no other liberty, then what he assumeth to himself;
as is apparent in his second information.

He has enlarged himself in that article of the Real presence: and why I
pray you? In regard of the eagerness wherewith the adverse part does impugn
the same.

Who sees not that the blind beggar strikes, but he knows not whom? for if
he understand by the adverse part, that part of the Catholic Church, which
lives under his Majesty's government, as his words import, he is blindlie
mistaken, for who knows not, that many in the Church of England confess
Christ's presence in the sacrament, though they assign not the manner how? but
to entertain the Catholic mean (as he terms it) page 44.
to acknowledge, Christ's presence in the Eucharist, in a sacrament all manner;
I think he can neither find pen, nor tongue, that contradicts the same.

Yet what he says, he will prove by miraculous demonstration, and surely I
think he is better able to justify their doctrine about the Sacrament, by
their legends, then the Scriptures, and by new invented wonders Alexand: de
Hales in 4. sent. q. (...) In sacramento apparet caro, interdum humana
procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica.
, then the venerable testimony of the ancient Church. And it is not to be
neglected what an open way to Atheism is prepared by their published legends,
and approoved miracles, whilst they dare aver, that none can believe the
scriptures, wherein are contained Christ's miracles, but by their Churches
proposal; and that the same hand though not in the same manner, does deliver
their legends for the comfort of her pretended catholic children; although
the consequence be not necessary, may it not fall out, that one finding fraud,
and falsehood in these wonders, Lyranus in Daniel 14. Aliquando fit in Ecclesia
maxima deceptio populi in miraculis fictis a Sacerdotibus, vel eis
adhaerentibus propter luciu^ temporale. Ga Biel in Can: Miss: lect: 49 Miracula
dicit fieri hominibus, ad imagines confluentibus, nonnunquam operatione
Daemonum, ad fallendum inoidinat^s cultores, Deo permittente, exigente talium
infidelitate.
may entertain a jealousy of the truth of those miracles that confirm our
faith? De tribus mundi impostoribus.
Italy I think knows the effect of this snare, not infecting inferiors alone,
but your infallible Chair Io. 23. Council: Constable. Sess. 2.
. And do not your imaginary fables herein, next to your images, and idols,
confirm the Jews in their hardness of heart, to think Atheisticallie of our
faith, and Messiah?

For working feeling in the well disposed Protestant Reader by those your
pretended supernatural events, I think, unless it be such, as Augustine
found in himself in reading Dido and Aen^as, an imaginary discourse, a
phantasticke compassion, you may despair of. For we are not now to receive new
doctrines, or new miraculous confirmations Stella in Luc. 11. 19.
. We have Moses and the Prophets, let us hear them Luke 16. 29.
; if any man preach any other Gospel, then that we have received, let him be
accursed Gal. ^. 9. Wadding: Legate: Phi^ ter^ii etc. sect: 3.
. And we need not to be ignorant ( Mr Malone) how the Dominicans answered the
Patrons of the immaculat conception of the blessed Virgin, when they brought to
confirm their cause miraculous proofs, that they were of the same stamp that
Iannes and Iambres wrought in Egypt, but let this expect its proper place.

I will not yet forsake the Preface. The Jesuit confesses that he has
roughly and freely dealt with the Answerer and this he desires might not be
imputed to any disregard that he has, to his person, or learning, which he
honors and highly esteems.

The Jesuits Commonwealth is not Athens, all ingenuous men are not cloystered
in their Colleges; The Jesuit confesses that we have one; But to deal with
one whose person he professes to honor, and learning highly to esteem in
more disgraceful and virulent strains, then Michael did with the Devil,
Jude. 9.
how can the Jesuit apologize for this?

But here I hope, his Majesty, and all others of eminent place, will consider,
to what a height, this spaune of Ignatius has ascended in this kingdom, that
they did not only build the Babylonian turrets, scorn and outface our true
Religion, practiced by his sacred Majesty, established by the laws of Church
and State, but also revile the most eminent for Piety, Learning and Prelacy,
in our Ecclesiastical Government.

Yet let him triumph in his snarling language, all good men do see such
eminencies of learning and sincerity in the most reverend Primate, that a
Jesuits tongue though more besmeared cannot defile his honor or his name.
Neither does this celestial luminary, greeve any more then the Moon, at his
Dogge-Rhetoricke:

That which vexes Lots ^. Pet: 2. 7.
righteous soul is to see his Country made Sodom and Aegipt by blindness and
Idolatry. An heard of swine he knows may make a greater noise, then an army of
men; and who wypeth her m^uth* or uses her tongue more then the harlot? If
such things as these will justify Papal intrusions, Mr Malone will not fail,
who has given us loud cries, and a large volume, but praeterea nihil.

Some things else we find in this preface, as their pretense of Unity, and
our Division, which because he pipeth it so often in the body of his Reply, we
will there take some opportunity for the consideration of the same.

The Jesuit a vain Demaundant.
THe Jesuit after his Preparatives addresseth himself to the Reply, and first
lays down his demand.

What Bishop of Rome did first alter that Religion, which the Protestants
commend in those of the first 400. or 500. years confessing it to have been
the true religion of Christ and his Apostles Reply. page ^.
. And here, we may see the Jesuits additions.

In his first demand, he expressed only the true religion, here he adds of
Christ and his Apostles; which I do not except against, as if I did conceive a
religion, might be true, that is not from Christ and his Apostles, but to stop
that which the Jesuit might insinuate, that we confessing them of the prime
ages, to have had the true religion, should confess all things practiced by
them, to be from Christ or Apostolical, or that they embraced no error in
practice, or in remote deductions, which were not fundamental.

To which question (he says) the Answerer returning a three fold answer,
comes at last very quaintly to prove that which full well he knew before: to
wit, that he cannot tell. Reply ibid.


Here the Jesuit thinks he has stabbed the Answerer and got the cause, but
by the way his folly is apparent; For who knows not, that a party may gain
his cause, as well by excepting against a foolish question, as answering ^t.
Respondere dicitur creditor, cum solvit Cic lib. 16. ad Atticu^. epist. 2.
, much more when he excepteth against the specialtie, and proves it ^retended
only, and of no faith.

You and your brethren perceiving your own weake^esses are from Arms and
valor, driven to foxe-holes, turnings and windings, and fearing Gods truth
will deny you shelter, you hope to stop the prosequution of his Prophets by
blocks that you cast in their way, as interrogating, where Unity? where
Succession? where Visibilitie? where your Commission to reform? and here, What
Bishop of Rome did first alter that Religion etc.? as if there were no certain
assurance of Religion, without knowledge of these things.

Ahabs false Prophets when they were astonished by the true Prophet Micaiah,
interrogate, 1. Kings 22. 24
which way went the spirit of the Lord, from m^e, to speak unto thee? The
Prophet answers, neither East, West, North, or South, but manifests the truth
of his Prophecy by other demonstrations; Behold, says he, thou shall see in
that day, when thou shall go into an inner chamber to hide thy self. What,
was the true Prophet ignorant of the place of the false Prophet his seduction?
if the Jesuit affirms this, what makes it for Roman purity, that a Prophet
now is ignorant of the time of the Roman Apostacy? Did he conceal it only,
and yet satisfied the demand an other way? then the Jesuit expresses himself
for a seduced Prophet, when he concludes the most reverend Primate cannot
resolve his demand, because he has pleaded by an exceptive answer.

In the strictnes of legal process, where the least omission nullifies a
cause; one may except against the Judge, the jurisdiction, much more against
interrogatories exhibited; and although some exceptions are vain and
frivolous, yet some are peremptory, which turn back the intention of the
prosequutor, neither can they be avoided of the adversary Cal^er: Iur: Quae
intentionem persequentis semper perimunt, nec possunt evitari ab adversario.
. And such will these three prove, though he could wish them, as he styles
them, tedious and impertinent.

He would further persuade, as if the reverend Primate had wholly travailed
against his conscience and there upon charge him to seem ignorant of the
original of that, which otherwise he knows etc. and all this least he should
give any advantage to their side, and so makes his whole work to wheel upon
the two fickle poles of want of knowledge, and want of sincerity, the first
voluntarily affected, the second through extremity unnaturally embraced.
Reply page 1.


Papal omnipotence cannot make a stinking breath, smell sweet. What fumes are
these, that this Jesuit rayseth against so sincere and sacred a breast? But
let him burst with his Iambicks, I dare say of him, as the Philosopher of
himself, He will so live, that none will believe his report. Neither do I
doubt, but it will appear in the examination, that this Jesuit his whole
endeavor has been, rather to justify his faction, then to declare the truth;
that what he charge the most reverend Primate with, as affected and
unnaturally embraced, will be found naturally in him, even as inherently, as
his pretended Justice, without any affectation at all.

An examination of his first Section.
THe most learned Primate in answering the question does except against it, as
a vain demand, and for confirmation thereof brings three reasons.

1. The Roman dunghill was not raised in an age, and therefore vain to demand,
In what Popes days? etc.

2. That the Roman Apostasy is a mystery of iniquity, that stole into the
Church disguised, cloaked with the name of Piety, so that those, which were
watchful against open heresies, might sleep when these entered, or have an
hand unawares to bring them in.

3. Errors have oftentimes but a base birth, which although it was observed by
some, that lived in the age, wherein they were produced, yet intract of time,
their beginnings might be forgotten.

The Jesuit in his Reply to takeaway these Answers, asks another question.

Sect. 1. Whether the abovesaid demand, be a vain demand, or no? And then
undertakes to show,

Sect. 2. How vainly our Answerer prooveth my dema^nd to be vain.

Let us examine the 1.

Whether the abovesaid demand be vain or not

The Jesuits Colleges were not builded when Solomon wrote his Ecclesiastes,
there can no vanity dwell with them. And because he knows, that a Jesuit is
not to be trusted upon his bare allegation, he will prove it by a threefold
coard, which he is confident will not easily be broken. The first of which is
this.

We charge the Church of Rome with heresies, and therefore we ought to point
out their beginning. He confirms this by Jerome and Tertullian, that the way
to confute and convince heresies, is the reducing of every one to its
beginning. That heresies want not beginnings, he produces Vincentius Lyrin:
that there was never heresy, but sprung up under a certain name, in a
certain place, and at a certain time; and further illustrates this out of
Ir^^a^^, that before Valentinus, there were no Valentinians, nor before the
Heretic Marcion no Marcionists Reply page 1.
.

That this proof wants life, is easily apparent; For first a question, may
be vain substantially: Secondly, relatiuely, and in order to the effect, as
Solomon styles all inferior things vain, yea, vanity it self, no way able to
produce perfect happiness.

The Jesuit by this Question, In what Popes days, etc? intends to free the
Church of Rome from all charges of Heresy and Apostacy, and in this manner:
it was pure and undefiled for 500 years, and if we know not when it lost its
purity, she must needs remain pure, undefiled, and perfect in her Chastity
still; Now our learned Ecclesiastes cries out, Vanity of Vanities, making it
clears, that although this question could not be answered, yet she might turn
Apostaticall and Heretical, and therefore concludes it, a vain demand, which
produces not the expected effect. Neither has our Jesuit spoken any thing to
free his Interrogatorie of this just charge. What he speaks from Jerome and
Tertullian, we deny not, that the way to confute heresies is to bring them to
their beginnings, (but this is not the only way;) and with Vincen: Lyrin: that
heresies had ever their sproute under a certain name, in a certain place, and
at a certain time; yet he does not say that they are ever known to
aftertimes: Nay, we confess further, that before Valentinus there were no
Valentinians, and before the heretic Marcion, no Marcionists: But we are able
to produce heresies, whose heads they cannot find ou^ Alphon: de Castr. adv.
Haer: lib: 4. Acephali, fie nominati quoniam simul insurgentes, nullus repertus
est, qui illorum esset princeps, atq, magister.
, and yet we doubt not but they had an head; and some that they style
heretics, and yet by the confession of their own cannot be prooved so by
this rule Bernard: in Cantic: sermon. 65. and 66. (Apostolici.) Quaere ab illis
suae sectae auctorem; neminem dabunt. Quae haeresis non ex hominibus habuit
proprium haeresiarcham? Manichaei Manem habuete principem and praeceptorem,
Sabelliani Sabellium, Ariani Arium, Eunomiani Eunomium, Nestoriani Nestorium
Ita omnes caeterae hu^^smodi pestes singulae singulos magistros homines
habuisse noscuntur, a quibus origine^ simul duxere and nomen. Quo nomine istos
titulove censebis? Nullo, quoniam non est ab homine illorum haeresis, neque per
homine^ illam acceperunt, (absit tamen vt per revelationem Jesus Christi) sed
absque dubio (vti Spiritus sanctus praedixit) pe^immissionem and fraudem
daemoniorum in hypocrisi loquentium mendacium, prohibentium nuoere. Reiner.
cont: haeret. cap. 4. Interomnes sectas, quae adhuc sunt, vel fuerunt, non est
perniciossor Ecclesiae, quam Leonistarum etc. Aliqui enim dicunt, quod
duraverit a tempore Sylvestri; aliqui a tempore Apostolorum. Many bare false
witness, but their witness agreed not together. Mark. 14. 5^.
; other heresies that are all head, and yet the head of these heresies had a
time for revelation 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 6. 8.
. We confess this Rule is not vain, in respect of those heresies that brought
amazement in the Church at their first entrance, and were full grown in their
first appearance, as that of Arius and the like, as the most reverend Primate
acknowledges; yet it is vain, to find out those gilded treacheries, that
stole in by deceit.

Is there no difference betwixt open arms, and secret fraud? betwixt robbing
at noonday, in the sight of the sun, and secret burglaries, when the world is
a sleep* Some like Cacus steal heresies into the Church, as he ox^^ into his
Cave, backward, persuading the world, that heresy is driven from that place,
where it enters in; others cut in sunder the Gordian knots of Unity of Faith
Alexander-like, with downright blows and professed opposition. May not a
careful watchman sleep with security, and not fear the one, when the other
will waken him, by his violence and noise?

And to answer all, this method (as before was confessed) is good against
violent intrusions, which burst forth into loud cries at their birth, but for
those conveyances, which first appear like an egg, before the Serpent be
hatched, it is a vain, simple, and frivolous ground.

His second Argument to prove this demand is not vain, is because, the
Answerer his forefathers, masters, and brethren, have bestowed such labor and
toil in searching and tossing up antiquity to shape, if they could, a wiser
answer i. Reply page 2.


This answers it self, with a non sequitur: Pro: 26. 5. Answer a fool in
his folly, least he be wise in his own conceit, not in his wise
interrogations, that like Caiphas Ioh. 18. 14.
his Prophecies, may come into his mouth by flashes, but in his folly. What if
some of ours have thus far descended* to your wisdom to answer this question.
I hope you would have conceived it to be rather ex abundanti to stop the
fools mouth, then to satisfy his demand.

Some questions are best answered by heels, as Joseph answered his Mistress
Gen: 39. 12.
, as poor oppressed christians your Pandarismes, by flying out of Babylon;
Some by sibe^ca, as our Savior, the high priests Mat. 26-63.
Some ironicaly as Micaiah Ahab 1. King. 2^. 13
: All this, does not justify the Interrogation and free it from vanity,
because in some sort or other it is answered. It was usual with those that
could not manifest the truth by solid proofs, to be ever asking questions. So
those wretches that saw Christ's works, when they were amazed at them, yet
could cry, by what authority do thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority Mat. 21. 23.
? Our Savior answered these questions, by asking an other ibid. 25.
, what, must this justify the chief Priests and Elders? does this banish
v^nitie from their lips?

I, but this Demand has troubled their brains, yea even to madness sometime
Reply ibi^.
.

What then? therefore no vain demand? What is this but a Bedla^s argument? Is
this question of such efficiencie and working, that it turns the brain? I
should have expected it in their doctrines, which like Henbane and Hemlocke
pr^^^ce worse operations, but this question (alas) what has it done?

It may be gathered out of their several answers to the same, in which they
not only contradict one another, but even fight most strangely, each man with
himself. Reply ibid.


This is no argument to prove them mad, that answer the question, if there be
any; neither to free the question that is proposed from Vanity. Humanum est
errare, it is man's weakness that makes him err, not his madness: Madness is never
right, how can it then err? That which is ever a wandering, can never go out
of the way.

Give me liberty to ask, whether contradiction either of ones self, or of
his own profession, be a symptom of madness? If it be not, what does he gather
from his pretenses herein? If it be, I dare undertake to produce, mad Popes,
mad Cardinals, mad Bishops, and Priests, and fine Cloisters as full as Bedlam
of such commodities.

And here I know not, wherefore I should follow the Jesuit any further, seeing
that this which he produces is nothing to the purpose, being far from
concluding the question, which he pretends to justify. But he that has
undertaken to wait upon a mad man, must not refuse to follow the wanderer over
boggs and mountains, the high way being seldom his ordinary road. And I pray
you let us see our contradiction^ and selfe-fight, from whence he concludes our
madness.

Surely this man was amazed, and dreamed of war, where there is most true
peace. For Whitaker declares plainly, that the Holy Ghost has foretold in
Scriptures such an Apostacy and defection, and (says he) we see it with our
eyes, but to inquire of the time when it invaded the Church, non est
laborandum, est h^c curios^ and (...) quaestio. De eccle: contr: 1. quaest. 3.


And in like manner John Cameron Cap: 21.
has published a Book in French, translated into English, whereby he has
prooved it to be an unjust proceeding to deny the change happened to the
Church, under p^^tence that the authors, time, and place of it, cannot be
specified.

And also Doctor Fulke In his answer to a counterfite Catholic, ar. 11. ^. 24
hereto agrees, that when the Scripture tells us, that the Mystery of
iniquity preparing for the general defection and revelation of Antichrist,
wrought even in Saint Paul's time 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is folly to ask whether
suddenly, and in one year, all Religion was corrupted; and if Mr Malone will
have more, he shall not want numbers of our own, to witness our consent
herein.

May not this shameless Jesuit blush then to produce Fulke and Whitaker, and
the rest to have answered this question, when they conclude it vain, and of no
necessity, and never dreamed of answering the same. For all the Quotations of
the Jesuit out of our Authors do not express one word of answer to his
question. Fulke speaks of the time that the Pope began to blind the world,
Napier of the beginning of the Popes Papisticall and Antichristian reign,
Brokard of the Popes falling from Christ; Leigh shows his opinion how long
the Popes have been Devils; Winckelman relates the different opinions
touching the beginning of the 42. moneth^ in the 11. of the Revelation,
Whitaker conjectures at the last true and godly Bishop of the Roman Church,
and so in like manner, the rest of the learned men, mentioned by him; but there
is not one of them, whose words he expressly lays down, that answers the
question. What Bishop of Rome did first alter that Religion, which you commend
in them of the first 400 years? or In what Popes days was the true religion
over-throwne in Rome? To this question from his own words, we may prove a
consent, that this observation of times and seasons, does often fail, and that
they are not so easy to be discerned, as foole^ are borne in hand they are.
For herein with the learned Answerer does Powell, and the learned Whitaker
agree, yea so consonant are they in their resolutions, that the learned
Answererin this Jesuits observation seems to be spit out of Whitaker his
mouth, and Mr Powell (he confesses) agrees with them.

The difference is not in answering this question, In what Popes days was the
true religion over thrown? but, In what Popes days did the revelation of the
Antichristian tyranny begin? The Jesuit may know there is a distance,
betwixt the blading of Antichrist his tyranny, whereby it became visible, and
the power of it: the blading was but a preparation for evil: the power and
authority it got afterward, was that which brought these frauds and
corruptions in; whereby it appears, that there is great difference in these
questions, and that worthy Whitaker was no weathercock, as this Buzard
terms him.

Yet notwithstanding, we do not deny, that as Hectic agues, (whose beginnings
are obscure) declare themselves to Physicians by diverse symptoms of the bodies
decay and waste, whereby one Physician at one time by one sign, another by an
other, in a different hour, may judge of the disease, though from diverse
symptoms, yet all aright: So have our Divines done; some perceiving the
symptoms of Apostacy in the Church at one time, some at another, have
declared the appearing of this defection foretold, some from one Popes
tyranny, some from another.

Some saw this Apostacy by symptoms of notorious pride, as in Boniface the
third: Others by out-daring impieties, when Dagon, images, and idols, were put
up in the Church of God: Others by open vileness and proph^nesse visible to
Parasites Plat. in Johan, 13. Onuph. annot. in Plat: Johan. ^.
themselves, when your monstra and pertenta opened heaven gates.

But what is this to the Jesuits demand? the question that he is to exempt
from vanity, concerns the time of the alteration or overthrowe of the true,
or the so much commended Religion of the first 400. or 500. years. The
Apostacy or defection, began indeed in the Apostles time, and the seeds of
Antichristianisme were laid for the six following ages See the most reverend
Lord Primate in his book de Christ. Eccl. success. and statu. page 16. 17* 18.
, and yet no Papist to be found* no such visible alteration, that thereby
religion should be overthrown.

About the sixth Centurie, some of these tares began to blade, and yet all the
good grain not utterly choked, whereby the Jesuits question appears more
vain. For consider this Apostacy in its beginning, or inchoation, and then it
not apparently altered, much less overthrew the Catholic faith, consider it
in the increase, and although it assaulted Religion, yet neither wholly, or in
any fundamental part did it alter the same: consider it, when it came to more
perfect ripenes, (if there be any perfection in Apostacy) as in the latter
Centuries, do not think that we conclude the Church of God overthrown,
because that Antichrist plays the Tyrant therein. So that Mr Covell says
nothing of the alteration, or overthrow of catholic faith, when he speaks of
the beginning of Apostacy,

His last objection is taken from S. Augustine his rule, that whatsoever the
universal Church uses, if no time can be found when that use began, it must
necessarily be derived from the very Apostles themselves Reply page 4.
.

We need not to question this ground, although S. Augustine gave this rule not
to discern points of faith by, for he knew they were in the divine word
plenarily contained, but ceremonies and matters belonging to Ecclesiastical
practice. For can we think the Fathers in S. Augustine his days, were so
ignorant of the catholic rule of faith, that they must lean upon such a
conjecture as this, for points fundamental and of necessary belief? Show me
one Council, that decreed any point of faith, by the bare strength of this
rule, if you can: I can show you a point of practice, that had all that this
rule could give it, as Childrens necessary eating the Eucharist Maldon. in 6.
Johan. Aug. de peccator. merit and remiss. lib. 1. c. 24.
, and yet is rejected both by the doctrine and practice of your
Traditiondefenders. Yet may we justly reproove, this Jesuits assertion, that
dare affirm, those points universally held and practiced by the Church, at the
time (as he calls it) of Luthers revolt, then which nothing is more gross; for
if he mean the very waiters of the Roman Mistress ( Sylvester Prierias his
representative Church) the Pope and his Cardinals, they will not be found to
agree in the points mentioned, but* did differ amongst themselves; And for the
Catholic Church, let him prove it, if he be able, for bare words will not
sway it. Yet if this will serve their turn, we shall be able to prove, that in
the Catholic Church, these points were never generally received, take the
Church, for the universal body of the faithful, and not for a handful of
Donatisticall Romanists. Nay this may be manifested by Romanists themselves,
who although they yielded outward conformity to the practice, and held
communion with the Roman Church, have yet notwithstanding loathed the burden,
and complained of the tyranny In Rhemensi Concilio coram Innocentio II. and
anno 1131. Bernard. Etsi reddenda est ratio de his quae quisque gessit in
corpore suo; heu quid fiet de his quae quisque gessit in corpore Christi, quod
est Ecclesia* Ecclesia* De^ vobis^^mmissa est, and dicimini (...) sitis
raptores. Et paticos habemus, heu pastores, multos autem excommunicatores Et
vtinam sufficeret vobis lana and lac, sititis enim sanguinem. Ioh: Sarithur: in
Poly cratic* lib. 6. cap 24. Romana ecclesia, quae matter omnium ecclesiarum
est, se non tam matrem exhibet aliis, quam norercam, etc. Sed and ipse Romanus
Pontifex, omnibus gravis and fere intolerabilis est etc. Petr. Aliac. de
Reformat. Eccles. ad hanc statum venit (Romana) Ecclesia, vt non esset digna
regi nisi p^^reprobos.
thereof, as they have expressed in their best and most selected thoughts.

Secondly, where he says, that we have all (...) Records common amongst our
selves, the lives, the names, the nations, times, acts, and deeds, both good
and bad, of all Popes, so carefully registered, that the least Ceremonies have
been observed, by whom, and when they were first ordained. Reply page 4.


We have some, (God be praised) preserved by his gracious providence, contrary
to the desire of their politic Consistory; yet we make no question, that many
were lost which would have pleaded for us, and confounded them, and not a few
concealed by them, who were never so unwise (unless by escape) to publish
their own frauds for their enemies advantage. Further it is improbable, that
the true Registers of Papal filth, which could not preserve their persons from
fire or tyranny, should exempt their books and registries from the flame.

So that there might be crosse-legged Popes, and contradicting councels, in the
midst of the Roman Monarchy and yet not delivered to posterity; For they
themselves will persuade, that things that are registered in Councels were not
done; and why might not we conceive with more truth and probability, that many
things were done in Councels, which were never registered.

Thirdly he urges, that not-withstanding all our curious prying into all
sorts of books, scroules, papers etc. yet never to this day could any one
instance be brought of any Pope, that defined any point of religion, contrary
to what his predecessors had before declared; nor of any lawful general
Council, that ever condemned any article of faith formerly established by
others, or yet established any that had been before lawfully condemned Reply
ibid.
.

Who does not see that this is a silly shift of the Jesuit, to confound the
understanding of his Reader? For to excuse Liberius their Pope, that subscribed
to Arianisme, he puts in [ defined.] 2ly to excuse all the rest, he adds [
contrary to what his predecessors had before declared] as if any Pope, in the
time of lawful general Conncels did either decree, or declare, any matters of
faith in this Jesuits sense. And therefore casting from him, and his, the
ragged mantle, by which they would conceal their attempts and presumptions, we
first charge them and justly for decreeing new additionall articles of faith,
which were at first made practical in the Roman Church only, and there but by
degrees; Secondly, they obtained the opinion of customs, yet no further but of
the Church of Rome, and afterward, were crowned as of faith, by your
non-erring decrees; and by this means many came to be of faith in the Roman
Church, as it is declared in your whole dozen by the most learned Answerer,
which is sufficient I think to show, that you have corrupted the rule of faith?

Who knows not, that never any additionall point of Popery got strength in a
day, in a session of Council, in a Popes tyranny, neither in a whole age. For
these supercilious Masters, minding themselves, and their temporal monarchy,
not that which concerned the glory of God, the successor began where his
predecessor ended, never attempting to decree any point for doctrine, till by
secret and mystical deceit, those false grounds, by the generality Wadding:
sect: 2* Nec co^sultum tunc putavit vltima sententia rem definire, aut pro pia
opinione definitionis far iudicium, quando adhuc (...), and egregios habuit
affirmative fa^tores* noluit immodice, vel amplius Adversarios exulcerare etc.
of the factious parasites See the same practice of their Popes at this day in
the point of immaculate conception of the blessed virgin
, had been presented to, and received by some of the sincerer clergy.

Further, we charge you not for determining against those catholic
fundamental truths, which were originally and universally received; for this
had been too gross for the bringers in of the mystery of iniquity; such a
work would have been espied, the person, time, and place, by whom, where, and
when this had been acted would not have been hid. But this is not the thing
that you are charged with, neither, will we say in terminis that you are
guilty of it* yet although you have not been so openly impudent, your
practices have not been altogether exempted from filth, though effected by
more secret frauds.

We know it is impossible that any councels could decree contrary to these new
articles of faith, unless they would determine negationem rei, before the
thing it self were known or understood, For do you not charge us, that our
heresies consist in the denial of many principal points of faith, calling
them negative refutes A. C. his true Relations of sundry Conferences. page 62.
etc? how then can that be denied by an antecedent Pope, or Council, the
affirmative whereof never had birth, but afterward received life, by customs
and decrees of men?

Show me a Canon in terminis against Aarons calfe, before it was made and
worshipped, or against the doctrine of Balaam before it was published, and we
will show you Popes, and Councels decreeing against traditions of faith,
carnal presence, Images etc. before they were ever heard of in the catholic
church.

So that this, is but a mere device, to save their credits for although the
Roman Apostasy be seen a^well in the corruption of the doctrine of faith, as
manners; yet this corruption is by addition, which may be without any such
cross opposition, as the Jesuit does suppose. For faith being like gold, it
may be defiled by addition, or corrupt mixtures, but all the tyranny of the
world, or gates of hell, by cross opposition cannot destroy it.

Yet letting those points which are specified by himself pass, it will not be
so hard a thing to prove, that councels, which you have accounted lawful, and
general, with your Pope also, have defined contrary to general practice and
custom of the Church, though not in fundamentals, yet in points of great
consequence, as your Council of Constance sess. 13.
against Communion in both kinds, and your Trent Synod for private mass
against the practice of primitive times De consecr: distinct: ^: cap: peracta.
Peracta consecratione communicent omnes, qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere
liminibus, sic enim Apostoli statueruntet sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia.
, not of one particular Roman; but of the universal body of the Catholic
Church, so that there might be as good Music made of an empty vessel, as the
impreg^able harmony you boast of* and though there were no cross definition
against the foundation of faith, yet that Pope is not hid, and Council, which
have made that faith from such an interpretation of scripture Scot: 4. ^: 11.
q: 3.
, which Scotus could see no reason, or authority for, but what was in the sic
volo, sic jube^, of the Roman Church.

But further this Argument may be retorted in their teeth; if these points
were not ab initio, but got footing in the Church of Rome, by Papal violence,
and decrees of Councels, which were his own, then they have not the birth of
Apostolical traditions, neither can they be accounted chief Articles Suarez
Ies: d^trip: ^i^t: disput 5. 4. number: 4. Cum non sit vniversalis in tempore, non
potest per se fidem facere catholicam, quae debet esse (...) pore vniversalis.
; but some of the points mentioned, are by your own thought to be put Iuris
positivi, which I think you will not stretch up to the Apostles times, as
confession etc: and all the rest have been declared quibus gradibus they got
footing in the church; by the most learned Answerer, against which the Jesuit
has in the point of Free will spoken little, and to all the rest materially
nothing, as will be declared in the examination of them.

Now the Jesuit thinking he has performed some brave exployt, concludes, (he
hopes) with triumph.

If we press them to name those Popes, who so (...) from faith to infidelity,
or brought in but one only article of religion, contrary to that of foregoing
ages: because they cannot satisfy our demand herein, it must be shuffled up
under the term of a vain demand Reply page: 4.
.

First we charge them not with decreeing contrary to the foundation interminis,
as that there is not one God, three Persons etc. but that they have added to
the faith delivered by the Spirit of God, many articles of their own. Neither
do we say that they have forsaken the faithabsolutly, (for they profess it)
but the purity of it, not contenting themselves with the ancient rule, without
mixtures of their own. Such corruption; such alteration of the faith they
cannot deny, and therefore have labored to excuse it, that it is not new
faith, but a declaration of the old; the birth of some of which ^aith was 1500.
years after CHRIST and his Apostles, had delivered the whole council of God.

So that the Jesuit ^^th marched valiantly, and with Bala^m has expressed his
desire to curse Israel, but all his hope is declared, upon which he founds his
confidence, that because we cannot satisfy his demand, he is therefore
secure, that his demand is not vain, when as the vanity there of makes it
unanswerable. S^ Augustine thought it a vain demand to ask, what God did
before the creation of the world, and therefore turns it off with a menacing
answer: The most learned Answerer has the same thoughts of the Jesuits
Quare, and casts it off by just exception, and both most rightly; Yet the
Jesuit inviteth us to see

SECT. II. Reply page 5.
How vainly our Answerer proves my Demand to be vain.
IN this discourse the Jesuit is blinded, and wanting reason to justify his
Demand; he will not want his good friend Frons ahenea to give some releife
unto his desperate cause.

The Answerer (says our Jesuit) by a smooth, and wily slight shrinketh from
the Question Reply ibid.
etc.

But how proves he this? why, in this manner.

Whereas I demanded (says he) What Bishop of Rome did first alter, or corrupt
the right faith? He answers, that it is a vain demand, to require the name
of any one Bishop of Rome, by whom, or under whom, this Babylonish Confusion
was brought in. And again, That it is a fond imagination to suppose, that all
such changes must be made by some Bishop, or any one certain Author.

And laying down this, he (...) the (...) how wide this is from that, which ^e
demanded Reply ibid.
.

Which I think the learned Answerer will not refuse, for although the Jesuit
would have this question, which now in his judgment, is unreasonable, to have
been f^rged by the most reverend Primate, yet it evidently appears that it is
an vnproportioned birth, a deformed Embryo of his own conceit; and that the
Jesuit herein is driven, not to smooth and ^ylie sl^ights for his defense, but
to perverse boldness and open outfacing, For, first in repeating his own
question and demand, What Bishop of Rome did first alter? he not only adds,
or corrupt the right faith, but shamelesly omits that, which wounds him to
the quick, In what Pope his days was the true Religion overthrown in Rome
See the Jesuits demand.
? Now I would have this Jesuit to declare the difference between the bringing
in of Babylonish Confusion, and the altering the true Religion. He proceeds.

For (says he) had he pointed us out any one Pope that had changed but one
only article of religion, or true faith, or brought in any one error, then
had he satisfied my demand. Reply page ^.


That which the Jesuit here supposes, contains two particulars, first, that
we cannot assign any one Pope, which has changed one only article of
Religion or true faith. Secondly, that we cannot assign a Pope, that has
brought any one error into the Church. The first has received answer in the
precedent section: The second, the most learned Answerer has satisfied in all
the Demaundants particulars, showing, how this Jesuits holy points of Doctrine
and faith, are such, as the Apostles never knew, the fathers scarce espied,
good men always resisted, and which came to receive authority amongst
Papalines, but were always rejected by the Catholic Church; And
notwithstanding the Jesuit braves it, there are many other articles pretended
by them, to be of true Religion, which are at the best, but superstitious and
gross errors, brought in by their holy Father, or his children in after-ages,
to the disgrace of the true received doctrine of the Church in the first times.

But that which the Jesuit does conclude hereupon, is most chyldish, that the
pointing out any one Pope, which had brought into the Church any one error,
would satisfy his demand Reply page 5.
.

Indeed your Religion consists of one point absolutely and simply [Papall
supremacy] and we doubt not, but if that were overthrown, all the Fabric of
your late Roman erection, would quickly fall to the ground; yet the Catholic
faith is not such, it consists not of one only article, neither is it
everthrowne by the intrusion of every error; for (this being granted) if we
can show you the time; when Indulgences Ro^^ens: Art: 18. In principio
nascentis Ecclesiae nullus fuit Indulgentiarum vsus.
, or any other error crept into the Church of Rome, you must then conclude
catholic religion throughout the world was overthrown; a conclusion forced
from shame; And let all men judge, whether this be not a desperate advantage
given, to free himself from the present danger.

Neither can the Jesuit from his confidence of Roman purity, glory as he
here has done, in regard he seems to have changed his opinion, before he
printed half his book, curbing his lavishnes, and making the Church of Rome
free, not from all errors, (as here he does,) but from spots of misbeliefe
only Sect: 9.
, which I fear, he will be forced to fly unto hereafter, when he shall
examine his own iollity in this particular.

For who brought in that doctrine, that the Pope is Lord over all? or did
extend Indulgences to your Purgatory flames, but Boniface the 8: if we believe
your own Agrippa De vanitat: scient: cap: 61. Hic est ille magnus Bonifacius,
quia tria magna and grandia fecit; primum, falso oraculo deluso Clemente,
persua sit sibi cedere Apostolatum: secundum, condidit sextum Decretalium, and
Papam asseruit omnium Dominum: tertium instituit Iubilaeum, indulgentiarum
nundinas, illasque primus in Purgatorium extendit.
?

Besides this, in Leo Ser. 4: de quadragesima. Cum ad t^gendum infidelita. tem
suam nostris audeant interesse mysteriis ita in Sacramentorum communione se
temperant interdum ut tutius lateant, ore indigno Christi corpus accipiunt,
sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino declinant.
the great his time, it was a note of a Maniche, to communicate in one kind;
yet now we fee it is practifed by them, which would persuade the world that
they are Catholics; and although they may quarrel, that the cause is
different, yet they may see the act of omission only condemned by Leo the
Pope: Also in the Primitive times, the Sacrament was received by the faithful
in both kinds, in the Greek Church, till Cassanders Consult: Art: 22. initio.
Satis compertum est, vniversalem Christi Ecclesiam in hunc vsque diem,
Occidentalem vero seu Romanam, mill amplius a Christo annis in solenni
praesertim and ordina^ia huius Sacramenti dispensatione vtramque panis and vini
speciem omnibus Ecclesiae Christi membris exhibuisse.
time, in the Western or Roman Church for above a 1000 years; and yet in the
Council of Constance, Henricus de Piro and Johannes de Scribanis Council:
Constantien. Sess. 13. apud Binium.
styled it Mos perversus, and the whole Council decreed against it.

Concupiscence the Apostle calls sin, but yet it is now no doctrine of the
Roman Church, for the contrary is decreed in the Trend Council Council:
Trident. Sess 5. Hanc concupiseentiam quam aliquando Apostolus pe^^atum
appeilat, fancta synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam* nunquam intellexisse
peccatum appella^i, quod vere and proprie in renatis peccatum sit; sed qu^^ ex
peccato est, and ad peccatum inclinat; Si quis autem contrarium senserit,
anathema sit.
; And many more may be found out, if I did desire to muster up your iniquities
in this kind. But it shall suffice for the present to refer the Jesuit, and
the Reader, to the Catalogue of the right reverend, the Lord Bishop of Derry
Lib. 3. de Antich: cap 6. Catalogus veterum haeresum, quas Ecclesia Romana
renov^^it. etc.
, which when Mr Malone or his whole Tribe has fully answered, I may conceive
he had something besides his wilfulnes, to breed his confidence in this opinion,

In his examination of the second exception against the Demand, he hops to
enervate it by his observations thereupon, the first whereof is, that therein
the Answerer supposes our catholic Doctrine to be that Apostasy which the
Apostle speaks of (1. Tim. 4. 1. 2.) Reply page 5.


And here our Jesuit wisely collecteth, for the learned Primate does neither
acknowledge your Roman Church, either in Diocese, or ad extra, for Catholic,
neither your additions and mixtures, for Catholic Doctrine, any more then Saul
1. Sam. 10. 11
for a Prophet, because he got amongst the Prophets, as your deceipts have
crept into the Creed: But yet that by your corrupt mixtures and declinings, is
truly accomplished that Prophecy (1, Tim; 4.) he makes little doubt. And what
abuse is done herein to your glorious Synagogue? why should not false
doctrines and novelties fall before the ancient and radical truth, as Dagon
and false gods before the Arc? Nay, what does the learned * 1. Sam. 5. 3. 4.
Primate suppose, that was not deprecatively expressed in your Trent-Councell
by a Bishop Cornelius Bishop of ^iton* ^0*
of your own? for if to fall from Religion to Superstition, from Faith to
infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, be not an Apostasy, let the Jesuit
declare what it is?

But the Jesuit would feign know, in what sense we take Apostasy, whether as
it designeth an utter Revolt from the faith of Christ, which the Jesuit is
confident they cannot be charged withal; Because elsewhere the learned
Primate confesses, that men dying (as he says) in our Religion, do dye
under the mercy of God Reply page 5.
.

What does the Jesuit mean by this? Does he think the most learned Answerer
[ by their Religion] did point out Ignatius his plat-forme, or the Religion of
their Holies Francis and Dominick? Were any of their other Religions
conjectured at, which are employed to frame Christ a Religion by policy, that
their Master might obtain a Monarchy by fraud? Surely whatsoever the Jesuit
may conjecture, these will find but little shelter for their security in that
sermon.

But if this Interpretation square not, who does he then mean by men dying in
our Religion? if those that lived in the Roman Communion, then his collection
is vain also, For who can doubt, that some may be saved there, without
casheering of the Apostasy t^e^ce; Many followed Absalom 2 Samuel 15. 11.
, that were true of heart, and yet the Jesuit will not deny a Rebellion
against David, and falling away of the People from him. The high places were
not taken away, and yet Asa's ^. Chron 25. 17.
heart, and many others (no doubt) were upright all their days. Judas Acts 1.
18.
may betray Christ, and hang; Demas 2 sim. 4. 10:
and others fall from heaven to earth, and yet the Apostles and Diseiples
adhere to their Master. When the whole world in a manner, communicated with the
Arians, were none safe but Athanasius Athanas in epist ad solita^^am vitam
agentes: Christi standiosi, vt magnus ille P^pheta Elias abscondebantur, and in
speluncas and cavernas terrae sese abstrudebant, aut in solitudine oberrantes
commorabantur. Hieronym^^on, Luciferian. Ingemuerit totus Orbis, and Arianum se
^^se miratus sit. Gregorius Valent: Analys: l: 6. cap. 4 Probatio: 4 Novimus
etc. cum Arianorum perfidia in orb pene to to dominabatur.
etc? not those which were ignorant of their heresies, who if they had known
them, would have abhorred their corruptions Aug. epist. 162. ad. Donat: Qui
sententiam suam quamvis falsam and perversam nulla pertinaci animositate
defendunt, (...) quam non a^daci^ praesumptionis (...) pepererunt, sed a
seductis, a^q^e in errorem lapsis parentibus acceperunt, quaerunt autem cauta
solici^udine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum invenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
Haeretico^ reputandi.
? Were all the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time damned, which joined in
Communion with the Churches of England and Ireland? The learned Primate is not
so uncharitable, as to judge perdition to every one in the Roman Communion,
and yet he doubts not, but that the Apostasy was there.

Who knows not that the Roman Pale includes a Church, as well as a Faction?
and though at the best it be but a Pesthouse, as the most reverend Primate
fitly styles it, yet he does not think it impossible, but that some poor
Souls, which had more love to Christ, then knowledge of the Doctrine of Popish
faith, might through the mercy of God Cypr. Epist. 63 13. Si quis de
anteeessoribus nostris vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter non hoc observavit, and
tenuit quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and magi^^erio (...) docuit, potest
simplicitati ejus de indulgentia Domini venia concedi, nobis vero ^^^ ^^terit
ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti instructi simus.
escape such infection and contagion, which is deadly and mortal; whereas the
poison of Apostasy will never leave the grand Masters, till it has brought
them to confusion and ruin. And this is all he speaks for the Iesuite's
Religion.

But hoping we will not charge them with an utter Revolt, he enquires, whether
we by Apostasy understand Heresies, which do not so openly oppose the
foundation of Christian faith, but come cloked with Hypocrisy, and under the
name of Piety? for if we acknowledge this, then howsoever some Heresies, do
oppose the foundation of Christian faith more openly then others, yet all of
them do still come cloked with the name of Piety, and have been always
observed by the diligent watchmen of Gods house in their very beginnings. Reply
page 6.


How does this take away the learned Primate's just exception? For while he
distinguishes of Heresies that oppose the foundation, some more, and some
less openly, and all cloked with Piety: and urges, that all these open
heresies were observed in their beginnings, what does he prove, but that
which was confessed before? For we acknowledge, that Heresy, whether more or
less, openly opposite to the foundation, has been more or less observed
(...) by the Pastors of the Church: but yours are of an other nature, they were
not Heresies at the first, but seeds only, or at least appeared not to be so;
but came in as Piety, when Heresy was closed and sealed up in a Mystery, and
not seen at all.

Besides this, there is nothing urged by the Jesuit of any weight to take away
this Answer. He says, that all Heresies came cloked with the name of Piety,
and for this he bring, three examples to prove his general conclusion. The
first of Origin, for the salvation of Devils. The second he imputes to
Tertullian, which was begun by Montanus Alphons: de Castro adver. Haer lib
11. De nuptiis. Hujus haeresis authors sunt Cataphryges, quo rum princeps fuit
Montanus, Eundem errorem postea docuit Tertullianusqui ers^ prius contra
Cataphryges pro hae re pugna. verat, posteatamen ad Ca^aphryges iediit, eorum
defendens errorem. Bzovius ann. 172. Porro quod dogmata Montani attinet; sunt
haec de^inia quae docebat, Secundas nuptias, velut for^^cationem damnabat, etc.
, against second Marriage. The third, Montanus his rigorous, fasts Page 6.
.

Which kind of arguing, as it is not concludent, (for how follows it, that
because three heresies have a show of Piety, therefore all?) So the same makes
nothing against the Answerer, it being granted. For who doubts, that
Heretics have always pretended Piety, and that their birthes have been so
presented to the world, that they have borne some show of truth, and further
that judgments not divinely enlightened, have received them many times with
religious applause? and yet they have been resisted and opposed by those which
had more clear eyes, and could see aright. But does it therefore follow that
the bundle of Heresies included in the grand Apostasy wrought by the man of
Sin at different times in a mystery, which must expect a time for Revelation
2 Thessalonians, 2^. 6. 7.
, should be detected in the first hour of their birth by circumstances of
person, time and place.

Many heresies have carried a show of Piety; but some have been so mystically
delivered, that they have received her name. Some with their show cannot hide
their substance, their express contradiction of Scripture, as those of Origin
and Montanus, which displeased every weak eye, and therefore in these
circumstances required, might easily be detected; But these mystical Anselm^
in ^. Thessalonians: 2. Mysterium, quia viderur occultum: quia tales operarii.
ostendunt se velut ministros, aut famulos Christi, cum revera sint ministri
Antichristi: Nam iniquitas ^orum est mystica, id est pictatis nomine palli^ta.
ones are of another nature, so cloaked, that their impiety was hid, so
presented to the world, that they are accounted Piety; if you demand their
mother, as the Saracens Sarah, they dare cry, the Church; if their Father, as
the Pharisees to Abraham Ioh. 8. 39.
, they dare look to heaven; if you question their Antiquity, they (like the
Gibeonites Josh: 9. 3. ^^.
) pretend the Apostles and plead the Apocrypha: if Universality, they are
travaylers, and as they say throughout the world, yet this is but Orbis
Romanus, the Roman Church. Do you think these Vagrants and Wanderers which
can bush and brake for their own safety, are so easily detected, as those
downright youths, which in their first appearance tell what they are by their
face and comple^^^^*

Is there no difference between a face muffled with pretenses barely, and
painted with equivocall colors? It is not pretending Piety in heresy,
neither muffling in part, that can give it liberty to keep station in the
Church of God without control, but when Piety is pretended* and Heresy
gets in by protection thereof, closed up and unespied, this is Iniquity in
a Mystery 2 Thessalonians. ^. 7.
. Whereby we see, that the Jesuit has not touched the most learned Primate
his answer; who for open heresies, (which like Edom cry out against the Church
of God at their birth, down with it, down with it even to the ground Psalm.
137. 7.
,) confesses, that the impiety thereof is so notorious, that at the very
first appearance it is manifestly discerned The most reverend the Lord Primate
his Answer. page 2.
.

And whereas he dare challenge his Adversaries to give true instance so much as
but of any one known and confessed Heresy, which was not at it first
divulging, contradicted by some one or other Pastor of Gods Church, how
cunningly soever it came muffled in the mantle of Piety Page 6.
, making it as a thing impossible to be performed: Hereby every man, may
perceive that the Jesuit is willing to close his own eyes, upon condition he
may pull out other men's. For otherwise da^^ he be so bold, as that he should
deny this Apostasy to have come into the Church without resistance; when the
spirit of God does declare, that the bringers in of it, must have a time for
detection, not being opposed in the beginning, but revealed and consumed These.
2. 6. 2.
afterward?

But leaving this; what the Jesuit desires here, was performed to him by the
Testimony of Bernard and Reiner^us in the Answer to the first Section,
concerning the (...) and (...), whom they have accounted and condem^^^^ for
Heretics. Yet because this point may be morefully answered, I will out of
their own authors gratify him further in this particular.

And first from Pr^teolus Prateolus (...).
the Aquarij are known and confessed Her (...) and yet qui^ hujus (...) fuit.
and ex quo tempore caeperit nemo est qui indicat. Here the Jesuit must send
for Saint Bridget, for he will need a Revelation in regard that as Prateolus
acknowledges their first beginning is unknown; So Alphonsus de Castro Alphon:
de Castro adv: haere: lib: 6. DeEucha^istia. Adversus hunc errorem tres
Evangelistae pugnant, Mathaeus scilicet Marcus, and Lucas.
cannot find any throughout all the Ecclesiastical History, which opposed
their Heresy at its first divulging, and therefore runs up to the
institution of the Sacrament, and makes Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the opposers.
A strange thing that this heresy concerning the Sacrament, should have birth
before the Sacrament was instituted, or the institution thereof published by
the Evangelists. The Praedestinati are reputed by your own for Heretics, yet
Alphonsus de Castro Idem lib. 12. de Praedestinatio: Quis autem suerit hujus
haeresis princeps, Sigibertus subticuit, nec egoapud aliquem alium reperi.
, notwithstanding his search, cannot find their Author, and Prateolus
Prateolus Elench. Haeret. Quis eorum Dux and institutor fuerit, nescitur.
tells us, their Captain is not known. So also the Abstinentes were taken
for no better then Heretics, and yet you are so far from discovering the time
of their birth, that their spreading is not remembered, as your Prateolus Ibid:
Abstinentes quo tempore viguere, non meminit Philastrius.
observes. Multitudes of this kind might be produced, but these shall for the
present suffice in answer to the Jesuits challenge.

He secondly observes, that the most reverend Primate his distinction of such
like Heresies, and that Apostasy, serve his turn nothing at all, forasmuch as
it has no ground, nor foundation which does not prove more strongly against
his part, then against us. This distinction will presage as ill to Rome as a
Comet* if you fail to prove what you so confident he affirm. But to make it
good: First he demands what can he infe^ta out of these sayings of the
Apostle, which we may not, with far more probability apply to himself, and
to his Revolting Religion, etc: rather then those ancient Fathers, and holy
Doctors of the Primitive Church, whom he himself, though else where he
confesses them to ^^ve been godly (...) yet in this place would have us to
think, that they were of those who spoke ly^^ in Hypocrisy, and had a hand in
bringing in of damnable Apostasy* Secondly he says; That our Answerer and his
mates did in their foreleaders Luther; and Galvin, revolt, and depart from the
Roman Church, yea from all the world, is voluntarily acknowledged by Calvin
himself. For which cause we think that we may with reason, hold them
guilty of Apostasy indeed. Reply page 6.


In all which observation we find him to charge us, first to further that
mystical iniquity rather then those ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church:
Secondly, that we did revolt, and depart from the Roman Church, and are
guilty of this Apostasy. But if all this were as true faith as the Jesuit
professes* how makes it to the overthrow of the exception? A deep charge,
but nothing to the purpose; For the question in controversy is not who brought
in the Apostasy, but whether there be such an Apostasy, that concludes
within it, many Heresies like terra filij, begotten we know not by whom, borne
we know not where, nor when. The learned Answerer says there are such; and
the Jesuit says nothing material to the contrary; and therefore the demand,
to find out all heresies, only by person, time, and place, must remain vain
and ill-grounded still.

But whereas the Jesuit by wrestling and struggling, thinks his demand is
made good; if he can cast this Apostasy from themselves and Rome, it makes
nothing for him, but alters the question, as if his demand (excepting these
mystical iniquities) had desired by circumstance of person, time, and place;
to have pointed out all other heresies only. And who does not see this
defense erected by the most learned Answerer for the Catholic faith
impregnable, and so far without his shot, that he would fasten falsehoods which
are ridiculous upon his learned pen, that he might with some show and
advantage fight against the same? For who charge the Fathers that they speak
lies in hypocrisy? let him point out the place if he can, in which the most
reverend Primate would have them think that they were of those, or such kind
of men. He tells us indeed, that when the seeds of mystical iniquity were
a sowing, they (the Fathers) that kept watch and ward against the one (open
heresies that oppose the foundation) might sleep, yea peradventure might at
unawares themselves, have some hand in bringing in this Trojan horse commended
under the name of Religion Page ^.
etc. But is here any thing that attempts to persuade you, that the fathers
speak lies in Hypocrisy? or does cross that testimony, which elsewhere he
has given them for godly men? what is affirmed here, but that the fathers
looking always to the advancement of Religion fought courageously against all
that openly crossed the same, yet might (which is not absolutely affirmed but)
peradventure sleep, whilst poisonous seeds that carried a semblance of
Devotion, were sown, or have some hand unawares (no way intending hurt, but
good to the Church of God,) to bring them in? And that there is nothing spoken
to the derogation of the Fathers piety or godliness, I think any man; but Mr
Malone, will easily conceive. For what offense has this learned observation
committed? Is any ignorant, that wicked wretches may bring good to the Church,
who never intended it, as Iehu ^ King. 10* 18. 31.
, Judas and all preachers for gain, etc. and that good men might trouble the
Church, and broach errors in it, and think thereby they have done God service
as Eusebius. eccli hist: lib: 3.
Iraeneus, ibid. lib: 7.
Cyprian etc. and yet some of them have been by your selves acknowledged for
Saints and Martyrs?

But while the true men's cause is pleading, the Theife must not escape; We
acknowledge it an easy matter to excuse the Fathers of this Apostasy: but how
will Mr Malone free his own? For although he may dare and outface much, yet it
is manifest, that their cloystered cattle and those of the like hiew, are
pointed out by the Apostle to be principal Engineres for bringing it in. And
this is so plainly descried, that every simple layman by this place 1. Tim.
4. 2. 3.
, can paint them out; for how are those Hypocrites which speak lies in
Hypocrisy by whom this Apostasy shall be brought in, discovered, but by these
two open and declaring notes of forbidding marriage and abstainning from meats?
Things which agree so fairly, with the cloystered and Romish Clergy, that if
we should plead any interest therein, we should be cried down for sleepers,
whilst this Tower was in building. And although we are charged with Apostasy
by the Jesuit, yet being examined by the Apostles notes, we shall escape very
well. For M. Malone knows, that Delectus ciborum is no article of our Creed,
nor point of our practice. And from the second mark, he has better reason to
excuse us, for I cannot doubt, but he that knows our wives have kirtles Reply
page 206.
, has surely observed that our Priests have wives.

But (let the Apostle use what notes he pleases) the Jesuit will prove that
we are guilty of Apostasy, how? because we have revolted and departed from
the Roman Church, for which he urges Calvin's Absurdum est postquam
discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus inter ipsa principia alios ab a,
liis dissilire Call: ep: 141.
confession; but if here be not lies in Hypocrisy, where are they to be found?

For that which he cites from Calvin acknowledges only that they were forced
to make a departure from the whole world, when as the Jesuit would have him
that died long before the most reverend Primate was borne voluntarily to
acknowledge that the learned Answerer etc. did depart from the Roman Church
Reply page 6.
: But pardon this escape, Is there no difference, to be forced to depart, and
voluntarily to make a schism Aug. de Bap. con: Donat: lib: 5. Cap: 1.
Apertissimum enim sacrilegium omines schismatis, si nulla (...) seperati^^^.
; to be driven from you by your corrupt doctrines, that you will not reform;
and with pertinacy and wilfulnes to embrace heresies? We have washed alone
because you will not be clean; and because your Naaman Dried: de Ec^l dog:
lib: ^. cap: 4. Neque tenentur oves subesse Pastori vlli qui iam sactus est,
aut ex pastore lupus, aut saluti gregis contrarius.
will not wash in Jordan, must we adhere to your Leprosy still? He is the
Schismaticke that causes Cassan: consult Art: 7. de Ecclesia vera Neque vnquam
credo, controversia apud nos de externa Ecclesiae vnitate extitisset nisi
Pontifices Romani ^ hac authoritate ad dominationis quandam speciem abusi ^
fuissent eamque extra fines a ^ Christo and Ecclesia praescriptos ambitionis et
cupiditatis causa extulissent.
the schism, and we are confident, that it was no more revolting Cypr. epist
63. Non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui
ante omnes ^st Christus prior fecent; neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi
oportet, sed DEI veritatem.
for us to leave your corruptions, then for the Exorcists to fire their books
Act 19. 19.
, and to reject their impieties.

And although I will not deny but we were in this manner forced to forsake your
corruptions, yet our Jesuit proves it but untowardly by Calvin's confession; for
if the world and the Church of Rome be the same with the Jesuit, why might not
we conclude, from his Baptism and entering the Cloister, but by vowing to
forsake the world in the one, and departing from it in the other, he has
revolted and apostated from the Roman Church, his Catholic Brethren? But is
not the Jesuit pitifully distressed that would from a Schism falsely
pretended to be confessed by Calvin, prove us guilty of the grand Apostasy
mentioned by the Apostle?

Now the Jesuit thinking that we would have swallowed his folly, and
answered him some other way, labors to prevent us, by crossing that which
his Conscience told him, would make for our just defense; for says he, Neither
can it suffice them to say that they departed from the Church of Rome, because
she her self had gone out of the true Church, unless they declare unto us,
what true church that was, out of which the said Roman Church departed Reply
page 7.
; As if this were hard to be done; What is the Catholic Church? do you know
it? not that pretended one contracted in a small compass by Roman ligatures,
but that truly Catholic dispersed over the ^ace of the earth Cassand.
consult art. 7. Veteres potissimum Catholicam dictam volunt, quod per vniversum
orbem diffusa sit.
: This is that you have fallen from, and like Dona^is^s Alphons: de Castro
advers. Haer: lib: 5. de Eccles: Ab Ecclesia se divisit, dicens in sola part
Donati esse veram Ecclesiam, in alijs autem partibus, quae Ceciliano favebant,
non esse Ecclesia, quia etsi ibi aliqui essent boni, and communione tamen
malorum maculabantur, and ita Ecclesia peribat.
have condemned her in her particular members, as if no salvation were to be
had, but with you Extrav: de mayor: and obed: cap: vnam sanctam. Subesse Romano
Pontifici omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. Bellar: de eccl: mil: lib; 3.
cap. 5. Neminem posse, etiamsi velit, subesse Christo, and communicare cum
Ecclesia coelesti, qui nen subest Pontifici, and non communicate cum Ecclesia
militante, viz: Romana.
; So that we can justly say, that we have been forced to depart from your
particular Communion, (you declaring your selves schismatics, and enemies to
the Catholic Church) and that we do adhere to the universal body it self,
in which Salvation will be found, notwithstanding all your desperate Decrees
cast out against the members thereof.

But our Jesuit says, that we are so far from discovering any such thing,
that a prime Doctor Doctor Field in his Treatise of the Church. lib. 3. cap.
13. cited Reply page 7.
of ours confesses, that the Roman Church held still Communion with those
other Churches, that never fell into error.

We find not this in the place alleged; but allowing it to be so, why might
not a perverse company hold Communion and outward Conformity with the true
Church? You make Judas an Heretic; we think he was scarce so good, and yet
how long in this Hypocrisy did he keep Communion with the Apostles? Arius
was worse if it were possible, for as the first would have dissolved his
humanity, this attempted with gross conceits against his Divinity, and yet his
Communion was Catholic, and in outward appearance, he Socrat. eccl. hist.
lib. 1.
and his consorts Carron. in sum: Council: page 39 Vnde^^^ consilio inter se
habito, acquiescunt ad subscribendum, manu sola, non mente.
subscribed to the Nicene Creed. If this be all that you can say for your
faith, that you have held outward Communion with the faithful, it does little
avayle; For a theife may be with true men, and Heretics with them that
profess the faith; and the Devil himself among the sons of God; nay,
present himself before the Lord Job 2. 1
.

But an other Master Bunny in his treatise tending to pacification. sect. 14.
page 89.
of the same rank, tells us, that the Church of Rome has ever continued
after a sort, in profession of the faith, since the time that by the Apostles
it was delivered to them etc. And has also in some manner preserved etc. the
word, and Sacraments that Christ himself did leave unto us (All this will not
make Rome Catholic, or free her from Apostasy and backsliding) which surely,
is a very speciciall blessing of God, and an evident work of the holy Ghost,
from which confession our Jesuit inferrs, that the Church of Rome, her enemies
being Judges is clearly freed from all suspicion of Apostasy, and is
confessed to have held faithful Communion with the true Church of God. Reply
page 7:


But all this foolishly, and without ground, even by the judgment of as cunning
an Arguer as himself, Parsons the Jesuit, for he does not think Mr Bunny so
kind, Parsons Resolution in the second part of his Preface to the Reader. It
is such a Pacificatio^, as the high Priests of the Jews would have made with
the Apostles after they had whipped and beaten them, upon condition they should
neither teach, nor preach any more the Doctrine of Christ.
as the Jesuit would have him, neither does he pick out of those words any
such conclusion, as here is pointed out unto us, which I have no cause to
think he would have omitted, if the words would have afforded any such thing.

Yet we must consider that Mr Bunny was a Pacificator, and would speak as
much, as possibly he could, if not more then was fit, for persuading union
betwixt Rome and other Churches.

Moreover all the good he speaks of the Romish church is, that after a sort
they continued in the profession of the faith which might have been spoken of
the Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, and the most heretics; that did not
utterly cast of the name and profession of Christianity; for which of them
after a sort, did not profess CHRIST to be the Messiah, the Savior of the
world.

Further, in some manner it preserved the word, and sacraments, but in such a
manner, that may stand with Apostasy* The word they acknowledge, but with
Additions traditionall and written, and the C^^on so corrupted must not speak;
but with a tongue of the Pope's making. The Sacraments they reject not, but
deny the People in the Eucharist the cup, and the other they have corrupted
with many mixtures whereby it appears plainly, that they have fallen from
the ancient purity embraced by the Roman church, and that after a sort and in
some manner only, they have had Communion with other Churches, the word and
sacraments being preserved* not from their desire so much, as from the blessing
of God. For if they might have done all at pleasure, the word of God had been
changed for Evangelium aternum Vide hist: explica: reverendis simi dom: Primar:
de success: and stat: Eccl: cap: ^.
, and what do you think would have become of the Sacraments? So that the
Answerer his work, neither totters, nor wants a supporter as yet.

His third observation is, that the most learned Primate, will not have those
opinions wherein we differ from him to be Heresies, but only a kind of still
creeping in Apostasy hooded with the name of Religion and semblance of
Devotion, and therefore pretends himself to be excused from discovering unto
us the author, and time of their beginnings Reply page 7.
. Again, he charge the learned Answerer page 12. to denounce their opinions
Heresies far spread, and of long continuance, which he imputes to
forgetfulness, till he remembers himself, that they are not exempted from
being Heresies by the Answerer, but from being such, as do openly oppose the
foundation of our faith Ibid.
. So that these sayings may stand well together, notwithstanding any thing, he
has as yet uttered. But he tells us, if the differing points be heresies,
that never any did more openly oppose the foundation of faith then they. And to
prove this, he produces the point of adoration of the host in the Sacrament,
of which he makes no question, but every man will easily understand, that if
Hell were raked up, a more notorious Heresy could not be found etc. and
therefore it seems impossible in this Jesuits judgment, that any Bishop of
Rome could be able to persuade such an impiety etc. without being manifestly
discerned. ibid.


That this gross and idolatrous Practice of Adoration of the Host is founded
upon a gross and heretical foundation is not denied by the most learned
Answerer; Neither do I think any man will otherwise conceit thereof, and yet
by this concession, the Jesuit gets no ground for his inference therein,
For suppose, this does fight against Gods divine truth, and in as violent a
manner as the gates of Hell, or power of darkness, it follows not that every
man will easily espy Rhem: annota: upon the 2 Thessalonians: cap: 2. ver: 6. The
mystery of iniquity is commonly referred to Heretics, who work to the same,
and do that that Antichrist shall do, but yet not openly, but in covert, and
under the cloak of Christ's name, the scriptures, the word of the Lord, show of
holiness, etc.
it. Serpents are not seen in the eggs, though in their growth they are full
of horror; and the most dangerous opposall many times proceeds from an
Ambush, and not from the Army. Who knows not, that the fowlest Devil may
appear the fairest Angel; the loosest Abbess may be enclosed in your
chastest vestment; the most licentious Nun be esteemed a Saint; and the most
traiterous Jesuit face it like a Subject?

Besides, we know, that Heresies, which in their nature might be damnable, and
destroyers of the foundation, to their receivers, many times appear not,
neither are they esteemed so vile: And Heresies that are accounted deadly at
one time, and to some receivers, have been but staynes in others, when the
intention of the receiver was considered; As Cyprian his rebaptization. So that
Error concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father, and not from
the Son, is fundamental in its own nature although to the Greek Church
that hold not thereby the inequality of the persons, it is no fundamental
Heresy Lomb: lib: 1: distinct: 11. Sciendum est tamen quod Graeci confitentur
spiritum sanctum esse filij, sicut and patris, quia and Apostolus dicit,
Spiritum fili^; Et veritas in Evangelio, spiritum votitatis. Sed cum non sit
aliud spiritum sanctum esse patris vel filij, quam esse a. patre et filio;
etiam in hoc in eandem nobiscum, fidei sententiam conveni^e videntur, licet in
verbis dissentiant. Bellar: De Christo. lib. 2, cap. 27, Respondeo igitur cum
Bessatione et Gennadlo, Damascenum non negasse, spiritum sanctum procedere ex
filio, quod ad rem attiner, cum dixerit, Spiritum e^se imagine^^ (...) et per
fillu^ esse: sed existimasse, tutius dici per filium, quam ex filio, quantum.
ad (...) loqucindi, propter haeresim Macedonii, et Eunomij, etc. Tolet. in
Johan: cap. 25. annot: 25. Graecus intelligens spiritum sanctum procedere per
filium, quod non aliud significat quam quod nos dicimus.
at all; So many might adore CHRIST in receiving the Sacrament, that never
thought of his bodily presence by Transubstantiation, nor dreamed of your
Wafer-god, nor your Priest able to create the Almighty. Moreover the Real
presence may stand, and yet you may be Idolators in adoring the Host; And in
Substance the Host may be but only bread, and yet Christ be present in the
Sacrament, and in the same manner as the Jesuit has confessed Reply page 44.
the same. But this point is considered elsewhere, and therefore may be here
omitted.

Secondly, the question is not about the earing or blading of these tares, for
every man can tell this, even he that asked the question, vnde Zizania Mat.
13. 26. 27.
, he knew the tares and saw the blade, but not their seeding time; this is a
question for the Lord only to answer, who sees the secret working of enemies
against his kingdom, and not for the servants to lay down.

The Plot of powder-Conspiracie in the first conception, if it was not observed
of the Watchmen of our Israel; yet in the blading it was espied, and the
Plotters choked before Harvest. Many Heresies have been plotted by the
Devil, by Antichrist, but spread abroad by their emissaries, frogs, locusts,
with their croaking Rhetoric. And suppose our learned Answerer knew not all
the plots in hell, and Rome, yet he has laid down the spreading of these
damnable Heresies, when the Church was first troubled with them, and when they
received strength and humane confirmation.

So this Jesuit closes up all, and finding he has said little to the
purpose, he adds, that if all alleged by the learned Answerer were suffered to
pass, it is but might be or peradventure Reply page ^.
, which he takes to be of little force; But it follows by this his
confession, that his demand is not absolutely exempted from Vanity, but lies
within the compass at least of a might be and peradventure, to be foolish and
ridiculous: Whereby we may infer, that this unwise man, his own mouth being
his Judge, does not know, nor this fool understand the infallibitie of those
things, which he would have us to be wise in at last.

The third Answer pleases not the Jesuit (viz^.)

The original of errors is oftentimes so obscure, and their breed so base,
that no wiseman will marvel, if in tract of time the beginning of many of
them should be forgotten The most reverend the Le: Primate. page 2.
. And what of all that Reply page ^.
? says our Jesuit. Sufficient I think to declare the vanity of the Jesuits
demand; for if Heresies be obscure in birth, and oftentimes not taken notice
of; or if taken notice of, yet by the espyers not judged worthy of a Register
to continue their memory, but barely of a contempt, then it must of necessity
follow, that that demand is vain, which presupposes the Church to take
notice of the father of every ba^^^rd doctrine, and to keep Registry thereof, as
she does of those sacred truths which were legitimately declared to the Church.

I but although they be oftentimes so obscure as this man says, must it
follow, that they are always so? ibid:


No, it must not. But it is no strange thing, that when your wisdom cannot
answer, your wits should be amazed; and although the wise Answerer has endured
many of your bolts, with this answer he has choked you with the feathers: for
he stands not in need of any such vniversals; if some Heresies are of this
temper it is sufficient; and if you cannot manifest, that every heresy
declares it self in its birth, and is registered to Succession, then that
cannot be excused from vanity, which requires for detection of every Heresy
in your Church, their beginning, with the circumstance of person, time, and
place.

Arians, Manichees etc. are diligently recorded (says the Jesuit) why should
not those wherewith he charge us have been more notorius? Reply page ^.


He does not rest here, but as if all his skill were in demanding, he asks,
Above two hundred Heresies have been gainsay^^ by the skillful watchmen etc.
what Doctor did ever gainesay any of those supposed heresies by word or
writting? ibid.


This Crambe is but of small value; all this has been answered before; the
effect is this: Every Heresy in it is birth appears not, but some express
their venomous disposition afterward. Who knows not, that those base birthes
which are generated expu^redine, are never taken notice of, till they reveal
themselves by their filth and motion? And have you not been fai^e to derive the
Pedigree of some Heresies from the Devil? See Bern cited before in the 1.
Section.


Besides, i^ i^ a good Consequent, Some Heresies have been detected in their
beginnings with the circumstances of person, time, and place; therefore those
which have not in like manner been ma^e known, are notheresies? Are not false
doctrines, many times like false Christians, like Hypocrites, who are often
accounted the best of those which profess righteousness, whenas afterward
Judas is detected and their fraud is apparent? were all the Jewish corruptions
before our Saviors time unvailed? was the curtain of painted appearance drawn
aside among the Pharisees? were not many good men deceived by the^, as Nic^^
(...) ^ John, 3. 1.
that entered their order? who espied their painted Hypocrisies till Christ laid
them open in their colors, making them appear to every pur-blinde eye what
they truly were? Our Jesuit to prove his demand has produced two Reply page
8.
places, first Isaiah, 62. 2. And what says the Prophet there? The Jesuit I
think suspects the strength of his quotation, or otherwise he would have laid
down the words nakedly and not with his gloss. I have set watchmen upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day, or night. These
are the words, but not one syllable, that they should cry out still upon every
arising error, or Heresy. Nay, what is here to confirm that which he would
prove* God gives his Church faithful watchmen, that will neither day, or
night, be idle and keep cloister, but will labor to build up Jerusalem, till
GOD make it a praise of the earth. But, (alas) what is this to the root of
Heresies? to the circumstance of their espyall?

The birth of every Prodigy is not observed in the shepherds Calendar, but of
Comets, and those which are of like nature; neither is every Heresy detected
by the Iesuite's rule, but such, as in their first appearing show themselves to
be against faith and good life, as Augustine epist: 119. cap. 19.
says in the words alleged.

Who knows not, that little clouds may end in storms, which without an Elias
1. King 18. 44
cannot be suspected? Yet must God fail in his promise, for his servants not
espying the taresower? The Apostle that could cry, 2. Cor 2. 16.
, quis idoneus ad h^c? did not think the perfection of Pastors such, that
completely they might perform every circumstance, which their Office does
require. If God give faithful watchmen that will not be tongue-tyed in Gods
service, nor cease to sound, when the enemy approaches, this is sufficient to
repute the watchmen faithful, and to free their souls: For God requires not
the trumpet to be used, before the enemy be espied; and when your cunnings
appeared treachery, they have not wanted opposers in all ages; so that herein
God has no ways failed his word.

For the other place, Ephe: 4. 11. it makes no better to his purpose; for who
denies, but Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers? but to what purpose? to espy the person, time*
and place of heretical beginnings? no, but for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the works of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ Ephesians 4.
^^.
, which might be effected by the faithful resisting of heresies by scriptures,
although their beginning, time, and place should be unknown.

For St Augustines words, they are true, and make nothing against the Answerer,
for if every Pastor ought not to pass ever in silence their manners and
doctrine, which be against faith, and good life but should labor to disgrace
and condemn the same: much more this will be required of the Church in
general, but they must appear first to be so. Paul did not bitterly enveigh
against Elimas, till he appeared the child of the devil A^^^ ^3. ^, 10
, and resisted the straight ways of the Lord: Neither are men's opinions
resisted till they appear heretical, for otherwise every Pastor should be
Johannes ad oppositu^, fighting with his own shadow. It is for Christ, that
knows the secret of hearts to say that Judas is a devil John 6. ^0,
. And to as much purpose is Dr Fulks confession, That the true Church has
resisted all false opinions with open reprehension. This no man denies; but
first they did appear to befalse opinions. Besides, cannot heresies be
resisted with out naming their beginning, time and place? Yes nodoubt, as
openly as Luther and Fulke have resisted your errors, whose beginnings you say,
they know not; or you the Leoniste, whose genealogy your great Inquisitor
Reinerius See this alleged in the ^. Section.
could not find out. So that the Jesuit may perceive, it is no gross assertion
to avouch such horrible errors, as their opinions are, to have assaulted the
Church with most secret and mystical fraud, although the beginnings of many of
them may be obscured and hid, But that ever we said, they conquered the whole
Church, that they obtained universal estimation of true faith, without being
either contradicted, or as much as once observed by any Watchman whatsoever,
this is no better then Jesuitical juggling, there remaining no truth in the
same.

And now, as the learned Answerer has prooved this question or demand to be
vain, so here he goes further to demonstrate the same by particular
illustration, showing that the same things which they desire of us, cannot in
the like case be performed by them. And first says the most reverend Primate:
We read that the Sadduces taught, there were no Angels: is any man able to
declare unto us, under what high Priest they first broached this error?

To this he makes a twofold Answer, one of them is, that if the certain time
of the beginning of this error of the Saduces were not known at all, little
could that avail, when as the like circumstance of time, is urged only to
find out the truth of an ^^ter in controversy etc. which because you affirm
we, who deny the same, do urge you to point us out the time when, etc but,
that the Sadduces taught that error, there is no doubt, nor controversy, it
being plainly testified by the scripture. Reply page ^.
Which is but a vain and simple strain of the Jesuit For how can it be, but
the reason must be alike in all, even in those, which be not declared expressly
in scriptures, as those that are? And it is as plain that you teach those
particulars by your self proposed, as the Sadduces did, that there was no
Angel; So that if yours cannot be adjudged Heresies by GODS word, unless they
be revealed by the circumstance of person, time, and place; Why should this
opinion of the Sadduces by strength of scriptures, and other grounds be judge
and concluded to be so? For otherwise, if any Nathaniel (in whom there was no
guile John, 1. 47.
,) should have preached against the Sadduces, before Christ revealed the same,
that they had been Heretics, for denying Angels and the Resurrection and
convinced the^ for such by the scriptures; do you think this trick of Popish
deceit would have exempted them from censure, or preserved them for Saints?
Surely if this Jesuit ^nquired after truth, he would not thus spend himself
with vain delays and exceptions: If a Sadduce should now appear and teach
the same doctrine, as Pope John Council: Constan: Sess: 11. Item quod dictus
Ioannes Papa vigesmus tertius ^apee and saepius cora^ diver^^^ praelatis and
alijs (...) and probis viri^ pertina^iter, diabolo suadente, dixit, asserv^^^
dogmati^avit and ad^^^uxit, vitam aeternam non esse, nequ^ aliam post hanc:
quin imo dixit, and pertinaciter (...), anima^^ (...) and extingu^ (...):
dixitque (...) die (...) contra articulum de resurrectione (...) de premissis
fuit and, est dictus Ioannes Papa apud clerum and populuae gravites di^^a^atu^,
Sicque vt praedici^^r, fuit dictum, tentum, creditum, and reputatum: dici^urque
tenetur, creditur, and reputatur palam, public^ and notorie.
the XXIIIth did, how would he stop his mouth? Do you think, that he would
be forced from necessity to urge the Scriptures? Why, the (...) urges them
here; And I doubt not, but he could be content with them in other matters
also, if they would afford them the like ^^elter.

But those that are strangled, must needs make mouths, though they can speak
nothing to the purpose; and our Jesuit would seem to defend that, which he
knows is impossible by his grounds to be made good, So that you may hereby
perceive, that we can expect from him, nothing but (...) for his own
advantage, for if he be not able to answer what is proposed, then what is
brought in against him is nothing to the purpose, laboring to frame a pretense
for upholding of that which he with no truth is able to justify.

For his other answer (viz:) Any man that has read the thirteenth book of
Josephus etc. may easily declare, how the Saduces br^ached both that, and the
rest of their errors under the high Priest Ion^^has as Machabaeus, who began
his reign about 163, years before the birth of Christ, and reigned twenty.
Reply page 9.


Whatsoever the Jesuit pretends, there is not one word in Josephus, whereby he
can prove the beginning of the Sadduces their opinion of denying Angels, or
indeed when they began to be a sect; For in the place Lib. 1^. anti^^^^.
alleged by him, Josephus tells us, that there were three Sects amongst the
Jews, one of the Pharisees, an other of the Sadduces, and the third of the
Essenes, who were accounted Sects, not in their inchoation, but perfection,
about 143. years before Christ, in the time of this High Priest. And the same
Author in an other place (...)
expressing things done some 11. years after Christ, shows that the Jews
were divided into sects, a (...) retro (...), which could not be if they began
in the time assigned by the Jesuit. Besides, the Jesuit is so far from
telling when the Sadduces or their Errors began, that he knows not when the
High Priest (...), under whom (he would have us believe) they (...) that
error, neither how long (to use his own words) he reigned. For if he had;
he would not then have begun his reign 163. years before Christ, neither
have extended his government to twenty years, against the truth of Chronology
in the manner that he has done.

For (...) his testimony, I do not need much to value it, in regard his own
fellow-Iesuite S^^^^ius In Tri^haeres: lib. 2. cap. 25.
has rejected and refuted his testimony in this particular. So that this
instance is not vainly brought; nor so far wide, as the Jesuit would have it,
but pressed to purpose, prooving strongly that to be an heresy, the original
whereof he is no way able to demonstrate unto us, which enervates and cuts
asunder the very heart strings of his Argument.

The Grecians, C^^cassians, Georgians, Syrians, Egyptians, Habissines,
Muscovites, and Russians, (says the most learned Primate) diss^^t at this day
from the Church of Rome in many (...): will you take upon you to show in what
Bishops days, these several differences did first arise?

To this the Jesuit replyeth, I will S^ and, by Gods help, perform it also,
out of the learned works of our modern Catholic ^^iters. Reply page ^.


But before this be performed, the Jesuit must remember what their own A. C:
his true Relations of sundry Conferences, page 11. 12.
require of us in this Quere, that he may with the same strictnes satisfy us,
in that which we desire of him, First they desire us to show the point changed
in the Roman Church, from the ancient faith. Secondly, they ^rge us to prove
this change not by any reason of antiquity, or the word of God, but by the
other circumstances of the Author, (...), and place; and who persisting in the
former unchanged faith, opposed, and continued opposition against is, as
against a Novelty and Heresy.

Besides this, the Author, time, and place, of such novelties and heresies,
must so be pointed out, that no Papist may be ^ble to show those points, to
have been hold by more ancient approved authors in the same sense, in which
they are held by the Roman Church, for if they are, then they conclude, that is
able to convince, that there was no such change ^ade.

Now, if this Jesuit can perform what he has promised in all the
controversies, betwixt the Roman and the Greek Church, with that strictnes,
which is required of us in the like kind, the^ may he have some color, for
what he requires at our hands: but if he has failed herein, the Reader will
easily perceive, that they are as little able to convince the Greek Church
(which yet notwithstanding they have rejected) of Heresy by this rule, as they
think we are unable to detect the^. And seeing the Jesuit has taken vpo^him
the former task; I will bestow the pains, to give him a Catalogue of
particulars, wherein those Churches dissent from the Roman, to see out of what
good authors he is able to lay me down, the person, time and place, by whom,
when and where, they were brought into those Churches, with their opposers etc.

1. For the Greciani, they deny Purgatory fire, and hold, that the souls of
holy men departed, enjoy not the beatificall vision before the day of judgment.
Council. Floren* prope initium. respons. Graec. ad Cardinal: Guisan. q. 1. Thom.
a Jesus. de conv. genesis lib. 6 cap. 1. eit: by Brere wood in his enquiries.


2, The Habissenes have with them the practice of Circumcision, not only of
males, but females also Zaga Zabo derel: and mor. Aethiop. cit. per cundem
.

3. They have a rule, that no man must spit, the same day, that he has
received the Eucharist* Zago Zabo ibid. cit. per cundem.


4. They teach, that the souls of Infants dying before Baptism, because they
are sprung from faithful parents, and from the virtue of the Eucharist,
received by the mother after conceptio^ to sanctify the child in the womb,
sh^lbe (...) Zag. Zab. ibid. Thom a Jesus lib. 7. pa. 1. cap 8. cit. per cundem.
.

5. They baptize themselves every year upon the Epiphany, as the Muscovites,
in memorial of Christ's Baptism, whom they thought to be baptized as that day.
Zag. Zab. ibid eit: per cundem.


6. The Egyptians have a custom to confer holy Orders to Infants. Thom^ a
Jesus* lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 5. cit. per cundem.


7. They deny all efficacy to Baptism, unless celebrated in the Church by the
Priest, notwithstanding any necessity whatsoever; neither do they baptiz^ till
the fourtieth day, though the child dye without Baptism. Tho. a Jesus ibid.
cit. per cundem.


I could name the Jesuit many mo^^, but if he can show the person, time and
place, by whom, when and where, these points received birth, with their
opposers, by demonstrable authority; and not by naked grounds, we will spare
him the rest, and confess he may with good reason ask the question he does,
and require our answer to it. But till then let him not expect that from an
other, which the whole Roman Inquisition cannot discover unto us in the like
kind. Yet for the present, the Jesuit has performed his promise, as he
supposes in some particulars pointed out by himself.

First concerning the defection of the Greek Church, which indeed
comprehends all the rest by you named Reply page 9.
etc.

Here we have the Jesuit myred in his first entrance. For what has he tu do
with generals, Saphista versatur in generalibu^, he follows not his answerer,
but forsakes him here: Particulars are demanded, and like a false Steward the
Jesuit delivers all in gross, fearing his prejudice if he submit to a
strict and particular account. All that he labors to prove here, are two
things. First, the beginning of the Greek Churches defection from the Roman,
which was not desired at his hands. Secondly, the beginning of several
errors, which shall be observed in their place.

For the first; the defection of Paulus Samosatanus, Macedonius Nestoriu^ etc.
was not from the Roman, but the Greek, a principal member of the Catholic
Church.

Secondly, the Greek Church did not fall with the^, but condem^ed the^; neither
do they adhere to them, or their doctrine at this day. That there are in the
East, which are named from some of those condemned Heretics, and yet follow
not their doctrine Onuphr. in Iul: 3. Uerum hie Nestoriani nomen potius
Nestorij haeretici quam errores retinuisse mihi videntur etc.
, there is no question. But that the doctrine of those Heretics is taught by
the Greek Church, is utterly untrue, neither dare the Jesuit say it is,
although by his obscure generalities he would insinuat, that in what those
differed from the Roman church, these close with the^. And for the other
several defectio^s (as he calls the^) though it were but ajust flight from
their tyranny, he cannot tell how many they were, but styles them twelve or
there abouts. But to what purpose (...) these (...)* unless he show us the
(...), (...) the (...) by (...), they were made? And this will not (...) ^^
show unto us, what error every (...) in with ^^; for otherwise his (...) have
(...) then employed to none ^ffect.

Whereas he makes them oppressed by the Turk, in regard of their (...) from
(...), it (...) Jesuits fancy. I pray GOD (...) the^^ other (...) separation,
they cast off* (...) though no^ all their slavery. ^ut if it be (...) ^^ (...)
at the cause of their oppression; which is not (...) ^aith, where (...)
notwithstanding their persequ^^ion they still (...); but their persons, many
more probable grounds may be given of Gods putting them to this (...)* then
this assigned by* Jesuit; unless you have relation to politic and worldly
prudencyes of that Church, and not to crimes, that bring down Gods judgments
upon them. For we know some things (...) not altogethe^ to be approved of, but
idolatrous, as Image Worship, are practiced amongst them* They deny (indeed)
that which is practiced by you, in regard of the manner, even Statues of stone
or Marble, and yet embrace with an idolatrous love paper and p^inted
representations. This their sin is not the least causer of Gods judgment upon
them as we may conjecture from the IX. of the R^velation if Gods visiting them
may be imputed to their sin, and not to his secret will, who tries his own
by affliction, as the Church of the Jews in Egypt, and the Primitive in her
sincere^^ perfections.

Thirdly ^s concerning the several (...)* (few in comparison) wherein the
Greek Church a^ this day dissenteth from the Roman, their beginning and
contradiction i^ noterious. Reply page ^^


Here the Jesuit by way of preface makes the Greek Church at this day to vary
from the (...) in regard of us (for so I conceive he desires to be understood)
^ut in a few points, which is (...) for they differ at thisday from them in
most points; that we (...) them for: So that I doubt not, but they received
scardall from your corruption, which because yo^^ pride would not ^ure they
left you (...) ^^ your (...)* and adhered to the (...) doctrine, which (...)
every when received, at all times (...), in the Catholic Church. And although
they (...) the (...) of (...), yet some of your own See before*
think their error therein, to be only in the (...) of expressing (...) and
not in the substance of doctrine it self. And (...), whereas he says, that
their begi^ning (...) i^ (...); I will believe him, when he has answered those
points, which I have lay (...) before, for what he has done by his own
election and choice will declare unto us; what great performance we may expect
^^ his hands, when an other may have the liberty to point out his task.

And first he begins with their denial of subjection^^ the Roman Sea etc.

This is the first (...); and agreat one, and (as he tells us) was beg^^ by
John of Constantinople, and he there upon severally contradected by Gregory the
great, and by Pelagius in his epistle etc. Reply page ^^


Here are two (...) fashood^ by this Jesuit in this particular supposed and
(...).

First, that (...) ages before (...) of Constantinople his (...), the Bishop of
(...) (...) in their sense was universally acknowledged. Secondly, that this
controversy betwi^^ (...) Gregory was about the denial of Papal (...). ^oth
which shall be (...) to be notoriously untrue. For the first (...) the Jesuit
orderly proceeded, he should have proved the Roman Bishop the Monarch of the
Church, by universal confent, before he should have questioned the Greek
Church, for the denial thereof; and that his Monarchy (...) consist not in
matter of outward glory and precedence, but of spiritual regency and power:
for else how could they deny, what was never established or consented unto by
the Catholic Church, or any famous or glorious member of the same. And
further in manifesting the falsehood of his supposition, you may conceive, it is
impossible to (...) the ancient testimonies i^ (...), that the fathers denied
this spiritual and divine regency of the Roman Bishops, because they never
assumed or exercised it: yet all those steps whereby they labored to ascend
unto this spiritual height, were ever resisted in all times and ages.

For in the first place their attempt of divine derivation of this power is
cast off by their own. Cusa^us Cusanus de Concord: cath: lib 2. cap. 13.
is so far from giving the Bishop of Rome this spiritual eminency by divine
Canon that he denies it to have been granted unto him by any Canon of the
Church, and proves it to have been only brought in by common use and
custom. And surely what privileges the Bishops of Rome enjoyed above their
brethren (which were far from that oecumenicall spiritual regency Turrecrem:
d. 2^. Constantino. Consistebat. hic honor in hoc videlicet quod ad locum in
fedendo primo post Rom: ^oat. and in responsionibus haberet secundam vocem, and
in subscriptionibus.
, or papal omnipotency) the Council of Chalcedon Chalced: council. act. 16.
Et^^im (...) ^^nioris Romae propter imperium civitatis illius patres
consequenter privilegia teddiderum
atributed to the gift of their fathers; which fathers we may conjecture Pius
Aeneas Sylv. epist. 301.
the second thought to be the fathers assembled in the Nicene Council, as
Marsilius Defens. pa. 2. cap. 1^,
Patavinus has plainly declared.

Now all practices of insurrection to gain this universal regency, either
before or after they received this limited honor of sitting and subscribing
first were ever resisted by the Catholic Bishops, as by this one instance
will be sufficiently cleared.

The Bishops of Rome did many timesstrive, that the finale judicium next to the
determination of a ^^^^cell (for a Papa Council Constan. sess 4. ^. Consil.
Basil. sess 2. Idem assent Cardinal Cameracensis, Ioannes Gerson, Iacobus
Almainus, Nicolaus Cusanus, ^anori^itan Cardinal: (...), (...), and alii test
Bellarmin d council. (...) lib. cap. 14.
supra was never dreamed of in primitive times) should depend upon the^ in
matters (not of faith, which they never pretended authority to declare) but of
fact; and this Cyprian Lib. 1. epist. 3. Nam cum statutu^ sit omnibus nobis and
aequum sit pariter and justum, vt vniuscujusque causa illic audiatur vbi est
crimen admissum, and singuli^ pastoribus ^^^tio gregis sit adscripta, quam
regat vnusquisque and guber^e^ rationem sui actus Domino redditurus; oporter
vtique cos quibus prae su^^s n^^ circumcurfare, nec Episcoporum concordiam
cohaere^^^^ sua subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere, sed agere illic
causam suam, vbi and accusatores habere and testes sui criminis possu^^ nisi si
paucis desperatis. and perditis minor videtur esse auctoritas Episcoporum in
Africa consti^utorum, qui iam de illis judicaverunt, et eorum c^^scientiam
multi^ delictorum laqueis vinctam judicij sui nuper gravitate damnarunt. I am
caus^ co^^^^ cognita est, iam de eis dicta sententia est, nec censur^ congruit
sacerdo^um mobilis atque in constantis animi levitate reprehendi, cum Dominus
doceat et dicat: sit sermo vester, est, est, non, non.
resists, as savouring of usurpation, showing upon what poor grounds, this
practice depends, even upon the judgment of a few desperate and graceless
people, who were of opinion, that Bishops were unequal in their authority:
whereupon the Bishops labored to restrain these busybodies, by lawful
remedy in Councels afterward as may be collected from the sixth Council of
Carthage Epistol. council: Aphricani ad Caelest: vrbis Romae Episcopum.
, and the 8th general Council held at Constantinople can. 26.
.

Secondly, the Jesuit does falsely point out the Patriarch to deny Papal
height, or their spiritual monarchy; for the Popes at that time pretended
nothing of that nature, and therefore he could not d^ny, that which was never
affirmed.

It is true, that John could not be content to enjoy the privileges of his
predecessors given him by the Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon, but
that he would be more, the only Bishop, and universal Patriarch: yet that he
denied the honor of the Bishop of Rome, no more then the other Pat^iarchs,
Gregory Epistol: 36.
will clear, in regard he lamenteth their loss as much as his own.

Neither is there any thing urged by this Jesuit, that proves the point of
denial of this Top-gallant of Papal usurpation, and therefore we may well
reject it as to no purpose; For why should Gregory by this, think the
Patriarchall Sees in their Privileges violated, if that Papal pride had only
bin contradicted by John of Constantinople? Secondly, he assumeth, that their
den^al of prayer for the dead, was begun by Acrius and contradicted by
Augustine and Epiphan. 1. This is boldness and impudency in the Jesuit to
charge the Greek Church to follow that Heretic, whom they have and do in
their practice utterly abdicate and condemn.

2. He speaks not any thing to the purpose, for Acrius did never cross
prayer for the dead* in the sense that the Greek Church does at this time, for
they deny prayers for souls in Purgatory Cocci^^ (...) 2. lib. 7 art. 5. (page
846.) Gr^ci ac Mus^^vitae, etsi fune^re sacrum (...), tamen Purgatorium
Purg^^o^ium. (...). art. 1^ co^ Luthe^ G^^^is ad ^unc usque diem non est
creditum Purgatorium esse.
, which the ancient Church^ never dreamed of, nor Aerius ever opposed: but that
Heretic denied the Commemoration and prayer for the Saints departed, used by
the ancient Church, which had no relation to Purgatory flames, or souls
pretended to be punished there, as willbe seen in handling of the point; and
for this, and not the other, was he condemned of heretical rashness. So that
the Jesuit is mistaken, framing an answer to that which was not required at
his hands, and therefore we desire him to rec^llect his thoughts, and tell us,
what person among the Greeks did first deny prayer for souls out of
Purgatory, or else he says nothing to the demand.

In the third place he tells us, their defense of marriage of Priests was
contradicted against Theodorus by Chrysostom, g Ro^^en^. ibid: Legate, qui
velit, Graecorum veterum commentarios, and nullum, quantum opin^^, aut quam
^arissi mum de Purgatori^ se^^o^em inveniet: sed neque La^i^i sim^l omnes ac
sensim hujus ^^i veritatem conceperunt.
and against certain other by Epiphanius her. 59.

And here the Jesuit without doubt is gravelled, for that which before he
says is notorious, he cannot here lay down; he says it was contradicted
against Theodorus, etc. but he does not tell us that Theodorus was the first
who brought that into the Church; neither speaks he one syllable of the
person, time and place, in what manner this supposed Heresy of Priests
marriage was brought in.

But if we can prove this an Heresy as ancient as the Apostles time, as the
Church of the Jews; that the institution thereof is divine. Surely, they were
asleep, that were watchmen in the Church, or else the contradiction hereof
had not been left to their opposall mentioned by the Jesuit.

And to verify this; the two last assertions need not proof, it being plain
to every man that God instituted marriage without restraint in Paradise Gen 2.
^2.
, and Priests, and Levites His enim cum ^aeteris omnibus jus connubii jam inde
ab initio fuit, vnde scriptum est 19, Iudicum, Vir Levites habitans in monte
Ephra im, accepit uxorem de Bethleem Judah, and Ioiada Pontifex ex tribu Levi in
v^^rem habuit ^esabeth sororem Ahoziae regis Iudae. 22. 2. Pa. ralip.
in after-time^ used that lawful ^emedy, as well as ^ai^^s.

And for the Apostles practice, that they had wives, Clemens Alexandr: Clem:
Alex: Strom: lib ^^. Philippus autem (...) quoque suas (...) tradidit. E^
Paulus quidem certe non veretur in quadam epistola suam appella^e conjugem,
quam non circum^^rebat, quod non magno ci esset ^pus ^inisterii.
and in a manner all antiquity does averte. Neither does Bellarmine Lib. 1. de
Clericis cap. 20.
deny it; for if he did, how could he charge the Apostles, postquam vocati a
Christo fuerunt, to do that, which he can never prove to have been done,
viz: officio conjugali renunciasse, seeing the Apostle testifies the contrary:
1. Cor. 9. 5. and the Canons of the Apostles Carran: sum: Co^c: ca^. 5.
Episcopus aut presbyter v^^rem propriam nequaqu ^^ sub ob^^n^^ religionis
ab^iciat, Si vero rejecerit, excommu^icetur: sed si perseveraverit, dejieiatur.
and Council: Gangrens: Caran: sum: cone: can: 4. Quicunque discernit a
presbytero qui uxorem habuit, quod non oporteat co ministrante de oblatione
percipere, anathema sit.
express their distaste of such practices; the first inhibiting Priests sub
obten^^ religionis to put away their wives; the other, the people for the like
cause to contemn their ministration.

But if he makes Chrysostom and Epiphanius to reproove this error or
heresy in Theodorus and certain others, as the first opposers of necessity of
Priests their single lives; Alphonsus de Castro Advers: hae^ lib. 13. De
Sacerdo: haer: 4.
may learn, that Luther is not Hujus haeresis primus author. And Innocent the
third might have received instruction, (if he had had but as wise Council as
this Jesuit) that before the time of Theodorus Monachus, the Oriental Church
did receive the vow of continency, at least virtually, (which this holy father
Titul: de Cler: con: cap: cum olim, cit: ibid: per Alphon de Castro.
could not find out) and that it was first opposed by him.

And how shall we give credit to their compilers of Councels, in their other
narrations, when Gratian in this particular is casheered by this Jesuit, as an
Ignoramus, or a petty observer? for he tells us, that Distinc. ^^. cap.
syracusanae cit: ibid: per Alphon: de Castro.
Orientalis Ecclesia non susc^pit votum castitatis.

Surely the Jesuit says in effect, that Innocent the Father, and Gratian and
Alphonsus de castro the sons, were children in these affirmations, and did
not wisely observe precedent times; for if they had, they should have found
Priests to have been restrained either by law or vow, until Chrysostom and
Epiphanius their time, when Theodorus Monachus and some others did only oppose
this doctrine.

But Chrysostom was not so affected to oppose the marriage of Priests or
Bishops; as may appear in his second Homile upon the first chapter of the
Epistle to Titus tom: 4. Obstruere prorsusintendit ^^reticorum ora, qui nuptias
damount, often dens eam rem culpa carere, immo ita esse pretiosam vt cum ipsa
etiam possit quispia^^ ad sanctum episcopatus solium subvehi.
whatsoever he thought of Monks.

And for Epiphanius, as he contradicted the marriage of Priests; so did many
Priests in his time practice the same, as is confessed by himself. Epiph haer.
5^.


He tells us, also their denial of the Holy Ghost proceeding from the father
and the son, was begun, and gainesayed about Anno 764. as witnesses our
Adversary Keckermanus in System. Theolog. page 68. Reply page 10 ^Pag. 9.


The Jesuit promised s, out of the learned works of their modern Catholic
writers, to show us in what Bishops days these differences did first arise:
but yet here, he is willing to embrace the testimony of their Adversary
Keckerman, and for necessity we presume, because he can have little evidence
elsewhere. Whereby we may see how convincing a rule that is, which is taken
from person, time, and place, to detect Heresy, and error: when as our
Jesuit cannot by these circumstances point out from the evidence of good
stories, the prime Greekish error, for which they pretend A. C. his true
Relations, page 49.
principally to cast off the Greek Church, and to make it heretical.

But if Keckerman be observed, he says not much to the purpose, for which the
Jesuit has produced him; for whereas a set time, a set place, a notorius
person, ought to have been produced, Keckerman for time, brings the whole
compass of 764 years page 6^. annis post Christ^^ natum 764.
, the age of along-liued Pope; and for the person, the Jesuit names him not:
and for the place where this error received birth, if the Jesuit will have us
to conceive the Greek Church, the place is as much extended, as the time, as
containing a larger circuit (unless he hop over to their new plantations of
America) then the Roman Catholic Church,

And here let the Jesuit either confess, that he understood not his
Adversary; or plead guilty of wilful a busing his author. For Keckerman never
said, that the Greek Church denied the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father;
neither does he appoint the year, when their denial of the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Son was begun and gainsayed. And therefore we must
conceive he read this Author with a squint eye, and a corrupt mind, when he
makes him to point at the time for the beginning of this error, to be about
anno 764. it being plain, that this opinion had ground in the Church, long
before, even in the judgment of this Author Ibid.
cited by himself.

In the next repeated error of the Greeks, he mixeth Papists and
Protestants, and yet both put together; they are not able to show the distinct
time, without a circum circa, and turn about, for so he expresses it.

The denial of unleavened bread in celebration of the Sacrament, was begun
about anno Domini 1053. as appears by Leo the 9. in his Epistle to Michael
Bishop of Constantinople. Reply page 10


The Jesuit has produced nothing but vanity for the finding the beginning of
this notorious heresy. For Leo the 9. says no such thing, viz: that Michael
was the first, that broached this error, neither does he cite the first author
of it* For it cannot follow, because Michael did oppose the Azymes used in the
Latin Church, about the year 1053. therefore about that age it did begin.
For that Patriarch charged the Church of Rome with other practices, quod Sabbat
a quadrage^^m^ observ^^^^ (...), quod suffocata comederunt gentiliter, and quod
(...) tantum in Paschate, nunquam vero in quadragesimali tempore decantarent
Brovius in anno 1653.
. All which I think you will not say, were first distasted by Michael at that
time.

The Jesuit runs from his path, and vainly without any relation to the
thing in controversy, tells us, that the Greek Church does vehemently
profess to detest the Protestants Religion Reply page: 10
. etc. Wherein we have no reason to believe him, in regard he brings not any
particular out of the Authors cited by himself, to convince the same* which I
make no question but he would have done, if they had fairly offered it unto
his hands.

Secondly, there would not be that freindly intercourse betwixt some of the
Patriarchs of the Greek Church, and our Bishops, as there is; neither would
they have sent their Priests, to our Universities for instruction, omitting
yours which are nearer to them; neither would the Grecians that are amongst us,
frequent our Chapels and Churches, when they avoid yours: if they conceived
them equally polluted, or held us in equal detestation Council* Lateran: 4. sub
Inno. 3. apud Bin. c. 4. In tantum Graeci coeperunt abominari Latinos, quod
inter alia quae in derogationem (...) in (...) committe^^^^ si quando
sacerdotes Latini super little celebrassent altarianon prius ipsi sacrificare vo
lebant in illis, quam ea tanquam per hoc inquinata lavissent. Bapti^atos etiam
a Latinis, and ipsi Graeci rebaptizare ausu remerario praesumebant, and adhuc
(sicut accepimus) quidam agere hoc non verentum.
with ^^^^selves.

Neither do they differ from us in the fundamental points of Doctrine, we
giving them (as we ought) a charitable interpretation; although in some of the
points in the Jesuits Catalogue, taken from the Divines of Wittemberge, they
may be censured somewhat to savor of superstition and error.

And that it may appear, whether the Greek Church does most favor Papists or
Protestants, I will insert here a Confession of faith of Cyrill, Patriarch of
Constantinople, translated into English, and published at London 1629. An other
translation whereof, I have seen, under which is written;

This Copy has been translated out of the original, made done
by the hands of the most reverend Patriarch Cyrill, which I know well. The
writing it self being in my hands, and having examined it my own self, I do
testify that it does agree with it word for word.

Corneille Hague, Ambassador of the united Provinces of the Low-Countreyes, at
the gate of the Grand Seignour.

IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST.
VEE believe one God Almighty and infinite, three in Persons, the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten of the Father
before the World, consubstantial with the Father: the Holy Ghost proceeding
from the Father by the Son, having the same ofsence with the Father and the
Son. we call these three Persons in one essence, the Holy Trinity, ever to
be blessed, glorified, and to be worshipped of every creature.

We believe the Holy Scripture to be given by God, to have no other Author
but the Holy Ghost, which we ought undoubtedly to believe: for it is written,
We have a mere sure word of Prophecy, to the which ^ee do well to take ^eede,
as to a light shining in a dark place. Besides, we believe the authority
thereof to be above the authority of the Church. It is a far different thing
for the Holy Ghost to speak and the tongue of man, for the tongue of man may
through ignorance err, deceive, and be deceived: but the Word of GOD neither
deceives, nor is deceived, nor can err, but is always infallible and sure.

We believe that the best and greatest GOD has predestined his Elect unto
glory before the beginning of the World, without any respect unto their
works, and that there was no other impulsive cause to this election, but only
the good will and mercy of God. In like manner before the world was made he
has rejected whom he would: of which act of reprobation, if you consider the
absolute dealing of God, his will is the cause; but if you look upon Gods
orderly proceeding, his justice is the cause, for God is merciful and Just.

We believe that one GOD in Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be
the Creator of all things visible and invisible: Invisible things we call the
Angels, visible things the Heavens and all things under them. And because the
Creator is good by nature, he has created all things good, and cannot do any
evil: and if there be any evil, it proceeds from the Devil and man: for it
ought to be a certain rule to us, that GOD is not the Author of evil,
neither can sin by any just reason be imputed to him.

We believe that all things are governed by GODS Providence, which we ought
rather to adore then search into, since it is beyond our capacity, neither can
we truly understand the reason of it from the things themselves; in which
matter we suppose it better to embrace silence in humility, then to speak
many things which do not edify.

We believe that the first man created by God, fell in Paradise, because
neglecting the Commandment of God, he yielded to the deceitful counsel of
the Serpent: from thence sprung up original sin to his posterity, so that no
man is borne according to the flesh, who does not bear this burden, and
feel the fruits of it in his life.

We believe that JESUS CHRIST our Lord has made himself of no account, that
is, has assumed man's nature into his own Subsistence* that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, that he was made Man in the Womb of Mary always a Virgin,
was borne and suffered death, was buried and glorified by his resurrection,
that he brought salvation and glory to all beleivers, whom we look for to
come to judge both quick and dead.

We believe that our Lord JESUS CHRIST sits at the right hand of his
Father, and there makes intercession for us, executing alone the office of a
true and lawful Priest and Mediator: and from thence he has a care of his
people, and governs his Church, adorning and enriching her with many
blessings.

We believe that without Faith, no man can be saved* but that we call Faith,
which in CHRIST JESUS justifies, which the life and death of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST procured, the Gospel published, and without which no man can please God.

We believe that the Church (which is called Catholic) contains all true
beleivers in Christ, which being departed, are in their Country in heaven, or
living on earth, are yet travayling in the way: the Head of which Church,
(because a mortal man by no means can be) Jesus Christ is the Head alone, and
he holds the st^rne of the Government of the Church in his own (...): but
because on earth there be particular Visible Churches, and in order every one
of them has one chief, which chief is not properly to be called a Head of
that particular Church, but improperly, because he is the principal Member
thereof.

We believe that the Members of the Catholic Church be the Saints, chosen
unto eternal life, from the number and fellowshippe of whom, Hypocrites are
excluded, though in particular visible Churches, Tares may be found amongst
the Wheat.

We believe that the Church on earth is sanctified and instructed by the Holy
Ghost, for he is the true Comforter, whom Christ sends from the Father, to
teach the truth, and to expel darkness from the understanding of the
Faithful. For it is very certain, that the Church of God may err* taking
falsehood for truth, from which error, the light and doctrine of the holy
Spirit alone freeth us, not of mortal man, although by Mediation of the
labors of the Churches Ministers this may be done.

We believe that a man is justified by Faith, and not by works; but when we
say, by Faith, we understand the correlative or object of Faith, which is the
righteousness of Christ, which Faith apprehends and applies unto us for our
Salvation. This may very well be, and yet without any prejudice to good
works. for Truth it self teaches us, that works must not be neglected,
that they be necessary means, and testimonies of our Faith, for confirmation
of our calling; but for works to be sufficient for our salvation, and to make
a man so to appear before the Tribunal of Christ, that of condignity or merit
they confer salvation, humane frailty witnesses to be false; but the
righteousness of Christ being applied to the penitent, does only justify and
save the faithful.

We believe that free will is dead in the unregenerate, because they can do
no good thing, and whatsoever they do is sin; but in the regenerate by the
grace of the Holy Spirit, the will is excited, and indeed works, but not
without the asistance of grace; to effect that therefore which is good, grace
goes before the will, which will in the regenerate is wounded, as he by the
thieves that came from Jerusalem, so that of himself, without the help of
grace, he has no power to do any thing.

We believe that there be Evangelicall Sacraments in the Church, which the
Lord has instituted in the Gospel, and they be two: we have no larger number
of Sacraments, because the Ordayner thereof delivered no more. Furthermore we
believe, that they consist of the Word and the Element, that they be seals of
the promises of GOD, and we doubt not, but do confer grace. But that the
Sacrament be entire and whole, it is requisite that an earthly substance, and
an external action do concur with the use of that element ordained by
Christ our Lord, and joined with a true faith, because the defect of faith does
prejudice the integrity of the Sacraments.

We believe that Baptism is a Sacrament instituted by the LORD, which unless
a man has received, he has not communion with Christ, from whose death,
burial, and glorious Resurrection, the whole virtue and efficacy of Baptism,
does proceed, therefore in the same form wherein our LORD has commanded in
the Gospel, we are certain, that to those who be Baptized both Original
and Actual sins are pardoned: so that whosoever have been washed, In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, are regenerate,
cleansed and justified. But concerning the repetition of it, we have no
command to be rebaptized, therefore we must abstain from this inconvenience.

We believe that the other Sacrament was ordained of the LORD, which we call
the Eucharist. For in the Night wherein he was betrayed, taking bread and
blessing it, he said to his Apostles, Take ye, cate, this is my body: and
when he had taken the Cup, he gave thanks and said, Drink ye all of
this, this is my blood which was shed for many: do this in remembrance of me.
And Paul adds, for as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of
this Cup, ye do show the LORDS death: this is the pure and lawful
institution of this wonderful Sacrament, in administration whereof we
confess and profess a true and Real presence of CHRIST our LORD, but yet
such a one as Faith offers to us, not such as devised transubstantiation
teaches. For we believe, the faithful do eat the body of CHRIST in the
Supper of the Lord, not by breaking it with the teeth of the body, but by
perceiving it with the sense and feeling of the Soul, since the body of CHRIST
is not that which is Visible in the Sacrament, but that which Faith spiritually
apprehends, and offers to us: from whence it is true that if we believe,
we do eat and partake; if we do not believe, we are destitute of all the
fruit of it. We believe consequently, that to drink the Cup in the
Sacrament, is to be partaker of the true blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in
the same manner as we affirmed of the body: for as the Author of it commanded
concerning his body, so he did concerning his blood: which commandment ought
neither to be dismembered nor maimed, according to the fancy of man's
arbitrament: yea rather the institution ought to be kept as it was delivered
to us: when therefore we have been partakers of the body and blood of CHRIST
worthily, and have communicated entirely, we acknowledge our selves to be
reconciled, united to our Head of the same body, with certain hope to be
coheires in the Kingdom to come.

We believe that the souls of the dead are either in bless^dnesse, or in
damnation, according as every one has done: for as soon as they remove out of
the body they pass either to Christ; or into hell: for as a man is found at
his death, so he is judged, and after this life there is neither power nor
opportunity to repent: in this life there is a time of Grace, they therefore
who be justified here shall suffer no punishment hereafter: but they who being
not justified, do dye are appointed for everlasting punishments. By which it
is evident that the fiction of Purgatory is not to be admitted, but in the
truth it is determined, that every one ought to repent in this life, and to
obtain remission of his sins by our Lord Jesus Christ, if he will be saved.
And let this be the end.

This compendious and brief Confession of us we conjecture will be a
contradiction to them, who are pleased to slander, maliciously accuse us, and
unjustly persecute us: But we trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, and hope that he
will not relinquish the cause of his faithful ones, nor let the rod of
wickedness lie upon the lot of the righteous.

Dated in Constantinople, in the Month of March, 1629. CYRILL, Patriarch of
Constantinople.

Our Jesuit is charged by the most reverend Primate. Some things are
maintained by you, which have not been delivered for Catholic Doctrine in
the primitive times, but brought in afterward, your selves know not when.

The Jesuit pumping for an answer hereunto, talks of ambiguity, doubtful
phrases, fighting in a cloud. As if a man could deal more plainly with the
Roman faction, then to tell them, that there are many points held now of faith
by them, which the first times never received for Catholic doctrine, and that
they themselves know not when, many of them were first broached in the Roman
Church.

But the Jesuit fearing least he should be espied in opposing so manifest a
truth, would here raife a mist or fogge, that he might the better steal out of
danger, for he indeavoureth to persuade: That by those words the Answerer goes
about to make his simple Reader believe, that we maintain doctrine contrary to
that of primitive times, because, forsooth, we maintain now somethings which
were not expressly declared, nor delivered as necessary articles of Christian
faith. Reply page 11


He were a simple reader indeed, that would believe this Jesuit either in his
faith or doctrine, if it have no better support, then the declaration of some
of their late Councels to confirm it; But he were more then simple, that can
pick the Jesuit his collection from the learned Answerer his words. Simple
men, interpret the Bells, as they imagine, and imagination has directed the
Jesuit here and not the truth. For what has the words of the most reverend
Primate to do with the species of opposition? where charge he you with
maintaining doctrine contrary to that of primitive times? where does he
insinuate so much? He that discovered your intrufions to have been brought in
under the name of Piety, was not so forgetful to judge those points contrary
to the received doctrine of faith. You teach new faith; this is the charge. You
deny not the old professedly in any point; this were too gross, and fit for
the fools, your brethren, open Heretics; and not for the wisest son, that
can promote his fathers kingdom by a more secret and mystical fraud. So that
let his words be softer then oil, or sharper then darts, I am sure herein the
Jesuit fayles, when he thinks them to be shot at the innocent.

The Jesuit would speak more to purpose, to free himself and his faction,
and to this end, he delivers to us two propositions.

1. We maintain some things as Articles of faith, which were not in primitive
times expressly determined, declared and delivered for such. And

2. We maintain some things as articles of our faith, which are contrary to
that, which has been declared for Catholic doctrine in primitive times. and
would have us know, that there is a great difference betwixt these two sayings.
Ibid.


But as the Jesuit grants the former to be true of themselves: so the most
learned Answerer in this place does not charge them with this latter at all.
For I doubt not, but that the most reverend Primate will yield so far unto
you, that in show (at least) you hold the Apostles Creed, and with the
Pharisees give it the first place of honor, as they Moses law: and yet
notwithstanding your additions have cast contumely many times upon the ancient
faith, as Pharisaicall traditions upon Moses law Mat. 25. ^, 9.
.

That which Roffensis says, may be acknowledged in a right sense, that there
were many points universally held by the Primitive Church in belief and
practice, the which with explanation were defended against contradicting
Heretics, that arose in aftertimes. But what is this to new doctrine, never
universally received, nor anciently known? or what argument is here
persuading you to declare that for ancient faith, which was never delivered
from the Apost^^s etc. or received by the Primitive Church?

But the Jesuit, that he might gain credit to his first proposition tells us.
Before the Nicen Council, some books of Canonical Scripture were doubted of,
yea and rejected from the Canon by some of the Ancient, without any blame at
all, which after the said Council could not lawfully be called in question.
Reply page 11
And all to very little purpose, For first the Nicene Council did not declare
doubtful books for Canonical Scripture, nor point out the Canon, which the
Catholic Church did universally receive; neither does it make at all against
their universal receipt of those books, that some private men, or Church,
doubted of, or rejected them; For the Jesuit will have his doctrine generally
received, if affirmed by ten or eleven Fathers, Valentia, if by the choysest.
Why shall f Reply page 94
not Gods book have equal privilege with a Papal Indulgence, when the first
is acknowledged in a manner by most, this never taken notice of, nor
acknowledged at all? Besides suppose, that some private men, or some few
Churches did not receive some book of the Canon: yet this can no way hinder
the universal receipt of the whole, more then a mountain, or a wave the Globes
ro^undity. Secondly, although they were not blame worthy (as the Jesuit would
have it) which should not receive some books of the New Testament, (which is
false) yet they were not without blemish: for if it were an honor to the Jews
especially to the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, that to them wholly and
entirely were commended the Oracles of God Romans 3, 2.
; it must needs be a dishonor to the ten tribes, to have rejected all but
the five books of Moses. Thirdly, although those books were doubted of, yet
they were doubtingly received, for you cannot find them by any Church
canonically rejected. Fourthly, it had bin as foul an error to have decreed
any thing against the authority of those books before the Nicen Council, as
afterward, For if the Jesuit will take it to be such a tie, that all are
bound to stand unto the declaration of a Council, why did not the Council of
Laodicea Carran. in sum: Concil^ can. 59.
perform their obligation but in the repetition of the Canon, leave the book
of Judith to be placed amongst the Apocrypha, not acknowledging it the more
authenticke, for that imaginary decree mentioned by the Jesuit? Besides, there
is no question, but the denial of those books of the new testament were
blameworthy, else Epiphanius Har. 51. 75.
would not have charged the Alogi with Heresy, for denying the Revelation of
St John.

The most learned Answerer goes further to express the blindness of this Rule
to find out Heresy by.

Gregorius de Valentia, one of your principal Champions, does confess that
the use of receiving the Sacrament in one kind, began not by the Decree of any
Bishop, but the very use of the Churches, and the consent of the faithful. To
which the Jesuit makes Reply.

And is not that use of the Churches and Consent of the faithful, a sufficient
warrant, I pray you, to clear it from the odious term of Sacrilege,
wherewith you unadvisedly do style it. Reply page 12


And here, if that which the Jesuit does insinuate, were granted for truth, it
were no sufficient warrant against CHRIST'S institution; but that justly it
might be styled Sacrilege, even as the Answerer has done.

What brought in the high places in Israel? do you suppose, they were erected
by any decree of Council? or otherwise? if not so! then by the Consent and
practice of the Israelites? and yet I doubt not, but you will style that sin
Sacrilege, or as bad: unless you think it piety to keep back from the
temple, what GOD had appointed for his service there. Compare the omission of a
typical sacrifice, with the removing of one of the Sacramental expressions of
Christ his death and passion instituted by himself: and then judge which
deserves the baser Epithet.

But if you further question with Valentia, when first did that Custom get
footing in some Churches? he returns you for Answer, (says the most
reverend Primate,) Minime constat, it is more then he can tell.

1. And yet (says our Jesuit) he largely and learnedly there proves, even
by the express word of God, that it was used in the Apostles times etc. Reply
page 12


Did he attempt it? his learning was exercised without his conscience: Did he
prove it? the Jesuit says so: but I will think him worthy to be General of
his Order, if he can do either the Pope or the Devil so much service, as to
persuade the world to believe the same.

2. Upon which use the ensuing Customer, which got footing in some particular
Churches, were grounded. Reply page 12


This is as true as their new Creed: for who will say, that Valentia knew the
ground, upon which this Custom was received in some particular Churches, that
has his Minime constat, his know not wh^^, for the Person, that brought it in?

3. The Council of Const^^ce from this chain (viz. Customs so grounded) and
other good reasons made it a la^ etc. ibid*


True it is, that your (...) Orbis, or Catholic world never received it
before; and he that reads their law, must see, that wilfulnes and not reason
persuaded it. For first they have a non obst^^^e for Christ's institution.
Secondly, they reject the Primitive practice Council: Constan. sess: 13. apud
Bin: Licet Christus post coenam instituerit, and suis discipulis
administraverit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile sacramentum,
tamen hoc non obstante: etc. licet in primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi sacramentum
reciperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie etc.
. Thirdly, they are forced to invent or confirm the poor deceitful Cousenage
of Concomitancy. And all to make good this faith never heard of before.

Further, what needed that to be made a law at Constance which Gods express
word has declared to be the use and practice of the Apostles times? how could
that come into the Church by degrees, which was brought in first by them that
converted the whole Catholic Church? How ordained in the first Council of
Ephesus, about a thousand years before the said Synod of Basil etc. if but
made ^ law from Customs so grounded only at Constance?

And now let Mr Malone consider how far he slideth from that he ought to aim
at, the wisdom of his inter^gation: and let him also apprehend, how he is
forced by ^ecessity to seek protection from the Apostles, omitting ^mpora
intermedia; which they scorn in us. And I could ^kewise wish him not to be
unmindful how this Council does (...) Antiq^^ty, which he so much desires to
magnify and defend. But if none of these considerations may work any mutation
in him* let him use his Vrbanus Regius Cited by the Jesuit ibid.
, who for my part I know not, neither will believe, if he were ever so prime a
Doctor, that should fasten so false a calumny on the Ephesi^^ Council.

But grant the Jesuit all that he desires, which is to make his Doctrine of
receiving in one kind, as ancient as the Council of Constance: for
opposition of their Decree we are able to produce the Bohemian^ not long after.

Gregorius de Valentia, (says the most reverend Primate In the answer to the
Jesuits challenge page 3. 4.
) confesses that it is more th^n he can tell, when the Custom of receiving
the Sacrament in one kind began in some Churches. The like does Fisher and
Cai^tan give us to understand of Indulgences, that no certainty ^^^ be had,
what their original was, or by whom they were first brought in. Fisher also
further adds concerning Purgatory: that in the ancient Fathers, there is
either ^none at all, or very rare mention of it* that by the Grecians it is not
believed even to this day, that the Latins also, not all at once* but by
little and little received it: and that, Purgatory being so lately known, it
is not to be marvailed, that in the first times of the Church there was no use
of Indulgences; seeing these had their beginning, after that men for a while
had been affrighted with the torments of Purgatory. Out of which confession of
the adverse part you may observe: 1* What little reason these men have, to
require us to set down the precise time* wherein all their profane novelties
were first brought in; seeing that this is more then they themselves are able
to do. 2. That some of them may come in podetentim (as Fisher acknowledges
Purgatory did) by little and little, and by very slow steps, which are not
so easy to be discerned, as fools be borne in hand they are. 3. That it is a
fond imagination, to suppose that all such changes must be made by some B^^^^or
any one certain author: whereas it is confessed, the some may come in by the
tacit consent of many, and grow after into a general custom, the beginning
whereof is past man's memory.

Here the Jesuit observes first want of Truth, when he says that we required
him to set down the precise time, wherein all our prof^^^ novelties were
brought in: etc Reply page 1^
.

This Jesuit wants honesty, otherwise he would not observe with falsehood and
jealousy that for which there is no ground in the most reverend Primates
words. For first he speaks not of the Jesuit alone, but of all his Tribe: and
do you think, it is so hard a thing to find some of you asking; What year the
Religion of the Papists came in and prevailed? Whether all nations suddenly and
in one year were moved to the doctrine of the Papists? Whether in a moment,
the mass was said in stead of other Apostolic communion? See Doctor Fulks
answer of a true Christian to a Counterfeite catholic*
Is it not your own Demand, In what Popes days was true Religion overthrown
in Rome? and when you come to explain your self in your Reply, is it not the
certain time, which you demand of us page 1. and the precise time page 14.

Secondly, (says the Jesuit) I observe false logic, to wit. Because Fisher,
Caietan, or Valentia cannot tell therefore none else can tell Reply page 13
.

This is none of the most learned Primates inference, but the Jesuits, Yet I
dare say, that it is better logic, then the Jesuit has usually replied
withal; For may not one argue from a probable ground, but it must destroy the
whole Systeme of Logic, and drive Aristotle's Topics out of his Organon?
Fisher, Caietan, Valentia, not Punies, (though Mr. Malone seem to slight
them,) but great Rabbis of Popish Divinity, nay (I think I may say,) the
greatest without deserving censure, cannot tell, therefore none can tell; is a
probable argument, and not false Logic, as, this sixth Predicable would have
it: For if the best learned cannot find out the time when these Customs etc.
were first brought in, it is a vehement, if not a violent presu^ption, that
poor Punies cannot find that out. If a Sheriff, that has posse Co^mitatus
return non est inventus upon a person; a Catchpole will scarce find out the
fugitive. And I think it is good logic, for I am sure it is good reason, that
if Fisher, Caietan, and Valentia cannot tell, this Jesuit (as he has done)
may well hold his peace. Yet here is more logic, the^ the Jesuit (...) see,
or at least, the^ he has observed; for Valentia says minime co^stat, it does
not appear, when that Custom of receiving the sacrament in one kind did first
get footing in some Church; Fisher and C^ietan say that no certainty can be
had, by who^ Indulgences were first brought in, or what was their original See
them veged by the most reverend, the Lord Primate, in his answer to the
Iesuit's challenge page 3*
, and therefore it will follow necessarily, that all the wise men in the Roman
Church are not able to set down the precise, or certain time, wherein these
Novelties did first arise; unless the Jesuit will despise the judgments of
their learned Cardinal, their highly esteemed Bishop, and his own Valentia.

Again, Because Valentia cannot tell, when the Custom of receiving the
Sacrament in one kind began in some particular Churches, therefore we know not,
when it was first used in the Church at all, whereas it is shown to have been
first brought in by Christ and his Apostles Reply page 13
.

Here is impude^cy would make an Ethiop blush; for what can be more foul, the^
to faste^ those things upon this most reverend Lord, which, he never intended,
neither can be collected from his words? But the Jesuit frames arguments,
that he may with more facility answer the^; the most reverend Primates are not
so easily digested: That which he collecteth from Valentia, is, that the use
of receiving the sacrament in one kind, began first in some Churches and grew
to be a general custom in the latin Church not much before the Council of
Constance, in which at last (to wit 200 years ago) this custom was made a
law. Secondly, that it does not appear when first that Custom did get footing
etc: And out of this confession etc. he observes. What little reason these men
have to require us to set down the precise time wherein all their profane
novelties were first brought in, seeing this is more then they themselves are
able to do See the most reverend the Lord Primate in his answer to the
Jesuits challenge* page* ^
.

Which observatio^ or inference the Jesuit durst not touch, as being too well
guarded by the premises, if Valentia may be believed, for him to avoid: For
suppose, one should say and speak as true as Valentia, that the plague, or a
leprosy (as heresy is) did begin first in some Provinces and was afterward
scattered throughout the Roman Empire: and should further add, that it does
not appear when first that infectio^ did get footing in some Provinces. Does
it not necessarily follow that all men must be ignorant when the Contagio^ or
Leprosy first infected the Empire? So that if this Jesuit had framed his
argument truly according to this most reverend Lords collection it would have
made him gape for an answer. Valentia (that speaks truth for we must not
think that a Jesuit can lie) tells us that the receiving of the Sacrament in
one kind did first begin in some churches at a time that does not appear, and
afterward got by custom into the Latin being made a law by a decree at
Constance, therefore it is more the^ your selves can do to tell when this
custom got footing in the Church at all: And further if Valentia did
co^tradict himself saying at one time that this custom was brought in by
Christ and his Apostles, and at another, that it began first in particular
churches, and so spread at a time that does not appear, let the Jesuit
bedaube him with an excuse, or condemn the waverer.

And again: Because Fisher and Caietan grant that no certainty can be had by
whom Indulgences were first brought in, therefore they must be profane
novelties, when as both Fisher and Caietan ground the^ upon the word of God,
condemning him of another untruth, when he affirms that they give us to
understand how no certainty can be had what their original was Reply page 13
.

Here the Jesuit is drive^ to the like inventio^, for the learned Answerer
makes no such infere^ce: His intention there, being only by Popish witnesses
to prove that you know not the original of some points of your faith, and to
discover thereby, your vanity in requiring of us the precise time of their
birthes. Profane novelties he styles not these alone but all your other
after-byrthes also yet proves the^ profane and new in his most learned
answer following. And although the most reverend Primate intended in this
place no such thing, yet if a Popish Martyr and Cardinal bear not false
witness, they will be little better then profane and novelties also by their
testimonies: For if Indulgences be such a point of faith, that no certainty can
be had what their original was, or by whom they were first brought in, whether
by Balaam or an Apostle, though the Jesuit and his fellows could pro^e it by
Apocrypha to be as ancient as the tower of Babe^^, it will be profane and new
in the opinion of any Christian judgment and understanding still.

And here it is not to be omitted, how the Jesuit flies to (that which they
contemn in us,) the sacred scriptures, deserting the succession of this
article of glorious Roman faith, suspecting the fathers so much boasted of by
him, to prove it of universal belief: must we be urged then in reason to tell
you, at what time Purgatory and Indulgences were first brought into the Church;
whe^as the Greek Fathers seldom mentioned Purgatory, and never received it
Ro^^ens. ar. 18. Graecis ad hunc vsque diem non est creditum Purgatorium esse.
, when some of the Latin apprehended it not Ibid. Sed neque Latini simul omnes
ac sensim hu^us rei veritatem conceperunt.
; when sometime it was unknown Ibid. Aliquandiu Purgatorium in cognitum.
, and but lately known to the Church Ibid: Sero cognitum ac receptum Ecclesiae
fuerit vniversae.
; when it got strength pedetentim, by little and little, and not from
scriptures or fathers interpreting them only, but partly ex revelationibus
Ibid.
, by some whisperer in a trunk, or a worse Gipsy?

But if these notable points in the opinion of Valentia, Cai^tan, and Fisher,
had their original from Christ and his Apostles, the word of God; why should
the Jesuit desire any other medium to examine the truth of their report, but
their own level?

The word of God is sufficient to canonize these of faith, could you but find
them delivered there; But we are sure of your disability herein, unless you
fly unto the aid of your pro ratione voluntas your will-guiding Interpreter.

And the Jesuit might have forborne to charge the Answerer with untruth, in
regard he but only repeats Fisher and Caietans opinions; and the Jesuit
himself thus far jumpeth with them, that there is some uncertainty, when
first their use began, Besides, I would gladly know, whether the word of God
(without succession) be able to point us out the certain original of the
Doctrine of faith? if it be, what will become of his demand? if it be not,
where finds he the untruth, that he does falsely charge the Answerer withal*

Finally, Because Fisher affirms that the knowledge of Purgatory came in
pedetentim, by little and little, therefore it ought not to be admitted, nor
esteemed. For by the same Logic he may prove, that S. James his epistle ought
not to be admitted for Canonical Scripture, because (as S. Hierome Paulatim
tempore procedente meruit authoritatem. Hieron. de vitis illust. verbo Iecobus.
does witness) by little and little, in process of time, it obtained
authority and credit Reply page 13
:

This is another brat of the Jesuits begetting, let him foster it: the most
learned Answerer concludes no such thing but shows that this profane Novelty
crept pedetentim like a snaile to the height of Papal faith, and therefore is
not easy to be discerned. But the Jesuit had a great mind to make use of
Ierome's words, and without a forged preparation he was not able to bring them
in. Yet as he urges them, there is great difference between these two
instances; For the Epistle of S. James was first received by the Catholic
Church Eusebius apud Sixth. S^nens: Bibl. Sanct: lib. 7. haer. 9. No^ tamen
scimusistam ( epistol^m Iacobi) cum caeteris ab omnibus Ecclesijs recipi*
, though doubted of by some particular members thereof Sixtu^ Senens: ibid. Nec
ita perperam sequentia verba Hieronymi interpretanda sunt, ut ex his --
dedueamus, Epistolam hanc, vel temporum successu, vel Ecclesiae di^^imulatione
divinam factam, and Ia^obo ascriptam cum tadis ipsa non esset. (hoc enim
impossible prorsus est) sed sic potius juxta veram Hieron mi mentem exponenda
sunt, quod Epistolam hanc, de qua primum inter ALIQVOS ambigebatur, an divino
spiritu, and a^ ab Apostolo Iacobo scripta esset, Ecclesia Christi paulatim
tempore procedente ^^mperit esse veram, et canonicam, etipsi^s Iacobi germanam.
; But Purgatory was not received (so far as they can manifest) but by degrees,
in particular Churches only and never (at the best) esteemed as of faith, but
among Romanists.

Secondly, Purgatory partim ex revelationibus, came to be believed of some
particular Churches, when the Epistle of S. James from the worth and divine
light that was in it self meruit authoritatem got authority, not in the
Catholic, but amongst those doubting Churches which had not received it. So
that here is the difference of paulatim and pedetentim: S. James his Epistle
was known and received by the Catholic Church, and did by degrees remove the
jealousy of those particular Churches, that suspected it. Purgatory being
unknown at sometime to the Catholic Church (which must either be in the
Apostles days, or never, unless this point were more unhappy, then any other
point of Doctrine,) got to be known afterward in the Roman Church, not from
Scriptures, which knew it not, but by revelations, and tales of a Ghost.

When our Answerer then etc. does demand of us, whence tho foresaid points of
Purgatory, Indulgences, and Communion in one kind, have their Originals, we
can show, even out of the very authors alleged by himself, that they have
their Originals from the institution of our Lord, howsoever it be granted that
there is some uncertainty, when first began their public and frequent use.
Reply page 13


What does the Jesuit get by this? he affords us matter sufficient to prove
his Demand idle: For first, what little reason has he to ask, What Bishop of
Rome did first alter that Religion, which we commend in them of the first 400.
years, and In what Pope his days was the true Religion overthrown in Rome:
when they themselves are forced to distinguish in regard of time, the practice
of their faith, from the person that instituted the Doctrine thereof; confining
this unto the age of Christ, acknowledging the other to have been brought into
the Roman Church, they know not when (...) constat.
?

Secondly, what ground has the Jesuit and the rest of his profession, to
require the circumstances of person, time, and place to find out heresies by;
but because the true ancient faith has been ever continued in the Church by
perpetual succession, being believed and practiced therein without
interruption? And yet here our Adversaries confess, that a doctrine may be
taught by Christ, and yet never practiced in the immediate following times; but
as a thing forgotten begin in particular Churches after the Apostolic times,
and from thence slide into the Roman (never into the Catholic) at such a time
which they are not able to design unto us without some uncertainty Reply page
13
.

Thirdly, he flies to the institution of Christ, as a sufficient rule to
declare the original of their faith which we like in them accepting the trial
thereby; and what he pretends for himself, we will on our part undertake to
prove, viz^. that all the points of our Religion, by the confession of the very
authors alleged by the Jesuit, have their originals from the institution of
our Lord. But if the Jesuit deny us the like liberty, which he takes unto
himself, he befooles his own argument: if he grant the same unto us, then he
demonstrateth his own demand to be vain, which requires person, time and
place as a necessary ground, whereby to detect Heresy and error by.

Finally, it will most plainly appear how vainly our Answerer proves my
demand to be vain, if we gather his reason to a head, thus: we our selves
cannot tell when some of those points which we maintain against them began, or
by whom they were first brought in: Ergo, we have little reason to demand the
same of him, seeing as he says, it is more then we our selves are able to
tell. The Antecedent has been already disproved Reply page 13
.

How the Antecedent has been disproved, the Reader may judge by what has been
already said: but I am sure it has driven this Jesuit, and the Defenders of
Purgatory etc. to the Scriptures, which the Jesuit, ^^r any Saylor in the
Roman Gulf, would never anchor (...), unless forced by a storm, and in case
of necessity. And further I wonder that the Jesuit should confess, that i^
all their profession, we cannot sh^we them any point, or article whose
Original they cannot derive most plainly from Christ and his Apostles. etc.
whenas they charge the Scripture with obscurity Bellarm De verbo Dei, lib. 3
cap. 1. Si res consideres, necessario fatendum est, Scripturas esse
obscurissimas, Siquidem tradunt summa mysteria, de divina Trinitate, de
incarnations verbi etc Et (...) post. Si veromodum dicendi consideremus
inveni^mus innumerabiles rations (...)
and darkness. And thirdly, you may perceive this Antecedent has been so well
proved, that ( omissa successione intermedia) the Jesuit is willing to break
down their bulwark of succession, and to originalize every point in his
profession from Christ and his Apostles, thinking that to be a sufficient
means to declare the truth of Doctrine, when their Champions Fisher and Sweet
denied the said liberty for the same end, to their acute and learned opponent
Doctor Featly Answer to the Fisher catched in his own not. Sect. 2.
.

And although we should not stand with him upon his said Antecedent, truly he
deduceth not a right conclusion out of the same. For, say, that we our selves
could not tell the precise time of their beginnings, yet have we good cause to
demand the same of him Reply page 14.
etc,.

This is but a fancy, and has no ground in reason, as if your Catholic Roman
Church ought not to have as much care to prevent heresies, as we to detect
them; or that you who make succession your note of truths, should not be
bound to show their perpetuity by a preci^e continuance from the Apostles
downwards, as well as we to declare their falsehood, and to show their
upstartednes in following times.

Our Answerer surmising (as it seems) that the vanity of these foresaid
proofs, would quickly be descryed by his judicious Reader, endeavors with
other vain instances, and examples, to cast a mist before his eyes Reply page
14
, etc.

Silly Dreamer! how did his self-conceit flatter him, when he compiled his
Reply? Does he think a judicious Reader can espy that in transitu, on a
sudden, and by view barely, which a Jesuit and his fellow laborers cannot
manifest with all their pains? Yet let the judicious Reader judge of things
past, he promises much in time to come.

But we (by Gods grace) setting forth the light of verity, will easily
disperse the foggie vapors of his vanity, that so we may reduce the Reader to
the path of truth Reply ibid*
.

Gods grace assisteth truth, not herefie; the breath of his mouth must consume
Antichrist, not fortify his kingdom: and the light of verity is so far from
being set forth by this Jesuit, that it is his master-peice to rail against
it, to eclypse it, if such a moone-calfe could perform the work. Yet let us
see what these foggie vapors are, which the glorious light of the Jesuits
verity will disperse.

He says then concerning our Private Mass, that he will tell us in what Popes
days it first began, if we tell him in what Popes days the People first
began to fall from their devotion Reply ibid.
.

But he has left the most learned Primate's answer, (not because a fogge,
but) because the light thereof of^ends his sight. For first the most learned
Answerer sets forth the vanity of his Demand, in asking, What Bishop of Rome
did first alter that Religion, which you commend in them of the first 400,
years? In what Pope his days was the true Religion over-throwne in Rome? by
several arguments, 1. from their own disability: 2. from their coming in
pedetentim, their lingering birth, which cannot be in one Popes days, 3. from
the tacit confent of many, which cannot be wrought by one. And here he
brings two more instances, the first taken from want of Devotion in the
people; the second from time it self.

And therefore to require a Pope for the altering of that, which was done by
another, or to restrain us so to time, as to urge us for to show that to have
been brought into the Roman Church in one Popes days, which (perhaps) was not
effected in the lives of 100. of them; this must needs be a vain and
ridiculous Demand. But let us see, whether the Jesuit be not lost in this mist.

We urge him with hi^ promise (says he) as he is a man of his word, and we
give him to understand, that in Pope Peter the Apostles time, the people fell
from their devotion, of whom therefore the same Apostle says, That it had
been better for them not to have known the way of Justice, then after having
known it, to turn from the holy commandment given them 1. Pe^^^ ^. 21.
etc. Behold now when people fill from their devotion, and consequently when
our private Mass began, even by our Answerers own rule, unless he put
(chance) between Reply page 14
.

Did people in general want devotion in S. Peter's time? was the best age of
the Church, the worst by your censure? Is it the decay of love in some one, or
few hypocrites minds, that can answer the most learned Primates demand? You
must show us a time, when the people did as universally lack Devotion, as they
do among you the Sacrament, or else you have accepted the Answerers promise to
your disadvantage.

Secondly, it is acknowledged by your own that a long time after S. Peter's
death, Priest and People communicated together; Vasq. disp. 216. cap. 3. Negare
non possumusetiam in Ecclesia Latina fuisse vsum vtriusque specici, and vsque
ad tempora Sancti Thomae durasse.
and therefore your assignement of lack of Devotion, should have followed the
Devotion of the people, and not have run up to the Apostolical times, before
they perfectly knew the faith. So that the most learned Answerer has no need
of your parenthesis, but when this general decay of Devotion is declared by
you, he will then be able to tell you, when your private mass began.

But howsoever the Jesuit halts in this, yet he says, We can tell him
without chance or doubt (if he know it not already) when, and by whom the
private mass was first impugned, and reproved; which it seems God most
wonderfully ordained should be made known to posterity by the very confession
of him, who was the Protoplast of Protestancy. etc. Thus then says Luther. I
will begin to tell tales of my self Reply page 14. and 15.
etc.

Do you think this Hypocrite thinks, as he speaks, that the Devil should
have his part to oppose that practice, which one of their best Champions
fetches from no other ground then lack of Devotion of the peoples part. Hard.
answer to the first article of Iuells challenge, fol. 26.
A kingdom divided against it self cannot stand: Mat. 12. 25.
if the Devil resist his servants, or his servants the Devil, then farewell
Popery.

But what reason have we to believe any thing, that Jesuits, or other
Papalines Nic. 1. epist. 8.. Igitur. Quod suspecti and inimici, Iudices esse
non debeant, ipsa ratio dictat. An Iudicium potest apud ipsos agitari? ut
ijsdem sintinimici, Testes, and Iudices?
conceive of Luther, whenas his beating down of their Antichristian Pride has
filled their mouths with abusive reports, and their books with reproachful
calumnies; Bzovij Annals Eccles: in anno 1517. Reply page 330 331. Cochl. vit.
Lutheri. Calvino-Turcism: Defense of the Censure. Sect. 5.
For some of them report his father to be a Devil Incubus, and his mother to
be a woman that spent her time fricandis in publicis balneis hominibus; that
before his birth like Hecuba (the mother of Paris) his mother dreamed she
conceived a firebrand.

They further seek to disgrace him, making him to change his name, in regard
that in certain languages it promised evil, comprehending in it the number of
Antichrist, and therefore (as they say) he took upon him the name of Luther,
which signifies pure in the German tongue. Neither do they only taynt his
birth, but they stain his life also, by seeking to impeach his writings, which
are justified by their own Erasm. Epist. l. 12. Alb. archi^p. and princ Mogunt
Card. Illud video, ut quisque vir est optimus, ita illius scriptis minime
offendi ^^ paulo post. Compertum est ab his damnata ut haeretica in libris
Lutheri, quae in Bernardi, Augustinique libris; ut orthodoxa, imo ut pia
leguntur.
; his behavior and carriage, when his life was approved by consent of all, and
the integrity of his mann^rs by his enemies Idem Epist. l. 11. epist. 1. Thomae
Card. Hominis vita magno omnium confensu probatur, iam id non leave praeindicium
est, tantam esse morum integritatem, ut nec hosts reperiant quod calumnientur.
Eras^mus in epistol^ ad Freder. El^ct Saxon test Hospinian* in histor. sacr.
par. altera, page 5. De Martino Luth^ro, Nil nisi lenitatem in eo desideravit.
. Neither could his death which was Christian and pious escape their calumny;
some falsely relating, that going drunk to bed, he was found the next morning
dead, his body black, his tongue hanging out as if he had been strangled;
some imputing it to his wife, some to the Devil. Neither have they spared his
Corpse, but report that those which carried him to his funeral, were feign to
throw him in a ditch: Inventions against all truth Sleid. com. lib. 16.
, and strains of malice, their being no ground or reason for these
informations against him; and to declare that they were beyond all malice
malicious, before he was dead, they invented from the father of lies a
notorious falsehood which is sufficient to manifest, what Spirit raised the
vulgar accusations against him; The whole story is related by Lonicer Theatr.
page 246.
. as follows.

A horrible miracle, and such as was never heard of before, that God who for
ever is to be praised, in the foul death of Martin Luther, damned in body and
soul, showed for the glory of Christ, and the amendment and comfort of the
godly. When Martin Luther fell into his disease, he desired the body of our
Lord Jesus to be communicated to him; which having received, he died soon
after. And when he saw his end approach, he desired that his body might be laid
on the altar, and worshipped with divine honors. But God willing at the length
to make an end of horrible errors, by a huge miracle warned the people to
desist from the impiety that Luther had brought in. For his body being laid in
the grave, on the sudden such a tumult and terror arose, as if the foundation
of the earth had been shaken: Whereupon they that were present at the funeral
grew amazed with fear, and lifting up their eyes saw the holy host hanging in
the air. Wherefore with great devotion they took it, and laid it in a holy
place* which being done, this hellish noise was heard no more. The next night
after was heard a noise and cracking about Luthers tomb, much louder the^
before, which waked all that were in the city out of their sleep, crembling
and almost dead for fear. Wherefore in the morning opening the sepulcher where
Luthers detestable body was laid, they found neither body, nor bones, nor
clothes, but a stink of brimstone coming out of the grave, had well-nigh
killed all the standers by. By the which miracle, many being terrified,
reformed their lives to the honor of the Christian faith and the glory of
Jesus Christ. This fable travailing out of Italy, from whence many lies
proceed, into Germany met with Luther, from whom it received this entertainment.

I Martin Luther, by this my hand writing confess and testify, that upon the
21. of March I received this fiction, concerning my death, as it was full of
malice and madness: and I read it with a glad mind, and a cheerful
countenance, but yet detested this blasphemy, whereby a stinking lie is
fathered upon the divine Majesty of God. As concerning the rest, I cannot but
laugh at the Devils malice, wherewith he and his rout, the Pope and his
accomplices pursue me. And God convert them from this divelish malice. But if
this my prayer be for the sin that is unto death, that it cannot be heard,
then God grant they may fill up the measure of their sinue, and with such
lying libels as this, let them delight themselves one with another, to the full.

Now our Jesuits charge here, is advantage picked from a temptation of Luther,
which they would willingly interpret his instruction, when as Luther was
disputed against, and not the Mass. For he tells us, the Jesuit here being
his interpreter, I was willing to defend my Innocence, and therefore I listened
unto him to see what he could say etc. Secondly, the Devils charges are to
draw him to despair. Thou have had no knowledge of Christ, nor true faith at
all etc. How could thou consecrate, when thou wast not a person apt, etc.
Thou have consecrated otherwise, then Christ either willed, or ordained, etc.
This drove him into anguish and perplexity, which is the fruit of temptation,
the effect of the Devil accusing a conscience, not instructing an
understanding. Thirdly, in regard the Jesuit urges Luthers words, he should
have enquired what Luther meant by the^, which he might easily have found out,
if he had looked a little further; For he acknowledges this a temptation,
saying, If I were a Papist ignorant of temptations, whom the Devil neglects,
as those which follow their lusts Luther. de missa privata and unctione
sacerdotum. Si Papista essem omnium tentationum rudis, quem securum and
stertentem Satan negligeret, ut ipsos negligit indulgentes fuis cupiditatibus
etc.
etc. Besides he says, this was no other, then Christ himself suffered,
although he was without sin Ibid and Christus ipse quamvis sine peccato,
propter nos in quantis lachrymis, in quibus augustijs agonizavit, in his
agonibus contra Satanam.
. Again, speaking of the fearful violence of Satan, he says, that no heart
of man could endure, except God be with him *, which he could not expect, if
he had given himself over, to have been instructed by the Devil. d Ibid. Nec
n. humanum cor horrendum hunc and ineffabilem impetum, nisi Deus illi adsit,
perferre potest.
Further he makes Judas Ibid. Vti cogitatio illa, quae Iudae cor percussit,
vera, Tradidi sanguinem justum.
and Caius Ibid. Sed ibi mentitur Satan, quando ultra neget, ut desperem de
gratia: Sicut Cain dicebat: majus est pec catum meum.
temptations, as examples; to illustrate this. At last he expresses what he
resolved; (which was far from a Devils Pupil,) to turn to Christ with Peter,
and to have an eye to his wonderful mercy and merit Ibid Sed verto me ad
Christum cum Petro, and respi cio ejus immensum beneficium and meritum.
.

So that the Reader may perceive what prodigious tales are raised by these
Jesuits to abuse the memory of Luther, who did with one stroke (God assisting
him) cut in pieces those ligatures, wherewith Hell and Antichrist were united
together. And thus you see the false accusation of Luther answered, and
according to truth; but if I would have been guided by Popish example, I might
have said, as they have done, that one Devil might plead for God against their
whole kingdom Histor de tribus Energumenis edit. Parisanno 1623. page 04. Et
Demon ex ore sororis Francis^ae coepit clamare: Nos hic tuemur partem Dei
contra Luciferum, and omnem infernum.
; that the Devil impugned Private Mass, compelled thereunto by God, and not
from his own inclination Ibid Et Demon exore sororis Catharinae dicebat: Vere
a Deo cogimur ad hoc. et postea Deus est qui in hunc modum cogit nos loqui. Et
page 109. Affirmabat Belz. quod Deus haec ei revelasset, and quia eadem non
publicasset ex propria sua voluntate, sed vi adactus. Ibid page 327. Tres
Daemones confirmarunt singuli jura mento, nihil est quod proveniat ex Diabolo,
and quod omnia sunt a Deo vivo.
, that the Devil might speak that which proceeded not from himself, but from
the living God; that the Devil might minister to Christ more zealously, then
most illuminate Popish Preachers Ibid page 797. De ministerio Daemonis Verini.
Possum dicere quod plures audiveram in Ecclesia Praedicatores, viros sanctos,
and valde illuminatos: and hujus comparatione voces emortuas dixisses.
; that God might speak by Devils, as by Balaam, or his ass Ibid. page ^35.
Neque decrevit quidpiam verbo Dei ex hoc quod per Asinam prolatum est, aut per
Balaam membrum Diaboli.
: But these are shifts of him, that confesses the doctrine, which he would
confirm, to be from the Devil, which we scornefully, and with derision cast
from us. Yet if the Jesuit will lend an ear, it is not much to prove many
particulars of Popish Doctrine to be that, which he labors to prove the
denial of private Mass to be. For the point betwixt the Dominicans and the
Franciscans, concerning the immaculate conception of the blessed Virgin Marie,
is on both sides confirmed by revelations Wadding: Legate De Concept. Virg.
Mariae, sect. 3. orat. 10.. 4. Haec sunt quae ex D. Catharinae S^nen. opponunt
maculatae conceptionis assertores, revelationibus B. Brigittae.
: now God is not ad oppositum, he never resists himself, and therefore, as
they confess, one or the other must needs make use of the Devil for
confirmation of their Doctrine Ibid Docte and Christian judicant non posse
dari in Ecclesia Dei revelationes contrarias, and de eadem re inter se
pugnantes, dum unam necesse sit esse mendacem, and a spiritu illusore, non a
Deo, (qui mendacij author non potest esse) prodijsse.
.

Besides, what points of your new Creed have not been beholding to new
miracles for their new entertainment in the Church of God; you have told us
sufficient of Transubstantiation See the Jesuits Preface to the Reader and his
Reply page 283.
, and Alexander of Hales Alex. de Hales. sum. Theol p. 4. q. 10. m. 2. ar. 4..
3. Quia ergo extensio ipsius Sacramenti debet fieri per indicia vera, and non
simulata vel ficta: videtur dicendum quod caro vel sanguis in hujusmodi
apparitione, quando a Domino est: est ipsius Domini. (A Domino esse dico: quia
huiasmodi apparitiones quandoque accidunt humana procuratione and sort
Diabolica.) -- Ad illud quod objicitur: quod caro, quae apparet, quandoque
computrescit etc. dicendum, quod hoc nunquam accidit, quando ab ipso Domino est
hujusmodi apparitio: sed solummodo quando fit HVMANA procuratione, vel forte
DIABOLICA operatione.
shall either be your Accuser or Expositor, whether you please.

Further in the point of Purgatory, Bellarmine enquires, Whether the souls
therein, are sure of eternal salvation, and tells that Dionysius Carthusianus
denies it in regard of certain visions Bellarm lib. 2. De Purgato cap. 4.
Quidam Catholici existimant varias esse in Purgatorio poenas, and unam esse
omnium maximam incertitudinem salutis, qua dicunt quasdam solum animas multari,
quae licet revera certo salvandae sint, tamen ipsas hoc ignorare* ita videtur
^entire Dionysius Carthusianus ob quasdam visiones, quas ipse refert libro de
4. novissimis, ar. 47.
; and yet this crosses the opinion of their Divines Ibid. At communis
Theologorum sententia est omnes animas quae in Purgatorio sunt habere
certitudinem suae salutis.
, so that either the Devil does teach some of their Divines, or else the
troop of their Divines resist the visions from God.

But what need we to run about to find, who has taught Papists so much of
their new faith, when they have Devils allowed Preachers, and justified to be
the mouth and isntrumental oracles Histor. de tribus Energumenis supra citat.
page 935. Oraculum potest a^cipi instrumentaliter, ut eraculum idem sit quod o^
Spiritus sancti, and in hoc sensu sicut in creaturis insensibilibus etc* ita
nihil absurdi sequitur ex hoc quod Deus facit Daemonem os suum.
of the spirit of God. Yea so lively and zealous is Verine the Devil reported
to be Ibid. page 797 Constat Daemonem Verinum multas actiones fecisse in quibus
Christo ministravit, sanctos laudavit, and beatam Virginem, and multa disseruit
de vitijs and vir^utibus, de vita aeterna, inferno, and concilijs Evangelicis
quae been vivero docent. In quibus duo admir^tione dig na concurrebant. Primo,
quod sermo ipsius erat arde^s and vivens, and crediderim, quod si Angelus de
coelo, aut Apostolorum quispiam descendisset, non potuisset aliter loqui.
loquebatur enim ut potestatem habens, and erant verba illius ut faculae
ardentes, and corda illorum ^epida inflammabant. Vnde qui audiebant eum,
ubertini flebant, and obliviscebantur vitae prae^eritae, alij ^undeb^^^
pectora, alij extra se rapti, alta vo^^ cl^mabant, ^iserere Domine, Domine
^iserere, alij vitam in melius mutaverunt, alij saeculo re^^^tiarunt. Possum
dicere, quod plures audiveram in Ecclesia Praedicatores, viros sanctos and
valde illuminatos: and hujus comparatione, voces emortuas dixisses.
, that neither Angel, nor Apostle could speak otherwise, praising the saints,
the blessed Virgin, disputing of virtues, vices, life eternal, hell, and
Evangelicall Counsels: So that some of his hearers wept, some did beat their
breasts, some cried Miserere, some changed their lives, some entered the
Cloister; Yea so excellent is he in preaching, that the Popish Preachers, which
were holy and illuminate, were (but like the white of an egg) without relishe
if compared with him.

But will you see what Doctrines these infernal oracles be approovers of? They
teach the great Doctrine of Popish Idolatry, by their word, and practice the
adoration of the Ho^st Ibid page 3 Compulsi fuerunt duo ex daemonibus dare
gloriam and honorem Domino Jesus christo, and adoraverunt cum sub sacra Hostia
verbo and gestu corporis.


Secondly, they defend the Doctrine of the Papal extent and use of the will
Ibid. page 101 et 102. V^us daemonum dixit, non est qui possit h^mini adimere
liberum arbitrium. and paula post. Et dixit unus daemonum, non vult ipsa uti
sua liberate, et si vellet uti sua liberate, non incideret in m^la qu^
commit^^t.
.

Thirdly, their practice instructs to swear by the venerable Sacrament Ibid.
page 104. Demon -- jurabat s^lenniter per venerabile Sacramentum, quod sic res
se haberet. and postea. jurav^t juramentum so ^nne per venerabile ^acramentum.
.

Fourthly, they confute the Protestants generally in the point of Antichrist,

1. That his name is not as old Irenaeus intimated, and we teach (...), but Tu
es Deus coeli atque terrae Ibid. page 71. Be zebub et Leviathan dixeruat
principi moderno, et Lodo^co quod nominarent cum hoc nomine, Tu es Dius coeli
atque terr^.
.

2. The two beasts, Apoc. 13. and 17. are not the same. but the first Lucifer,
the second Antichrist Ibid. page 94: De duabus bestijs Apocalyps^oslocuta est
in hunc modum: Audivi^ Diab^lo quod duarum bestiarum quae venire habent sub
finem mundi, alter est Lucif^^, alter Antichristu^.
.

In the generation of Antichrist, see how Bellarmine and the Devil agree;
Antichrist is borne of the Devil. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 12. Non
esset tamen error, si quis diceret, Antichristum nasciturum ex Diabolo and
mu^ere etc. Histor. de tribus Energum. page ^^. Nunc natus est, and non ex
coi^^ viri, sed per operationem diaboli.
, His mother a Jew Bellarm. ibid. Sententia est Antichristum nasciturum de
tribu Dan. Histor. de tribus energ. page 59 Matter ejus Iudaea est.
; The Jews will receive him as a Messiah Bellarm ibid. Quod Antichristus sit
futurus Iudaeus, and circumcisus, certum est, and deducitur primum ex dictis
Nam Iud^i nunquam reciperent hominem non Iudaeum, aut incircumcisum pro suo
Messia. Histor de tribus energ. page 61. Vocatur etiam Christus, Rex, Messiah
; He shall not reign at Rome, but at Jerusalem Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. ^.
cap. 13. Vera sententia est, Antichristi sedem fore Jerusalem, non Romam
Histor. de ^^bus Energ. page 59. Non habitabit Romae, matter ^jus nutrit eum
; He shall not receive Baptism in the Church, but be circumcised Historia de
tribus Energum. page 59. Non in Ecclesia nomen impositum est ei^, neque in
Ecclesia baptismum accepit. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Antichristus sit futurus Iudaeus and circumcifus.
, He shall be Monarch of the whole world Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. ^^
dicunt. -- Antichristum omni^m Princi^^^ (...) Histor. de tribus energum. page
^9. Dominabitur per universum (...) ad omnes perveniet principatus ejus.
. Now let the Reader behold, who is most beholding to the Devil for their
Doctrine, Rome, or the Catholic Church; Antichrist, or the Protoplast of
Protestancy?

And to show us how confirmed they are to follow lies, the Jesuit does margin
his citation against Luther with a note, The Devil alleges Scripture, as if
it were no better then a Divelish practice to be instructed from God and his
Word. I will say nothing in answer to these blasphemies, only Increpet vos
Deus Jude 9.
, the Lord rebuke every proud tongue, that dare attempt so high despite
against God and his truth. The Jesuit proceeds, L^c here the Devils
disputation against the Private Mass, which I thought good to lay down thus
at large Reply page 17^
.

Here the Jesuit begins to triumph, but upon what reason, the precedent
discourse will declare; yet his intent is pious, that my poor deluded
Countriman may understand whither his new Masters do lead him. Ibid.
. The Owl might leave preaching, unless it be to night birds; for the Jesuit
may assure himself, that this most reverend Lord will never be so deceived
Ruffin. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. Dolis apud ignorantes locus est,
scientibus vero dolum intendere non aliud est quam risum movere.
, as to be taken with his delusions, which are grounded upon so filly a
persuasion as Dabunt signa monstrous miracles, and tale-Divinity. His masters
are CHRIST and his Apostles, neither does he refuse the sacred Chorus of the
ancient Church; these have not been seducers, they neither delude, nor draw
into errors; they will consume your man of sin; and because you fear the
consumption, you disgrace their effects and operations, making the reading of
the sacred scriptures Reply page 17
, the cause of most horrible impieties, reviling with your tongue-prodigies
GODS heavenly lamps, least they should declare your filth by their celestial
light.

The holy Sacrifice of the Mass has triumphed in the Church of God even from
the beginning, and shall continue mangre all Opposers, unto the end Reply page
17
. etc.

If the Jesuit mean by the sacrifice of the Mass, the administration of the
body and blood of Christ, whereby the sacrifice of Christ's death is
commemorated unto us, he has no Adversary: For we know it was instituted by
Christ and has been continued perpetually by the Catholic Church, even to
these very times. But if he mean, by the sacrifice of the Mass, that outward
visible sacrifice made by the Priest alone, Council: Trid. Sess: 22. cap. 6.
Sacrosancta Synodus Missas illas, in quibus solus sacerdos sacramentaliter
communicate, non modo non damna^ ut illicitas, sed etiam probat atque commendat.
: wherein CHRIST is pretended really to be sacrificed; this was never in the
ancient Church, much less triumphed therein: and although the Jesuit would
have it ancient, yet it was not borne in the fathers time Erasmus de concord.
Eccles. versus sinem. Sunt qui in Missa comm^nionem requirant: sic, fateor, a
Christo suit institutum, and ita olim consuevit observari Cas^ander Consult.
art. 24.. De iteratione, page 223. Certe ex tota Canonis compositione manifest
apparet, totam ill^^ ^ysticam, in qua Canon adhibebatur, actionem vel publicam,
vel certe inter plures semper celebratam suisse. Quod si ^odie (...) queat,
facile verus ^ius intellectus restitui possit.
, but brought into the Church, by the decay of Devotion on the peoples part
Erasmus de amab. concord. Ecclesiae. Verum id quo minus fiat, haud stat per
sacerdotes sed per laices, in quibus h^u nimium refrixit charitas.
, which defection it has still nourished.

The word sacrifice (indeed) was in use amongst the fathers* though Calvin
thought it was abused; neither did they, or the Church of Rome, thereby hold it
a real sacrificing of Christ, but a commemoration of his death Lombard. Sent.
lib. 4. Did. 12. par. 2. Quaeritur. Si quod gerit sacerdos proprie dicatur
sacrificium vel immolatio: and si Christus quotidie immoletur, vel semel tantum
immolatus sit: Ad hoc breviter dici potest, illud quod offertur and consecratur
a sacerdote vocari sacrificium and oblationem: quia memoria est and
repraesentatio ve^i sacrificii, and sanctae immolationis factae in ara crucis.
Et semel Christus mortuus in cr^ce est, ibique immelatus est in semetipso,
quotidie autem immolatur in sacramento: quia in sacramento recordatio fit
illius quod factum est semel.
, and therefore Calvin himself says, that your impiety in that particular
being considered with the abuse of the ancients, there would appear between
them and you an unmeasurable distance Calvin lib. devera Eccles. reform. extat
in Tractat. Theolog: Calvini etc. page 389. Vtrumque illis concedo veteres non
m^do sacri^ici^ ^oce abuso^ esse, sed. etiam caeremonia. Verum, sireputemus
quantum a veterum corruptela distet quae nunc abipsis fucatur ^^pietas,
immensum est fere intervallum.
, and therefore the Jesuit abuses their adversaries, in making them to impute
that to the fathers, which they knew these never held. Whereby the Jesuit might
see how vain he is in making us to be enemies of this mystery, when we only
oppose their popish innovations and defiling of so sacred an institution. And
whereas the Jesuit would make Luther the first oppugner of private Mass, it
is a good argument, that many were a sleep when it first came into the Church,
seeing many of themselves forced by the testimony of the ancient Fathers,
confess, that it was not according to the ancient use of the Church of God.

Ignatius makes all to communicate, and all in both kinds Ignatius ad
Philadelphenses Vnuspanis omnibus confractus and vnus calix, qui omnibus
distributus est.
, in receiving of this blessed Sacrament. Chrysostom Chrysostomus in: Cor:
Homil. ^8 Est autem ubi nihil differt sacerdos a subdito, ut quando fruendum
est ho^^endis mysterijs: similiter enim omnesut illa percipiamus digni habemur:
Non ficut in veteri lege, partem quidem sacerdos comedebat, partem autem
populus, and non licebat populo participer^ esse little quorum particept erat
sacerdos: sed nunc non sic, verum omnibus unum corpus propon^^^ and poculum ^um;
makes Priest and People all alike. This is acknowledged to be the practice of
the primitive times by Innocent the third Innocent. 3. lib. 6. Myster. Missae
cap. 5. In primitiva quidem Ecclesia singulis diebus, qui celebrationi Missarum
intererant, communicare solebant: sed excrescente multitudi^e etc
, and by Durand Dur. ra^. l. 4. c. 53. In p^^mitiva Ecclesia omnes, qui
celebrationi ^^issarum inter^rant, singulis diebus communicar^ (^lebant, co
quod Apostoli omnes de ^alice biber^^. Domi^^ dicence, Bibite ex^^oc ^mnes.
, And to preserve pious minds from embracing this fond persuasion of the
Jesuits, that Luther first impugned Private Mass, I desire that they would
consider with what impatience Chrysostom would have prosecuted the same, when
he expresses bitterness even against the peoples neglect of communicating.
Indeed he could not actually dispute against that which was not, yet we may
co^ceive by his words, how he would have approved of Private Mass, if it had
received being in those times: For he with vehemency declares, that it is in
vain for the Priest to attend the Altar, where the people do not communicate
Chrysostom. homil. 61. ad populum Antiochen O consuetudinem, ^ (...), (...)
frustra quotidi anum. Incassum a^sistimus altari, nullus qui communicetur.
. And Cassander will tell you, that this D^pravation of the Sacrament in the
Popish Church, was distasted in two several Councels, and the Priest forbidden
to celebr^^^ alone Cassander consult. a^. 24.. de solitarijs missis page 21, Ex
Canone quodam c^^cilij Nanetensis Sacerdos solus Missam celebrare vetatur,
absurdum enim est, ut dicat, Dominus vobiscum, Sursum corda, Gratias agamus Deo
Domino nostro, cum nullus sit qui respondeat, -aut Oremus, cum nullus si^ qui
secum oret. Itaq. concludit ridiculos^ ^^perstitionem illam maxim a
monasterijs monachoru^ exterminanda^ esse.* Et huic (...) decreto simile
reperitur in conc* Papiensi, cap. ^32. ut ^^llus ^resbyter sol^^ (...)
celebrare praesumat.
. But if Luther had first opposed this practice, did he not well? was it not
better to reduce things to that good order, from which they were fallen, then
to curse them who will not have things to continue unorderly still? See the
whole face of the ancient Church; see the confession of your own Doctors,
C^^hl^us Cochlaeus de^acr^ficio Mi^sae. Quod, inquit (...) tam frequentes non
(...) Missae, inde accidisse arbit^or, quod olim omnes tum Sacerdotes* (...)
inter^ra^t sacrificio Missae peracta oblatione, cum^acrifica^te (...) ex C^^.
Apost. and ex lib^is atque epist antiquissimor^ Ecclesiae Doctoru^ perspicue
co^^oscitur. Tum adjungit: Nunc vero postquam Co^munionis ordo a nobis
observa^^ (...), idque propter negligentia^ atque so^^^dia^ tam plebis qua^
sacetdotu^, Spiritus Sanctus missas privatas celebr^^do, (...) remed^^ ^^ic
defect^^ invenit. Test Hospin. l 4. hist. sacr. page 330. 331.
and Cassander Cassa^^. con^ a^ ^4.. De iteratione, page 223. Dubiu^ non est,
quin una cum ipso Sacerdo^^ ali qui ad^^^rint, qui haec (...) laudis
offerebant, and Sacramentu^ (...). Id enim (...) verba manifest significant,
ut cum dicitur, Quotquot ex ha^ ^ltaris participatione sacr^sanct^ corpus et
(...) tui sumps^ri^^^^ ^t^m, Prosi^^ ^obis Domine, Sacramenta quae sump^imus:
Certe ex tota Canonis co^positione manifest^ apparet, totam illam mysticam, in
qua Canon ad^^bebatur, actionem vel publica^, velce^^ inter plures semp^^
celebratam suisse, Quod si ^odie quoque impetrari qu^at, facil^ verus ejus
intellectus restitui (...).
, and tell me whether this be the doctrine of Devils, that was instituted by
Christ, and practiced by the Fathers of the first ages; or those practices
which were brought into the Church by prescripts of men (though imputed to the
holy Ghost) propter negligentiam and socordiam (...) plebis qu^m sacerdo^^^
Vid^ lit. ^^
, by the negligence and sloathfulnesse as well of the people, as of the Priests?

The Jesuit now comes to the second instance, and would persuade, that the
Answerer does far more idly range from the matter in this instance
concerning the time, when the People fill first from their vulgar languages
Reply page ^8
.

The end of the most learned Answerer his whole discourse, is to point out the
vanity of the Jesuits demand, and to this purpose, he manifestly declares,
that all their profane Novelties were not effected by any one Bishop of Rome,
or in one Popes days; But that some alterations within the Roman territories,
are to be attributed to the very change of time it self, not being prevented
by the Roman Pastors whom the Jesuit pretends to have been so diligent and
watchful. An experiment whereof we may see in the use of the Latin service in
the Churches of Italy, France and Spain, which was used in those Countries
from the beginning (the Latin tongue being at that time commonly understood of
all) and afterward by little and little degenerated into those v^lgar
languages which now are used. This peir^ing Argument of the most learned
Answerer against the Jesuits Demand, is thought to be avoided by him with an
idle chatt.

First he tells us, that this abuse belongs not to any point of Religion
Reply page 18
, which we confess; but it is a great help and pillar to irreligion Aquinas
comin 1. Cor. 14. fol. 100. Duplex est fructus orationis. -- Alius est
spiritualis consolatio, and devotio concepta ex oratione. Et quantum ad fructum
devotionis sp^rituali^, privatur qui non attendi^ ad ^a quae ^rat, ^^^ non
intelligit.
, that the service of the Church should be continued in a language, which
keeps men from hearing God, and knowing his will. And yet what belongs to
Religion, if this does not, that the People should both pray to God
intelligently Lyra in cap. 14. 1. Cor. Hic* consequenter idem o^^endit in
oratio^^ publica. quia ^i populus inte^ligat ^r^tionem, ^^^ benedictionem sacer
dotis, melius reducitur in D^^m, and (...) der Amen.
, and receive instruction from him in a language which they familiarly
understand? Secondly he says, that this change was unadvisedly brought in by
him for an example Reply page 18
. I pray you tell us, of what this was produced an example? Thirdly, he
persuades, that it was untruelie affirmed that the Latin tongue in the
beginning of the Church, was commonly understood of all in Italy, France, and
Spain, for the two last had their proper vulgar language, far differing from
the Latin Ibid.
. But is not English common in Ireland at this day? and commonly understood?
and yet the Irish have a proper language of their own. Why may not the same
be affirmed of France and Spain in the Primitive times? were not they under
the Roman government? were there not several Colonies in each of them? do you
think they left their language when they departed their Country? Do not the
Latin remains show their usual Speech? Any may see who is not blind, that
although the Goths, Vandalls, and Moors, by their intermixtures have somewhat
corrupted the same Bellarm* libro 2. cap. 15. De verbo Dei. Ante M. C. annos
(Hispania) seperata ^^it a Romano imperio and subj^^^^ pa^tim Gothis, partim
M^uris, qui novam linguam (...) dubio invexerunt.
, yet they brought their Religion and language at first from Rome. And
therefore what the Jesuit takes from the concession of the most learned
Answerer, makes nothing for his advantage vizt. that when be grants that
the Latin service was used in those Countries from the beginning etc. full
well and freindly does he justify our use of the Latin service Reply page 18
etc. For this is far from freely justifying the present Latin service,
because it was in primitive times unless he can make it as generally to be
understood in France and Spain at this day, as it was sometime in Spain
before the Latin ceased to be the vulgar language in that Country Bellarm.
de v^^bo Dei. lib 2. cap. 15. A multis jam seculis des^^t in Hispanialingua
latina esse v^^garis.
.

But our Jesuit confident in his variety resolves, not to trouble the most
learned Answerer with any more demands until such time, as he shall have
thought upon some better Answerer to my challenge, for as we have seen (says
he) hitherto he has well played the answerlesse Answerer indeed, concluding at
last out of Arnobius, thus, If I be not able to declare unto you by what Bishop
of Rome, and in what Popes days, the simplicity of the ancient faith was
first Corrupted, it will not presently follow, that what was done must needs be
undone Reply page 18* and 19.
.

Can there be a better Answer then what has been given him? For the Demand
is not only prooved vain by the most learned Answerer, but he has moreover
answered the fool in his folly, and satisfied the vain Demaundant, not
confessing his disability therein, (as the Jesuit would persuade) but pointing
out the original of those bastard birthes, which he does struggle to
legittimize. Yet the Jesuit being hard pressed with Arnobius, who directly
affirms that the truth of a matter of fact, does not depend upon any man's
knowledge, or detection, replyeth.

Indeed I grant, that, if we had agreed that it was done, we ought not to
pose you about the time when it was done, but we denying that it is done, and
having already proved that unless it be shown when it was done, it must needs
follow that it was never done, without doubt when you confess that you are not
able to show when it was done, you declare plainly, that it is not ^^ yet done
Reply page 19
. But is here any syllable that answers Arnobius? is not the answer
answerlesse indeed? For first Arnobius is produced to prove that a thing may be
don, though it cannot be shown how it was done; and the Jesuit for answer
thereof, tells us, that he has proved the contrary; but we are not tied to
believe him, until he points out the time when, and the place where it was
done, this being necessary by his own rule. Besides the Jesuit does not
consider, how he shakes the foundation of their Roman faith; ( Peter's seat,
and Peter's successor) by this his assertion. For the first, Have the
Protestants agreed that Peter placed his seat at Rome? The Jesuit knows, they
altogether oppose the same: yet if we argue from the uncertainty of time, when
Peter did that great work, that it was never done, Bellarmine answers us,
that though their Divines disagree when it was done, yet it does not at all
weaken the matter of fact, but that it was done De Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. ^.
Respondeo, discordiam de tempore, si qua esset, quo Petrus Romam venit non
infirmare sententiam nostram, quod Petrus Romam venerit. Nam saepissime
accidit, ut constet de re, and non constet de modo, vel alia circumstantia.
. Further it is the great foundation of your Roman faith, that S. Peter left
the Bishops of Rome his successors, which we believe was not done: shall this
article together with the Roman church fall to the ground, unless you can
certainly lay us down his immediate successor to whom he delivered this
Commission? Bellarmin is a greater friend to the Papacy, then so: Etiamsi plane
ignoraremus quis Petro proxime successerit, non tamen propterea in dubium
revocari debere an aliqui^ successerit Bellarm. de R^m. Pont. lib. 2. cap. 5.
. Although we be ignorant (says he) of the person that immediately succeeded
Peter, yet does it not breed any scruple, that he had no successor at all. Now
compare these harpers together, and you shall perceive, that either our Jesuit
wants skill, or else his instrument is out of tune, for otherwise he would
not jangle thus against their Master-Musitian, that unless we can show him the
time when a thing is done, it must needs follow that it was never done.

Whereby also it appears how far that parable of the good and bad seed
(says the Jesuit) by you alleged, is from furthering of your cause Reply
page 19.
. Here is a discourse laced with wise observations. First because the
demaunders acknowledged the bad seed Ibid.
. But how knew they that seed to be bad, which they never saw? was it not by
the blade, as evil trees by their fruit? or was it by comparing it with the
blade of the good seed, as we examine heresies, by Apostolic doctrine?
Secondly, (says the Jesuit) the Master ^old them the party by whom it was
s^wen (...)
. Yet the Servants told the Master that they were tares, before the Master told
them who was the seedesman: and why in like manner may not we discover heresies
before the heretics that brought them in? Thirdly, by the text (says he) we
(...) when it was sown, to wit, when men were asleep (...)
.

But will such a time satisfy the Jesuit, if it be laid down by us? will
this answer the Jesuits demands, What Bishop of Rome did first alter that
Religion which you commend in them of the first 400. years? In what Pope his
days was the true Religion overthrown in Rome See the Jesuits preface to the
Reader.
? if it do not, he abuses the parable: if it do, let him receive his answer
in the second page of the Answer to his Challenge, where this most reverend
Lord, tells him, that they who kept continual watch and ward against
heresies which openly oppose the foundations of our faith, might sleep while
the seeds of the Roman Apostasy were a sowing. And now let the Reader
consider, how slightly and shiftingly the Jesuit has cast off this parable of
the seed.

Well then our Answerer tells us (says the Jesuit) that in the tenth age,
men not only slumbred, but snorted also, by the testimonies of our own
Authors Genebrard, Baronius, and Bellarmine, and what then? must this (says
he) enforce me to yield that the Devil brought in no tares all that while,
but let slip the opportunity of so dark a night, and slept himself for
company? No Sr the case is clear, he did not sleep, but bestirred himself
most busily in soweing then his tares abundantly. Then brought he in all those
vices, which at that time reigned both in Princes and Prelates, and made that
age so unhappy, yet Gods divine providence (says Bellarmine in the very place
alleged by you) did so work that no new heresies did then arise Reply page 19.
.

Here we have many things seemingly confessed by this Jesuit. First, that the
visibility of the Roman Church has passed through an obscure age. Secondly,
that the light of the Roman Church could not free that age from darkness.
Thirdly, that the Spirit which assisted Popes and Princes in those times, was
the Spirit that works in the Children of disobedience Ephesians. ^. ^.
. Fourthly, that Heresies might have come into the Church of Rome, for any care
the Pope had to keep them out, if GODS divine providence had not prevented
them. Fifthly, that the Devil abundantly sowed his tares of vices in Princes
and Prelates, yet Gods divine providence did so work, that no new Heresies did
then arise. Is not here a brave defense to make the Answerer his argument to
languish and sleep for ever? Surely the Jesuit was betwixt sleeping and
waking, that he said he knew not what.

But did the Devil think no ground fit for his tares, but Princes and
Prelates? Surely we are able to demonstrate, that this bad blind sleepie age,
did give seed-time for innumerable corruptions in others also: yea, so
flourishing were the blossoms, and prodigious the fruit; which sprung from
that seed husbanded by the Devil; that it infected the whole Roman Church in
such a manner, that Gerebertus in his Apology for the Council of Rhemes, put
his petition up to Christ in Heaven, as having no hope for good in the Roman
Church upon earth, it being so far infected, that loosing the nature of a
mother, she cursed the good, blessed the evil, communicated with those, whom
she ought not to salute, bound them with excommunication, whom Christ had
freed, being accepted of him and zealous of his law Gereber. Apolog. pro
Rhemens. Council. post acta. Council. Rhem. Sed una salus hominis; o Christ,
^^^e^. Ipsa Roma omnium Ecclesiarum hactenus habita matter, bonis maledicere,
malis benedicere fer tur, and quibus nec Ave dicendum est, com^^^icare: tuamque
legem zelantes damnare, abutens ligandi and solvendi potestate a te accepta.
.

And so corrupt was that age, that all virtue was consumed both in head and
members Io. Stella in vita Benedicti ^. Papae 122. Acciderat illi aetati quod
omnis virtus tam in capite quam in membris, ex hominum ignavia consumpta suerit.
; nay, so far was Religion out of date, that Priests and Bishops durst not
speak of Justice or righteousness, in regard they neither loved nor practiced
it A^lfric. sermon* ad Sacerdotes MS. in Biblioth. Colleg. Benedict. Cantabrig.
His diebus tanta negligentia est in Sacerdotibus and Episcopis, qui deberent
esse ^o^umnae Ecclesiae, ut (...) non audent de justitia loqui; qui justitiam
nec faciunt, nec diligunt.
. But the Jesuit thinks all is well, if Princes and Prelates were defiled
together; Yet Wernerus their own Carthusian may assure us, that our Jesuit
puts Princes (causelessly) into a lewd company, when as he coupleth them
with Popes; for he tells us, it was most apparent that Holiness had left the
Pope, and fled to the Emperors Werner. Fascic. temp^tat. 6. circ. an. 944.
Sanctitatem Papam dimisisse, and ad Imperatore^ accessisse hoc tempore; --
clar^ apparet.
, which is clear on the one side also by the testimony of their own Baronius,
who says, that most sordide whoo^es governed at Rome, their lustful mates
ascending the Chair Baron. tom. 10. Annal. an. 912.. 8. Quae tunc facies
sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae? quam foedissisima, cum Romae dominarentur
potentiffimae ae que ac fordidissimae meretrices quarum arbitrio mutaren^^r
seeds, daren^ur Epis^opi, and quod auditu horrendum and infandum est,
intruderentur in Sedem Petri earum ama^^p^eud^ pontifices.
.

Here first this Jesuit has abused Princes, as their usual practice is, in
joining them with such filthy and foul-lived wretches, as their Popes are
confessed and acknowledged to be; when Princes have reprehended and loathed
them, laboring to bring them to reformation, as Otto and the Roman Synod did
John the 12. or 13. (for you agree not whether he is) calling him to purge
himself of most fearful offenses, as Homicide, Perjury, Sacrilege, Incest,
drinking the Devils health, Dicing, invocating Jupiter, Venus and other Devils
^uitprand. Ti^inens. Hister. l. 6. c. 9. ^* 10. Summo Pontifici et universali
Papae. Domino Iohanni. Otto divinae respectu clementiae, Imperator Augustus cum
Archiepiscopis Liguriae, Tusciae, Saxoniae, Franciae in Domino salutem. Romam
ob servitium Dei venientes dum filios vestros Romanos scilicet Episcopos,
Cardinales, Presbyteros, Diaconos, et universam plebem de vestra absentia
percontaremur, et quid caussae esset, quod nos Ecclesiae vestrae, vestrique
defensores, videre noluissetis; talia de vobis tamque ob^^oena protulerunt, ut
si de hi^^ o^ibus dicerentur. vobis verecundiam ingererent. Quae ne
magnitudinem vestram omnia lateant, quaedam vobis sub brevitate d^scribimus,
quum si cuncta nominatim exprimere cuperemus, dies nobis non sufficeret unus.
Noveritis itaque non a paucis, sed ab omnibus tam vestri quam alterius ordinis,
vos homicidij, perjurij, sacrilegij, et expropria cognatione, atque ex duabus
sororibus incesti crimine esse accusato^ Dicunt et aliud aud^^^ ipso horrendum,
Diaboli vos in amore^ vi^um bibisse etc.
. Neither let the Jesuit think, that the Devil made them so evil men, and
yet left them good Bishops to preserve the purity of Catholic doctrine, this
surely would be a Paradoxe in all places but at Rome; where they acknowledge,
doctrines were not as the ancient Prophesies delivered to the Church by holy
men, as the Spirit gave them utterance, but brought in by such, that were not
able to rule their own houses well, and therefore far unfit to be governors
of the Church of God.

And as the Jesuit was deceived in the Devils arable land, so with Bellarmine
is he mistaken in the seed also. For i^ i^ probable; that he who did sow
seeds of Heresy in the slumbering age before this snorting nap, would be
idle when he was altogether without resistance? If Image Worship got footing
when their eyes were open, may we not expect, that other heresies came in,
when they were fast asleep? In what primitive times durst an Image by rolling
eyes, and sweating knavery require adoration from the people? Durst any godly
Bishops decree for this idolatry in the first six ages? No: this Heresy was
resisted by three hundred thirty eight Bishops at Constantinople, Anno 754.
And though afterward it got strength at Nice, was defended by Rome, and at
last got to be Roman faith; yet was the same disliked, denied, opposed,
resisted by all the good men that lived in that and aftertimes, as Charles the
great, the Council of Franckford* Jews his son, the Synod of Paris;
Alcuinus, the Church of England and the Waldenses etc.

Neither did the English distaste it, as an ordinary folly and superstition
only, but as contrary to true faith, and such an opinion, which the Church of
God did execrate and abhor. All which is fully justified out of ancient
monuments by the most learned Answerer See the most reverend the Lord Primate
his Answer to the Jesuits challenge, page 461. 462. 463. And his book De
successione and statu. cap ^.
, the Jesuit being tongue-tyed, replying nothing thereunto.

But were there no seeds of Heresy in that age? Bellarmine is willing to have
it so, and the Jesuit is confident in the same opinion; but the truth is,
Heresy was embraced of them which should have resisted it; otherwise there
would not have been so many fruitless complaints, as holy men powered forth in
the immediate following times. Yet how shall we make a true search for
Heresies in this age, when Bellarmine himself confesses that it was unhappy,
as affording neither writers of any worth, nor Counsels Bellarm. in Chronol*
V^de hic, Seculum infelix: in quo nulli Scriptores illustres, nulla Consilia.
? It seems, we must be beholding to their experiences which did observe
something when they did awake. Genebrard (then) tells us, that for almost 150
years, Pontifices circiter 50. a virtute majorum prorsus defecerint Apotactici
Apostaticive potius quam Apostolici, About fifty Popes altogether fell away
from the virtue of their Ancestors, being disordered and Apostaticall rather
then Apostolical Genebrard. Chron* in Annum Christi. 901.
Others relate, that the Devil got power to elect him, whom Papists now would
have to be as an infallible oracle to direct to Heaven Platina in vita
Silvestri secundi. Gerebertus ambitione et diabolica dominandi cupiditate
impulsus largitione primo quidem archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, inde Ravennatem
adeptus, Pontificatum postremo, maiore conatu adiuvante Diabolo, consecutus
est; hac tamen lege, ut post mortem totius illius esset, cuius fraudibus tantam
dignitatem adeptus erat* Aenaeas Sylv. in comment* de gestis Basil Council. lib.
1. Nec ^^^ fugit Marcellinum iussu Caesareo idolis thurificasse: alium vero,
quod majus and horribilius est, diabolica fraud Romanum pontificatum
ascendisse.
: Others amazed, mourned for the Church, as if in Rome Satan had been at
liberty in perniciem totius Ecclesiae, to the destruction of the whole Church
Baron Annal. to^* 12. an. 1170.
. And many not long after wondering at the face of the Church, concluded that
Antichrist had placed his seat in the Church of God Vide reverendum and
doctissimum Episcop. Derens. de Antichristo; l; ^ cap. 9*
. Could all this be effected, and not one error creep into your Church, to
bespot the Roman Purity? I might tell you that the opinion of the gross and
carnal eating of Christ in the Sacrament, had so little admittance in the
Church before this careless and snorting time, that in the precedent age it
was scorned of the most learned in the Christian Church, Rabanus Bertramus,
Iohannos Scotus etc. I might name you Purgatory, if the most learned Primate
had not declared it to be a new devise never heard of in the Church of God for
the space of a thousand years after the birth of our Savior Christ In the
answer to the Jesuits challenge page 178.
. And it were no great matter to show you the Hildebrandine Heresy, which must
have had his seeding in this age, or not far from it. By all which the
Jesuit may perceive, how sleepy a defense he has made for a snorting age, and
how vainly he deduceth arguments to make good his Popish Religion, from our
nescience of person time and place, it being cleared that his demand in
respect of these circumstances is merely vain, and that his Digressions do
nothing benefit his cause.

SECT. III.
IN this piece of Vanity, the Jesuit proceeds to discover, How vainly our
Answerer betaketh himself to the Scriptures Reply page 19
, and the Jesuit has showed more vanity in his entrance into this third
Section, then I am persuaded he will be able to declare against the Answerer
throughout his whole Reply; for he confesses, that the most learned Answerer
has thus farrerun on answerlesse Reply ibid.
; a wonderful thing, that he, who has so domineered, should acknowledge here
for a part, as before for the whole, that Responsa ejus which were replied unto
sine responsionibus, were answerlesse, notwithstanding the Reply. Secondly, he
tells us, that the most reverend Primate in betaking himself to the
Scriptures, and showing his copiousnes of Abilities, has abandoned all that he
has formerly said Reply ibid.
: But if this were forcible and not Vanity, surely we should have vain
Answerers amongst their Schoolmen, their Commentators especially, and the more
learnedly and fully they express their thoughts, the more vain should they be
demonstrated to be, by this line and measure. Thirdly, he insinuates, that
this most reverend Lord is hereby brought to confess, that he cannot by the
Jesuits way give them satisfaction Reply ibid*
, when as he has most learnedly and punctually answered each particular of his
demand: which shows in him not Vanity only, but Jesuitical impudency, and
out-facing falsehood.

There are other means left, (says the most learned Answerer) whereby we may
discern the tures brought in by the instruments of Satan, from the good seed
which was sown by the Apostles of Christ, besides this observation of times
and seasons, which will often fail us. But the Jesuit would know, what other
means are these that yet remain? and the most reverend Primate, has
manifested out of Tertullian Tertull praescript. advers. Haeret cap. 32.
, that their very Doctrine it self being compared with the Apostolick^, by the
diversity and contrariety thereof will pronounce that it had for author,
neither any Apostle, nor any man Apostolical Reply page 20.
.

I hope, this mean is no new invention, but Tertullians advice; no upstart
direction, but the practice of his times; whereby the Jesuit may see, that the
repugning of the vain pretenses of Heretics, may be as well or better
performed by comparing their heresies with that doctrine, which is
Apostolical, then by the circumstances of person, time and place; which
convicteth him of notorious vanity, in making his vain demand, the necessary
square to measure heresies by.

And whereas this Jesuit says, he is content to wink a little for this
time, at the Answerers converghance Reply page 20
. The Jesuit for one promise keeps faith, he is not always of Carthage, his
speech does not here bewray him, for he winkes indeed, and is so wilfully
blind, that he will not take notice of Christ's practice in convincing
Pharisaicall novelties urged by the most learned Primate In his Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge.
from Mat. 19. 8. from the beginning it was not so: neither Apostolical
Council to prescribe against the infection of Seducers crept in at unawares,
earnestly to contend for the faith which was first delivered to the Saints Jude
v. 3. 4.
: neither the instrument, Gods Book Luke 1. 4.
written for this purpose, and continued for this end, that it might be a
memorial of Gods truth for the time to come for ever and ever Esai 3^* ^.
. Do you think, that if all or any of this, had made for him, or given
advantage to his cause, the Jesuit would have closed his eyes? I cannot
believe that it was courtesy which made him for bear, but the brightness of
the testimony, which this (...) his tender eyes durst not behold: whereby you
may take notice of the Jesuits practice, in leaving convincing grounds
untouched, that he might the better, and with the less reproof, style that a
vain betaking to the Scriptures, which truly is done in imitation of Christ,
and by Apostolical direction. And furthermore who amongst his own will not be
ashamed of his wry mouth and cloven tongue, that dare style that a conveighance
which this most reverend Father urges from antiquity, citing Tertullians
words? Is this the honourer of the ancient Church, that accounts the
judgment of the fathers as the assured touchstone to try all controversies
betwixt us In his Epistle to the King.
? Here we see what esteem they may expect at his hands, if they cross his
way; for though he forbear to question Tertullian whom he cannot answer, yet
you may perceive his direction followed by the most learned Answerer is
persecuted by this Mountebanke with a base invective.

But although the Jesuit dare not absolutely submit his cause unto this
trial, yet for the present he will accept his motion, upon condition, that, if
the Answerer come short of proving this way that a change has been made, that
saying of Tertullian shall point at him and his doctrine, and all the rest
which he casts at us, shall fall upon his own head Reply page 20
. I understand not this condition, nor I think he himself; but if the Jesuit
convict us by Tertullian his rule, we are content that he shall triumph and be
acknowledged a Victor.

The first instance then produced by the most reverend Primate is this: In the
Apostles days, when a man had examined himself, he was admitted unto the
Lords table, there to eat of that bread and drink of that cup: as appears
plainly, 1. Cor. 11. 28. In the Church of Rome at this day, the people are
indeed permitted to eat of the bread (if bread they may call it) but not
allowed to drink of the cup. Must all of us now s^^t our eyes, and si^^ As
it was in the beginning, so now.
, Sic^^ erat in principio and nunc* unless we be able to tell by whom, and
when this first institution was altered See the most reverend the Lord Primate
his answer to the Jesuits challenge.
? And the Jesuit would persuade, that this is a weak argument, by his cross
pleading of four things practiced by us.

1. In the Apostles days the faithful received the sacrament after meat in
the evening 1. Cor. 11. ^1.
, in the Protestants Church at this day it is commonly received fasting and in
the morning, therefore it is not with them, sicut erat in principi^ and nunc.

2. In the Apostles days the sick were anointed Mark 6. 3. Ia. 5. 14.
with oil, and a commandment given so to do, the Protestants practice no
such thing, therefore etc.

3. In the Apostles days the faithful were commanded to obstaine from eating
of blood Act. 15.
and strangled meats. Among the Protestants there is no such abstin^nce
observed. Therefore etc.

4. Christ when he ministered the sacrament, said Mat. 26: 6.
, Take, eat, this is my Body, the Protestants now adays say not so, but take,
^ate this in remembrance, etc. And from this he concludes, that it is not with
the Protestants, sicut erat in principio Reply page 20
etc.

Here any man may see, that this Jesuit dare not stand, to his accepted
motion, to be tried by Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, the
sacred Scriptures, and therefore he labors to weaken the strength thereof;
but let him mantle himself in his pretenses never so much, this is sufficient
to declare that a change has been made, which is all that the most learned
Answerer desires to conclude. So that if we can declare that Papists, not
Protestants in their changes made, have fallen from the purity of Doctrine and
practice of primitive times, the Jesuit will rest like a Franciscan Novice,
demure and tongue-tyed for ever.

For the three first instances, we confess that a change has been made, and
that herein we have followed the practice of those that brought them in. But
for the fourth, he deals like a shuffler, and would seem to insinuate, that
we have dealt with those words, This is my Body.
Hoc est corpus (...), as they have done with some of the Commandments, either
cast them out, or put something in the place thereof, as their own (...) and
Ribad^n^yra The second they have left out; and ^ut in stead of the fourth
Commandment, Remember to sanctify the holy Days.
have done: Whe^^^ our Church teaches Children before Confirmation, that the
Body and Blood of Christ (which is the inward part or thing signified of the
sacrament) are verily and indeed taken and received of the faithful in the
Lords Supper See the Cat^chisme in our Common Prayer Book.
, and in the celebration of the Communion, the whole institution is repeated in
these words expressly, Take, ^ate, this is my Body which is given for you See
there, the Order for the Administration of the Communion.
. So that this is but an imaginary change pretended, having no truth in it at
all.

For the Changes confessed, they are not but in things indifferent and
ceremonies, which no Papist dare deny but the Church of God had and has power
to alter; CHRIST, as in the Sacrament prescribing the substance, leaving the
Ceremony to the ordering of the Church Augustine epistol. 118. Salvator non
praecepit, quo deinceps ordine sumeretu^, ut Apostolis per quos dispositurus
erat Ecclesiam, servaret hunc lo^^m. Nam si hoc ille monuisset, ut post cibos
alios semper acciperetur, credo quod cum morem nemo variasset
, as is apparent in those words: This do (not thus) in (...) of ^ee. Luke 22.
19.

This Answer the Jesuit knew would put a period to his vain flourish, and
therefore by repeating it, he thinks to avoyde the same; as if the rule by
Scriptures were of no force, if this answer were permitted: for says he,

What force leaves he to his own argument made against us in a matter of the
like indifferency Reply page 20.
.

If the Jesuit could prove it so, it were something to the purpose, but lame
Ignatius here leaves his arms, and falls to crutches; For what are the
Arguments he contendeth with?

1. That there was never any commandment given that the Cup should be given to
the Laytie.

2. That the use of celebration of the Cup was not s^ general in the
Apostles time etc. And for this he cites a Jesuit: and tells us that
Cardinal Per^n in his Reply to the King of Great Britain, has unde^yabli^
proved, that upon just cause the Church might change the Communion of both
kinds into one, that Cardinal Bellarmine has most largely disputed he^reof,
and clearly prooveth, That Christ in the Sacrament is wholly contained in one
kind, and that under one kind, there is found the full substance and virtue
of the Sacrament Reply page 20. 21.
etc.

Lo, here is the brave confirmation of his indifferent Chalice, If Christ's
Blood, how ^lightly is it valued when they fight to avoyde it.
which, if allowable, I wonder he should take so much pains in his Reply, but
have referred all the Controversies to his Predecessors pains, because, nihil
dictum est, quod non ^^it dictum pri^^. But as he prooves, so shall his
answer be suitable. His referments shall be answered with referments. For
their Peron, I refer him for answer to M^^lin. And for Bellarmine, I could
name him an host.

But this sacrilege of theirs, I will truly lay down, and briefly in a few
words; that the Reader may see the ground of our Churches practice; and the
base and simple shifts that they are forced unto for their defending of the
surreption of the Cup. And although our Jesuit declares himself to have
been borne in a full Moon, or the Dogge-dayes by his folly and reviling,
calling our Clergy, the Cupping Ministry Reply page ^^
, yet (GOD be thanked) we defire not the cup for our own selves (in that
their appetite is seen) but for the people also, that all things may be
ordered in the Church. according to Christ's institution. And herein all may
see, that he might as justly revile CHRIST and his Apostles, as he does those
whom he styles the C^pping Ministry. And I think a Papist and a Priest might
best of all men let that scorn have passed, seeing the Cup (not of the New
Testament) might ^it them for their arms, with a Po^u^ non (...) for their
Motto. For a man may be in the act of ^eriting with them, that is none of the
soberest Less. de Iustie and ^u^e. l. 4. cap. 2. dubitat. ^: nu: 10 p. 718.
719. Si tantus ^it excessus, ut peccet mortisere, amittit meritum ^^junij,
sicut and aliorum bonorum* operum. Si a^tem non peccet mortifere, non amittit
absolute, sed solum ex part. Quia qua part voluntary abstinet a cib^^
vetitis et a secunda refectione propter Ecclesiae pr^^ceptum, meretur; quod
meritum non eliditur, etiamsi in usu cibi vel potus non se^^^^ d^^i^am
mode^^tionem: qua ^amen part excedit, non ^e^e^^.
; nay, a man may be drunk, and yet fast truly ^^llarm: lib. 2. de bonis
operibus. in partic. cap. 1. Iejunium Ecclesiasticu^m est* ab^^in^ntia cibi
secundum Ecclesiae regulam assumpta. and pa^le post. Iejunium igitur
Ecclesiasticum dicitur abstinentia cibi, quo^iam hoc ^^junium, neque POTVS,
neque medicamentorum, sed solius cibi abs^^^^n^ia^ per^se r^qui^i^.
, if Bellar^ine his definition of a Fast be adequate to the thing that is
defined.

But (letting all this pass) I will show plainly, that the Cup cannot be
taken from the Sacrament, but the per^e^tion and integriti^, if not the
substance thereof, is utterly overthrown. And to deal with a Jesuit from
Jesuitical grounds* we may observe, that if it cross the substance either of
Christ's institution, or of his Sacrament, ^r his precept, or of the practice of
the primitive Church Reply to Jesuit Fisher by Dr Fran White page 466. 467*
, it can no less then vitiate the whole action.

That it crosses these, what tongue can deny, which impudency has not
appropriated to its self? For did CHRIST exhibit a double thing to the
Apostles faythes and memories? and did he not likewise for the effecting
thereof consecrate two material elements, bread, and wine? was it not the
practice of the primitive Church Lyran^^ in 1. cor* 11, Fit hic (1. Cor. 11.)
mentio de duplici specie: nam in primitiva Ecclesia sic da ^atur ^idelibu^,
Cassander consult. ar 22. page 168. Satis con^^at occidentalem se^ Romana^
mill a Christo ^nnis in ^olenni et ordinaria h^^jus Sacramenti dispensatione
^tramque pa^^^ et ^i^^ spec^em omnibus Ecclesi^ Christi members e^hibui^^e: i^
quod ex in nu^^^i^ ve^^rum scriptorum ta^ Gr^co^um, quam Latinorum testimo^^^s
manifes^^^ est, atq. ut ita facerent inducto^ fuisse (...) institu^^ exemploque
Christi.
, and of the Latin, for a thousand or more years, to administer it in the
same manner; not only to the Clergy, but to the people also by the
institution and example of Christ ^ellar^. De Euchar. l. 4. c. 24. Ecclesia
autem. vetus ministraba^ ^^b duplici specie, quando Christiani ^rant p^^^^i,
(...) Crescente a^t^m multi^^^^ne magis ^^ magis (...), ^t sic pa^lati^ def^^^
^s^^ (...).
? was the contrary ever received by the Church deliberatly and upon concluding
grounds? or did it steal das the rest of the tares, into the Romish Church by
Custom? If the Jesuit can show us better grounds to acquit it from
intrusion, let him declare it? this was the chief reason the Council of
Constance Council. Constantien. Se^^. 13. Licet Christus post ^^^nam
insti^^erit. and suis discipulis administraverit s^b (...) que specie panis and
vini hoc venerabile ^^cramentum, tamen hoc non obstante, sacrorum Ca^o^^^
^^thori^a^ la^dabilis and approbata co^^etudo ecclesiae servavit, and servat
etc. Et sicut haec cons^^^^do ad evit^^dum aliqua pericula et scandala est
rationabiliter introducta, quod licet in primitiva ecclesia huju^^odi
sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie, pos^^a a confi^^ent^bus
sub utraque, et a laicis tantu^^odo sub specie panis s^cipi^^ur* etc. Vnde cum
hujusmodi consuetudo ab Ecclesia and sanctis patribus rationabiliter
introducta, and di^^issime observata sit habenda est pro lege.
, had for its defense, and what strength it has against Christ's institution,
and the Primitive practice, any may conceive.

What has moved the Roman Church to this surreption of the Cup from the
people, no man can without doubting imagine; for if those wife motives repeated
by Gerson should be the cause, we may see how weak arguments will moove the
Apostolical power against CHRIST'S institutions. For first he tel^ethus, of the
danger in the effusion. 2. The inconvenience of the portation of it from place
to place. 3. The vessel might be as filth^^ as Judas his trunk. 4. There may
be want of a Barber amongst the Laics. But the killing Argument is this, that
if the Cup be given to the people, there will be no difference betwixt the
people and their Priests Gerson. d. com sub utraque specie. Primum periculum in
effusione. Secund^m, in depo^tatione de loco ad locum. Tertium, in vasorum
sordidatione, etc. Qua^^^^, in longis ba^bis laicorum. Item, quod tanta esset
dig^itas laicorum circa sum^^^^^^m corporis Christi, sicut e^ Sacerdo^um. vide
plura ibid.
. Would not this moove a Saint (think you) to scorn Christ and his
institution, and embrace that, which is but a Custom, and had no better a
style before the Council of Constance?

But that we may further manifest this truth; One thing may be said to be of
the substance of another two manner of ways, either integrally, or
essentially. And first, who does not see, that the sacrament is deprived of an
integrall member by taking away the Cup?

For the second, it is no difficult thing to be manifested: for any Judgment
will determine the Sacrament to be maimed, when it is received according to
men's pleasures, leaving that prescript form which is laid down by Christ
himself in such a part, that does confer grace Vasques t. 3. in 3. disp. 215.
c. 2. Vnaquaeque species hujus Sacramenti, quatenus Sacramenti para est, suam
habet significationem diversam, -- hinc sequitur unamquamque speciem in hoc
sacramento su um effectum per se operari.
. Besides, they must acknowledge themselves either violators of Christ's
Testament Mat. 26. Hoc est sanguis meus Novi Testa menti: Luc. 2^. Hoc poculum
est novum illud testamentum per sangu^em meu^^. Durand rat. l. 4 c 42. Christus
post coenam corpus and san guir em suum dedit Apostolis: ut^ hoc sacramentum
velut ultimum testatoris mandatum arctius memoriae commendaretur.
, or that he revoked what he first instituted by some subsequent act. Nor can
I see how the Sacrament may be without the sign, to wit, the bread and wine,
any more then without the thing signified, which is the Body and Blood of
CHRIST, when both are required to the conficiency of a Sacrament, as a body and
soul to the constitution of a man Bonaven. l. 4. D. 11. p 2. ar. 1 q* 2, Vt
perfect esset vel signaretur redemptio, and ex hoc perfecta refectio, debuit
signari corpus in pane and anima, cujus seeds est i^ sanguine, and in vino.
.

Neither does this institution alone cross the Roman practice, but the
Precept of Christ also Mat. 26. Drink ye all of this, which points not
only to the Apostles, but to the people also, notwithstanding their pretenses
to defend their fraud, as is apparent by Paschasius Paschas. cap. 15. de corp.
Christi. Accipite and ^bibite ex hoc omnes, tam ministri quam and reliqui
credentes. Damas^. orth. fid. l. 4. cap. 14.
, who interprets this precept not of the Ministers only, but of all
beleivers. And yet Becan one of our Jesuits own society, will not have this
a precept to the Apostles themselves (so fearful they are to hear our
Saviors commands) but tells us that CHRIST his words, Drink ye all of
this, are of the same strength with those of Luke 22. 7. Take this and divide
it among your selves. And (as if our Savior had suspected the Apostles to have
been as Cupping a Ministry, as this Jesuit now charge us true Catholics
to be) he makes CHRIST to deliver all the wine to one, with this caution,
that he should not drink it all, but taste a little of it, and afterward
deliver it orderly ^o his fellow Apostles Becan. Manual contr. lib. 1. c 9. p
340. Calvinistae objiciunt illud, Bibite ex hoe omnes Resp. Hoc solis Apostolis
dictum est, qui erant praesentes: cum enim* Christus divi^isset panem
Eucharisticum in varias parts, and singulis Apostolis singulas porrexisset;
calix autem co modo dividi non posset; uni ex Apostol^s integrum porrexit, cum
hac cautione, ut non putaret totum sibi ebibendum esse, sed aliquid inde
gustandum, ac deinde reliquis ordine porrigendum. Itaque verba illa, Bibite ex
hoc omnes, perinde valent, atque illa Lucae 21. 7. Accip^^e and dividite inter
vos, id est, unus non exhauriat totum calicem, se^ singuli aliquid bibant
, that they might partake of the Chalice with him; whereas the direction was a
precept unto all there present to communicate in the Cup, and not a caution
only for him that first received, ^^ forbear drinking of all, as that Jesuit
would persuade.

And although the Precept Luke 22. 19. This do in remembrance of me
immediately follows the consecration of the Element of Bread; yet it is
plain, and pressingly evident, that it has relation to the whole institution,
in which the Cup is contained, as may be convinced from an other Evangelist,
Mat. 26. 27. Besides this, the Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 23. makes the
whole institution (not excluding either Element) to be delivered from CHRIST
to him, that the practice thereof might be observed in the Church. And though
it be a finne for a Papist to confess it, Ruard: Tapper. ar. 15. Ruard:
Tapper: ar^^ 5. Concludunt enim utilius esse, habito scilicet respcetu ad
efficaciam and virtutem sacramenti sub utraque specie Ibid. Plus gratiae
spiritualis sub utraque conseratur, quam sub altera tantum specie. Ibid* Et cum
Sacramenta conferant gratiam quam significant, quando completior et perfectior
est significatio; plen^orem oportetesse effectum.
cannot deny, but to communicate in both kinds is of greater efficacy, then
in one, it being acknowledged, that the Sacraments confer that grace which
they signify, so that when the signification is more full and perfect, as he
confesses it to be, being received in both kinds, the effect must answer
thereunto. And Alexand. Halensis peremptorily affirms the receiving under
both kinds to be of more merit, for increase of Devotion and faith Alex Al. p
4. q. 11. Sumptio quae est sub duab^^ speciebus, est majoris meriti, tum
ratione augmentationis devotionis, tum ratione fide^ di^atationis actualis, tum
ratione sumptionis completioris. and rursus ibid. Sumptio sub utraque specie
quem modum sumendi tradid^^, Dominus est majoris efficaciae, and complementi.
. So that while our Cup by which our Jesuit has denominated us to be a
cupping Ministry, proves to be a Grace-Cuppe, we may with more patience
deryde the reproach of his scorningfolly.

And not to dwell on the examination of this sacrilege any longer, it is
plain both by the testimony of Bonaventure Bonaven. lib. 4. did. 11. part. ^.
ar. 1. quaest 2. Quantum ad signationem vel significantiam: -- sunt de
integritate, quia neutra per se exprimitur res hujus Sacramenti, sed in utraque
simul: et hoc patet sic: Hic significatur Christus cibus perfect reficiens
manducantes Sacramentaliter, and spiritualiter: perfect a autem refectio non
est in pane tantum, nec in vino tantum, sed in utioque: idco non in uno tantum
perfect signatur, ut reficiens sed in utroque.
and Aquinas Aquinas part. 3. quaest. ^0 art. 12. Ex part quidem ipsius
Sacramenti convenit, quod utrumq. sumatur, scilicet and corpus and sanguis:
quia in utroque consistit perfectio Sacramenti.
, that we cannot express CHRIST'S death truly, which is the thing signified
in the Sacrament, without the use of both the Elements, because therein the
perfection and integrity of the Sacrament does consist. Whereto let be added
and well noted what Tapperus affirms. That having respect to the Sacrament,
and the perfection thereof, it were more convenient the Communion should be
under both kinds, then one alone. For this is more agreeable to the
institution and integrity thereof, and to bodily refection, yea and to the
example of Christ, and the Fathers of the Primitive Church, who dispensed the
holy Eucharist under both kinds even in the Roman Church it self Ruard.
Tapper, ar. 1^. Habito respectu ad Sacramentum, ejusque perfectionem, magis
conveniret sub utraque specie sieti communionem, quam sub altera tantum. Hoc
enim magis consonum est ejus institutioni and integritati and refectioni
corporali, imo and exemplo Christi and patrum primitivae Ecclesiae, qui -- sub
^^raque specie sacram Eucharistiam dispensabant in Ecclesia etiam Romana.
.

But if any Good Fellow Protestant (says our Jesuit) should be the loather
to embrace our Religion for being so scant of the Cup: we give him to
understand, that with us he shall be partaker of as good a Cup every way etc.
for we present unto every one a Cup of the best wine, to wit, the Ablution,
and the Protestants confess theirs to be no more then mere wine: and
therefore he thinks our charge of Sacrilege which we cast upon them for
withholding the Cup from the People to be unjust; and that it is surely to
be laid upon us, who (if we might believe him) have most sacrilegiously
defrauded Gods Church of the Communion of the true blood of CHRIST, giving no
sacramental blessing to the Cup at all Reply page 21. 22.
.

Jesuits had never such an Advocate; where truth affords him not matter to
plead, he wants not impudency to reply Aug. d^ Civit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 27.
Facile est cuiquam, videri respondisse, qui tacere noluerit. Aut quid est
loquacius vanitate? Quae non ideo potest quod veritas, quia si volu^rit etiam,
plus potest clamare quam verit^^.
. But will it endure examining? let us see, A good fellow Reply page ^^
must be converted, and with a cup of ablution A cup of Ablution is water in
most of our Irish parts.
. Here is a reason for a tankard-carrier. Your argument would have been more
persuasive to good-fellowes (Mr Malone) if you would allure by an other Medium;
that what wants in your feasting, shall be sure to be made up in your fasting,
having in your strictest works of mortification, not only wine Azor. Instit.
part. 2. l. 7. cap. 10. q. 7. page 562. Consentiens est opinio, potionem vini,
sieve mane an^^ prandium five post prandium vespere jejunium non solvere.
and strong drink which you may take freely Less de Instit. et Iure, l. 4. c.
2. Ex his infertur primo, Potus sumptionem crebriorem non vetari; quare*
etiam^^ qui^ co ^ine utatur, etiam immoderate, non violabit praeceptum
Ecclesiae de jejunio, etsi contra temperantiam peccet.
, and when you please, without violating your strictest devotion Io. Medina
Cod* de ^ejuno. q. 2. In Ecclesiastica Qu^dragesima unica refectio tantum est
concessa, et in potatione nulla est opposita limitatio.
; but all other choice electuaries and pleasant confections Less. de Instit. et
Iure, l. 4. c. 2. ^u. 10. Infertur secundo non prohiberi (...) Electuariorum et
cond^^torum, etc.
in like manner also. These had been Arguments would not only have turned a
Good Fellow Protestant, but Sodom and Gomorrha to be Papists in Profession,
and of your Order also.

And whereas he charge us, that we give mere wine in the Sacrament Reply
page 21
. We answer, that this may be true when a Jew or a Jesuit does receive it,
or one equally affected with them, as Saint Augustine in like manner spoke of
Judas, that he received Panem Domini, not Panem Dominum: But to a faithful
receiver, we know, as we offer them the blood of Christ, so they really receive
it, and therefore we justly charge you with sacrilege for detaining the Cup;
Neither do we alone charge you herewith but your own law De consecratione
did. 2. Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri portione
a calice sacri cru oris abstineant. Qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur obstringi) aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur: quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterij sine grandi
SACRILEGIO non potest provenire:
, lays the same condemnation upon you.

But (says he) our Answerer and his Symmists, have most sacrilegiously
defrauded Gods Church thereof Reply page 22
.

Gods Church? what means the Jesuit by this Phrase? conceives he hereby the
Roman? surely no: All theirs have the true blood of Christ, at least by
Concomitancy. Are the Protestants that Church, wherein this fraud is committed?
doubt you of this? How then can Gods Church be so ma^acled, that all must to
Hell, not one permitted to clime to Heaven, to ascend to salvation?

And now he has confessed us to be Gods Church, let him prove our Sacrilege
if he be able, as also that we vary from the practice in St. Paul's days, in
giving the true blood of CHRIST to our Communicants; or that we celebrate the
Sacrament without consecrating it, and we will confess guilty. But if this be
but a Jesuits charge, a strain of impudency, kind men may prefer him
before Esope, but none will think him fit to register the truth. The Jesuit
tells us, that the most reverend Primate his second Argument is framed thus.
By S. Paul's Order, who would have all things done to edification, Christians
should pray with understanding, and not in an unknown language, as may be
seen in the fourteenth chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians. The
Case is now so altered, that the bringing in of a tongue not understood (which
hindered the edifying of Babell it self and scattered the builders thereof) is
accounted a good means to further the edifying of your Babell, and to hold her
followers together; is not this then a good ground to resolve a man's judgment,
that things are not now kept in that order, wherein they were set at first by
the Apostle See the most reverend the Lord Primate in his Answer to the
Jesuits challenge, page ^.
. And hereunto the Jesuit replies.

I have always esteemed our Answerer so both for learning and sincerity, that
I prefer none of his rank before him, yet do I not see how in this
objection he can escape a blemish, in one of them at the least Reply page 21
.

We have had good experience, that the Jesuits jealousies are not crimes; nor
his words, slander; and therefore if he proves nothing, he says nothing. But
he is ready in his arms.

For where he says, that by S. Paul's Order, Christians should pray with
understanding, and not in an unknown language, alleging for the same the 14
chap. of his 1. epistle to the Corinthian, it is most certain that neither in
that fourteenth chapter, nor yet in all S Paul's Epistles, there is any such
order (as he means) to be found, which if he knew not, his ignorance is to be
wondered as: if he knew it, his integrity must be stained, for wronging the
Apostle and deluding his Reader Reply page 22.
.

It were vain to bestow time to defend this most learned Primate, from this
unjustly charging Jesuit, especially in either of these dreams of want of
learning or sincerity; when his own tongue and pen have manifested such deep
knowledge, his life so sacred sincerity, that a legion of Jesuits extracted
cannot express the like. And who is there, that has stood at the feet of
this learned Gamaliel, that has not heard him to declare more learning, then
this Jesuit can boast of, and seen in him more truth and candidenes of divine
conversation, then Jesuits and Friars by their demure and painted outside can
challenge to themselves? Nay, whose conscience (that knows him) does not
testify of him, that what is or may be required in a good man, learned Doctor,
and faithful Bishop may be found in him Epistol. Bap. Mant. ad Joan. Picum
Mirandulam. In uno codemque homine viderer videre Hicronymum and Augustinum
revixisse.
. Neither does this Jesuit deserve so learned an Adversary, who slighteth
those things, which befoole his endeavors to answer; and falls into violent
straynes against the Proposer. But let us see what gro^^d our travailer now
treades upon. No, he will demand first.

When he says that by S. Paul's order Christians should pray with
understanding, what kind of prayer does he mean? Reply page 22.
.

To this we answer him; All prayers which as well require the understanding as
the will, knowledge as Devotion.

But the Jesuit says, if private prayer, such as Christians by themselves do
exercise, clear it is that the Apostle in that fourteenth Chap. speaks of
none such, and say he did, it is well known that amongst us the use of praying
in a vulgar tongue is left as free to each one, as amongst the Protestants
themselves Reply page 22
.

The most learned Primate interprets not those words of prayer, as public,
or private, but in regard of the act of praying with what circumstances soever
it be used: and that by St. Paul's order no prayers ought to be made, of what
kind soever, which the parties invocating understa^d not, be they public, or
private, for the whole Church, or for particular necessity. But for that
freedom of praying in a vulgar tongue, which you say, is left to each one
amongst you; we know it false by experience, unless your directions for saying
of Ave's, and Pater-nosters, be arbitrary and left to the discretion of your
Catholic children, which I think no Popish father will admit. For your
Rhemists conclude, that praying either publickely or privately in Latin, is
thought by the wisest and godliest to be most expedient Upon the 18* verse of
the 14* chap. of the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.
. and though they confess, that their church has commanded in some Counsels,
that such as cannot learn distinctly in Latin (specially the Pater noster and
the Creed) should be taught them in the vulgar tongue. Yet the wisdom of the
Church has better liked and allowed of Latin Primars, Beads and Prayers Upon
the 1^. verse*
. from whence the Jesuit may collect, that the Rhemists stick closer to the
Latin, then himself, insomuch, that they would have the people to use not
only Latin Primars and Prayers, but Latin Beads also, All which (without
doubt) are alike availeable.

Again the Jesuit says, if he mean the Public Prayer and service of the
Church: certain also it is, that the Corinthians had theirs in the Greek, and
not in any unknown language, and therefore the Apostle speaking of prayer in
an unknown tongue, cannot be said to mean the public Service of the Church
Reply page 22
.

And wherefore in Greek? was it not, because that language was more generally
understood? and did not the Apostles for the same cause make use of that tongue
in revealing the mysteries of God? But at length our Jesuit confesses all
which he so violently fights against, by distinguishing betwixt prayer which
is directed to the edifying and instruction of the hearers, upon which Prayer,
the Apostles Doctrine in that Chapter runs altogether: and their public
Church service, which cannot any way be said to be such Reply page 23
: For hereby we get this, that our prayers both public and private are
agreeable to the Apostles grounds, which are general; and that their prayers
both public and private do oppose the same. And yet they think all will be
made up, by a more gross uncovering their shame and nakedness, and therefore he
tells us, that their public Church service is directed principally to the
worship of Almighty God, and not to instruct and edify the hearers Reply. ibid.
.

What* Gods service, and no way for instruction? what? Dark Church? Dark
souls? all in obscurity? Gods worship also? Has the Church been without Vrim
and Thummim since her captivity in Babylon? The Jesuit will have it so; But
we know that as GODS worship is an act which GOD accepts for his honor; so
thereby man does increase in saving graces, not of those only which are
appropriated to the will, zeal and devotion, but to the understanding also
being made conformable to GODS Image in wisdom and knowledge Thomas 22^.
quaest. 92. ar. 2. Ordinatur primo divinus cultus ad reverentiam Deo
exhibendam. Secundo ordinatur* ad hoc, quod homo instruatur a De^, quem coli^*
Tertio ordinatur dirinus cultus ad quandam directionem. humanorum actu^m
secundum instatuta Dei qui colitur.
: and surely if every action, especially that which is christian and divine,
ought to be done to edification, we may see where our Jesuit is, that in the
supreme act of divine adoration, denies any thing but darkness to remain.

Moreover (says the Jesuit) when S. Paul in that Chapter speaks ^^ a
strange tongue, certain it is that he means an unknown language,
miraculously imparted to the speaker, by the gift of tongues; but the Latin --
is none such etc. Reply page 23.
.

This is false by the Judgment of their own Dionisyus Carthusianus upon the x.
verse of this Chapter. But suppose it were not, yet in effect it is the same
crossing the general rules of the Apostle, as those tongues which were given
by miracle. The Jesuit does further from the Rhemists make the Co^tents of
this Chapter to be this that men though they had strange tongues by miracle,
yet should not prefer the same before prophecy, the speaker of languages
being inhibited to utter his inspiration unless there were an interpreter.

It were not much if this were in part granted the Jesuit, but is there
nothing else driven at by the holy Apostle? surely if their practice durst
endure trial, the Apostle speaks to other ends also. Bellarmine makes the
Apostles words to signify prayer, singing and giving of thanks, and
confesses that Chrys^st^me and Theophilact, Ambrose and Haymo understand this
place of prayer Bellarde verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. 16. Nam (...) and (...) and
(...), quibus vocibus Apostolus utitur, non significant concionari, fed pre
cari, and canere, and gratias agere. Quncirca* Chryso (...) and Theophilactur,
nec non Ambros^^^ and Haymo Haymo hunc locum de precibus intestig^^t. Ve^^
^isp. ^^^ ^. ^. Que vis ^es mundi* ex natura ^ei, and se^^^so periculo ^^^^ cum
Deb, sicut ^^ago ipsiu^ adorari potest.
. The Jesuit also observes that the Apostles doctrine in this Chapter runs
altogether upon such a prayer, as is directed to the edifying and instruction
of the hearers: and yet has the face to deny, that the Apostle either means
public, or private in this Chapter. Howsoever surely the drift of the Apostle
here, must be something else, then that cited from the Rhemists; For if the
understanding of the party, that either prays, or assenteth to the prayer, be
not exercised* why may not God be worshipped with any words as you confess he
may be adored (...) Image, or representation, be it, of beast, or man^? and
then why may not the Church make use of one of Ariosto's Poems in a strange
tongue, or such slight fantasies, seeing the minds might perform their
^eale, where the words signify nothing to the purpose at all?

But whatsoever Prayer is meant here in this chapter either public or
private, it is plain that it ought not to be used, but in such a manner that
it might be understood: for says the Apostle ver. 15. I will pray with the
Spirit, I will pray with understanding: Neither has this relation to him that
prays, but to all those that communicated with him in his prayer. So ver. 16.
Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he which occupies the
room of the unlearned say Amen* at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say. And although this Jesuit thinks he does
wisely, when he tells us, that those tongues which the Apostle inhibites,
were not such as the Latin, but such as the Apostle spoke by miracle, having
the gift of tongues: this makes more against him, for if God would not have
those tongues which did principally give honor unto his name, to be used in
prophesying or praying without an interpreter, where the people could not
understand them; much less other tongues which were only obtained by industry
and pains. And the Apostle gives the reason by expressing the inconvenience,
that thereby they shall be Barbarians to each other ver. 11. and be like a
Trumpeter that strikes amazement, but stirs up no Devotion, unless a blind
and a distracted one, when the Trumpet gives but an uncertain sound ^. 8.
. Whereby, it is apparent, that all popish prayer, whether private, or public,
is made in opposition of these grounds laid down by the Apostle, under these
poor pretenses, that the efficacy of the prayer consists in the very virtue
of the work ^hum. upon the 13. verse of this chapter.
etc. that the public Church Service is directed principally to the worship
of Almighty God, and not to instruct and edify the hearers* Reply page 23.
; that it per^^neth much more to unity Rhem. upon the 11. verse of this chapter.
, that men should in their devotion pray like Parrates, and the Priests read
the Exhortation with an intent not to be understood. And as this opposes the
Apostle his direction how to pray; so does it contradict the general practice
of the primitive Church founded upon this rule. For Origin says, that the
Greeks truly do call upon GOD in Greek, the Romans in Latin; and every one
also does pray unto him in their native and vulgar tongue Origin. Con: Celsum.
lib: 8. At Grae^i quidem graece hunc nominant and latin Romani: and singuli
item nativa and vernacula lingua Deum precantur.
, And also the Council of Lateran under Innocent the third, (by reason that in
many parts, people of diverse languages were mingled within the same city and
diocese, having diverse (...) and manners under one faith,) did straightly
command, that the Prelates of such cities or diocesses, should provide fit
men, which according to the diversityes of (...) and languages should celebrate
divine service, and minister the ecclesiastical sacraments unto them,
instructing them as well by word as by example Council Lateranen: 4tum Oecum. sub
In nocen: 3o. cap. 9 Quoniam in plerisque partibus intra eandem civitatem atque
di^^ce. sin permixti funt populi diversarum linguarum, habentes sub una fide
varios ritus and mores, districte praecipimus, ut pontifices huiusmodi
civitatum, sive di^^cesium, provi deant viros idoneos, qui secundum
diversitates rituum and linguarum divina officia illis celebrent, and
ecclesiastica sacramenta illis ministrent, instruendo cos verbo pariter and
exemplo.
: which Decree must needs cross their subsequent practice. Further, although
Aquinas does justify the service of the Roman Church which the vulgar
understand not, yet he a^^irmeth this to have been madness in the Primitive
times Aquin. in 1. Cor. 14. Dicendum est ad hoc, quod ideo erat insania in
primi^^^ ^ Ecclesi^, quia erant rudes in ritu ecclesiastico.
. And if understanding be not requisite in your Church service, wherefore
insert you in your missall the prayer of St. Ambrose, Make me by thy grace
always to believe and understand that of so great a mystery Missa^. Roman.
Orat: sancti. Ambro: ante missam. fac me per gratiam tuam semper illud de tanto
mysterio credere and intelligere etc.
etc, if (I say) for his own edification in spirit and affection, there be no
difference, whether the Speaker understand any thing he speaks, or not, as
the Rhemists In ver. ^. cap. praed:
, would interpret the Apostles words* Besides if the People should learn
nothing, nor understand any thing that is there done, wherefore does the Priest
turning himself unto them say, Let us pray, the Lord be with you? why does the
People answer you, and with thy spirit Missal: Roman. Celebrans versa facie ad
p^pulum* cum dicturus est, Orate fratres, Dominus vobiscum. Res. Et cum spiritu
tuo.
? Or why did the Council of Basil decree against those that say Mass in
secret prayers with such a low voice, that it cannot be heard of the standers
by Basil. Council. Sess. 21. Abusum aliquarum Ecclesiarum in quibus-Missa etiam
privata sine ministro aut per secretas orationes ita submissa vo^e dicitur,
quod a circumstantibus audiri non potest, abolentes, statuimus, ut qui in his
transgressor inventus fuerit, a suo superiore debite castigetur.
, if some in that Council had not thought it convenient, that the People
should understand the prayers that were read? So that let our Jesuit contend
as he pleases, Chrysostom concludes, that the Common people cannot say Amen
to a prayer which they do not understand Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Corin. 1. cap.
14, homil 35. Si peregrina lingua gratias agas, quam nec intelligas ipse, nec
caeteris item interpreteris, subjicere Amen, plebeius non potest, and illud, in
secula seculorum, quifinis precum est, ^udiens Amen non dicet.
, which duty both the Apostle 1 Cor. 14. 6
and the ancient practice Justinius sub finem secun^ae Ap^logiae pro
Christianis, disertis verbis dicit totum populum in Ecclesia re^p^ndere
consuevisse, Ame^; cum Sacerdos rerminabat orationem, vel gratiarum actionem.
^dem etiam p^stea l^ngo tempore ser^a^um esse ^am in Orient, quam in
Occidente. ^aret ex li^urgia Chrysostomi, quae habetur in fine operum ejus, ubi
apertissime distingunatur quae Sacerdos, quae Diaconus, and quae populus in
divin^s officijs canebant. Item ex Cyp^ano sermon d^oratione Dominica, ubi d cit
plebem respondere: Habemus ad Dominum, and ex Hierony ni praefa^. lib. 2. in
Episto. ad Galat qui scribit in Ecclesijs urbis Romae quasi coeleste ^omtru
audiri populum reboantem, Amen. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. lib. -. cap. 16.
supposes as necessary for the people to perform. And therefore our Jesuit
may leave to triumph, unless it be in his scars, and to boast any further,
unless he be confident of his impudency; and let the trophy rest where it
should be, upon the Victors head, who has showed the ground to resolve a man's
judgment, and has further manifested, that Papists being unable to justify
their practice thereby, must confess, if ever they expect acquittall from
their perverse and incrept innovations, that things are not now kept in that
order, in which they were left at first by the Apostle.

Moreover, whereas the learned Primate shows the practice of Popish
contrivers, in that, the case is now so altered, that the bringing in of a
tongue not understood, which hindered the edifying of Babell it self, and
scattered the builders thereof, is accounted a good means to further the
edifying of their Babell, and to hold her followers together: Our Jesuit would
have us to espy,

How many absurdities are couched in these words, unworthy truly of such a
pen Reply page 3.
. Indeed it ill befits ^o slender a braine-pan to charge that pen with
absurdities. but how persuades h^ his fictions?

First (says he) those words [the case is now so altered] as charging us to
vary from S. Paul's order are most vain, seeing that we find no such order at
all Reply ibid.
.

The Order 1. Cor. 14. 37. 40.
of S. Paul is evident to any that will not counterfeite blindness: for (says
he) let all things be done to edification v. 26.
, that is, to the commodity of many, even of the whole Church, as S.
Chrysostom observes, this (says that ancient Father) is as it were a Canon
to the Apostle in all things Chrysostom. in epist. ad Cor. 1. cap. 14. homil. 35.
Idem ubique viri institutum vides, multorum, ac totius ecclesiae scilicet
commoditatem: hic illi est in rebus omnibus veluti canon.
. And accordingly the Apostle orders that no tongue shall have privilege to
be used among the faithful that does hinder knowledge 1. Cor. 14. 28.
, by which the people are edified and instructed v. 22.
, the gift of tongues being a sign to the^ that believe not*: And professes,
that in the Church he had rather speak five words with his understanding, that
so he might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue v.
5.
. Now the practice of these primitive times is not imitated by you, but opposed
by your practice, howsoever accidentally and not by Papal decree it first got
footing in your Church.

Secondly those others, [that the bringing in of a tongue not understood]
contain two gross mistakes: for neither is the Latin a tongue not understood
Reply page 23.
. v. 19.


That the latin is a tongue not understood. We will bring two witnesses from
Rome, Roman Priests, Roman People, which will be sufficient to vindicate the most
learned Answerer from this mistake, which the Jesuit lays against him. For
wherefore did you accent the Masse-booke, but because your Priests could not
rightly read it? and will you persuade, that they could understand, what they
could not read? 2ly. For your People, if you will not confess that they are
generally ignorant of the Latin, observe, how they mumble their Mattens and
this will suffice. But the Jesuit well knowing, that the Latin is a tongue
not understood, does restrain his speech, that it was not such a one ^^ St.
Paul speaks of; that is, imparted by miracle; But this is nothing to the
purpose, whether the Roman language were miraculously imparted, or no, For St.
Paul makes that language to be unknown which needethan interpreter, and I
doubt not, but you will confess, that your Latin has need hereof,
especially when the ignorant people are your auditors. And further let us
consider the Jesuit mistaken, in making a language to be known or unknown
in regard of it self; whenas it is so reputed only, in regard of the hearers,
which do not understand the same. Balaams Ass spoke by miracle, and yet his
language was not unknown: and many spend their lives in your Latin Mass, and
yet beget but ignorant hearers.

Moreover, if the Jesuit had not mistaken himself, he might have found the
Latin to have been a tongue unknown, and a tongue imparted by miracle also,
as we may see in the Acts of the Apostles Act. 8. 10. 11.
, where the dwellers in Phrygia, and Pamphilia, in Egypt, and in the parts of
Lybia, about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites etc. did hear
the Apostles speaking in their tongues the wonderful works of God. whereunto
S. Chrysostom agrees, affirming more then once, the Latin tongue to have
been imparted by miracle to the Apostles Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Cor. 1. cap.
14. homil. 35. Idem Persarum ROMANORVM Indorum, and multorum praeterea linguis,
Spiritu susurrante, loquebatur, atque id munus, munus tum vocabatur linguarum.
E^ paulo post. Erant enim jam olim, qui precandi donum, and linguae conjunctum
haberent multi, and precabantur quidem, and lingua sonabant, vel Persarum vel
ROMANA utentes.
. Neither (says the Jesuit) was it brought in by us, but by our Answerer
himself confessed to have been from the beginning Reply page 23.
.

For this your second mistake; the learned Primate says, that the Latin
service. was used from the beginning in those countries; and who doubts of
it? but was it not also understood? if the Priests had then Latin tongues, had
not the people Latin ears Azor. Ies. Instit. Mor. par 1. lib. 8. cap. 26. Nos
tan en libe^ter fatemur, tunc temporis laicos in Scripturarum lectione fuisse
versatos, quia sacra eloquia fue^unt Graeco vel Latino sermon conscripta, quem
sermonem vulgus quoque callebat: nunc vero plebs fere rudis est, and imperita
Latini sermonis; at Laici qui Graece vel Latin noverunt, Scriptura^ jure
optimo lectitant.
?

But this (as the Jesuit pretends from the Answerers confession) has
remained in the Church without alteration (no such syllable in the Answerer)
when the people in their vulgar speech departed from it Reply page 23.
.

Imagine at the mistake; the people departed from the vulgar speech: who
brought it after them, or in amongst them that had departed from it, but Popish
Engineers? For does not the departing of the people make an alteration? can
this be denied? for although the Latin remain the same, yet is it not fit in
these times for the same use and purpose, whereunto it was before appointed. Is
it not all one, whether faith ran from the people, or the people from the
faith? Does not both of these make infidels? if the Candlestick be taken from
the people, or the people forsake the light; will there not be an operation of
the same effect? We confess, Latin service has remained in some Churches,
like Saul in his Kingdom, but the people have been stricken with blindness,
as he was possessed with the Devil, ever since the spirit of truth and
knowledge departed from them.

And herein who cannot see that our great Logician in pleading for obscure
Church Service, deprives himself of reason? for who will say, because the
Latin Church had their Latin Liturgy, when that language was understood
generally, therefore they ought to have it so now: or that there is no
alteration among the people, but that they are the same in knowledge and
devotio^ now, when they understand nothing, as they were in the primitive
times, when they were well instructed: or that because some churches within the
Roman Empire had the continuance of a Latin Liturgy, which at first they
understood; that therefore Popish Contrivers cannot as criminous be charged
with bringing in and continuing of a strange tongue amongst other Churches,
that were afterward converted? So that the Answerers charge is just, that,
that service which was lawfully practiced, when it was vulgarly understood,
has by your carelesnes and negligence of the peoples instruction remained
amongst you: But for many other Churches, as Ireland, the Indies The Jesuit
argues, that Latin was not commonly understood in France and Spain, because
they had their proper languages.
etc. who brought in those preparations to darkness amongst them, but your
Bab^ll (...), not indring light, least your works of darkness might be
detected or overthrown? And does not your mistake lie in your way, it being
true that by your negligence it has continued in some Churches, where it ought
to have been changed; and by your impudencyes, it has been intruded upon
others, where it ought not to have been admitted?

Thirdly (says the Jesuit) the words following, (which hindered the edifying
of Babell it self and scattered her builders) are of the like nature, for it
was not one only tongue, that hindered the edifying of Babell, as it is well
known, but many: Finally, ^e absurdely concludes with manifest contradiction;
for if Babell, was called Confusion, and her builders scattered by a
multiplicity of different tongues: whilst we in one tongue, and faith hold
united together, can any wiseman say that we build confused Babell Reply page
24.
?

But if one only tongue confounded, and not many hindered the edifying of
Babell, as it is well known; or, if Babell was called Confusion, because that
one only tongue was confounded; will not the Jesuit be ashamed to charge that
pen with absurdities, which he can no way resist; but by such ignorant boldness,
which here and in other places most freely and liberally he uses against it?
And that this is true, St. Chrysostom affirms Chrysostom. in epist: ad Cor. 1.
cap. 14. homil. 35. Cum n^^ris extr^^retur, una lingua in multas secabatur.
, and Josephus does fully declares where he tells us, that the place of the
tower was called Babel, or Confusion, not for the multitude of tongues which
were then given, but propter confusam lingua^ quae prius omnibus ex aequo clara
fuerat, because that tongue was confounded which before was indifferently
understood of all the people Josephus l. 1. Antiq. cap. 5. Locu. vero turris
nunc Babylon vocatur propter confusam etc: nam Hebre^ confusionem nominant
Babel.
; which your vulgar Bi^le expresses, Venite igitur, descendamus and
co^fundamus ibi lingua^ coru^ ut non audiat unusquisque voc^^^ (...) sui Genesis
11.
. G^^ to, let ^^ go down, and there confound (...) language, that they may
not * Genesis 1^. 7.
understand (...) spe^^^h; and therefore (in the 9. verse) is the name of it
(...), (...) the Lord did there (...) the (...) all the earth* which Torni^llus
tells us was done by (...) bringing upon them a soddaine and (...)
forgetfuln^s of their first speech (...). Annal. sacr. in an. a^ Orb cond^^^
1931. n. 10. (...) dicimus, quod Deus inducta mirabiliter in cunctis illis
hominibus subita quadam and omnimoda prioris idiomatis obli^ione, illico divina
sua dispensatione and omnipotent^^, in corundem (...) novo^ dire^^^sque indidit
habitus, juxta vanarum lingua^^^ genera (...) distributa, ita ut statim (...)
il^^ (...) promptum expeditumque ac (...) illius sermonis, qui (...) Quare
(...) confusionis (...), quo non semel Scrip^^ra (...) est, ac si denotare
(...), (...) in s^ ipsis (...).
, for who is so wilful to affirm this confution to consist in the gift of new
tongues, but in making the former un^ntelligible, as your Latin is now to the
people, (...) formerly they vulgarly understood? And yet upon this confused
foundation he seeks not only to justify their own blindness, but he would
make us scattered wights and Babelists also. May not Protestants (says he)
be rather termed Babelists, whose diversity of languages and daily ja^^es
amongst themselves, give good testimony that their (...) of (...), built
against the true Church, the Saints and Sacraments, the t^ppe thereof aiming at
heaven it self, will (...) be dissipated, and left ^^^^lated. Reply page 24.
*

May not Mr Malone be rather termed a Babelist, that so confusedly falls
upon us, without any ground whence to force this conclusion? For, first our
diverse languages make no more confusion amongst us, then the extraordinary gift
of tongues did in the Apostles days; in regard we retain your Latin
unconfused, and have many other languages which are (...) acquainted with the
faith of CHRIST. Secondly, our jarres are not equal to yours, although they
many times are passionately expressed; neither are they of any other nature, then
those which have been among the members of the Church of CHRIST; neither
destroying faith nor the foundation thereof. Thirdly, the Jesuit is vain in
his f^aunting terms, (...) tower of Protestancie, -- the top whereof aiming
against heaven it self, (when all the world is but gleabe-land sufficient for
their tower of S. Angelo) built against the true Church, the Saints and
Sacraments Reply page 24
. As if there were a true Church, where CHRIST is not Monarch; or that their
Universal Master could make Saints, as he has done Sacraments.

But if we consider all aright, the ambitious tower of Protestancie will not
be a molehill, i^ compared to your mountains; for the whole world cannot
contain Popish ambition, although the greatest honor upon earth must stoop
before it Extra de Major, and Obed. cap. Vnam Sanctam. Porr^ subesse Romano
Pontifici omni huma^^ creaturae declaramus, dicimus, di^^^imimus, et (...)
omni^^ ^sse de necessitate (...)
; No terms will su^^ice the Papacy, but those which we express God
withal, as we may see variously out of (...) De Patriarch. and Primat. orig.
l^b. 1. Exercit^. 1. V^ quema^modum Di^^cesani i^ Episcop^, Episcopi in
Metropolita, Metropolit^ in Patriarcha unum (...); it^ Tri^^taa Patriarcharum
in Vnitate Pontificis coalesceret, sicq, sedis Principis Apostolonum esset in
Trinitate VNITAS, and in Vnitate TRINITAS.
. But this is little to that which follows; for you have made your Monarch
after the manner of serpents, to cast off his slough, yea his nature it self
Alvae. (...). de (...) Eccles lib. ^. cap. 37. Papa igitur participatutra^^que
naturam cum Christo.
; he must not be barely man, either you must take him for God and man, or
compounded of ^^th Clemens. (...) in gloss. Papa (...) mundi: -- Qui maxima
(...) nec Deus ^^, nec homo: quasi Neuter es inter Vtrumque;
. Where will you find his Preisthood, when his Majesty is styled divine
Ludou. Luisius ab Alca^ar. in Apoc. in carmine ad (...) Apost. D^ (...) 5. --
Quem numinis instar vera colit pietas --.
, which cannot stand with a mi^^steriall duty? Did he affect divinity as the
Emperor thought Aventin. lib. 7.
? The Pope will tell you, that Peter, (and you may conceive for whose sake) is
assumed into the society of the individual Unity Nicol. 3. de Election. cap.
Fundamenta in (...) Hunc enim in (...) individu^ unitatis (...) etc.
, and the Gl^sse will give his succe^^or the tittle of our Lord God the Pope
Extravag. Joan. 1^. de verb rum sign. cap. (...) in gloss. Credere au^^m (...)
DEVM (...) Papam etc.
, and as if this were too little, a Cardinal of their own has told us, that
Popes have been persuaded, that they might do unlawful t^^^gs, and so, plus
quam Deus, more then God himself Francisc. Zabarel. deschism. Innoc. 7. and
Benedicti p. ^0.
. Now let the Jesuit consider, what reason he had to style true Religion, an
ambition^towre, when as (if he cast an eye upon themselves) the tower of
Papacy has a foundation as low as Hell, and an height more lofty then the
tower of Babell it self.

For the Jesuits invectives of spirit of giddines, several sects, varying
opinions, Reply page ^4
etc. His testimonies are not his friends. First he urges Lavatherus, but as
it seems from Genebrard and Staphylus See the Margin. ibid.
, men of excellent credit and repute, (no doubt) su^ficient by their bare
testimony to divide all Protestancie; but the Jesuits text is moderate if his
margin truth it, for the one divides Protestancie but into above 100. sects
and varying opinions, when the other makes the sects 180. and both differ from
Genebrard the author that he cites, who says there are more then 200: but we
see the Jesuit, lest he should be taken lisping, places sects and varying
opinions together: Now in this sense, who is there that is acquainted any thing
in Popish writings, but can point out many thousand varying opinions amongst
the Papists themselves (which they condemn not, as we do those follies
mentioned by Genebrard) and not go out of the compass of the Papal Creed?
And to give them a taste in their Hierarchy, there has been eleven points of
Popish Irish divinity Censura propositionum ad sacrae Theologiae facultatem
allatae per Patricium Cahil. Rectorem S. Michaelis Dublinensis etc.
condemned by above 60. Doctors of Sorbon lately Actum apud Sorbonam in
congregationibus publicis sacrae facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis, habitis
diebus secunda and septima ^a^arij 1632. Et confirmatum in Co^itiis
extraordinariis deci^^^ quinti ejusdem mensis, and anni, praesentibus sexaginta
Doctoribus and ampl^^^.
, with such terms as these, lame Censura* In ista ^. propositione^numeratio
membrorum Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae -- est manca.
, false ^. Falsa.
, contrary to common right 4. Iuri communi contraria.
, ambiguous 2. Ambigua.
; injurious 7. Inju^iosa.
, inept, ridiculous, against the sense and use of the Church 6, Inepta,
ridicula, contra communem Ecclesi^ sensum and ^sum:
, contrary to divine, natural and positive law 10. Iuri divino, naturali and
positivo contraria.
, seditious 1^. Sediosa.
, scandalous 9. Scandal^sa.
, schismatic ^. Sc^is^atica.
, Heretical etc. ^. Haeretic^.
But suppose there were as many sects as the Jesuit pretends, to disturb the
peace of the Protestant Churches; what concludes he in reproach of us, when he
acknowledges that before S. Augustine's time there were many more heresies
that oppugned the Primitive Roman Faith Reply page 8.
, then he names sects to discredit ours? For Perk^; as the Jesuit has
mistaken his name, so his Author, if he speak as he is alleged, (for I have
him not) has forsaken the truth* there being no ground in the Church of
England to produce so vain a charge: But for that noble Sir Edwine Sands.
Knight, the true inheritour of his Fathers virtues, he does show in the place
cited In his Relation of Religion.
, that whatsoever unity is amongst us, proceeds from the mere force and
virtue of verity, which he accompteth the best and blessedest, and which only
does unite the soul with God. And that the Unity of the Church of Rome is but
for order in the world, etc. antecedent before us, for which worldly peace they
are beholding to their Father and adviser: yet he further acknowledges our
differences are not essential, or in any part capital. Whereby the Reader may
see with what truth he has cited this Author. For the most learned Bilson, he
does only bewail the minds of many men, that are not so prone to peace, as
they ought. A complaint that the best age of the Church might have taken up.
And therefore if the Jesuit will prove our jarres; let him forsake such poor
advantages that for the most part are raised from Passion, and manifest that in
fundamental points we vary one from another, or all from the Catholic Church;
for otherwise it is more then probable that Babell will remain where the most
learned Answerer left it, even in the midst of the Roman blindness.

SECT. IIII.
THe most learned Primate, as he has sufficiently showed the means whereby
tares that have crept into the Church might be detected, viz^. by having
recourse unto the first and best times, does further show, that the like may be
done by comparing the state of things present, with the middle times of the
Church.

To which the Jesuit replying shows himself offended, not so much to be
foiled by his Adversary, as to have it known: This word thus does does more
perplexe the Jesuit, then the blows which make him smart, and therefore his
passion expresses it self.

Why (says he) unless you perform it better then thus, I see not but your
self may be crowned an Innovator of idle arguments Reply page 25
:

No, neither of idle demands; for that is so proper to the popish schools,
that no man can deprive them of this catholic title; and least want of
succession should make them loose their privilege, the Jesuit has
sufficiently continued it in this his vain Reply.

The first of these Arguments which the Jesuit would have accounted idle, is
comprehended in these words. I find by the constant and approved practice of
the ancient Church, that all sorts of people, men, Weomen and children, had
free liberty to read the holy scriptures, I find now the contrary among the
Papists: and shall I say for all this that they have not remooved the bounds
which were set by the Fathers, because perhaps I cannot name the Pope, that
ventured to make the first enclosure these commons of Gods people? See the most
reverend the Lord Primate his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 9.
And hereunto the Jesuit gives a downright answer, that he finds no
truth in this his saying: first because he lays not down, where amongst the
ancient, any such practice is testified to have been; 2ly. neither does he
show where amongst us he finds the contrary Reply page 25


The most learned Answerer thought it not necessary to produce witnesses to
manifest so open truths, whereof the Jesuit could not be ignorant. besides,
he is vain and wilful to conclude a thing untrue, because the proof is not
particularly urged: for who will seek to prove those things, which are most
manifest, which the Jesuit without declaring his ignorance cannot deny?

But because he charge this most reverend Lord with untruth, I will take away
that scruple from whence he seems to deduce this conclusion, and briefly
manifest, first, that it was the constant and approved practice of the ancient
Church, that all sorts of people -- had free liberty to read the holy
scriptures. secondly, that we find the contrary amongst the Papists; that then
we may see whether his impudency will deny that which his deceit in this place
is willing to cover.

For the first; it is a proposition so clear, that I am persuaded the Jesuit
would not have denied it, if he could with safety to himself and his cause
acknowledge the same. Yet although he does not confess it, I need not much to
trouble my self in the manifesting thereof, there being such clouds of
witnesses. And to go further then the Pri^itive times after Christ; It is
apparent, that Gods word was not given to be kept under a bushel, but as the
sun in the Orb of the Church to lighten and irradiate the hearts of his
Children; as may be gathered from the scriptures, penning in their vulgar
tongue when they spa^e Hebrew. To this purpose it was, that Moses commanded
the Israelites to Deuteronomy. 6. ^.
write the law upon the posts of their houses, and on their gates. And that it
was a custom amongst the Church of the Jews to try doubtful things by the
scriptures, may be collected by the words of our Savior 10. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. And why should the Jews have sent their Hebrew
text to be interpreted, if they had conceived, that the vulgar use had not
been permitted? Also it appears 2. Tim. 3. 15. that it was the familiar
practice of good people to breed up children in the knowledge of the sacred
scriptures, And that it was the practice of the primitive times is plain by
the Act. 17. 11.
Bereans, who searched the scriptures daily, to try the truth of the Apostles
Doctrine, and were therefore accounted more noble then those in Thessalonica.
Neither was it practice only, but the Apostle in those times persuades
thereunto, by showing the blessing which followed the same Apoc. 1. 3. Blessed
is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy etc.

And for the Ages following, who can be ignorant (that knows any thing) of
that, which the Jesuit desires proof of? For Polycarpus to the Phillippians
says, I trust that you are well exercised in sacred scriptures Poly^arp. ad
Philipp^n. Confido been exercitatos esse in sacris literis, and nihil vos latet.
. And in Origin his time, the reading of these divine mysteries, daily prayers,
the word of instruction, were the nutriments whereby the Spirit Origin: in
Levit. hom: 9. Nutrimenta igitur spiritus sunt divina lectio, orationes
assiduae, sermo doctrinae. His alitur cibis, his co^valescit, his victor
efficitur.
of God increased his graces in the hearts of his children; and in after ages
this practice continued in the Church, and the negligence of Christians in not
teaching their children the scriptures was complained of by the ancient
Fathers Espencaeus Episcopus in 2. Tim. 3. in haec verba (Et quia ab infantia
literas nosti) page 116. Neque enim haec mea, aut nova, sed est patrum
orthodoxorum querimonia.
.

Eusebius Caesariensis also in commending of Pamphilus amongst other things
says, that he did not only lend the scriptures to be read, but also gave
them to men and weomen, which he saw were addicted to reading Scripturas
quoque sanctas non ad legendum tantum sed and habendum tribuebat promptissime,
nec solum ^iris, sed and foe^ nis quas vidisset lectioni deditas in vi^a
Pamphili, (...) per Hieron in Apolog. contra Ruffin. ad Pamachium and Marcell.
. Chrysostom finding the opinion to begin in the Church, that the reading of
the Divine scriptures belonged only to the Monks, because others had wives,
and children, and care of families, bitterly resistes and reprehendes this
evil in the people, affirming the reading of the scriptures to be much more
necessary for the lay people then the Monks, in regard they having more open
conversation, and daily receiving spiritual wounds, do stand in more need of
spiritual Physic Chrysostom. homil. 2. in ^. caput Matthew. Sed est ne horum
criminum tandem aliqua defensio? Non sum, inquit, ego monachus, uxorem habeo,
and filios, and curam domus. Hoc enim est, quod omnia quasi una qu^dam pesse
corrumpit, quoniam lectionem divinarum scripturarum ad solos putatis monachos
pertinere, cum multo magis robis quam illis sit necessaria. Qui enim versantur
in medio, and vulnera quotidie accipiunt, magis indigent medicamine.
. And S. Hierome commends the reading and meditation of the holy scriptures
to many holy persons of both sexes, in diverse Epistles to them, as is confessed
by the Rhemists themselves In the Preface to the Reader before the new
t^stament.
. Yea Chrysostom accounts it a greater absurdity for his auditors to receive
his doctrine without examining it by the scriptures, then for a man to receive
money upon an others word, and not to reckon it himsel^e Chrysostom. Homil. 13.
in epistol. ad Corinth. cap. 6. Quo^^^do autem non absurdum propter pecunias
alijs non credere, sed ipsas numerare and supputare, pro rebus autem
amplioribus aliorum sententiam sequi simpliciter, praes^r^im cum habeamus
omnium exactissimam t^utinam and gnomonem, ac regulam, divinarum, inquam, legum
asserti nem. Ideo obsecro and oro omnes vos, ut relinqua^is quidnam huic
v^l^lli vid^atur, deque his a scripturis haec omnia inquirite.
. Gregory likewise says of the scripture, as if it had been given to that
purpose, It is a river shallowe and deep wherein the Lamb may wade and the
Elephant swim Gregor. mag. Epist. ad Leand. in expositione ^ob Est fluvius
planus and altus in quo agnus ambulet, and Elephas n^tet
. But chiefly Chrysostom urges the practice of this holy duty. Because the
Spirit of God has so disposed and tempered the sacred scriptures, that
Publicans, Fishers, Carpenters, Pastors and Apostles, idiots, unlearned, might
be saved by these books, least any of the vulgar might fly to the excuse of
difficulty; that those things which are delivered might be easy to be seen
of all, that both the work^man, and the servant, and the widdowe-woman, and the
most unlearned of all men might carry away some gain or profit by hearing of
the word read Chrysostom. conc. 3. de Lazaro. Propterea siquidem spiritus
gratia dispensavit illa tempetavitque, quo publicani, piscatores,
tabernaculorum opifices pastores, and Apostoli, idiotae, illiterati, per hos
libros ^a^vi fierent, nequis^diotarum ad hanc difficultatis confugere possit
excusationem, ut omnibus facilia conspectu (...) quae dicuntur ut and opi^ex,
and famulus, and vidua mulier, et omnium hominum ind^ct^ssimus ex and ta
lectione aliquid lucri utilitatisque reportaret.
. And lastly to discover the Jesuits vanity in charging the most learned
Answerers just assertion with untruth; Azorius the Jesuit in the name of all,
does willingly confess, that the lay people were conversant in the reading of
the Scriptures in the primitive times Azorius Jesuit. tom. 1. Moral. l. 8. cap.
26. Nos libenter fatemur tunc temporis laicos in Scripturarum lectione fuisse
versatos.
.

For the second; It is manifest that the Papists teach and practice the
contrary; This the Jesuit does believe, as will be manifested by many passages
in his Reply; yet he will give us leave to prove it, least confessing so great
an alteration, he might seem to acknowledge the Roman Church to have fallen
from the practice of the ancients, to wit, in making ignorant people wise to
salvation by the reading of the Scriptures. Now the first which I will produce
to confirm this, are your Priests at Rhemes, who deny the holy scriptuees to
be ordained by God, to be read indifferently of all, and say that in the peace
of the Church, vulgar translations were neither muchrequisit, nor perchance
wholly tolerable: that the Roman Church allows not the publishing or reading
of any Catholic translation absolutely and without exception, but that such
as read them must have express license thereunto of their lawful ordinaries
In the Preface to the Reader before their testament.
. And Azorius tells us, that Clement the 8. has prohibited the reading of any
part of the sacred Scriptures, or any comperdious history thereof in any
vulgar language whatsoever Azor. inst. moral l 8. c 26. Et in Indice novissime
edito jussu S. D. N. Clementis 8. in observatione circa quartam regulam
prohibentur sacrae Scripturae parts tam novi quam veteris testamenti, quavis
vulgari lingua editae: ac insuper summaria, and compendia etiam historica
^orundem By bliorum, seu librorum sacrae scripturae, quocunque vulgari idiomate
conscripta: quod quidem inviolate praecipitur servandum.
. Yea so far they are from giving the people this liberty, that Sanders
makes it Heresy to determine the necessary conversion of the Scriptures into
vulgar tongues Sander. vis. Monarch. haer. 191 Haeresin esse si quis dicit
scripturas necessa^^o debe^e in vulgares linguas converti.
; and Peresius accounts it the Devils invention to permit the reading of the
Bible to all sorts of people Peresius de tra: par. 2 asser. 3. Credo ^quidem
institutum hoc sub pictatis quadam umbra a Diabolo esse inventum.
. And howsoever the Jesuit will not here speak his mind, yet his thoughts
burst from him afterward in this section, for he acknowledges it no better
to afford the people free liberty to read the scriptures, then to cast
Pearls before swyne Reply page 27.
, which he has received from Hosius De expresso Dei verbo. Sed sic visum est
haeresiarchae nostri temporis, qui primus dare sanctum canibus, and ante porcos
ausus est projicere margaritas.
. And it is no marvel, that they so much desire to enclose these commons of
Gods people; in regard they find not any to be made Papists by the Catholic
Doctrine contained in them. For experience it self has taught them what
fruit the reading of these divine mysteries in a vulgar tongue has brought
forth Hosius de sa. vern. leg. Experientia magistra didicimus quid fructus ea
res attulerit -- Tantum abest, ut accesserit ad pietatem aliquid plus, ut etiam
diminutum esse videatur.
. The People (says Bellarmine) take no profit out of the Scriptures, but hurt
Bellarm. De verbo Dei. lib. 2 cap. 15. Populus non solum non caperet fructum ex
scripturis, sed ^tiam caperet detrimentum. -- Experimento idem comprobatur.
. And the Jesuit tells us a whole legend of tales, to confirm this Doctrine
Reply page 27.
. So that it is most apparent by what has been already said, that the
ancient Church not only permitted all Christians, without exception, or
dispensation, to hear and read the sacred Scriptures, but also earnestly
exhorted them to the practice of those holy duties; and that the present Roman
exhorts none, permits very few, to be acquainted with those heavenly
Oracles. And shall we^ then deny, that Papists have remooved the bounds set by
the ancient Fathers, and fed the people with husks of superstition, whom
they ought to have nourished with the sincere milk of the word of life,
unless we can point them out the Pope that first attempted to bereave Gods
people of so great a blessing?

But the Jesuit has an other frame for his defense. That scripture, which
those of the ancient Church had free liberty (as he says) to read, was
only such as was approved to be true, and lawful by the same Church; the
reading whereof amongst us at this day, is as free as ever it was amongst our
forefathers Reply page 25.
.

How tenderly does the Jesuit tread here? if this Ice break, sure, he will be
swallowed up. He dare not grant, that the ancient Church gave free liberty
to read the scriptures, and therefore points it out as the most learned
Answerers assertion ( as he says) neither dare he confess the truth
concerning themselves, that they deny them to the people, (as has been fully
proved) yet declaimeth of the desperate effects, that are produced by the
reading of them, and nevertheless would persuade us to believe. 1. that they
vary not from their forefathers; 2ly. that their adversaries have removed those
bounds, which were set by the Fathers in this point, leading, yea, and driving
Christ his flock out of the wholesome pastures, wherein formerly they were fed
unto Salvation, into the marish, weedy and poisoned grounds of their new
fangled vulgar Bibles Reply ibid.
.

For the first of which, I willingly assent thereunto, if by forefathers he
understand those wise, grave, learned fathers, which in watching the Church,
lost Religion, learning, languages, and suffered Barbarism and superstition to
invade the same: But if he mean those ancient lights, the vigilant Bishops
and Priests of the first and best times; as we take them to be none of your
fathers, so is it made good that you altogether in this practice vary from
them, it being most evident, that the prime fathers (for the edifying of
Christ's Church) exhorted the people to the reading of the scriptures; when your
forefathers (Mr Malone) for the advancement of their Templum Domini (in which
is adored your Lord God the Pope,) were forced blasphemo^sly to inhibite the
same See this proved before in this Section.
.

For the second, he will never prove it, although he attempt to perform the
same by a two fold argument. 1. Because our vulgar Bibles are not approved for
holy Scriptures by the Church of God Reply page 26
, Whereunto I answer; first that any may perceive, the Jesuit cannot deny
those books, which we offer to the Church to be divine and revealed from God,
although ^e dream^th that they have lost their nature by their translation.
Second^y, he does calum^iate us; for the o^iginal^ Canon, o^t of which we
translate, is allowed by the catholic Church, (which they cannot say for
theirs) and the translation by a renowned member thereof; which is sufficient
for the approbation of the same. Yet it may be he would have ours to be
allowed (as their vulgar Latin has lately been) by canon in the Roman Church,
as if the Spirit of God remained at Eckron, and no word of God were to be found
in Israel 1. Kings. 1. 2* 3
: But we know if it were in their power to approve or disprove it, Gregory and
Sixtus Consilium Episcopi Bononiae congregat. de s^abiliend. Romans eccl.
Consilium nostrum esset, ut tua Sanetitas Cardinalibus illis at que Episcopis,
quos in suis residere eclesij^ contigerit, praeciperet ut -- Decretales,
Sextum, Clementinas, Extravagantes, and regulas Cancellariae, in (...) quisque
civitate legi ac doceri public curet. Vtinam legendis hujusmodi libris,
homines ubique diligentisu incubuissent. Neque enim res nostrae in hujusmodi
deploratissimum statum ad ductae essent.
should be the Canon which should govern the Church, the Scriptures should
not only be cast out, but Gratian Ibid. Ac non item Decre^i quod minime mirum
videri debet. Est enim perniciosus liber, and author tatem tuam valde
vehementer imminuit: licet alicui extollere videatur. Nam inter alia, negat
multis in lo^^s, posse Papam vel tantillum ad eam Doctrinam adjungere, quam
nobis Christus ipse tradidit, and Apostoli docuere.
also, as too opposite to their intents. The titles which they have given to
Gods divine Oracles will declare how great affection they bear to the
approvlng of them. Besides, if no translation be the word of God before the
Roman synagogue has approoved it, I would know whether Sixtus or Clemens his
edition be the word of God? As for their vulgar edition; by this rule it was no
Scripture before the Trent assembly, and the Rhemish Translation no Scripture
to this hour.

His second Argument is, that as it is not confirmed by Rome, so it is
disproved by Protestant Doctors themselves Reply page 26.
.

But herein two things are fit to be observed. First, that the Churches under
the government of our sacred Prince did never propose any translation
absolutely, as without all kind of error (they being the works of industrious
and painful, and yet but men) but as a fair help and means to convay those
heavenly lamps into the most simple man's conceit and understanding, and in
such a manner that they should always stoop to the original tongues wherein
God delivers the^ to the people. 2die, we must make difference betwixt
extremes of passion which did many times befall good men when they apprehended
some small error with too much feircenes of conceit; and their more selected
judgments; the one bursting from them; the other being a true birth. Now if
this be truly apprehended, what can the Churches of England and Ireland
suffer, who in proposing the Scriptures to the people have used all diligence,
viewing and amending those errors which time has detected, not defending
them; as the Romanists have and do their corruptest Latin Praesatio Sixti
Quinti praefixa Biblijs sui^. Tanta per se est Vulgatae editionis auctoritas,
tamque excellens praestan^ia, ut majorem desiderare, penitus inane videatur.
. It is far from the practice of ours to commit wilful errors in translations,
and if any such are once found out, (be they never so light) we are willing to
amend and follow the truth. If our late Sovereign of ever blessed memory did
find some errors in our translation, and amended them; if the learned Dr
Reynolds saw the same, and persuaded reformation; what, must this conclude,
that there was no truth in our Church? no Scriptures there?

For his other citations, some are passions, others are of like nature with the
first. But esteem them as you please, your jealousies do more bring your
vulgar Latin into suspicion, then these testimonies can disgrace ours. For you
seek to justify it, because it comes nearer the Hebrew then the Septuagint
Jacob. Gordon. Huntl. Epit. controvers. contr. 1. Deverbo Dei cap. 1^.
Interpretatio* septuaginta ^nterpretum long magis recedit ab Haebrco textu,
qui jam extat quam nostra vulgata.
; a muddie argument for him that charge the Hebrew text with corruption Ibid.
cap. 6. Hebraicus textus -- vitiatus sit and depravatus.
. Secondly, they say, that the best sense in the obscure places of the
Scripture is not always to be sought after: for then, there would be no end of
translations Ibidem cap. 15. Si interpres in manifestis and apertis locis
Scripturae omnia recte interpretetur, and in obscuris aliquem sensum literae
congruum exprimat, etiamsi fortassis non assequatur optimum sensum, sed posset
alius melio^ affer^, non ob id censendus est errasse, aut officium boni
Interpretis non impl^sse -- (...) si semper optimus sensus quaerendus esset,
nullus unquam erit finis interpretationum: sed oportebit nos singulis fere
annis novam cudere interpretationem, aut certe priorem ^mendare.
, whereby they declare that all translations are subject to error, and that
the best interpretation is not always to be reputed the authentic in the
Church of Rom^. And are they not driven in their defense of the vulgar, to
confess errors Ibid Hinc diluuntur omnia argumenta desumpta ex pa^vis erratis
vulgatae editio^ is, quae velex libra^iorum incuria, aut aliunde irrepserunt.
, though they would have them to be small? and that, that Church does not err
which holds such a version of the Scriptures which may be corrected in some
particulars, when there is nothing to be found that crosses faith and good
manners Ibid. Consequitur, Ecclesiam illam non errare,, quae re^inet versionem
Scripture, quae in quibusdam corrigi possit, dummodo nihil sit in ea, quod
fidei aut bonis moribu^ adversetur.
? Do they not go further, telling us, that translations of Scripture are not
to be reprehended for their diversity in the manner of expression; so they be
not contrary Ibid. Non sunt reprehendendae translationes sacrae Scripturae ob
id duntaxa^, quod sint inter se diversae, dummodo non sint contrariae.
to the truth?

If you for the justifying of the vulgar translation cast from you as corrupt,
the Greek, and Hebrew, (from which you differ in ten thousand words Vide
Bellum Papal. in append. ad Lectorem Supersunt. corrigenda ^ docc^ millia
verborum in utroq* testamento, quae differ quantum ad sensum a Graecis and
Hebraeis fontibus, Chaldaicoque Paraphraste observatum est and annotatum
jampridem a Lovaniensibus in notis marginalibus.
) and all the Latin Copies that were found amongst your selves before that put
forth by Sixtus 5. by which they should be amended Praefatio Sixti Quinti,
praefixa Biblijs suis. Auctoritate and tenore praemissis mandamus, ut Vulgatae
editionis Biblia, posthac non nisi uniformia imprimantur, nec aliquid a textu
diversum in margin scribatur. Quae vero antehac quibuscunque in locis impressa
sunt, iu^ta hunc nostrum textum ad verbum and ad literam corrigantur.
: where will you find in the Roman Church the word of God for many ages
together, (unless you be beholding to the corrupt Hebrew and Greek) seeing
your own Pope presupposes that your Latin Copies in some places can neither
be reconciled nor understood Ibid. Nostri Codicesipsi perse aut conciliari,
aut intelligi non possunt.
. And notwithstanding your vigilant Pastors were 22. years before they
performed what was necessary by your Trent-Councell Ibid. Per hosce jam 22.
annos, quia dicto T^identini consilio decre^o ad nostri usque Pontificatus
exordium interfluxerant, licet hujusmodi opus aliquando coeptum fuerit, tamen
ob alias fortasse occupationes intermissum.
, (so careful they were to bring the Word of God into your Church) yet so
poorly did Sixtus then perform his task, that Clement did afterward put
forth the same according to the Greek and Hebrew fountains Praefatio ad
Lecto: ante Bibliam Sixti ^^ recognit. atque edit* per Clement. In hac
Bibliorum recognitione in codicibus manuscriptis, Hebraeis, Graecisque
fontibus, and ipsis veterum Patrum commentarijs con^erendis non mediocre
studium adhibi^^m fuerir, in hac tamen pervulgata lectione -- nonn^lla consul^o
^^tata.
; with many 1000. variances, crossings and contradictings of Pope Sixtus his
former edition. I shall not need to lay down any particulars, seeing the whole
catalogue of their discrepancies is made up by the labor and industry of
Doctor Thomas James in his Bellum Papale. So that the Jesuit may see what
little reason they have to question our translations.

But what is all the Jesuits digression to the purpose? the most learned
Primates observation whereunto he should have replied, is, that all sorts of
people had free liberty to read the holy Scriptures, in the ancient Church,
and that the contrary is now practiced amongst Papists: if the Jesuit confess
this, we will press him no further; for this suffices to prove, that although
we cannot name the Pope that first spoiled Gods people of this heavenly
treasure, yet it is most certain, that they are defrauded of their right;
which undenyablie demonstrates the Jesuits demand to be frivolous and vain,
that concludes the Church of Rome does remain pure and undefiled still,
unless we can point out a Pope, that brought in every corruption wherewith she
is tainted.

Neither will it serve the Jesuits turn to exclaim against our translations;
for although we should confess that some of ours have as many faults as we
know to be in the vulgar Latin, or they charge the Originalls withal; and
that some express it with more impatiencie, then Clemens did the omissions of
Sixtus Praefatio ad Lectorem ult. citat. Non pauca in sacra Biblia praeli vitio
irrepsisse, quae iterata diligentia indigere viderentur.
, yet this is not sufficient to to make our translations no Scriptures, to
excommunicate them out of the Church, or to deprive the people of the true use
thereof. For, is any ignorant, that vulgar translations in primitive times,
were in many particulars faulty, and more gross then any translation, which
is allowed to be read in the Church of Ireland Ibid. S Hieronymus tempore suo
accidisse testatus est, tot scilicet fuisse exemplaria, quotcodices; cum
unusquisque pro arbitrio suo adde^et vel detraheret*
. Did not Lucian and Hesychius at several times correct the Septuagint Hieron.
in libr. Paralip. praefat. Alexandria and Aegyptus in Septuaginta suis
Hesy^^ium laudat autorem. Constantinopolis usque Antiochiam Luciani martyris
exemplaria probat; mediae inter has Provinciae Palaestinos codice^ legunt, quo^
ab Origin elaboratos Eus^bius and Pamphilus vulgaverunt, totusque Orbis hac
inter se tripharia varietate compugnat.
? Were all the translations out of Greek into Latin, without faults, as they
were without number Augustine. de Doctr. chr lib. 2. cap. 11. Qui enim
Scripturas ex Hebraea lingua in Graecam verterunt linguam, numerari possunt,
Latini autem interpretes nullo modo*
? The vulgar Latin now in force by decree in the Church of Rome, abounded with
errors; or else your Popes were full of impiety, that kept all the learned
train of the Roman Church 22. years in work to correct is, before it could
be fitted for an impression, and then let it pass not without downright
errors, as by Clements altering, adding, detracting, contradicting of it in
thousands of places in his after-edition, is most apparent, and has been
formerly declared. Vid. lit. ^. and ^.


Further, whereas* the Jesuit urges St Hierome, that the Gospel of Christ,
by p^rverse interpretation, is made the Gospel of man: or which is worse, the
Gospel of the Devil Reply page 26.
. Our Jesuit has forgot himself: for what has interpretation to do with
our translation? we confess Arius and Pelagius used the Scripture in this
manner, and that your great Roman Interpreter has so behaved himself, that he
needs not to give place to any precedent Heretics See the right reverend and
most learned the Lord Bishop of Kilmore his Epistle to M^ Wadsworth. chap. 3.
page 62. 63. and ad page 69,
. But for which of our good works would he stone us?

Now you may see how great cause our Jesuit has to complement it. Has not
then our holy mother the Catholic Church good reason to bar her children
from reading of such dangerous books, as lead their Readers head long into
perdition, and does she not h^reby regard that Christian reverence and respect
which is due unto the Majesty of Gods sacred Word, more by keeping it from
defiled hands, then our Adversaries do, by casting that pricclesse pearl
before such (wine etc Reply page 27.
.

Here our Jesuit is out of his coule (like a Fencer) in his flourish; For they
are not corrupt translations which his faction detesteth* (for none are more
corrupt ^^e has ^^ authentic) but vulgar, and even now our vul^mpleh, (...)
were but poisoned grounds, new fa^gled d, deserv^^d train? (...) Reply page 26
name of holy Scripture, yet here they shall haveger* (...) of pricelesse
pearls, which (as the Jesuit says) ^n his ^^ before s^yn^. Surely if our
translation be no Scrip^^es, where is the breach of reverence, of Christian
respect? where is the Majesty of the sacred word profaned, if ours be the
true word of God? Let the Jesuit return to his vomit which he has disgorged
against God and his Oracles: I would know whether it is more honor to Gods
Book to be reserved in close Libraries; or in the hearts or hands of his
Saints. Whom he means by Swyne, every one may perceive; even those that
Christ prized at the high rate of his precious blood; the laytie, and all
others to whom this liberty by the Adversaries is denied: But our Jesuit must
learn, that the word of God is of that efficacy, that it can make clean
wallowing swyne, and those which are now dogs, and without, it will force to
cast up their vomit; and in time it will purge and consume Antichrist, and
that foul fabric of iniquity, your A^gean Roman stable.

And further our Jesuit deals like the Jews with the Inhabitants of the
tower of Syloam, Luke 13. 4.
p^^ving quidlibet de quolibet, particular doctrines by desperate events. First
he tells us, that since the most learned Answerer printed his book, there
fell out an example among our selves, which might sufficiently condemn this
their perni^ious licensing of every giddie brain to read their Bibles. But I
pray you what example is this? why, of one Gray, who not long ag^^, ^^ving
inhumanely murdered his own son, excused his bloody fact by the example of
Abram, whom God commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac. Reply page 27
Who will excuse the bloody fact of that distracted wretch? But yet who can
collect any such thing from the Jesuits fond premises, as he labors to
conclude? Nabal was his name, and folly was with him; ever^ (...) knows that
it was co^ceived discontent which (...) his soul in that speculative
desperatnes, and that (...) Devils suggestion and not the scriptures* which
(...) to that evil. And I pray the Jesuit to tell me the (...) why amongst
them images (the Laye-mens books) (...) not wrought the same effect; seeing by
them ^he historie^ of the Bible are likewise represented? Further will the
Jesuit argue, the Devil has abused scriptures by suggestion, therefore the
scriptures should be taken from the tempted for their ordinary use? If this
were good Logic, the Jesuit might debar Christ of his scriptum est Mat. 4.
4. 7.
, because the Devil cited text. Neither can the Jesuit show such gross
abuses in the interpretation of scriptures by those which have been
indifferently learned, as have been committed by the learned themselves; some
of them prooving to be the greatest Architects of Villainy. It may be the
Anthropomorphites did embrace their opinion simplicitate rustica; yet we cannot
deny* but Origin (besides diverse Heretics) did abuse it more* (...) enquiring
after Allegories, never dreaming of the letter. Now if the simple, because they
mistake the literal sense, and the learned, because too much given to
allegories be inhibited the use of scriptures: How can St John's words be true,
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of
God, and that beleiving, ye might have life through his Name Ioh 20. 31.
?

But he proceeds in his storying, In like sort does Franciscus Costerus in the
preface before his Dominical sermons, produce examples of gross enormities
proceeding from this liberty Reply page 27.
.

The Author is of such worth, that we might easily cast off his testimony; but
give him leave to relate his observatio^s.

First, a certain Painter in Prussia, who having read how Lot lay with his
daughters, learned* thereby to defile his own daughters also Reply ibid.
.

Suppose we have one ignorant Prussian, that imagines every example in
Scripture equivalent to a Rule; must Gods word upon this ground be denied the
Laytie? surely, there is no bon sequitur here: What if a Jesuit has
conceived King Butchery lawful by Ehud's example Io. Mariana, de Reg. instit.
lib. 1. cap. 7. Itaque aperta vi and armis posse occidi tyrannum, sive impetu
in regiam facto, sive commissa pugna, in confesso est. Sed and dolo atque
insidijs excep tum: quod fecit Aiod. etc.
, must the Scripture therefore be denied your learned train? the reason, truly,
is the same, the consequent stronger.

Secondly, John a tailor of Leyden, found out in his Bible that he should be a
King, and that he might lawfully have two wives at once, and that all temporal
goods ought to be common amongst men Reply ibid.
.

Who knows not, that the Church has had, even as amongst the learned,
Heretics and those which have raised Schism; so also amongst the Laytie,
Phantastickes even in her best ages and times? Must the Church seal up her
treasure from the people, because they have fond and strange imaginations?
Every eye may perceive that those very books which you deliver for the peoples
instruction, are as subject to vain imaginations as the Scriptures, and
therefore why permit you them to the people, if you condemn us, when as Gods
word is less subject to abuse then the frames of sinful men? And for your
setting up images in Churches for Laymens books, besides their occasioning
idolatry, what error and blindness bring they among the People, as that Moses
has horns, etc. and yet which of these are separated from them? Must
Lay People with us for ever loose the comfort of Gods truth for the error of
one seduced fancy; and must images by you be pressed upon the people, which
occasion in the Church such fearful events of Idolatry, superstition and
error?

But I pray you tell me, what has the Tailor of Leyden done more then your
Roman Bishops? where have his mistakes been more gross? He by his Bible
found he should be a king: They by their wresting their Bibles, that they are
above Emperors (...) de Mayor. and obed. c. Vnam sanctam. In hac ejusque
potestate duos esse gladios: spiritualem videlicet and ^emporalem evangclicis
dictis instru^mur. Nam dicentibus Apostolis, Ecce gladij duo hic, in Ecclesia
scilicet cum Apostoli loquerentur, non respondit Dominus nimis esse, sed ^atis.
Certe qui in potestate Petri temporalem gladium esse negat: male verbum
attendit Domini proferentis. Converte gladium ^^um in vaginam. E^ paulo post.
Nam veritate testante spiritualis potesta^ terrenam potestatem instituere habet
and judicare: si bona non fuerit: si de ecclesia and ecclesiastica potestate
verificatur vaticinium Hieremiae* ^cce constitui ^e hodie super gentes and
regna: etc. quae sequnntur. Ergo si deviat ^er^^^ potestas judicabitur a
potestate spirituali. vide plura.
. He, that he might have two wives: They for Catholic ends, can dispense
with a brother to marry his brothers wife Antiq. Britan. p. 307. Sed quia jure
divino ^^^tris sui relictam viduam haud liceret ducere, it ur ad Papam Iulium
-- Is -- Theologis Cardinalibus etiam dissentientibus, instante Ferdinando ad
contrahendum inter Henricum ^ Regem, and D. Catharinam matrimonium Iuris divini
dispensationem produxit.
. etc. and permit many Stews Agrip. de van. scien. cap. 64. Sixtus Pontifex
maximus Romae nobile admodum lupanar extruxit.
also. He would have all things common. They, will have nothing so
appropriated to others, that some way at least in ordine ad spiritualia may not
belong to them Bernardus Mornalensis in 3 libro de contemptu mundi. Heu, sua
propria deputat omnia REX BABYLONIS.
. Now let any indifferent judgment determine, whether there be not as good
reason to deprive the Romish Clergy of the use of Scriptures in the original
for the Papal abuse of it; as the Lay People for the default of a poor
crazed, though an Academicall Tailor.

He tells us further of one David George: that by the same reading was bold
to affirm, that he was the son of God; of an other in Germany, that
reading the manner of Baptism prescribed Mat. 28. thought himself obliged in
conscience to baptize such young dogs, as his Canet had lately whelped: and
under the pretext of a commandment given in those words, Crescite and
multiplicamini etc. the Anabaptists exercise their abominations in darkness
Reply page 27
.

I need not to examine the truth for the bare matter of fact of this learned
Jesuits variae historiae; for it being granted that all is true, what can be
concluded against the liberty of using the Scriptures? But in regard this
foul mouth imputes all these mischeifes to the reading of Gods book, he
has only declared himself an enemy to that light, which in time will
obscure and consume him and his faction. God styles his Word to be a lantern
to our feet, and a light unto our paths Psalm 119. v. 105.
, And who they be that Tertullian calls Lucifugae Tertul. de resurrect.
carnis cap. 47.
, let the Jesuit enquire. For opinions and practices of like nature with the
Jesuits examples, Jesuits and such kind of enemies to God, may impute them to
the reading of the Scriptures, but the Holy Ghost pleading for himself (whose
words they are) gives another reason Romans 1. 21. Because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds and
f^are-footed beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleannes, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves: Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.
Whereby we may see, from whence such fearful practices and opinions
proceed, not from Gods truth; but from the contempt of it, when men had rather
adhere to their vain imaginations, then that heavenly light. Which is further
declared Romans 1. 28. Even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient. And what ground this Jesuit has to charge the scriptures
with these fearful effects, he says not. But let him tell us, whether does
Gods book afford one syllable to justify any of these practices laid down
by him? nay, does it not deter them from such wickedness? That corrupt men in
the maliciousnes of imagination may pervert the Scriptures to their own
destruction; as we deny it not; so it makes nothing at all against the vulgar
use thereof. And herein our Jesuit is worse then Adam, Eve, the Serpent, or
he that possessed them in their corruptest nature; none making God the cause
of their fearful wickedness, as the Jesuit in these particulars does his
Word. And I think the pollution of Popish Priests might with as much truth be
objected unto them, as to Anabaptists; nay, I dare say, (though I hate to give
them a word for defense) that there is as much sufferance for notorious
pollution within the Papal command, as under any government and confusion in
the world, as will be cleared by their stews, incestuous dispensations, filthy
Sodomies, and mincing those sins which a chaste mind is distempered to
think on Sanches lib. 4 de debito con jugali, disp 46,
, and modesty forbids me to name.

But our Jesuit will conclude the matter, and tells us, if our Answerer cannot
prove (as sure he cannot) that ever any such liberty was granted to the people,
to read such like Scripture, as is allowed amongst them at this day, let him
tell us himself, how far he is from agreeing with the practice of either
first or middle ages of the Church, wherein no such Bibling, nor Babbling
amongst the common people was ever beard, or dreamed of Reply page 27
.

If this Jesuit by such like scriptures would have the same translations
prooved to have been in practice in the first or subsequent ages; or if he
would have us to prove that there were others, which were as corrupt, as he
presupposes ours to be, in common practice; then he requires us to prove
what we affirm not. Yet this we may justly say, that there was never
translation in the Latin Church before Hierome's time, but was more corrupt,
then any he can find allowed in the Church of Ireland since the Reformation,
which may be demonstrated by their own measure or rule; for if our
translations be nearer the Hebrew, out of which they were translated, then
those aforementioned Versions out of the Septuagint, it cannot be denied,
that they are more agreeable to the truth. And that they come nearer the Hebrew
we need not to go far* for manifestation thereof, in regard they are more
agreeable to the Vulgar Latin, which in the judgment of Papists is nearer to
the Hebrew then the Septuagint, and by consequent then any translation from
thence whatsoever. But it has (this notwithstanding) been formerly showed in
this Section, that the Fathers not only permitted the same scripture for the
people to read, as we do now, but exhorted them also to that duty. And this
did continue in the Church of God, until (God and his truth being neglected
and contemned,) humane inventions and superstitious customs, (which did better
consent to Papal tyranny then the Scriptures could any way do) invaded the
Church. And notwithstanding our Jesuits pretenses, we know, it is not because
the Scriptures are so dangerous in their use, that they are not permitted by
the Romish Faction, but because by their light every weak judgment may
discern Papal Hypocrisy Verger. secretar: Pont. act 1. page ^1. Et scio
quidem te non ignorare prudentissimos homines qui diu in hac causa versati
sunt, ita sentire, ut si ea judicanda sit ex verbo Dei in veteri and novo
testamento scripto juxta eum sensum quem ex Epistolis atque actis Apostolorum
agnoscimus ipsos Apostolos t^nuisse and docuisse fore ut vincamur a Lutheranis.
, and thereupon* be inclined to cast off that Usurper which reigns in their
conscience Consilium quorund. Episcop. Bonon. congregat: de stabiliend: Rom
Eccles. Denique (quod inter omnia consilla, quae nos dare hoc tempore
beatitudini tuae possumus, omnium gravissimum ad extremum reser^avi^us) oculi
hic aperiendi sunt, omnibus nervis admittendum erit, ut quam minimum E^angeli^
poterit (praesertim vulgari lingua) in ^^s legatur civitatibus, quae sub tua
ditione and potestate sunt. Sufficiatque tantillum illud, quod in Missa legi
solet: nec co amplius cuiquam mortali^m legere permittatur. Quamdiu enim
pauculo illo homines contenti fuerunt, tamdiu res tuae ex sententia successere,
eaedemque in contrarium labi coeperunt, exquo ulterius legi-rulgo usur patum
^st Hic ille (in summa) est libes, qui praeter caeteros has^e nobis tempestates
ac turbines concitavit, quibus prope abrepti sumus. Et sane, si quis illum
^iligenter expendat, deinde quae in nostris fieri ecclesijs consueve^unt,
singula ordine contempletur, videbit plurimum inter se dissidere, and hanc
doctrinam nostram ab illa prorsus diversam esse, ac saepe contrariam etiam.
.

So that whether you have made a change, or our selves, let the Reader
determine; and whether Bibling in a language that may be understood does not
better agree with the ancient practice; then Babbling in an unknown tongue,
where the people and the stones are equally edified. I also desire the Reader
further to conceive, how the Jesuit has behaved himself in this controversy,
that when he should have freed his Church from the change mentioned, and so
have avoided the most learned Primates argument, he does nothing labor to
prove their agreement with the Fathers, as he should have done, but only goes
about to persuade, that the Fathers never permitted such translations, or as he
terms it, such like Scriptures to be read of the people as are allowed
amongst us at this day. Al which is nothing to the purpose: in regard the
change consists in their different practice from the ancients; and not in
our agreement with them; For if all sorts of people did read the Scriptures in
the primitive times, being invited thereunto by the Christian practice of the
faithful, and the exhortations of the Bishops then living; and that the
Churches under Popish government have been for many hundred of years without
vulgar Bibles approoved and appointed to be read of the people, whereby they
might be exercised in the like ancient Christian duty; does it not then
follow, that (let our custom be what it will) they denying free liberty unto
the people to read them without dispensation, disagree herein from the
practice of the ancient Church, although we do not point out the Pope that
did first seal up this treasure from the people; and consequently that the
Jesuits demand is vain?

Yet the Jesuit continues his pursuit and his Vanity also. By an other
instance (says he) no less vain then the former he endeavors to tell us
again, how we differ from the middle ages of the Church Reply page 27


If no more vain, then the former, the learned Answerer needs not to fear:
well; where is this enclosure of Vanity? I hear S. Hierome say: The Church
does read indeed the books of Judith and Toby, and the M^chabees; but does
not receive them for canonical scripture Hieronym. Praesat. in libros Solomon.
Epist 113.
I see that at this day the Church of Rome receives them for such. May not I
then conclude, (says the most learned Primate In his Answer to the Jesuits
Challenge. page 9.
) that betwixt S. Hierome's time and ours, there has been a change; and that
the Church of Rome now, is not of the same judgment with the Church of God
then: howsoever I cannot precisely lay down the time wherein she first
thought her self to be wiser herein then her forefathers?

What Vanity can the Jesuit espy here? why, says he, Our Answerer plays
Bopeepe, with his Reader, affecting ignorance to wrong the truth; for well he
knows, that the same S. Hierome, not long after, did testify unto the world,
that the first Nicen Council declared the book of Judith for Canonical,
which he had not heard of when he wrote the former words alleged by our
Answerer. Reply page 2^


Here the Jesuit had need to be active, for his weapons are but reeds. The
place he urges is Hierome in the prologne to the book of Judith. And surely
there will be small grounds to make Judith reputed canonical in Hierome's
time. Paula and Eustochium desired Hierom to translate this book of Judith
into Latin, (where, by the way, you may see, if you make it canonical
Scripture, we may conclude, a woman might have and read the same in the
vulgar tongue) to whom St Hierome answers; that among the Hebrews, tht book
of Judith was taken amongst the holy writings, but yet of no authority to
resolve a controversy, being written in the Chaldey, and reckoned among the
Histories; yet because it is read, that the Nicene Council did take this book
in the number of the sacred Scriptures, he did yield to translate the same
Hiero in Prolog. ad librum Judith. Apud Hebraeos liber Judith inter Hagiographa
legitur, cujus autoritas ad roboranda illa quae ad contentionem veniunt minus
idonea judicatur. Chaldaeo tamen sermon conscriptus, inter historias
computatur. Sed quia hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero sanctarum
Scripturarum legitur compu tasse: acquicri postulationi vestrae imo exactioni.
. But where was it read? non ex canone de sacris libris confecto, not out of
the Canon made up of the holy books Baronius in appendice decimi tomi.
notatione ad annum 32, Haud affirmandum omnino existimarem Canonem de libris
sacris statutum esse a Nicaeno Concilio, a quo neminem ausum fuisse recedere,
jure debet existimari. Sed non ex Canone de sacris libris consecto, id
asseruisse S. Hieronymum, verum potius ex actis cjus, in quibus obiter citatus
idem liber inventus ^uit
, this Baronius affirms: where then? in some obscure pamphlet, for any thing
the Jesuit knows: and so far was St Hierome from testifying to the world,
what the Jesuit so confidently affirms, that it cannot be manifested, St
Hierome gave any credit to what he says was only read. Yea, their own
Lindanus from St Hieromes uncertain manner of Speech, [Legitur computasse,]
seems to conclude, that St Hierome believed it not, though he might read it
Lindan Panopl Evangel. l. 3. c. 3. Vehementer ut dubitem, facit quod apud
Hieronymum Praefat in Judith reperitut. and paul^ cost Sed legitur computasse,
ait Hiero. quod mihi dubitantis suspicionem subindicate videtur.
, and says, if the Nicene Council did aunciently reckon the book of Judith
in the Canon, why did not the Council of Laodicea reckon it? why did not
Nazianzene make mention of it? What meant the same St Hierome to say, the
Church at that time did read the books of Judith, Tobic, and the Maccabees,
but did not receive them amongst the Canonical Scriptures Idem ibid. Si
Ni^aena Synodus olim hunc Judith librum cum alijs in Canonem redegerat, cur
annis 80. post ^um non accenset Laodicaena? cur Nazianzenus ejus non meminit?
and paulo post. Quid sibi vult quod idem Hieron in librorum Salomoni^
praefatione scribit, Ecclesiam libros Judith Thobiae, ac Machabeorum legere
quidem, sed inter canonicas scripturas non recipere?
. And Erasmus in his Censure upon this Prologue says, that St Hierome does not
affirm the book of Judith to have been approoved in the Nicene Synod
Censura Prologi ad librum Judith. Non affirmat approbatum hunc in Synodo
Nicaena, sed ait legitur computasse.
. So that it is most apparent, who it is that plays Bopeepe, with his Reader,
that affects ignorance to wrong the truth. Further, what did St Hierome
afterward, that might cause the Jesuit to conceive it in his subsequent
esteem Canonical? He translated it: but did he not the like to others which
he denies to be in the Canon? and where then is his retractation, which he
ought to have performed for abusing the Canonical book of Iulith, if he had
committed violence against Gods sacred truth? Neither ought it to amaze the
Reader, that this book should be said to be taken in the number of sacred
writings; for who knows not that Books were esteemed Hagiographa, holy and
divine from their matter, and in opposition to profane writings, and yet were
far from the authority of the Canon? And if it be a true rule, that one
falsehood makes the whole testimony suspected, what shall we say to the
corruption of this prologue to the book of Judith, wherein Hagiographa is put
for Apocrypha, as may be prooved by Lyranus Lyrs. Prolog. in Bibl. Neque al
quemm veat; quod in Judith and Thobiae prologis dicitur, quod apud Hebraeos
inter H^giographa leguntur, qui manifestus error est, and apocripha non
hagiographa est legendum qui error in omnibus quos viderim codicibus invenitur
and inol^uit (ut pu^o) ex pi^tate and devotione exscribentium, qui devotissimas
historias horrebant annumerare inter apocrypha.
and Johannes Driedo Dried: l. 1. c. 4. Alterum difficultatis nodum, qui est
super libris Judith and Tobiae, conatur dissolvere magister in historijs, cuius
sententiam se^uitur and alius quidam expositor in prooemio Bibliae, dicens in
prologis illis duobus Hieronymi super Judith and Tobiam. mendosum esse codicem,
and in ^oloco, ubi legimus hagiographa, legend^m esse ap^crypha.
.

Here is a solid truth for Iudith's virginity; no witness but an hearsay;
and we know not from whom: So that our Jesuit ought to seek an other answer:
for this is lame, halting and of little strength.

But suppose the Nicene Council in S. Hieromes opinion did receive Judith into
the Canon, yet he will not say the same of Toby and the Maccabees: how can our
Adversaries then deny the change? Why, Gods own are not so much bound to our
compassionate Jesuit, as these suspicious birthes; but how will he array them?
with a canonical coat. The ancient Church (says he) received them for
canonical Reply page 28
. S. Hierome his ignorance were then much to be wondered at: but this testimony
will not be rejected, if the Jesuit can make good, what so generally he
affirms. By the ancient Church, he must exclude neither age, nor judgment,
unless some straglers: wherefore then does he leave out the first 300. and
almost 400. years, affording us not one testimony, but a pretense or two out
of Cyprian to no purpose: and in his proofs, why does he afford us only
particular testimonies, private men, when the Churches declaration is to be
expected at his hands? But let us examine his testimonies. First, he produces
the third council of Carthage Can. 47. We say, this is but a private
testimony, and at best but a declaration, of a particular Church; and a
Council that they allow not themselves Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2. cap. 21.
At objicit Calvinus -- Concilium Carthaginense tertium. can. 26. ubi vetatur,
ne quis princeps sacerdotum, aut summus sacerdos dicatur: sed solum primae
sedis Episcopus Respondeo, Concilium statuisse solum de Episcopis Africae,
inter quos multi erant Primates a quales ne vllus little summus Sacerdos, aut
Princeps aliorum diceretur. Nec enim Concilium hoc provinciale, Romanum
Ponuficem, aut aliarum provinciarum Episcopos obligare poterat.
. Secondly Innocent ad Exuperium. But if this be his Epistle what does he
declare therein but his private judgment? what find we there but an answer
that he gave not ex cathedra, but as he expresses himself pro captu
intelligentiae meae, at the entreaty of a Brother? Gelasius his decree, has
not one word of Canonical in it; only they are styled of the old testament,
which is a phrase used many times by our selves, because they are comprehended
in one volume together, and yet we esteem them not within the Canon. S.
Augustine does not take canonical, for those scriptures which were inspired by
the Spirit of God, and delivered by the Catholic Church for such; as (...)
appear by his words, before the (...) of those books Aug. de (...) Christi l.
2. c. ^^ In canonicis (...) scripturis (...), (...) quas (...) Apostolicas
(...).
. For first he persuades those to be chiefly respected, quae Apostolicas sides
habere, and epistolas (...); that were received of those Churches, in which the
Apostles themselves did ^^^, and (...) they directed their Epistles.

Secondly, amongst th^se which he (...) Canonical books, he could have this
(...) Ibid (...) In scripturis (...).
to be observed, ut ^as, quae ab omnibus (...), quas (...) non (...); that
those which are received of all Churches, should be (...) before those which
(...) Churches did not receive. Certainly, by this we may see what St
Augustine (...) by his Canon, not those which were generally received only;
but those also which were (...) of a few Churches, and those (...) of less
(...) Ibid.
, which were the same that we account (...). So that Canonical in Augustines
sense is (...) those which abound with lies and (...) Ibid. (...) occupen^
(...), and (...) den^^s (...) dicent (...) contra (...)*
, ^^ is (...) by his words, and not to those which is godly books were
premitted to be read by the people, though (because not divinely inspired) they
were not to confirm any point of Doctrine, whereby the same Father
interprets the meaning of that Council of Carthage urged by the Jesuit, in
case he had subscribed thereunto, as our adversaries persuade. And that this
agrees with S. Augustine mind, it shines forth in many places: For although
S. Augustine says, that the Church had them [the Maccabees] for canonical, yet
he tells you, how; not because they were divinely revealed, but for the (...)
and (...): which must needs interpret that the church (...) them for
canonical, that is, of that canon which was fit to be read only for the moving
of the peoples affection, by declaring the passions of the (...): for he makes
them not of that (...) which were (...) inspired, ^ Aug. de (...) Dei (...)
(...) opposes the^ to it ^, non (...) (...), (...) in (...), ^^ quibus (...)
and Machob^^rum ^ Aug. con. Epist G^ud^^. l. ^^ 31. ^^ ^^pe quidem scripturam
quae appellatut, Mac (...) non habent (...) and (...), and psalms quibus Dom.
(...) testibus tuis -- Sed recepta est (...) Ecclesia non (...), si sobrie
legatur vel audiatur.
libri, (...) non Judas, sed (...) canonicis (...) propter (...) passiones
(...) ^^rabiles. This is found (says that Father) not in the holy Scriptures
which are called Canonical, but in others, amongst which are also the books
of the Macchabeas; which not the I^wes, but the Church has for Canonical, for
the vehement and wonderful sufferings of (...) Martyrs.

And so in an other place ^^^aith, that the Scriptures of the (...) were not
received of the Jews as the Law, the Prophets and Psalms, to which God gave
testimony ^^ to his own witnesses: Yet he denies not but the Church received
them not unprofitably; But wherein lay their profit; S. Augustine declares, s^
(...), in the sober reading and hearing of them read*

For Isiodorus and Cass^dorus, their testimonies make no^ the received Doctrine
of the ancient Church.

Neither can those terms of holy and divine wherewith ^ Bellarm. de Verbo Dei
lib. l. (...) 4* Po (...) de ijs, (...) ^ (...), (...); (...) vino (...) etc
(...) illo (...), quae (...) ab (...). epist. 3. ad ^^per. (...) 15. ^^^ (...)
Romana. Athanasius (...) hist. cap. (...).
S. (...), Basil, and Augustine style th^se writings (^^ving his counterfeit
Calixius at Rome) make these books Canonical, it being plain that they were
so termed in respect of other corrupt writings, which were read in the Church
at that time, which practice was excepted against by the Third Council of
Carthage; (...) (as it is urged by the Jesuit) wherein it was decreed, that
nothing should be read in the Church under the name of divine Scriptures, and I
think you will not conceive, this inhibition had any relation to any of those
books we call Apocryphal, they being never condemned to be read by the Church
Besides Bellarmine tells us, the title of divine ^^ given by most (...) and
most (...) to the Prayer of (...), the 3 and 4. of (...), the 3. and 4. of
(...)? and the book of Pastor ^. etc.

And the calling of (...) Prophetical Scripture by S. Ambrose, is to like
effect, it being given to the fourth book of E^^ras, which the Jesuit will
not have Canonical Scripture, though it be lifted up with as great a testimony
from that Father Sixtus sene^ Bibl. sancta. lib. 1. de Esd^^ lib. 3. and 4.
Divus Ambrosius etiam quartum librum putat editum ab ipso Esdra non sine divina
revelatione.
, as the book of Tobie, which he is willing to justify.

But leaving Tobie with his dog, the Jesuit has some further proof for the
Macehabees: They are alleged (says he) as other Canonical books of
Scriptures are, without any difference. And who are the alledgers? Cyprian,
(...) ^en, and Ambrose Reply page ^^
. Two things are here to be examined. First, whether every book cited by a
Father, be Canonical? Secondly, how and in what manner they be urged and cited
by the Fathers? First, it is evident, that there is no ground, that the citing
of a book by a Father should turn his nature, when an Apostles pen has not
that virtue in it self: unless he will conclude all those Poets cited in the
Scriptures, and the book of E^^ch by Jude to be reckoned within the Canon.
Besides, if this Argument have any life in it against us, why (...) it not have
the same strength against Papists, to prove the book called Pastor to be
Canonical, which (as Bellarmine observes) (...) by the Fathers, Irenaeus,
(who gives it the name of Scriptures) Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origin. For
the Bellarm de scriptor. eccles^ Hermen five Hermes librum. scripsit apud
veteres valde celebrem, (...) inscripsit Pastorem. Is lib^^ quamvis a sancto
(...) re^^o lib. 4 caprino, and Orige^^ et divinorum
title Divine, given by Cyprian, and his testimony out of Augustine, there
needs no further illustration, (...) answered in substance before.

Our Jesuit from these grounds; the principal whereof i^ S. Hieromes
ignorance, begins his (...)*

What wonder then if the Church at Rome (...) them also for Canonical (...)

The slightest cause has two or three witnesses, and those* without exception,
that directly agree one with an other in giving testimony to the proposed
articles. The Iesui^e, that pretended the ancient Church, has not given us
^^^ complete proof from the same: and those which he ^^th produced, are but
particular men, with one Provin^^^ll Council, which they themselves generally
approve ^o^, and some of his private testimonies say little to the p^rpose, So
all that our Jesuit can expect is this, that in some private judgments these
books might be judged. Canonical, but never so delivered by the ancient
Church, which defense the book Past^r has from (...) confession; and the
fourth of Esdras by the confession of your own Sixtu^ Senensis (...) lib. 1.
de (...). ^. (...) (...) (...).
. And therefore there is reason sufficient, that our Jesuit should (...) do^^^
his (...), whichupon so vain a confidence he^ has ^rected, and acknowledge
their change; although they have do^^ it upon so good a ground as the embracing
of some private judgments three or four h^^dreth y^^es after Christ, leaving
the stream of the ancient Church, and ^he (...) of the same. Thus the charge
app^^^^th to be (...) and not (...) as the Jesuit hoped to have proved it, that
the Church of Rome has le^^ the g^^^rall practice of the ^^^cient Church, and
has imbrac^^ (...) private (...), not for love of their persons, but (...) in
the (...) themselves they find some shelter (...) their (...).

(...) s^^ing he cannot declare them scriptures by (...); neither by the
testimony of the ancient (...) all is sure, if we cannot manifest* that (...)
books (held now (...) by the Church of (...)) (...) a contrary sentence by the
^^cient church (...) (...) all his skill, (...) ^^ (...) (says the (...)) ^^
(...) th^^ ev^^ the Church of God did (...) (...) before the Church declared
them for Canonical by (...) authority Reply page 2^
.

The Jesuit must tell us what he me^^^th by the Churches declaring them by
public authority. For if he understand a, general Council, it is idle, for
they never came to be so y^ Canus loc: Theol. l. ^. c. ^^. Cyprianus ( (...))
in expositione symboli ^osdem sex libros patrum anctoritate, a quibus se (...)
a (...) Quod id^^ (...) ci^* (...) (...) (...) ^^ordium: Cu^^que dilige^ter de
omnibus exploraverat, omni investigatione comperit, hos lib^^^ esse a veteris
instrumenti am in Psalmum ^ ^^ Sed and i* (...) Cyril (...). ^^ (...). Ca^. ^^
audacious in the primitive times, as to claim the privilege to ^^eepe into
the Canon, Besides he is as fo^d in the consequent, that they have made no
change herein from the practice of the (...) Church, unless we can show that
the ancient Church of God did give judgment, or senten^^ contrary to their
Trent declaration in a general council* For if this were good reason, the
council of (...) have (...) the 3. and 4. book of Esdras, Pastor, their
decretall epistles, Gregory, Si^tus, (yea what not?) and plead in the same
manner that they had made no change, they never being in your judgment, (I
think) condemned by the public authority of any general council in the
ancient catholic Church, that did give judgment, or sentence con^^ry
thereunto. But if the Church might be said to give ^^^ judgment, against the
books of Judith, Toby, and the (...) by keeping them out of the cano^ as no
doubt ^^ may, practice being the best declare^ of men's judgments) it shall be
manifested sufficiently, that they have long (...) received their doom. For
first they were always dif^^^^med in regard of the canon and rule of faith,
(...) that the Jesuit has not produced one private (...) that is plain and
convincing for almost ^^^ years (...) Christ, Secondly* In the (...) Catalogue
(...) by (...) ^all of the a^^cient Fathers and the Council of (...) Canone
(...) these books are omitted; ^^ ^^ part of the (...) Scripture.

Thirdly, the reputed 47. Canon of the third Council of Carthage (which is
their chiefest testimony) by the indgeme^t of their own, was never determin^^^^
that Synod ^arclaij Paraenesis l. 1. c. ^1. Refertur ^ic cano^ council. 3.
Carthaginensi, cui Augustinus inter^^it; sed ex (...) constat, posterioris
Concilij esse, quod paulo post sub Boni ^^cio convoca^^m.
.

Fourthly, in after ages they were by many rejecteda, never getting authority
till the Trent decree.

Besides, these books will by their own light declare, of what authority they
are. The (...) (I hope) will grant that God is as true in his word, as the Pope
infallible in his decrees; and if upon this ground, these books deserve
credit, let the Reader conclude. first, for Iudeth, whether it were ^squam or
ull^bi, we cannot tell, neither I think the Jesuit himself. Again, she
honors that fact of Si^^on Ca^^s loco ^^pra citat. Constat au^em (...)
doctis^imo^ in contrariam sententiam (...), qui tamen semper in Ecclesia
Catholica sunt habiti* Nich. Ly^an. super (...). ^. 1. and super Tobi^^
Abule^^^s super Math. c. 1. D. A^^on. 3. p. ^. 1^. (...) lo^^ tum ma^ime in
fine (...). super (...), (...) etiam sex ^^cros esse (...). Gela^^^^ P^pa
rejecit (...) Macha. Di^^^ autem Gregorius l. moral. ^^ rejjo^^ (...), (...) de
T^^^poribus and Rich: l. 2. Exceptio^^^. c. 9. and Ocham. ^ ^ Di^^ (...) 1. l.
3. (...) Ac D. Aug: -- docet a^ Ecclesia esse quid em receptos, se^ ^^^ certa
side, (...) 9. 2,
and Levy, which the Spirit of God abhors as appears by Moses Genesis 49. 5.
.

And we may see, that Iudeth fitting her self for lies and deceit (...) 9. 10,
, desires God to give a blessing thereunto Ver. 13.
, which action as it condemns the person that does the same; so does it
disgrace this book, which speaks ^^ directly opposite to the Apostolical
rule Ephesians. 4. 25.
.

And as Iudeth does detect her self; so does T^bit also, by his vain story of
the Rival Devil Tob* 6. 14.
, and the driving away of a devil or an evil spirit which should trouble any
with the smoke of the heart, and the liver of a fish T^^ 6. 7*
, contrary to Christ's doctrine, that there are some devils which will not be
cast out, but by fasting and prayer Mat. 17. 21.
: And wherefore should the Apostle Ephesians: 6. 13. have left this out of his
a^moury, if it had been of such for^^ and e^^icacy, as is here expressed?
Further we have an Angel lyeing chap. 5. verse ^^ and a fish travailing on
Land chap. 6. verse 2.

The Ma^chabees contain many things, which decla^^ the author of them not to
write with confidence of God^ Spirit asisting him* as first, that he was an
Epito^^ist of ^^son 2. Maccab: 2. 23.
. Secondly he excuses himself 2 Maccab. ^5 39.
, as if the holy Ghost might deserve a censure. Thirdly, it appears, that his
end is to delight his Reader 2. Maccab. 2, 25. 15. 40.
, and to get honor to himself 2. Maccab. 2 ^6. ^7.
. Lastly, he justifies Razis in killing himself 2. Mac^ab. 14 41. 42. 43.
; a commendation fitter for the (...), then the patient Mar^^rs of Christ, as
S. Augustine Aug. c^n. G^ud. l. c 31. Dictum est quod (...) nobiliter merit
me^us veller h^militer, ^^^ enim (...). Illi^autem verbis historia gentium
^^^dare (...) sed viros (...) huius ^^culi, non martyr^^ Christi.
observes.

To these many more may be added, but this which has been spoken will suffice
to show, that they have dealt without all conscience in obtruding those books
upon the church, which were never (as canonical) received from the Jews, unto
whom were committed the oracles of God Romans 3. 2.
, never delivered to the primitive Church from the Apostles; never aproved by
any father of the church for almost 400 years, never thought of when the Canon
was repeated; and such which by their Physiognomy detect themselves. Whence we
may gather, that the Church of Rome now, has varied in her judgment from the
church of God then, although we be not able to lay down the precise time, when
she thought her self wiser then her forefathers herein.

Neither will his turning to the Epistles of James, Jude, the second of Peter
Reply page 2^
etc, any thing avail his cause; in regard there is a great difference betwixt
those Epistles, and these books of Iudeth, T^bit and the Macchabees; for
although some private men did doubt of the former, yet the church in general
did receive and approve the fame See before page ^5.
; whereas on the contrary, the Jesuit after all his search cannot find ^^^
testimony either of Father, or Council, that accoun^^^ the latter Canonical
for well-nigh 400 years after Christ. And therefore most indiscreetly did the
Jesuit urge (...) and (...) to prove the like doubt to have been held of these
Epistles, with those books, which they absolutely call Apocrypha. Secondly he
abuses his Reader, when he would persuade, that they were ouely particular
Fathers that doubted of these books; when the Jesuit cannot find that they
were received, either of the Jews, or the Apostles, or Primitive Fathers for
certain ages after Christ. Thirdly, to what thoughts of desperation is he and
his fellows driven to defend this adding to the Canon? as first, that
doubtful writings which have been accounted Apocryphal for certain hundred
of years, which our Jesuit calls sometime, may by the public authority of
the Church be declared Canonical: and secondly, that particular Fathers,
(which indeed are all the Fathers that lived in the first 300. almost 400.
years, the Jesuit citing none within that compass but Cyprian and their
bastard Calixtu^ as has been formerly declared) might doubt of the authority
of those books without prejudice, till the Church had declared them for
Canonical by public authority. But if the Canon was not complete in the
first times, I would know when it was made perfect? and whether in those times
tradition was enabled to declare the same? or whether the Fathers were
negligent to testify this truth: and also whether Canonical and Apocryphal,
is a distinction lately invented? All this the Jesuit must resolve, or else
acknowledge the Canon of the Church in the Primitive times to be certainly
known and settled; which will declare their vanity and change in these last
times, to add unto the sacred Canon and rule of Faith, upon pretense that the
Church has power to declare canonical Scripture: A Doctrine invented in
after-ages by the Roman faction; who as they looked for unlimited power, so to
defend their practices, they desire an unrestrayned rule, making Scriptures
what they list. and interpreting it according to the times how they pleas^
Epistola 2. Nich. de Cusa Card. de usu commu. ad Bo^emo^. Ecclesia hodierna non
ita ambulat in ritu communionis. sicut ante ista tempora, quando sanctissimi
viri utriusque speci^i Sacramentum, necessarium esse vi praecepti Christi et
verbo and opere a^^^uebant: Po^^^^ ne tunc Ecclesia ^rrare? Certe non: Quod si
non: quomodo id ^^die verum non est, quod tunc omnium opinione affir^abatur,
cum non sit alia Ecclesia ista quam (...) Ce^^^ hoc te non movent; quod
diversis temporibus alius and alius ritus sacrisiciorum at etiam (...) stante
veritate invenitur, scripturasque esse ad tempus (...), et va^^^ intellectas,
ita ^^uno tempore secundum currentem universalem (...) ^^po^^rentur mutato
(...) iterum sententia mutaretur.
.

SECT. V. How vainly our Answerer betaketh himself to the Scriptures again.
IN all this Section we find nothing, but what the most learned Answerer
before styled a slight In his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 11.
: for where will he manifest the most reverend Lord scared with the ancient
Church, whose testimonies he is assured, afflict these worst and last times?
but that he might first give the sacred Scriptures the precedencie; which is
due to the word of God, and that he might not erect a new faith, which was
never builded upon the foundatton of the Apostles and Prophest Ibid.
.

Now let us see to what purpose the Jesuit has here spent his pains. He (it
should seem) was willing to find out a way, whereby the true Religion might be
known; and first he takes it for granted, that the Primitive Church of Rome
held the true Religion for the first 500. years. Secondly, that this true
Church of Rome did generally hold the chief Articles of Religion, pointed out
by himself in his demand: and then would have men to judge of true points of
Religion, by the testimony of that Church See the ^^^^ites Reply page 29.
.

The most learned Answerer in this place says nothing to these things in
particular, but to the Jesuits whole frame, which he makes a rule to find
out true Religion by; arguing it first, as a needless labor; secondly, as a
tedious rule, in regard matters in controversy might be brought to a shorter
trial; thirdly, as derogating from the Word of God, that Rock upon which
alone we build our faith; from which no slight that they can devise (says
he) shall ever draw us See the (...) reverend Lord Prima^^ his Answer page 11


Upon this the Jesuit has almost spent a whole page to prove that the sayings
and authorities of those ancient Fathers are sufficient to prove what their
opinion was Reply page 29.
in the points controverted: as if the most learned Answerer had denied that
which in the very place alleged by the Jesuit, he undertaketh to make good,
vizr, that the Fathers writings fortify the Catholic cause against the Pope
and his party: And this we say (says the most learned Answerer) not as if we
feared that these men were able to produce better proofs out of the writings
of the Fathers for the part of the Pope, then we can do for the Catholic
cause, (when we come to join in the particulars, they shall find it far
otherwise In his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. ^ Gregor. de Valen. Analys.
Fidei l. 8. c. 8. Fatendum est raro accidere posse, ut quae sit Doctorum omnium
uno tempore viventium de religione sententia, satis cognosc^tur. Sunt enim
Catholici Doctores in Ecclesia ubique diffusa plurimi, qui proinde omnes nec
facile congregari, nec interrogari possunt quid sen^i^nt.
.) Whereby it is clear, that the Jesuit has altogether fought with his own
shadow, or the Jesuit Valentiag, having not assaulted either word or passage
of the most learned Answerers.

For if this most reverend Lord had accepted the rule, I doubt not, but he
would have acknowledged the Fathers able to relate their own belief, and
would further have accepted them as sole Umpier; but accompting this but a
Jesuitical shift, to avoid the true touchstone or ground of faith, the holy
Scripture, he tells him, that allege what authority you list, without
Scripture, and it cannot suffice: which the Jesuit did observe, although he is
unwilling to take notice of it, in regard he supposes that the Answerer will
not be satisfied herewith Reply page 29
. This dispute shows, that the Jesuit has not been so well employed as the
Emperor, for in all this his fishing ne musca quidem, he has not caught a
Fly, and therefore the good man is sleepie that thinks the Answerer has for
got himself; for although he should grant the first* that the primitive
Church of Rome held the true Religion of Christ for the first 500. years, it
will not needs follow, that whatsoever points the Fathers of that Church
generally held without the Scriptures, should be points of true Religion: For
then every point of Morality, Philosophy, Rhetoric, (...), should be points of
true Religion: and this is crossed in the Greek Church, which is a true one,
but yet notwithstanding may not be justified in every particular that they
generally handle. Neither dare the Jesuit admit the consequent: for then the
points of the blessed Virgins conception in original some Canus ^o^. Theol. l.
7. c. 1; n. 1. n. 3.
, receiving of the Sacrament by children Rejoinder page 25.
, and the opinion of the Millenaries Sixtus Senens. Bibl. sancta. l. 5. c. 233.
: of the vulgar reading of the Scriptures Rejoinder p. 139. 14^ 145.
, communion in both kinds Rejoinder page 116.
, that the books of To^y, Judith, and the Macchabees are Apocryphal Rejoinder
page 166.
, must be points of true Religion. Nay, further, the Jesuit urges, that the
most learned Answerer elsewhere confesses, that those which dye in the
communion of the Church of Rome at this day dye under the mercy of God Reply
page 5*
; which surely this most reverend Lord would not have granted to them, if he
had not been persuaded that they believed aright in the foundation of faith:
and yet he does not take any Church since the Apostles times to have been more
corrupt, or full of error then your own. So that a particular Church, as the
Roman, may in some of her members be true in the foundation of faith, and yet
tainted with many corruptions both of manners and doctrine; Is not this plain
by many of S. Paul his Epistles? by the Church of Perga^^s Revel. ^. ^4.
? And therefore the Jesuit may consider how weak a rule he would persuade us
to follow; as if this argument were concludent, because we hold a particular
Church a true Church, therefore that Church must be the measure and square of
our faith.

Further, you shall see he is taken in the train, whereby he thought to
intrappe, for in answering S. Augustine alleged by the most learned Answerer,
he tells us, that the pretense of Scripture only in such a matter of fact as
this, is (...) a (...) ^^^i^king from the question in hand Reply page ^^.
. Indeed, if the question in ^^^d were, whether the Fathers of the primitive
Church held these points, or not; then who would deny, but it were a s^^inking
from the question in hand to fly to the scriptures* But if the contro^ersie
here be concerning the rule, whether the Jesuit has rightly framed an
invention to find out true religion by; then the producing of the true rule,
the sacred scriptures, that a defective one framed by the Jesuit may be
de^ected, is neither from the matter, or question in hand. And if the points
proposed by the Jesuit be points of Doctrine, as I doubt not but he would
have them, yea doctrines of Faith, and fundamental also, why should not he
try them by the Scriptures, in regard he confesses, that S. Augustine
omitting the Fathers provoked the Donatists, and Pelagians, to the try all of
Scripture, for as much as he then disputed of a point of Doctrine only (...) 29
?

But (says our Jesuit) if it be demanded, to what p^^pose then does he fill
up whole volumes with the Fathers saying, if nothing but only Scripture may
suffice? he answers, that he does it to the end we should not thinks, he is
any whi^^ afraid of all whatsoever we can produce against him out of the
Fathers: and no wonder he should be so confident heer^^^, when as he lays
this ground for himself -- No Father but God, do we know upon whose bare
credit we may ground our consciences in things that are to be believed Reply
page ^0
etc.

If the Reader please to consider he shall find the most reverend Primate in
answering the Jesuits demand to detect 2 things; first, the vanity of his
invention in assigning a rule that God never instituted, to find out points of
true Religion by. Secondly, his foolish considence in that rule, that lays
them open to heresy and shame. Now by this they may know to what purpose the
most learned Answ^rer does fill up whole volumes with the Fathers (...) (...)
with that sword, which they (...) to be their (...) to wit, the anncient
Fathers, (...) might (...) those railing Heresies, that revile the (...) of the
^^^^ving God. For although your rule be not (...) of it (...) whereupon to
ground our (...) of (...) yet it will be (...) to show that you are but (...)
traditions, real (...), prayer (...) ^ (...) ^^^roso^. (...) he^. 4. Ne mihi
ca ^^bi proferen^^ SIMPLICITER sidem adhibe^^ nisi de divi^^^ Scripturis eorum
quae ^^cam ^
(...) yo^^ Roman ^^nce to be allowed by the (...) Fathers. And the most
learned Answerer will never oppose the general (...) of the anncient Fathers
in points of Faith, which they have generally received out of the word of God;
but the Jesuit may consider, that this is not to depend upon any authority
without Scripture.

The Jesuit further revileth us for leaving the Fathers, and cleaving to God,
(although we most firmly adhere to them, where they join in a general
consent with the sa^red Scripture, which is as much as the Fathers ^ profess
to do) telling us that in appealing to scripture the most learned Answerer
disagreeth with those of his own profession etc. And to manifest this he
b^^geth in (as he (...) him) Dr Hooker saying* Of all things necessary, the
v^ry (...) i^, ^^ know what (...) we (...) holy, which (...) the Scripture i^
(...) to (...), (...) if any (...) of Scripture did give (...); yet still that
Scripture which (...) unto the rest, could require another Scripture to give
(...) unto it: neither would we ^ver (...) to any (...), (...) our ^ssurance
this may; (...) that unless (...) something which (...), we could not (...) we
do (...), (...) Scripture i^ a (...) and holy rule of (...).

This place of the learned Hooker presupposes but (...) (...) and that
historical; and what (...) this against the (...), their (...) of the Church*
or being a (...) Umpier and sufficien^ (...) to square our ^aith and actions
by? For who knows not that the Heavens cover all things, and yet cover not
themselves? and what may hinder the Scriptures in like (...) to teach all (...)
doctrines of faith and manners, and yet not to point out themselves? S.
Augustines words are in every Papists mouth, viz. that he would not bele^ve the
scriptures, unless the authority of the catholic Church had moved him
thereunto; and yet he (...) all things (...) ^aith and (...) to be (...) in the
(...). ^


But this necessary point of ^aith is a (...) o^ (...) in (...) (...) Secondly,
the Jesuit abuses his (...); for the Churches testimony harely and alone
begotteth but opinion in Hookers judgement^ For (says ^o) the more we b^stow
(...) reading and learning the (...), the more we (...) thing it (...) ^^th
answer (...) received (...) that the (...) with ^^ before (...) ^^w much more
(...)* when the very thing (...) ministered further (...)* And therefore
Hookers* words make ^^thing against the (...); for (...) the (...) of Gods
(...) to (...) the way by (...), (...) which convinces to believe the
scriptures to be the word of ^ Lib. ^. (...). ^
God, (...) And thus, Gods (...) give witness to his word, does not take (...)
s^^^^ciency to declare whose words they are and from what (...) they (...) any
more then it does the suffi^^^^cy of their rule which consists of scripture
and tradition also: Whereby the (...) may see he has produced this worthy
Author to no advantage* ^^ being plain, that although there be something else
to prepar^ the way (...) sid. form. disp^ 3. sect. 12. n. ^^^ Admitti potest ex
hum^na authoritate ge^^rari quandam fidem humanam praevia^^ ad fidem (...) non
^^^quam (...) vel rationem (...) ejus (...) tanquam ^^^ditionem and
applicati^^^^ objec^^^
, yet the mind is altogether (...) by the ^^ght o^ the scriptures themselves,
the Church pointing (...) ou^, and they themselves (...) the Churches (...). So
that the scriptures remain the only (...) upon which a man (...) his faith,
for any thing the Jesuit has pick^^ out of this learned Divine.

^ ^ D. Field (...) his Appendi^ to the book of the (...) par. 2.. ^.


(...) will (...) and (...) all (...) ^^ any way (...) the (...) where (...) I
have in my Epistle (...): That all m^^ (...) carefully (...) which is the true
(...), that so they may (...), follow her directions, and rest in (...)
charge ^^, that ^^ my fourth (...) following, I (...) her of almost all such
(...) a^ I (...) unto her; so that (...) safely follow her (...), (...) rest in
her judgment, in th^^ I say general Counce^^ may (...) in (...) of (...) the
Church her self from (...) (...) of Christian Religion, and (...) in all. This
is a ^ad beginning, being a (...) the (...) him, I lay down (...): first, that
the Church including in i^ all (...) Christ appeared in the (...), (...) and
(...) of (...) Secondly (...) all those (...) that (...) Apostles times i^
(...) all (...) happily not from all ignorance. Thirdly, that the Church
including (...) the ^eleivers living (...) free not only from (...) in such
things (...) to (...) and (...); (...) thing that any (...) to Christian (...)
and religion. (...) without all doubt (...) the judgment of the Church, in
(...) so ^^ to the things (...) in Scripture, or (...) by the (...) that ^ath
been (...). Because as (...) (...) the Church (...) (...) Church (...) of
(...) or Rome, but the Vnivers^ll Church: neither that Universal Church which
(...) be gathered together in a general Council, which is (...) sometimes to
have erred, but that which dispersed through the world from the Baptism of
John continues to (...) times* Sixthly, that in the judgment of Waldensis, the
Fathers successively are more certain judges in matters of faith then a
General Council of Bishops, though it be in a sort the highest Court of the
Church, as the Treatis^r says.

But (says the Jesuit) if yet for all this our Answerer will not be brought
to build his conscience upon any other authority Reply page 32
. I perceive a little thing will beget con^idence (...) Jesuit, that is so
lifted up with producing two old objections to little purpose, but what then?
why, majora his, agreat one of our own shall school him a little better.
Poo^e ^edant, in what manner? By telling him out of Lyri^ensis, that the
ancient consent of godly Fathers is with great car^ (not only) to be searched
(but also) to be followed of us, chiefly in the rule of Faith Reply ibid.
. As if the consent of Fathers were the absolute rule of Faith without
Scriptures; when you yourselves dare not attribute to any Fathers, authority
and power to express the rule of Faith by their bare consent? For Durand
says, that although the Church has power of G^^ on (...), yet that does not
exceed the limitation of the Scripture Durand. ^^ Did. 44. q. 3. ^. 9.
Ecclesia licet habet in terris dominationem Dei. illa tamen ^on excedit
limitationem Scripturae.
. Universal extent of Doctrine is a good directory to truth, but the absolute
foundation of Faith are the sacred Scriptures: Neither are we at all to give
credit (says the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew amongst the works
of Chrysostom) unto the Churches themselves, unless they teach or do those
things which are agreeable to the Scriptures (...). Commentar. in Mat. homil.
49. intes oper^ S. Chrysostom. incerto auctore Nec ipsis (ecclesijs) omnino
^redendum est, ni^^ ^a dicant vel faciant, quae convenientia sunt Scripturis;
.

No testimonies have any strength, that walk without God and his word. The
Fathers adhere to the Scriptures, and therefore we ought to adhere to them; and
so are we to embrace the authority of the ancient Doctors and Councels, as
those that embraced the holy Scriptures in their faith and doctrine; and for
that cause this learned Bishop coupleth them together; We rest (says he) upon
the scriptures of God, upon the authority of the ancient Doctors and Councels
Reply page 31
; inferring thereby, that those which fix their faith, have not only divine
testimonies, but also the judgment and belief of the best men to declare the
same, as good subsidiarie helps to their convincing grounds: which does not
conclude, that any authority besides the Scripture is necessary* but that it is
a fair and convenient rule to bridle men's fancies, least the Scriptures should
be wrested by them which are too much wedded to their own conceits, to
patronage their errors. And what Augustine gave to Bishops and Councels, this
learned Bishop assenteth unto: but I am assured, that the Jesuit will not be
able to prove, that S. Augustine ever embraced such a thought, as to believe
that the receiving of humane testimonies should disable the Scriptures from
being the only concluding and sufficient rule; for he is of a quite contrary
opinion, as is apparent in many places of his writings A^g ^. Donat. post
collat. c. 1^. Qu^si Episcoporum Concilia Scripturis Canonicis fue ^int
aliquand^ comparata?
.

Neither will our Jesuit have us in our app^^le to Scripture to betray our
cause by our disagreement with our selves alone, but also by our agreement with
ancien^ Heretics: and who are those Heretics? The Valentinians, Ennomians,
Marcionists, Arians, and others, wh^ as it is well known (says this Jesuit)
were w^nt to reject all other authorities, and to ^^nce with Scripture only
Reply page ^^
.

If this Jesuit be not a fencer, judge by his weapons both edge and point
being rebated? for his most powerful performance ends not so much as in a
scratch or scarre. And whereas he says we fence with Scripture only; it
seems he knows not the nature thereof, otherwise he would repute it with
the Apostle, a sword for a ^ouldi^r, yea sharper then a two-edged sword. We
acknowledge many subsidiarie helps, but indeed none sufficient to control
the conscience, but Scriptures only: And herein we follow these ancient
Heretics: 1. August^^^ cited by the most learned Answerer, and unanswered by
the Jesuit, Let humane writings be removed, let Gods voice sound Aug. de
Pastor. c. 14. A^ferantur chartae humanae, son^^t vo^^s divinae. ede mihi unam
Scripturae ^ocem, pro* part Donati.
; and further in his book of the Unity of the Church he says, Let them
declare their Church if they be able, not in the speech and rumors of the
Africans, not in Councels of their Bishops, not in the passages of their
disputes, not in their ^ignes and deceitful wonders, because even against
these things the word of God has persuaded us to be ^a^y, but in the Law,
Prophets, Psalms, the Pastors voice, the Evangelists preaching, and labors,
that is in all the canonical authority of holy Scriptures Aug. de Unit. Eccle.
c. 88. Ecclesiam suam demonstrant si possunt, non i^ sermonibus and rumoribus
Afrorum, non in concilijs Episcoporum suorum, non in literis (...) libet
disputatorum, non in signis and prodigijs ^alla^ibus, qui etiam contra ista
verbo Domini pr^parati and cauti^^ddi^i sumus. sed i^ praescripto legis, in
prophetarum praedictis, in psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius pastoris vocibus, in
Evangeli^^a^um praedication^bus and laboribus, hoc est, in omnibus Canonicis
sanct^^um libr^^^m authoritatibus.
. How fairly this Heretic Augustine opposes this Catholic Jesuit! And
further the same Father in a point of controversy openly professes; We ought
not to depart from the authority of the divine Scriptures, to which ALONE in
this matter faith is to be given Aug de Genesis ad li^. l. 12. c. 33. Ab
authoritate Divinarum Scripturarum, quibus (...) lis de hac r^ fides habenda
est, recedere non debemus.
.

And before this Heretic Irenaus a more ancient one, in the same book which
the Jesuit directs us to s^e, agrees with us. We have by none others known
(says he) to obtain salvation, but by those that brought the Gospel to us;
for what first they preached, that by the will of God they delivered to us in
the Scripture, that in aftertimes it might be the FOUNDATION and PILLAR of our
FAITH Irenaeus l. 3. ^ ^. Non per (...) dispositionem nostrae sal^tis
cognovimus, quam pereos per quos Evangelium per^^nit ad ^o^ quod quidem ^un^
praeconiave^^nt postea (...) per Dei (...) in (...) crunt (...).
.

By this which has been spoken we find our Appeal to Scriptures alone, as
the absolute rule of Faith not to be the only practice of Heretics, as the
Jesuit would have it, but of the most Catholic Fathers themselves: and indeed
so uncontrouled a rule it was in points of faith to be judged by God in the
Scriptures, that never any Heretic did deny the same, till Papists
tyrannizing over the truth, brought in new faith which could not be justified
by the old rule. And as all acknowledged this rule most absolutes so Heretics
as well as Catholics used to justify their opinion by other means also. It
is probable that E^nomius was more beholding to his Logic then Scriptures; for
he is painted out by Alphonsus de Castro* as a most cunning Sophister Alphons.
Castro; adv. Haer. l. 5. De Deo. haer. 10. Eunomius artis dialecticae
callidissimus.
. Besides, the Montanists, when they were overcome by force of argument, fled
for shift and refuge unto Martyrs, reporting themselves to have many Eusebius
Eccles, hist. l. 5. c. 14. Quando igitur in cunctis iftis redarguti, argumentis
destituunt^r, admartyres confugere nituntur, multos se martyrs habere, arque
illud certum prophetici spiritus, qui apud ipsos sit, documentum esse dicentes.
. Nay, what practices have the Papists for the most part, that Heretics had
not? sometime they pleaded the Church Opus imperf. in Mat. hom. 49. Nunc autem
singulatim professores haeresium diversarum dicunt. Ecce hic est Christus, id
est Ecclesia. Et illic, id est Ecclesia. Quia jam non audiendo dogmatum verba,
sed videndo eorum Ecclesias Christiani scandalizantur infirmi.
, sometime Fathers See Dioscorus cited by the most reverend, the Lord Primate,
page 24. Alanus Copus Dial. 6. c. 22. Veteres haeretici cum Patres ipsis
apertissime adversarentu^ cos tamen a se stare magna contentione clamab^nt.
Baron. Annal. an. 431. number. 170. Sed mirum dictu, quam calumniose ad suam
ipserum haeresim astruendam citare ijdem Nestoriani consueverint sanctos
Patres, quantaque mentiri jactantia, universos ferme Orbis Episcopos secum
sentire.
, sometime Tradition Eusebius. Eccl. ^ist. l. 5. c. 25. Dicunt (Samosateni,)
Majores omnes etiam ipsos Apostolos ^a sensisse ac do^nisse, quae ipsi nunc
dicunt, servatamque eam praedicationis veritatem usque ad tempora Victoris, qui
13. a Petro Romanorum Episcopus fuit. Irenaeus advers: haer. l 3. c. 2. Non
enim per literas traditam illam, sed per vivam vocem.
, sometime Councels Epi^tola quorundam (...) ad Episcopum Rufu^^. apud Binnium
inter Acta Conc. Ephesin. O Ecumen. Tom. 3. c. 13. No^ autem in sanctorum
Patrum, qui apud Nicaeam convenerant, caeterorumque qui post illos in Ecclesia
claruerunt Eustachij Antiocheni; Basilij Caesariensis, Gregorij, Ioannis
Athana^^, Theophili Damasi Romani, Ambrosij Mediclanensis, reliquorumque qui
cum memora^is consentiunt, doctrina perseveramus etc.
, sometime Miracles August. in Johan. tract. 13. Pontius-fecit miraculum, and
Dona^us ora^it. and respondit ei Deus decoelo.
, sometime Visions August. ibid. and de uni^at, eccles. c. 18.
, neither were they so naked, but they had your great argument of succession
Aug. Epist. 165. ad Generosum. Synod. Lateran. apud Bin. Secreta^sive Consult.
4. Haec pi^tatis dogmata tradiderunt nobis, qui ab initio praesentialiter
viderunt, and ministri verbi facti sunt, eorumque discipuli and successores,
and sequenter a Deo inspira^i Ecclesiae Doctores, id est sanctae and
universales quinque Synodi bea^orum and a D^^ inspiratorum Patrum, qui in (...)
and in hanc regiam civitatem, nec non in Ephesium primum, and in Chalcedona^,
and iterum in Constantinopolim in 5. congregati sunt concilio^
also: and yet we must be Heretics, because we appeal to the Scriptures as ^
most absolute rule of faith. Vaenitas vaenitutu^! I would have the Jesuit
consider that although some of these blind wretches he names could not see God
in the flesh, yet none of them were so blind that they could not perceive light
in the Sun, the holy Ghost in the word, in the sacred Scriptures: and they
whose impudency durst deny any thing, could not deny Gods rule to be the
Scriptures. For the heretic Maximus, (as he calls him) if he speak no worse
then in defense of the sacred Scriptures, we may give him the privilege
allowed to the Devil; that sometime he may speak truth, as the other
acknowledged Christ to be the son of God. And to agree with an heretic in
truth, is not to be heretical, but (as the Jesuit interprets his meaning)
not any whit to regard those sayings which are not Scripture; and herein if the
Jesuit did us right he would a^quit us; for we give the ancient Church so
much honor, that we make her the greatest witness of Gods truth, though we
deny her to be the truth it self, or rule of faith.

And whereas S. Hierome is brought answering the Lucifrians, that they should
not flatter themselves too much because they seemed to have Scripture for what
they affirm: for even the Devil has alleged Scriptures, which consist not
in reading, but in understanding Reply page 3^
; what is this to us? nay; with what corruption and falsehood does the Jesuit
dragg this place of Hierome against the authors* intent and meaning? for the
Jesuit urges it against the authority of the Scriptures and their
determinative power: when that Father presses the same against a show of
Scriptures, as the devil used them in his allegations against our Savior; or
Popes in their (...), corruptly and (...), and not according to the (...) and
true meaning of the text. Yet that Scriptures are the only sufficient rule;
was so generally a received truth, that never any Heretic denied the same,
for although many of them denied some Scriptures, yet they confessed those
which they acknowledged divine, to be delivered to the Church, to reveal Gods
will and to determine all doctrines in the Church, and controversies of Faith
by.

And whereas this wisest of his Brethren would persuade, that we to cloak our
errors with a show of Piety, will not be subject to the sentence of any Judge
whatsoever, but the sacred Scriptures Reply page 32
.

The Jesuit is here in a mist, and sees nothing; for we refuse not the
judgment of any, whether Fathers, Councels, or consent of the Catholic
Church, to judge us by the doctrine of Faith, the sacred Scriptures: but to be
tried without the Scriptures, were to be tried in the dark; Tertullian calling
Heretics, Flyers from the light of the sacred Scriptures Tertullian. de
resurrect carnis c. 47. Qualiter accipiunt Lucifugae isti scripturarum.
: and in his prescription against Heretics, he tells us, that they have a
faith without Scriptures, that they may believe against Scriptures Idem
praescript. con. Haeret. cap. 23. Credunt fine scripturis, ut credant adversus
scripturas.
. And what the Jesuit would make the note of an Heretic, the contrary thereof
did point them out in old Ire^^us his time; Heretics were then known by the
path wherein our Jesuit treades in* railing and accusing the Scriptures, when
they are convinced by them, as if they were not upright, nor of authority; and
because they are ambig^^^^ and cannot afford the (...) to them, that are
ignorant of Tradition Ir^^eus lib. 3. cap. 2. Haeretici cum ex scripturis
arguuntur, in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non re^^e
habeant, neque sunt ex authoritate, and quia variae sunt dictas, and quia non
possit ex his invenire veritas ab his qui (...).
. You see Heretics and their practices, they hate the Scriptures, because they
bear witness of them, that both their works and doctrine are unsound and
evil.

Now, (as if he would make it appear to every weak eye, that we submitting to
Scriptures, as the only rock whereon we build our faith; do thereby anoyde
all trial) he prosequutes this with a simile. For we see (says he) in the
temporal Courts, besides the Law, there must (...) be a Judge, who must
declare the true meaning of the Law, and pronounce his sentence in matters of
controversy according to the same Reply page ^^.
. So likewise the same form must be observed in the spiritual regencie of the
Conscience, if credit may be given to this Jesuit, concerning the written Law
of God.

If all this were true, what makes it against the sole rule of Scriptures?
Judges do not Ius dare, but dicere, and if they do attempt more, they usurp,
which your controuling Judge does, for he will declare what he pleases for
Scriptures, and will prove what he pleases by them: nay, our Jesuit himself
can prove doctrines by Scriptures, that were never known but by tradition
Reply Sect. x:
.

If a temporal Judge trench against the law of Man, as your infallible Guide
does against the Law of God, his sentence may be disanulled, revoked, and the
Judge himself is not free from reproof. And we know that the makers of a law
may interpret it, or give power to others to perform the same. But Gods law
is not made by man, neither has man received power to be such an infallible
Judge August. Confess. l. 13. c. 23. Non enim oportet de tam sublimi autoritate
judica^, neque enim de ipso libro tuo etiamsi quod ibi non lucet, quoniam
submittimus ci nostrum intellectum, certumque habemus etiam, quod clausium est
aspecti^^^ nostris recte veraciterque dictum esse. Sice^^^ homo; licet jam
spiritualis and renov^^^^ in (...) Dei, secundum imaginem ejus qui creavit eum,
FACTOR tamen legis debet esse non IVDEX, De his enim judicare nunc dicitur, in
quibus et corrigendi potesta^^m habet. Clemens Alexandrinus strom. l. 7 Non
enim absolute e^^^ciantibus hominibus fidem habucrimus, quibus licet etiam
c^^tiare contrarium -- Sed oporte^etiam probare quod dictum est, non expectamus
testimonium quod datur ab hominibus, sed voce Domini probamus quod quaeritur,
quae est magis side dig^^ quam quaevis Demonstrationes. Ibid. Hac ergo ratione
non sunt pij, ut, qui divinis praeceptis non acquiescant, hoc est, Spiritui
sancto. -- Quia est ergo ex scipso fidelis, Dominica scriptura and voce est
fide dignus, quae per Dominum (...) ad hominum beneficium. Ipsa autem Iudice
utimur ad res in^ niendas. Wadding L^gat Philippi 3. etc. (...) multa sunt
hujusmodi quae re^^agantibus aut circ^ca (...) Doctor (...) sunt a
Pontificibus; nec enim parvum. Doctorum aggerem, sed Dei sapientiam et spiritum
pro regula, etrectore veritatis habet ^^^cta haec (...) quae falli non potest,
Matter Ecclesia.
. That which God has left his Church, is, the blessed Spirit in his word^,
which Christ has promised shall direct his own in all (at least fundamental)
truth. And what if some desperate men follow deceitful guides, must this of
necessity make the true guiding of his Spirit contemptible? Or must the
Scriptures be uncertain in their direction, because we have men that will not
see, that will interpret by their own passion; and not yield to the truth, or
absolute demonstration?

Besides, how vain is it (...) to expect the Roman Judge for our Determiner,
who ^^y make us a new rule of faith, as large as the Decretals, pretending the
Scriptures or tradition for it, and yet never be an Heretic? For if he might
be an Heretic, it must be for denying some truth before defined, but he
cannot be ^^ (...), for defining any new matters (says your Cardinal
Bellarmine) for then he does not believe against any thing defined by the
Church Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 7. Nam Pontifex si possit esse
Haereticus, solum erit, ne gando aliquam veritatem antea definitam, non autem
potest esse haereticus, dum ipse aliquid novi definit: tunc enim non sen^it
contra aliquid de^^nitum ab Ecclesia.
. And suppose he could not err in expounding the Scriptures; may not they
which receive his exposition, mi^interpret the same, and the people upon report
be carried out of the Roman faith?

Our Jesuit proceeds; It will be worth the marking also to observe, how this
manner of trial by only Scripture, has ever been pretended by such, as not
only interpret the same to their own lust, but also reject what parcels or
books they please; and for this he cites the Marcionists rejecting the Old
Testament. the Manichees; the New; (...), and Cerinthus, the Acts of the
Apostles; the Ebionites the Epistles of S. Paul: Luther, that of S. James etc.
Yet would these men (says he) be tried by none but by the Scriptures, when as
they had* discarded all such S^riptures, as were found any way to make against
their Errors. In like sort deal our Adversaries at this day Reply page 32*
.

But if we do neither interpret the Scriptures after our own lusts; neither
deny any part of the sacred faith that was once delivered to the Saints: if we
adhere to that perfect rule which of it self is sufficient, and more then
sufficient ad omnia, for all things Vincen. Lyrin. Cum sit perfect ^^
Scripturarum cano^. fibique ad omnia sati^ superque suffielat.
: Surely the Jesuit is a Calumniator, and we are no Heretics, not so much as
in similitude only. We know Heretics both add to the Scriptures, and detract
also: This we see at Rome; let the Jesuit espy it amongst us, if he can, in
Ireland. Further, i^ ^^^ ignorant, that Heretics, in discarding all that
makes against them, have rather forsaken Scriptures, then pleaded trial by
them? for what is this but the Preparer of an Index Expurgatorius? so that we
may see from whence Papists had their so profitable inventions. And where can
you find a greater agreement in this kind, then betwixt your selves and
Heretics? for you admit no Scriptures but with your own glosses, which is as
much in effect as to deny all. And if the r^^e concerning God, be as true
concerning Scriptures, Non est minus Deum fingere quam negare, It is no loss
error to feign a God; then to deny the Deity; what will your additions to the
Scriptures merit? You embrace not only Apocryphal books, but whatsoever
superstitions your corrupt practice has produced; and these, because God will
not justify them, you will have to be Apostolical Traditions.

His accusation, that we admit what Scripture we like of. and cast out what
displeases Reply page 3^
us, is the report of a Jesuit; Italian news; a thing which he will never
manifest, as you may perceive by his proof. Ecclesiasticus with them is no
true Scripture (says the Jesuit) and why? it approves Free will too much
Reply ibid.
.

The Jesuit argues but with his own impudency, and no reason of ours.
Ecclesiasticus has no authority to confirm points of Doctrine, and therefore
was justly cast off by Whitaker. That it is so reputed by the Church of God,
is, because it was never written by any of the Prophets, 2. Peter 1. 19. never
received by the Church of the ^ewes, to whom were commended the Oracles of God,
Romans 3. 2. Further, it had never approbation by the Apostles in the Church of
God: and besides these generals, there are many other particulars for which we
reject this book; as from his own mouth, who in the beginning thereof does
not assume to himself that honor, which the Jesuit would confer upon him;
for he acknowledges his own weakness and disability in translating it out of
the Hebrew In the Prologue.
, which I think is not comely for that mind to do, which was assisted by the
Spirit of God: for when Moses said, I am not eloquent, God questions, who made
the tongue Exodus 4. 10. 11
? Besides this, chap. 46. ver: 23. it is not agreeable to the truth of sacred
Scriptures, which is there spoken of Samuels prophesying after his death, and
other things. But I would know, if your additions and traditions were not,
where would you find that new Fabric of the Roman Creed, published by your
infallible guide?

But says our Jesuit, Cyprian, Ambrose, August. Clemens Alex. and other holy
Fathers, account Ecclesiasticus to be holy Scripture Reply page 33
.

If this were proof sufficient, a small authority would suffice to prove the
Canon; for we may as well confirm the book Pastor and diverse others from
Bellarmines Bellarm. de script. Eccles^ page 34. See this testimony cited
before page 163.
testimony, as the book of Ecclesiasticus etc. for any thing he urges from
these Fathers to determine it within the Canon, in regard he acknowledges,
that it has the same Epithites from many Fathers as he professes this to
have. So that if this be the Jesuits best Apology for Ecclesiasticus, it is
much beholding to his free will, but nothing to his industry.

This manner of proceeding (says the Jesuit) Tertullian does discover in
those Heretics of his time, and withal will teach us how we are to proceed
with those of our days, who tread so right the steps of their forefathers*
The conflict (says he) with the Scriptures, is good for nothing, but to turn
either the stomach or the brain. This heresy receives not certain
Scriptures; and that which it receives it draws to her own purpose, by
additions and substractions: and if it receive the whole Scriptures, it
depraveth them by diverse expositions. Where as the adulterous sense does no
less destroy the truth, then does the corrupted letter. What will thou gain
that ^^^ cunning in Scriptures, when that which thou defendest is denied, and
that which thou denyest is defended? thou shall indeed loose nothing but thy
voice with contending, nor shall thou gain any thing but choler hearing
blasphemies. The Heretics will say that ^^ (...) the Scripture, and bring
lyeing interpretations, and that they defend the truth. Therefore must not
appeal be made to Scriptures, nor must the conflict be in them, by which the
victory is either uncertain, or little certain, or none at all Reply page 3^
.

What Tertullian and other ancient Fathers thought of this rule has been
formerly declared: and this quotation does not make Tertullian a despiser of
the rule of Scriptures; but proves Heretics to be shifters and forsakers of
the same; Whereby the Jesuit may espy the heretic. All that bears any show
for the Jesuit is in the tail of his allegation; Ergo non ad Scripturas as
provocandum est, therefore must not appeal be made to Scriptures, but the
Jesuit dare not put in the whole, nec in ijs constituendum certamen in quibus
nulla aut parum certu victoria, which is as much as, if I were to deal with a
Papist in points of religion and should urge the scripture to him; it were in
vain; why? because although they receive the Scriptures, they accept them not
as the rule of faith; besides they add, detract, and what they receive they
must only interpret. They not only corrupt the style by a vulgar authenticke,
but the sense by a Papal violence: and in this case what shall a man get from
a Papist, but cholerike blasphemy and licentious railing? Does not the Jesuit
make this good in his own particular calling Bibling Babbling Reply page ^^
.

We know in this sense every mean may be despised, not only Stephen Acts 7.
^4.
and Paul Acts 28. 24. Socrates histe Eccles: l. 1. c 6. Sabinus, qui haerefis
Macedonian^^ princeps est, dedi^^ opera his refragatur: immo vero, cos qui
Nicaeae coacti crant impetitos and (...) vocat. (...) de vita Constantini. l.
2. c. 71. Magis, magisque lis accrevit and (...) provincias mali illius imperus
invaser^t.
, but Christ himself. What Councels ever choked Heretics, but they croaked
afterward ^? It is sufficient if the Scriptum est may stupifie a Devil Math.
4. 4. 7.
, amaze a Pharisee (...) 17. ^. ^ (...) Eccles. l. 1. c. ^. Cum amplius
^recenti Episcopi ^unam candemque (...) and (...) and exquisitis legis devin^^
testimoniis vera fides esse confirmatur) (...), (...) ^^^, (...) ^^ (...)
victus* ab ^^ pe^itu^ de^eiverit.
, convict an Arian^, consume Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
in the effect or judgment of others: What they themselves conceive hereof is
nothing to the purpose; the Rule is the Rule, though a perverse Heretic
cannot be made to acknowledge it.

Thus (says the Jesuit) we may easily espy the reason, why our Answerer
refuses to stand to the verdict of either Church Council, or Father^,
admitting only Scriptures for the judge of his cause Reply page 33
.

Indeed by this place of Tertullian we may easily epsy, it is the same reason
that moved the ancient Fathers to urge the general tradition of the ancient
Church against certain Heretics of their time, which persuaded the most
learned Answerer to make use of the like weapons against the Jesuit, in regard
Papists, as ancient Heretics shift off the Scriptures many times by
additions, substractions, depravations, adulterous senses, corrupted styles
etc: But to charge this most reverend Lord with refusing to stand to the
verdict of either Church, Counsels, or Fathers etc. is one of the Jesuits
truths; He refuses them indeed as judges of our faith, as the absolute rule,
seclusis sacris litaris, (so do your own Marsilius def. Pa. pa. 2. c. 28. Quas
vero ipsorum auctoritate propria prae ter Scripturam protulerunt sententias,
scripturae sive canoni consonas, recipiam: quas vero dissonas, reverenter
abjiciam. Non tamen aliter quam auctoritate Scripturae cui semper innitar.
Aquinas, 1. part. sum. q. 1. ar. 8. Auctoritatibus autem canonicae scripturae
utitur proprie and ex necessitate argumentando: Auctoritatibus autem aliorum
doctorum Ecclesiae, quasi arguendo ex proprijs, sed probabi liter; Innititur
enim fides nostra revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae qui canonicos
libro^ scripserunt: non autem revelationi si qua fuit alijs Doctoribus facta,
that have any conscience) but not as good testimonies to assent to the truth.
And so far are they from patronizing the Popish cause, that you dare not
accept them, nisi ex cogitato commento, but with mental reservation of a false
comment, or a worse interpretation Index Expurg. Belgic page 5. Quum igitur in
Catholicis veteribus alijs plurimos feramus errores, and ex^enuemus, excusemus
excogitato commenso persaepe negemus, and commodum ^^^ sensum assingamus, dum
(...) in disputationibus, aut in confliction but cum adversarijs. Reply page 33.
. What follows, to wit, that by the confession of his own forefathers,
masters, and fellow Protestants they (the fathers) were no better then mere
Papists a, is both falsehood and froath: for which of our account the fathers
Papists? if the Jesuit knows them, let him produce them: but we believe his
weakness will be seen, before his detection. And surely he dreameth, to think we
esteem the Fathers Papists and slaves to that Tyrant whose usurpations their
writings always resisted. And how can this hang together; We acknowledge that
for the first 400. or 500. years the Church of Rome remained a true Church
free from Papal impostures; and yet (as the Jesuit spares not to accuse us)
charge the fathers of the primitive Church etc. as Papists, to favor of that
leaven, which they ever cast out and expelled? But this the Jesuit has
referred to another place, till which time we will leave it. Yet whereas the
Jesuit still insisteth upon the most learned Answerers words, no other Father
(but God) do we know, upon whose bare credit we may ground our consciences, in
things that are to be believed, and that rock upon which alone we build our
faith is the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: from which no slight
that they can devise, shall ever draw us, and thinks the same are uttered for
no other end but to cast by the fathers, as little respecting their authority
Reply page 33
We take this but for a wizards surmise and a vain repetition: we having shown
before, that the most learned Answerer has given the Fathers their due
respect, and if he should do more, he would deny to God his due reverence. You
that give too much to Saints and Angels, dare not justify, but distinguish
your worship; How much better is it then to deal plainly, and to give unto
Fathers that which is theirs, and to God and his word what belongs to them?
Yea, whether is it greater disparagement to the Fathers, to make them stoop to
God or man? We do the first; you do the last: where you dare, you purge them;
they shall not speak one word against Babylon, but by inventing some device
you will deny them Vide lit. ^.
, and if such dealing will not serve, then down with their buildings, giving
them no honor at all Index expurg. Hispan^ard. Qui^ogae. edit. Madilti ann:
1584. (in fine literae ^) Deleatur tota Epistola Vdalrici. Episcopi Augustini,
de ^^libatu cleri. Item totus liber Bertrami presbyteri de corpore and sanguine
Domini, penitusauferatur.
.

Lastly, the Jesuit says, we will now discover for conclusion of the whole,
how far herein the Answerer differs from those Fathers of the ancient
Church of God, with whom he pretends to have so great affinity. And this we
will declare by the express words of an ancient learned Father, Vine^^tius
Lyrinensis Reply page 34
etc.

How willingly the Jesuit would have the ancient Church to be as corrupt as
themselves may appear by this his struggling with one only Lyrinensis, whose
words largely translated speak not any thing in effect to prove his intention:
for who is ignorant that heresies are novelties, and that Heretics would
justify their new follies by the ancient testimonies of the sacred
Scriptures? neither by them alone, but the ancient Fathers also? Yet must this
prove the Answerer to differ from the Fathers of the ancient Church, because
with them he uses the rule that was ever received in the Church with more
truth and faithfulness then Heretics have done? Surely, the Jesuit has paid
it here; for he that every where dreameth of false logic in others, does not
here speak true sense himself.

Lyrinensis makes 1. one general sufficient rule for all things, the sacred
Scriptures Lyrinens. Duplici modo munire fidem suam Domino adjuvante deberet:
Primo scilicet, divinae legis autorita^e. --. Cum sit perfectus Scripturarum
canon sibique AD OMNIA satis superque sufficiat.
. 2ly. another* useful in some cases only Ibid. Tum deinde ecclesiae
catholicae traditione. -- Sed neque semper, neque omnes haere^^s hoc modo
impugnandae sunt.
, yet never to be used in those cases without Scriptures, which is, the
tradition of the Universal Church Ibid. Multum necesse est propter tantos tam
varij erroris anfractus, ut Propheticae and Apostolicae interpretationis linea,
secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus normam diriga^ur, In ipsa autem
catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod ubique quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc est etenim vere, proprieque
catholicum.
. The first was used by the ancient Church from the worth that is in it self
Ibid. Sibique ad omnia superque sufficiat.
, the other from the perverseness of Heretics that many times abuse the sacred
rule Ibid. Quia videlicet scripturam sacram pro ipsa sui altitudine non uno
cod^mque sensus universi accipiunt, sed ejusdem eloquia aliter atque aliter
alius atque alius interpretatur -- Aliter namque illam Novatianus, aliter
Sabeilius.
. Bring us now one Scripture expounded (according to Lyrinensi^ his rule Ibid.
Quod ubique quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est.
) by the universal consent of the primitive Church, to prove traditions,
confession, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, image worship, Free Will etc. in your
sense, and we will receive it: if you cannot, confess the truth, that you
deal like heretics; and acknowledge that we follow the practice of the
ancient times.

And here I would have the Jesuit consider how many of their own do cry, the
Scripture Sanders. Rock of the Church, chap. 8. page 193. They have most
plain Scriptures in all points for the Catholic faith, and none at all
against the same. Bristo. Mot. 48: Most certain it is that from the beginning
of Genesis to the end of Apocalypse, there is no text that makes for you
against us, but all for us.
(though it be, more Iudeorum, as they templum Domini) and further with greater
pretended reverence kiss antiquity, not that they love either, but because the
one is not so light as the other to lay open their errors and detect their
deformities.

Moreover whereas Christ made it a note of his sheep to hear his voice, this
good man would have it to be the sign and token of an Heretic; but if
Heretics make use of Scriptures, this confirms the rule to be what God made
it, though it cannot justify their practice that abuse the same. And for
brutish and wild interpretations of Heretics which this Father makes
woolvish, let the Jesuit cast an eye to their own, and who has dealt so
grossly as they have done See before page 149 ^it. b.
? And although they brag of Unity and interpretations of good consent, yet
(for any thing we see) it is to be suspected when their Popes could not agree
about the Text, that he (as his scholars) may fail to accord in
interpretation thereof. Further I could wish it were examined, whether we or
they fail in the Rule of interpreting the Scriptures according to the
universal tradition of the Church and analogy of faith, and then it would
easily appear (if this be a note of Heresy) who the Heretics are. For the
Fathers believed but half the faith according to that you interpret; and to
make those points, traditions of the universal Church which needed decrees to
authorize them 1500 years after Christ, must needs conclude egregious vanity.
But who knows not that you had rather be tried by the Moon and seven
Stars, which cannot so easily detect the works of darkness, then the
Scriptures, the fountain of light, that will declare the least error in your
doctrine or practice Clem. Alex: Serom. l. 7. Sicut improbi oueri excludunt
Paedagogum: ita etiam hi arcent Prophetias a sua Eccles^a, suspectas ^as
habentes propter rep^eh ensionem and admonitionem. Quamplerima certe
consarciunt mendacia and figmenta, ut jure videantur non admittere Scripturas.
? So that we disclaim not the Fathers, but in your Fantasies; for we allow
them at all times what they ought to have; and when by an universal consent
they declare what the Apostles delivered to the Church we grant them a more
centrouling authority. Yet we are not ashamed to distinguish betwixt God and
man, (though you blush not to equal them) and to make Gods ipse diceit a
convincing rule, which we cannot grant to man, or the best of men, the Fathers
and Bishops of the ancient Church, where they come alone without the
Scriptures.

Our Jesuit has done much in this Chapter, to wit; proved that we prefer
God before men; and I have showed that we deny not to men what God has allowed
to them.

SECT. VI.
AND least Vanity should be absent for a little, here the Jesuit proceeds to
take a veiw. How vainly our Answerer excuses his disclaim from the Fathers
Reply page 36
? But how vainly he charge the Answerers most learned observation will
presently appear.

Here (says the Jesuit) our Answerer meets us with the same ancient Father
Vincentius Lirinensis who though a great Commender of the method of confuting
Heresies by the consent of holy Fathers, yet is careful herein to give us this
caveat, that neither always, nor all kind of Heresies are to be impugned
after this manner, but such only as are now and lately sprung, namely when
they do first arise, while by straitnes of the time it self they be hindered
from falsifying the rules of the ancient Faith, and before the time that their
poison spreading farther, they attempt to corrupt the writings of the ancient.
But far-spred and inveterate heresies are not to be dealt withal this way,
for as much as by long continuance of time, a long occasion has lion open unto
them to steal away the truth. Out of which saying our Answerer inferres that
our Heresies being farre-spred, and of long continuance, have had time enough,
and place to coin, and clipp, and wash the (...) of Antiquity, wherein (says
he) they have not been wanting, and therefore must not be impugned by consent
of holy Fathers Reply page 36
.

Here is little Vanity to be seen as yet; how the Jesuit will make it
appear remains to be done; and this he will accomplish by espying a
manifest contradiction in his words against himself: for above he more then
once (says the Jesuit) (...) our opinions profane novelties, and heretical
novelties. If Novelties, how are they now become Heresies far spread, and of
so long continuance, that we are bold to make duration the mark of our Church
Reply ibid.
?

The Jesuit imagines here Contradiction, and why? because ^^ opinion of long
continuance cannot be styled a Noveltie: So that if we can manifest, that a
Noveltie may be of long continuance our Jesuit is deceived in his slippery
hopes. And what will he make novum in Religion, but that, which is not
antiquissimum? Our Savior when he would declare Pharisaicall traditions to be
Novelties did not respect their long continuance in the corrupt estate of the
Church, but says, ab initia non fuit sic Mat. 19^8
, that they were not from the beginning delivered by God, or practiced by the
Church. So that if the duration and antiquity of your opinions be but humane,
that is, not Apostolical, neither from Apostolical grounds* It ^^inke and
justly, that they may be esteemed new and novelties Terrullian^ de praescrip^
panlo ante medium. Si haec i^^ sint, constat pro^^ de omnem doctrinam, qu^ cum
illis Ecclesijs Apostolicis matricibus and originalibus sidei conspiret,
veritati deputandam id sinc dubio tenantum, quod Ecclesiae ab Apostoli,
Aposto^^ a Christo, Christus a D^^ suscepit, reljquam vero omnem doctrinam de
mendacio praejudicandam, quae sapia^ contra veritatem Ecclesiarum, and
Apostolorum, and Christi, and Dei.
, for a point is (...) in religion that did not proceed from God and his
blessed Spirit either in terminis, or by deduction from his word that is the
Ancient of days whatsoever pretenses of du^^tion and continuance may be
supposed.

(...) was never generally received by the Roman faction themselves before the
Council of Lateran ^corus in 4. d. 11. q. 3. apud Bellarm. de Euchil. 3. c.
23. ditis, ante Lateranense concilium non fuisse Dogma fidei
transubstantiationem. ^ Rhem. An* not. upon the 1. of. Tim. 6. ^^.
; and yet we are condemned for calling this a Noveltie; whereas it crept in
many hundred years after those words which they themselves account* Novelties
both in the Arrians which had their Similis substanti^, and Christ to be ex
non existentibus, and also other Heretics that had their Christiparam and such
like ^, new coined terms agreeable to their sects. Wherefore it is not enough
to free your doctrines from being Novelties: because they are of long
continuance: seeing the words of ancient heretics being of more long
continuance and auncienter in birth, even many hundred years before them,
might better claim that privilege and are nevertheless styled Novelties by
your selves. And as the Rhemists acknowledge of words, so we say concerning
points of doctrine, that, we are to esteem their newnes or oldnes by the
agreeablenes or disagreeablenes they have to the true sense of Scriptures, the
form of catholic faith and doctrine them* ibid.
etc. and not because it is long since they had their birth in the world. So
that you see Novelties are new doctrines which are neither delivered in
Scriptures openly and in expressetermes, or lie couchant in the same, but had
their births in aftertimes being framed by the phantasticke illusions of
Satan, the producer of falsehoods and heresies; which is conformable to the
Apostles doctrine; for what 1. Tim. 6. 20. he terms profane novelties, Gal.
1. 8. he expresses to be new doctrine, (...) ibid.
which is not the same, but besides as the Rhemists ^, or against that which
the Apostle did deliver to the Church. And therefore our Jesuit and his
contradiction, contradict his imagined* Vanity and not prove or confirm the
same.

For his other Collectaneas; that if they be prophant Novelties then by the
Rule of Lyrinensis they ought to be impugned by producing and confirring the
agreeing sentences of ancient Doctors. Secondly that the consent of ancient
Father is called the rule of the ancient Faith by Lirinensis in the place
alleged Reply page 36
.

1. We have showed before See before Sect. 5. prope finem.
that we dissent not from Lyrinensis being rightly understood: For all kind of
heresies are profane Novelties howsoever they differ in extent or age; Yet all
kind of Heresies are not to be impugned (though profane Novelties) after this
manner in Vincentius Lirinensis his judgment. Besides Lirinensis makes not
the Fathers rules absolutely, but because they assisted at that time the
Scriptures to rule unruly heretics that would wrest the same; so that when the
Fathers cannot do the work for which they were used, that is, stop the
Heretics mouths, because that having corrupted antiquity, they will also
pretend it, then he thinks such heresies (though profane Novelties) are not
to be dealt withal this way. And for his second observation (although the
Jesuit collecteth untruly,) yet who will deny consent of Fathers to be the rule
of faith according to that Fathers meaning? For in the immediate quotation
following out of the same Father we find, that it has been the custom of
Catholics to try their faith two manner of ways; FIRST by the authority of
the Divine Canon; next by the tradition of the Catholic Church Vine^^.
Lirinens* adv. Profanas Novationes. Primo scilicet divine legis auctoritate,
tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione.
; not for that the Scripture is not sufficient in it self: but because very
many interpreting the divine word at their pleasures do conceive varying
opinions and errors Ibid Hic forsitan requirat aliquis: cum sit perfectus
Scripturarum canon sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat* quid opus est ut
eiecclesiasticae intelligentiae, iungatur autoritas? Quia videlicet Scripturam
sacra^^ pro ibsa sui altitudine, non uno codemque sensu universi accipiunt*
quod ^^ -- Confideratio temporis -- (...).
. Now in these words, who does not see, that Lyrinesis does make consent of
Fathers not to be an absolute or sufficient rule of Faith, as he does the
Scriptures, but a directive rule to the right understanding of the absolute and
sufficient rule of faith which is the holy Scriptures? Neither can we otherwise
confecture, but that Lirinensis gives, this directive Rule for his own time
Ibid. Ad
and not to all succeeding ages* for by many particulars it is apparent, that
the foundation and ground of his whole discourse received being from those wise
experiences which the present age he lived in, and precedent had afforded him.
Besides we have many Mathematical instruments which are rules in their kind,
as the Globe, Quadrant, etc: and there are many books written to assist us in
their use: now I hope you will not say, the rule to use the instrument, is the
absolute rule it self to draw a Conclusion in the Mathematickes! And why
likewise may not the Fathers that assist and direct in understanding of the
Scriptures, be Rules (as Vincentius Lirinensis only styles them) in their
kind, and yet give place unto the word of God, as the absolute and sufficient
rule of faith?

Moreover Rules and Measures are either original, which we call the Standard,
or those which are proportioned and fitted thereby: and might not this Father
make the Scriptures as the Standard, the only absolute rule, sufficicient of
it self (as he terms it) to try points of Catholic Faith; and yet grant
the general consent of all Bishops and Priests of the Catholic Church in a
general Council to be a Rule proportioned, fitted and squared thereby? Who
knows not also that the Standard is a most absolute and controuling Rule,
without doubt and exception, when there are many things that may call in
question the truth of the other, so that it may need to be corrected thereby?

Now what does the most learned Primate say that crosses Liriuensis? This
ancient Father acknowledges the authority of the divine Canon sufficient of
it self to try the Catholic Faith: His learned Pen confesses, Gods Word
to be that rock alone upon which we build our Faith. Lirinensis to avoyde
jarring interpretations, would likewise from the Custom of Catholics have the
Traditions of the Catholic Church, to wit, the general consent of Fathers to
be requisite at some times to the understanding of heavenly Scriptures: And for
any thing I can find, the most reverend Primate does not urge a syllable
against it. So that until the Jesuit can show further then he has done,
Vanity I think will turn Friar and remain with him.

And although this Jesuit does make the Fathers upon Lirinensis his experiment
the absolute rule; yet a further experience persuades them to leave Lirinensis
at sometimes; which although they will not do with open face, yet by covered
shifts they labor to avoyde what they pretend to be his direction. For they
make the Fathers doctors not judges; to be followed, for their reason, not for
their authority Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 10. Aliud est interpretari
legem more Doctoris, aliud more judicis: ad explanationem more Doctoris,
requiritur cruditio, ad explicationem more judicis requiritur auctoritas Doctor
enim non proponit sententiam suam ut necessario sequendam fed SOLVM quatenus
ratio suadet.
, (which destroys their judgship;) to be rejected where excogitato commento
they cannot help Vasquez. Ies^ l. 2. de Adora disp. 3. c. 2. initio
Recentiores aliqui pondere hujus (Concilij Elibertini) quasi oppressi, tanquam
optimum ^ffugium elegerunt, authoritatem Concilij negare, quod Provinciale
fuerit, -- nec a Pontifice confirmatum: etc. -- Et sane, si alia via Concilio
satisfieri commode non possit, hoc nobis effugium sufficeret.
. So Maldonate upon the xvi. of Matthew Maldonat. in 16* Mat. Portae inferni
non praevalebunt. Quorum verborum sensus non videtur mihi esse, quem omnes
praeter Hilarium quos ^^gisse m^mini authors putant.
, Bellarmine upon the vi. of Mark and the v. of James Bellarm. de Extrem:
Vnct. c. z. Duae Scripturae prose^^tur ab omnibus, una ex cap. 6. Marci, altera
ex cap. 5. Iacobi. De prio^ non omnes convenient, an cum Apostoli ungebant.
oleo infirmes, and curabant; illa fuerit unctio Sacramentalis, de qua nunc
disputamus: an solum fuerit figura quaedam, and adumbratio hujus Sacramenti Qui
tuentur Priorem sententiam, ut Tho, Waldens. loco citate, and Alphons. de
castro. l. de Haer verbo. Extrema Vnctio, ca ratione ducuntur, quod Beda,
Theophila^^us and OE cumenius in commentarijs Marci and Iacobi videantur dicere
eandem esse unctionem, cujus fit mentio in utroque loco. Sed profecto
probabilior est sententia posterior que est Ruardi -- and lansenij -- and
Dominici a Soto -- and aliorum. Et mihi certe eo etiam nomine gra^^^or, quod
videam Lutherum, Calvinum, and Chemnitium locis citatis esse in priore
opinione: existimant enim illi eandem esse unctionem Marci 6. and lu^^^i 5.
, reject the authorities of Fathers, and any may tell me, wherefore.

Besides the suspicion of this rule is detected; that when a wrangling Papist
will question the true sense of the Fathers (as it is easy to be done even
where the mind is convinced) how can the fathers be the assured touchstone to
try all controversies when the Pope may order all matters as he pleases
Gregor. (...): Anal. Fidel l. 8. c 8. Quod si per sententiam Doctorum aliqua,
fidei controversia non (...) commode componi posset (eo quod de illorum
confensu non (...) constare^) ^^ tunc constat authoritas Pontifici.
?

But hereby we may see who fear the judgment of Antiquity, you, or our
selves; We receive them without appeal, if true and not forged, if clear and
not ambiguous, in points that they were bound to believe, and teach from the
sacred Scriptures upon pain of damnation: You not at all, unless, when you
please, they will stoop unto and undergo a Papal explanation.

Yet thirdly (the Jesuit tells us) Lirinensis, as we see does not so withdraw
the trial of inveterated Heresies from the consent of holy Fathers, that he
will have it brought to Scripture only, as our Answerer pretends: but gives
us to understand that when they cannot sufficiently be convinced by holy writ,
then the authority of general Counsels (wherein by the consent of catholic
Priests, and Prelates of the Church they have been condemned) should suffice
us to avoyde and detect them Reply page 37
.

Lirinensis makes the sacred Scriptures the only absolute rule fit for all
times and occasions Vincen. Lirin: adv. profanas Novat Cum sit perfectus
Scripturarum canon, ^^^ique ad omnia satis super^^^ sufficiat
, but this directive help of Fathers he applies to sometimes only Idem Sed
noque semper neque omnes hae reses hoc mo* ^^ impugnan^^ (...).
. But will the Jesuit persuade us, that, when Lirinensis does withdraw the
trial of inveterated Heresies from the consent of holy Fathers, it is left to
other judgment on earth besides the Scriptures? Surely, the Jesuit did better
adhere to the Fathers in his Epistle Dedicatory, then in this place, for there
they were the assured touch stone to try all controversies betwixt us, whether
we vary about the true sense of holy writ, or about any Article of Christian
belief whatsoever* but here they may be suspended as he acknowledges in
Lirinensis his opinion, and in some reserved cases neither Scriptures nor
Fathers must be the rule, but the authority of general Counsels etc. So that
you see their rule is that which best befreinds them. The Fathers at one time
shall help and be the assured touchstone; A general Council (not ancient I
hope but of the Popes calling) when the Fathers fail; But for the Scriptures,
their confidence has not been so great therein, as to make them alone a rule
for the least article of their new faith.

And this Jesuit that even now would persuade others to believe that we adhere
to the Scriptures only, because we would not be subject to the sentence of
any* judge, does here detect himself, what judge he will allow; The Scriptures
must be locked up, Bibling is Babbling, and general Counsels must do the
work, well! why then do they not confirm Constance and Basil? If they dare
not submit to them, why do they vainly pretend their authority? But it may be
they are not confirmed by the Pope; So that you may see by the Iesuit's
wavering, his aim is only to have that Exlex (who ought at this time
principally to be corrected for his heresies) to be both the rule and the
Judge.

But we are as free (says the Jesuit) from the imputation of Heresy, as our
Adversaries are far from finding out any such general Council, in which we
have been condemned Reply page 17
.

Have you no better Apologies then this to exempt you out of the Catalogue of
Heretics? The Pelagians had as good, and pleaded the same against S.
Augustine, who answered them with scorn: Aut vero congregatione Synodi opus
erat, ut apertu pernicies damnaretur? quasi nulla haeresis aliquando nisi
Synodi congregatione damnata sit Aug. con. ^. Epist. Pelag 4, 4 c. 12.
. What, is it needful to assemble a Synod that a manifest corruption should
be condemned? as if no Heresy has at any time been condemned without the
calling of a Synod.

And they are as surely branded for Novelists and Sectaries (says this
Loyolist) as their opinions have been certainly condemned by many the like
general Counsels Reply page 37
.

I wonder where the Jesuit will find them; nay, what have they besides the
names of general Counsels that may honor the assembly of their so many
Bishops? Some of these you dare not confirm, why then should they have
general faith and esteem amongst us? If you dare not subscribe to your
Councels, for what reason should they have power to condemn us? Some against
Faith given* have martyred those which you acknowledge ours: Your Trent Synod
has anathematized the Catholic Church and Doctrine; And I am persuaded if
that faction had as much power as they give to their Head, the Church
Catholic should not be long from martyrdom also.

Besides, whose opinions have General Councels condemned? ours? Surely, then
our pretended Heresies are ancienter then Luther: he is not the first that
taught our doctrine. But where are your Councels (Mr Malone) that condemn the
holy Scriptures, the four first General Councels, the three Creeds? These are
ours, to them we subscribe. If these are Novelti^s, we are Novelists; if this
be doctrine of Sect^ries, the Heretic has justly styled us: But if the
Jesuit cannot bring Councels, that have condemned God in his Word, the
Primitive Church in her Decrees, and the general Confessions of Faith, I hope
he will upon better thoughts except Noveltie from our Faith, and Schism from
our Persons. Neither let the Jesuit run about as in other-places he has
done, to coin us an other Faith, when as he himself revileth us for adhering
to the Scriptures Reply Sect. ^.
; when as our Laws justify our embracing the four first General Councels,
and our Liturgy does enclose the Creedes. The Jesuit continues his vain
discourse.

And as (says he) they never yet assembled any General Council of Catholic
Priests and Prelates of that Church which is dispersed through many Nations,
neither by reason of their fatal discord amongst themselves will ever be^ able
to assemble the same, so we may for ever live secure Reply page ^7
.

Every Jesuit is not a Prophet; We may have a Co^^^^ll, such a one where your
Papa shall not be Presid^nt, ^or your Clo^ke-bagge carry the Spirit that shall
direct i^: when the Church of Rome it self shall be fr^^^ from that Faction
which now does tyrannize over it, and the true Bishops thereof shall enjoy that
authority which most truly is their own by divine institution, and Friars
and Jesuits may tur^e Turks for any station, that they shall have in the
Hierarchi^ of the Church of God Censura ^^^positionum ad sacram Facultatem
Theo^^giae Parisi^^. sem allat. etc. Pri^^a Propositio. Hierarchia
Ecclesiastica constat ex Pontifice, Cardinalibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and
Regularibus. C^^sura. In ista prim^ propos^ti^^^ (...) ratio mem^^^rum
Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae, seu sacri Principat^^ divina ordinatione instituti,
est manca, and redunda^^ atque inducens in errorem.
.

Finally (says the Jesuit) the reason of this his ^ergiv^rsa^ion from the
Fathers authority is vain and idle, when he says that we have coined,
clipped, and washed their monuments. And why, I pray you? For though (says he)
he endeavor to prove this by several instances, yet not one does he produce
that will serve his turn, and therefore tells the most learned Answerer, that
he is bound to bring forth ^^und proo^^ of this his accusation, under pain of
incu^ring the brand of forgerie and spiteful calumny himself Reply page 38
.

We may perceive the Jesuit is unwilling to enter into dispute concerning
these particulars, and therefore ^^sts them off as wanting proof: Yet indeed
the matter is so notorious in many of the instances, that your own have espied
the counterfeits, and branded them with their Censures. But the Jesuit might
have forsaken his self flattery, and have taken notice, that there is more
proof against the particulars, then he had answered unto. For is it possible,
that there should be little respect given to the Church of Rome before the
Council of Nice, as their Cardinal and after-Pope urged by the most reverend
the Lord Primate, affirms, when we find the first Bishops of that Church,
writing such controuling Epistles; Councels before that of Nice, giving such
unlimited power, and the Roman Emperor qualifying with such unmeasurable
Principality their Roman Bishop?

But because the Jesuit desires a further manifestation of these Counterfeit^,
I will take them as they are laid down in order by the most reverend the Lord
Primate, beginning with your Crafty Merchant, Isidorus Mereator, that is
justly charged with counterfeiting Decretall Epistles etc.

Our Jesuit has a mind to justify these bratt^, and to make Isidorus his
merchandise to pass for good wares, yet Bellarmine confesses, that they are
infected with Error script into them Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 14.
Aliquos errores in eas irrepsisse, non negaverim, nec indubitatas esse
affirma^e audeam. ^ Cusanus de Concord. cath. l. 3. c. 2. Sunt meo judicio illa
de Constantino apocrypha, sicut fortassis etiam quaedam alia longa and magna
scripta Sancti^ Clementi and Anacleto Pap^ attributa. In quibus volentes
Romanam sedem omni land dignam, plus quam Ecclesiae sanctae expedit and decet
exaltare, se pe^^tus, ^^t quasi, fundant. Si quis illas omnes Scripturas (...)
Sanctis attributas diligenter perlegeret, et eorum tempora ad illa scripta
applicaret, ac deinde in opusculis omnium sanctorum Patrum, qui usque ad
Augustinum, Hieronymum et Ambrosium fuere, ac etiam de gestis Conciliorum, ubi
authentica scripta allegantur, usum et memoriam h^beret: hoc inveniret verum,
quia nec in illis omnibus Scripturis, de illis praefatis Epistolis mentio
habetur, et etiam ip^^ Epistol^ applicatae ad tempus eorum sanctorum scipsas
produ^t.
. Cusanus does downe-rightly style some of them Counterfeits, and doubts not
that they all would betray themselves, if diligently read and applied to the
timesh. Contius wrote a Preface, which is suppressed with his reasons, that he
was confident would have declared these Epistles Counterfeit Contius Annot. in
did. 16. c. Septuaginta, dicit, (...) a^ supra in (...) ratio^^^ addu^^i,
quibus omnes Pontificum qui Syl^^strum (...), (...) esse manifest octendi.
Vide colloq Rainoldi cum Harto* c, 8. divis. 3.
. Besides, they shame themselves; For would these Fathers speak like
Barbarians, when the Heathen Rhetoricians were ready to oppose them? Could they
speak in one style and form of words, when they had so many different pens
and diverse tongues? Were Popes so obscure, or their Epistles so contemptible,
that they were not known in the first 500. years? Were they of so slight
persuasion, that they could not moove the Bishops of Africa to give their
Successors, what those blessed Martyrs possessed? Did they cite Hieromes
Translation by Prophecy, which was not extant while any of them were ^iving?
Did any Author in those times speak such terms as are mentioned in those
Epistles? Find me Primatus and Apocrisiarius in Anacletus his time, Paga^^^ in
Caius his daye^. Find me a Priest with a shaven Crown in Anicetus his
Government.

Much more may be gathered from our learned obsenvers: but these things may
sui^^se to declare of what breed these Epistles are.

Secondly; If the Nicen^ Fathers have not ampli^^ed the ^ounds of the
jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, in so ^^rge a manner as she desired: the
most learned Primate observes, she has had her well-willers that have
supplied the Councels negligence in that behalf, and made Canons for the
purpose in the name of the good Fathers, that never dreamed of such abusines In
the Answer to the Jesuits challenge page 13.
. But in regard the Jesuit has undertaken to justify them in the Eight
Section, I will there (God willing) discover their corruption.

Thirdly; If the power of judging all others will not content the Pope, unless
he himself may be exempted from being judged by any other: another Council
(says the most reverend the Lord Primate) as ancient at least as that of
Ni^^, shall be suborned, wherein it shall be concluded by the consent of 284.
imaginary Bishops, that No man may judge the first seat* and for failing in
an elder Council then that, consisting of three hundred Bu^kram Bishops of the
sel^^ same ^^king, the like note shall be sung: quoniam prima seeds non
judi^abitur a quoquam; The first seat must not be judged by any man Ibid.
.

Now that these tr^ly be as they are reported, no man ^^n doubt, that will
seriously enter into consideration of them, unless he leave his wits and
wisdom also. For the first, to wit, the Council of Sinnessa; it was never
heard of till the time of Pope Nicholas the first, about the year 860. unless
the Jesuit has better evidence then Bellarmine could find Bellarm. de Romans
Pont. ^ 2. c. 26. In Concilio (...) dicunt Patres: (...) se^^^ ^ (...)
judicatur. Resett haec verba ex isto Concilio Nicola^^^ in (...) ad (...)
, and yet the supposed Session of this pretended Council, was many hundred
years before, even in the time of the Emperor Dioclesian. And the number of
Bishops that are urged for the glory of this Council, de^ect the forging of
it; for could it be that the Church in her cruellest persequution should cause
300. Bishops to assemble together, when afterward in her full prosperity at
Nice, in the most urgent cause that ever the Church had, there were assembled
but 318. Neither are we without other just exceptions againstit: Did this
Council tell truth that Dioclesian being in the Persian war heard of the
condemning of Marcellinus, when that war was ended 2. years before? No;
Binnius condemns this as no part of the Acts of the Council, unless he may
help the liar by making him speak as he pleases Binius Not. ad Concilium
Sinuessanum. (Cum esset in bello Persa^^m) Haec nisi ^mendentur falsa sunt.
Etenim cum (sententia Eusebi^ and quorundam aliorum) hoc anno 20* imperij sui,
imperio se abdicaverit, and quod magis est, ante biennium de Persis superatis
and vi (...), Romae una tum Maximia no collega suo triumphum egerit quomodo,
quaeso, hoc anno, cum exercitu adversus Persas in procinctu and expeditione
^ss^ p^tuit? Dicimus igitur, ^^c omnia quae sequuntur, non esse exactis
Concilij; sed (ut apparet) ad ip^^ a^^a appendicem superadditam: ^el s^^ectio
ista resti^atur, (...) erat ^ be^^^ Pers^rum* germana esse videbitur, and (...)
consenta^^ea. V^de Ba^on. ^n. Christi. ^^^* (...). ^^^.
. And lastly, it is apparent that as wise as our Jesuit, has accounted these
^^ckram Bishops (even Donatists) the Acts spurious and of ^^ weight Ibid.
(...)) Virorum (...), ^^c acta (...) and (...) esse, validis sa^e argumentis
pr^bare conati funt, adcoque (...) nihil (...), (...) a (...) c^l^^de
excogita^^m.
.

For your second Council held (as you pretend) at Ro^^ under Sylvester, it had
neither other Bishops, nor more authenticke acts. For first it is infected with
Constantines (...) Act. 1. c 1 Cum (...), quod Constantinus (...) a Sylvestro
Episcopo urbis Romae, and (...) suit a lepra.
, a tale, and indeed beyond all folly ridiculous, (...) known to the Church
many ages after Constantines death Platina in vita Ma^ci. 1. Q^od ver^ in
lepram (...), ^^ (...) si^, conficta prius de (...) nescio qua (...), (...)
^^^do, (...) ^^ee in re secu^^^, qui (...), ^bi ^^^ (...) quintum aetatis (...)
attigisset, (...) ex urbe Constanti^o^oli ad a ^^as ^alid as (...) causa, ^^ll^
de lep^a mentione habita. Praeterea (...) ^ac de re a ^ullo scriptorum ^^t
mentio, non dico ab his, qui ethni^i (...), (...) ^^ a (...) quide^.
. Secondly, this Council sub Sylvestr^ must be the year before Sylvester was
Pope (an idle conceit) for that is the third Consulship of Constantine
Augustus (...) hist, Ecel. l. 4. in (...). 313. and 314*
. Besides we may see how often memory fails an imaginer, by his ^aking
Priseus Constantine's Collegue^. Moreover, veiw the Council, and tell me, is
the form like the Counsels of that Age? Did the Bishops at Nice without
giving their su^^^ages, or discussing the controversies, submit to your Roman
Bishop, or Legates; sig^i^g whatsoever they should say (...) Not^^ in Synodu^^
^^om, 2. sub Sylvestro. li^. 1. Constantino Augusto 3. and Prisco con^s. Hic
legendum esse. Crispo and Constantino 3. (...). ipsi Fasti consulares docen^.
. No, this discovers for whose sake this Council was invented.

Fourthly, If the Pope do not think that the fulness of spiritual power is
sufficient for his greatness, unless he may be Lord ^aramount in temporalibus:
Our most reverend Lord con^^udeth, he has his followers ready at hand to frame
a fair donation, i^ the name of Constantine the Emperor, whereby his
holiness shall be estated not only in the City of Rome, but also in the
S^igniorie of the whole West Synodus R^man. 2. sub. ^ylvest. cap. 11.
Responderunt cum omnes Episcopi and dixerunt, claman^es universis Presby^^tis;
Glericisque. In te justitia, and pietas a te non discedat, quon^a^ a nobis
nihil judicubitur in (...) dictorum (...), quoniam ^apientia non est, nisi in
patienti^ ^^er^^ (...): Dixit autem Sylvester Episcopus: Quon^^^ si sapientia
non est, nisi (...) patientia quicquid sermon (...), vestro chyrograph^
confirmatur, ^ In the An^^er to the (...) Challenge.
.

Will this need proof too? The Jesuit will acknowledge nothing. But can any
man think that a poor perseented Bishop could be changed into a potent
Prince, be adorned with a Diadem Crown, and all other Imperial ornaments;
and yet neither Eusebitu, Socrates, Theodoret, E^^grius, Ruffinus, (that wrote
passages of that time in their stories) should take notice of it? Would Zosimus
an hater of Constanti^e and Religion also, have omitted to reproach him for his
Leprosy and bloody Bath; if it had not been a foolish frame, an after
invention? Further this Donation will have Constantiue baptized in the strength
of his age, by Sylvester, Pope of Rome: when many Fathers and Historiographers
r^late it to have been done in his old age, by Eusebiu^ of Nicomedia
Hieronymus in chronicis. Eusebius de vita Constantin. l. 4. Socrates hist. ec.
l. ^. c. 39 Theodoretus hist. Eccles l. 1. c. 31. Zozomen l. 3 c. 34.
Cassiodorus, qui historiam ab his tribus ecclesiasticam compilavit. Pomponius
Laetus, alijque scriptores hujus ordinis Constantinum tradunt non Romae a
Sylve^^^^, sed Nicomediae ab Eusebi^* sac^um baptisma recepisse. Canus loc
theo. l. 11. c. 5.
.

Neither need we to conclude here, in regard we abound with proof against his
Counterfeit. For how could the Emperor give the West by his Will unto his
Son (as many Historiographers Socrates hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 25. Ad maximum
natu que^ suo ipsius nomine nuncupaverat Constantinum, decimo anno regni su^,
partibus imperij in Occidente sitis praefecit. Melchior Canus loc. theol. l.
11. c. 5.. Quod deinde. E^sebius, Ru^^inus, Theod (...). Socrates, (...),
Eutropius. Victor, caeterique p^obae fidei authors, qui omnia Constantini
ge^^a scripsere diligentissime, non modo nullam donationis ejus mentionem
(...)* ^ed trad^nt etiam orbem Roman^^ ^^^ inter tresillius filios distributum,
ut Italia uni little tota contigerit.
affirm) when before he had given the same to Sylvester and his Successors for
ever? How could he give power over the Sea of Constantinople, when the City was
not builded, or the name known Baronius tom. 3. ad annum 324. Quomodo potuit
in ^o Imperator meminisse Constantinopolitanae fedis, ^^ n^^ nomen quidem
Constantinopolis tunc erat exortum?
? And if this will not satisfy the Jesuit, but that he will have the West for
the Pope; let him know there are many that plead against this title at Rome it
self, as Laurentius Valla Laurentiu^ Vall^m scimus integrum librum adversus
receptam communi opinione sententiam declamasse, (...) quae vulgo circumfertur
ejus Donationis formula, came commentitiam esse satis indicant cum palec
inscriptiones denotant. Melchior Canus loc. th^ol l. 11. c. 5.. Quod inde.
, Raphael Volaterran Raph, Volater-Anthrop. l. 23. De dono ejus aut (...),
(...) nullos extat authors, praeterquam in libro Decretorum: idque in antiquis
(...) minime contin^ri author est Antonius Praesul Florentinus in Chronicis. *
(...) de elephantia, deque sanguine puerorum, and (...) baptismate omnino
rejiciendus.
, Cusanus Cusanus de (...). cath. l. ^. c. 2. Sed i^veritate* supra modum
admiror, si ^es ita est; eo quod in authenticis libris, and in historijs
approbatis non invenitur. Relegi omnia quae potui gesta Imperialia ac Romanorum
Pontificum, historias sancti (...), qui ad (...) colligendum (...) suit,
Augustini* Ambrosij ac aliorum opuscula (...), revolvi gesta (...) qu^^ po^^
(...) fucre: and nullam invenio concordantiam ad ea, (...) de illa (...). --
Ego etiam ad longu^^ hane Scripturam in (...) inveni, qu^ multo plut continet,
(...) decreto (...) loco (...), and diligenter eam examinans, reperi ex
ipsa^^et Scriptura, argumenta manifes^^ (...) is and (...) -- Sunt ^^o judicio
illa de Constantino Apocrypha.
, and diverse others, and condemn it as chafe; a fr^me without any author of
antiquity, (...) without concordan^^, false, ^^igned.

But that which inflames the Jesuit ^s, that the most lear^ed Answerer should
charge them with forging so many base tractutes, d^cretals and Counsels, as to
name them only would require a volume, without producing any other proof then
this. Mari^, the (...) Doctors themselves if they were now alive would be
deposed that they were (...) pr^vy to their begetrings. To the which (says the
Jesuit) might it not with as good reason be replied, that the (...) ^^n^ient
Doctors, if they were now alive; would laugh at this i^^ginary reason of his,
as proceeding from a (...) Bishop indeed Reply page 3^
.

I perceive the Jesuit wo^ld fame be ridd of this lear^ed Bishop; (what title
so ever he gives him:) He had rather, that this most reverend Lord had been
employed in detecting base tractats, decretals and Counsels, then in answering
his Challenge. But let him rest satisfied for a time his Challenge has not
wanted an Answer; and those ^ase Tractats etc. invented for the glory of the
Roman Sea by their well-willers (for they serve to no other purpose) will not
be long without their revelation. Yet the Jesuit is not reasonable to require
proof against all their Forgeries here; (...) that must perform the work, is
too large for a (...). Let him be assured, that as it was promised by the most
learned Answerer See the most reverend the Lord Primate his Epistle to the
Reader, before (...) ^^swere to the Jesuits Challenge.
, ^o he is not unmindefull of his promise, but (God giving life and strength)
will send it unto them. Wherein he will manifest (I make no doubt) that the
Bishops of Rome have clymed to their great height, not without the furtherance
of counterfeit and buckram Bishops indeed: and that it is a shame for Jesuits
(who so much desire to be accounted holy and learned) to produce this Buckram
and black guard, (as (...) from h^ll.) to howl for the unspotted purity and
(...) of their Catholic cause.

B^^ whilst he (...) so (...); and proves so ^eebly, he makes me remember
(says the Jesuit) what S. Augustine says of his like; They seem (says he)
to think that they have not to do with men, but as if they were (...) beasts,
who hear them, or read their writings they abuse the ignorance or dulnes of
them, or rather their blindness of mind. And so I need not to stand longer with
our Answerer in this point, for as the same holy Father said to such another,
why should I labor to make good my excuse, when he endeavors not any way to
prove his accusation Reply page 38
. More Serpentum lubricus undique Iraeneus adv. hoer. l. 3. c. 2.
; The Jesuit being deeply charged, thought it most expedient not to answer,
and he that passed by one argument grounded upon the words of Aeneas Sylvius,
what would he have done (think you) had he been pressed with a multitude? What
we conceive of them, it is not material to be expressed, whether beasts, or men:
The Apostle fought with beasts as Ephesus after the manner of men. And for his
excuses we are more acquainted with them then his answers, and therefore care
not here to spare them, if he afford us nothing else. Yet putting on a brazen
face; and carried away with the Spirit of Calumny (says this Jesuit) he
says further, thus, neither has this corrupting humor stayed it self, in
forging of whole Councels and entire treatises of the ancient writers, but
has, like a Canker, fretted away diverse of their sound parts, and so altered
their complexions, that they appear not to be, the same men they were. As he
forced me to storm a little at his vanity, when without proof he charge us
with forging of whole Counsels and entire treatises; so now I cannot choose
but smile to see what simple proofs he brings for this his charge of
cankering, and fretting, the monuments of the ancient Reply page 49
.

Is it possible that a railing tongue and a smiling countenance at one time can
accompany a Jesuit? When he storms, the Answerer must be a (...) Bishop;
when he smiles he must put on a brazan face, and be carried away with the
Spirit of Calumny. Surely Solomon could see far from him, that tells us,
When a wiseman contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh, there
is no rest (...) 29. ^.
. But let us see, what simple proofs those are which make this wise man merry.

To instance (says the most learned Primate) in the great question of
Transubstantiation we were wont to read in the books attributed to S.
Ambrose de Sacramentis lib. 4. cap. 4. Si ergo (...) vis est in sermon Domini
IESV, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto magis operatorius est, ut sint
quae ^rant, and in aliud commutentur? If therefore there be so great force in
the speech of the Lord JESUS that the things which were not, began to be
(namely at the first Creation) how much more is the same powerful to make that
things may still be that which they were, and yet be changed into an other
thing? It is not unknown (says our most reverend Lord) how much those words,
ut sint quae erant, have troubled their brains, who maintain that after the
words of Consecration, the Elements of Bread and Wine be not that thing which
they were, and what devices they have found to make the Bread and wine in the
Sacrament to be like unto the Beast in the Revelation, that was and is not, and
yet is. But that Gordian knot which they with their skill could not so readily
untye, their Masters at Rome (Alexander-like) have now cut asunder, paring
clean away in their Roman Edition, (which is also followed in that set out at
Paris, Anno* 160 3.) those words that so much trouble them See the most
reverend the Lord Primate his Answer to the Jesuits challenge. page 13.
.

In this instance of our Answerer (says the Jesuit) it is easy to espy, how
wilful spleen and affected ignorance do tyrannize his mind and pen Reply
page 39
.

The Jesuit here plays the Orator (...). (...): institut. l. 5. c. 13. Haec
simulatio hucusque procedit, ut quae dicendo refutar^ non possumus, quasi (...).
, fleights what he cannot answer, reviles where he wants patience, and like a
frantic, without sense; for if his spleen be wilful, his ignorance affected,
how will he make them tyrants? how can they tyrannize his mind and pen? He is
a King, no Tyrant, whom we willingly obey, and when we a^^ect sin, it
reigns, not tyrannizeth over us. But let us consider his pretenses. First he
tells us that Ambrose gives the Answerer a s^ronde bobbe in those words, and
in aliud commutentur etc. as hereafter shall be more at large declared Reply page
39
. To which place we will refer him for his Answer.

Secondly he labors to free these two editions from clipping. First in
regard those words being rightly understood, establish our doctrine of
transubstantiation (says the Jesuit) to the utter confusion of all that gain
say the same Reply page 40
; and that this might appear, he finds fault with the translation of the
most learned Answerer, when he Englisheth those words ut sint quae erant, thus,
that things may still be that which they were Reply page 39
. But I ask the Jesuit, to what ^ix: has relation? if to the elements of
bread and wine (as of necessity it must) how can the translation be otherwise
then it is expressed by the most learned Answerer? For whose mind is so
tyrannized with ignorance as to believe that bread and wine can be what they
were, when as their substance is departed? quae erant declare a substantial
not an accidental manner of being; but the truth is, the Jesuit knowing not
how to relish the words would force an interpretation contrary to the sense
they offer the Reader: for (whatsoever his hopes are from them) Hugo their
Cardinal could not see how those words of Ambrose and Popish
transubstantiation could agree together; He could conceive no otherwise but
that Ambrose made the bread the body of Christ, and therefore directs the
Reader with an hoc tamen impossible, that it is impossible, and from thence
concludes that the words are to be understood ad sanum intellectum Glossa apud
Gratian. de consecr. Did. 2 Panis est. Ambrosius de sacramentis ^ Qu^^tomagis
operatorius est fermo Christi, ut sint quae erant and in aliud commu^entur, and
sic quod erat pa^is ante cons^crationem jam corpus Christi est etc. Hoc (...)
est impossiblle, ^^ panis sit corpus Christi; sed haec verba ad (...)
intellectum (...) ita solvit (...).
, as the Jesuit would persuade us he is here willing to do; though in other
men's judgments they would have a more wholesome understanding, if the words (
ut sint quae erant) were utterly cast out of the text.

Neither do the subsequent words of Ambrose help his translation or assure
him that he has hit the mark, to wit, Before consecration there was not the
body of Christ, after consecration, I tell thee plainly, that it is now the
body of Christ Reply page 40
. For the change which Ambrose speaks of is no other then of a child of Adam
to be made a new creature Ambros: de sacram. l. 4. c. 4 Tu ipse eras ve^us
creatura, postquam consecratus es. nova creatura esse coepisti: accipe igitur
quemadmodum ser^o Christi omnem creaturam mutare consueverit.
, which the Jesuit (I hope) will not say is done by Transubstantiation.

His further defense rests in this, that they have other editions which have
those words Reply page 40
. This indeed concludes that all your impressions of Ambrose are not guilty of
this clipping, but this excuses not all.

Now (says the Jesuit) if he who either at Rome or at Paris, set forth that
work, found not in the exemplar, or manuscript, which he took in hand to
print, those words, ut siat quae erant; is that a sufficient argument to charge
us with cankering etc. when as we otherwise do generally hold to this day the
ancient reading Reply ibid.
.

To which I answer, that if any such corrupted exemplar were, no man that was
fit for such a work could be ignorant that the exemplar was depraved in
regard Gratian Gratian. de cons. did. 2. c. Panis est.
, and other your books of more ordinary use Breviare Romans lect. 58 infra
octav. corp. Christi.
, repeat this sentence of Ambrose with those words ut sint quae erant. Besides
this, it was Berengarius his usual argument against the carnal eating of
Christ Modius No^ did. 2. c. Pani^ est.
, and therefore the true reading to such (no question) learned men as were
employed about that work could not be unknown. So that if he, who either at
Rome or at Paris set forth the same, found no such exemplar where those words
are omitted; as it is more then probable; or finding any such corrupt one,
should publish it contrary to Gratian and all other Coppies for the sole
behoof of the Popish cause; what can this be but a cankering and fretting
away of a sound part of an^iquitie?

To conclude the most reverend the Lord Primate, has not in this particular
exceeded in a circumstance, for all probability will persuade that these words
ut sint quae erant have troubled your brains; for being urged by Berengarius*
and accurately explained by Guitmundus and Algerus z, yet an accurate
explanation could not serve the turn, but sometime an exemplar is pretended,
where sint is left out Ibid. Vt sint quae erant.) Haec B* Ambrosij verba, quae
Berengarius Catholicis objiciebat, accura^e explanantur a Guitmundo, l. 3. and
ab Algero, l. 1. c. 7. Lanfranous autem non modo ea opti^e interpretatur, sed
etiam ad dit in quibusdam codicibus sic legi* Si igitur tanta vis est in
sermon Domini Jesus, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, qua^^^ magis
operatorius est, ut quae erant in aliud commu^entor. ^ So Lanfranc. vide lit. ^
pruceden^
, sometime, where the whole sentence is omitted So the Roman Edition*
, sometimes the words are inserted, but ad sanum intellectum, they are to be
translated, not as they bear, but as in the Roman Church they ought to be
understood So Hugo Card.
.

The second instance is out of the imperfect work upon Matthew ^omil. 11.
where the Author writes* thus. Si ergo haee vasa sanctificata ad privatos usus
transfer, sic periculo sum est, in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed
mysterium corporis ejus continetur: ^uanto magis vasa corporis nostri, quae
sibi Deus ad habitaculum praeparavit, non debemus locum dare Diabolo agendi in
cis quod vult? If therefore it be so dangerous a matter, to transfer unto
private uses those holy vessels, in which the true Body of Christ is not, but
the mystery of his Body is contained: how much more for the vessels of our
body which God has prepared for himself to dwell in, ought not we to give
way unto the Devil, to do in them what he pleases. Those words (in quibus
non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur: in which
the true Body of Christ is not, but the mystery of his Body is contained) did
threaten to cut the very throat of the Papists seall presence (says the most
learned Answerer) and therefore in good policy they thought it fit to cut
their throat first, for doing any further hurt. Whereupon, in the Editions of
this work, printed at Antwerpe apud Ioannem Steelsium, anno 1537. at Paris,
apud Ioannem Roigny, anno 1543: and at Paris again, apud Audonum Parvum, anno
1557. not one syllable of them is to be seen, though extant in the auncienter
edition ^^ one whereof is as old as the year 1487 See the most reverend the
Lord Primate his Answer to the Iesuite's challenge page 14*
.

The substance of the Jesuits answer to excuse this clipping, is twofold.
First from Sixtus Senensis who does testify, (as our Jesuit says) that some
auncienter ^^ppies have not those words at all Reply page* 41
. But I would ask the Jesuit what coppies those are? whether manuscripts, or
printed? if Manuscripts, where are they? why does he not point them out? why
does he not direct us to them? if more ancient Popish printed Coppies, this
does but point them out for more ancient clippers: But the truth is Sixtus
Senensis says no such thing in the book alleged Sixtus Senens. l. 4. bibl.
Sancta
. And therefore (letting him pass) the Jesuit hopes to make sure work by
telling us, that this appears by the marginal note of that very coppie which
our Answerer cites Reply page* 43
. But the truth is there is no such marginall in the edition set out at
Antwerpe anno 1537. by the first corrupter of the place Johannes Mahusius, as
being conscious he had never seen any such Coppie; yet in the fourth Tome of
Chrysostom set out at Paris anno 1546. (which the Jesuit alleges not) there
is this marginall annotation, Haec in quibusdam* exemplaribus desunt: but what
were those quadam exemplaria? Manuscripts? surely not, but the former printed
one of Mahusius his editions set out at Antwerpe anno 1537. and at Paris anno
1543. And is not this a prettio trick of legerdemaine, first to corrupt the
Author in print; and then in after editions to cite those so corrupt
impressions under the equivocall title of quaedam exemplaria? Is not this a
brave restoring of an Author to the ancient purity of it is true and first
reading? So that indeed any may see, that he which follows such guides must
have the throat of his understanding cut with the knife of will full blindness;
but the most reverend Primate is too well experienced in these their practices
to be intrapped by such cheates, or blinded with such wiles.

But if it be read with those words (says the Jesuit.) our Answerer himself
cannot free it from manifest error, mention being made of the Vessels only of
Salomons Temple, which King Balthazar transferred to profane uses, and
therefore was punished with loss of life and Kingdom* and seeing that in
those vessels neither the Body of Christ, nor yet the mystery of his Body is
contained, those words are not only superfluous, but also erroneous and false
Reply page 41
.

Indeed this Argument of the Jesuits is most erroneous and false; for this
learned Author shewiug us how to* keep our Vessels in Holiness, presses it
first from the Vessels used in the Temple, Si enim vasa sanctificata ad
privatos usus transfer peccatum est, and periculum, sicut doce^ nos
Balthazar, qui bibens in calicibus sacratis, de regno depositus est and de vita
Opus imperf^^ Matthew* hom. 41*
. For if it is a sin and dangerous to transfer unto private uses the
sanctified vessels (to wit, those of the Jews) as Balthazar does teach us, who
drinking in the holy vessels, lost both his Kingdom and his life. Then from
the vessels used in the Church. Si ergo haee vasa sanctificata ad privatos usus
transfer, sic periculosum est, in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed
mysterium corporis Christi continetur: quanto magis vas^ corporis nostri etc.
If therefore it be so dangerous a matter to transfer unto private uses these
holy vessels (signanter and demonstrative that were used in the Church
Christian, and in all probability were before his face) wherein the true Body
of Christ is not, but the mystery of his Body is contained: How much more for
the vessels of our body, which God has prepared for himself to dwell in,
ought we not to give way unto the Devil to do in them what he pleases?

But (let the Vessels be what they will) in the judgment of his own Sixtus
Senensis, this Author does here allude unto the Sacrament Sixtus Senens. Bibl.
Sancta l. 6. Annot: 21. Author operis imperf. hom. 11. alludere videtur ad
haere^im little, qui ^egant verum corpus Christi esse in Sacramento altaris, dum
ait* Vasa sanctificata etc.
, which is all that we need to require. And therefore the Jesuit has little
cause to sport, unless it be in his shame, it being evident, that he that
thrust out those words did canker fret and corrupt this place, and not restore
it to the ancient purity, as the Jesuit vainly labors to persuade.

After all these pains, the Jesuit conceiving he has not satisfied the
Reader, closes up all with an other answer (no doubt) without exception. The
truth is (says the Jesuit) as Bellarmine rightly observes that imperfect
work upon Matthew, though it go commonly amongst the works of Chrysostom,
yet is it none of his Reply page 41
.

Who says it is? Was it urged by the most reverend the Lord Primate for
Chrysostomes? Here he contendeth to little purpose, his fight is but folly.

For (says the Jesuit) it abounds with errors etc. the which errors have
been foisted in by diverse Heretics Reply ibid*
etc.

But who were those Heretics? what were their errors? were they not Arians.
Montanists, Manichees, Donatists, Pelagians Sixtus Seneni. Bibl. sanctae ^* 4.
In Matthae um extat incerti autoris imperfectum opus -- varijs Montani,
Ma^ichaei, Arij, Donati, ac Pelagij haeresibus implicitum.
? Had their Heresies any thing to do with the question of the Real Presence,
or the controversies betwixt us?

Wherefore (the Jesuit concludes) I do not see that any account ought to be
made thereof at all Reply page 41
.

A poor fetch, because in some particulars it has been p Sixtus Senen. ibid.
Ego quod ad dam, nihil habeo nisi hoc, ipsum opus disertum and doctum esse, ac
dignum quod assidue legatur, si tamen prius diligentissime expurgatum fuerit ab
ijs erroribus, quos in sexto libro in censuris super Matthaei expositoribus
annotavimus.
abused by Heretics, therefore it must be rejected in the whole? Sixtus
Senensis approves not this, for he acknowledges the work witty and learned,
and wort^y of a daily Reader, if it were first diligently purged from those
errors which he has noted in his sixth book. And Bellarmine although he
thought it was either composed or corrupted by some Heretic does
nevertheless confess, it is a learned book, and (contrary to the Jesuit,)
minime sper^enous, no way to ^e despised* Bellarm. de Scriptor. Eccles.
Cujuscunque sit opus, aut ab Haeretico aliquo Compositum suit, aut ab Haeretico
aliquo corruptum, quamvis alioqui liber sit doctus and minime spernendus.
. Whereby we may see how great esteem the Jesuit has of ancient Writers,
and with what clippings his well-willers would put forth these learned
monuments, if they might have their desire. For although Bellarmine thinks it
credible that this Author was a Catholic, and his book not to be despised,
though it were corrupted by ancient Heretics Ibid. Pro^^de eredibile est
auctorem suisse Catholicum, sed opus illius ab* Arianis depravatum.
, yet Sixtus Senensis before he will give him this liberty, will have him
purged not only of the ancient heresies, that were, as the Jesuit speaks,
foysted into him, but of all those errors also which he has noted in his
Censures upon the Expositors of Matthew, as in his fifth homily, where he
favors the Lutherans in the point of original sin Sixtus Seven* lib. annot.
16.
: in the IX. where he overthrowes the freedom of humane will Ibid. annot. 10.
, in the XIth, XVIIth and XIXth, where he denies the real presence in the
Sacrament of the Altar Ibid. annot. 11.
. But the Jesuit will have it altogether rejected, and no account to be made
thereof at all; and yet it has been used as a Champion to fight the Christian
cause by their greatest Divines, in their glosses, chains, decrees of Popes,
sums of Divinity, from the weight and worth of the work, as cannot be denied
by their own Sixtus Seven. Bibl. sanct. l. 4. ^unt ex opposito qui hoc ipsum
opus con^endunt esse Chrysostomi, adducti non solum auctori^^te Apostoli^ae
Eclesiae, quae public inter divinas ^^udes legit homilias ex his commentarijs
sub nomine Ioann^^ Chrysostomi, sed etiam permoti pondere and gravitate
sententiarum and propositionum ^ujus operis, quae ad confirmationem
Christianorum dogmatum, sub titulo, testimonio, and auctoritate Chrysostomi,
inducuntur in glossis authenticis, quas vocant ordina^ia^, in Ca^enis
Evangelicarum explanationum, in Decretis summorum Pontificum, and (...)
Theologici^ magni nominis Theologorum*
. So that you may see the most learned Answerer has brought this instance, not
(as you vainly affirm) in derision of the blessed Sacrament; but to manifest
your corrupting of the works of antiquity, for your own advantage, without the
authority of any ancient manuscript Copy whatsoever. Neither is the authority
of this work so contemptible (although the Jesuit may take liberty to
^^eight antiquity) but that seeing it has served the Popes turn, it may well
serve ours also to cut the very (...) of the Papists real presence. And
therefore y^^ (...) Commilitones (Mr Malone) that carry the mari^^^^r the beast
in your foreheads, may continue your bla^^^^^es, and abuse the Scriptures as
you have done his ^a^^ed ordinance of the blessed Sacrament, deriding the
f^llowers of his sacred institution: but howsoever you flatter your selves, The
right hand of the Lord will find out those that hate him, and shall make them
as a fiery even in the time of his anger Psalm ^^.
. And howsoever your scarlet Mistress says in her heart, I fit a Queen, and
am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, Yet her plagues shall come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord God who judges her Re^. 18. ^. 7. 8.
.

His third instance (says the Jesuit) out of the same book, concerning the
sacrifice of the Body and Bleod of JESUS CHRIST, put in for the sacrifice of
Bread and Wine, is too too childish: for we indifferently allow of both those
manner of speeches, as signifying one, and the same thing, and therefore the
changing of those words could advantage us no more then it does help our
Answerer to prove what he intended Reply page 40
, etc.

Mr Malone has an ill name for every thing that displeases him: This instance
is too too childish, but as wise as himself think not so; For Sixtus
Senensis, by those words which they have changed, judges this Author to deny
the Body and Blood of Christ to be in the Sacrament of the Altar Si^tus Seven*
Bibl. sancta l. 6. Annot. 21. Author operis imperf. homilia 1^ alludere videtur
ad haeresim eorum qui negant verum Christi corpus esse in Sacramento Altaris,
dum ait, Vasa etc. Neque ab hac sententia abludit, cum hom. 17. non multo ante
finem, Eucharistiam appellat panem benedictum. and hom. ^9. fere in principio
vocat sacrificium pani^ and vi^^
, and would therefore have this place to be purged Idem libro 4o.
. And will any deny the corrupter, that used this sleight of hand to be of the
same opinion? The Text then is corrupted, this is not denied, and therefore
(notwithstanding the Jesuit falsely pretends the changing of those words
do not advantage them) the most reverend Primate has prooved what he
intended, to wit, that the Papists have hereby so altered the complexions of
the ancient writers, that they appear not the same men they were. The Jesuit
runs on in his examination.

Two instances more (says he) in this matter does our Answerer produce, still
striving to surpass himself more and more in vanity; For besides that our
question is concerning the writers of the first five ages, he comes out with
Fulbertus and Rabanus, whereof the later lived in the ninth age, the former in
the eleventh; so far is he ever from speaking to the purpose Reply page 42
.

I see the Jesuit is weary of his work; he is not willing to have his own
arraigned of Forgery, and therefore excepts against these instances as not
being to the purpose, in regard the question is concerning the writers of the
first 500. years Reply page 42
.

In answer whereunto, we say; It is equal perfidiousnes to corrupt the
authors of the middle age, as those of the first 500. Secondly, if they
confess guilty in these, they deserve to be suspected in their impressions of
the most ancient. Thirdly, Augustine is here corrupted, though it be in the
writings of Fulbertus, and so both the ancient and middle aged Doctors suffer
violence. Fourthly, let this be to the purpose or not, the Jesuit cannot
excuse their corrupt handling of authors, and for corrupt ends, when as
Fulbertus, was published corruptly, ad refutandas haereses hujus temporis. But
taking them in order, the Jesuit tells us, that, In the former, for want of
sounder matter (when as the Answerers subject here is Popish corruptions) he
fiddles about a mistake of two words, which though he confesses himself to
have been amended in the end, yet must it needs (such is his distress) serve
him for an instance to prove that we have corrupted the writings of the
ancient Reply page 42
.

I am sure the Jesuit does not like the Music he terms it so wisely, but
I may excuse him herein; for the Papists were unwise that would otherwise
commend it. But whose mistake was this? Dicet Haereticus in all probability
could not be the Printers: here then was the error, he that set forth this
book, did not foresee, the words were S. Augustines and so easy to be
detected. And whereas the publisher did afterward put this among his Errata,
he was much behoulding to his Adviser, that assured him, if those words
remained, his fraud would be discovered. Now any may see, who is in distress,
he that forgeth for necessity and corrects for shame, or the most learned
Answerer that has found out and scorned the Cosener.

The Jesuit comes to the second; and exclaimes, that the Answerer makes, much
a do about nothing Reply ibid.
; as if it were a matter of nothing to corrupt the ancient writers?

If the Reader will but observe the Jesuit, he shall find him where he is
most plunged and stifled to be most abundant in his railing language, scorning
and contemptible behavior toward the Answerer. For what reason has he to
term this learned observation, a dribling objection worthy to be answered
with laughter, builded only upon surmises, when he groans under it, and all
his struggling is not able to deliver him thence? See what he says. I say about
a blanke, when with frivolous surmises he seeks to make his Reader believe,
that the Monks of Wengart should have thrust somewhat out of Rabanus his
penitential; but such dribling objections are worthy to be answered with
laughter Reply page 4^
.

What do we find here but a rabble of words, that carry no weight at all?
for they are not frivolous surmises, that are used against the Monks of
Weingart nor dribling objections that are urged against you Mr Malone. First if
there be a blanke in Rabanus his penitential set forth by Petrus Stuartius as
is not denied; if Stuartius received a blanke Manuscript from the Monks of
Weingart, as is likewise acknowledged: If Romanists may purge (or blanke)
manuscripts, as Possevine affirms See the most reverend the Lord Primate his
Answer to the Jesuits challenge page 15. 16. 17.
, If the words, blanked or purged out, make against the Popish carnal presence
in the Sacrament, and for the cause of the Protestants, as the Jesuit, that
can now with the Answerers help make up the blanke out of Paschasius, well
knows, though he will not acknowledge so much: How can he with any modesty
call it a f^^volous surmise, that the Monks of Weingart did thrust those words
out of Rabanus his Penitential: and that a dribling objection, a petty
instance, which convinces the altering of the complexions of the aunci^ut, by
fretting (unless such rasures are not fretts) and washing away the soundest
part of their writings.

For it is well known how that blanke, which he observes in the Penitential
published by Steuartius, is to be supplied out of Paschasius Radbertus whose
Doctrine (as it seems) was there alleged Reply page 42
.

I doubt not, that it is well known how that blanke should be filled up, now
it is cleared to you by the most learned Answerer; yet I suppose you never
learned it by your own pains out of Rabanus his penitential.

The Jesuit tells us, if Paschafius were the first bringer in of the Carnal
presence as our Answerer does blindly avouch, without doubt, his saying could
prejudice nothing our cause, and consequently it is a foud imagination to
think that the Monks of Weingert should have clipped his words for any
advantage in thi^ matter Reply page 43
.

Who does think, Paschasius his assertion could prejudice your cause? It is
the fretting of Rabanus, not Paschasius that the Answerer complains of: The
words that declare Paschasius his Doctrine in his, or your own books, we give
you leave to raze at pleasure, but to raze it in Rabanus where it is brought
forth to receive a judgment, to undergo a censure, this makes I hope for the
advantage of your cause. For does not your blanke and rasure hinder the Reader
to see Rabanus in his words following [ cui errori quantum potuimus etc.] to
condemn the Paschasian and Popish doctrine and there I hope you gained by it,
unless it were no loss for the most famous Doctor of his time, the most
glorious star of Germany Bar^n, tom. 10 a^. de Raban* Fulgentissimum
Germaniae sidus.
directly to pronounce your Doctrine erroneous?

But if our Answerer will allow others to build upon surmises but half as
boldly as he presumes to do himself, and upon grounds far more likely
also, then he has any: it may very well be thought, that Rabanus Maurus that
famous Archbishop of Ments, whose commentaries for the most part, are in the
ordinary gloss upon the Scripture, of so great request in the Church of God;
who also, as it is well known, was never yet ^oted by any writer, before
Waldensis, to have maintained any point contrary to the Catholic faith of
the then Roman Church Reply page 4^
etc.

I fear the Jesuits surmises will be according to the imagination that he has
had of his learned Answerers demonstratives, frivolous and vain. But before we
examine them, observe in these words, a false supposition that the Doctrine of
the carnal presence was in Rabanus his time the general received doctrine of
the Roman Church. Secondly, a most untrue assertion, for before the Waldenses,
William of Malmesbury reproached Rabanus as disputing against the doctrine of
the carnal presence Guil. Malmes. in praef: Epit: Amalarij. de divinis
officijs, ad fra^ rem Robertum. M^. in B^bliothe. Colleg. Omnium Animarum Oxon.
Admonitum te volo, ut unum exhis qui de talibus disputaverun: fugiendum scias,
Rabanum nomine. qui in libro de officijs Ecclesiasticis dicit Sacramenta
Altaris proficere ad saginam corporis: ac pro hoc corruptioni, vel morbo, vel
aetati, vel secessui, vel postremo morti obno^ia quae de Domini corpore dicere,
credere, scribere, quan^^ sit p^riculi vides.
, which in all probability the Jesuit having the learned Answerers book De
christianarum Ecclesiarum successione and statu, in his hand could not be
ignorant of, though here he wilfully dissemble the same. Now let us see what
his c^ca insomnia his sleeping surmises will prove that are brought in with
such untruths. First, because it is well known that Rabanus Maurus wrote one
peuitentiall work before this, void and free from all such error, and
therefore it is not likely that he should write another Reply page 43
.

Here is a wise surmise, a convincing reason, as if it wereso unusall, that men
should write twice of the same general subject, especially occasion being
offered by the propounding of a new question, as it here fell out. For this
penitential was written in answer to certain particular questions propounded
by Bishop Heribaldus, as the book it self shows: whereunto you may add the
express testimony of Sigebertus Genblacen^s de illustr. Eccles. scriptor. cap.
90. that says Rabanus did write [ de qu^stionibus Canonum ad Heribaldum
Episcopum librum unum, and ad Reginbaldum Coepiscopum de eadem re librum unum]
one book concerning the questions of the Canons to Bishop Heribladus, and an
other book concerning the same matter to Regi^^ld his Colleague.

Secondly, many Authors (says the Jesuit) as well Catholics as others, do
allege that book which Paschasius wrote de Corpore Domini, as if it had been
composed by Rabanus, whereby they declare that he was held to be of the same
mind with Paschasius in this point of the Eucharist Reply page 43
.

Here is a surmise indeed, if this may moove a Jesuit, surely he will make
Hierome a Pelagian, in regard many authors allege the confession of faith and
Epistle ad De^etriadem framed by Pelagius, as if they had been composed by
Hierome. This then is no ground to prove Rabanus to be of the same mind with
Paschasius; and if without ground any held, as the Jesuit persuades, he may
know they held an error, induced thereunto by the no clean dealing of those that
coined false titles to those books. Now as if surmises had been
demonstratives, our Jesuit tells us. The Author then of this Penitential
written to He^ibaldus, was either some other Rabanus Reply ibid.
. Here we find the Jesuit ignorant of that Author, upon whose writings he
takes upon him to be so acute a critic; for if he had read the Author
himself, he would have thought of those words, which point out who he is, Ego
dum in Episcopat^ Moguntiensis indignus constitutus sum Cap. (...),
, etc. But how a Jesuit of his undertaking could be ignorant of their own
Gratian his citing of this book under the name of Rabanus the Archbishop
Gratian. (...) 50. cap de his vero. Rabanus Archiepiscopus
, we can tell without surmise.

Secondly he says, that his supposed Rabanus fell with Heribaldus into the
Error called by Paschasius, and Algerus Stercoranistarum, who held that Christ
in the Sacrament being hypostatically united unto the bread, and assuming it
into one person with himself, was therefore subject to disgestion and
avoydance Reply page 43
.

Callida mendacia! He faineth in earnest, and there is but need; for Paschasius
makes no mention of the Stercoranistae. Secondly, Rabanus in his penitential
holds the contrary Cap. 33. Ista sententia contraria est sententijs Clementis
Papae, and aliorum multorum sanctorum Patrum, qui dicunt corpus Domini non cum
cae^^ris communibus cibis, per aquati^ulos in se^^ssum mitti.
. Thirdly, it is an idle figment, that either this Rabanus Rabanus l. 1. de
Instit. Clericorum cap. 31.
or Heribaldus, or those you term Stercoranistae, did hold that Christ was
hypostatically united to the bread. The Jesuit has only dreamed here, he
gives us not an Author. But all that he has yet said, will not serve the
turn, and therefore he would have us to believe him, if no such other Rabanus
there was, at least that Penitecial, together with the libel written to Abbot
Egilo, was made by some erring spirit or other, and to get the more credit
fathered upon Rabanus Maurus Reply page 43
.

This we must believe upon the Jesuits test, or reject it; for he brings us
nothing to manifest the same: and further whereas he says, that Rabanus was
far enough from maintaining any such Error Reply ibid.
. Indeed as the Jesuit has invented an error, and fathered the same upon the
author of the Penit^nti^ll, we easily confess. For Rabanus was ever far
enough from maintaining, that the Body of Christ was subject to disgestion, and
avoydance; but that the Sacrament thereof was digested and turned into our
substance, as other meats are, he taught indeed, and was condemned for the
same by Guli^lmus Malmesburiens^s See Guil. Malmes. before cited at the letter ^
, and Thomas Waldensis Tho. Wald. tom. 1. Doctrinal. Prolog. ad Martinum Vitem
tom. ^. (...) Sacramentis cap, 19. and (...).
.

Neither does he with any truth prosecute his plea when that he tells us that
Bertram and that supposed Rabanus, were as far different in their opinions
concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as Bertram and Paschasius
himself: for the author of that Penitential erring with Heribaldus, held that
Christ was so really present in the sacrament that there was no figure at all,
whereas Bertram made it but a sole figure, without any real presence of Christ
his body Reply page 44
.

What does the Jesuit bring here but heaps of untruthes, some of which cross
and contradict himself; for the Author of the Penitential and the book
written to Egile the Abbot of Fulda, under whom Rabanus had his education held
the flat contrary to Paschasius, and maintained the very same thing that
Bertr^^ did, to wit, that the consecrated host was not the very body and
blood of our Lord which was borne of the Virgin Marie, and in which our Lord
suffered himself on the Cross, and rose again from the grave. This was
taught the Jesuit before by the most learned Answerer, neither is it long
since, that he upon that evidence confessed (...) 42
, that this being the doctrine of Paschasius was resisted as erroneous by
Rabanus. Besides where will you find that Bertram made it, as you report a
sole figure? That he made it a figure will not be denied, but that he said it a
sole figure, you give us no ground to believe.

And now taking leave with Rabanus, whom the Jesuit in the point of the
Sacrament would make a Romanist against his will, he comes to Bertram and
demands. Why may not Claudius Sanctesius, and others more, be thought to
guess aright when they think that Bertram was truly a Roman Catholic, free
from that error contained in the book supposedly dedicated unto the Emperor
Charles, seeing that in proof thereof, there be not wanting many presumptions
stronger far then those are, which are brought in by our Answerer to the
contrary Reply page 44
.

What your presumptions will prove, shall be examined, but the Answerer has this
advantage, that his evidences have already convinced the Divines of Doway, to
acknowledge this book mentioned to be Bertrams indeed, though by shifting
distinctions they labor (as you term it) to free him from error Index^^purg.
Belg. page 5.
. And first of all he begins, that neither Paschasius Radbertus who defended
our Catholic Doctrine at that time, nor yet any other Writer of those days,
makes any mention either of Bertram, or of any such erroneous opinion, as is
attributed unto him in (...) book Reply page 44
.

Here is a good beginning* for to justify Sanctesius his guess, he directly
contradicts that which he lays down for a certain ground* For first he
says, that about the time of Charles the Great, and Charles the Bald, this
book came forth that was assigned to Bertram, and whereunto Paschasius did
answer. He thinks it indeed to be credible, that the book came then abroad
without any name, and that afterward to gain the more credit, Bertrams name
was added Sanctei. Repet. 2. cap. 14. Cum Paschasius Corbeiensis, qui etiam
illo seculo vixit, suum scriptum opponat corruptelis libri, qui Bertram^ datur,
ut ex collatione notum fiet, proculd^bio Bertrami uomini non pepercisset, ne
quis tanti viri authoritate falleretur. -- Itaque (...) est, ortam tum
disputationem de transubstantiatione ac, corperis Christi in Eucharistia
veritate, and verbis institutionis cirea secundum Caroli magni, and Caroli
Calvi, quemadmodum cer^itur ex Rabano Mauro, and Raschasio Corbiensi, and tum
exijsse librum, quem nune Bertramo* assignant (...) Paschasius respondent*
: so that there is no question, but the book was at that time, and the
doctrine therein opposed by Paschasius that wrote against the same. But whether
any mention was made of Bertram, it matters not: for would you be so wise as to
gather from thence, that therefore there was no such man at that time, when you
confess his person, though you deny this book to be any of his?

Secondly, the opinion against which Paschafius disputed, was that only of
Heribaldus, which our Protestants themselves confess to be no other then a
most gross error Reply page 44.
.

Here the Jesuit speaks whetstones; For Paschasius does not dispute against
that opinion, either (...) or principally, but touches it incidently: Neither
can (...) Jesuit show that Heribaldus himself ever held any such opinion.

Thirdly, the said Paschafius does testify, that in his time no man was found,
who did publicly maintain any such error, contrary to that Catholic
Doctrine, which he with the whole Church professea and defended, which surely
he would not have said if any such book had been written by Bertram; for
that book must needs have been much talked of, and the Author very public,
seeing that he wrote it as the Emperors request, and also dedicated the same
unto his Majesty Reply ibid*
.

Here is a gross mistake; For if this book of Bertram was written at the
request of the Emperor [ Carolus Calvus] who obtained not the Empire until
anno 875. Is it not dreaming to take it as a matter granted, that we suppose
the book of Bertram to have been published when Paschafius wrote his, who died
in the year 851? Secondly, here is a notorious untruth: For Paschafius does
testify no such thing, but the contrary; for in the beginning of his Epistle,
De corpore and sanguine Domini, ad Frudegardum, he thus propounds the
question. Queris de re ex qua MVLTI dubitant. You desire resolution in a matter
whereof MANY doubt. Besides, the Jesuit, as conscious of his deceit, does not
here tell us where Paschafius testifies any such thing.

Fourthly, it is well known, that the Church of Rome, with all Christian
Churches adhering ^^to her at that time, did profess the same doctrine
concerning the Real presence, which Paschasius then Laid down, and which to
this day she has always believed. Is it likely then, that such a book being
written even by the Emperors appointment, not one man in all the world should
be found to answer the same, and to gaine^^y that Author, and his opinion, so
repugnant to that which was publicly and generally maintained ^. Reply page 44.


It is ill presumed; for at this time, this was no Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, neither received or decreed for such, it being showed before, that the
most learned men then living, resisted and opposed the same. And Bellarmine
himself supposing (as the Jesuit does) erroneously, and without ground, that
Bertram wrote before Paschafius, does thereupon conceive Paschafius his book
to have been purposely written against Bertram Bellarm. de Sacram. Euch^ l. 1
c. 1. Tertius suit Bertramus, tempore Caroli Crassi, circa annum Domini
DCCCLXXXVI cujus liber adhuc ex^at. Is rursum in connoversiam vocare coepit, an
esset vere in Eucharistia illud ipsum cerpus Domini, quod de Virgin natum
erat. Confutavit hunc errorem doctissime Paschasius Abbas Corb^ienfis, qui illo
ipso tempore floruit.
.

Fifthly, when Berengarius some 200. years after Bertram, bred that uproare
which is known, by bringing in the same opinion, with that which is fathered
upon Bertram, when there was so much writing and disputing against Berengarius
his sentence, and for it, how came it to pass that there was not as much as
mention once made of this supposed book, whose authority surely might have
done good service unto the part of Berengarius, and would doubtless have been
produced by them, if then it had any being at all Reply page 45
?

Here is an irresistible demand, this surely will clear the point! But the
Jesuit must consider, that he ought to lay before us all those books, that
they have extinguished concerning the cause of Berengarius, before he can
expect our answer to his Demand; for otherwise how can he make it appear unto
us, that there was not so much as mention once made of this supposed book?
Further we may observe here, that this point of carnal presence was but
disputable, and no matter of faith in Berengarius his time, when there was so
much writing and disputing against Berengarius his sentence, and FOR it,
although the Jesuit would have had it 200. years before to have been well
known, that the Church of Rome with all Christian Churches adhering unto her
at that time, did profess the same doctrine concerning the real presence,
which Paschasius then laid down.

To this profound silence (says the Jesuit) let us add what Guilmundus
writing against Berengarius does testify. It is most notorious (says he) that
until Berengarius at this time began to rage, no such madness was ever heard
of any where. Add moreover that S. Thomas of Aquin, and the rest of the
Schoolmen do agree all in laying down Berengarius for the first Author of
that heresy which denies the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
without as much as once dreaming of Bertram Reply page 45
.

The Jesuit here brings the gross absurdities of their own writers to
approve him in those things which he has laid down. For who can justify
either Guitmundus Aquinas or the rest of the schoolmen in laying down
Berengarius for the first that denied the carnal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, when that very Council which condemned Berengarius condemned also
the book of Johannes Scotus de Eucharistia Council. Vercellense. tom. 3 apud
Binnium. In qua in audientia omnium, qui de diversis ^uius mundi partibus illuc
convenerant Iohannis Scoti liber de Eucharistia lectus est ac damnatus:
sententia ^ua exposita ac damnata.
, which assisted him in the defense of his doctrine, it being plain that he
ever extolled this book and condemned the other of Paschafius Council. Roman 2.
ibid Intellecto quod Ioannem Scoturs extollercs, Paschasium damnares, communi
de Eucharistia ^^dei adversa sentires: promulgata est in te damnationis
sententia.
, which maintained your Roman doctrine? And this is so evident and apparent a
truth, that without extreme impudency it cannot be denied, being acknowledged
by Bellarmine himself Bellarm. de Euch. l. 1. c. 1. Primi, qui veritatem
corporis Domini in Eucharistia in quaestionem vocarunt, fuerunt Iconomachi,
post annum Domini DCC -- Hi enim -- dicebant unicam esse imaginem, Christi ab
ipso Christo institutam, nimirum panem and vinum,, in Eucharistia, quae
repraesentant Christi corpus, and sanguinem. -- Secundus auctor hujus erroris
fuit ^ohannis Scotus -- qui tempore Caroli magni circa annum Domini DCCC.
scripsit: Is enim primus in Ecclesia Latina de hac re dubie scribere ^oepit,
cujus librum de Eucharistia damnatum fuisse in Concilio Vercellensi, testatur
Lanfran^^ etc.
. So that they are but Dreamers that agreeed in laying down Berengarius for
the first Author of that Heresy.

Neither dare the Jesuit take upon him to answer that treatise which our
Answerer found in the library of S. Robert Cotton but by casting it of and
disregarding it; for that would quickly have casheered this foolish conceit
that Berengarius was the first that denied their carnal presence in the
sacrament, in regard it is manifest thereby that Rabanus and Ratrannus (who is
the same with Bertram) the one in his Epistle to Abbot Egilo, the other in a
book that he made to King Charles argued largely (against Paschasius) saying
that it is another kind of flesh* and therefore he is vain when he
thinks, that in reason he ought to be excused from regarding the said
trea^ise, until such time as we have proved the antiquity thereof, seeing
this is acknowledged already by Possevine his brother Jesuit, and also that it
is the same with that, which is to be seen in the Iesuit's College at Lovain:
which the Jesuit might have known by comparing them together if he had not
conceived it an easier task, to cast off, then to answer this testimony.

Further the Jesuit would have proved that the said treatise at Lovain is
blindly fathered upon Berengaerius, whereof I ^row (says he) he will give us
leave to doubt, seeing elsewhere he is bold to father it so himself: for will
he confess that he did it ^lindly also Reply page ^5
?

Whether it is blindly (by Possevine) fathered upon Berengarius, or no, neither
helps, nor hurts the cause; yet the Jesuit might have found it true, had he
not been lazy, if he would have taken but a little pains to have sought the
truth, as he did a long and dangerous journey to corrupt it, especially when
he was in Flanders not far from the Coppie. Neither does it any thing at all
reproach this most learned Answerer that he following the Jesuit Possevine
fathered it so himself, for who knows not that Jesuits will deceive all that
believe them? But the Jesuit may observe that he is not blind, that has a
veil cast before his eyes: It is rather an argument that he has eyes, that
can see to cast it off. True then it is, that he pointed in that place as
directed by Possevine, whom afterward, (having gotten a transcript from the
Iesuit's college at Lovan) he found to have been blindly mistaken and therefore
rejected him: So that all that the Jesuit has obtained here is, that this most
reverend Lord, did not see aright whilst he viewed the Manuscript with a
Jesuits eyes; but putting off those false spectacles, he easily discerned the
truth, whilst he used his own, and viewed the transscript.

Now after all these notorious over-sights and falsehoods, he draws on to
conclusion. Seeing then we find so little, or no knowledge at all to have
been of this said book attributed to Bertram, until Oecolampadius (a prime
Preacher of the sacramentarie error in these later times) did publish the same
at Basil, why may it not be well thought, that the said Oecolampadius was
Author of the work himself, and that to cloak his fraud, and to win the
credit of antiquity to his error, he framed a Dedicatorie to the Emperor
Charles, a^ to him who had forspoken the same Reply page 45
?

Here the Jesuit would say something, if he could mouth it; and first he would
have us believe, that this is the work of Oecolampadius; but herein he suspects
himself and justly; for this book was printed at Cullen, anno 1532. Now if
the Jesuit cannot show us an edition (as here he has not,) before that
printed at Basil, we may justly suspect, that Oecolampadius did not so much
as ever see that book in regard he died anno 1531. Secondly, this book is
acknowledged by your Sanctesius, to have been written many ages before
Oecolampadius saw the light, and therefore (it being a matter beyond all
exception true) your own think it fit to extenuate and excuse Bertram, as
they have done the errors of other ancient Authors, although some (making no
question that the book was Bertrams) would have it altogether remooved out of
the way Ind. expurg. Hispan. Card. Quirogae. edit. Mad^^ti, ann. ^^^4. (in fine
^^terae ^) Dele^tur tota Epistola Vdal^ci Episcopi Augustani, de coelibatu
Cleri. Item totus liber Bertrami Presbyteri, de corpore and sanguine Domini,
penitus aus^ratur.
. Thirdly, the Puteani fratres in Paris have there a Copy of Ratrannus or
Bertram De corpore Domini, which to have been no Manuscript of Oecolampadius,
the Jesuit I hope will grant us. So that he and his fellow laborers (that be
the greatest intelligencers abroad, and would be ashamed to be ignorant of any
of the particulars) may blush if they have any modest color left in them, to
run (as here they have done) unto such desperate shifts.

But (says the Jesuit) if any one had rather say, that Bertram indeed, at the
Emperors motion, wrote a book concerning the blessed Sacrament, why may he not
also say, that Bertram maintained our Catholic doctrine; in this point,
against Heribaldus and the rest of the Stercoranists Reply page 45
.

This may assure us, that the Jesuit cannot tell well what he has to say; the
truth he pretends to enquire after, and yet he would feign cast out any evasion
to cloud the same. Are not the Manuscript Copies witnesses sufficient to stop
your mouths? If impudency will not be satisfied upon so convincing proofs;
the Jesuit may know that Bertram has taught the same doctrine in other books
also, vizr De nativitate Christi, which is to be seen in the libraries of the
Cathedral Church of Sarisbury, and Ben^et College at Cambridge. And therefore
all his shifts are vanity, while he endeavors to persuade, that Bertram
maintained their Catholic Doctrine in this point against Heribaldus and the
St^rcoranists, when as he opposed (as has been formerly manifested) the
Doctrine which Paschasius taught, and the Roman Church does now adhere unto.
And it is a trifling inconsequent of the Jesuits, to insinuate, that because
Bertram did not write against Paschasius (which is false) therefore he did not
oppose the corrupt doctrine, that he (in effect) first published to the Church
Bellarm. de Script: Eccles^ (in Paschas^ Rat^erto) Hic auctor pri^^^ ^uit, qui
^en^, and co^ios^ scrip^it de veri^^^^ corp^^^, and (...) Do^^^^ etc. Reply page
45.
. But the strength of the Jesuits conjecture consists in this, that Bertram
lived under the government of Paschasius in his Monasteri^ of Corbey in
Picardie q. Which indeed the Jesuit may say, but will never be able to prove,
how confide^tly soever he publishes the same. For Paschasi^s died in the year
851. when as Charles, to whom Bertram wrote, was not made Emperor before the
year 875. So that Bertram might well have been a Monk at Corbey, and yet not
have lived under the Government of Paschasius. By all which it appears that
the Jesuit has beslabered OEeolampadius with an untruth, who for any thing
the Jesuit has produced, did neither publish the work, nor promised (as he
faith) to publish it sincerely in its own colors. And now he thinks that he
has said sufficient to excuse the Censurers of Doway, or any other that should
endeavor to cleanse away such errors, as have been by the enemies of truth
foisted either into that, or into any other the like work r. Reply page 4^


But the Censurers of Doway did not think these to be such Errors as have
been foisted into that work by the enemies of the truth. Those errors which
they endeavor to cleanse away, are such as are found in the true old
Catholic Writers I^d. Expurg. ^elg. page 5. Quum igitur in Catholicis
veteribus alijs, etc.
. Nay, how could it be that Heretics (as these Antichristianaries call us)
should cry out that you burn and forbid such antiquity as makes for you, if
Bertrams book at the publishing thereof had been be^^abered by O
Ecolampadius, and they only had cleansed it of these things? The Jesuit must
then confess (unless he have better to plead for himself then he has
produced) that neither Fathers nor Antiquity shall control him or his, whilst
by extenuation, excuse, inventing devices, denying or faigning they can avoyde
the same.

But all his hope is (though this be granted) that he will stop our mouths
by recrimination. I will take some pains (says he) to try whether we may not
find more easily such like corruption and washing of antiquity amongst his
fellows, as he would fasten upon us Reply page 46
.

Nescivit iniquus confusion^m ^eph. 3. 5*
. Whilst a wicked man can speak, he will not blush, otherwise the Jesuit
would not have insta^ced so vainly, as he here has done. For first, ^^o of his
instances are nothing to the purpose, in regard he cannot produce any Father
that either Willet or the Apologists set forth, and therefore they could not
fret, wash or corrupt the monuments of the Ancients, which they never
published. Yet Mr Malone cannot be ignorant, that private men in defending their
opinions, do many times interpret the Scriptures and Fathers, contrary to
their Adversaries thoughts, against whom they use them, so that their
Adversaries, with passion are many times provoked to take notice of some
things, which they conceive to be not clearly carried and thereupon take
occasion to challenge them of misalledging, corrupting, abusing, detracting
etc. This we find is done amongst our selves; as in the Controversies amongst
your own, the like is not wanting Wadding. Legate Phil* 3. sect. 2. orat. 9,
tract. 10. 6. Qua velura hac diligentia exhibita experiretur vestra Sanctitas,
tam falsum esse quod dicunt Adversarij quam verum esse quod in citato Tractat^
ego animadverti, ex apparenti and violenter congesta illa congerie Patrum apud
Bandellum, Bandelloque. similes reprobatos, ^liosve authors, paucissimos esse
vel nullos, qui express ferant sententiam contra Virginem; caeterosque vel
ferme omnes corruptos, and mutilatos esse in verbis, quae ex eisdem
proferun^ur. Payva ci^ ibid. Minime verum est communi veteris Ecclesiae
sententiae illam repugnare cum praesertim a multis videam Sanctorum Patrum
testimonijs a quibusdam oppug^ari, quae parti^ sunt depravata, partim nihil ad
rem faciunt.
. Only here is the difference, that we bewail these passionat escapes, and
could wish that men were more tempered with Charity; You justify your own,
and tell us that your Church grants free liberty to all Catholic Doctors
to expound as well the Scriptures, as the Fathers for the upholding of that
part which themselves do think to be most probable Reply Sect. XI.
.

For the objection from Mr Rogers, true it is, that he was deceived in taking
that book for Augustines, when in all probability it was written by some
Author of a Schoolemans age, for Riming Meditations were not in date in St
Augustines time, as we may gather from Sixtus Senonsis Sixtus Senen* Bibl
sanct. l 3. Scholastici cum desideraren thomines sui saeculi rythmes deditos,
ad studia sacrarum lirerarum allicere, accepta hinc occasion, excogitarunt and
ipsi novam Metricae art^^ rationem.
. For could that practice (if it had been so ancient) have been contemned
and exploded by all learned men in the late learned ages, as inept,
superstitious and ridiculous Ibid. Non me later, Schola^ocorum Poe^ticem ab
omnibus (...) contemni, and prorfus explodi, tanquam ineptam, and
superstitio^^m, and (...) dignam.
? I persuade my self, Antiquity would have had a greater reverence and better
esteem.

Now in regard this Author was diligent in the reading of Augustine, (of whom
he has made good use.) in all probability he gave it the name it bears, and
yet he mixed many corruptions of his own therewith. Secondly suppose the book
be Augustines, yet consider that M. Rogers does not put forth the same to
deceive, for the Jesuit acknowledges that he declares in his Epistle
Dedicatory, what is omitted in the book; so that what he has done, is no more
in effect, but a censure, such as Sixtus Senensis has used and others.
Thirdly, the book that he published was fot popular use, and therefore he
thought it not requisite to suffer those things which he distasted should
remain in the text, where conveniently he could not advertise the Reader, but
placed them in the Epistle Dedicatory, where he has showed what he conceived
of them. Wherefore this, as it is the last, so it is the Iesmites worst
defense, whereby, to excuse themselves, he would make Israel to sin.

SECT: VII.
HEre the Jesuit considers. How vainly our Answerer accepts of the Fathers
judgment again Reply page 4^
, and in the first place most unwisely plays the Orator. Notwithstanding all
that our Answerer has said hitherto, playing (as it were) fast and loose, and
by a doubtful tergiversation keeping off, and on, with the Fathers, at last
ashamed of his inconstancy herein, he proclaims valoroustio his final
resolution in these words. That you may see how confident we are in the goodness
of our cause, we will not now stand upon our right, nor refuse to enter with
you into this field, but give you leave for this time, both to be Challenger,
and the appointer of your own weapons Reply page 4^
.

If the Jesuit had any modesty, he would not play the child so vainly as
here he does* for where does the most reverend the Lord Primate play fast and
loose? Out of which of his words will he find his doubtful tergiversation?
where is his inconstancy that makes him ashamed? These flashes at the best are
but straynes of Vanity.

The most learned Answerer has showed the Jesuit out of Tertullian, the
means to find out the truth; Their very doctrine it self, being compared
with the Apostolic by the diversity and contrariety thereof, (says that
ancient Father) will pronounce, that it had for author, neither any Apostle,
nor any man Apostolical See the Answer to the Jesuits Challenge page 7.
. The Jesuit boasts, if the Fathers authority will not suffice, he will
produce good and certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures See the Jesuits
Challenge in fine*
. The most learned Answerer tells him, if he would change his order, and give
the sacred Scriptures the precedence: he should therein do more right to God
the author of them, who well deserves to have audience in the first place: and
withal ease both himself and us of a needelesse labor, in seeking any
further authority to compose our differences. And thereupon as St Augustine
the Donatists, so this most reverend Lord, provokes Papists, Let humane
writings be removed, let Gods voice sound. Produce but one clear testimony of
the sacred Scripture for the Popes part, and it shall suffice: allege what
authority you list, without Scripture and it cannot suffice Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge page 10.
. And in the same page he further expresses himself. And this we say, not as
if we feared that these men were able to produce better proofs out of the
writings of the Fathers, for the part of the Pope, then we can do for the
Catholic cause (when we come to join in the particulars they shall find it
far otherwise:) but partly to bring the matter unto a shorter trial, partly
to give the word of God his due, and to declare what that rock is upon which
alone we build our faith, even the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets
Ephesians ^. ^0.
, from which no slight that they can devise, shall ever draw us. Here also in
the place alleged he shows, that although, by reason of their corrupt dealing
with antiquity it is high time for us to listen unto the advice of Vincentius
Lirinenfis, and not be so forward to commit the trial of our controversies to
the writings of the Fathers, who have had the ill hap to fall unto such
hucksters handling. Yet that you may see, (says the most reverend Primate In
his Answer to the Iesuitea Challenge page 20.
) how confident we are in the goodness of our cause: we will not now stand upon
our right, nor refuse to enter with you into this field; but give you leave for
this time both to be the Challenger, and the appointer of your own weapons.

Now let all men judge whether there can be a more plain expression, without
fast and loose, without tergiversation, without inconstancy; when as the most
learned Answerer adhereth with the ancient Fathers to the true and absolute
rule, the sacred Scriptures, and yet to satisfy the Jesuit, is willing to try
our faith, according to the rule proposed by the Jesuit himself; not that our
doctrine had no other foundation or testimony besides the Fathers but that the
Jesuits vain pretenses of Antiquity might be detected and made known, and
that the world might see, that their Doctrine and Church is not to be
justified by the testimonies of either God, or man, unless it be that Man of
sin, who in this cause would be both party and Judge, and in matters which
he calls faith would have his determinations to be received without dispute.

The Jesuit proceeds.

Although we have already shown how little right, you have to stand upon in
this case, yet such thanks, as this your courtesy does deserve, we willingly
return Reply page 48
.

Palmarium Facinus. What have you shown but your shame? You have declared your
distaste of Scriptures; and if the Fathers would perform the work you expect
from them, why do you muster in their rank such hired Soldiers, Epistles,
Canons, Books, swollen with forged titles, corrupted, depraved, that they might
deceive, but that gladiatorio animo, although neither God, nor good men will
plead for you, yet you will not leave to plead for your selves?

We have heard you say ere while, (says the Jesuit) that we have had
opportunity enough of time, and place, to falsify the Fathers writings, and
to teach them the learning, and tongue of the Chaldeans: and that we have
performed it so well, by clipping, washing, cankering etc. that thereby their
complexions being altered, they appear not to be the same men they were Reply
page 48
.

And where I pray you does the most learned Answerer unsay it? O but if this be
true (says the Jesuit) how can the goodness of your cause be proved by them?
if not true, what satisfaction can you make us, for your uncharitable
slanders? If the Fathers be corrupted, how dare you enter into this Field? if
not corrupted, why did you charge us wrongfullie Reply ibid.
?

If the most learned Answerer had not detected your frauds, you had never been
charged by him with those crimes. If your clipping, washing, cankering, had not
been espied; or if he had been so credulous, as to have believed all your
impostors, that you can style Fathers of Counsels, then might you justly have
demanded, How could the goodness of his cause be proved by them? But whenas
you dare not trust God in his own meaning, nor the true ancient Fathers, or
lawful decrees of Councels, without the assistance of your bastard authors, to
help in time of necessity, this gives him ground sufficient to justify our
cause, that has no need of such treacheries, and to detect, yours, even they
being Judges, whom you appeal unto. For in the point to be handled
afterward, whether Peter's Primacie did descend to all succeeding Bishops of
Rome, what testimony brings the Jesuit, but Arabic canons of the Nicene
Council proved to be according to the title by an experiment from the
mountains of S. Thomas 1605 Reply page ^6
. and confirmed by an epistle of Athanasius to Pope Mark Reply page ^7
. Here is one Counterfeit brought to justify another, and all for the
counterfeite authority of the Roman Bishop.

This your corrupting of antiquity would have hindered us, if the same had not
been detected, but this most reverend Lord can discern betwixt the right hand
and the left, and point you out those witnesses that you only dare commit your
selves unto. The Council of Nice was corrupted by the Pope for to magnify his
Chair and sea and to make the African Fathers believe that he had that, by
positive law, which now they challenge by divine right; but did these Fathers
trust the corrupters? No, they sent for the true coppie, and then left the
pretenders. May not this be done in the like manner by the most learned
Answerer? True it is, that Gibeonites with their pretenses of antiquity and
outward mustines may sometime deceive a Joshua, yet we doubt not, but time and
experience may reveal the fraud: Jacob was deceived by Laban, but it was in
the night; Day declared who deceived him. Whilst the world was no further
learned then the Pope infallible, what excellent testimonies were there for the
Papal triple? but when the Sun, the sacred Scripture did burst forth of
those libraries wherein it was ecclipsed, and the most lucide stars, the
ancient Fathers, waited upon that original light; then many of these poor
meteors and fained appearances were quickly obscured and despised of some of
your own: So that your Dilemma proves but a childish flourish. For although it
is most true that you have done as much as you durst to pretend Fathers, make
Fathers, detract from Fathers, add to Fathers, forging, clipping, washing,
cankering them, yet these things being detected and casheered, the Fathers are
restored to their authority they formerly had, although they are not thought
fit to be used as a rule against those Heretics, that have not spared in this
manner to abuse their writings.

Again (says the Jesuit) you have given us flatly once to understand, that
the Scripture was the rock, upon which alone you build your faith, and from
which no slight that we could devise should ever draw you, and therefore you
bade us to our face, allege what authority we list without Scripture, and it
could not suffice. How is the wind now changed? how come you now to falsify
this your former resolution Reply page 49
?

Did ever any Jesuit trifle in this manner and speak more inconsequent? The
Scripture is the rock upon which alone he will build his faith, no authority
can suffice without Scripture, therefore the wind is changed, he falsifies
his former resolution? Does not this rational deserve to censure others for
false Logic that pleads with such a shape of reason himself?

The Jesuit promised in his Challenge to produce good and certain grounds out
of the sacred Scriptures, if the Fathers authority will not suffice: Did he
cast off their rock of Fathers because he promised Scriptures? I think he
will not acknowledge it, and why should he vainly here dream that the
Scriptures are rejected by the most reverend the Lord Primate, when to stop
the Jesuits boasting out of a well grounded confidence in the goodness of his
cause, he will not in this place stand upon his right.

Besides, let the Jesuit show me the general consent of Fathers in a matter
of faith without the Scriptures, if he be able. If he cannot, his thoughts are
confused, when he dreamed of their authority without Scripture: if he say he
will, let him produce them, for surely it is hard to be believed.

Furthermore, when the Lawyers urge Constantines denation for Papal
possession, I ask the Jesuit, upon what authority he would build his title,
whether upon the donation it self, or the Lawyers interpreting it? If the
Donation be sufficient, why not the Scriptures? If the interpreters must be
added, yet this is not to take away the power of the Charter; Nay, if they be
added (...) necessary testimony, the Charter were nothing without the Lawyers.

What follows in the Jesuit has received Answer in the fifth Section, only
here he will not be persuaded, that he chooses his own weapons Reply page 49
; but let the Reader judge, for bibling in his judgment is but babbling, it is
no other then fencing to fight with Scriptures, and to appeal to sole
Scripture, is but to agree with ancient Heretics. So that Scriptures are
none of his armorie, and if the Fathers be rejected also, what remains
further, but ipse dixit, assisted with pretended miracles, lying wonders. But
let them be whose weapons they will, He tells us that he will use them, and
the first encounter shall be concerning the dignity and preheminencie of the
Church of Rome Reply ibid.
.

Indeed this is that fruitful article of Faith, that has got all the new
articles of the new Roman Creed. This is the breast that nourishes them, that
gives them strength. The occasion wherefore he begins here, is, for as much
as our Answerer takes his first exception against him, for styling all the
ancient Doctors and martyrs of the Church universal, with the name of the
Saints and Fathers of the Primitive Church of Rome, though he alleges herein
no more against me (says the Jesuit) but this one bare Interrogaterie out of
Albertus Pighius: Who did ever yet by the Roman Church, understand the
universal Church Reply page 49
?

What needs further proof? If neither the whole Roman Church, neither your
whole Roman world in the judgment of Albertus Pighius, did ever take the Roman
Church, for the Church Universal, is not this enough to lash the Jesuit, for
confounding Vrbem and Orbem, and mingling Heaven and earth together? But he
will take of Pighius by a Distinction.

If (says he) the Roman Church be taken, as it comprehends only that
Clergy, which makes but one particular Bishopric and Diaces in the city of
Rome, abstracting from that relation which it has unto all other Christian
Churches, as the head unto the members, then I say with Pighius (who speaks
of it only in this sense) that no man ever, by the Church of Rome, did
understand the Universal Church. But if it be taken, as it is, the Mother
Church begun in S. Peter under Christ, and miraculously continued (those of
each one of the rest of the Apostles failing) by due succession of lawful
Bishops, having a relation to all other Christian Churches, as the head to the
members; then do I say, that it may rightly be styled with the name of the
Universal Church. And that all other Churches are to be accounted Catholic no
further, then they be linked in a subordinate obeisance thereunto Re^^^ p^g. ^^
.

Here are many pretty things; By this means the Church of Rome the Mother,
must be borne after the daughter; for many particular Churches had birth
before Rome was a Church, or the Roman Inhabitants received the Faith of
Christ. Secondly, that the Catholic Church must be in a subordinate obeisance
to the Church of Rome, before there was any Church there. Besides, the
Catholic Church was never enclosed in any other place but the world, never
restrained to any other habitation: To chain it ^o any head out of Heaven, or
to confine it to any particular place on Earth were to make it schismatic.
This Church concludes all Saints: Noah's Ark was here a Temple; Christ
delighted with this Church (as in the Canticles) before Rome was Rome, or a
Pontifex governed therein; Some are in Heaven that never yielded obedience to
this Church, or heard of Rome: And it is more then probable, some are in hell,
that were termed Holiness it self whilst they remained in this Catholic
here.

But what the Jesuit has to make this Roman Church the Catholic and mother
of all other Churches, in the next Section we shall examine.

SECT: VIII.
THis Jesuit after he has obtained from the most learned Primate (ex gratia)
liberty in his own challenge to choose his own weapon, would first use it to
prove, that The Ancient Fathers of the first Ages acknowledged the Roman
Church to be the head of all other Churches Reply page 40
.

I had thought the Pope had been the Head. and that all other Churches had
held the Catholic Faith of him in capite, but I perceive, the Roman Church
is now presumed from the Ancients to have had this title.

Yet I think it will scarce be found, what the Jesuit does understand by the
Roman Church, For if, by the Roman Church be comprehended, all other Churches
that are only to be accounted Catholic for the subordinate obeisance to
Peter and other succeeding Bishops See the Jesuits Reply page 49,
, then it is mere vanity to make an Head the Head of it self, to make the
Church all Head and no body; If their particular City or Diocese and Church
therein, then he cannot by the Roman Church understand the Roman Catholic, as
he confesses in the last Section; for (says he) if the Roman Church be
taken, as it comprehends only that Clergy, which makes but one particular
Bishopric and Diocese in tho City of Rome* abstracting (or as he would say
abstracted) from that relation which it has unto all other Christian Churches,
as the head unto the members, then I say th^^ no man ever by the Church of Rome
did understand the Universal Church Reply (...)
.

Secondly, if it be not the Roman Catholic, then all the testimonies
produced, make nothing for the Roman Catholic Church, but for the Roman
Church that is not Catholic. But though he does not fully express himself
herein, yet he does that which may give us a guess of his meaning, seeing the
stream of his proofs is to set forth the eminency of their Roman Pastor,
And to make this good, he cites some Fathers to prove the Pope to be the head
of the faithful See S. Augustine cited by the Jesuit page ^1.
, head of Pastoral Honor See Prosper ibid. page 52.
, so that notwithstanding he pleades for the Church Roman, yet that which he
labors to advance, is the Sea and Pope Roman, that is that they fight for,
this they desire, Rome they would have the head of all Churches, and the Pope
the Head of her: and their sleighting of Councels many times declare in their
opinion the Pope to be the only Beasts head that must be adored; for the
Council makes not the Pope infallible, but the Pope the Council Wadding.
Legate. Phil. 3. etc. Sect. 2 Non tribuit Concilium infallibilitatem Pontifici,
sed a Pontifice habe^ Concilium, ut fit ratum ac firmum.
. For Peter, and those that follow him in the faith of Peter, not for a
Council did Christ pray Ibid. Pro P^tro, and in fide Petri succedentibus NON
PRO CONCILIO oravit et ex^ravit.
.

Well then; let us see how we shall answer what he brings for the Roman
Churches exaltation. And first of all it seems a needless thing for this
Jesuit to bring proofs to manifest the same. It being so undoubted a truth
(if we may believe this Jesuit) that the very first Broachers of Protestancie,
when they speak without Passion, do not deny the same Reply page 30
.

The Broachers of Protestancie were CHRIST his Apostles, who gave us wine and
oil out of the Vessels of his Truth, when such botchers as you have labored
to erect a fantastic frame of your own.

His first instance is, Martin Bucer, whom he produces, confissing
ingenuously, that with the Fathers of the ancient Church, the Roman Church
obtained the Primacie before the rest, for as much as she has S. Peter's
chair, and her Bishops almost ever still have been held for Peter's successors
Reply page* ^^
.

And what I pray you gets your Church or Pope by this ingenue confitemur?
Little I suppose, to make Rom^ caput infallibilitatis, or the Pope the Pylot to
guide thither. For he says, that the Roman Church has obtained the Primacie
prae caeteris, before other Churches, not super, not over all the rest, and
that the Bishops of Rome have been held for Peter's successors, but not
absolutely as an infallible truth; but semper fere, almost ever, not without
doubts and jealousies, as he seems to express: But if absolutely other
Bishops, nay, all other Bishops have been likewise so esteemed, as is plain
by Chrysostomes exhortation to Basil Bishop of Caesarea, who from the ground
of Pasce oves, exhorts him to that duty of Peter's, because it belongs to
his Successors as well as to himself Chr^sost. de Sacerdotio. l. 2. ^^tre
amas me ^^quit, atque illo id con^i^ence, adjungit: Si amas me, Pas^e ores
meas. Interrogat discipulum Praeceptor, ^um ab eo non quo id ipse do^eatur,
^erum in NOS DOCEA^ quan^ae sibi curae ^^ gregis hujus praefectura. ^^ ^aulo
cost. Ve^^m hoc ille tum agebat, ut, and Petrum and caeter^s no^ edoceret,
quanta bene^^^en^i^ ac* charitate erga suam ipse Ecclesiam afficeretur, ut hac
ratione and NOS quoque ejusdem Ecclesi^ studium curamque toto animo
susciperemus -- (...) item de causa Christus sanguinem effudit suum? certe ut
pecudes e^^ acquitere^* qua^ ^^^ Petro ^um Petri successoribus gubernandas in
manum (...)
, whereunto agrees Peter Lumbard lib. 4. Did. 18.

We envy not the Bishop of the imperial City this Honor, that in
Procession he shall go last, and in a Council sit first. If this will serve
his turn, let him put off his Crown and assume his Myter, and with an ingenue
confitemur, we will all acknowledge him the greatest Bishop, first in place of
all Peter's Successors: But (for his Monarchy) to make the whole Catholic
Church, the Senate of Bishops and Priests a bare shadow, this is too much to be
allowed him.

Further whilst he embraces Peter's faith, we will not deny him to have a
part as the rest of the Catholic body in Christ's prayer: Yet to think that
Christ so prayed for Peter and his Successors Bishops of Rome, that Hell might
prevayle against all other his Successors the Bishops of the Catholic
Church, this without extreme flattery we cannot grant unto him. So that
Bucer has not said much for this Head of Churches.

Yet he goes not alone, Luther himself (says the Jesuit) does confess that
the Bishop of Rome has superiority over all other Bishops Reply page ^^
.

This is no great matter, for it was (as the Jesuit confesses) when he made
use of his bests wits Ib* ^
, that is, when he did and said, or at least submitted all to the determination
of this Apollyon; but afterward in his raving pange of madness, he spared not,
like madde-men and fools to speak the truth, and to call a spade a spade, the
Pope Antichrist, and the Roman state the Whore of Babylon. So that any may see
this makes little to the Producers purpose; for if this were a good
Testimony, why does he not produce our Acts of Parliament in Queen Mary's
days and all those Testes, which in the time of blindness from men not well
informed, he might have alleged?

But (Luther tells us) that Gods will which way soever it is made known unto
us, ought to be reverently embraced: and therefore it is not lawful to gainsay
rashly the Bishop of Romes Supremacy. And this reason is of such force, that
although there were no other, it alone ought to be sufficient to ^urbe the
temeritie of all opposers Reply page* ^
. The Argument is thus.

Whatsoever is permitted by God, is reverently to be embraced: But the Papal
altitude is permitted by God. Therefore with all reverence to be embraced. May
not this argument serve for Pope Joan, the stews, the holy Lady Ma^ylda Judas
and Julian, yea for all villainy without exception or interruption? For we must
not think that any thing can come to pass without Gods voluntary permission.
God made the world, shall we say that (like Gallio) he c^reth for none of these
things (...)
? God has permitted many evils, many tyrannies, among the Baby^nians,
Persians, Grecians, Romans; yet this does not justify them in their impieties,
or make us reverently to embrace them therein.

We know God placed Peter in the sheepe-fould to ^eed^ his Lambs, as he sent
the the rest to the same work; but show us that he took him from the Ewes
great with young, to make him the King of Israel, the Monarch of the Church,
and this is something to the purpose.

Yet this Argument is not the Charter, by which Peter got his Primacie, but
those Popes that came in the last days. For when Luther was in his best wits,
he could not find the Popes Primacie in Pasce ^ves, or Oravi pro te Petre, or
in any other place of Scripture, or from any other reason, but from experience.
So that we perceive the Bishop of Rome has as much right to his pretended
greatness, as Nimrod to Babylon, and all former Tyrants to their Usurpations.

Now the Jesuit addresseth himself to Antiquity, and wherefore? Because our
Answerer will needs be a scholar of their maddest humors in this point we
present him here, (says he) with the Doctrine of Antiquity utterly condemning
the same Reply page ^0
.

The most learned Answerer is no Scholar of Luther, or of Bucer, neither are
their humors directories of his Faith, or opinions. One is his Doctor, and
that is Christ, and as far as Luther and Bucer follow him, so far they may
have his company, but no further. It is your holy Brotherhood that are tied to
mad humors, nay to such as a mad man would not embrace. Who can presume
that a Jesuit has his wits, that casting aside Gods Law, in the place thereof
embraces the rule of Ignatius, as if it were their Decalogue, or Square for
direction? And for any thing we can see, the Prescripts of their General are
little less esteemed by them in their practice, then what God himself
appoints them Hassenmuller. Hist. Ies, c. 6 de vo^. Obedieniiae.
Impudentissimos istos homines non pudet, haec sigmenta capi^is sui, and ha^
Loiolae nuga^, ipsi Dei Deca ^^go praepone^^. quod Iacobus Crusius, Novitiorum
Landspergensium Rector facit. Noster, inquiens Decalogus e^^, R^gula vo^orum ab
Ignatio L^^^^^ tradit^.
. This goes far, but yet all this is nothing to the requisites that they
prescribe to themselves, viz^, that if the Church (you know who they mean)
should determine white to be black. it must not be opposed Regulae Jesus it ad
finem Histor. interdict* tenet, regula 132. si quod o^ulis nostris apparet
album, nigrum illa esse definierit, debemus itidem quod nigr^^ sit pronunciare.
.

Now seeing he has urged Bucer and Luther disputing ^^ concessis, he will
make it clear by Antiquity it self. So that he will not accept that the Roman
Church is the Head of all other Churches by a bare Concession or grant of her
enemies, but will further make it apparent by her own evidences and ancient
Prerogatives. And his first testimony is the Inscription of an Epistle of
Ignatius, the disciple of S. John the Evangelist to the Romans, where amongst
other prerogatives, he confesses that it bears sway ever all other Churches
Reply page* 10
.

The person cannot want authority and esteem, being an holy Bishop and Martyr.
Yet I am sure the Jesuit has besmeared the face of this Epistle with falsehood
and fraud; for where will he find this sway-bearing to be Oecumenicall and
over all other Churches? Bellarmine dare not be so bold, but contractedly
speaks in the Region of the Romans Bellarm* de Romans Pont l. 2. c. 15. Primus
igitur sit Beatus Ignatius qui Epistolam ad Roma^^^ inscribi^. Ignatius
Ecclesi^ sanctifi^a^ae, quae praeside^ in regione Romanorum*
, and yet more largely, then the truth of the Epistle will bear, (...), in
loco Regionis Romanorum; and what Patriarch had not the like to bear sway in
divine matters over all the Churches of the Province or Provinces, that were
subordinate unto him? Nay further, the Arch-Bishoppes of York and Dublin are
styled Primates, the one of England; the other of Ireland, and yet this does
not make them Universal Swayers of the Church in those Kingdoms, much less
to obtain headship for their Churches above all others therein. So that I am
persuaded, if ever God had given the Roman Church such a capital privilege,
the Catholic Church would have had plainer words to have declared CHRIST'S
favor and particular bounty unto it. But you may remember who it was that
took our Savior to the pinnacle of the Temple, that offered him all the
Kingdoms of the world, that he might near sway over them, and you cannot
forget mitte te d^^rsum. If in these things, you will not reject Sa^^ with your
Master, take heed you fall not from the pinnacle of the Temple with him that you
embrace as your Lord.

It is more glorious for a Bishop to be a fatherly guide and governor, then a
sway-bearing President. and it would more commend the Roman Bishop to attend
those suburbane Churches and Provinces committed to his care by the Nicene
Council, as Ruffinus ^ expounds it, and not to distend his holiness with the
vaste thoughts of universal Regiment.

The second Witness of Antiquity he makes Cypri^^, and two places he cites
out of him. The first out of his third Epistle in his first book, where this
Father calls the Roman Church, Cathedram Petri, and ^^clesium principalem;
the Chair of Peter, and the che^^^ Church Ruffinus hist^ccles. l. 1. c. 6. ^t
ut apud Alexandriam, and in urbe Roma, vetusia con^u^^^do ser^^ur, ut vel ille
(...), vel hic ^^^aroicariatum ecclesiarum solicitudinem gerat.
.

And might not the Church of Antioch have the first title or style? And yet
this would not be sufficient to give that Church such an universal headship
and pre-eminence. Reply page 50
For the other phrase of Ecclesiam principalem, it makes it not the Head, for
that Church obtained this title by reason of the City, wherein the principal
members of the Church remained, and because it was an Apostolical Church, not
for that all the other Apostolical Churches were subordinate unto it in power.

The second he urges is out of the Eight Epistle of his fourth book, where
he would have Cyprian to style the Roman Church, the root and the mother of
the Cathelicke Church Reply page 50
.

If this be true, surely Cyprian had a conceit that the branch might grow
before the root; for who will say, that Rome first received the Faith* or the
name of Christians, or that there was no Catholic Church before Peter
preached there. But Cyprian meant no such thing as this Jesuit would persuade
him to affirm: He finds a Schism in Rome betwixt Novatianus and Cornelius
Nevatianus being made Bishop the other living, and suspends his judgment in
this matter until he had enquired the truth from the Roman Priests and
Deacons Cyprian. Epistol. 45. Omnia interim integra suspenderentur, done end
nos iidem collegae nostri rebus illic aut ad pacem* aut pro veritate compertis
redirent*
, only he advises them, that like good Navigators they should not separate
themselves from the unity of the Catholic Church Ibid. Nos enim singulis
navigantibus, ne cum scandalo ullo navigarent, rationem red sentes scimus nos
hortatos cos esse, ut Ecclesiae Catholi^^ radicem and matricem page* (...) at
(...)
, which he understands by this phrase, taking the root and mother of the
Catholic Church to be the ^^nitie of Faith, and not as our Iesu^^ would
collect, that thereby is meant the Roman Congregation; for wherefore then
should he suspend his judgment till he heard the matter, if his thoughts had
concluded, as this Jesuit would have it, that Cornelius and his Adherents,
were the root and mother of the Catholic Church? And that this is the
meaning of S. Cyprian, we may easily perceive, in regard he takes these words
ad Catholic^ Ecclesiae unitatem, to the unity of the Catholic Church; and ad
radicis and matris sinum, to the bosom of their root and mother, in his 42
Epistle to express the same thing. Besides, we may further observe, that the
root and mother of the Catholic Church is not Cornelius and his Diocese, in
regard the Jesuit will not have the Pope and his Diocese, to be the Catholic
Church Reply page 49.
, which S. Cyprian Epist. 43. makes to be the Mother, ad matrem suam, id est
Ecclesiam catholicam.

His third witness from Antiquity, is Tertullian, who even when he was fallen
otherwise unto heresi, yet did he (though he was an Heretic) acknowledge the
Bishop of Rome to be Episcopus Episcoperum, the Bishop of Bishops Reply page 51.
.

As if this were sufficient to make the Roman Church the head of all other
Churches, or the Pope the Father of all Bishops: Well, if it be not, Rome has
lost one of her best Arguments for her triumphant Station over the Church of
GOD. And who knows not, that this title was given to all those that had
Bishops under them, as all Patriarchs and Metropolitans had? And what is more
common then to give other Bishops the style of Summus vel princeps Episcoporum,
Chief, or Prince of Bishops; as Rabanus speaks of the Bishops of Antioch and
Alexandria Rabanus l. 1. de instit. Cleric. c. 5. Sicut Archiepiscopus
Antiochenus Episcopus, atque Alexandrinus Antistes (...) Graeco ^ocabulo
dicitur, quod sit summus vel Princeps Episcoporum tenet enim vicem Apostolicam
and praesidet Episcopis caeteris.
? Yea so common was this appellation, that in the third Carthaginian Council
this title was inhibited to all the Metropolitans Concilium Carthag. 3. can 26.
Vt prim^ sedis Episcopus, non appeiletur princeps Sacerdotum, aut summus
sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus.
.

But least the Jesuit should say that the style of Prince of Bishops is not so
concludent for an universal government as to be called Bishop of Bishops, we
shall find Sidonius calling Lupus, Pater Patrum, and Episcopus Episcoporum,
Father of Fathers, and Bishop of Bishops Sidonius l. 6. Epist. 1. Benedictus
Spiritus sanctus and Pater Dei omnipotentis, quod tu Pater Patrum and Episcopus
Episcoporum.
; and Athanasius was called (...) Arch-Preist of Priests (...). in orat ^^. de
laudibus He ronis.
, which is the same in effect; whereby we may see, upon how slender a
foundation the Castle of S. Angelo is raised.

Yet if Tertullian be but observed by an eye that will not be blind it will
appear that he speaks only in scorn and ironically when he calls your Roman
Bishop, chief priest and Bishop of bishops. Only this Roman Fisher will
forsake nothing that comes to his hook, though it be but the scorn of an
Heretic.

He cease not but brings in old Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. saying, that with
this Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality, or Supremacy,
it is necessary, that all other Churches do agree Reply page 51.
.

All this makes little to give the Church of Rome the headship pretended; For
the question here is particular concerning the Canon of the Scriptures, and the
Church of Rome is commended for her truth as she then stood Irenaeus l. ^. c.
3. In qua semper ab his qui sunt undique consecrat^ est quae ab Apostolis
traditio.
, not for her infa^libilitie in ages after that she should remain the same.
For were see Augustine forsakes the Roman Church in which some doubted of the
Epistles to the Hebrews, and adhered unto the Greeks, who received it into
the Canoni: Irenaeus also in another matter, forall the powerful principality
that he gave unto the Roman Church, reproved sharply her Monarch, and forsook
not (in all probability) their Commu^ion whom he had excommunicated Eusebius
hist. Eccles* l. 5. c. 23. Extant autem and verba illor^^ qui Victorem acriter
reprehenderunt; equibus and Irenae us.
.

Besides, if all other Churches did agree with the Roman Augustine. l. ^. de
Peceat* merit, and remissse, 27. Ad Haebrae^^ quoque* Epistola quan* quam
nonnullis incerta fit, -- tamen magis me movet authoritas Ecclesiarum
Orientalium, quae hanc etiam in Canonicis habent.
propter potentiorem principalitatem, by reason her more powerful
principality, it were good our Jesuit would have interpreted what he had
meant thereby, for these are words that better fit an imperial government then
the rule of the Church. And that people should come thither for this respect, I
think the Church of Rome has little cause to triumph therein any more then
other Patriarchall Seas, because all men come up from all parts to the
Metropoliticall Sea, that have any business Antiochenum Council* ^: sub ^ulio
can. 9. Ad Metropolin omnes undique qui negotia videntur habere concurrant.
. And who can perceive any other thing in Irenaeus? for he does not as the
Jesuit interprets him, make all Churches to agree with the Roman for her more
powerful principality, but shows that all faithful men from all parts of
the world coming to Rome (in regard it was the imperial Seat) might learn
what Scriptures were delivered by the Apostles Peter and Paul in regard at that
time in this Fathers judgment they were there conserved by the Church. And so
Chrysostom in like manner does attribute to the City of Antioch the titles of
the great City, the Metropolis of the whole world, to which multitudes of
Bishops and Doctors came for instructions, and being taught by the people
departed Chry^ostom. de Verbis E (...). Vidi Dominum hom 4. Magna civitas ac
totius orbis Metropolis Quot Episcopi quot doctores huc venerunt, and a populo
docti discedunt.
.

In the next course appears Athanasius who (if we may believe this Jesuit)
together with all the Bishops of Egypt did acknowledge themselves subject unto
the same [viz the Roman Church,] though far distant. The ground that moves
the Jesuit to be so well persuaded is their Epistle written to Pope Mark,
with this Inscription. To the holy Lord Venerable Mark sitting in the
Apostolical height, Pope of the Roman Apostolic Sea, and of the Church
Universal, Athanasius, and all the Bishops of Egypt send greeting. Besides he
tells us, that in this Epistle this holy Father with his fellow Bishops
ingenuously acknowledges the Roman Church to be the mother and head of all
other Churches, and therefore they profess themselves to belong thereunto, and
that both they and all theirs will always live obedient unto the same Reply
page 51
.

Here is a heap of Fathers, like Abdisu and his company in the Trent
councelli, a feigned Athanasius, a troop of Gypsies. These know better how to
cant (M. Malone) then to speak Athanasius, or like Bishops of the Catholic
Church. Such bastard birthes as these may advance your now scarlet Mistress to
be the Lais orflourishing Flora of the world, but never prove that ancient
holy Church of Rome to have taken upon her as her right to be the Head and
mother of the Catholic Church, as you desire to manifest thereby.

Bellarmine tells us that both these Epistles of Athanasius to Pope Mark, and
Mark to Athanasius are supposititious Bellar. Script. Eccles. De Athanasio. De
Epistolis Athanasij ad Marcum Papam, and Marci Papae ad Athanasium constat ex
ratione temporis, eas epistolas esse supposititias.
, and Baronius gives them the like honor Baronius an. Christi 336. sect 58. 5^.
At Merca^^is merces nonnihil suspectae redduntur.
. But M. Malone may be excused, for why may not he as well cite a bastard father
for the Catholic Roman mother, as their Pope did a fictitious Canon for the
Catholic Roman Father Council. Carthag. 6
? Yet I wonder all these pains should be taken when the headship of the Church
might by a general Council be taken from the Roman and given to any other, as
Cameracensis Camerace nsis in Vesp. a^. 3 page 380.
affirms.

His next evidence is the general Council of Chalcedon, where Paschasinus and
other Fathers assembled there, do manifestly declare the Pope to be, caput
universalis Ecclesiae, Heal of the Church universal Reply page 5^
.

The Jesuit should have forsaken this for fear of loss; For surely it is no
otherwise then they gave it to the Church of Constantinople, which at that time
when this Council was held, had the same cause for her headship, to wit, the
Empire and Senate as old Rome had. Whereupon th^se Bishops thought it very
reasonable that she should enjoye the same Privileges, as old Rome had, and in
ecclesiastical matters, sicut illa majestatem habere, be an head of the
Universal Church Council Chalced. Act 16. Eadem intention permeti centu^
quinquaginta Deo amantissimi Episcopiae. qua sedi novae Roma privilegia
tribuerunt, rationabiliter judicantes imperio and Senatu urbem o^na^a^ aequis
senioris Romae privilegijs frui and in ecclesiasticis sicut illa majestatem
habere.
.

And what does the Council give to Rome, (if she had this title) more then
has been given to other Bishops and Churches? Did not Basil term
Athanasius, caput universorum, the head of all Basil. epist. 52
? Nazianzen also says of him, that he gave laws to the whole world Nazianzen.
Orat in laude^ Athanasij. Leges orbi terrarum praescribit.
. And Chrysostom calls* Antioch the Metropolis of the whole world Chrysostom.
de verbis Esaiae, Vidi Dominum etc. hom. 4. Magna civitas ac totius orbis
metropolis.
, and in another place the head of all the world Chrysostom. hom 3. ad Populum.
Caput totius orbis
. Justinian likewise calls Constantinople caput omnium civitatum, the Head of
all cities Institut. l. ^. de satisdat. vlt.
. Whereby it appears that the title of head was given to many persons and
places for their excellency in some kind or other and not for their supremacy.

Besides this, to any that will veiw the Council, it will evidently appear,
that the Roman Bishop was considered, as then he appeared in the Council by his
Legates, and not as he was in his private chair; and was reputed Head of the
Church, not in regard of his Sea or succession, but because he did presede by
his Legate that Church representative which was there gathered together, as
Cyrill was Head of the Ephesine Council. Ephesi^. apud Binn. in Epistola ad
Imperator. tom. in act. Council. (...). cap. 8. Quia inquam triginta illi contra
sacram Synodum, ^anctissimorumque Episcoporum hic coactorum CAPVT, Cyrillum
sanctissimum Alexandriae Archiepiscopum -- blasphemam depositionis noram, ut
(...), in se continentem, protulerunt.
, and Hosius of the Nicene Council Bellarm. l. 1^ de Council. c. 19. Athanasius
in Epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes, -- dicit, Hosium Principem fuisse in eo^
Concilio, and ipsum esse, qui composuit Symbolum, quod dicitur Nicaenum.
, so that the Jesuit prooveth nothing here, but only amazeth his Reader, with
this pretense of a Council, having not one word in this Council that will
give him the privilege of a Semper-President because he is head, but
accompting him Head, because by the general Council he was accepted President
and did discharge that office by his Legate there present.

The Jesuit has ommitted nothing; Steven Archbishop of Carthage in that
Epistle to Damasus which he wrote in the name of three African Councels has
this title. To our most blessed Lord sitting in the Apostolical eminency,
Pope Damasus the chief Bishop of all Prelates Reply page 51
.

Which of these words (M. Malone) prooves Rome to be above Jerusalem? the Hills
of Babylon to be higher then the mountains of the Lord? Not the title of
Chief Bishop; for this gives the Bishop no power, but place; no authority,
but precedence. Is it the other, that he sits in the Apostolical eminency?
Who doubts that the Apostleship is attributed to other Bishops as well as Rome,
that dare not adventure to imagine the effect of this appellation to be a
spiritual Monarchy? As Sidonius to Lupus, praeter officium quod
incomparabiliter eminenti Apostolatui tuo, sine fine debetur (...) l. 4. Epist.
4.
. So likewise in the renunciation of the Metropoliticall Sea of Heraclea, thus
speaks Theodoret Chrit^pulus, Deprecor and thronum and principatum and
sacerdotium adhortorque eum qui vocatur and quem Paracletus ad Apostolatum suum
separabit. And if we will give credit to Pacianus Episcopi Apostoli nominantur,
Bishops are called Apostles (...) Epist. 1.
, so that it was no unusual thing to give good Bishops, titles that were
indeed proper and peculiar to the Apostles of Christ, as Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and the like. And therefore this can be no rest for him to depend
upon.

For the two places to prove Rome the head of all Churches cited out of Victor
Vticensis and Ennodius Reply page 51
, we have answered thereunto, that this title is but an appellation that
betokens honor and precedencie, not power and superiority. Surely the Church
of Rome, got not this height by such arguments, neither do I think that it
could be maintained, if it wanted other strength and defense. So that any may
see his capital argument gets no more, then what we yield unto him in. What
his other endeavors will effect, we may easily conjecture.

He brings in S. Ambrose next Reply ibid.
, but with as little help for the Roman headship, as the former from whom he
expected assistance: But here is no truth in this quotation, all, neither true
Author, true word, true consequence. For first how many can we find that
reject those commentaries upon Paul's Epistles, as being none of Ambroses, some
charging them as upon the Epistle to the Romans with Pelagianisme, from which I
think the Jesuit will defend this Father? Secondly, let the Author be who he
will; these words seem to be inserted, Cujus hodie rector est Damasu^ for if
it be he (as by some of the learned of your side is supposed) that wrote the
book of questions of the old and new testament Bellarm: de Script. Eccles: De
Ambrosio M. credibile igitur est auctorem horum commentariorum esse Hilarium
Diaconum Romanum, qui Luciferi schisma propagavit.
; he lived Quae^^. 43.
300 years after Christ, and so could not speak these words of Damasus, who
was Bishop 367. Or if he were Remigias Lugdnnensis, as Maldonat thinks
Maldonat. in Ioh. c. 12. v. 32.
, who lived about the year 870. I think you will say he spared the truth, if
he had said, Hodie rector est Damasus. And who does not see the poor
consequence that follows hereupon? Damasus is Rector of Gods house, therefore
the Roman Church is the head of all other Churches: By this I dare say, a man
may prove any Church the Head of another: for to what Bishop is not this style
given? Paul calls himself and Timothy and others that were called to the
regiment of the Church, ministers of Christ, stewards of the mysteries of God 1
Cor. 4. v. 1
, and himself a minister of the Church Coloss. 1^ 25.
. But let Gods word prevayle, as the Jesuit is affected, what has herein
been said of Damasus that has not been said, and by Rome it self of Andrew
the Apostle? who I fear, will not be admitted to enjoy the conclusion, though
the Roman Breviarie give him the premises. Majestatem tuam Domine, suppliciter
exoramus ut sicut Ecclesiae tuae, beatus Andraeas Apostolus existit Praedicator
and Rector. O Lord, we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as blessed Andrew the
Apostle, is Preacher and Rector of thy Church Cassander. Prec: Eccles: De
sancto Andre^.
. I fear he would smell like Spalato, that from hence should conclude that the
Church which Andrew governed as a Bishop, was the mother church of all others,
or that he were the universal Bishop, from whom every man should receive his
faith. Nay Bellarmine will not exclude others from this title Bellarm. de Romans
Pont l. c. 11. Omnes enim Apostoli) fuerunt capita, Rectores, and Pastores
Ecclesiae universae.
, and yet none shall have what the Jesuit infers thereupon but his own Roman
mistress.

After Ambrose comes S. Hierome, whom he brings in saying, I following none
as first, but Christ, am united in one Communion to thy blessedne^: that is to
say, to Pet^rs Chair. Upon this rock I know the Church is buil^. Whosoever
eats the Lamb out of this house, he is profane. He that gathers not with
thee, does scatter: that is to say, He that belongs not to Christ, stands
upon the side of Antichrist Reply page 5^.
.

What our Jesuit would have here is plain, that consent with the Roman Church
makes a Catholic, and therefore it must be the Mother Church. Is there no
difference betwixt Rome now and then? Who could then argue her of falsehood or
false belief? It were a poor reason to a^gue from her being pure to her
corrupt defylings. But wherein lies the strength of this Testimony? Surely in
side-^^king and communion, as if it were certain that to commucate with Rome
and her Bishop is su^ficient to declare a man catholic, and that non-union to
that head were as much as not to be of the body of Christ. Now what force has
this testimony for confirmation hereof? For we see Popish confession will not
acknowledge Sergius a catholic, though he communicated with Honorius Council ^
VI Oecum (...) Act. 12. and 1^.
. Neither do the present Romanists embrace those Arrian^ as Catholic for
Liberi^^ his familiarity, nor condemn Athanasius, though condemned by their
Pope Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4 c. 9. Nam ut colligitur ex Athanasij verbis,
and ex Epistolis ipsius Liberij, duo mala Liberius commisit: Vnum quod
subscripsit in damnationem Athanasij. Altem^^, quod cum Haereticis
communicavit. Binnius Not. it. Epist. Liberij* ad Episcopo^ Orien. extat tomo
1. Council. Quisquis innocentem Athanasium a Catho^icorum communio^e arcet:
impio^ vero Ariano^ ad communionis vinculum admitti audeat (...) non
Catholicum: sed Arianum esse oportet.
. Will you account all for Heretics, that have not obeyed your Roman Bishop?
What say you to Irenaeus Eusebius hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23. Extant autem and
verba illorum q^i Victorem acriter reprehenderunt. Equibus and Irenaeus.
. To Cyprian Bellarm. de Rom Pont. l, 4. c. 7 Cyprianus pertinaciter restitit
Stephano Pontifici, do^^^ienti haereticos non rebaprixand^^, ut patet ex
Epistola ejusdem Cypriani ad Pompei^^, and tamen non solum non fuit haereticus
sed neque mortaliter peccavit -- et tamen Ec^^esia Cypria^um ut sanctam colit,
qui non videtur unquam resipuisse ab illo suo error.
. To the African Bishops in the cause of Appeals Epist. Bonifacii ^. ad Alex.
Episc Aurelius enim praefatae. Carthaginensis Ecclesiae olim Episcopus, cum
c^llegis sui^ instigante Diabolo superbire temporibus praedecessorum no^^^orum
Bonifacii atque Coelesti^i, contra Romanam Ecclesiam coepit. Sed vide^s se modo
peccatis Aurelij Eulalius a Romanae Ecclesiae communione segregatum humiliam
recognovit se, pacem and communionem Romanae Ecclesiae petens subscribendo non
cum collegis sui^ damnavit Apostolica auctoritate omnes Scripturas quae
adversus Romanae Ecclesiae privilegia factae quoquo ingenio fuerunt.
? Must all Africa not afford one Bishop that is catholic, or Layman that is a
right Christian and true Catholic? How are they acknowledged Martyrs? How
Saints?

Besides, I wonder that this truth never appeared in Canon of Council, nor was
ever registered by the Fathers in the ages mentioned with general consent. For
that phrase, upon this rock I know the Church is built, meaning S. Peter's
chair, I dare say with reverence to S. Hierome, that it was either upon
Christ, or Peter's confession of Christ to be the Son of God (as the Fathers
in multitudes do interpret it) or upon Peter himself, whom your own would
have the rock, and not upon Peter's ^haire, which was not of such an
unmooveable stability, ^s that rock ought to be upon which the Church is
builded. Further I think Mr Malone will not de^y that the foundation of the
Church was laid before Peter had any chair either at Antioch, or at Rome; and
if he say, S. Hierome meant not his chair but in relation to Peter; then who
can deny, but all the Apostles are rocks, as Peter was? Petrae omnes Apostoli,
All the Apostles are rocks, upon which the Church is built, says Origin
Origin. in Mat. hom. 1.
.

The Jesuit proceeds, and brings two places from St Augustine, if we will
believe him to be the Author of the questions of the old and new testament.
For to make this other then a counterfeit, he shall never be able, but what
says he that may procure such an universal pre-eminence to this only Father?
Why he is called caput fidelium* Head of the faithful Reply page 51.
. So may every Priest in his Parish, unless his flock be Infidels. And for
the other title, Pastor gregis Dominici; Pastor of our Lords flock Reply ibid.
. What Bishop is not Pastor of the flock of Christ, but Papal Bishops, who
(poor Delegates) have not their institution from CHRIST, but as poor
hirelings from the Papacy?

In the second place the Jesuit tells us, thot S. Augusti^^ gives this
testimony of the Church of Rome, that the Principality, or supremacy of the Sea Apostolic has always borne sway therein Reply page 52
.

This Father will not serve the Jesuits turn without a gloss, Principality,
and Supremacy must be the same, so the Jesuit would have it; for if this be
not true, Augustine forsakes his engager. But the Jesuit may know that
principality is not Papal Dominion, there was a primatu^ or principality of
the Church of Constantinople Theodoret. l. 2 c 27.
, and a primatus or primacie of the Church of Jerusalem (...). l. 7. ^. 6.
, into which seats ascended none of these Monarc^s. He comes to the
principality of a See or Bishopric, that enters by orderly election, as
Augustine acknowledges the Bishop of Rome, to have done. And a man may get a
principality in the Church by sedition and ambition, as Leo expresses
himself to the Bishops of Afric Leo Epist. 87. ad Episc. Africanos.
Principatus autem, quem seditio ex^orfit, au^ ambitus occupavit, etiam si
^oribus atque actibus non ^ssend^t, ip (...) tamen ini^^^ ^ui est (...)
. What he can pick out of the word Apostolical, has been answered before.

Next to the Master he produces the Scholar Prosper in two places, but to no
more purpose or advantage then the former. For who will deny the Church of Rome
in Prospers time in regard of her outward eminency, to be made the head of
pastoral honor unto the world Reply page 52
, and that she was more conspicuous by being a tower to Religion in defending
the faith against heretics, then by exercising any power, not temporal No
such word in the original quotation out of Prosper.
(as the Jesuit adds) but Ecclesiastical, that was given him by Councels.
Whereby we may see the difference betwixt Rome now, and then, their eminency,
their honor, then was extended, arce religionis, by def^nding the true faith:
Your holy Fathers now seek advancement solio potestatis, by obtaining a
Monarchy, and bringing all powers but hell, (that must triumph over you Revel.
19. ^^
) into subjection under their feet.

But the Jesuit confident of Prosper, tells us; Therefore the holy Bishop
(...) does testify how in his days: The whole world agreed with Pope
Siricius, in one and the same fellowship of communion Reply page ^^
. Here is a Logical therefore, Prosper tells us, that Rome the Sea of Peter,
is made the head of pastoral honor unto the world etc. therefore Opta^^^
(that lived many Decades of years before him) does testify how in his days
the whole world agreed with Pope Siri^^us in one and the same fellowship of
communion. We will leave the inference, the evidence is nothing. For was there
not reason that they should do as they did, to wit, agree in truth with the
eminentest opposing Bishop, for otherwise they should have been Donatists.
Make your Popes as Siricius was, and we will agree with them in communion, not
because Popes, but because they ^defend the true Doctrine against Donatisticall
and heretical rashness.

Do you think Hierome thought himself bound to Liberius his Communion, when
he styled him an Arian Hiero^. Catalog. Scrip. Eccles. Fortunatianus Episcopus
Liberium Romanae Vrbis Episcopum ad subscriptio^^^ Haerese^^ compuiit.
. Ambrose would not endure to give a stupide consent to the Church of Rome
itself, unless he saw reason for it, lib. 3. de sacram. cap. 1. In omnibus
cupio sequi Roma^^^ Ecclesia^, sed tamen and nos omnes sensum habe^^^, Id quod
alibi rectius servatur nos custodimus. Here you may see how the Ancients did
adhere to the Roman Bishop, not in every thing from opinion of his authority,
infallibility, mother-hood, or mistresseship; for they thought in other places
something might be more rightly observ^d: but so far as they might convince
them of the truth of their doctrine and profession, otherwise, N^^ (...) sensum
habemus, they could espy error there, as well as in any other less eminent
Church.

But he tells us, This agreement in Communion with the Roman Church was in
those primitive times held for an infallible mark of true faith, a^ appedreth
most plainly by that which S. Ambrose relates of his brother Satyrus Reply
page 52
. It appears plainly that the Jesuit shootes at rovers, not at the mark,
otherwise he would not produce a matter of fact, knit to time and occasion, to
prove a thing absolutely, and without dependence. Satyrus would not communicate
in the dread mysteries of the Eucharist, but by the hand of a Catholic
Bishop, opposite to the Luciferians, who were Schismatickes at that time, and
to that purpose calling a certain Bishop so him, (...) supposing that no true
freindship could be without true faith, he therefrre first of all enquired of
him wheth^^ he did accord with the Catholic Bishops that i^ with the Roman
Church Reply ibid.
. Now the Jesuit would hereupon conclude, that agreement in communion with the
Roman Church. was in those times held for an infallible mark of true faith
Reply ibid.
. In Satyrus his time, the Romam Church was a good mark, because by true
doctrine it gave good aim, but was it the same when Liberius, Honorius were
Roman Bishops: Satyrus made not Bishops Catholic, because Roman, but in
regard they were opposite to Schismatickes. Neither did Ambrose interpret
Catholic Bishops by the Roma^^ Church, but because they were truly Catholic
at that (...) which were of the Roman clergy. About those times then they did
choose Bishops by their agreement with the present Orthodoxall Bishops, as
Nectarius of Constantinople, Timothieof Alexandria etc. not because those Sees
made their Bishops infallible and exempt from error, but because these men at
that time by general testimony, suis Ecclesijs religiose praessent; did
religiously govern their Churches (...)* hist. l. 7. c. 9. Hos enim and
imperator quo. que visos, and cotam allo^^^tus approbavit de quibus et integra
constabat fama, quod suis Eccles^^ religiose praeessent,
. The same reason made Satyrus call some Bishops Catholic; and from the same
ground Ambrose expounds Satyrus his Catholic Bishops by the Roman Church.

The Jesuit comes now to his last proof from restaring of Bishops put out
of their Bishoprics to conclude his Papal Monarchy, and brings us only
one example, and that but an attempt only, viz^ of Athanasius Patriarch of
Alexandria, Paulus Archbishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra,
Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lucianus Bishop of Hadrianople, who being all
Patriarchs and Prelates of the East Church, and expelled from their places,
even by Councels of other Bishops, came unto Rome, complained unto Pope Julius
of their wrongs, and were by him righted and restored. As witness Sozomenus,
etc Reply page* ^^
.

The Bishop of Rome was a man of great authority, in regard of the Imperial
City, whereof he was Bishop, and much he might do by persuasion, advice, and
by the assistance of the Imperial power, yet all this will not conclude him
the Monarch of the Catholic Church. And what did Julius more then the
Archbishop of Canterbu^y ought to do upon the like occasion? He discussed
the crimes of every one Reply page ^^
.

And good reason; for a good man ought to know the cause he would patronize,
much more a good Bishop. He did receive them into his Communion, finding that
they all did agree to the Nicene Council Reply ibid.
. Could he have done otherwise without blame. As one that had care of all, by
reason of the dignity of his See, he did restore to every of them their own
Churches, writing also to the Bishops of the East, etc. Reply ibid.
And what made him so confident of his power? his Monarchy? Surely no; but
because he was the Emperou^s Chaplain, and therefore might expect to be
graciously assisted by his Lord. And that this is not a conjecture, you may
conceive, in regard the Bishops of the East made ^ Reply page 53
light of his restitution, returning him an answer full of scorns and threats
Sozomen. Hist. Eccles: l, 3. 2, 7. Athanasi ^s autem and Paulus ad suas seeds
revertuntur; literasque Iulit Episcopis Orientis mittunt, Quibus illi graviter
commoti, convenient Antiochiae in unum, and epistolam verbis elegantibus
ornatam, and diserte, ut ^heto rum mos sert, compositam ad Iulium scribunt,
eamque plenam ironiae, and minarum non expertem gravissimarum.
. Neither was he ever able to bring to pass what he determined, whil^st he
used his own power (for they disdained that the greatness of his Bishopprick^
should make them his inferiors Ibid-Indignati sunt, se posteriores ideo far,
quod magnitudine Ecclesiae superarentur. Sozomen hist. eccles. l. 3. c. 9. At
cum literis apud ^piscopos Orientis de rebus propter quas scripsisset, nihil
proficeret causam A^hanasij and Pauli ad Constantem retulit.
) and therefore he solicited his Lord, by whose authority they were restored
Sozomen: hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 1^. Con^tans autem rebu^ gestis in concilio
Sardicensi cognitis scripsit ad fratrem Constantium literas, uti Athanasio and
Paulo ecclesias suas redderet. Vbi v^^o intellexit fratrem diem de die ducere,
scrip^i^ denuo, ut vel viros istos reciperet, vel se ad bellum gerendum
pararet. Constantius igi^ur cum de linere cum Episcopis Orientis commun^casset,
stultum putavit ob^eam causam bellum civil and intestmum suscipere. Quo quidem
concilio inductus, Athanasiu^ ex Ita^^ acce^sit and cap. 20. Imperator autem
dimittit Athanasium in Aegyptum, (...) ^^^ ^^ literas cum ad Episcopos et
Presbytetos cujusque civitatis, tum ad populum Ecclesiae Alexandrinae: quibus
et vitam ejus pie actam, et probita^em morum commendavi^: (...) cohortatus est,
uti ei, utpote suo antistiti, p^rent^, precibuses ora^ionibus (...) reilgio^^
(...).
.

And now the Jesuit having finished his testimonies, concludes for the Papal
Crown. How far now, may we think does our Answerer swarve from the
ancient Fathere Pastors, and Saints of the Primitive Church, whilst he by a
separation from that Church, which they acknowledged to be their head, and
themselves to be members thereof, fails to be a member of the true body of
Christ, or one of his true flock forasmuch as he with-draweth himself from the
true confessed Pastor? And what wonder then that he should dissipate and
destroy all true faith and doctrine etc Reply page 53.
.

It is clear that the most learned Answerer has with the Church that he by
Gods providence governs, not swarved from the ancient Fathers, Pastors and
Saints of the primitive Church, much less made a separation from the ancient
Church. How the Church of Rome was accounted an Head; How the Popes pastoral
office was extended: How little reason the Church of God had to depend upon the
Popes Monarchy before he had a Crown: How vainly our Replyer terms o^^r
dissipation of their pride and vanity, the destroying of all true faith and
doctrine. Le^ others conceive, res acta non transacta est.

But as if he had said too little for the grand Impostor, taking breath, he
gets into the CASTLE-CHAMBER (where in-truth a Jesuit should be, rather then
in his Cloister) and primafacie makes the STATE simple, the most reverend
Primate a Deluder, and his Countrymen poor and afflicted Reply page ^^
. Here is no mean man, Totus Proteus, totus Aristarchus, many times
flattering great ones, always censuring good ones. Shall I defend their
Wisdom that then were IVDGES in that honorable Court? It were to dishonor
them. It may suffice, that not only those PATRES CONSCRIPTI, wise Senators,
but their wisest MASTER, (which could not at any time beedeluded by all the
Sophistical practices of Rome) approved and applauded the speech. But who
knows not, Delusus quia non delusus? Every one is deluded by others in the
Jesuits conjecture, that is not deceived by themselves. Yet how will he make
this most learned Lord a Deluder? He has said all and nothing, something he
has spoken without the compass of the Virga, that his Countrymen are poor
and afflicted: For how can they be but poor, when they live in an Egyptian
dearth? And affli^ted they will still remain, whilst such herds of frogs
and losusts, Egyptian blessings prey upon them. But let us see how wisely the
Jesuit has behaved himself.

In clearing the second maine branch of the oath, the Answerer (says he)
grounded himself altogether upon these ^wo fickle foundations. First, that S.
Peter was not head of ^h^ Church universal more then any other Apostle.
Secondly that the Bishop of Rome did not inherit by succession this same
headship or universal Bishopric which S. Peter had Reply page 53.
.

The Jesuit distasted the first as well as the second, but the opposall of
that he supposes not fit doctrine for the present time, the second only must
endure a censure as grounded upon those two sickle foundations. And be they as
they shall appear in trial, the Jesuit yet might have conceived, if his ears
had not failed him, that the most reverend Primate did not so much question,
whether Peter was head of the Church universal, as whether he had power in this
kingdom, his speech having relation to Peter's power not over the Church
absolutely, but over us. And what he says, is for the honor of S. Peter, not to
disrobe him; For, if S. Peter himself (says the most reverend Primate) were
now alive, I should freely confess, that he ought to have spiritual
authority and superiority within this kingdom. But so would I say also, if S.
Andrew, S. Bartholomew, S. Thomas, or any other of the Apostles were now alive.
For I know that their Commission was very large; to go into all the world, and
to Preach the Gospel unto every creature; so that in what part of the world
soever they lived, they could not be said to be out of their charge their
Apostleship being a kind of an universal Bishopric See the most reverend
the Lord Primate his speech in the Castle-Chamber.
.

But the Jesuit tells us that these two assertions before mentioned are
manifestly contrary (even by the confession of learned Protestants) to the
doctrine of the primitive Church Reply page ^^.
. And to make this good, John Brereley is in the margent. But I wonder the
Jesuit will utter so gross and so deceiveable falsehood. For we know that in
the sense the Jesuit would have Peter to be head, neither Calvin, Whitgift,
nor Musculus ever dreamed of it: and to show his precedence in order, calling,
gifts, abilities, age, or otherwise, this makes nothing either to the Jesuits
purpose, for Peter's monarchy, or the succeeding monarks. So that the Jesuit
(as Brereley) has brought but ill advocates to plead for a Papal Monarchy
from the headship of S. Peter.

But let the matter be examined; for every government presupposes not a
Monarchy. He might as in the schools be the first in the head class to
dispose and order in some kinds the rest, but this is far from being in Popish
sense, the head of the Church. A poor wiseman might deliver a City Ecclesi 9.
15.
, and an inferior Priest remove a schism; and this they may do by their
wisdom and government, not Monarchy and power. Besides if we grant the
Jesuit, that Peter excelled the other Apostles, as one Angel excels
another in glory, he cannot conclude Peter the Apostles Monarch, nor the Pope
the Churches head, unless he will have another Monarch in heaven besides God,
and an head over some of the Apostles whilst they lived upon earth that was not
Peter.

The most grave Counselor brought therefore no new doctrine into the
Castle-Chamber. If then you will have Peter head of the Apostles, we yield it,
but we say withal that he was such an head that was neither adorned with
Coronet or triple Crown to declare a Papal supremacy over his brethren. But
to state the question, as it ought to be, let us enquire whether the Jesuit
has from the Fathers proved as he ought (if he speak to the purpose) viz.
that S. Peter was so head of the Apostles and Church Universal, that all were
bound to acknowledge him as their Monarch.

You have seen all that he has urged from Calvin, Whitgift, and Musculus
prove no such matter, and I doubt not but the Fathers will fail the Jesuit
also.

First he urges S. Basil, who says, That blessed Peter who was preferred
before the rest of the disciples, to whom the keys of the kingdom of heaven
were committed Reply page ^4
. And what makes this for a Monarchy? That Peter was blessed? so were the
Apostles: that he was preferred before the rest of the Apostles in many
particulars is not denied, but every preferment is not Monarchical: neither do
the keys work any more in Peter, then the rest of the Apostles to who^ they
were equally give^. So that Basil speaks not full for this headship.

His second instance is out of Hierome: Therefore one Peter, is chosen amongst
twelve, that a Head being ordained, all occasion of schism might be taken away
Reply ibid*
. But what have we here that might not be found amongst equals? For Bishops of
the same dignity may have among them a President. Besides his Ambrose speaking
of this Primacie makes Peter to be that of the Circumcision, that Paul was
among the Gentiles Ambros. in ^ (...). Ab his itaque probatum dicit donum, quod
accepita Deo, ut dignus esset habere Primatum in praedicatione gentium, sicut
et habebat Petrus in praedicatione circumcisionis.
, that is a Primate of Order, of Eminency of Gifts, not of an excellency of
Power. Neither did Peter take away schism by absolute definition; as your Pope
assumeth authority to do, but by orderly disposition, with Apostolical
consent.

His third instance is, Nazianzen Reply ibid.
. But does he give Peter, what will satisfy the Jesuit, a monarchy? The
Church cannot endure two universal Bishops, two Monarchs. Had Peter it by
Nazianzens testimony? Surely, how could James and John inherit that blessing,
and yet Nazianzen puts them together Petrus, Ioannes and Iacobus, qui prae
alijs and erant and numerabantur: Peter and John and James, who both, were, and
are reckoned before others Nazianzen. de moderat. in disput. servanda.
. Here Nazianzen his prae alijs is not Papal, not Pontifical, neither then
could Peter's advancement be a Monarchy.

In like manner all that the Jesuit urges is nothing to the point that he
ought to prove. That Peter was Captain or chief of the Disciples, as
Epiphanius styles him, the most excellent Prince of the Apostles, in Cyrils
judgment d; these Reply page 54
are but titles of excellency which were given him for his personal gifts and
endowments, Paul in this manner compares himself to the very chief Apostles
1. Cor. 11. v. 5.
, and Eusebius Emissenus, or whosoever was the Author of the Homily De Natal.
utriusque speaking of Peter and Paul, terms them Princes of Christians from
their order and gifts, and further says, si ille primus, iste precipuus, if
the one was the first, the other was the chief, It was familiar to give terms
of excellency of power to those that exceeded in gifts. Nicodemus is styled
Prince of the Jews Cyrillus l 2. In Iohannem cap. 41. Nicodemus Iudaeorum
Princeps.
, and who knows not that Aristotle is ever mentioned as Prince of
Philosophers? So likewise his supposititious Ambrose speaks not of any other
Primacie, but of personal eminency. For he makes Paul from his own words to
be no less then the first Apostles in dignity and other excellent
performances, though he were after them in time, which that Author presumes
cannot weaken the Apostles testimony of himself, in regard John preached
before Christ, and baptized CHRIST, Andrew followed CHRIST before Peter, who
notwithstanding received the Primacie Ambros. in 12 cap. post ad Corinthios
Hocerant quod and Apostolus Paulus Hoc ergo dicit, quia minor non est, neque in
praedicatione, neque in signis faciendis Apostolis praecessoribus suis, non
dignitate, sed tempore. Nam si de tempore praescriben. dum putatur, ante coepit
Ieannes praedicare quam Christus: and non Christus Ioannem, sed Ioannes
Christum baptizavit. Number ergo sie judicat Deus? Denique prior sequutus est
Andreas Salvatorem: quam Petrus. and tamen Primatum ^on accepit Andreas sed
Petrus.
. Here the drift is, that if Paul were as excellently qualified, as the
Apostles, his afterbirth could not prejudge his equality, and if Peter were
more eminent in gifts then his brother Andrew, Andrew his precedencie in time
could not deprive Peter of his eminency of gifts.

The Jesuit concludes not, but brings Eusebius telling us, Peter the Apostle
by Nation a Galilean was the first Bishop of the Christians Reply page 54.
. This the Jesuit perceived would conclude nothing, and therefore added his
ridiculous gloss, James was Bishop of Jerusalem, others of other places; but
Peter was Bishop of all the Christians Reply ibid.
. Poor folly! who deprived them of their Apostleships, that their Bishoprics
were so contracted, that they ceased to be Bishops and Super-intendents of the
Christian Church? Paul professes, that the care of all Churches were upon him
2. Cor. 11. 28.
; Pope Innocent called Chrysostom, the great Doctor of the whole world
Canisius F^com. Patrum mitio Catechismi, Innocentius primus pontifex in
Epistola ad Arcadium Impera torem -- Ejecistie throno suo, re non judicata,
magnum totius Orbis Doctorem.
; and other Fathers have had these titles given them ordinarily, whereby their
esteem in the Universal Church has been declared, as Origin, the next
Master (after the Apostles) of the Church Six^us Senens. l. 4 tit. Origenes.
Didymus in primis appellat cum secundum post Apostolos Ecclesiarum magistrum.
, so that he is preferred before your Popes,) Athanasius an agregious pillar of
the Church whose Tenets were esteemed for the law of right faith Nazianzea.
Orat. in laudem ejus. Athanasius egregium Ecclesiae columen -- cujus dogmata
pro orthodoxae fidei lege habebantur.
. Basil the mouth of the Church Greg. Nissen. in vita S. Ephr. Syri Cesaream
Cappadociae divino Spiritu ductus, ipse Os Ecclesiae auream illam doctrinae
lusciniam Basilium vidit.
, and Hilary the Pillar of the Church of Christ Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. De
S. Hilario, S. Hilarious Doctor maximus, and Ecclesiae Catholicae columna merito
habitus sit.
. But to remove this title see whether Paul be inferior in Chrysostom
judgment, Ille alter Michael Christianorum Dux, Alter Aaron totius mundi
populis inunctus sacerdos: He another Michael the Archangell, or Captain of
Christians: An other Aaron an anointed Priest to the people of the whole world
Chrysostom. hom. 8 de laudibus Pauli.
. And Cyprian when he was sought for to be martyred, was termed the Bishop of
Christians Cyprian. Ep. 69. Siquis tenet vel possidet de bonis Caecilij
Cypriani Episcopi Christianorum.
, which is the same with Pontifex Christianorum, so that this title gives not
Peter this Universal Monarchy any more then others. But the Jesuit may know
those words cited by him, are not truly the words of Eusebius; for Scaliger
delivering him truly to the world, finds not there the Jesuits quotation,
there being neither in it natione Galilaeus, nor Christianorum Pontifex, whereby
we see the Monarchy will stoop to any corruptions.

Neither are the Jesuits next following quotations any better. For the two
places cited from S. Augustine: the first cited out of his 124, sermon. de
tempore, where S. Peter is termed the Head, the very Crown of the Church: the
second urged from the same Father, or whosoever else was the Author of the
questions upon the old and new Testament. For even as in Christ were found all the causes of mastership: so after our Savior all are contained in Peter: for
Christ ordained him their head, that he might be the Pastor of our Lords flock
Reply page 54
: they are none of his; the first being suspected by many; the second rejected
by all, yea so despised by Bellarmine, that he makes the Author no Catholic
Bellarm l. de gra. primi hominis c. 3. Ex his intelligi potest auctorem
quaestionum novi ac veteris testamenti non solum non esse S. Augustinum -- sed
neque esse hominem Catholicum.
, but an Heretic Idem de effectu Sacra^u. l. 2. c. 10: Respondeo primo, librum
citatum non esse Augustini, sed alicujus haeretici.
, qui multa docet and contra fidem, and contra Augustinum, that taught many
things both against faith, and against S. Augustine. I do not urge this, as if
his testimonies from hence were of any strength they being answered in
substance before, but because you may see that they will avoyde no witnesses
(though in other causes they reject them) that will advantage their cause.

For the titles given to S. Peter by Chrysostom, as Chief, Captain, Head of
the Apostles Reply page 54.
, they all have received answer before. For we acknowledge Peter Head which is
the same with chief of the Apostles, otherwise how could Paul compare himself
to the very chief, if there had been no chief? And if the Apostle had been
by divine institution Paul's Sovereign, how could Paul compare himself, with
him, he himself being divinely assisted?

But the Jesuit making a pause is willing for brevities sake to let pass
many other holy Fathers and Doctors of the ancient Church, who are most
copious in the confirmation of Peter's primacy over the rest of the Apostles
Reply page 54.
.

And you have seen for what kind of Primacie it is, that the Fathers speak,
not a Primacie of power to which all the members of the Church must stoop, but
of Order, excellency, gifts, graces; for the Fathers will expel from their
minds, that will sincerely read them all conceit, that Peter had a sovereign
Monarchy over the Apostles. See Peter's Primacie the same with that of James and
John, for so says Clemens, Peter and James and John, after the assumption of
our Savior, although they were preferred before others of our Lord himself,
yet did not challenge this glory to themselves (...). hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1.
Clemens hoc asserit: Petrus enim; inqui^, and Iacobus, and Ioannes post (...)
Servatoris, quamvis ab ipso quoque Domino alijs essent praelati, gloriam tamen
hanc sibiipsis non vendica^^^^, ^^^
. Neither is Paul by Chrysostom made less then Peter himself, and from S.
Paul his own testimony, Gal. 2. 8. And now (says that ancient Father) does
Paul show himself to be equal to the rest (of the Apostles) in honor,
neither does he compare himself to those others, but unto the very Chief,
declaring that every one of them had obtained alike dignity Chrysostom in Epist.
ad Gal. c. 2. Iamque se caeteris honor parem ostendit nec se reliquis illis,
sed ipsi summo comparat declarans, quod horum unusquisque^ parem sortitus sit
dignitatem.
. Ambrose knows not whether should be preferred Ambros. sermon 66. B. Petrus
and Paulus eminent inter universos Apostolos and peculiari quadam prerogativa
praecellunt, utrum inter ipsos quis cui praeponatur incertum est.
, but Cyprian and Hierome make them all equal Christ after his resurrection
(says Cyprian) gave equal power to all the Apostles Cyprian. de Vnitate
Ecclesiae. Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuat.
. And the rest of the Apostles were even the same that Peter was being endued
with the like fellowship both of honor and power Ibid Hoc erant utique and
caeteri* Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and
potestatis.
: Hierome also speaks as much. The Church is founded equally upon all the
Apostles, all received the kingdom of Heaven, and ex equo super eos Ecclesia
fortitudo solidatur Hierom. l. 1 cont. I^rin. At dicis super Petrum fundatur
Ecclesia: licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat: and cuncti
claves regni (...) and ex ^^^^ etc.
. So that the Jesuit had done well if he had taken up before; if he had not
troubled his Reader with proving that kind of Primacy which is not denied him,
and had forborne the attempting a proof of that, which the Fathers will never
grant. But howsoever he resolves that Optatus Bishop of Milevetum, must not be
let pass, in regard he will seem to catechize our Answerer himself very
handsomely in these words. Thou can not deny but that thou know full well,
that the Episcopal Chair has been first given unto Peter in the city of
Rome, wherein Peter the head of the Apostles has sitten: whence also he was
called Cephas. In the which one Chair Unity might be kept of all men: least
the rest of the Apostles should maintain every one their singular Chaires to
themselves: so that now he should be a schismaticke and an offender, who would
seem to raise up another against this only Chair Reply page 54.
.

This place of Optatus, if the Papists do rightly interpret it, must enclose a
notorious falsehood; for can it be affirmed with truth by Optatus that in his
time the Apostolical Chair was only placed in the City of Rome, when other
Apostles had their several seats and Chaires in other Cities also, as James
at Jerusalem, as well as Peter at Rome, all which were visible and conspicuous
to the Church before Optatus his time, as we may see out of Tertullian,
Percur^e Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipse ^^huc cathedra Apostolorum suis
locis praesidentur Tertul. praescrip. con. haere^^^^.
.

And therefore Optutus his Chair cannot be interpreted for the only chair of
the Catholic Church placed by Peter at Rome, from which whosoever did
separate himself (upon what cause soever) should be a Schismaticke.

But Optatus being rightly understood declares thus much and no more; That
Peter having his seat placed at Rome (and yet Eusebius makes him not the
first Bishop ther^ Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. ^^ and 19.
) the Apostles did forbear to place their seats in that City, and therefore
judges the Donatists schismatic, that placed another Bishop of their
Schism in Rome contra singularem cathedram, which this father shows was ever
one in Rome, in ea sedit primus Petrus, succedit Linus, Lino Clemens. So that
the Donatist Permenian with his fellows were esteemed Schismatics by Optatus,
not because they separated themselves from the Unity of the Roman Church as
now they understand it; but in regard by placing a Bishop of their faction in
Rome, they contemned the established policy of the Church that required in one
City but one Episcopal Chair. Whereby we see, that Optatus is so far from
catechizing the Answerer, that he does check the Jesuit and his faction,
that in like manner as the Donatists have done, do now intrude upon our
Episcopal Chaires in Ireland, titular Bishops of their faction of Schism, not
forbearing the chair of S. Patricke it self.

But drawing to conclusion of this point, the Jesuit could wish that both the
Answerer and all his Adherents would listen well unto S. Leo, who says, that
Peter only in all the world is chosen as chief in the calling of all Nations
Reply page ^5
etc.

And we tell him that Pope Leo did speak more for Peter to advance himself,
then it is probable he would otherwise have done, if his Chair had not met
with some opposition in those times; for Leo makes Christ (Mark the tenth) to
reprehend the desire of that power which in the Jesuits quotation he seems
to give to S. Peter Leo Epist. 55. ad Pulcher. Augustam de ambitu Anatolij. Et
ille vere crit magnus qui fucrit totius ambitionis alic^^^ dicente Domino:
(Quicunque voluerit inter vos major sicri, sit vester minister. Et quicunque
voluerit inter vos primus esse, erit vester servus. Sicut filius hominis non
venit ministrari, sed ministrare.
, although Maldonate the Jesuit would not have the words of the Evangelist so
to be understood Maldonat. com. in Marc. 9. 35. Non hic agi de prjma in
gubernanda Ecclesia dignitate, etsi co etiam sensuhunc locum alicubi apud
Leonem magnum legi memini.
.

We have seen then (says the Jesuit) how undoubtedly the ancient Fathers
maintained S. Peter's primacie as well ever all the Church of Christ, as over
the rest of the Apostles also Reply page 55
: But any may perceive with how false eyes; his own witnesses but little
favoring his cause, as we shall further show hereafter. So that any may
conceive, how poorly he has laid the foundation of the Roman Catholic
Church, vizt. Peter his Monarchichall power over the Apostles.

Neither (says he) will it be hard to show the like uniforme consent of
antiquity in attestation of that other point, denied also by our Answerer, in
the Star Chamber, concerning the same headship and Primacie which the Bishops
of Rome do inherit by lawful succession Reply page 55
. And to manifest this he begins his entrance with a repetition of what has
been said and answered before, and then fixes first of all upon the strong
pillar of Popish height, the Arabicke Canons of the Nicene Council, from whom
he doubts not to bring us most plain testimony in this point Reply page 56
, and who beleiveth him not? for if these Canons speak not plainly for the
purpose whereunto they were framed, what device can help them?

But the Jesuit knowing his coin counterfeit tells us, that the Answerer does
soon rid himself of this, and the like decrees of that holy Synod, by
averring them to be forged by certain well-willers of the Roman Church in the
name of the good Fathers that never dreamed, says he, of such a business Reply
ibid.
.

And is not this a truth that the Jesuit cannot resist though he plays the
Baby, in telling us, that if you desire to hear him prove this his saying, you
must have (...) ^^ other proof you are like to get none of him, besides his
own rash affirmation Reply ibid.
.

For the matter is so clear from all antiquity, that there were but twenty
Canons in the Nicent Council (all which we have) that it were but the
mis-spending of time to prove that which all acknowledge See them repeated in
the sixth Council of Carthage* apud (...) um.
. Besides, could the famous lights of the world at that time be ignorant of
these Canons, as S. Augustine Council. Carthag 6. c. 7. Augustinus Ecclesiae.
Hi^ponis Regiensis, Legatus Provinciae Numidiae.
, with (...) and more (...) Bishops Epistola Aphricani Council. ad Bonifacium
Papam 1. Aurelius -- and caeteri, qui praesentes affuimus, numero ducenti december
and septem ex omni Concilio Aphricae.
? Were they so little esteemed, that they were clofetted at Rome, or so
unknown in the East, that the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria
could make no return of them Epistola Council. Aphric. ad Coelestinum. Quia
illud quod pridem per cundem co* episcopum nostrum Faustinum, tanquam ex part
Nicaeni Concilij, exinde transmi^^^^is in Concilijs verioribus quae accipiuntur
Ni aena, a sancto Cyrillo coepiscopo nostro ^^ (...) Ecclesiae, and a
venerabili Artico Constantino (...), ac auther (...) missis tale aliquid non
po^uimus repe^^e
, though the one sent them entirely as they were decre^d by the Fathers at Nice
Epistola Attici Episcopi Constantinopolitani ad Concilium Africanum Sicut
sta^^ta suntin Nicaea civitam a Pauibus cano^^^ (in integro ut jussisus) direx.
, and the other ^^nsm faithful exemplars from the authenticke Coppie escripta
ad Conc. Aphrican. Cyrilli Alexandrini Episcopi. Necesse habus (...) exemplaria
ex authentica Synodo, in N^^^^ Bythiniae habito, vestrae charitati dirigere
quae and in Ecclesiastica historia requirentes (...).
. But if there were nothing else to disgrace them; the Jesuit his endeavors
to justify them from farre-fetched and counterfeit grounds were alone
sufficient to render them suspected of themselves. For do you think that a
^^e from the (...) of S. Thomas, sent from some slight Mercenarie of the Pope
to his mancipated servants the Jesuits in a matter that concerns the Popes
greatness so nearly, is to be received as an infallible Argument? Neither if
this Papal altitude could stand upon true grounds, would it need ^uch
counterfeit supporters as these two Epistles cited by the Jesuit, in regard
they declare themselves counterfeite and are acknowledged for no better by
their own. For if this Epistle were written to Pope Mark after the Arians
burnt their books at Alexandria, surely it must be many years after Pope
Mark was dead; their burning being in the reign of Constantius Athanasius
Epistol. ad orthodoxos in persecut.
, when ^^ Pope Mark died in the time of Constantines government Hieron. in
Chron.
. Further how could this Epistle lie hid, when the controversy was betwixt the
African Church and the Roman Bishops? Besides, could Mark send to Athanasius
in Egypt, when it is apparent by Baronius, that he was ^^ Exul in France Baron.
^om. 3 ad an^um 336 ^, 39, Exul ho: (...) agebat ^^ Galli^^.
? Could the Roman Coppie and that of Alexandria so far differ, (as we see
they did) if the Pope had sent a true Exemplar ex Romano scrinie? And not to
press the Reader any further; What trifling follies do they impute to the
Nice^^ Fathers, as to publish these Canons half Latin^ half Greek,
(persuading that forty were made by the Greek Fathers, forty by the
Latin,) and to insert ten Cannons amongst the rest, in relation to the
seaventie languages which they conceived to be in the whole world, or the
seventie disciples, and all this by the assistance of the Spirit of God
Epistola Athanasij and Aegiptiorum Episcoporum ad Marcum Papam Sa^e
praesentibus nobis octoginta capitula in memorata tracta^^ sunt Synodo scilicet
quadraginta a Latinis similiter Latinis edita ^^gua. Sed visum est, 318.
patribus, Sancto spiritu, repletis in prae^^^^o Concilio congregatis, and
maxim jam dicto Alexandro and Apostolicae sedis Apo^^^sarijs, ut december
capitula a dunarentur alijs, atque congruis locis inscrerentur, and ad for^^^
septuaginta discipulorum, vel potius totius orbis terrae linguarum, sepungi^^^
discipulorum and tam excellentis concilij fierent capitula.
? And if these be not sufficient to mark out an Impostor, let us hear what
their own speak and you shall find Bellarmine accompting them both, (viz.
Athanasius his epistle and Marks ^^^ script) supposititious Bellarm. de
scriptor Eccles. ut. (...). De Epistolis Athanasi) ad Marcum Papam, and Marci
Pap^ ad Athanasium, (...) extratione temporis, ^^^ epistolas esse supposititi^s.
, Baronius takes them as Co^^entitious and forged by certain well-willers of
the Roman Church Baron. tom. 3. ad an. 336 (...) ^^. 59. and ^^. (...) ille
(...) Architectur been esse consultum assertion (...) and (...) de Nic^^o
Canone extra numerum vicentarium allegatum. Ho^^ ^^^^ ^^ (...), qui ignoravit
ex apertissim^ veritate solutionem (...).
.

For the second Epistle to Felix Reply page ^
, if we observe what the Jesuit urges out of him, unless we be wilfully
perverse we cannot think Athanasius and the Bishops of Egypt to be so far
from sense as this Epistle makes him, that they dare not presume to yield to
the Errors of their enemies (the Arrians) without acquainting the Pope
therewithal, as if with his dispensation they might adhere to any corruption
whatsoever. Besides the Rescript to this Epistle was dated Agario and Iuliano
Cass: Vide rescriptum hujusmodi apud Bi^^ium tom. 1. conciliorum.
when as never any that did number the Roman Consuls did make mention of
Agarius. And also the Rescript declares what we may conceive both of it and
the Epistle of Athanasius, to wit, that they are of no better stamp then the
Decretall Epistles, the latter part of the Rescript being taken out of the
latter part of the Epistle of Felix the first to the Bishops of Frannce. And to
close up this, Binnius will tell this Jesuit that the Epistle it self is of
suspected birth, both from the time when it was written, and other
circumstances Bin. tom. 1. Council. in (...) in Epist. Athanasij etc. ad Felicem
and Felicis ad Atha* Haec Epistola sub nomine Athanasij ad Felicem ex synodo
Alexand^^na scripta ab Episcopis ^^gypti, Theb^^dis, and Lybiae, de fide
suspecta est, tum quod hoc tempore, qu^ Athanasius ^^ga clapsus in cremo
latitabat, (...) ^^^ Liberio (...) Episcopi orthodoxi, decr^^ Imperatoris and
(...) (...) quod hunc epistola ad (...) scripta, ipsum (...) de sua ipsi. ^^^
(...) reddat.
, and Baronius does also disparage this Epistle, and derides the Merchant that
makes use of such baggage Commodities Baron. Annal. tom. ^. ad. Annum 217.
^^^: 66. Quae fertur Athanasij nomine ad Felicem Romanum (...) ex Synido
Alexandrina scripta -- hand aeque probatur etc. At ipse (...)
: From whence we may see, how this Jesuit is void of all shame, who as if he
had hit the Eagle on the eye, does not only produce these counter^^its, but
swollen with impudency, in his wonted manner of railing, bitterly reviles the
Answerer for justly telling him, that the good Fathers assembled in that Synod
never dreamed of such a business, nor established any such Decrees or Canons at
all,

Behold here (says he) how precisely this holy Father does allege the
Canons and decrees* of the Nicene Council for the authority of the Roman
Church, and for her absolute Supremacy over all other Christian Churches
through^^ the world. And what will not our Adversaries venture to say and do
against the Catholic Truth, when as they stick not with brazen faces to
avouch, that the good Fathers assembled in that Synod, never dreamed o^ such a
business, etc. But I leave it to the judgment of the unpartiall Reader, to
determine whether the abovesaid Testimony of S. Athanasini, given but twenty
years, or thereabouts, after the said Nicene Council, does not sufficiently
bruise and hurst their face of brass, and force them to swallow down again
their enormious untruthes, and calumniations Reply page 59
.

Here we may see a discourse fit for a Jesuit, all confidence, ^^t builded
upon no truth. Cardinal Bellarmine confesses the Jesuits proof from the
Epistle of Athanasius to Pope Mark, and the Rescript to Athanasius to be
unsound Bellarm. de Rom Pont^^* l. 2. c* 25. Quod illi ^an^nes non sunt omnes,
probant non^^^lti ex Episto^^ Athanasij ad Marcum Papam, in qua^e tit exemplum
Nicaeni concilij ex Romani Pontificis scrinio (...) ^^empla quae erant
Alexandriae fuisse cre^^^ ab Aria^^^, Sed hoc (...) ^ (...), ^^ vere NON ^^
SOLIDV ^^
, and what sound evidence he has brought from his INDIAN Tale, and the other
Epistle to Felix, has been declared. So that the Jesuit may consider, that
Fures clamorem, thieves may slye from his voice, but true men tremble not at
the noise. He may strain himself against brazen faces, enormious untruths,
calumniations, but whom does he wound but himself, that among all the ancient
Fathers, cannot bring one Argument for these Arabicke Canons, but these false
birthes, lying, counter feit, and yet does swagger, triumph, rage and swell
against him, that justly putts desiance to his folly?

But leaving these counterfeits, the Jesuit would ^^^swade us, that he will
proceed in laying down the judg^^^^ of the anncient Fathers, concerning the
derivation of S. Peter^ supreme jurisdiction unto all his lawful Successors
in the Roman See Reply page ^
.

The Jesuit does well to distinguish those that follow, from those that in
this point he has already alleged; but with whom does he begin? With him
(I suppose) that will fail him, when it comes to trial, and that is S.
Augustine Aug^in Psalm. mum contra partem Donati.
, who expresses what the Jesuit is to prove most plainly. Reckon (says he)
the Priests even from Peter's seat, and observe, who to whom has ever succeeded
in that rank of Fathers: that same is the rock which the proud gates of hell
do not overcome Reply page ^^
.

Lo here (says the Jesuit) S. Augustine makes the very succession of
Bishops in the Roman See, that invincible rock upon which Christ built his
Church, forasmuch as it is grounded in Peter, and thereby is partaker of the
promise of Christ, that the gates of hell shall not prevayle against it Reply
page 59
.

S. Augustine speaks nothing here to the Jesuits purpose; for he neither
makes Peter the Monarch of the Church, nor the Pope his sole Successor in that
Monarchy, Neither does S. Augustine (as the Jesuit affirms) make the very
succession of Bishops in the Roman See that invincible rock upon which Christ
built his Church. For who will dream that Father, to esteem that present
seat or succession to be the rock for any other reason, then because they
held the rock confessed by Peter? And in this sense, not only Peter's
successors at Rome, but all other successors of Peter and the rest of the
Apostles might bestiled rocks Origin. in Math hom. 1. Petra est (...) omnis qui
imitator, est Christi: ex quo bibebant qui bibebant de spiritali consequenti
petra. Et super omni hujusmodi petra: aedificatur ecclesia Dei. In singulis
enim quibuscunque perfectis qui habent in se congregationem verborum and
o^erum: and sensuum omnium qui hujusmodi beatitudinem operantur: (...)
Eccelesia Dei: cui portae non praevalent inserorum. Si autem ^per unum illum
Petrum arbitraris Vniversam Ecclesiam aedificari a Deo: quid dicis de Iacobo:
and Iohanne filijs tonitrui: vel de singulis Apostolis? Vere ergo ad Petrum
quidem dictum est: ^u es Petrus etc. tamen omnibus Apostolis: and omnibus
quibuscunque perfectis fidelibus dictum vi^^ retor.
. For why may not those churches that cleave fast to the rock of faith be
called rocks to stay and adheare unto Iranaeus l. 4. c. 43. Ijs qui in
Ecclesijs sure presbyteris oporter obaudire qui successionem habent ab
Apostolis quicunque cum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis certum
secundum beneplacitum patris acceperunt. Idem c. 44. Adherere his qui and
Apostolo^um doctrinam oustodiunt, and cum presbyterij ordine sermonem sanum and
conversatio nem sine offen sa praestant.
, as well as the Roman and her Bishops, in regard Augustine says in that very
Psalm, that if any man come full of the Catholic faith, we are wont to give
ear unto him, as unto these men August. in Psalm. contra partem Donati. Talis
si quis ad te veniat plenus Catholica side. Quales illo^ sanctos viros om^es
solemus audire.
.

But what makes the former words to the Jesuits conclusion? Does S. Augustine
here declare Roman Priests, Successors to Peter in a Monarchical estate, or
such unmovable grounded rocks, that all the Churches in time to come must be
grounded upon them? Surely, the sesuite will never find this to be S.
Augustines meaning; but from what the Roman Priests had been, and from what
for the present they were (alluding to our Saviors words) he does style them a
rock that the gates of Hell did not at that time prevail against, making them
a good directory to truth, whilst they adheared to the Apostles doctrine* For
by the course of that Psalm we cannot conceive S. Augustine to have thought
otherwise, in regard he does not give the Bishop of Rome power to end and
determine that controversy, but makes Donatus his request to have his cause
heard at Rome to be unjust, telling us what the Emperor had ordained, that
diverse Bishops and Priests should hear the matter, and not the Roman Bishop
alone August. ibid Nam Donatus cum volebat Africam totam obti^ere. Tunc Iudices
transmarinos petijt ab Imperatore. Sed haectam unjust petitio non erat de
charitate. Hoe ipsa veritas clama^ quam vclo modo refe^e. Nam consensit
Impe^^^or, ^^^^t, quae soderen^ Romae, Sacerdotes, qui tunc possent Caeciliano,
cu^ ill^ audite.
, which he would not have done (I suppose) if the Bishop of Rome had had that
Monarchy by Apostolical succession, which now they pretend by that title to
enjoy. But there is not a word of Augustine that proves the Roman Bishops,
Successors of Peter in any office, power or Bishopric, or so much as makes
him Bishop of Rome. That he had his seat there, where the Roman Priests had
their Succession, he insinuates, but in this place he tells us no more, nor
so much as Eusebius, who begins the Roman Bishop with Linus Eusebius hist
Eccles. l. 3. c. ^. Linus vero primum post Petri and Pauli Martyrium Romanae
Ecclesiae Episco patum sor^i^ut est.
, for the words of Eusebius [after the martyrdom of Peter and Paul] can no
more make Peter Bishop of Rome, then Paul, and I think they will not admit two
Bishops at once in one City. Much more might be urged, to show that the
Jesuit has produced S. Augustine, to testify that which he never thought
of: But I will come to Chrysostom, whom the Jesuit produces, expecting much
from him, because he names Peter's Successors. Why (says he) did Christ shed
his blood, but to regaine those sheep, the care of whom he committed both to
Peter and to Peter's Successors Reply page 59
.

I ask the Jesuit, whether he thought the Apostles had no commission from
Christ to have a care of his sheep: whether, Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature Mark 16. 15
, did command no care of CHRIST'S flock, or whether there be no successors of
Peter, but the Bishops of Rome? Cardinal Cusanus cannot deny, that all Bishops
are the successors of Peter Nich. de Cusa. Card. l. 2. De concord. cath, c.
13. Non possumus negare, omnes Episeopos esse ejusdem successores, Scilicet
Petri.
. And S. Chrysostom in the very place cited by the Jesuit, expresses
himself to be free from the conceit, that the Bishops of Rome are S. Peter's
only Successors. For why should he persuade Basil to be mind full of his
duty, he being a Bishop from this reason, because CHRIST said to Peter,
Love thou me? Feed my sheep, and because the care of his sheep are
committed to Peter, and his successors See Chrysostomes testimony produced
before in the beginning of the Section.
, if he had not been one of them? This title I have showed before, does
belong to other Bishops, as well as Roman, neither is it denied by Bellarmine
himself Bellarm, de Romans Pont. l. ^ c. 23. Respondeo in Apostlatu contin^^
Episcopatum, and Episcopes succedere Apostolis.
, and therefore I may forbear here further to press it,

The next is Leo, but I shall not need to speak to that which is urged from
him here, in regard I shall have more occasion in the next Section. He loved to
be great, and to make Peter greater then he should be, for his own sake, as I
have in some things before declared, and shall hereafter more fully show. Yet
all that he desired (I suppose) was not so great licentiousness as the Bishop
of Rome desires, and would have all to attribute unto himself.

Now comes the Bishop of Ravenna, Peter Chrysologus in his Epistle to
Eutyches, You are not much beholding to that See, that you should bring a
Bishop from thence to give testimony for you; but what says he? We desire
thee honorable brother, that thou will listen dutifully unto those things which
are written by the most blessed Pope of the Roman city; because S. Peter who
lives in his proper See, and is president in the same, gives the truth of
faith to such as seek the same Reply page 59
.

But what is all this? He persuades Eutyches to adhere to the truth of
Doctrine, preached by the Roman Bishops* and from what reason? Because S. Peter
who lives in his proper See, and is president in the same, gives the truth of
faith to such as seek the same. Who means he here, by S. Peter? Not the
Apostle in person; surely if he did, they did ill to usurp that chair that he
did presede in himself, and hereby they are debarred of succession. If he
meant his doctrine* this might have been said of Antioch, and other Episcopal
Sees; But if they will have Peter so to remain in the Roman city, that he may
give the true faith by inspiration, to such as seek the same, this is too
gross to be believed* though Leo has some words that cast upon us this
interpretation Leo epistol. ^9. ad episc. Vi^^^
. So that you see Chrysologus here speaks little for a Monarchy by succession.

The Jesuit is at a pause, yet before he leaves, he brings forth Siricius Pope
Reply page 59
; but do you conceive the reason* That he may make his discourse suitable, and
as he begun with a forged Council, so he might conclude with a counterfeit
Pope.

Now, as if he had been able to have pleaded the cause of those ignorant
Delinquents, and to silence the whole Starchamber, he tells us: By these
authorities, and many more the (...) which might be alleged, it appears how
casilyone mig^^ have taken up our Answerer in his Star Chamber flourish,
concerning* this matter of S. Peter's, and his successour^ universal
Jurisdiction Reply page* ^^
. But let me advise the Jesuit, unless he leaves counterfeits and forgeries,
to keep himself out of that Chamber which (...) pleaders and pretenders of
that kind; For although his folly and conceit may so advance the opinion he
has of his Rhetoric, that he presumes he can persuade any thing. Yet
experience will acquaint him, that he cannot so easily in that place deceive.
But let us veiw this Orator, how he would have argued, if at that time he durst
have confessed S. Peter in that presence. First he would have told those grave
Counselors. That howsoever all the Apostles were equally chosen, and
extraordinarily sent by Christ to preach teach, and convert all nations, and
had herein equal jurisdiction every one over all Christian people, throughout
the world, yet as S. Leo does truly observe, though all were elected alike*
yet to one was granted the preheminencie over the rest Reply page 60
.

All which had been a slender defense, unless he had proved better then he
has done, that Peter's preheminencie was Monarchical of power: not of honor
and gifts, etc. as we our selves acknowledge.

Secondly, he would have said, that they had then the like Apostolical power
extraordinarily given unto them over all nations, but not in the same degree
with Peter, their power being over all, yet not over one another, as Peter's
was, who was their Head Reply page* ^^
. which is a dream and fancy, as has been showed in answer to his former
productions. Yet if the Apostles were equally chosen, as the Jesuit says, and
had equal jurisdiction to teach all nations throughout the world, if if they
had plenitudinem potestatis, fulness of power: as Bellarmine confesses (...) de
Rom* (...) c. 11*
, if they were endued, as before has been related, pari consortio honoris and
potestatis, with the like fellowship of honor and power, as S. Cyprian, and to
the same effect other Fathers have affirmed, how can this disparity arise? Does
he think by a framed deceit, that neither has foundation from Scriptures, or
Fathers, to control our belief? The Apostle [1. Cor. 11. v. 5.] tells us
that there were Summi Apostles, chief Apostles, not one that was summus the
chief, and shows Gal. 2. v. 9. that Peter with others gave the right hand of
fellowship and Communion, not of command to him, and Barnabus. Besides the
Apostles show more power over Peter, then the Jesuit can show that he
exercised over them. They sent him to Samaria, Acts 8. v. 14. They question his
actions, and call him to an account, Acts 11. Paul reproves him, ( Gal. 2.)
where he failed; Paul chydes and Peter suffers (says S. Chrysostom) that
whilst the Master being ^hidden does hold his peace, the Scholars might very
easily change their opinion Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Galat* c. 2. Vnde and Paulus
objurgat, and Petrus fustinet, ut dum magister objurgatus obticescit, facillime
discipuli mutatent sententiam.
. An act that the gloss is persuaded would not have been done, unless he had
thought himself Peter's equal Gloss. Ordinar* Resti. Quod non auderet nisi s^
non imparem sentiret.
, or as Cajetan conceives, something greater Caietan. in locum.
.

Thirdly he would have told them; that they (the Apostles) were but as
extraordinary Ambassadors unto all Nations, Peter was the ordinary Pastor, not
only over all Nations, but also over the very Apostles themselves Reply page 60
.

But that grave Councellor would have espied the Jesuit to have disadvantaged
himself* for in one place he acknowledges, that all the Apostles had the
like Apostolical power extraordinarily given unto them, -- being, Heads and
Pastors of the universal Church, their difference being in Degree Reply ibid.
, and here he makes S. Peter not only in degree to excel the rest of the
Apostles in the Apostolical office, but gives him another different power
superior to the Apostleship, which he calls ordinary not only over all
nations, but also over the very Apostles themselves. But I ask the Jesuit,
why it should be a good argument for Peter's primacie, that he was first named
among the Apostles, Mat. 10. v. 2. if the naming of the Apostles in the first
rank of the ministers of the Church, Ephesians. 4. v. 11. may not obtain from the
Jesuit the same privilege? It seems hard, that the Jesuit should so plead
for the Papacy, that thereby he should labor to diminish the Apostolical
power, especially when the Rhemists will have the name of Apostle to signify,
dignity, regiment, paternitie, principality and primacy in the Church of GOD,
according to that of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 12. v. 28. And GOD has ordained some in
the Church: as first Apostles, etc; And that they thought the Apostleship to be
no bare extraordinary power legantine, but as supreme, so ordinary, it will
appear by their describing of it to be a calling of office, government,
authority and most high dignity given by our Master -- with power to bind
and loose, to punish and pardon, to teach and rule his Church, which is called
by a name expressing ordinary power in the Psalm and in the Acts, viz. a
Bis^opricke Rhem (...) upon Luk, ^. ^^
: And although the Jesuit now sees that Peter can be no Monarch by his
Apostleship, such extraordinary power being given to others, yet it has been
that which they ever pretended to exalt him, whom they would have to be Peter's
Successor, and the Monarch of the Church; and therefore they have had their
mouths and rescripts full of Apostle and Apostleship, calling his office
Apostleship, saying that he hears causes with his Apostleship* (why should he
not determine with it?) All his instruments of government are Apostolical, as
Letters, Decrees, Mandates, Bulls, Pardons, Dispensations, nay what has he that
is not Apostolic? Whether messenger or Legate? Whether Palace, Chamber,
Chancery, Seal Sacra^ ce^am Romans eccles. l* 1. Reg. Canc. Apostol. Extra do
jurejur. c. Ego.
, etc. Besides how many of the Jesuits counterfeits urged for the Primacy are
thought to speak effectually, when they attribute to the Pope, to sit in the
Apostolical height, to have his See Apostolic, his office an Apostleship,
his privileges, his eminencies Apostolical.

Fourthly, he would have told them, that the ancient Fathers declare in plain
terms, how Christ grounding his Church upon Peter Mat. 16. committing his
flock to Peter Ioh. 21. wishing Peter to confirm his Brethren, and praying
for Peter's faith that it should not fail, Luc. 22. constituted Peter head of
his Church upon earth, and consequently thereby made him Prince, Chief,
Captain, Head, Leader and Prelate over the rest of the Apostles Reply page 60
.

But whosoever will weigh his quotations shall perceive that the Fathers have
been only pretended by him, they disdaining any such Monarchy as from those
texts, the Jesuit labors to collect. And first for the 16. of Mat. Although
the Fathers do sometimes give Peter the name of the rock or foundation upon
which the Church is builded or grounded; yet their meaning is not that the
Church is builded upon Peter absolutely and personally, but relativelie and
from his faith, or Christ that he confessed. And therefore Hillary that
calls Peter the foundation of the Church Hilar. in Mat. 16 Faelix Ecclesiae
fundamentum.
, tells us that; not only to say but also to believe that CHRIST is the
Son of GOD, this faith is the foundation of the Church Hillar. l. 6. De
Trinitat. Christum Dei silium non solum nuncupare sed etiam credere -- Haec
fides Ecclesiae fundamentum.
, and in another place he says, This is the alone happy rock of faith
confessed with the mouth of Peter, Thou art the Son of the everliving GOD
Idem l. 2. De Trinitat. Vna ^^aec est faelix fidei Petra Petri ore confessa Tu
es filius Dei vivi.
. S. Basil also says, that CHRIST is truly a Rock unmovable, but Peter is
so from the Rock^ Christ Basil sermon. de P^niten. Christus vere Petra est
inconcussa. Petrus vero propter Petram.
. And S. Ambrose concludes Ambros. ser. ^ Recte igitur qui Petra Christus,
Simon nuncupa^^s est Petrus, ^^ qui cum Domino fidei societatem habebat, cum
Domino haberet, and nominis Dominici unitatem, ut siqut a Christo Christianus
dicitur, ita and a Petra Christo, Petrus Apostolus vocaretur.
that rightly therefore, because CHRIST is the rock, was Simon called Peter,
that so he that had a society of faith with his Lord might also have the unity
of his name: that as a Christian takes his denomination from CHRIST, so Peter
the Apostle might ^^ke his name from the rock CHRIST. So also says, Gregory
Nissen, The LORD is the rock of faith; even the foundation as the LORD himself
says to the Prince of the Apostles, Then art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church Gregor. Nissenus, cap. postremo testimoniorum con. Iudaeos
Dominus est Pe^^^ fidei, ^^^quam fundamentum ut ipse Dominus ait ad principe^
(...); Tu es Petrus and super ^anc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam (...).
. And S. Augustine teaches us* that, The Church is founded upon a rock; from
whence even PETER took his name: For the rock took not its denomination from
PETER, but PETER from the rock, even as CHRIST takes not his name from
Christians, but a Christian from CHRIST August tru^^ 124. in Johan. Ecclesia
fundata est super petram, ^^ de and Petrus nomen accepit, Non enim a Petro
petra; si^^ Petrus a petra si^^ non Christus a Christianis sed Christianus a
Christ^ vocatur.
. Theodoret shall conclude for this particular, who tells us, that Blessed
PETER or rather the LORD himself laid the foundation, for when PETER said
thou art CHRIST the Son of the living GOD, the LORD said, upon this rock I
will build my Church: Be not you therefore denominated from man, for CHRIST is
the foundation Theodoret. in 1. Cor. 3. Fundamen^^^ jecit beatus Petrus vel
p^tius ipse Dominus, Cum enim dixisset Petrus Tu es Christu^ filius Der vi^^
dixir Domi^^ super hanc (...) ^rar^ aedificabo Ecclesiammea^, Ne vo^ ^^ go
denomina^^ ab hominibus, Christus (...) ^^^ (...).
. So that the Jesuit may see how Peter was the rock and foundation by
confessing and preaching CHRIST the true rock: The latter of which duties [to
wit, preaching CHRIST] is so bitter unto their Popes, that I think they had
rather forsake their Rock-ship, then be tied thereunto.

And as the Church was no otherwise grounded upon Peter then you have heard
from the Fathers, so neither was the flock of CHRIST (Io. 21.) committed to
Peter in the Roman sense. For feeding is not domineering, and that which before
did point out a shepherd, must not now constitute a Prince, or Monarch. But
not to descant upon this place in every particular, the Jesuit may take
notice, that there want not Fathers, that think the other Apostles had as much
interest in feeding as Peter himself, and that he received no new power by
his pasce oves, this is clear from the reasons that the Fathers give wherefore
CHRIST spoke only to Peter. As first, not to give him a new power and
Commission, but to stir him up to con^^sse his LORD thrice as before he
denied him. So Augustine tract: in Johan: 123. Cyrillus in Johan. lib. 12. cap.
64. Secondly that he might renew the Apostle ship, for so says Cyrill. But
CHRIST said, fiede my Lambs renewing unto him the dignity of his APOSTLESHIP,
least it might seem to be l^st for his denial which happened by humane
informitie Cyrill^^ in Io. l. 12. c 64. Dixit autem pasce ag^^^ (...),
Apostol^^^s ei renov^^^^ dignitatem, ne propter ^egatio^em, quae human^ (...)
accidit. l^befacta^i videre^^^
.

What new power is here given? What ordinary jurisdiction, that ordinarily did
not belong to the rest? Here is the old Apostleship renewed to Peter, which by
denial of his Master, he might fear he had lost. This is all we find by the
Ancient in pasce oves, And if the Jesuit will permit it with patience,
besides the places formerly cited, their own Counterfeit, that has a name of
antiquity tells us, that the rest of the Apostles received honor and power
in equal fellowship with Peter Ana^letus ad ^pis^. Italiae Epist 2. did. 21.
c. In ^o^o te^^^m ^^eeti vero Apostoli ^^m codem p^ri consortio, hono^em, and
potestatem ac^^^erunt.
. And Ambrose will not favor Rome so much, though he ruled at Millaine, but
that he will acknowledge, that Peter did not only receive the charge of them,
but himself and all Bishop^ received it with Peter Ambros. de dignit. sacerd.
^. ^. Pasce ove^ ^eat. Quas oves, and quem ^^^gem no^ ^^lum tunc (...) susce^it
Petr^s, fed et cum illo. ^^s no^ susce^imus omnes.
. And as they received the commission with Peter, so likewise did they perform
the work; for so say your Roman Clergy. CHRIST said th^^ unto Simon, Love
thou me, he answered, I love thee: he says unto him, f^ede my lambs: We
know this word was performed by the very act of Peter's obedience: and the rest
of the disciples did so likewise Epist. Cleri Romans ad. Clerum Carth. apud
Cyprian epist. 3. Sed et Simoni fie dicit: Diligi^ me, ^^spondit, diligo: ^ ^
ei, Pasce oves, ho^ verbum factum ex actu ipso quo cessit cognoscimus. e^
e^teri discipuli similiter (...).
. Yea this is acknowledged by Cyprian for a common duty, and no particular
prerogative of Peter. All the Apostles are Pasters, but the flock is showed to
be one, which is fed of all the Apostles with an unanimo^^ consent Cyprian. de
Vnitate Eccles. E^ (...) ^unt (...), sed grex (...) ostenditur, qui ab
Apostolis omnibus (...) consensio^^ pascatur.
. And therefore Gregory from this place does argue, that they fail of love to
CHRIST, that perform not this duty of feeding the flock. Whosoever (says he)
being endued with gifts, refuses to ^eede the Lords flock, is convinced not
to love the chief Pastor Gregor l. 1 de cura past c 5. Si diligis me, pa^ce
oves me^^. Si ergo dilectionis est testimonium, cura pastonis: Quisque
vir^^tibus poll^^ gregem Dei pascere (...) it, pastorem (...) convincitur non
a^^r^.
.

Neither does the other place, Luc. 22. in the ^^dgment of the Ancient, make S.
Peter otherwise then the rest of the Apostles. For (says Ignatius) CHRIST
prayed that the faith of the APOSTLES should not fail Ignatius ad Smyrnen.
Epistola. ^. Dominus Jesus Ch^^stus rogavi^ ne defic^ret fid^^ a postolorum.
: and Clemene tells us, that CHRIST even now says as in times ^ast when we
were gathered together* I have asked that TOVR faith should not fail Clemens
constitut. l. 6. c. ^. Hic dicet and nunc, sicut and antea nobis in unum
congregatis de nobis aiebat, Rogavi ne deficia^ ^^des vestra.
. And Augustine reads these words in that manner, that it concludes all the
Apostles, I have prayed for you, that YOUR faith fail not Augustine. de verbis
Domi^i in Luc. ser. 36. Igo rogavi p^trem pro vob^^ ne deficiat ^ des vestra.
. Whereby the Jesuit may see, that these texts in the judgment of the Ancient
Fathers, make not Peter to be (as he would persuade) constituted Head of the
Church upon Earth, and consequently neither Prince, Chief, Captain, Head,
Leader and Prelate, over the rest of the Apostles, with such sovereign power,
as is pretended.

What the Jesuit cites out of Hierome and Leo have received answer before,
Nothing remains in this Section, but his more particular answer to the most
reverend the Lord Primate his enquires, and first (says he) When our Answerer
then made his first In^uirie. Whether the Apostleship was not ordained by our
Savior CHRIST as a special Commission, which being personal only, was to
determine with the death of the first Apostle? Answer might soon have been
returned, that the Apostleship indeed, ended with the Apostles, yet not that
Apostolical power of headship and Jurisdiction Reply page ^^
.

First here is poor forgetfulness; for but now Peter was Head of the Church,
not as he was an extraordinary Ambassador, (for therein the Apostles had
equal jurisdiction with him over all Christian people) but as the ordinary
Pastor not only over all nations, but also over the very Apostles themselves;
and now in this place, the Headship must be Apostolical power and not
ordinary Jurisdiction. Secondly, I desire the Jesuit to expound this riddle;
How the Apostleship ended with the Apostles, yet not the Apostolical Headship
and Jurisdiction, seeing the power Apostolical i^ whomsoever it be found does
make an Apostle, they being so styled for their Commission and power received
and not for any other reason that the Jesuit can assign. Thirdly, I would
gladly know, whether this Apostolical Headship does consist in infallibility
of doctrine, immediate calling, extent of Jurisdiction, in binding or loosing,
in punishing or pardoning, teaching or ruling the Church of GOD See the The
mists annotations upon Luke 6. 13*
; for if it be found in these, the Apostles enjoyed it; if out of these; let
the Jesuit seek, into what place this Saul is run to hide it self. But
this Head of the Church that has ever been acconuted an Apostle, has now
lost this title, for the Jesuit tells us, that the Apostleship ended with the
Apostles, yet not that Apostolical power of Headship and Jurisdiction, which
CHRIST for the better government of his Church gave to S. Peter, the which
Apostolical power, although it does not absolutely make the man upon whom it
descends, an Apostle yet it makes him Apostolical. And this is all which is
meant, whenever in the Lawyers yearsbookes or elsewhere, the Pope is called
by the name of Apostle Reply page 60
.

What he assumes to be given to Peter has been before plainly showed to be
a vapor and sum from a full stomach.

That the Pope is no Apostle we easily grant; yet hereby we may learn that
they have sometimes taken to themselves those titles that their evidence could
not warrant; for by the Jesuits confession the Pope has been styled what he is
not, to wit, an Apostle; Yet this will not satisfy them sometimes to be an
Apostle barely in succession, but Peter the Apostle himself, for so Pope
Stephen does proclaim himself; PETER (says he) called an Apostle of JESUS
CHRIST, to you most excellent men; Pipin, Charles, and Charlemaine, three
Kings, and to all Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Monks, Dukes, Earls and Generals,
etc* PETER the Apostle, called by CHRIST, and ordained to be the enlightner of
all the world, to whom he committed his (...), saying* (...) my (...)* I the
Apostle PETER whose adopted sins you are, admonish you (...) you presently
come and define this (...) from the hands of adversaries, because the (...)
Lamb andafflict and (...) is etc* That I PETER the Apostle of GOD, ^^ the (...)
day may yield you (...) defense again, and prepare for you tubernacles in
Heaven Baroni^^^^ annum 755. ^ 17. PETRVS v^^atus. Apostolus a IESV CHRISTO,
etc. Vobis vitis excellentissimis Pipino, Carolo and Carolomanno, tribus
Regibus, atque sanctifimis Episcopis, Abbatibus, presbytery vel cunctis
religiosis monachis. vernm ^^iam Ducibus Comitibus, and cunctis generalibus
etc. Ego PETRVS Apostolus dum a Christo Dei vivi filio voca^^ (...) clement^^^
arbit^^^^, illuminator ab ejus poten^^^, ^^tius mundi ^um (...) etc. Ideoque
ego Apostolus Dei PETRVS, qui vos adoptivos habeo filios ad defendendum de
manibus adversariorum hanc Romanam civitatem* (...), pro co quod maximas
afflictiones and oppressiones a pessima Longob^^dorum gente patiuntur etc. Vt
^^^ PETRVS vocatus Dei Apostolus in h^c vita and in die futuri exanimis vobis
alterna impendens patroti^^^, in regno Dei (...) tabernacula. (...)* par^n. ad
remp* Venet. Pa^^^ igitur, idemque Petrus, vicem Christi agens in ter^^s.
.

And it is not long since* Paul the (...) was made PETER also by Cardinal
Baronius ^. So that we see it is not well agreed at Rome, whether the POPE be
PETER the Apostle, or an Apostle by Succession, or merely Apostolical. But as
the shining lamps of the Church of GOD have detected him to be far from
Peter and an Apostle* So for all the Jesuits covers, he will not appear to be
Apostolical either. Here the Jesuit has given us a riddle^ no resolution to
the first inquiry.

When he inquired secondly (says the Jesuit) what sound evidence we can
produce, to show that one of the company was to hold the Apostlesius as it were
in (...) for him and his Success^ours for ever, and that the other cleaven
should have the same for (...) of life only? Answer might soon have been
made out of what before has been declared; that S. Peter had somewhat more
then the rest of the Apostles, to ^it, his superiority and dignity -- and this
being given to him before the rest* for the benefit of the Church, must needs
have continued after his death Reply page ^^.
.

We see the Jesuit has no more to say for S. Peter, then he has already
uttered* In the answer whereunto, the Reader may see his pretenses examined.

In (...), when he inquired thirdly, (says the Jesuit) how the state of
perpetuity came to fall upon S. Peter, rather then upon S. John? A child might
have answered, that it pleased CHRIST to make choice of S. Peter, rather then
of S. John* and who is he th^^ will demand of GOD* why?

It seems a Child can do more then a Jesuit; for how will he make it good;
that CHRIST made choice of Peter rather then of S. John to continue the state
of perpetuity, in regard he tells us the Apostleship determined with him?
And we demand not of GOD; why? But we ask the Jesuit why they will invent
and establish a foundation for their Church, that has no better ground to
depend upon, then (...) taletelling.

Finally (says the Jesuit) when in the fourth place he inquired, why did not
the inheritence rather descend upon the Church of Antioch; whereof S. Peter was
first Bishop then upon Rome? Answer might he made by (...) pleasant demand,
to the recreation of the whole Court, to wit, why should not our Answerers
Child be called (...) her the Heir of a Parsin, then of a Bishop, seeing that
his (...) was the former, before he came to be elected for the (...)* Truly I
am sure, that although the lad might happily repine at either of both the
names, uet (...) of a Bishops son, before that other of a Person: and with
good reason too, forasmuch as his Father did willingly forsake the Parsinage,
to get the title of a Bishop Reply page ^^
.

Here the Jesuit would turn Arsby, if he wanted (...) wit: For who sees not
the Couse laid aside and the guarded Habit girded on, that he might recreate
the whole Court? So that Jesuits (we may know) want not their (...), nor (...)
many times* (...) I would (...) the ^^^inde to explain himself* and to show
in what purpose he has brought forth this (...); for as it thus stands, his
Comedy will not be understood, ^^ither answer the inquiries for he will
confess the Bishop of Antioch to differ from the Bishop of Rome more then
(...) Persons* form from himself, whose father is a Bishop, (...) he must
acknowledge them to have the same head, members, commands* prerogatives* And
upon (...) will not say, that Pet^^^ was the poor P^^s^^ of Antioch, and left
his (...) to get his universal Bishoppricke of Rome; for if you do, it will
destroy all your arguments from Tu es Petrus, and (...) pro te Petre, and pas^e
eves; for if the Bishoppricke (...) Peter a Monarch, how ^^ their Monarchy be
founded in* S. Peter, or that Church get any thing by Peter his pla^ing his
seat there? And from hence you see the force of his reason, that makes the
inheritance to def^^^d upon Rome rather then upon the Church of Antioch,
because the Roman Church is the Here of Peter the Bishop. Antioch only of
Peter the Parson. So that we may easily perceive that what he has produced
was not to answer the inquiry, but to sto^ne the Children of Bishops and
Priests, ^ Parsons as he calls them. But he may take notice that the Children
of Priests were never of base ^^eeme* till the base and filthy carriage of the
Romish Clergy acquired it; for among the Priests we find some married to
the blood ROYAL as I^hoja^^ 2. Ch^. 22. 11.
(...) why should God take such strict care for the choice of their wives Lev.
2^. ^^. 14
if he contemned their generation?

Since our Saviors time, was it infamy to Philips (...) that their father was
an Evangelist* Acts* 21. ^. ^. Na^ian^ Mono^ in (...) and (...) 20*
? Did the Jesuit ever read that S. (...) repined at the Bishop his Father? Was
Gregory the great made the less that his great (...) a Pope? Or did it (...)
(...) Ch^yre that the (...) (...) the same? ^. No, the children of Priests and
(...) lawfully married, never dishonored their (...), neither were the
children (...) by their (...) from a Priest. But when (...), and Mac a N^^bui^,
and (...) their Popes and Clergy with their (...) and (...) ^ (...) not^^
vitam Gre^^^ij Papae 1. Factus est Pontifex ^. Grego^ius, qui natus ATAVO
FELICE PAPA ejus nominis tertio.
last, filled the world full of their unlawful (...) This invented the (...)
(...) and (...) and made many holy birth^^ (...), because their ^^thers did
forbear to challenge them. Indeed the Children of Bishops and Priests among
you may well ^epi^e to be styled either (...) a Neas^uig, or mac a (...), in
regard their fathers villainy adh^^eth to that name, and adds affliction to
their minds: but for the sons of Priests and Bishops amongst us, what
repining humor can possess them, seeing they were borne in honourab^ Did.
56. cap. Osius. Osius Papa suit silius Stephani subdiaconi. Bonifacius Papa
^uit silius ^ucundi presbyteri. Faelix Papa filius Felicis presbyteri de titulo
Fasciolae. Agapitus Papa, ^ilius ^ordi^ni presbyteri. Theodorus Papa, (...)
Theodo^^ Episcopi, de (...) Hierosotyma Sylverium Papa, filius Sylverij
Episcopi Romae. Deusdedit Papa, (...) subdia^^^, (...) natione (...), (...)
matrim^ny, their patents living in the rule appointed by the Apostle?

But the Jesuit as (...) of his sports, comes in good sober sadness to
wonder, that in such an audience the Answerer blushed not to affirm, that Rome
had little to allege for this perf^rment, but only that S. Peter was
crucified in it. But what can the Jesuit say it has more* Why, he tells us,
That (...) can ^ll (...), that the Apostle did relinquish Anti^^h, to (...) his
(...) her Reply page ^^.
.

As if the Bishop and Monarch of the whole Church (...) not (...) a double
mansion, several places of (...)* Did their Popes relinquish Rome by fitting in
the chair ^^ A^ignion? Or was it possible, that he that kept the Bishopric
of the whole Church, could relinquish the Se^ of Antioch by his so journing at
Rome? The ^^suite would persuade it, and that it was done by command. For
(says he) as (...) Writers ^. (...) Papa and (...).
do relate, Peter was commanded so to do by CHRIST himself Reply page ^.


Here is nothing to make the inheritance to descend upon the Church of Rome
from divine testimony. And Bellarmine indeed conceived the matter only
probable, ^^remptorily he concludes not, that the Bishop of Rome by divine
right is Peter's Successor Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. ^ c. 1^. Et quo ^^am ^ Mar
(...) Papa i ^^. ad (...) s^^^bit, (...), and S. (...) in (...) contra (...),
and Athanasius in Ap^logia (...) Marry (...) nor ^^^ improbabile Dominum (...),
ut ^edem (...) ^^geret (...), u^ Roma^^s Episcopus (...) ^^ succed^ret, sed
(...) ^^ hoc ^^t, (...) ratio (...) non est (...) institutione (...), qu^ in
^^^gelio legitur.
, neither will he (...) it of faith, that Peter's seat was there, only h^^
(...) that it is most probable, and p^^ credendum, and he will ^^count you a
Catholic if you believe it Bellarm de Rom Pont. l 4. c 4. Accedit quod (...),
Christ^m imperasse (...), ut Romae ^edem ^ollocaret, non ^^men (...)* (...) ut
(...) ibi coll^caret. Quo^iam ergo ^on constat, (...) Pe^^o, ut Romae (...)
col^ocaret, ideo non est de (...) divine and (...), Romae ^^dem esse
constitutam, sed ^amen, ut (...), est (...), and (...).
. Is this the Cardo upon which all the Catholic Roman ^aith tur^eth? Is
there no more certainery in this groundworke? Must Peter's inheritance descend
certainly upon him, who by divine right cannot prove himself to be his
Heir? Must one Witness, and that a known Counterfeit, and ^^ Marc^llu^ Haec
est una illarum epistolarum, quas (...) esse (...).
, tell us a story, and obt^ine an Empire? This is too great a reward.

Now whereas he tells us, that Peter was Bishop of Rome the space of ^^ve and
twenty years, Antioch having had him but for (...), and consequently that he
labored more fruitfully, and performed all more gloriously in her, then in
Antioch: and finally, that in her, even by Christ's appointment also, he
glorified God by the triumph of his blessed death and martyrdom Reply page ^^
. We tell him, that when he attempts to prove it, he shall not want his
answer. That Peter was at Rome, preached there, was crucified, it is not much
to grant him: but that he was there such a Bishop, as Linus, etc. he cannot
prove; some making him such a Bishop as Paul was, others making him non^ at all.

But the Jesuit charge the most learned Answerer with judging according to
the flesh, when he made the Apostles death and martyrdom a slender cause why
Peter should respect her so much. And further tells us, that surely it is no
slender cause for the Catholic Church, to sing therefore of her with solemn
joy in this sort.

Thrice happy Rome, that with the purple blood
Of such great Princes stand'st adorned and bles^
Not thine own worth, but their deserving good
Crowns the^ on earth the fairest and the best Reply page 61 and 62.
.
This most grave and reverend Lord, I confess, has nor (as some of you could
have wished) put off the (...), the (...) man, in the Jesuitical form Hassen.
Mullerus de Votis Iesuitarum c. 6 Si Nobiles illo^^m societatem ingrediantur,
and habitu veniant splendido ac precio^o, permittunt, ^t triduum e^m reservent:
quo lapso cum ^^ponere, alteri dare, and Societatis habitum ^^duere juben^^^.
Et hoc est, secundum illos, veterem exuere (...), seip^^m motti^^cais, and
alteri su^^ (...) ^^^.
, neither as your Popes have ^nterpreted (...). I. Epist. 3. ad (...).
the Apostle Rom; 8. ^. ^. ^
, but as God himself has commanded, wherein the World is his Witness, and I
think it but time spent to justify him. But let the Jesuit prove this
Argument to be convincing if he be able, his singing and other passages will
not work the feate. The Saints in Rome, we know, as the Church otherwhere,
were much confirmed by the patient sufferings of the Martyrs, but this does not
excuse, much less lift up Rome, Did Abels blood that ^^yed for vengeance,
plead then for glory? Did innocent blood the^ advance your Monarchy, that now
you make your selves drunk with the blood of the Saints?. Jerusalem lost he^
Crown by the Prophets blood, must the Apostles triple Rome? Yet if Rome get
such an height in martyring the servant, what might Jerusalem plead that
crucified the Lord? These you see are silly inventions, but the strongest
pillars of the Roman faith.

The Jesuit has done his do; yet he tells us, Much more might be said, and
now intreates the Gentle Reader to trophey him for his victory: But he has
not yet cured the wound that has been given him, though he conceiteth all
fair, smoothe, and without scarre. He has labored to make Fathers and
Saints, the Popes servingmen; the World his City; Heaven, the Church and
Purga^ory his Provinces: but as you see, all in vain. The downeright blows he
persuades himself to be given, we feel not, our sheild^ are not peirced,
neither are the least of our bull warkes overthrown.

SECT: IX.
THis Section shows, that the Jesuit having overshot himself in a term,
would now make it good by an interpretation, and thereupon he enquires,
Whether the Church of Rome may rightly be termed unspotted, or no Reply page 6^
.

In discussing whereof he durst not free this Church of his so much adored,
from all spots, but only those which are of misbeleife Reply page 6^
* and spots of misbeleife, whose spots can they be? Not the true Churches; for
that company which beleiveth not aright, cannot be esteemed the Church
Universal, or Particular: so that every pure Church in this sense has equal
privilege, though he pretends it for the only triumph of the Roman; (...)
every man, for ^e that is an Heretic truly, and (...) by (...) appel^ation,
(...) be (...) of CHRIST* neither of the Church.

But the Jesuits preface is full of confidence. As the Answerer provoked me to
the former disputation though I ween to his smart, so does he give me the like
occasion to buckle with him in this Reply page 6^
.

Whom have we here? Hercules with his distasse? smart? your Fathers and
fellows use not to make such worthies smart; you had rather destroy then wound
men of his quality, But where or when was this smart given? I am sure wound or
scarre we see none; Surely the Jesuit has been Chaplain to the knight
Errant, that fights sleeping, that conquers in his dreams; otherwise he could
not stand so fortified with imagination, as he here appears. Nemo alieno sensu
est miser, he feels nothing, he complains not, it is not sufficient to prove
that he smarts, because you conceit that you have given him a wound, this has
declared your desire but not manifested the event you presume of.

But the Jesuit seems to promise as much in this Section, because in a
twitting fashion the Answerer says, that he not only confounded Urbem and
Orbem, but also mingled heaven and earth together by giving the title of
unspotted unto the Catholic Church of Rome ^. Reply page 62


Has not this just charge a just ground? If unspotted be a property belonging
to the triumphant Church; can it without confusion be attributed to any Church
upon earth? How this word unspotted is taken in antiquity S. Augustine has
determined, and the Jesuit says nothing materially in opposition: why should
it not then continue in it is strength still? I would know whether the Church in
general or in her members can be without spots, that is, not defiled in
manners, though free from false belief. The Church that was free as much as
humane imperfection would permit confesses herself black though comely Cant.
1. 5.
; And the Jesuits citation out of Pa^^anus acknowledges a freedom only from
heresies Paci^^. epist. 3. Ecclesia est non habens ^aculam neque rugam, hoc est
haereses non (...).
, which every true Church and true member has. But how will the Jesuit prove
the Roman Church unspotted? First he must have two things granted him
according to his present understanding, or ^lse a ^ople. First, by the Roman
Church we must understand the Church universal, as has been declared (says
he) in the former Section Reply page ^^
; Secondly, Unspotted must have relation to spots of misbeleife only. And then
I say, (says the Jesuit) that the Roman Church has ever been found, and will
always remain, in that kind, unspotted even unto the end of the world Reply
ibid.
.

This is after-wit, but if the Jesuit has not proved the Roman Church to be
the universal in the former Section; if the universal has been without
spots of misbeleife; when the Roman in her prime-member has been infected with
Leprosy; this will declare, that the Roman Church (if their positions be true)
was not without spots, or Catholic either. For the first; the Jesuit would
get by Petition, that by the Roman Church is understood the Church universal.
But let him know it is too great an alms to grant an Adversary, Ioh. Sansour.
in Polycratic. l. 6. c. 24. Romana Ecclesia, quae materomnium ecclesiarum est,
se non tam matrem exhibet alijs, quam novercam, Sedentin ea Scribas and
Ph^risae, ponentes on^^a importabili^ in humeris hominum quae digito non
co^^ngunt.
, and too great an imposture to be approved in them. For I am sure, no modest
man will dream that the Church of CHRIST could be so forsaken by CHRIST, that
it were not worthy to be governed, but by reprobates, as Aliace testifies of
the Roman Church Card de Aliaco lib. de Reform. Eccl. cap. de Reform.
religionum. In proverbium abierit Ad hunc statum venisse Roman^^ Ecclesium, ut
non fit digna regi nisi per reprobo^.
. The Catholic Church were a poor mother to instruct Gods Saints, if she did
not show her self so much a mother as a stepmother; if in it fit the Scribes
and Pharisees, Heretics long since condemned by Christ and yet Johannes
Sarisburiensis affirms this of your Roman Church. Besides, those which have
bewailed her corruptions have told us, that prophecy is now quite extinct in
the Church and it is accomplished, that is written 3. Kings 22. I will go
forth and be a lyeing Spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets A^a^. Pelagde
planctu Ecclesiae l. x. act. 5 Ad literam ho^^^ in Ecclesia deficit (...) and
(...) quod scribitur 3. Regum. 22. (...) and (...)
: but this were harsh for any to affirm of the Catholic Church of God.
Moreover it is cross to reason it self, to make the Roman the Catholic. Who
will think that the whole is not greater then the part? that Catholic and
Roman are ejusdem ambitus? that the Churches Subsistency must depend upon that
which will fail, that must be utterly overthrown Ribe^^ Iescom. in Apocal.
14. number. 44. and 48. Babylon significat Romam in fine mundi futuram.
? Besides were there no Saints, nor Martyrs before Rome was converted? Nay,
were all the Roman Converts malefidians, before Peter confirmed them in the
Faith? Poor Stephen, thou art little behoulding to this Jesuit, that Heaven
must now be shut to thee, which Christ opened Acts, 7. 36.
at thy Matyredome! But this Grand-imposture has been lately laid open by
the reverend and learned the Lord Bishop of Leichfield, and therefore I may
here forbear it.

For the Second; I will briefly declare the Jesuits Vanity herein: and first
to take away all ambiguitie S. Augustine that uses this term of unspotted
not of the Primitive Roman, but of the ancient Catholic Church expounds
what he meant by the same; Wheresoever in these books I have made mention of
the Church not having spot or wrinckle; it is not so to be taken as if she were
so now, but that she is prepared to be so, when she shall appear to be
glorious. For now, by reason of certain ignorances and infirmities of her
members, the whole Church has cause to say every day: Forgive us our
Trespasses August. Retract. l. 2. c. ^8. Vbi cunque i^ his (...) memorari,
Ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam, non sie accipiendum est quasi jam
sit, sed quae pr^paratur ut sit quando apparebit etiam gloriosa. Nunc enim
propter quasdam ignoranties and in firmitates membrorum fuorum habet unde
quotidie tota dicat. Dimitte nobis debita nostra.
. Neither was it the question in those times, whether the Catholic Church
could be spotted with Heresy, but with sin, which was affirmed by the
Catholic Church against the Pelagians; and this the Jesuit seems now to
conceive and therefore tells us, that by reason of ignorant and infirmities
of her members in other matters, the Church has daily occasion to pray for the
forgiveness of sins Reply page 43.
. Now the Jesuit giving the title ^^spotted unto the Primitive Church of Rome
which he accounts the Catholic, how could the most learned Answerer
understand the Jesuits term, but according to the sense of the word, as it
was vulgarly taken in the primitive times? Secondly it were not amiss to
conceive that the Jesuit in his Challenge calls the Primitive Church of Rome
(...) In his Challenge.
; in his inquiry in this section, he lays down the Roman Church without
re^^raynt of Primitive; and lastly in his proof he thinks he has got the
day if from antiquity he can prove that the Catholic Church cannot fail. So
that you may easily ^spy, who is guilty of mingling one question with another.
But let us examine this new question as the Jesuit has proposed it. Whether
the Church of Rome may rightly be termed Unspotted, or no Reply page ^^
?

That the ancient Roman Church was invincible, never fundamentally erring in
the foundation of faith in all her members for the first 400. or 500. years
after Christ, The Jesuit tells us, our Doctors and Masters grannt In his
Challenge.
: So that the Controversy is not, what the Primitive Church of Rome was in
regard of Heresy: but what the Roman Church is liable unto in her succession,
which the Jesuit resolves (and as he would make us believe) from Augustine and
other anncient Fathers, saying, that in the truth and soundnes of her faith and
doctrine, she is evermore invincible, and not liable to any spot or stayne
Reply page 43
.

But neither does Augustine, Origin, Eusebius, Alexander B. of Alexandria,
Athanasius, Cyrill B. of Jerusalem, or Philo Carpathius etc. whom he urges
Reply page 64 and page 650
, say any thing for the Roman, but for the Catholic Church, to which they
bear testimony that it cannot fail.

So that our Jesuit falls under Bellarmines Censure, who affirms that they
do but trifle away the time, who contend to prove, that the Church cannot
absolutely fail, because it is granted by the Protestants themselves Bellarm.
de Ecclesia mil l. 3. c. 13. Notandum autem est, mulu^ ex nostris tempus (...)
dum probant absolute Ecclesiam non posse d^ficere, (...) Cal^^^^ and e^teri
(...) ^i id concedunt
: which the Jesuit knowing though dissembling, (after he has produced S.
Chrysostom for the perpetuity of the Catholic Church) argues f^r her. But
what Church does this holy Father mean think you? Surely none other then
Peter's Church Reply page ^^
: etc.

Peter's Church^ pro^ nef^^! was the Church espoused to Peter? purchased by
Peter? redeemed by Peter? At Antioth the Church was first called Christian Acts
1. v. 26.
, which name it has retained, and shall it loose its title and (...) now, and
be denominated from Peter? The Spouse of Christ, the mystical body of Christ,
the house of God, the Lords granary and (...) Staple^. Relect. cont. 1. q. ^
art 1. not. 5 Vt est corpus Christi in uno sensu propter internam gratiam, ita
est domus magna Cheisti, ^st area and ager dominicus in alio sensu propter
externam collectionem etc.
; but Peter's Church is somewhat harsh; Chrysostom near gives the Church no
such title, only their poor forged Cyrill has Ecclesia Apostolica Petri, an
evidence answerable to the cause, yet not convincing; for the same title might
be given to the Church of Antioch. But can the words of Chrysostom stretch to
the Roman Church? ^et the Jesuit show it if he be able, That Church whereof
Chrysostom speaks, is the Church of Christ, not of Peter: that Church
whereof he is a Pastor Chrysostom. in Mat hom^ ^^. Ecclesiae futurae pastorem
constituit.
, not a Monarch, the rock upon which it is builded, is not Peter, but Christ
believed and confessed by Peter Ibid. Et super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam, id est, fidem atque confessionem.
. Peter had no gift given him to preserve this Church from amidst ^^erce
assaults and raging floods in this Fathers opinion, though the Jesuit would
persuade it: but Peter was confirmed in his faith confessed, by this promise
made, that the gates of hell should not prevail against the Church^. Neither
had Peter power given him to make the Church invincible, but to declare it Ibid
Petrus Ecclesiam per universum orbem amplificatam (...) validi^^^^ monstravit.
.

And as the Fathers ground this privilege of the unspotted ^ Non enim turbari
te con ven^^ cum audicris, quia tra^ar and crucifi^^^.
integrity of the Roman Church upon the promise of Christ to Peter Matt, 16.
so also they oftentimes deduce the same from the virtue of that prayer, which
Christ made to his Father for Peter's faith, that it should never fail, Luc,
22. wherein doubtless he was heard for his reverence. Heb. 5. 7. Reply page ^^


There is no ground why the Roman should enjoy this privilege, either from
Christ's promise or his prayer; and as the Jesuit has failed in deducing any
thing from the former; so does he show his abilities in this latter at his
first entrance. For first he brings in forged Epistles under the name of Lucius
Bellarm. (l. 2 de Romans Pont. c. ^) dare not affirm this Epistle to be
undoubted; and it is dared Gallo and Volus^ ano Cos^: when as they were not
Consule at that time, as appears by Baron, Annal. to ^. an. ^
and Felix The Epistle is dated Claudio and Paterno Coss: when as there were
none such in his time. Baron. ad a^. 273.
, good Bishops, who would have (...) the pride that they are urged here to
(...) the rest he cites (...) good Bishop, we will not deny; yet his goodness
did not declare itself at all times when he spoke of S. Peter, or the Roman
Church, but his infirmity. For as the Bishops of Rome both before and after him
desired more then was fit; so it will be no difficulty to show that they
contended to justify their desires by unfit means, and especially by swelling
word^^ in the honor of S. Peter and their own Se^, and practices suitable
thereunto. Insomuch that they were esteemed smo^^^ by some Epistol Council.
Aphricam ad Papam Caelestinum Executores etiam clericos vestros quibusque
petentibus (...) concedere, ne fumosum typhum seculi in Ecclesiam Christi, --
videamur inducere.
; ambition by others Hieron Epist. 57. A Pastore praesidium ovis flagito,
facessa^ invidia Romani culminis recedat, ambitio.
, their pride being hated their motions contemned: And Le^ was no more to be
excused then some of his Predecessors in these particulars seeing he rejected
the Catholic Church, a Council of (...). and ^^^: Bishops, because they would
make another Patr^arcke equal with him (...) in Council. Chalcedonen^^
Occumenicum sive Universal IV. approbat (...) ^^^centi Triginta Episcop^. Id
vero. quod instigante Anatolio Constantinopolita^^ Antistite ambiciose
absentibus, and possea contradicentibus segatis, de primatur (...)
Constantinopolitanae contra decreta (...) them* secundum (...) quam, S. Leo Romans
^ex plane in probavit, cassa vit atque irritum reddidi^^ ^. ^eply page 66.
Bellarm. de sacram. con^^^ l. 2. c. x. Epistolae (...) apud nonnullos (...) ve
(...) supposititi^^, (...) Non sit certain, (...), quorum nomina praeserunti
: So that if you have no better argument then Leo his appetite to magnify Rome
and to free it from spots, it is but a poor and tender (...). For we deny not
Christ's care of Peter, neither his prayer for Peter, but that all were
fortified in Peter, any otherwise then by example, the Jesuit must prove by
better grounds then he (...) produces or else he is not half way at his
journeyes end.

The next witness is the good counterfeit Eusebius, from whose plain dealing
he begins his triumph. Could any (...) speak more plainly for us,
concerning the ever during (...) of the Catholic Roman Church ^.

There is no reason any should, for if your forgt^ y ^ (...) you who will
expect truth to plead your cause^ But the Jesuit tells us, that S. Cyprian
affords (...) like testimony, for that speaking of certain Heretics of
(...). They are bold (says he) to (...) even to the chair of Peter, and to
the principal Church, from whence Preistly Unity draws its original,
neither do they consider how they are those Romans, whose faith is commended
by the Apostle, and to whom persidiousnes cannot (...) Reply page, ^^
.

But he fayles; for first he speaks not of the same thing; (...) in Cyprian
having relation to matter of fact in discipline, not doctrine. Secondly, if
Cyprian should speak in the Jesuits sense here; surely he speaks nonsense
in his bitter charges against Stephen, Cornelius his Successor, who received
these schismatics, whose (...) in former Popes times could not have access
thither Cyprian. epist ad (...)
. Thirdly, Cyprian speaks elegantly in this place, as a Rhetoritian; not
positively, but perswasively; at the Roman Soldiers, and the Spanish Navye
were styled invincible, not because they were truly as they were styled; but
that by a superlative and excessive praise, their carriage and valor might be
lifted up, and increased, and you call your Popes generally blessed, not
because they are, but because they should be so.

For his other Citation out of Cyprian. The spouse of Christ cannot be defiled,
she is unspotted and chaste Reply page 67
. We acknowledge (as that Father says) that the spouse of Christ is incorrupt
and chaste: but this prooves not the Roman Church free from Heresies; neither
that the same which you call Peter's Church shall in her succession enjoy that
privilege. And what the Ancient meant, when they termed the Church incorrupt,
I told you before, and the same Father shall tell you again, that it is so
styled in relation to what it shall be* not what actually it is August cont.
Pelag. de n^^. and gra. cap. 63. Hoc agitur ^tique nunc in haec seculo, ut ad
^stam quam omnes sancti (...) puritatem Ecclesia sancta pervenina, quae in
(...) seculo neque aliquo malorum hominum sibi permixto, neque aliqua in se
l^go (...) resistente legi mentis dicut (...) vitam in (...) divine.
.

The next testimony is the learned Priest S. Hierome; but what says this their
supposed Cardinal? surely he is not so full mouthed as the counterfeit Popes.
In his Epistle to Damasus thus he writes: Apud vos solos incorrupt^ Patrum
servatur haereditus. With you only is the inheritance of the Fathers kept
without corruption Reply page 6^
. Which we believe; for which of ours taints the Roman Church, as an heretical
Assembly in Damasus his days? yet when he was dead* your own witness styles
Rome, BABYLON the PURPLE HARLOT, the Bishop and Clergy, the Pharis^icall
Senate Hieron. ad Paulinum in lib. Didymi de Spiritu Sancto Praefat. Cum i^
BABYLONE versarer, and PVRPVRATAE MERETRICIS essem colonus; volui aliquid
garrire de Spiritu sancto, and coeptum opusculum ejusd^urbis Pontifici
dedicate. Et ecce Pharisaeorum conclamavit Senatus, and nullus scriba vel
doctus, sed omnis quasi sibi indicto praelio Doctrinaru^ adversus me imperitiae
factio conjuravit -- Damasus, qui me ad hoc opuspilu^ impulerat, jam dormit
(...) Christo.
.

But to what purpose does the Jesuit urge the latter sentence, Know that the
Roman faith commended by the mouth of the Apostle, cannot be deceived, yea
though an Angel should teach otherwise then has already been preached, yet
ca^ it not be changed, being defended by the authority of the Apostle S. Paul
Reply page 67.
.

Here we see it is Paul that defends the Roman says; not Peter; And how does
Paul perform this, but by his Epistle, his doctrine? Now if Paul's Doctrine can
defend the faith, that it cannot be changed, what will the Prophets and Apostles
do altogether? This is a testimony for the Scriptures, not for the Pope. Paul
anathematizeth ^al. 1. 8. 9.
all whose doctrine sounds against that delivered by himself, though Peter or
his Vicar should define it Vincent. Lirinen div. prof. Novati^^^. (...), (...),
(...) Ioannes, (...) omnis Apostolorum (...).
, but you will ^^ve no heretics or heresy before the definition of your
Pope, no, not Arianisme it self Reply page 10^. 103. 104.
. Yet if Paul befriend you, you are very ungrateful, that in your solemn
sermons in ^^ly, have censured S. Paul for a ^ote headed person, who was so
transported with his pangs of zeal and eagerness beyond all compass in most
of his disputes: That there was no great reckoning to be made of his
assertions, yea he was dangerous to read ^^ (...) of ^^resie in some places,
and bett^^ perhaps he had never written S. Edwind S^^ds his relation of the
state of Religion, in the Weste^^ parts of the wo^^^
. Pacianus brings up the rear, who in his first Epistle to the Heretic
Sympro^^^^ (says the Jesuit) speaking of the Catholic Church has these
words. When as after the Apostles diverse Heresies did arise, and with different
names did end avour to tear in pieces, and devide Christ his dove, and his
queen or spouse, was it not reason that the true Apostolical Church should be
called by her syrname (of Catholic) thereby to discern, and distinguish her
incorrupted unity: least that Unspotted Virgin by other men's errors, and
mistaking might be divided Reply page 6^
? etc.

What have we here for the unspotted Roman Church? Here is nothing to exempt
her from present stains, or after pollutions. That there was a Catholic
Church and not ^espotted with the impurities of the ancient Her^ticks, who
does deny? yet this does not prove Augustine over-shot in his retractation, or
the Jesuit justified in ^^^ term.

Now as if he had performed what he made us expect, ^e swells. Might not a man
now be bold to be tried by the judgment of our Answerers own conscience,
whether he had any reason to except against me for tearming the (...)
Catholic Roman Church unspotted Reply page ^^
.

And indiscreet man may be bold in an arm of flesh, a ^eed of Egypt, a broken
tooth; but vainly and to his loss. The most learned Answerers Conscience may
for any thing you have said, commiserate your confidence, not justify it;
unless you would have him to be convicted with forged words and bare names.

When as I have (says the Jesuit) this general warrant from the holy
Fathers, and Doctors of this Primitive times for the same Reply page 67
?

The most learned Answerer by excepting at your unspotted Church did not charge
the ^niversall (built upon the rock confessed by Peter) with desperate
Heresy. Particular members and Churches which have outwardly professed Christ,
have fallen into Heresy, and so may Rome Frauciscus Picus Theo. 13 Iuxta
Theoso. gorumquotu^dam and Iuris Interpretum aliquorum dogmata fieri possetut
Romana Ecclesia quae particularis Ecclesia est contra universalem distincta,
infide aberraret.
: but that the Catholic Church should forsake the foundation of faith, this he
well knew would cross Christ's promise, and make the gates of Hell prevail
against his Church. It would then be no rock upon which the Church was builded,
but the sand, subject to wind and weather. The Jesuit in his Challenge, did
not style the ancient Catholic Church, (which he here terms Roman) but the
primitive Church of Rome, unspotted: and in this sense it is there acknowledged
by himself, that the ancient Roman is by us confessed to be unspotted: so that
what he has produced for their Catholic exemption from Heresy, is nothing to
his purpose. But he proceeds in his Oratory.

The which being maturely pondered of thee (Christian Reader) thou may
easily perceive how far unlike our Answeters Church is unto that of the
primitive and confessed best times notwithstanding that he seems to claim so
great affinity therewith. But wherein is this dissimilitude and unli^enes? In
regard the Roman Church being head of all other Churches in earth etc. and
thereupon rightly called the Universal or Catholic Church etc, is blessed
with the prerogative of an in^incible perpetuity of an unspotted faith etc. But
our Adversaries Church (says the Jesuit) forasmuch as by them it is confessed
to want this infallible rule of faith, and to be liable to error cannot with
reason challenge unto it self the name of an unspotted Church, and therefore is
rightly concluded to have no affi^ity, or aliance with the true ancient
catholic Church at al Reply page 67 and 68.
, In answer to this, we have told the Jesuit and truly, that the Roman Church
is so far from being the head over all other churches, that (for all the
Jesuits proofs) if it were utterly destroyed, the Catholic Church would not
fail. 2ly, that in no sense the Roman Church can be truly called Catholic or
Universal. And here (Godwilling) I will show that no Church in the world has
been more besmeared with spots and stains even of misbeliefe, then the Roman
in her succession. And if an heretical Pope can bespot the primitive church of
Rome with heresy (which indeed we believe not) though Papists must not deny the
same, it will appear that the Primitive Church of Rome was not blessed with
the Prerogative of an invincible perpetuity of unspotted faith.

And first if we believe their own Rhenanus, Pope Zephsrinus was defiled with
spots of misbeleife, Montanizing; which is warranted by Tertullians testimony,
that was well acquainted with the Favorers of Montanus Bellarm. de Rom Pont.
l. 4. c. 8.. Zepherinus Victoris successor, videtur haeresim Montani
approbasse. Scribit enim Tertullianus in libro contra Praxeam, Romanum
Pontificem agnoscentem prophetias Montani, and ex ea agnitione pacem Ecclesijs
Asiae and Phrygiae inferentem, a Praxea fuisse persuasum, literas pacis
revocare, quas jam emiserat. Constat autem ex historij^ to tempore Zepherinum
fuisse Romae Pontificem. Quare Rhenanus in annotationibus ad Tert^llianum ponit
hoc loco in margin, Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. Neque dici potest eo tempore
nondum fuisse damnatam ab Ecclesia haeresim Montani: Nam, ut ibidem
Tertullianus dicit, Pra^eas persuasit Pontifici revocare literas pacis; ea
praecip^re ratione, quia praedecessores ejus haeresim illam antea damnavissent.
, neither has Bellarmine any better shift to excuse this Pope, then by telling
us, (as if a Montanist knew not a Montanist) that faith is not to be given to
Tertullian Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 8. Respondeo, non esse omnino fidem
habendam Tertulliano in hac part, quandoquidem ipse Montanista erat.
.

Some hundred years after we find an other bespotted Pope, Marcellinus
acknowledged for an Idolater by C^sterus Costerus Enchirid. c. 3. p. 137.
Fatemur, siquidem (...) posse, ut Petri successor Idola eolat, (quod beatum
Marcellinum fecisse aiunt.)
, Bellarmine Bellarm. recognit. l. de (...) Pont. p. 20. Concessimus S.
Marcellinum Idol^^ sacri^^casse
, and reported by a Council of their friends making, Sin^essa Council.
Sinuessanum. Ecce introierunt testes 14. qui dicebant se Marcellinum vidisse (
in temple Ve^ta and (...)) thu^ificantem. Ibid. In sinu autem trecenrorum
Episcoporum caputeinere convolutum, Marcellinus Episcopus urbis Romae: voce
clara (...) dicebat: Peccavi coram vobis, and non possum in ordine sacerdotum
esse, quoniam (...) me corrupit auro. Subscripserunt autem in ejus damnationem,
and damnaverunt ^^^ ex^^^ civitatem.
, by Pope Nicholas the first Nicholaus ^ ad Michael. Imperator. Epist. ^.
Tempore Dioclesiam and Maximiani Augustorum, Marcellinus Episcopus urbi^ Romae,
-- adeo (...) est a Paganis, ut in temp^^^ eorum ingressus, grana thuris super
(...). Cujus nei gratia collecto numerosorum Concilio Episcoporum, and
inquisitione facta, hoc se idem Pontifex egisse confessus est.
, Platina Platina de vita Marcellini. At (...) Pontifex ad sacrificia gentium
duct^^ cum (...) instarent carnifice^, ut thura dijs exhiberet, (...), Deos
alienos adoravit.
and others. But it may be they will say, a Pope may have spots of Paganism,
yet not of Heresy: but I think any man will conceive, that if the Pope may
practice against all the points of Christian Faith, and turn Pagan, he may
well turn Heretic, and plead against one, and then farewell the blessed
Prerogative of an invincible perpetuity of unspotted faith.

Not many years after Liberius was Pope, and although some desire to mince it,
yet is it plain that he was an Arian Heretic, and subscribed to that
heresy, as Athanasius Athanasius in Epistola ad solimariam vitam agentes.
Liberius deinde post exactum in exilio biennium inflexus est, minisque mortis
ad subscriptionem inductus est.
, and S. Hierome Hieronymus Catal Script. Eccles ^ortunatianus Episcopus
Liberium Romae urbis Episcopum -- ad subscriptionem Haereseos compulit. Idem in
Chronico. Liberius taedio victus exilij, and in haeteticam pratitatem
subscriben^.
testify. Yea so public was the report hereof, even in our late ages, that
many eminent Papists, as Cus^^^^ Nich. de Cusa. Candi^^al. l. 2 de Concord.
Cathol. c 5. Et licet Liberius Papa tunc suit, qui ut scribit Augustinus contra
Crescentium, Arianae sectae se subscripsit, licet resisteret in principio, and
propter hoc in exilium missus esset, and habetur elegans disputatio Constan.
^ij Imperatoris, and Liberij, rediit autem de exilio Victus, and consensit
errori, ut scribit* S. Hieronymus in Chronicis.
, Platina Platina de vita Liberij I Constantius Liberium ab exilio terocat qui
Imperatoris beneficio motus ^^m haereticis in rebus omnibus (ut quidam vo^^nt)
senticas.
, Sabellicus Anton. Sabellicus Ennead. 7. l. 8. c. 36. Hiprecibus suis apud
Constantinum, in Felicis i^ vidiam Liberio reditum ad urbem confecere: quo ille
beneficio (...) ex consesso Arianus, ut quidam scribunt, est factus.
, and others, made no doubt from the testimony of antiquity, to charge him with
it. Surely, if an Arian Head be no spot to Roman infallibility what will
besmeare it? These may fuisse to show their Popes in the ^est times not to have
been without spots.

And now if in the best times of the Roman Church when it was most pure, this
pretended head was bespotted with heresy; how can we expect that he should be
blessed with such a prerogative to be infallible to others? And indeed
Experience has confirmed our judgments herein. For in the seventh age
Honorius was a Monothelite, condemned by the judgment of three Councels Council.
VI. Occume^icum. Act. 13. Council. VII Occumenicum. Act. 7. Council VIII.
Occumenicum. Act. 7.
, his own Epistles witnessing against him (...) Epistolae Honoris ad Sergium,
una in VI. Synodo act. 12. altera ibidem Act. 13. ^^ ^^raque autem Honorius
approbat doctrinam Sergij principis Monothelitarum, and jubet non debere dici
Christum duas habere voluntates aut operationes.
and Pope Leo the second execrating him Leo II. ad (...) Imperatorem. Epist 2
Anathema^izamus novi erroris Inventor^s, id est Theodo^^^ etc necnon and
HONORIVM, qui hanc Apostolicam Ecclesiam non Apostolicae traditionis doctrina
lustravit, sed prophana proditione immaculatam fidem (...) conatus est.
.

In the XIIth age Alphonsus de Castro affirms Celestine the III. no way to be
excused of teaching Heresy, to wit* that Heresy so dissolves matrimony, that
a party may marry again Alphons. de Castro adv. haer l. 1* c. 4. Coelestinum
Papam etiam errasse circa matrimonium fidelium, quorum alter labitur in
haeresim, res est omnibus manifesta.
.

In the XIIIIth Age, John the XXIIth taught, that the Saints departed saw not
God before the Resurrection Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c 14. Ioannes XXII*
Papa a multis reprehenditur, ac praessertim a Galielmo Ocam in opere ^^*
dierum, and ab Adriano in quaestione de confirmatione, circa ^nem, quid
docucrit animas beato ^um non visu^as Deum ante resurrectionem* Erasmus praefat
one ad ad librum 5. Ire^aei idipsum cum additamento affirmat.
.

In the XVth Centurie, John the XXIIIth, denied the Resurrection and life
eternal, and was accused of pertinaci^ therein Council. Const^nti^ self* ^^.
See this at large before page 53:
.

Bellarmine tells us, at that time there were three pretenders for the
Papacy, so that it could not easily be discerned quis eorum verus ac
legitimus esset Pontifex, which of them was the true and lawful Pope Bellat^n
de Rom Po^^. l 4. c* 14. Erant enim co tempor^tres, qui Pontifices haberi
volebant. Gregorius XII Benedictus XIII et Ioannes XXIII. nec poterat facile
indicaa^i, quis eorum ver^s ac legitimus esset Pontife^* cum non decssent
singulis doctissimi patroni*
. So that it seemed the Council of Constance did not adhere to the Pope, nor
the Pope to the faith.

Now let the Reader judge, what great reason we have to be wail our selves,
that we want this pretended infallible rule of faith, which cannot rule it
self, and free the adherents thereto from error: and how far these Puritans
are from the Catholic humility, that defend their stains; when the auncien^
Fathers and best men in their journeying toward heaven, did bewail their
imperfect estate, and hungered for that righteousness and perfection that was to
come. And what cause have we to blush that the particular Church of Ireland is
liable to error, when the best particular Churches in the world never assumed
a better Condition?

But is the Jesuits inference concludent here? because our Church is liable to
error, therefore it cannot with reason challenge to it self the title of
unspotted. Here is not so much as silly Sophistry, the Churches of Ephesus,
Thessalonica, Philippi, in the Apostles days were liable to error, therefore
bespotted? posse et esse are two distinct things. A Jesuit may be a true
subject but it does not follow, therefore in an instant he forsakes his order.
And a Pope may be a Saint, but who will think it necessary, that he will
without delay forsake his tyrannical condition?

The Church of Ireland may err in faith, yet it does not follow, that it is
now bespotted with heresy, or hereafter will be. So that it may have alliance
and affinity with all true ancient Churches, true members of the Catholic,
for any thing the Jesuit has yet produced. Yet as if the Jesuit had dreamed
all this while, and did now awake, he bolts out with a phantasticke flourish.

Let them take then (says the Jesuit) if they will, their erring Church unto
themselves, but let them not withal deny us leave, to stick unto that Church,
which by the testimony of venerable Antiquity, we find approved to remain
ever free from all error* to that rock against which the power of hell shall
never prevail* to that foundation which Christ has settled by his promise* and
made for ever immovable by his obtained Prayer Reply page 6^
.

How non-erring a Church your Roman has been in her head is already declared:
How infallible a rule of faith your Chief Pastor has proved in the primitive
times, venerable Antiquity by several examples has detected: What a rock
Peter's pretended Successors have been, when the devil was let loose to split
(so far as possible) the ship of the Church, has not been left you untold:
And who can believe that CHRIST his prayer for Peter's faith was effectual for
the POPES, when against faith they day he desire to usurp his kingdom?

This we Catholics (says the Jesuit) are exhorted to do by S. Cyrill
sayin^. Let us remain as members in our head the Apostolic Throne of the
Roman Bishops from whence it is our part to seek, what we ought to believe.
This also all Protestants are advised to do by a Doctor of their own, who
(as we heard before) tells them, that they ought diligently to search out the
spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground
of truth; and having found her, then setting aside all other questions, they
ought to embrace her communion, follow her direction, and rest in her judgment
Reply page 6^
.

What Doctor Field advised Protestants to do, has been formerly declared:
And for what Catholics are exhorted to do, he urges S. Cyrill, but from
whence? From Aquin^s Cyril. Alle^. in Thesauro alleged by S. Thomas in opusc.
cont. Graeco^. Reply page 6^.
who forged it. For Cyrill has no such words: His Thesaurus has no such
filth: He neither consented unto, nor approved this tyranny. He was one of
them that sent the Copy of the Council of Nice to curb these pretenses before
they got head. I wonder why the Jesuit added not the like forgery of the
Council of Chalcedon to the same end from the same Author! Here we may see
that the best grounds he has to prove their holy Father to be infallible, and
the Roman Mother without spots, are but authorities taken from deceit.

But leaving Doctor Field formerly urged and answered, he presents us with
these sentences of the Ancient, in which (says he) as in a pure mirror, they
may, if they list* espy their enor^ions disagreement from the truth Reply page*
63
. And the first Ancient Father that he produces, is Ireneus.

All they that are in the Church of God, ought to obey* says he, unto those
Priests who have their succession from the Apostles, who together with the
succession of their Bishopric* have received the assured grace of truth
according to the good will of the heavenly Father. And we ought to have for
suspected such as withdraw themselves from the like principal succession, and
join themselves together in any other place; I say, we ought to hold them as
heretics of a perverse judgment, or as schismatickes and selfe-liking
presumptuous fellows. And elsewhere (says the Jesuit) he declares how such
like heretics are to be con^^^ed and confounded according to the practice of
his times, to wit, in the second age after Christ. We confound says he, al
those who gather otherwise then they ought, how? by that Church which is the
chiefest, the most ancient and best known unto all men, which was established
and grounded in Rome, by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul,
pointing forth that Tradition and faith which this Roman Church holds from
the Apostles by the succession of Bishops, even* unto our days, After this
manner also (says the Jesuit) did Tertullian tro^^ce and wrest those
Heretics whom he had to deal withal. Let them show unto us if they can, the
original of their Churches: let them rip up the order of their Bishops in ^ue^
^ort, that by a succession derived from the beginning, they prove their chief
Bishop to have some one of the Apostles, or Apostolical men for his author and
Predecessor: for by this means the Apostolical Churches do make up their
accounts. And because the Heretics then were destitute of all such proof, as
Tertullian exacted of them for the maintenance of their cause* even as our
Adversaries (says the Jesuit) are as this day, He therefore brings in the
Catholic Church upbrayding them, and with them all Protestants in this
manner, Who ^ Gods name are ye^? When and from whence came yo^ hither? What do
you amongst mine, being none of mine? By what right, O Marcion, do thou cut
my ^ood? what leave have ^h^^, O Valentine, to turn my streams and fountains
another way? By what authority do thou remove my bounds, O Apelles, O
Luther, O Calvin, O Zui^glius, The possession is mine* I have it of old, I
enjoyed it before you etc Reply page* 69 and 70.
*

All that the Jesuit has produced from Iren^us and Tertullian, will make
little for justifying his pretenses, if the point be truly considered: For
there is a bare personal succession, which may accompany a false Church, as it
did the Jewish when the Pharisees sa^e in Moses Chair, and the Churches of the
East, when Heretics invaded the chaires of Catholic Bishops. Secondly,
there is a Success^^^ not only personal* of Bishops and Priests, but where the
Catholic and Apostoli^all doctrine is continued also. The people, we say,
where this is plain, are bound to receive the Doctrine from Timothy (every
succeeding Bishop) as Timothy ^. Tim* 1. 14.
from the Apostle that established and first published the same.

Now whatsoever the Jesuit has brought from these Fathers, is no way
advantageous for the Church of Rome: For first, we can show and have done, as
good personal succession, as the Roman Bishops can claim any. Secondly, to
this our orderly Succession, we can and have proved by comparison and
consanguinity of Apostolical doctrine, that we are true and Apostolical
Churches. Thirdly, the Roman certainty, upon which their Profelyres must
depend, is no firmer by these Fathers testimonies, then Ephesus, Smyrna,
Corinth, Philippi, Germany, Spain, France, Egypt, Lybia, Thessalonica Irenaeus
page 140, 142. Disci te ab Apostoli cis Ecclesijs, Habetis Romae Linum -- and
Polycarpum Smyrnae ab Apostolis edoctum. Tertull. Praeser. p. c. 37. Proxime
est tibi Acha^, habes Corinthum. Si non long es ^ Macedonia, habes Philippos,
habes Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Asiam tendere, habes Ephesum, si autem
Italiae adjaces, haqes Romam, unde nobis quoque authoritas praest o est
Rhenanus Argum. in Tert. de praescript. and alibi. Impress Basil. 1521.
Tertullianus Ecclesiam unam Apostolicam nulla loco affigit: Romanum Ec lesiam
ornat magnificae laudis elogio. non tamen tantam illam facit, quantum hodie
fieri videmus: nam Apostolicis Ecclesijs numerat, non ^ola^ facit Apostolicam.
Videmus quod lac, a Paulo Corinthij hauf^rint. Si superesset Tertullianus, non
^^pune illud diceret.
etc: which I think you will not defend from failing. Fourthly, we shall
find, that the Doctrine did always honor the Sea; the Sees were no further
esteemed, then because they gave true testimony to the Doctrine Zozomen. l. 7
c. ^. Eo autem declarabat (Thodosius Imperator) se velle ut illorum duntaxa^
Ecclesia diceretur cathol. ca, qui Prinitatem divinam aequali honor colerent*
qui diveriam sentirent cos haerotico^ appellari, intestabiles esse, ^^supplicio
affici^
. May we not then from better grounds cry O FRAUNCIS, O DOMINICK, O IGNATIUS,
then the Jesuit, O Luther, O Calvin, O Zuinglius, and charge them for creepers
into the Church without any personal or doctrinall succession either?

What the Jesuit further urges against the Protestants from Augustine, to
prove the Romanists the only unspotted Church, is mere vanity.

As for my self (says Augustine) there be many things which make me to
remain within this Catholic Church. First the uniforme consent of people and
nations; which (says the Jesuit) is not seen amongst Protestants Reply page
70
.

I am sure the Papists are not Catholics from the body of their Church, but
from the Union with their Head, when in fundamentalls the Protestants agree
with all people and nations, not thereticall and D^^^tisticall, over the face
of the earth.

Secondly, a certain authority begun by miracles, such as the Protestants
themselves (says the Jesuit) will swear they have none, nourished by hope,
increased by charity, and strengthened by antiquity Reply ibid.
.

It is true, we have no new Doctrine, and therefore we need not new miracles;
but I hope the Jesuit will not be so impudent to deny that the ancient and
Apostolical Doctrine had miracles for confirmation, and that we adhere and
depend upon the same.

Thirdly, the succession of Priests even from S. Peter the Apostle, unto this
present Bishop of Rome, which (says the Jesuit) I wish the Protestant Reader
to observe well Reply ibid*
.

I pray the Jesuit to consult with M. Mason, and either to justify us, or
condemn themselves.

Lastly, the very name of Catholic, which is so proper to this Church
amongst so many Heresies, that how^^ever all Heretics affect the name of
Catholic, yet if a stranger chance to enquire in what place do the
Catholick^ meet together, no Heretic will dare to show hi^ own Church or
house Reply page 70
.

First I desire the Jesuit to consider what Augustine says, that Heretics
affect the name, and never any (...) more then Papists, who are all but
Donatists; of which none are found in the ancient succession of the Roman
Bishops. Secondly, that although the title Catholic did point at the true
Church in the Primitive times yet it was no otherwise then the titles of men
did point out Heretics Hieron* cont* Lu^ferianos prope fine^^.
. Now if at this time many are called by the names of men, which the Jesuit
takes for Catholics, as Dominicans, Franciscans etc why may not many be
called Catholics that truly are Heretics, as Jesuits and all Papalines?

Besides names make not Heretics; Nestorians in name are not ever Nestorians
in Doctrine Onuphrius de vita Iulij III. Long maxima pars Christianorum, qui
per Assiriam, Persiam, ac reliqu^^ orientales provincias habitant appellantur
Nestoriani. Ibid. Vero hi Nestoriani, nomen potius Nestorij haeretici, quam
errores, retinuisse nihi videntur* Nam nihil pl^ne, quod illam sectam referat
in his hominibus, qui hic adsunt compe^io.
; neither Papists Catholics; for howsoever they usurp the name, yet are they
spotted and infected not only with errors of life, but with heresies and
Apostafies also, as has been plainly declared. What Theophilus speaks
concerning the Church, we resist not, neither can the Jesuit embrace it as
enclosing any Prerogative for them.

So that, all his laboring here, has been to cloth Rome with the
Catholic Privilege of exemption from Heresy, but with ill success, seeing
it has been declared filthy in manners, heretical in Doctrine, and
Apostaticall from the ancient purity wherein she appeared in the primitive
times. And therefore the Jesuits Conclusion is nothing but the approbation of
his Fantasy, which out of self-love is bestowed upon his enlarged
endeavors.

SECT: X.
THe Tenth Section inquires. How vninely our Answerer claymeth kindred with the
Primitive Church Reply page 72
? ^ the Jesuit begins like a Bedlam or Frantic.

Here our Answerer like Saul in his distress, runs upon his own weapon, and
with Achitophel is strangled in a knot of his own twisting Reply ibid.
.

Jesuits (I confess) do not fall upon their own swords, but make others to
fall by them. Yet they cannot deny, that some of them have been choked with
halters, which they never twisted themselves, and meritoriously: But how far
the most learned Primate is from Saul, any man may see, when his learned
answer has made the Jesuit to travail Vagabound, to compile and build up
this frame, which he has sent us.

And whereas he assimulates him to Achitophell; I think he ought not from his
strangling himself, but because he has both saddled and bridled M. Malone,
and rid him out of breath also. But any may espy to whom these things would
best belong; whether to the Jesuit, or to the Answerer: Qui enim appetit quod
adipisci non potest, cruciatur Augustia. ^^ ^or. Eccl. c. ^.
. The Jesuit expected glory by his demand, but seeing his expectation
frustrate, his reviling expresses his torture, and points out the desperate
Saul, the amazed Achitophel.

Now what is the chief ground that the Jesuit produces to manifest the
vanity of the An^^rers claime^ Surely a wise one, and from confession of the
^^swerer.

Forasmuch as clayming kindred with (...) ann^^us Church of Rome, he yet
confesses (says the (...) Church is indeed unlike unto her, having wasted
away such spots, as impaired both the bounty and health too of that ancient
Church Reply page 7^
.

And what hinders this, but the Church of Ireland might claim kindred with the
ancient Roman? Why, he tells us.

If the ancient Roman Church was the true Church and spouse of Christ, for 500
years (as he will ^o^ deny) what may we think of his (I pray you) which he
himself does grant to be unlike unto the same Reply page 72
?

Does dissimilitude take away kindred? Brethren may be unlike, as Jacob and
Esau; Why not Sisters? It is sufficient to conclude a Prince of the house of
Austria from the lip, although they much vary in their other proportions.
Hippocrates his twins were not (I think) in all parts so alike, as the
Jesuit would have particular Churches, and yet they were not without that
Sympathy of Nature, to cry together, laugh together, and die together. Omne
fimile est dissimile, or else they would be numerically the same, and therefore
although there be some dissimilitude betwixt the ancient Roman Church, and
that wherein the learned Answerer communicates, yet it is not in those things,
that will cut off kindred or acquaintance either. But here (we see) the Jesuit
wresting and tugging to perfect this Argument, has most falsely charged the
Answerer with confession of that, which he does but for Argument sake admit, as
is plain by his own words.

And therefore (says the most reverend Primate) though we should admit that
the ancient Church of Rome was somewhat impaired both in beauty and in health
too (wherein we have no reason to be sorry, that we are unlike unto her)
there is no necessity that hereupon presently she must c^ase to be our Sister
See the most reverend the Lord Primate his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge p.
22
* so that we may easily perceive whose neck^ is taken in the halter, by his
struggling and striving to get out thence.

And if the Jesuit will endure examination, I think he will not so justify
the Roman Church for the first five hundred years, but that it had something
practiced in it, which other Churches did dislike. Neither does this so far
deface it, as the Jesuit would persuade: For what will he say of all those
Churches in the Apocalypse? None d^re deny their spots, because God has
registered them: And if the Jesuit be interrogated, whether the Roman then, as
now, differs from them, in their Spots, I think he will affirm it, and yet
account them true Churches also.

Does not this Jesuit then abuse his Reader by his vain flourish, when he
grounds it for an Argument, that we are no true Church, because we do in
some particulars differ from a true one, to wit, the ancient Roman Surely
this Argument would better fit the mouths of Atheists! Who does not see, that
Rome now in many things differs from Rome ancient it self? For if Rome
ancient were without spots, and you in all things like unto it. Why did your
Councels pretend reformation? Why did all goo^ men call for Councels? Why did
your Doctors complain of the corrupt estate of the Church? Nay, why did your
assemblies amend those things that were never amiss? But the Jesuit
suspecting the strength of this pretense, labors further to discredit the
most learned Primate his answer.

He seeks indeed to recover his head out of the halter (says the Jesuit) by
telling us, that those things wherein his Church is unlike unto that of
ancient time, are not of any such moment, but that he may for all that claim
her for his Sister, though (poor soul) a disfigured and diseased one Reply
page ^^
.

Do you see, how skillful this Jesuit is, to take his Metaphors from the
Halter and the Hangman? In this my Answer shall be the admiration of his
Rhetoric. But what produces he to put by this defense? Why, as if he were
making an Oration to his Novices, he cries out.

To whom would not such babish conceits as these moove laughter Reply page 7^
?

Is it possible that a Jesuit can leave his fixos oculos, his complicatas
manus, to prove ridiculum quid, upon so small provocation? Surely, he would
never have answered so discreet an answer with derision, as you perceive he
here does, if he had had any thing else to have furnished his Reply withal.
But let us see the grounds of his laughter.

That Christ (forsooth) after all his promises to the contrary, should suffer
his beloved spouse, even in those first ages to be so impaired as these men
dream: that for so many Centuries of year^s, he should abandon her lying in
disgrace, and languishing in disease, until such time as a luxurious Apostata,
arising from his sacrilegious bed, should come with his impure hands to wash
away ^e^ spots, or until such time as a branded Sodomite took in hand to play
the Paracelsian, thereby to cure her malady Reply page 7^
.

Here were matter of weeping rather then of laughter, if this charge were just:
For who makes the Roman Church in the first ages to be ab^^doned by CHRIST, to
be lyeing in disgrace, to be languishing in disease? Not the Answerer, but
this Jesuit out of his honesty has invented it, because against the Answerers
words he has no ground for exception.

But I would know, whether the promises are made to the Church ( qua) Roman and
not otherwise; whether he has any other Arguments, then what are answered to
prove it, and how it came to p^sse that there were invented Epistles and other
proofs urged to declare this, besides the Scripture, when the institution is
pretended to come from thence?

Secondly, I desire to know, where he can find us (the ^^urches of England and
Ireland) acknowledging Luthe^ ^^ Calvin their dictates, any further then they
are agreeable to the truth delivered by CHRIST and his Apostles; or whether we
have depended upon them, or either of them for reformation?

Thirdly, I desire the Jesuit to certify, whether Luther were not a luxurious
Friar; and how he can prove the Apostacy, which he brandeth him with, let
him further declare?

Fourthly, whether Bolsecke be not the best testmionie, that the Jesuit has
to prove Calvin to have been a ^anded Sodomite, as without shame he blusheth
not to traduce him? These things when the Jesuit has declared, we will
confess he has raved zealously; but for the present, we can but conceive this
to be the effect of his received wounds which forces his impatiencie, that he
cannot contain himself.

But that which the Jesuit supposes will countenance his p^ssion, is that the
Fathers (whom he deservedly commends) in their best times are concluded
hereby to have less understanding to know, or less grace, and courage to
perform what was necessary for the washing and c^ring of Gods Church, then
certain tumultuous Vpstarts Reply page 7^
etc.

I desire that you would confess ingenuously, whether you or our selves give
more honor to the Fathers: We that acknowledge them to be Counselors
appointed to the Church, to be pastors and doctors raised up by God to feed
his people, and when they are met together in a Council or Consent, their
sentence to be the greatest determination on earth, whose credit immediately
follows the sacred page: Or you, that account the best of them whilst they
lived (except the Roman Bishops themselves) but a Roman Delegate, that all of
them when they ruled their Church could not teach the Church any point of
doctrine but by the Popes call and appointment, whose works you so esteem
that you have made them companions but of bastard broods, base births, and have
professed in your practice to make them speak as you desire them, by falsE
interpretation See before Sect. ^. etc.
.

Secondly, I desire that the Vanity of this pretense might be seen: Is it any
thing to the dishonor of the understanding grace or courage of the Fathers,
that somethings were since amended, which were scarce espied in their times?
How does every Council disgrace the knowledge grace and courage of former
Fathers and Bishops, if the amending of things amiss might conclude the same
Augustine. ^, ^apt. con. Donat. c. 3. Ipsaque plenaria saepe priora a
posteriorib^^ eme^dari, sine (...) typho sacrilegae superbi^ sine ^lla
in^^^t^cervice arrogantiae, fine ulla co^^entione lividae invidi^ -- cum ^^^e
catholic cum charitate (...)
? Have not some of your bret^ren found out new thoughts concerning the blessed
Virgins conception, which will take away the harsh doctrine of the Fathers and
Catholics of former times? Shall we think that these tumultuo^^ upstarts
have therefore more knowledge grace or courage, then those ancient Fathers, the
whole Catholic Church?

Little honor was given to the Roman See before the Council of Nice Aeneas
Sylv. epist. 301.
, must we conclude that your after Doctors had more knowledge, grace or
courage, then the Apostles and Fathers before that Council, because they have
washed and cured GODS Church of so notorious an error? I see the Jesuit is of
the Cardinalis Matthee Langi. Archbishop of Salzburg. Hist. con. Tri^en l. 1.
mind, that did think the Church should be reformed, but not by a Monk.

But they are Popish thoughts to have the reformation or government of the
Church to depend upon men. We have a Rule left by CHRIST, which as it is the
rule to govern, so to reform, what by fraud or neglect has crept into the
Church amiss. We acknowledge, GOD has many instruments in the Church, but
that which works reformation is the word of God, and although the Instrument
may have honor for the works sake, yet it is the word, not the instrument,
that effects the reformation. Why the Jesuit should term those learned men,
tumultuous upstarts, I cannot guess; for I am sure they were as ancient as
there Order; and for tumultuous practices, who dare compare with Jesuits for
grand supplanters.

Whereas the Jesuit thinks to vilify them by his heap of invectives; they
will appear true friends to the Catholic Church by grave and solid
discourses pleading her cause and contesting for her right. And I would know
whether they have sinned in being impatient of the Churches sufferings any more
then the Councels of Basil and Con^stance, who greived to see a Saracens head,
upon the Churches shoulders, and therefore declared the Churches rights and the
Popes usurpations, condemning him with his foolish pretenses Council* Constane*
Sess* 4. and 10. Council. Basil. sess* 12. and 33. Veritas de potestate concilij
generalis universalem Ecclesiam repraesentantis supra Papam and que^libet
alterum, declarata per constantiense and hoc Basileense generalia Concilia, est
veritas fidei Catholicae* -- veritatibus praedictis pertinaciter repugnans est
confendus Haereticus.
; Wherefore the Jesuit might have left this passion, as being grounded upon
distemper and fury, and have taken his rabblement to himself and his, to whom
truly it belongs.

But this Jesuit will speak nothing without demonstration, and therefore will
show ours to be a deforming, rather then a reforming humor Reply page* 73
* and this he would prove because, First of all the prime stirrer of this stone
Martin Luther, had the gift to see in his omne days such comfortable success
herein as was answerable to his labors Reply (...)
.

What was that? The shaking off the Roman Triple* The emptying of the Friars
bellies? The restrayning of the Cleargies luxury? No* but from the time the
pure Gospel was first restored and brought to light, the world has every day
become worse and worse Reply page* 73.
.

We acknowledge, that Luther and others complained of the disorders of men
that communicated with them; but will the Jesuit conclude that these were
occasioned by bringing in the doctrine of CHRIST? Were the Preachers of the
Gospel filled with a deforming, rather then a reforming humor, because they
could not tolerate stews and profaneness where they preached, but did
inveigh with bitterness against them? If there were a Jesuit that had so much
devotion, as to reproach the sins of the Roman Court, or Italy, with Luthers
courage, and should upbrayde them with neglect of the Cleargies example, the
Popes holiness, and the lamp of divine light that proceeds from him, and
should cry out that Sodom and Gomorrha never abounded with sin and Sodomie,
as Italy, (notwithstanding their helps of devotion) does at this present, or
since Peter placed his seat there; Should he therefore confess, that Peter
planting his seat there, should be the cause of those filthy sins and
Sodomies? or that the Cleargies lives, Papal holiness and determinations did
bring profaneness into those states and countries? Absit.

The Apostle says of the Corinthians (after they had received the Gospel)
that there was such fornication amongst them, as was not once named amongst the
Gentiles 1. Cor. (...)
: Must it follow, that this is to be imputed to the Christian religion? No,
this makes the offense the greater, it does no way cause it, and this is the
meaning of Luther, and most of the others cited.

The word of God is compared to light in Scripture II. Peter* 1. 19
, the light whereof might declare more to Luther a Preacher abroad, then when
he remained dark and lazy in his Cloister at home. And we think that Luther
might deceive himself in this particular, for not distinguishing betwixt an
evil and the detection thereof. The Pharisees hypocrisies were not thought
such before CHRIST'S time; His revealing of them brought them not in. Luther
espied more mischeife abroad, when he veiwed men's actions by the light of the
word, then he could before by a Roman Gloworme, and this might make him think
the world worse, when his eyes had more light, and his medium was more clear.

When Grace enters into a man's heart, he trembles at every thought of
uncleanenesse, that before the receipt thereof (in regard of blindness) could
not see the odiousness of the filthiest crimes. And man, as he cannot esteem
virtue but by this light of grace, so he cannot apprehend the foulness of
sin. So that Luther might get fruit by his preaching, though he was bold to
say of some that pretended to follow him, They are and remain swyne: they
believe like swyne, and like swyne they dye Reply page 73
.

But does M. Malone urge this for the credit of the Swyneheard, or the Swyne?
For the harlet, or her lovers? Poor Luther, because the Swyne that Rome had
bred in filthiness, would not leave their swynish condition for his preaching
against their swynishnesse, this is the thing he bewayles. And what great hurt
comes thereby to Luthers cause, or the cause of Religion, whose complaints may
be paralelled by the Prophets (...) 49* 4.
and Apostles themselves.

And here to satisfy the Reader, I would have him to observe some things fit
to be taken notice of, and it will overthrow all that building which the
Jesuit hopes to erect by his collected Invectives.

First, that the learned Divines in general in reformed Churches (by the
ancient Fathers example^) do from their heart detest the pollutions and
corruptions of the world, insomuch that they cannot treat of them but with
detestation, denying all honor to them, (though their own by communion) that
live not after the purity of the doctrine of their profession; which we
cannot find among the Papis^es, they commending sin Baron. a^* 1100. n. 14.
De (...) ^^li^ Imperatoris. Quis negare poterit summum fuisse hoc pietatis
genus in hoc se exhibuisse crudelem? Immo ex ^^ quod non firmioribus vinculis
strinxerit, etc. nihil habes in quo damnes fili^^, magis quam si vehementi
febre phrenetico, delirenti, infanienti, furentique, pius fi^^^s in^iciat
vincula patri, ^vere intuitu, pietatis, ut facere prae se tulit, ea omnia
praestitit
, collerating uncleanenesse Espenc^^us in Epast ad Titum c. 1. p. 67. Prostat
and in quaestu pro meretrice sedet, liber palam ac public hic impressus, and
hodicque ut olim venalis, Taxa Camorae seu Canceilariae Apostolicae inscriptus,
in quo plus scelerum diseas licet, quam in omnibus omnium vitiorum summistis et
summarijs, et plurimis quidem licenti^, omnibus autem absolutio ^^pturientibus
proposita.
, protecting abominable wretches, as lately in the Venetian State Historia
Interdicti Vencti* lib* 1. p. 7, 8. ^ Reply p. 74*
; and if any has either declaimed against, or abhorred the base lives of their
Clergy, (which is but seldom) they have been suspected as no good
Catholics for the same.

Again, we by his testimonies may see, that Reformed Churches by doctrine or
connivencie, do not tolerate those evils which they declaime against, (as
the Papists do) whereby it can cast no impeachment upon their doctrine.

Thirdly, the cause of these evils is declared by Iacobus Andr^^ to be,
because the severe discipline of the Church has been formerly disgraced by
Conscience-tyrannie, and oppression in the Roman Church^, so that there is no
correction of sin, but the People fear a Papal tyranny.

Fourthly, the Jesuit has taken advantage of some points in controversy
betwixt those that they style Lutherans and Calvinists, making use of eithers
passions, to disgrace the good life and sincerity of both.

Now for his charge of Atheism, I fear we have cause to suspect there are
some amongst us, I mean in our Kingdoms: All do not believe the Gospel, and
the Ministers of Satan have their work herein. But that which the Jesuit
would lay to our charge, may be seen in every corner of Italy. We have not
nourished one Machiavel that the Jesuit can produce, nor one John that denied
the immortality of the soul: He has not espied one amongst us that has
called the Gospel, Fabulam de Christ^: Yet if there be any such, as from the
loose conversation of some may be suspected, I am sure they play their part in
secret, as the fool in the Psalmist, that said in his heart, There is no God
Psalm. 24. 1.
.

These things duly considered and weighed, may show, that the Reformation does
more detest and abhor sin, then give any encouragement unto it. Besides we
see, that the exclamation against sin, is no argument that sin is in the
budde and flourish, but in her ruin and decay. So that all the Jesuit can
say from these testimonies, is this, that as those pious men assaulted the
Kingdom of Antichrist, by the opposall of such corruptions of Doctrine, as
did get footing in their schism of Rome, so did they labor afterward to
extirpate and root out those fruits of Idolatry and Superstition, wicked
life, open profaneness, and all kind of filthy and notorious demeanor.

But if we should grant all to be true which the Jesuit urges, he argues
vainelie in laboring to disgrace the profession of the Gospel, because some
of their Communion, are of dissolute lives: For if this Argument were good, we
should quickly make Rome the Synagogue of Satan, far from the Church of God.

For how many have showed the chief Pilots in your Church to have been in
many successions, the most notorious wicked wretches that ever the earth did
bear; some of them for saking S. Peter's ways P^a^^^a in vit. Johan* X*
Pontifices ipsi a Petri ve^tigijs discess^runt.
, others being monsters and unnatural Idem in vita Benedicti 4. Vbi cum ipsis
opibus lasci^ire coepit Ecclesia Dei, versis ejus cu^toribus a severitate ad
las^iviam, peperit nobis tanta licentia peccandi * haec portenta; a quibus
ambitione and largitione sanctis^ma Petri seeds occupata est potius quam
possess^. Idem in vit. Christopher. 1. Pon^^fices tanquam monstra quaedam e
medio Deus sustulit. Idem in vit. Sergij III. Vide quaeso quantum isti
degeneraverint a majoribus s^^s.
, yea prodigionsly wicked Geneb. Chron l. 4 Nihil mirum si isti Pontifices
prodigiosi essent.
, Sylvester the second giving himself to the Devil Platina in vita Sylvestri
II. Diabolum secutus, curse totum tradiderat.
, and doing him homage Martinus Polon. ann. 1007. Sylvester II. -- diabolo
homagium fecit, ut sibi omnia ad votum succederent.
. John the XIIIth abounded in all wickedness See before page 107.
, no Catiline, Nero or Heliogabalus like unto him, so that if he was not a
baptized Turk, yet he was worse in the judgment of your own, for he died of a
wound given him by the Devil in the act of adultery, as your own report it
Luitprand. Tiein. l. 6. c. 11. Dum se cum c^jusdam viri ux^^^ oble^^^ret, in
temporibus adeo ^ Diabolo est percussus, ut intra dierum oct^ spatium ^odem sit
vulnere mortuus.
. What was Boniface the seventh, but a Villain, a Church-Robber, a Theife, a
murderer of two Popes, as good as Sylla and Cataline; I rail not, it is
Baronius his Rhetoric Baron. ann. 985. n. 1. Au^umerandum potius interfam^*
sos latrones, et potentissimos grass^tores atque patriae perditores, Syllas et
Cat^linas, ^o^umque similes, quos omnes superavit sacrilegus iste turpissima
^ec^ duorum Pontificum
. Besides, Alexander the VI. what virtues, what holiness did he shine with? I
will speak no more of them, as having showed what they were before.

But for your Cardinals, what holiness was enclosed in their purple habites?
They were Pride it self, and acted it, yea the most excellent exemplars to
paint it by; By their Wickedness, horrible schism was brought into the
Church. And for the unmeasurable and bottomless gulf of their covetous
desire, who can by words sufficiently express it, besides their Simoniacall
intercessions to the Pope, their selling of their favors for money, their most
shameful and damnable ^orruptions, the adulteries, wheredomes, and
fornications wherewith they defiled the Court of Rome, and usurie in the
highest degree N^ch. Cle^^^ng. in lib de corrupto Ecclesiae stam c. 10.
Cardinalium qui Papae assident spiritus, verba tumen^ia, gestus tam sunt
insolent^s, ut si a^tifex quisque vellet superbiae simulach^um effingere, nulla
congruentius tati^^^id facere ^osset, quam Cardinalis effigi^^ oculis in^^^^i^m
objecta^^o. Idem c. 12. Quis ^esci^^* ^ctionis schismatic^ horrend am p^^^^m
per nequitiam Cardi^alium in Ecclesiae gr^mium injectam etc. Idem c. t^. Quis
immensam and i^^^t^icabi^em voraginem ip^orum concupiscenti^ ver bis ^quare
valeat etc. Idem c. 12. Trans^o Simo^^^c^^ a^^d Papa^ intercessione^;
patrocinia ve^alia; corruptiones aut promotione^ ^^^pis^im^^ and damna^is^^^s,
quae omnes fere istis auctoribus and suasoribus ^i^bant etc. Ne^ enum^rare volo
c^rum adulteria, flupra, ^o^^ic^^^ones, quibus Romanam Curi^^ ^^^am nu^^
inc^^^ant, etc. Ne^ refero usuras, etc. qua ex causa n^^mulario^ supreme (...)
non incongru^n^er ^o^ quidam vocant.
?

And for their Clergy, how are they esteemed amongst themselves? Aventine
terms them in his time great wolves, lustful per sons, adulterers, ravishers
of Virgins and Nuns, theives and Usurpers, Drones, leacherous, perfidious,
perjured, ignorant asses, wolves hypocrites Ave^ini^ l. 6. Annal. (...). Cu^
O^i^^ ^ap^o^, ^i^ ^^^, lu^^^, li^idino^os, adulteros, virginum, sacrat^rum
foeminarum ^^upra (...), cocos^^^li^^^s, latro^^^, arge^tario^* num^x^^rio^,
^ucos, pecuniarum aucupes, ^u^^^^^ditos pe^^^do^, (...), literarum omnium
penitus rudes imponi^. Non audita loquo^* ^^ quae ^is^e oculis video, narro.
etc. Albertus expresses the rulers of the Church, by the messengers of
Antichrist, supplanters of the flock of CHRIST Albertus in Evangel. Johan. c.
10,
. And how long they have continued this good opinion amongst all men, the
complaints and grief of men that have had any modesty in several ages, will
declare Ho^ori^^ A^gust Dial. de praedest and lib. Arbit Verte te ad Cives
Babyloniae, and vide quales sint, etc. Alvares Pelagi^s de plan^^^ Ecclesiae.
Nic. (...) de co^^^pto Ecclesi^ (...) Ne^ ^^^ Ber^^^d^^ and alij.
.

Neither does this age minister unto us any hope that their Doctrine is now of
better efficacy, though the Papacy be honored with more glorious titles then
ever it was before; in regard they do not (as Luther is by them pretended to
have done) term only some dissolure persons swyne, but all their Clergy and
Laytie also; for so our Irish Regulars would have the Irish Bishops to be
swin^^erds, and their flock swine, this being their argument to prove the
Provincials of the Regulars to be greater Pr^lates then the Bishops, because
the Pastor is known by his flock, and Opilio dig^ior est s^b^^c^, A
sheeph^^rd is better then a s^y^eheard Consu^a ^^^i^ien. Pro^^^ ^ Superiores
Regularium digniores s^nt Episcopis, siquidem dig^^tas Pastoris petenda est ex
condition^ (...) gregi^, quemadmodum ^^i^^o dignior ^^* ^^bul^o.
*

So that if the Jesuit make loosenes of conversation in some particulars, an
Argument against the truth of Religion and doctrine in the reformation, and
would thereby take away our kindred with the Primitive Church: What may we
conclude from the universal leprosy that has by their own confession
over-growne both head and members throughout the Papacy? But i^ this manner of
arguing from corrupt manners to corrupt doctrines be of small force, as is
acknowledged by themselves, in so much that no inward Virtue in Bellarmines
judgment, is required to make one a part of the true Church Bellarm. de Eccles.
mili^^^^^ l. 3. c. 3. Vt aliquis aliqu^ modo dici possit pars ve^^ Ecclesiae,
de qua Scriptur^^ loqu^n^^r ^on ^^ta^^^s, requiri ullam internam virt^^e^.
. Yet I am sure it is able to moderate this Vaunter from triumphing like the
Pharisee, God I thank thee, I am not like other men Luke ^8. 9.
.

But here our Answerer domandeth of me (says the Jesuit) whether I be able to
show one point, wherein they have broken that Harmony which Iren^^s commends
in the Catholic Church of his time? I answer, that I can very easily show
it, and make good withal what I said in my demand, and (...) which he keeps
such a vain stir, to wit, that the ^rotestants agreewith that ancient holy
Church in very few points of Religion, or rather, to say better, that they
agree not in any one point at all Reply page 76
.

How well able the Jesuit is or has been to make good wha^ he said in his
demand, will be examined in the XIth Section. Here we expect what point of
Doctrine he ^an find out, held by us, wherein it will appear that we vary
from that Harmony which Irenaeus commends in the Catholic Church of his
time. And for his orderly ^andling of this matter, he puts down Irenaeus his
words as his Major Proposi^ion. That Church which is spread throughout the
whole World, presents her faith, as ^^ were dwelling in one house, and
likewise beleiveth as it were, having on soul and one heart, and uniformely
preaches, teaches, and delivers this faith amongst all nations, having as
it were one mouth Reply Ibid.
.

And now as if this repetition were our confusion, he tells us, Our
Adversaries neither have nor believe any such Church, therefore they keep no
such Harmony.

The Minor he is willing to prove by a twofold Medi^m: First, by what has
been heretofore produced by him concerning our disagreement, which I hope the
Reader has observed, will not serve his turn. Secondly, by a far greater
dissension which happens (says the Jesuit) betwixt them and those
Protestants, with whom they pretend this Harmony in other Nations Reply ibid.
. So that it seems the Jesuit will first attempt to prove, that we be not
of that Church which keeps Irenaeus his harmony, and that he will reserve
unto the last place the point he should prove, to wit, that we deny the
Catholic Church.

His best argument to manifest the first, is the testimonies of some Lutherans,
Brownists, and Puritans, who dis^^aime and discard our Answerer and his Church
(as the Jesuit tells us) from all this pretended harmony and agreement with
him Reply Ibid.
. And we say (if they charge us so deeply as the Jesuit affirms) that this
is not sufficient to prove his undertakings, seeing that Doctor Stapleton
denies the Fathers (and especially S. Hiero^e) the privilege of testimony,
when they write contentiously and with passion Stapleton ^rinc. Doctri^^l l.
67. Distinctio de his (...) a p^^^ibus (...), and ^^ae co^tentio ^ scribuntur
in verbis Hiero (...) locum (...).
* and therefore these rigide Lutherans, (though they befriend a Jesuit) cannot
in their disputes be allowed an in^allible privilege.

Besides these Lutherans which the Jesuit urges, (if their words be, as he
lays them down, for I cannot come by their books) do speak without
ground; for the controversies betwixt the Lutherans and the Calvinists (as they
term us) are but like a coal (as Sr Edwin Sands well observes) which a wise
man with a little moisture of his mouth might soon have quenched, although
their ministers with the wind of others have contrariwise enflamed the same Sr
Edwin Sands his Relation. (...)
. Neither does it make against the peace of the Church in faith, that some have
rashly and passionatly urged our diff^rences against the judgment of their more
moderate and well advised brethren, who account no otherwise of the Calvinists,
then of erring brethren Ibid.
.

And further, the Jesuit cannot manifest, that the points wherewith the
Lutherans are offended, be in their own nature of the essence of faith, which
he must do before he can prove us to be no Church, the quarrels mentioned
by the Jesuit, arising not from disunion of faith in the foundation, but from
some dislikes and jealousies, which some indiscreet persons amongst them
entertain in points far remote, and therefore their rash censure can
condemn us no more then the Popes Bulla c^na, unless we condemn our selves
by denying some part of the foundation of ^aith.

For the Brownists; They condemn us, and with us the Catholic Church by their
schism, and we also condemn them, as the ancient Fathers did all the factious
schismatics in their ages: But does this make us no true members of the
Catholic Church? Is our candlestick removed, because an heard of schismatics
bark against us? Did your Marrani, baptized Jews and Moors S^ Edw. (...) his
Relat. (...) 44.
, make Spain non-catholick? Or did the Illuminati in Arragon, the brood of
your hypocritical Priests, by their pretenses of Angelical purity Ibid.
, banish that Church from the kingdom of grace? This is neither Sophistry nor
Logic.

For the words that he cites from the Puritans: No man can deny but they are
the fruit of distemper and disobedience, yet unable to drag with the Jesuit
the conclusion which he aymeth at, for their dissension is not in fundamentalls
nay it is so far from the foundation, that it is no way doctrinall This you^
Turne-about Spalato, when he was in England perceived and told it his brother
Suares Spal. con. Suar. c. ^ (...) 30. (...) qui vocantu^. circa articu^^s
fidei non dissentiunt, sed circa (...), and externam Ecclesia^^icam (...).
, though afterward he f^am^d them a lying Catalogue (...) ^^. p. ^5.
*

But it may be the Jesuit will bettet perceive the weakness of his Argument. If
we use the strength thereof against himself. If I should bring (before Sixtus
the fourth his time) the Franciscans and Dominicans bandying Heresy at each
others Cloister, damning and condemning each other of heresy, not by words
alone, but in writ also c; will the Jesuit conclude that the Roman Church is o
Sixth. IV. Decret, de Concep. Virg, Matiae.
heretical, and keeps not Irenaus his harmony? Surely if the Pillars be
rotten, the roof is not safe. Besides, if the Franciscans and Dominicans did
see those feirce gladiat^res, the Jesuits and Seculars in England, fight their
late combat; the Jesuits tearming the Seculars, Calumniator^, factious,
turbulent, seditious, scandalous, authors of schism, rebels, betrayers of the
Catholic cause Parson* Apolog.
, and the Seculars returning to them terms of Schismatickes, Donatists,
Anabaptists, Arians, with detection of their Counsels and Stratagems to be
heathenis^^, tyrannical, Atheistical, Sa^nicall, to make them like Lucian and
Machiavel, and for impiety and Atheism to overcome Lucifer himself Watson.
Quod^.
. Would they use the Jesuits Logic, and confess that the Catholic Church
is not Roman, and that Irenaus his harmony cannot be found there?

But let all the world veiw the Devil fighting with the Lamb, anno 1255, or
56. when the Friars published their eternal Gospel, and the Pope partaked
with them! If the Jesuit can find amongst all the Heretics that have ever
troubled the Church, such an essential and fundamental dissension, let him
swell, swagger, and display Ignatius for ever: for here we find Friars more
perfect contemplatives then Christ and his Apostles Henry. Exphurd. Chron. c.
93. Eymeric. Director. Inquisitor. part 2. quaest 9.. 4. (...) errores 4.
libri. 2. partis tractat 2. I* Quod Christus and Sancti Apostoli ejuse, non
fuerunt perfecti in vita contemplantium. ^ Quod activa vi^a usqu^ ad tempus
Abbatis Ioachim fr^ctuosa fuit: sed (...) no^ est: contemplativ^ vero vita ab
ipso Ioachim fructificarc coepit, etamodo in perfect ^ successoribus^psius
perfecti^^ manebit.
, of more dignity and authority then the Apostles Ibid. inter errores ^ libri
ejusdem partis, in tractatu de Joseph et (...), cui somnium apparuit invenitur.
Quod prae di^a ^ores qui erant in ultimo statu mundi, erunt dignitatis et
auctoritatis majoris, quam (...) Apostoli.
, the Gospel of CHRIST disgraced as less excellent, if compared to their
eternal Gospel Ibid. inter errores primae partis, Primus est, quod Evangelium
aeternum (quod idem est quod doctrina Abbatis Ioachim) excellit doctrinam
Christi.
; that it must vanish Ibid 3. Quod novum Testamentum est evacuandum.
, and another in succession follow it Ibid. 6. Quod Evangelio Christi aliud
Evangelium succedet.
; that it brings none to perfection Ibid. inte^ errores 2. libri, partis 2. I.
Quod Evangelium Christi ^eminem perducit ad perfectum.
, that the Preisthood of CHRIST (is not for ever after the order of
Melchisedecke) but must have an other Priesthood to succeed it Ibid. intet
errores 1. partis 6. Quod sacerdotio Christi aliud sacerdo^ium succedet.
. These desperate blasphemies, besides other impieties as opposite to the
doctrine of CHRIST as the Turkish Alcoran, being resisted by the Doctors of
Paris; What merited these Champions of CHRIST at his Vicars hand? They were
accounted malicious, the Friars innocent Extravag. Papae Alexandr. ex speculo
minorum tractat. 1. fol. 10. b. edit. Rothomagi anno 1509. and Firmamento trium
Ordi^um Francisci. part. 2. tractat. 2. fol. 62. a. edit. Paris. an. 1512.
Cogitaverunt nuper malitiam (magistri Paris.) and contra innocents and rectos
(fcil. Fratres Praedicatores) iniquitatem maximam sunt locuti.
: they rebels, the Friars, the beloved sons of the mother Church Ibid.
Surgentes adversus Fratres detraxerunt, and contra dilectos matris Ecclesiae
filios scandalum posuere.
? their defense of CHRIST and his Gospel a pernicious and detestable libell
Ibid. Prodiere, inquam, and in prava commen^a ex nimio calore animi
proruperunt, libellum quendam valde perniciosum and detestabilem temere
componentes.
, the Friars excellent instruments working many spiritual proficien^es and
fruit in the Church Ibid. In ipso quaedam perversa and reproba -- contra co^
qui (...) animarum zelantes ardenter and sacris studijs procurantes, multos in
Ecclesia Dei operantur spirituales profectus and magnum faciant ibi fructum.
, their books burnt Ibid Di^^icte praecipientes, ut quicunque libellum ipsum
habuerit cum -- prorsus and in toto and in qualibe^ sui part comburere and
abolere procuret.
, the Friars preserved from the flame; the Friars made inquisitors of heresies
Bulla Alexandri IV. inter liter. Pon^i^^c. pro officio Inquisit. a ^^. Peg^a
edit. Romans an. 1585. page 5051. Alexander Episcopus servus servorum Dei,
Dilectis filijs universis fratribus, Praedicatorum and Minorum ordinum
Inquisitoribus ^aereticae pravitatis etc. Praesentium vobis auctoritate
mandamus, (...) in ^odem negoti^ de divino e^ Apostolico favore confisi, omnj
human^ tractare deposito, constanter ac ^ntrepide procedentes, cirea
extirpandam haereticam pravitatem -- c^m omni vigilanti^ omnique ^^^dio
laboretis. Prateol. de haer. in Guile^. de S. A^^^e, Gault. sec. 13.
; these censured as forsaking the faith; I will not for all this say, that
there were no members of CHRIST in the Church of Rome, yet I dare say, that all
these Factionists, against the Person, Gospel, and Preisthood of CHRIST were
members of the Devil.

Neither is Dissension at this day such a fugitive from the Roman Church, as
the Jesuit would have us to believe. The Regulars of Ireland yesterday would
excommunicate the Seculars out of the Hierarchy, and prefer their Prelates
before their Bishops, for this reason, because their Bishops are Subulci,
Swyneheards; their flocks swyne Censura Paris. Propos. 2. Sacerdotes sunt meri
saeculares. Ibid. Propos. ^. Superiores Regularium digniores sunt Episcopis,
siquidem dignitas Pastoris peten da est ex condition sui gregis, quemadmodum
opilio dignior est subulco.
. The Sorbonists that cry loudest in this Heard, make the Regulars (as has
been before related) in their positions to be schismatic, inept, heretical
See before page 136.
etc.

Now we may see what reason the Jesuit has to use his interlineall glosses,
or to demand, with what reason the Answerer pretends harmony in Religion Reply
page 79
, seeing it is apparent, that the quarrels of Protestants are but in
ceremonies, or at worst, in points of no absolute consequence: and that their
differences are in matters that concern the life of Religion, unless they
think the Church may subsist without CHRIST, his Gospel, or his Preisthood.
We may complain with Joseph, that our brethren (or those which should be so)
are too hard hearted, that will offer to cast us into the pit of Death and
Heresy for such petty and small differences, that being scanned with
charity, would not appear to be material: when as your Variances (Mr Malone)
would burst into scisme, nisi ignis and securis in officio contineret Spal.
contra Suar. c. x. nu. 30 Schisma proculdubio facerent etiam nostrae
Romanen^^umsectae, modo a me nominatae, nisi illos ignis and securis in officio
contineret.
, unless your Peacemonger tied you to Unity by the faggot and the hangman. So
that his declamation out of Chrysostom does torture himself, not punish us;
for who barely seems to have CHRIST, but the Principal of Papists? And what
Alcoran denies him more then their eternal Gospel? Who mixeth the Gospel
with decrees of men? Have they forgot them who will have traditions to be
received with the Scriptures, pari pietatis affectu Conc. Triden. sess. 4.
Omnes libros tam veteris quam novi Testamenti neenon Tradiones ipsas* pari
pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit ^c veneratur.
? Are they not at Trent and Rome? And therefore we condemn you not, because
you are at odds with Heretics, but because you are at peace with Hell and
contention against the Faith.

But although the Jesuit has failed in his first attempt to make our
dissentions such as either drive us from the Church, or the Church from us; yet
he cease not, but proceeds to manifest, that the most learned Answerer in
his Sermon at Wansted, did seek to shake off the palpable badge and cause of
discord from himself, by laying all upon the Pope, and his universal
superiority, as may appear (says the Jesuit) by his words. Neither indeed
is there any hope that we shall see a general peace for matters of Religion
settled to the Christian World, as long as this supercilious Master (the Pope)
shall be suffered to keep this rule in Gods house. But is not this (says the
Jesuit) just as if malefactors should give out, that they can never live in
quiet peace whilst Justice bears sway? Or yet, as if the damned spirits
should complain, that they can never find rest* in Hell, while God in Heaven
bears rule Reply page ^0
.

It is just as like, as the Pope is either like to God or Justice; It is true
(as I have showed before) that the Devil is something less ambitious then the
Pope* For if the Scripture do point out that wicked one, he would be but
similis altissimo, like unto the most High, yet the Pope does so far disdain
to be like GOD, that he must be GOD himself; No sooner Pope, but he must be
placed upon the Altur, and be worshipped, lib. 1. ceremon. sect. 1. page 16 Bis
super altar collocatur cum mitra, ibi. que adoratur.
. If in the Chair, who governes but a Celestial Prince Carer. de potest. Romans
Pon. 2. c. 24. n. 19. Hac itaque in re Itali maxim se divino m^nere extollant
super omnes nationes quod habuerintprin* cipem coelestem Pontificem scil.
Romanum.
? Talk of his power, it is Omnipotent Theses Pauli 3. Dicat^ Vicedeum
Christian^ reipublicae Monarcham invictissimum et pontificiae omnipotentiae
conservatorem acerrimum.
, His Act the act of GOD Panor. in cap inter corpcralia de trans. Episc.
. His Tribunal one with God Hostiens de trans. Episc c. quanto. n. 11.
: from whom there is no Appeal to GOD Aug Triumph. quae^^. 6. 1. Nulla
appellatio tenet facta a^ Papa ad Deum* quia unum Consistorium est ipsius Pap^
and ipsius Dej.
, because this presupposes a superior. The Unity and Trinity of his Deity,
I have showed before out of Morinus See before page 135. lit* ^.
.

Besides, he is as like to Justice, as he is truly GOD, and no further. I will
not say, that like Zi^^ri, he ^ surped his Monarchy by killing of his Master,
but by actions in our Saviors testimony equally unjust, as by butchering his
servants, slaughtering his Saints. Justice gives; He takes from every man his
due. His actions are the measure of Justice, not measured by it. Princes and
Priests, the most glorious witnesses of the world, (whose prerogatives he
covets and usurpes) can witness this. Shall we think, that all the Schisms
in the Roman Church were contentions for Justice? That Symony was her
purchaser? Shall we deem that Justice enthroned Cardinals above Bishops?
Friars before Priests? Will Justice judge GOD'S rule to be dangerous, and that
man's is able to lead to perfection? Will Justice inhibite marriage, and open
the Stews? VRBANVS nihil equi cogitat, if we believe the Proverb, URBAN was
never yet just, how comes he now to be so upright?

And further, as your Monarchy is far from being either like to GOD or
Justice; so shall we appear to be far unlike either to your Malefactors on
earth, or the damned in Hell. We are Malefactors, Heretics, but by whose
judgment, save the Heretics himself, the most absolute Malefactor on earth?
Were not the Apostles so styled? What better appellation had Memnon or Cyrill
from the Nestorians Acta Concilial. Ephesians. tom. ^. Acta Council Ephesians. c. 1. p.
774. and sequ^^.
? But for the damned in Hell, I am so far persuaded of Papal charity (from
their fiery Chariots) that I doubt not but they would adventure an other
Powder Plot to blow us up to Heaven, upon condition, that his Usurpations in
darkness be not unlightned, and so troubled with us on earth.

But the Jesuit is impatient, and would scorn away this presage. As though
(says he) there has not been a general peace for many ages before the
stirring of Luther and his rebellious rout, notwithstanding that the Pope did
always keep the same rule in GODS house Reply page 80
?

The Jesuit to exempt the Bishop of (...) from being a disturber of the peace
of the Church* would prove it from the experience of his peaceable government
before Luthers time. But he might know that there has been no peace at all,
that we might call the peace of GOD, where he has borne any control: For is
it probable that Peace should proceed from him that was always, or the most
part at war? How many Schisms were there in the Roman See Stapleton. Doctr.
Princip. l. 23. c. 15. Schismata Romans Ponti^icum viginti numerantur.
? If they could not agree upon their Peacemaker, must they not be at war
themselves? Had it not been the best course in those times to bring peace to
the Church, for to have excluded them altogether from government?

But if so great peace were in the Roman Church as you pretend, why did the
Pope condemn your representative Church of Basil Epistola Synodalis contra
invectiva^ factam nomine Eugenij Papae, -- qui Epistolae illius exordio dicere
ausus est. Patres in Concili^ congregatos jam fere septem annis ab ipse Christi
Vicario, and a^ suprem^ Apostolica^ Roman^ sede Christianorum matre tree and
capite segregates esse.
, when your Roman Church had censured him for a Schismaticke Council. Basil.
Sess. 34.
. If we by a spirit of giddiness be divided, because there are (as the
Jesuit says) above a hundred several sects and varying opinions amongst us
Reply page 24.
; what shall be concluded concerning them, that in the hight of their tyranny
and leonine peace, have had six hundred, and such as were begotten by
posthabiting the Gospels Epistles and Christian wisdom Cornel. Mus. com* Romans
6. page 279. Vigebat Spinosa and molesta nescio quae Theologia de instantibus,
de Relationibus, de Quidditatibus etc. Tota pene aetas in hominum decretis,
quae inter se pugnantia semper, nullo tempore reconcilianda, alunt perpetuum
per secula litem centerebatur, etc. Is sublimis Theologus habebatur, qui majora
portenta pro suis Traditiunculis fingere sciat etc. Minc SEXCENTAE Sectae,
Thomistae, Scotistae, Occhamistae, Albertistae, Egidiani, Alexandr^i, etc. O
sec^^^, posthabebantur Evangelia, Epistolae Christi^^ sapientia delitescebat,
etc.
. Neither can the Jesuit glory in their Roman peace, when in Ferus his
judgment, In omnibus gentibus major est concordia quam inter Christianos, at
the time the Pope kept the greatest rule in the Church, there was more concord
in any nation then amongst the Christians (...). 3. De (...) Domini
. And from what fountain came these quarrels? He (...) it will dec^are;
Because their (...) were not as our (...): (...) of Peace, [Esay 9.] but of
War Alvar. de planct Eccles. l. ^. art. 5. Nec sunt ^odie Pr^lati principes
pacis, sicut Christus Esaias 9. sed Guerrae.
. And what made the Pope and his Prelates so M^^tiall? Was not the quarrel,
doctrine, and in their divinity the foundation of faith, the Supremacy? What
peace had the Roman Church when Princes resisting their Usurpations, their
Kingdoms were filled with war, with blood? What Unity of faith could make
the son break the bond of nature to his Father, the servant the bond of
faith to his Lord? What peace was there when your Pope denied marriage to the
Clergy, when they bearded your Tyrant, charging him with heresy, and
frantic opinions Lambertus Schafnaburgensis in histor. ann. 1074.
Hildebrandinus Papa cum Epicopis Italiae conveniens, jam frequentibus synodis
decreverat, ut secundum instituta antiquorum canonum, presbyteri uxores non
habeant etc. Adversus hoc decretum protinus vehementer interfremuit tota ^actio
Clericorum hominem plane haer^ticum and vesani dogmatis esse clamitans, qui
oblitus sermonis Domini, quo ait; Non omnes capiunt hoc verbu^ qui potest
capere capiat. Et Apostolus: Qui se non con^inet, nubat; melius est (...)
n^bere quam u^i: (...) exactione homines vi^ere cogerat, titu Angelorum, and
dum consuetum cur^^n naturae negaret fornicationi, and immundiciae fraena
laxaret.
?

You talk of Peace, and will have the Tyrant the Peacemaker, when like a
cursed Ismael his hand has been against every man, and every man's against him
Genesis 16. 12.
. What Prince was not an Heretic or Schismaticke that resisted his will? What
Priest or People were not condemned, persecuted, that would not stoop to this
golden Calfe? Peace you have had, but it has been amongst your own, such as
Gr^gory speaks of, that the ministers of Antichrist shall be knit together
like the scales of (...) Greg. Moral. l. 33. c 24. Quia membra Leviathan
istius, id est, iniquos omnes quos Dei sermo, squamarum compactionibus
comparat, ad defensionem suam par culpa co^cordat, been dicitur; Vna alteri
adhaerebunt, and tenentes se, (...) abun^ur.
: and this Peace the Turks have, and how have they got it think you, but as
your Popes have obtained theirs, by the strangling of their brethren? Could not
the Arians say, that all peace was amongst Arians, when they execrated the
Catholic world? And who can speak against Roman Peace, when by their Bulla
coenae they excommunicate all the world but Heretics? This Peace may be found
amongst the wicked; Nay, Hell it self cannot stand without it. The Jesuit
has an other defense for their Makebate; yet when he should protect their
Pope, he tattles of a rule, and expresses it with notorious falsehood. The
which rul^ (says he) if it be (as he says) the only hinderance of peace,
when^e then have they such mortal discord amongst themselves where the rule of
this supercilious Master has not power Reply page ^^
.

Our Iarres are his Crambe, which he always chowes, and cannot digest; yet it
has been answered him, and palpably declared, that they are only such as
proceed from breath of men not well advised, and not from any essential
difference in the foundation of faith, when theirs have been in all ages for
the maine point of Papal faith, the bounds of their Monarchy and Supremacy,
which to defend, they have abused Paul's sword in raising war, and Peter's
keys by excommunicating Azo^. ins^. mor. ^om (...). c. 43.
for their private and corrupt ends.

But the Jesuit to get this Argument, does faigne the most learned Answerer to
make this supercilious Master, the only hinderance of Peace; which I cannot
find in the words cited by the Jesuit; Neither do I think, our most divine
Ecclesiastes did at that time free Earth or Hell from assisting his Holiness
in this work of division.

For the Iesu^tes inquiry, How chance they have no better peace at least one
with an other, and his re^olution. Let us speak plain in Gods name, and tell
the truth and say, that it is a supercilious Master indeed, the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience Reply page 1^
. What our variances are, I have showed, to wit, that they be otherwise, then
the Jesuit would enforce them.

But for the spirit that works in the children of disobedience, I would not
have the Jesuit to suspect the spirit that informs his Faction, so for to
direct us. This is the Angel of your Monarchy, neither could your ^actions
Doctrines get head otherwise, in regard they were ever thought to have their
ground from Hell. So Carolus Cal^^^, Quis hanc (...)? Quis Tart^rus de suis
abditis and (...) Constitut. Imperial. a Golda^^^ edit. tom. 1. page 24. 25.
. Why should your Pope John the XII. drink the Devils health? but that he was
his gracious Lord, or his especial Familiar Ottonis Magni and Synodi Romanae
literae ad Johan. Papam XII. apud Luitpran. Ticinens. Histor. l. 6. c. 10.
Dicunt and aliud auditu ipso horridum Diaboli vos in a^orem vim^^ b^bisse.
? What has your B^^onius brought out of the Vatican Library, but a
demonstration, that Satan was let loose to the destruction of the whole Church
Guiliel. Senens. Archi^p. in literis ad Alexandrum tertium Pontificem ex
Vaticana Bibliotheca edit. per Baron. Annal. tom. 12. an. 1170.. 9. Ibi
solvitur Sa^anas in (...) ^^tius Ecclesiae.
? Besides this it is most apparent, that some of your Popes Nic. Lyra^us in
morali gloss a ad 19. c. 2. l. Macc. Per Alchi^um, qui Demetrio coronam auream,
and palma^ obtulit, ut per hoc summum sacerdotium obtineret, significatur
ambitiosus in tantum quod facit DIABOLO sacri^icium; ut per ^oc promoveatur ad
dignitatem: sicut referet Gui^^ermus in Chronica de quodam nomine Gebertus, qui
per hoc ascendit ad Archiepiscopa^^m (...) ad Ravemensem, and post ad statur
PAPALEM. Aeneas Sylvius in com (...) Basil. Council. l. 1. Ne^. nos fugit
Marcellinum jussu Caesareo idolis thurificasse aliud vero, quod majus and
horribilius est, DIABOLICA fraud Romanum Pontificatum a^^^ndisse. Ioh. Trith^m
in Chronic. Hirsangiens. ann. 1081. In Brixinensi Synodo Hild^brandum, quod per
a^tem Magi^am, Necromanticam, and D^MONVM suffragio s^dem Apostolicam invaserit
accusa^^^. Et ipsa Decreti (...) conceptis (...) ex^^^ ^ Conrado (...) Abbate
(...). Divinationum ac (...) cultorem, manifestum (...) cum, P^THONICO spiritu
laborantem, and id^irco a vera ^ide exorbitantem, judicamur canonice deponendum
and expellendum; and nisi ab ipsa Sede, his auditis, descenderit, in perpetuum
condemnandum.
, Roman Factions Matthew. Paris. Chronic. Greg. Papa, confessus est (...) DIABO^O
se iram and odium inter hum^n^m genus concitasse. Aventin. (...). Boiorum. l.
6. page 4^0. Per trigin^a tres ann^s a Gregori^ and Vrbano continenter
sanguin^, o^ium belligeratum est.
* Roman miracles See before page 13. and 95.
, Roman Cardinals Wiccliff. in speculo militantis Ecclesiae. c. 10. M^. in
Bibliotheca Regia Westmonaster. Quae major infidelitas, quam approbare
electiones Cardinalium qui ex nobis indubi^ sunt DIABOLI incarnati.
, had their birth from Hell? Was there not intelligence from Hell, if your own
lie not? Did not your black Prince congratulate your Cleargi^ for your dayli^
(...) of souls unt^ him Mat. Paris histor. ann. Dom. 107^. Satanas and omne
contubernium infernoru^ omni Ecclesi^stico coetui gratias ^misit* quod (...) in
nullo ^ui^ voluptatibus d^essent, tantum numerum subditarum sibi animar^m,
(...) praedicationis incuri^, paterentur ad INFERNA descendere, qua^tum secula
nunquam ^^troacta viderunt*
. Have not your own mourned, that the Devils spirit has posted it amongst
your Clergy? But it may be, with Cosma^ Pr^gensis Cosm. Prag. Chronic. Bohe^.
l. 2. in anno 1073. His diebus venerat Roman Mat^ildis (...), quae post ob^tu^
Patris sui Boni^acij ^otius Lo^gobardiae simul and (...) suscepit regni (...),
^^bens potestatem eligendi and (...) ^ive ^liminandi CXX. super* (...). Hujus
quasi prop^^ae Dominae ad ^^tum (...) ordo parebat, and ipse Gregorius Papa per
^amdirina and humana negotia disponebat: quia ^rat sapienti^^^^^ consi^^atrix,
and in omnibus adversitatibus ^ive necessitatibus Romanae Ecclesiae maxima
fautrix^
, and O^^phrius Onuphrius in vita Ioha^^i VIII. Johannes XII. -- (...)
adoleseens Papa factus, aliquo^ (...); ^^ Luitprandus Ticinensis ^^^orum
temporum scriptor. l. 6. c. 6. and 7. tradit, habuit, in his praecipue ^rant
Ioanna, (...), and (...) igitur Papa, and ejus item scorto Ioanna, ad cujus
^orte arbitrium tanquam ^^pa (...) Romae pendebant Ioannis ^oemin^ Papae fabula
manavit.
, you may pretend, that some ^eude Queanes, and not the Devil, governed your
S. Peter! But if this be granted, it is not sufficient to conclude, but that
the Devil may direct them. And although you make a show of antiquity, yet he
that observed this Ruler of Gods house, and the Clergy by whose ministry he
ruled, tells us, that they took great pains ne ^^li ad Tar^^ra veniant, that
they might not go to hell without company (...). Dialog. de ^^^dest and
libero arbit^. ad calcem 2. tomi Auctarij Bibliothecae Patrum, edit: Paris. an.
1610. Totis viribus laborant, ne soli etc.
; So attentive they were to the ancient Doctrine. Do you think the Devil
plays ^ex only in his own Kingdom? No, assure your selves; no more then
the Pope Pontifex only at Rome; for though he swayes not universally, yet many
States ^eele his secret practices, to work division amongst those that are
united to the truth. Is not this the greatest part of your work to make
sedition, to break peace? Divide and impera is not a lesson that the Jesuits
are now to learn, seeing it has been their daily practice* Did. Compe^. D^
Jesuit. (...) ^ 27. ^ Watson Quod^. 3. art 4. p. ^^.
. And although the Jesuit would now excuse it, I cannot see but the Christian
Commonwealth at this time is pestred by their Vrbanus or Turbanus, as
Cardinal Benno styled an other of the like Condition, and of the same name
Benno in vita Hildebrand.
. So that the Jesuits pretenses to free his Supercilious Master from being
that which he was justly styled, are too vain and light, there being no hope,
that we shall fee a general peace for matters of Religion settled to the
Christian world, as long as he is suffered to keep this rule in Gods house The
Jesuit might have taken notice of what was urged by the most reverend Primate
immediately before those words whereas he carpeth, in the Sermon preached
before his Majesty, page 13. 14. viz. That Nilus Arch bishop of Thessalonica,
entering into the consideration of the original ground of that long continued
schism, whereby the West stands as yet divided from the East, and the Latin
Churches from the (...), wrote a whole book purposely of this Argument,
wherein he shows, that there is no other cause to be assigned of this
distraction, but that the Pope will not permit the cognizance of the
controversy unto a general Council* but will needs sit himself as the alone
Teacher of the point in question, and have others hearken unto him as if they
were his Scholars, and that this is contrary both to the ordinances, and the
practice of the Apostles and the Fathers. thereunto we may add the testimony
of their own Cassander consult. Art. 7. de Ecclesia vera. Neque unquam credo,
controversia apud nos de externa Ecclesiae unitata extitisse^ nisi Pontifices
Romani hac authoritate ad dominationis quandam speciem abusi fuissent, eamque
extra fines a Christo and Ecelesia peaescriptos ambitionis et cupiditatis causa
^utulissent.
.

But returning again to the Answer, he tells us, that, Our Answerer
alleges for himself the example of S. Cyprian, who with the rest of the
African Bishops, dissented from the Pope and Church of Rome, without being cut
off from the Catholic Communion. To which the Jesuit replies, that this is
easily answered, forasmuch as the point wherein S. Cyprian did vary from the
Pope, was not declared by the Church, until after S. Cyprians death, and
therefore it might have been maintained without any breach of Catholic Unity
Reply page 80:
.

What he speaks concerning the Churches declaration, will have a more fit
place hereafter. But to show how little the Jesuit has spoken for his cause,
we may first consider, That Cyprians opinion was condemned by your Pope and
his Council, and the contrary defined Bellar. l. 2. de Council c. 5. Constat --
Cornelium Papam cum nationali Concilio omnium Episcoporum Italiae, statuisse
non debere haereticos rebapti^^ri, et eundem sententiam postea approbasse
Stephanum Papam, et jussisse ut haeretici non rebaptizarentur*
, yea S. Cyprian himself excommunicated, and so severely dealt withal by Pope
Stephen, that he would not admit the African Legates to speak with him; but
styling Cyprian a Counterfeit, said, that CHRIST did deny any Communion to be
held with him Cassander Consult. ar. 7. Cum Stephanus Episcopus Romae utbis
Cyprianum, quod in ipso erat, repelleret, and Episcoposa^ ipsum ex Africa
legatos, nec ad sermonem communis colloquij admitteret, and praecip eret
universae fraternitati, -- ut venientibus non solum pax and communio, sed and
tectum and hospitium negaretur: insuper and Cyprianum Pseudo. Christum and dolo
sum operarium diceret. Haec scribit Firmilianus Episcopus e Cappadocia ad
Cyprianum; cujus Firmiliani meminit Eusebius Histor. 6, l. c. 25. and l: 7. c.
13. Ad quem Stephanus scripsit, non esse communicandum ijs, qui ad Haereticos
transcuntes rebaptizant.
. All which did not make the declaration of the Church in Augustines opinion;
so that we may easily perceive, that Augustine did not think the Pope to be
the Church, or his declaration to be the Churches definition. And indeed what
toil did Vincentius Lyrinensis Advers. prophan. Novat.
take in vain, if the Pope could define alone; if there were no true knowledge
of Scriptures, but where he gapes: if for him CHRIST only prayed?

Besides, see what Church did define this; Not the Roman out of which Cyprian
was excommunicated and never reconciled, but that for which Cyprian shed his
blood Augustine. l. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 32. Non accipio quod de baptizandis
haereticis et schismatics B. Cyprianus sensit quia hoc Ecclesia non accipit pro
qua B. Cyprianus sanguinem fudit.
, to wit, the true Catholic, which with Cyprian is every Maundy Thursday by
their Bulla Coenae excommunicated at Rome. And therefore the Jesuit has
unwisely urged S. Augustines words against the Donatists, Put your selves into
that Church which as it is manifest, S. Cyprian defended, and then may you
allege S. Cyprians authority for your Doctrine Reply page 81.
. It being plain that the Roman Schismatickes accuse and accurse that Church,
in which Cyprian dyed a blessed Martyr, accompting it no further Catholic
then it is Roman.

All that follows is chafe. Finally (says the Jesuit) I would our Answerer
did observe in this example, how notwithstanding so many Bishops as in Afric
joined with S. Cyprian (who in number were more then are in all his Majesty's
dominions) yet was there found a superior Church, that did control them all
herein, prescribing both to them and others, what they ought to follow and
believe: by whose authority S. Augustine, as we have heard, and all the rest of
the African Bishops, did reject that opinion of S. Cyprian, and embraced the
contrary Reply page 81.


First we may see, that the Bishop of Rome had not so peaceable a dominion, as
the Jesuit pretends, if so many Bishops did resist his controuling, as the
Jesuit acknowledges.

Secondly, you may see his falsehood in his cautelous conveighance, laboring to
persuade, that the Roman Church was the superior Church, having authority to
control them all, and to prescribe to them and others what they ought to
follow and believe: whenas Augustine never dreamed of it; when he and the
African Bishops always resisted and disdained it See before page 301.
. That they did not adhere to Cyprians opinion, the reason was not, because it
was condemned by the Roman Bishop or his Roman Church; but because out of the
sacred Scripture by a lawful Council Council Nicen
of the Catholic Church it was detected as erroneous and false.

But whilst our Adversaries do not acknowledge any such superior Church, what
wonder (says the Jesuit) that they live forlorn, consumed, and confounded
with ^dious discord and debate amongst themselves, and deprived of all true
faith, forasmuch as they refuse to listen unto her, by whom God has decreed
all faith should be delivered unto his people throughout the world Reply page
81.
.

This is but fuming froth. We acknowledge a Catholic Church as superior to
all particular Churches in the world; But we say, your Roman is so far from
being it, that it gains well, if it appear a true member thereof, when it
comes to be examined. What is there no God, but at Dan and Bethel? Must your
Calves measure true worship, or your Excommunicating the Levites, make the
Catholic to be no Church? It is not your censuring of all others for
Heretics, that can exempt you from being Schismatickes, any more then the
Donatists which did the like.

Being then aliens from this Church, wherein, and no where else, the right
Christian faith is certain to be found, they must not wonder (says the
Jesuit) that we should thus bewail them as perished and lost Reply page ^^
.

For your bewayling us; as perished and lost, it is but a fetch of your
Hypocrisy. I could wish your tears, if you shed any, were bestowed upon your
selves who need them. We (...) know the temper of your tears too well. How
bewailed you the French Massacre, the Butchery of Princes, but with tears of
blood, with groans of applause See the Oration of Pope Sixtus the fifth, upon
the death of the French King, Henry the third.
.

The places which you brought out of the Fathers against Schismatickes, do
most properly point out your selves, and therefore ill chosen to discredit us.
Take then your own charge unto your selves, who justly deserve it; for
howsoever you glory, as if you only had the Church of CHRIST (which we do
not) it will not therefore follow, that you belong unto his consecration, in
regard you are separated from the body of CHRIST, keeping neither Communion nor
Unity with the whole, and being sequestered by your selves do censure all that
will not forsake the liberty of CHRIST, and hold from you in villainy and
Vassalage.

Whereas the Jesuit thinks to despise the Answerers Church by his frames of
folly and falsehood, tearming it ^ Church lurking in a corner of the earth,
obscure and in glorious, that can neither obtain friendship with any abroad,
nor yet maintain agreement in itself at home Reply page 8.
.

We know the true Church many times does lurk; when the where sits as Queen,
and knows no sorrow Rev. 18. 2.
: Yet it is not so obscure, but it has enlightened the world, that it can
despise your outward glory, and deride your lies in Hypocrisy, your tales of
Hobgoblins, your deceit from Purgatory, your holiness for gain, and new
declarative doctrines.

Secondly, we hold peace with the Catholic Church, as has been manifested;
when you have and do really excommunicate it. And in fundamentalls both with
them and amongst our selves we are faithfully knit together, (although there
be some differences in matters of n^ absolute consequence, which the purest
Churches have been ever subject unto;) when you are not agreed, who is only
able to teach uncontroul^ably an infallible point of doctrine, whether a
Council, or the Pope Francise. ^icus Theorem. 16. Fuere qui di^erent Concilium
in ^ausa fidei praeesse Pontifici, fuere qui Pontificem Concilio praeponerent:
alia etiam quaestio, utrum sine Pontifice, utrum ^o ^efragante, convocari
colligique possit. Bellarm* l. 2. de Concili^* cap. 13. Sed dum. Vsque ad hunc
diem quaestio superest.
. When your Church is so far from holding freindship with other Church^^,
that it maliciously sets it self against the whole, rai^ing wars and tumults
against the true members thereof, as lately against the Greeks, and eve^
against that part of the Latin Church that refused her command, as the Monks
of Bangor, the Waldenses etc. can well witness. And although you are
continually speaking of dissentions, yet the best judgments and wisest eyes
that our ages have afforded, have found your peace to be but the outward effect
of Policy, not natural from truth, but forced from* your bloody lawe^ and
cruellest Inquisition.

What is further urged against Schismatickes out of the Fathers, we assent
unto: Which the Jesuit well know, and therefore tells us, I know our
Answerer here will say, that these heavy threats, admonitions and exhortations
of the ancient Fathers do make nothing against him at all, forasmuch as he
pretends himself to be within the true Church already Reply page* ^5
.

Here we may perceive the Jesuit has taken a great deal of pains to little
purpose: For whereas he should have proved us to have been schismatickes,
before he had given sentence against us* he as it seems; according to the
practice of their Inquisition (with Hallyfax-law) condemns first, and
enquires for the Schismatic afterward, and so poorly, that a Jury of moral
honest Papist^ rightly informed, would find an Ignoramus upon his bill* for he
brings us no proof, but repeates what he has formerly done.

But howsoever (says the Jesuit) he is able with this ^ond conceit to s^oth
up, and quiet his own Conscience, ^ doubt not but other^ many will be found, who
taking more t^ ^eart the business of their salvation, will ponder advisedly
what Church the holy Fathers above produced do point at, and whether they
declare it not plain enough to be the Roman Church embracing in her holy
Communion all Christian Churches of the earth, out of which our Adversaries are
confessedly departed, and have erected to themselves a new Congregation, so
far unlike unto that Vnivers^ll and Apostolical Church designed by the
Fathers, that neither in other Nation^ does she find any other Churches to
join in one sincere Communion with her, nor yet is able to maintain agreement
amongst her own at home it self, as above has been abundantly declared
Reply page* ^^
.

We have showed in answer to that which the Jesuit has formerly produced,
that the Fathers never thought the Roman Church to be the Catholic, nor
dreamed of necessary Communion with her any further then she communicated with
the Catholic Church, teaching that Truth* which was first delivered by the
Apostles. And that we have left your Roman schism, it is just (as before is
declared) in regard you have gone out of the Catholic Church, and corrupted
and depraved the Catholic Faith.

The repetition of Lutheran and Puritan accusations might have been spared,
seeing they have been urged and answered before, where the Reader may see not
only the Pope and the Council of Basil, but also whole fraternities of
Orders accused and charged with Schism or Heresy.

Whatsoever in this Section follows, is but the t^ar^ of a Crocodile, or the
preaching of a Fox, an Homily made of what has been answered before. That
which we are now to examine, is the Jesuits ensuing Discourse, wherein he
promises to show, that

SECT: XI.
Our Answerer by Vanity offers wrong t^ Truth and Charity Reply page* 87
.

This our Jesuit makes the Scope of his XI Section, which he doubts not to
make as manifest, as he has done his former undertakings, with a nil ultra; I
hope we have given sufficient satisfaction (says he) unto our Answerers
de^a^^nd, when he enquired, whether I was able to show one point wherein he and
his have broken that Harmony which Iraeneus commends in the Catholic Church
of his time Reply page* 87
.

Mr Malone is not so good in his payments as banque^o^ts, for they will pay
debts with good words, but the Jesuit thinks, he can satisfy all with
invectives, and with the same Method (wanting matter, as they money to pay)
quarrels with the form, or by out-facing pretends the debt satisfied, when
(poor man) he has only snarled a little against the specialtie; for that
which he terms to be the holy Catholic Church has been declared a Schism;
and that, the Catholic Church is not enclosed within the mountains, but
dispersed ^ver the face of the earth (with which we communicate and are
members*) has been sufficiently declared, to which we refer the Reader.

And now (says he) a^ we have ^ully ^^sw^red ^nt^ his demand, so have we just
cause to complai^^ that he has not given us any re^^^^tion of that which I
propound^d when I d^sired him to tell, whether of us both have the true
Religion; we who do not disagree with the ancient Church in any one point, or
they who agree with it in very few, and disagree in almost all? Observe I pray
you how vainly he shapeth his answer (...) unto R^^l^ page* 88
etc. Indeed if that which the Jesuit affirms for granted could as easily
be proved, as it is bouldly avouched, (says the most reverend Primate) the
question would quickly be resolved, whether of us both have the true religion?
But he is to understand, that strong conceits are but weak proofs: and that
the Jesuits have not been the first, from whom such brags as these have been
heard. Diosc^rus the heretic, was as p^arte, when he uttered these speeches
in the Council of Chalcedon. I am cast out with the Fathers, I defend the
doctrine of the Fathers, I transgress them not in any point: and I have their
testimonies not barely, but in their very books Answ* page ^^
.

L^e here what a flourish of words he has unf^ulded, and not one to the
purpose etc Reply page* ^8.
.

You see that the most reverend Primate his Answer justly conceives that such
a Proposition as the Jesuit desires to be resolved in, supposes, that (by the
confession of our Church*) either antiquity speaks only for them and against
our selves, or else that the supposition is so clear in it self that it
cannot be denied: Then which nothing is more ridiculous, and therefore, you
were a little too hasty (M. Malone) as the most learned Answerer tells you to
^ry out. Whether of us both have the true Religion? and might have done well
indeed to have bethought your self more advisedly of that which you had
undertaken to perform: as also to have remembered the saying of the King of
Israel unto B^nh^d^d; Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast
himself, as he that puts it off. For if you can convince us, that we agree
not with the ancient Church in any one point, we will plead guilty, and
confess our error, if you can justify your selves, by the ancient doctrine
of the Catholic Church, we will recan^ the charge of Apostasy, which now we
deservedly cast upon you; In the mean time we know, that such as you can
pretend with Diosc^rus, the doctrine of the Fathers, when indeed you exclude
them, and foyst upon the Christian world, old Gibeonitish mustinesse of
Decretall Epistles, and false birthes to prove you to be ex genere antique when
for all this your chiefest Heralds stagger at your Pedigree; so that his
learned Answer, is not a flourish of words, but a detection of your folly,
who supposing in your Challenge that to be confessed by us which is the point
in controversy, would vainly flatter your self, as if you had borne us down
with the weight of the authority of the Fathers, and so astonished us
therewith, that we could not tell what to say for our selves; whenas you had
not laid down so much as the name of any one Father at that time. But you
ask the question.

Why may not Dioscorus his peartenes in bragging so of the holy Fathers when
they least of all made for him be applied unto our Answerer, vainly boasting
of them in the same nature, rather then to us, who have alleged their assured
authorities for our cause so abundantly Reply page 88
?

This is nothing to the purpose; (let him be like whom he will,) it is apparent
by Dioscorus that men may pretend a property in that, which is none of their
own, as the Devil, and the Pope, in the kingdoms of the world; which being
granted, it cannot be denied, but you may also pretend that Scriptures and
antiquity make for you, when truly and re ver a, they batter you, and beat
you down.

And although it be nothing to the point controverted that the Jesuit speaks
of Dioscorus, yet we may consider it without offense. He tells us, Dioscorus was
condemned and cast out for maintaining his own opinion against that of the
whole Council Reply page 88
, Not so, but an heretical opinion, he might have varied from a whole
Council in a truth as your Panormitane insinuates Panorm. super. p. Decret.
Deelect. etelec. potestate c. signif. Quod si Papa movere tur melioribus
rationibus et auctoritatibus quam Concilium, quod standum esset sententiae
suae: nam et Concilium potest errare etc. In concernentibus fidem etiam dictum
unius privati esset praeferendum dicto PAPAE si ille moveratur melioribus
rationibus e^ auctoritatibus novi and veteris testamenti, quam Pap^.
. And had our Answerer lived in those days, would he not think you, have
received the like censure of the said Council for denying unto the Pope that
Supremacy Reply page ^^
etc.

A fancy, the Council you dare not stand to, you in part except against it,
and in a point that comes near the Supremacy Bin^not in Conc. Chaleed. verb.
Concilium Decretum illud act. 16. quo Patres Council. absentibus legatis and
postea reclamantibus Constantinopolitanae sedi primatum attribuerunt, ideo,
quod instar Romae caputi^^perij effects, primatum meruerit, velut illegittimum
a Leone Pontifice justissi^^ improbatum fuit. Supponit enim, quod Romana seeds
tunc primatum habere merucrit, cum Romani orbis imperio potiretur, atque adeo
non divino, sed humane jute caput Ecclesiarum effecta fuerit.
. It might have been that the Council of Trent or such like might have made
good your word, but in a true and legitimate assembly of pious persons (such as
Chalcedon was) it would never have been done; for they would have
distinguished, betwixt pretenses and truths, betwixt an heretical sound and a
true allegation.

Your crambe has received his answer before, to which I refer the reader,
yet all that is here produced, prooves nothing, first that the Pope was head;
that is Praeses concilij, head of the representative Church; secondly this is
declared by a similitude. Tu quidem sicut membris caput pr^^ras, Thou sit
President as the head over the members Reply page 12
: which is nothing; for will the Pope claim by the similitude, and not
acknowledge a dissimilitude, Balaams ass spoke ( sicut heme,) yet no man,
Balaam* gave his resolution ( sicut Prophet^,) yet no Prophet: The beast had
two horns, like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon Revel. 13. 11.
; so the Pope may be sicut caput, in usurpation, but no head established by
Christ. Only your new addition Vine^ custodia a Salvatore commissa est [to
whom the charge of this Vineyard was committed by our Saviour] sure should be
to some effect; yet what makes this to your Papal height? Indeed it may prove
your Pope a Pastor but not a Prince of the Church: For to whom is the custody
of the Flock of CHRIST committed, but to every Archippus? Which Flock (I
think) the Jesuit will not deny to be the Vineyard of the Lord: So that you
see the Jesuit has done as much as an heretic for his Dalilah, his defiled
M^^, he has pretended her beauty, comelines, ancient Progenitors, when indeed
it is all but painting, (or as he charge the Answerer,) but a flourish.

And now the Jesuit challenges the most reverend Primate with breach of
Courtesy, because in bitter terms, he inveigheth against him, vizt the Pope
who never did him any hurt, calling him a supercilious Master, the King of
Pride Reply page ^^
etc. But will M. Malone tell us the ground of the Popes mild countenance and
courteous behavior toward the learned Answerer, that he never yet did him any
hurt? It is not I think because his affection diswades it, but because he is
out of his reach By the Faculties of the Carmelites (a coppie whereof being
lost in the streets of ^ublin remains in my hands) they have power to
reconcile Heretics, but you must conceive it is in places where they cannot
destroy where their Inquisitionis not in force Facultates concessae ^ SS. mo D.
N. D. VRBANO divina providen. P. P. VIII. Fratribus Carmelitis Discalceatis
infrascriptis in Missione Hibernica and alijs Regis maga^ Britanniae Regnis
versantibus. 1. Reconciliandi Haereticos (...) nationis dummodo non sint ex
partibus in qui bus exercetur sanctum. Inquisitionis officium.
, not within the compass of his cruelty, for otherwise it is to be suspected,
that they love him, as well, as Crammer, Ridley, Hooper, and the other good
Bishops, that he sent to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire. And this (without doubt)
the Jesuit believed, or else he would not have reviled the most reverend
Primate in such a shameless manner, as he has done, throughout his whole
discourse.

But what evil has the Answerer done? John the Baptist calls those wretches
which fought against the Kingdom of God, a Generation of vipers Mat. 3. 7^
; yet they never provoked him with personal injury; and John the Evangelist
calls another of like temper Abbadon and Apo^^yon Revel. 9. 11.
, whom he saw by the Spirit of Prophecy to be such a pest to the Church of
God, as he now proves himself. And we have heard of a man of sin 2 Thessalonians.
11. 3. 4.
, that the Spirit of God checked with more bitter terms, then are here given
him by the learned Answerer. What has he sinned by being in his appellation
too merciful to usurpation, to cruelties?

You ought then to pardon, not to accuse his clemency. Those that have lived
in the Popes own Communion neither thought nor speak so tenderly of him
Aventin. Annal. Boiorum l. 7. Flamines illi BABYLONIAE soli regnare cupiunt,
far pacem non possunt. non desistent, donec omnia pedibus suis
conculcaverint. -- Ingentia loquitur, quasi vero Deus osset. Aventin. Annal.
Boiom^ l. 5. Falsi tum Prophetae, false Apostoli, falsi sacerdotes emersere,
qui simulata religione pop^lum decepert^^ ^^magna signa at^ prodigia ediderunt:
and in templo Dei sedere atque extolli super omne, id quod colitur, coeperunt.
Dumque suam putentiam dominationemque stabilire conantur, charitatem,
simplicitatem Christianam (...). Bernardus Morlanensis in 3. l. de Contemptu
mund^. Rexo BABYLONIS.
neither did he deserve it Greg. VII. Regest. l. 2. post epist. 55. tom. 3.
Council. edit. Binn. par. 2. Dictatus Papae: Quod solus possit uti imperialibus
insignijs. Quod foling Papae pedes omnes Principes deosculentur. Quod illius
solius nomen in Ecclesijs recitetur. Quod unicum est nomen in mundo. Quod illi
liceat Imperatores deponere. Lib 1. Ceremon. Eccles. Romanae.
. So that this charge is just; for it is not washing feet dissembling titles,
that can preserve him from being the King of Pride. For paint pride and paint a
Cardinal Nicol. de Clemangis, de corrupto Ecclesiae statu. c. 10. Si artifet
quisque vellet superbiae similachrum offingere, nulla congruentius ratione id
facere posset, quam Cardinalis effigiem oculis intuentium objectando.
* Now I hope you will not deny the Pope to be their King.

Neither can his vain pretenses of Scriptures, or fathers, free him from being
a supercilious Master, in regard he will be the only Doctor and Master of the
Church, for who knows not, that Christ must teach by his gloss Hosius in fine
libri de expresso Dei verbo. Quod Ecclesia docet, expressum Dei verbum esse,
quod contra sensum and consensum Ecclesiae docetur, expressum Diaboli verbum
esse.
* and servus servorum given in humility, is but the contrary of his
practical pride Aventin. Annal. Boiorum. ^7. page 547. Quiservus servorum est,
dominus dominerum, perinde ac st Deus foret, esse cupit. Sacres coetus atque
concilia statrum, imo dominorum suorum aspernantur.
.

So that we see Dioscorus his saying is well applied, and the Jesuit has said
nothing material, in opposition against it, he likes it not, that Heretics
were used to forsake Scriptures, and adhere to Fathers, and herein consists the
strength of his confutation.

Now as this of Dioscorus has not been received by him, with any good relish,
so what the most reverend Primate says further in this particular, is
displeasant also: I will put them down at large, that the Reader may observe
this Astmaticall Jesuit, in this particular to pant for breath.

Neither need we wonder (says the most learned Answerer) that he should bear
us down, that the Church of Rome, at this day does not disagree from the
Primitive Church, in any point of Religion: who sticks not so confidently to
affirm, that we agree with it but in very few, and disagree in almost all See
the most reverend the L. Primate his answer to the Jesuits challenge page 24.
.

To the first, the Jesuit says, it is his constant assertion, that the Church
of Rome, at this day, does not disagree from the primitive Church, in any point
of Religion Reply page 89.
.

Secondly that neither the learned Answerer, nor any of ours, have ever yet
been able to disproove the same to this day, how eagerly soever they have set
themselves against it Reply page 89
.

Thirdly, (having no more to say, then what his foremen have said before him,)
he referres the Reader to his sound and pregnant evidences, throughout the
whole volume in the particular points propounded Reply ibid.
.

To the Jesuits first Assertion; I answer, that the Jesuit is neither Pope,
nor inspired, and therefore may err.

To the second; the Jesuit must deny what Protestants have learnedly
performed, or else betray his God on earth, and so break his mancipiall
obligation; but as they use to deny any unjust thing, whereof they are
convicted, so of necessity, must they not confess, that evidence whereby they
are overthrown. It is as bad, as heresy, for them to give our writers their
merit Possevin. Bibliothee. select. p. ^30. Vniversa igitur hac ^tactatione
haeresim sapit, quod Lutherum, Calvinum, Melancthonem, caeterosque nominet
honorifice.
, they deny them the honor of their moral parts, and therefore have their
quidam doctus, and terms of that cut Index Hispa^. fol 148. Bucerus
Theologus. Deleatur verbum, Theologus Ibid Hulderico Zuinglio Theologo.
Delcatur Theologo. Ibid. p. 204 Supprimat^^ nomen Calvini: ponatut, studios^s
quidam.
.

Now for your last, your reforment to your evidences, we accept your motion,
and if in them be found any thing else but corruption and confidence, we will
confess you hold with antiquity: But the question is so far from being
resolved, that your endeavors have made your cause more full of jealousy, in
regard, you have stuffed your volume not as you pretend, with multitudes of
convincing evidences, but with counterfeit authors, impertinent allegations, as
has been already discovered and will be further made apparent in the
examination of your reply; Yea you have cast behind you all modesty, in
handling the testimonies, brought against you, by the most learned Answerer,
some passing by altogether as unanswerable, as in the point of Free Will; and
others slightly passing over, as in many points of your Reply.

Another of his Assertions is, that we agree with the Primitive Church but in
very few points of Religion, and disagree in almost all Reply page ^9
.

The most reverend Primate, in his answer, would know where he should find
those few points in which we agree with the ancient Church; whether in the
points controverted betwixt them and us? or else in the whole body of that
religion which we profess? dare the Jesuit acknowledge our agreement with the
Primitive Church in the first. Then he must confess themselves to vary from
us, where we agree with Antiquity and so leaves small credit unto himself,
who with the same breath has given out, that the present Church of Rome does
not disagree with that holy Church in any point. Does he by those few points
wherein he confesses we do agree with the ancient Church mean the whole body
of Religion professed by us? Who sees not then the height of impudency? Can
those points be esteemed few, which in truth contain the Apostles, Nicene and
Athanasian Creeds? Do we not adhere to this Religion? see our Liturgy; do we
not judge heresies by this rule viz. Scripture, Creeds, and four first
general Counsels? See the Statute Anno 2. ^^^zab. inter statut. Hiber^. page
267.
if we approved equivocating, as they learned of Arius, they might suspect us
that we speak not as we believe, as they usually practice; but our words being
plain, our profession, loathing your practices especially in points of faith
and religion; what ground had the Jesuit for these outdaring, and outfacing
calumnies?

See the Jesuits defense at large, I doubt not, but if your cause were good,
you are of ability and learning enough to frame an Argument more soundly, and
to divide more judiciously, then here you have done. For every schooleboy may
discern that by those few points, wherein I confess you agree with the
ancient Church, I could not (...) either of these your two sorts of articles at
all Reply page 89
.

The Jesuit has bestirred himself here to go from this Dilemma; for first
he rayles and revyles the whip, the division that afflicts him, as if it might
more judiciously have bin done, and indeed with a schoole-boyes reason, because
it smarts. For how proves he it not judicious, but because it cannot cohere
with his former words? A wise reason. The division detects the incongruity of
the Jesuits assertions, therefore it might more judiciously have bin done. proh
sapienti^! But the Jesuit by his confession acknowledges, that he could not
mean these words (of our agreeing with the Primitive Church in very few points
of Religion) to have relation either to the points in controversy betwixt them
and us, or to the whole body of our Religion, and that this is so plain, that
a schoole-boy may discern it. And now I would gladly know of the Jesuit a
third member that does not lie under the whole body of our Religion, or our
negative refutes (as they term them) of their Positions additionall, vizt the
points controverted betwixt us.

The Jesuit promises something: If you urge me (says he) to declare what
points of Religion th^se are wherein I confess you do* agree with the ancient
Church Reply. page 90
. Indeed this is the thing we would know, but instead of their enumeration, he
gives us a repetition, I say again they are but very f^w Reply ibid.
, and an addition, yea s^ few, that we may boldly say, they are just none at
all Reply ibid.
. If this be not a mere Bull, carry me to your Cloister, and make a Jesuit of
me; we agree in few, and yet in none at all; Christ's little flock might be no
flock if this were sense. If here the Jesuit be not amazed, let the Reader
applaud him. For if we agree in none with the ancient Church* why do you agree
with us in any? why d^^ you believe one God three (...), Christ's incarnation,
crucifixion, resurrection, and his last coming to Judgment etc. Such as accord
therewith in none at all, are not heretics or schismatickes, but (...)
Atheists and Infidels; and who (...) not but every g^pe of the Jesuit is ad
oppositum, and cross to himself? And here we shall see to what shifts this
Jesuit flies for shelter: the question is, whether we agree with the ancient
Fathers in points of Religion? the Jesuit answers sometimes in very few an
other time in none at all, and here to justify this lashing Hyper^ole, he
tells us. That howsoever some few points might be assigned in the outward
profession whereof you will say you do not vary from the common faith of
Primitive times: yet whilst we can show that in very many points you believe
contrary thereunto, and that with all you hold not with the Church Universal,
but have departed from the same, we may not yield unto you, that your inward
faith can be true and sound in any one article whatsoever, notwithstanding
that from the teeth outward you make profession of this your imaginary
agreement never so much Reply page 9^


All which is sliding and beside the point, for we speak here of doctrine, as
in truth of position it does agree with the ancient Church, and not as it
respects the act of belief in the sincere receiving and embracing of it.
Suppose we have with us as great a dearth of Saints (as you at Rome) that
Protestants were as bad as (...) Popes. Geneb. (...) in ann. Christi 901.
Pontific^^ circiter ^0. -- a virtute majorum prorsus defec^runt Apotactici,
Apostaticive, potius, quam Apostolici.
, yet notwithstanding this will not make the Apostles Creed to be no ancient
faith, neither the ancient doctrine which we hold, to be heretical. Who doubts,
that the denial of one point of the foundation, perversely or expressly atleast,
makes the belief of all the rest uneffectuall? but what will the Jesuit
infer from hence, that therefore we have not in the confession of our Church
one point of Religion, that agrees with antiquity? We might as well argue,
that Arius, Nestorius, a Jesuit, had no true and sound inward faith, therefore
they agreed in no particular doctrines with the ancient Church.

Or would this consequent found well? Many of your Popes have had no true
inward faith (being such monsters as you have painted them) therefore they
agreed in no point of faith with the Primitive Church. if this conclude well,
what will become of Papists, who are only Catholics by dependence, whose
faithes are judged by their adherence to their Head? The Jesuit now runs to
another shift, and that of calumny, charging us, that we make profession of
the ancient faith with an imaginary agreement from the teeth outward Reply page
90
. I must confess we are not so zealous, for that doctrine the ancient Church
has taught us, and the rooting out of your innovations, as we ought to be;
pardon us this: but whether you or we embrace the faith of Christ, practiced
and taught in the ancient Church, with more sincerity, it is not here to be
judged, but must be left to him, that knows the secrets of hearts.

And now we may see, how impertinent the Jesuits allegations are. Augustine
says, that Schismatics separated from the body of the Church, are not in the
Church, and that heretics and schismatics cannot be prof^^^ by the truth they
hold with the Church, being in their heresy and schism^, that those, that keep
not communion with the Church, are heretical and antichristian, according to
Prosper Reply. page 90
. Who denies this, and wherein makes it against us? If we acknowledge things in
controversy, and that Rome were the Church, and our selves schismatics and
heretics, it were something, yet nothing to this purpose, neither of strength
sufficient to prove, that we agree not with the ancient Church in any doctrine
of faith, or point of religion, as he should here manifest, so that we see his
ou^facing cannot protect his impudency, but that he speaks vainly, in
charging us, that we agree with the primitive Church in very few articles of
Religion, and just none at all.

And here Augustine and Prospers words are their cutthroats, who not only
reject communion with the Catholic Church, but judge that Catholic body to be
a schism and heretical, because it will not join in communion with
themselves; and if Augustines and Prospers words may convict a Pope, they have
force in them sufficient to perform it, for though he hold all the doctrine of
the primitive church in show, yet failing in the point of the Church, denying
the authority thereof, and preferring his simple power before the (...)
authority of all the priests of God, against the stream of antiquity, and the
two (...) general Councels of Constance and Basil. Is it not sufficient to
bring him within your capital letters? that his holiness, and others of like
sanctity ARE NOT IN THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH AT ALL. And thus you see that the
Jesuit does both deceive himself and others, when he would persuade, that
upon pain of eternal overthrow all mustadhere to the Pope, who indeed is
taken by them for the ancient Roman Catholic Church: And also that the
doctrine of the Church of Ireland, is sincere and agreeable to the foundation,
neither by heresy forsaking, the doctrine delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, and embraced by the ancient Church; neither by schism, departing
from the body of Christ making their faith uneffectuall. But that rule of faith
(says the most reverend Primate) so much commended by Irenaeus and Tertullian
and the rest of the Fathers; and all the articles of the several Cteedes that
were ever received in the ancient Church, as badges of the catholic
profession, to which we willingly subscribe is with this man almost nothing at
all, none must now be counted a catholic, but he that can conform his belief
unto the Creed of the new fashion compiled by Pope Pius the 4. some four and
fifty years ago See the mo^^ reverend the Lord Primate his Answer (...) the
Iesuit^ challenge page 25.
. The Jesuit tells us that he has already made it known how far we have
strayed from that rule of faith Reply page 91
; and we tell him again that he is deceived in the wanderer, and that we have
manifested it also, and that we do willingly subscribe unto all the articles
of the several Creedes that were ever received in the ancient Church although
the Iugler Iesuita est omnis home.
is jealous we intend nothing less then what we say Reply page 91
. But it is Iesuitisme to remoove the tongue from the heart, equivocating you
defend, we abhor it, why do you suspect us? but upon a sudden the Jesuit
flying from this calumny, without one word to justify it, but his detraction
or Jealousy is rapt up with admiration, shall he say of the ignorance, or the
folly of the Answerer, when he upbraides him with a Creed of the new fashion
compised by Pope (...) the fourth Reply page 91
.

Nullus sapien^ admiratur, M^ Malone; and therefore take the fool with you: And
howsoever you think to defend Pins the fourth by the Practice of the Nicene
Council, it will give you no shelter; they did (you say) express and declare
the ancient faith in a new fashion and form of words Reply ibid.
.

So did Athanasius, so others; but this is not the things for which you are
accused, but it is for an Appendix of twelve new points; many of which were
never accounted of faith till Pius the fourth his time, and therefore your
ground from which you persuade us to embrace it, is unsound, viz^, that it was
compiled after the like manner without any alteration or innovation of the
ancient faith a^ all Reply page 92
.

The ancient faith was so necessary to be believed, that Athanafius tells us,
Whosoever wilbee saved, it is necessary that he hold the Catholic faith, but
your Creed is propounded only to scholars, and cheifely to such as are to
receive promotions unto Scholasticall or Ecclesiastical dignities Reply page
91.
.

Secondly the Apostle S. Jude tells us, that the Faith Catholic was once
delivered, but all your Trent articles are not so, but brought in, in
aftertimes by the authority and definition of your Church, as
Transubstantiation (...) 4. dis^. 11. q. 3. (...) in Can. (...). ^ect. 41.
.

Thirdly, in the unity of the Catholic faith laid down Irenaeus ^. 1. ^.
3. 3^
by Irenaeus, all the founded Churches in Germany, Spain, France, the East,
Egypt, Lybia, and all the world did sweetly agree, but upon many of the new
articles in your Creed, there have been continual wars and controversies
betwixt those that you will acknowledge Catholics, as communicating in one
kind, Purgatory, Indulgences, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches. So
that these points must be additions, or else the Church lost the unity of
Faith, for a long time together.

Fourthly, (...) Lirinensis Vincen. Lirinen. advers. prophan. novat. Cum sit
perfectus Scripturarum canon sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat.
, and other Fathers S. Basil. l. de vera and pia fid Manifesta defectio fidei
est importare quicquam ^orum quae scripta non sunt. S. Hilar l. 2. ad Constable.
Aug. fidem tandem secundum ea quae scripta sunt defiderantem, and hoc qui
repudiat, Antichristu^ est and qui simula^ Anathem a e^^. S. August l. 2. de
doct. Christ. c. 9. In ijs quae aperte in scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur
illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
, and some Schoolmen Scotu^ Prolog. in Sent. q. 2 Scriptura sufficienter
continet doctrina^ necessaria^ viatori. Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. a 10. ad 1. In
Doctrina Christi and Apostolorum veritas fidei est sufficienter explicita.
, make the Scripture sufficient to ^each all points of faith, but many articles
of this Creed are confessed by you to be delivered by tradition only, and not
by Scripture Coster. in compend. orthodoxae fidei demonstr. (...). 5. c. 2p.
162.
: so that you see you have vainly sought your defense from the practice of the
Nicene Fathers. It had been better I think (Mr Malone) that you had taken
another kind of defense, and that you had justified the Pope and your Church,
that they make new Creedes, defining verities by the infolded and still
revelation of GOD, which determinations have the force of a certain divine
revelation in respect of us, as one of the learned of your Fraternity has
said Sua^es ^om. 2. p. 93.
; or with Stapleton, that the church may define a point of faith [ Etiamsi
nullo scripturarum aut evidenti aut probabili testimonis confirmaretur]
although it be not confirmed with any evident or probable testimony of the
Scriptures Stapleton R^lect. Cont. 4. q. 1 ar. ^.
, or with L^^ the X. in his Bull against Luther, that it is heresy to say [
immanu Ecclesia aut prorsus non esse statuere articles fidei] that it is not in
the hand of the Church or Pope to make articles of faith Art. 27.
; and not to have run to expressing and declaring, which the Council and Pope
never intended; but be it as it will, the Jesuit tells us, that the Laytie may
be well counted Catholics, though they never so much as heard of it, and
therefore we need not to trouble our selves about so trivial a matter,
especially they accounting us of the Lay number.

But after charges of ignorance, folly, and wrangling, the Jesuit accuses the
most mild and modest nature of the most ^overend Primate, that he sticks not
maliciously to slander Maldonate and others with the crime of Perjurie Reply
page 92.
etc. He that would answer this snarling* Jesuit with equal currishnes, must
speak with his teeth, and not with his tongue. But passingby his language, I
will consider how impudently he charge that with slander, the truth whereof,
he cannot cast off with all his shifts.

Their Trent Creed is, Neither will I ever receive or expound it, viz^ the
Scripture, but according to the uniforme consent of Fathers Bulla Pij IV. p.
478. Nec eam unquam. nisi juxta unanimem consensum Patrum accipiam, and
interpretabor.
. Now to defend Maldonate and Pererius two of his brotherhood for not
practicing according to faith, he first reviles after his accustomed manner the
most reverend Primate. Secondly, he denies that Maldonat^ ever took his ^ath.
Thirdly he expounds the article of faith, for the saving of the Jesuits
credit See the Jesuits Reply page 9^.
.

First for his reviling, let Rabshekah rail; for Maldonats oath, he tells us,
that the most reverend Primate cannot tell whether Maldonate took the oath or
not, and gives two reasons, one in the Text, because he supposes he never did:
the other in the margent: For he lived and wrote in Paris, where the Tridentine
Council is not received Reply page 92
.

A Jesuit must believe for the Popes advantage, why should we think his
suppositions should prejudge his cause? he that must believe white black, if
the Church injoyne it (...) p. 247.
, can suppose any thing.

The other reason is as vain, and might as well have been spared in the
margent as in the text; for though the Church of France, receive not the
Council of Trent, yet is there any Jesuit in France, that does not subscribe
unto it? and to submit in any other manner then the Pope prescribes, is not
obedience, but rebellion. Besides, this being made a part of the Papal Creed,
he cannot deny his Baptism in that faith (if their faith be as ancient as the
Jesuit) which is not done without a vow or oath. But if it be, yet it being
clear that it is the Popes will, that that course of interpreting shall hold,
their mancipiall vow and oath makes them perjured that violate the same. The
Jesuit esteems these but ^hifts, and therefore he will justify his Fathers an
other way, and to that end proceeds, in this manner. But let us put the ease
that Maldonate did ^^k^ that ^ath (if you do, without a dispensation he must
be perjured) yet shall not our Answerer be able ever to show that either he or
any other Jesuit did once violat the same Reply page 9^.
. I fear you will be deceived, for if your excuse fail, Maldonate must get a
learneder advocate, or plead guilty, and it seems you are to seek, when you
fly from the words of the oath, and seek relief from the extension of the
intent thereof. For I suppose he is not so ignorant (says the Jesuit) but
that he knows how the intent of that oath extends it self no further, then
to bind the taken never to interpret the word of God in matters of faith
contrary to the consent of ancient Fathers Reply page 9^.
. He should be as blind as Mr Malone, if he should take his shifts for a fit
gloss for this text; who shall measure the exte^t of this oath, but they that
first occasioned it, the council of Trent? and will their decree patronize his
conceit? It will tell you that [ ad c^^rcenda petulantia ingonia] to restrain
petulans wits Conc. Trid. sess. 4. Decret. 3
, the Synod does decree that Doctors shall not interpret the Scriptures [
contra eum sensum quem tenuit and tonet sancta matter ecclesia, aut contra
unanimem consensum patrum] against that sense which the holy mother Church has
and does hold, or against the unanimous consent of Fathers Ibid.
. But is this all, if it were, the Jesuit would think himself secure, but we
shall find that in the first place it inhibites [ ^t nemo prudentiae innxus,
sacram scriptura^ ad suos s^nsus contorqueat;] that no man lea^ing to his own
wisdom, do wrest the Scriptures to his own sense Ibid.
. which Maldonat does confess he has don. [ non nego me hujus
interpretationis authore^ nemine^ habere] I do not deny (says he) that I have
no author of this interpretation. Besides the council conde^nes interpretations
contrary to the unanimous consent of fathers, but the Jesuit will not have the
oath bind, so it be not contradictory in that point which is expounded: whether
the council wants faith, or the Jesuit, let the Jesuit resolve. The words of
the oath excludes the Jesuits gloss, and are stricter then the Councels decree:
The council condemns interpretations that are private from a man's own
wisdom, or (...) against the Consent of Fathers Ibid.
, though it be with many assistants, but the oath inhibites the receiving and
interpreting of the Scriptures, not only with glosses that are contra, against
the Fathers, (this were too little) but with such that are not juxta unanimem
consensum according to the uniforme consent of Fathers Bulla Pij 4. Nec eam
unquam nisi juxta etc.
: So that the place of Augustine is produced to small purpose; it neither
shadowing nor salving the Jesuits credit, for the question is not, whether a
Divine free and at liberty may use S. Augustines practice in the
interpretation of Scripture, but whether a Jesuit tied to the oath, nec eam
unquam, never to interpret, [ nisi juxta unanimum consensum Patrum] but
according to the uniforme consent of Fathers, ^ay without breach of faith enjoy
this liberty, this is the question.

But their Jesuit Pererius has interpreted quite contrary to the consent of
Fathers, and this Jesuit only affords him, a good word, but sweats not at all
for his releife, or defense: So that all may see, the most judicious Answerer
is freed from malice, slander, ignorance, and of bold and desperate forehead,
which the blistered tongue of the Jesuit would have cast upon him.

He wrongeth me in like sort Reply page 92
, says the Jesuit: If his learned pen has done you wrong, it has been by
detecting your frauds, as (before) the perjuries of your Order: For wherein is
the wrong, but in showing forth the wisdom of your insinuations? For the
truth is he indeavoureth not to make his Reader believe, that you should be so
unreasonable as to say that a man might not dissent from the ancient Doctors,
so much as in an exposition of a text of Scripture, without making himself
more learned, more pious, and more holy then they were See the Reply page 92.
, but shows that you have done it, enforcing the same from your reason of the
Fathers learning, piety, and holiness, which looks upon all points with like
authority. And suppose that (according to your own) principles) an
interpreter should dissent from the Doctors in exposition of one text the most
remo^est from the foundations of Faith, as T^bies dog his wagging of his
tail, I hope you cannot deny but by that Act, if they be not more pious and
holy then the Fathers from whom they vary, yet they make themselves more
learned in that particular, if your reason be true, or sound; For if the
learning, piety, and holiness of the Fathers, be an argument of truth in
deducing points of doctrine from the Scripture, they that vary from them in
doctrine drawn from thence, must make themselves more learned, (...), and holy
then they were. But upon revisall what (...) to confess, he does labor to
excuse, and to this intent he refines his character, and tells us a long story
of his thoughts, that he who in such points of faith, as those be which I laid
down in my demand, would prefette his own private interpretation of
Scripture before the general and uniforme agreement of holy Fathers therein
could not be excused from the guilt of such like arrogancy Reply page 93
.

Is it but arrogancy to deny the Fathers in a point of faith? such as those be
which you have laid down? It seems your faith is of your own making,
otherwise it would be heresy, especially being pervers^y done, against so
great a light, and conjoined testimony; but why more in these points that are
named by you, and such like, then in others? learning, piety, and holiness
direct in every point of religiou, as well as in these, and therefore if it
conclude arrogancy to those that oppose in these, you must show us a reason
why it does not in others also; And so far, as I can see the Jesuit has no
reason (against the current of their whole Church) to make learning, piety,
and religion causes of true interpretation of Scripture, no not in points of
faith, when (by their own confession) these three Graces were suspended from
guyding the Roman faith, for whole ages together Stapl. Relect. cont. 1. q. 5.
A. 3. Vixullum peccatum (sola Haeresi excepta) cogitari potest, quo illa seeds
turpiter ma culata non fuerit, maxim ab an* no ^00.
, and therefore it were better to acknowledge the miracle with Bellarmine,
Bellarm. in Chronolog. an* 970. Vide seculum infelix, in quo nulli Scriptores
illustres, nulla Concilia, Pontifices parum solliciti de republ^ Sed divina
providentia fecit, ut nullae surgerent haereses novae.
; and from thence persuade obedience* then from le^^ning pi^ti^ or holiness at
all, which you neither acknowledge requisite Papi^ius Massonius in vita Pauli 3.
In Pontificibus nemo hodie sanctitatem requirit; optimi putantur si vel leviter
mali sint, vel minus boni quam ^aeteri mortales esse solent.
, or assistant to the guider of your Catholic faith. And thus you see
distinctions of points of faith left indifferent and determined* cannot
preserve the Jesuit from his unsound and unreasonable supposition, the reason
being alike for both; So that there needs no consideration of the points, nor
satisfaction to the Persons mentioned, the mistake presupposed by the Jesuit
being a just charge. But he proceeds and tells us, that through the like mistake
the Answerer charge him with boldness, when he offered to produce good and
certain* gr^^nds out of the sacred Scriptures in confirmation of such points
of Religion as he laid down Reply page 93
.

M. Malone; this is bouldnes (believe it) and such, which the best of your
own, notwithstanding your flourishes will not adventure to defend; and
therefore it is justly so styled by the most reverend Primate. It is apparent
that your confidence herein had no other prop at first, but ignorance, to
conceit your ability, howsoever your shame has now attracted impudency for
your further assistance, and if your answer to this be not mere blockish you
shall triumph everlastingly. In your challenge your promise, for the
confirmation of all the therein mentioned points of your religion, to produce
good and certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures if the Fathers authority
will not suffice.

And further you desire any Protestant to allege any one text out of the said
Scripture, which condemns any of the above written points See the Jesuits
challenge.
. This rash escape begets in the most learned Answerer, a just derision of your
boldness and ignorance who against the consent of your learned council will
attempt to prove confession, prayers to Saints, image worship, Limbus patrum,
and Purgatory etc. by good and certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures,
whenas some of those points are confessed neither express, nor involute, to be
contained therein ^annes 2. 2* q* 1* ^. 10*
, and all of them referred to the tradition of the universal Church Gloss. in
Gratian. de Poeni^en* d* 5* c. 1. in poenitentia* Canus lo^. th^ol^. ^. c* 4*
Coster. in compend. orthodo^ae fidei Demonstr* propos. 5* c. 2* p. 162.
. Is not here cause sufficient to deride your boldness? has not your evasive
answer confessed your ignorance, who sees not an amazed Jesuit? He dares not
deny the truth, that this doctrine is not delivered in Scripture; neither has
he the modesty to confess his lapse, and therefore frames such an answer,
that justly makes him ridiculous unto all.

When by and by (says he) we shall come to dispute of Traditions, we will prove
even by good grounds of Scripture, that such divine traditions are no less to
be believed of us, then are those points of faith, which be expressly mentioned
in holy Writ: and then it will appear how it was a confidence of the truth,
which did beget this boldness in me, and nothing else but partialiti^ which
begot in him that sinister suspicion Reply page 93
.

Is not here wisdom? merus Logicus is a better rational then we find here.
He will prove by Scriptures, tradition^ are no less to be believed, then
points of faith expressed in holy Writ; will it follow therefore, confession,
image worship etc. may be proved by good and certain grounds out of sacred
scriptures? Where were your Canonists, schoolmen, and late Jesuits their eyes
or wits, that they could neither see nor find out this, but rather reckoned
these points amongst traditions not laid down in Scripture See before lit* ^
. They saw what you pretended: your Arguments are no news* they used them to
the same purpose with as much wilynes, as you either have, or can do, yet they
could never prove those points that are acknowledged to be received from
tradition, to have good and certain grounds out of the sacred scriptures.
Besides, the points specified, either have good and certain grounds out of
scriptures, or they have none. If they have none, how can the Jesuit produce
them? if they have any, why does your church persuade their belief from the
word not written, the tradition of the universal Church. Neither will this
evasion deceive a purblind sight, for if he prove traditions of as necessary
belief, as points expressed in scriptures what gains has he? for he does it
in gross; and this proves there are traditions, but not conf^rmes any of the
points by good grounds out of sacred scriptures, or in particular, that
confession, Prayers ^o Saints, Image Worship, (...) Purgat^ri^, etc. are divine
traditions. And th^n the Iesuit^ has not performed what he promised in
handling ^raditions, no not in his endeavors, neither will he ever do* if ^is
own guess aright.

The Jesuit tells us he will forbear to urge any more ^h^^ other injury
whereby he charged us with forging, c^yning* and clipping, the ^^n^ments of
antiquity Reply page 93
.

And do you not think it had been better his forbearance had begun before?
But let us examine this injury, and it will not be any great trouble to make
the Jesuit impudent, or a confessionary of such frauds. And first to begin
with the first of forging, and coining; not to name all* (this were to much)
but some of most kinds, First, D^^ation: as Constantiues for his temporal
Patrimony See before ^* ^05. ^06.
. Secondly Councels, as Conciliu^ Si^^^^^an* and (...) su^ Sylvestr^ See before
p* 203. 204. 20^.
; Thirdly Canons, as those of Nice pretended to the Bishops of Afric, and the
Arabian to the whole world See before p. ^73.
; Epistles, as your De^^^^^ls never heard of in antiquity, but invented by
your Merchant, when Rome had forgot to speak in her ancient ^legancy See
before p* 202*
; Besides false titles, have been given to Books, but by whom? for whose
benefit? you can judge. If this be not forging and ^^y^ing charge ^s with
falsehood.

But if I should at large proseq^^te this, it would trouble patience it self
to attend. Besides is it not forging and c^yning, to cite from a father that
which he never sp^ke^ as your Aquinas has do^e from S. Cyrill^ Thesaurus in
the point of Supremacy; an evidence applauded beyond all other* For says
Canus, all other anthors never said so much for it, as Aquinas his Cyrill Canus
l* 6. ^* 5 Cyrillus apud Thoma^ ^ul^o evidentius quim authors ^ae^e^i huic
veritati testimonium perhibet.
, and yet in the true Cyrill there is never a word to be found. And further in
the Council of Chalcedon has not the same Thomas In op^s^* con: ^rrores
Graeco^^m.
mentioned decrees they never dreamed of; and labored to make the Greeks
esteemed Heretics by such invented forgeries, that he has brought against
them, and all for App^a^^ ^^ R^^^* ^or ^^^ holiness his universal vicarage.
The cause shows the forger, and the forger confesses the weake^^s of the
cause.

Now not only forging and coining, but also clipping has been too manifest.
You say your selves, that Here^ickes have done this, and we believe it, and who
are those heretick^* if you cannot declare, who those be, surely they were
never done, the assigning of persons, time and pl^^e, by your doctrine, being
the m^dium to find such conceal^men^s out; Further, if the monuments of
antiquity be corrupted, we may justly accuse you, that pretend to be the
keepers and teachers of the Church, that you would suffer such things to be
done, and know not whom you may truly suspect; so that if you confess
corruption, declare the corrupters; if you know corruptions, and do not
assign them, it is more then probable, that you were acquainted with the
work. Howsoever, you may not re^urne this upon us, whom you acknowledge to be
little ^^^^ienter, then your order, and but a little in antiquiti^ preceding
your faith; So that we may conclude the injury is little, the accusation being
just.

The Jesuit names other injuries that he will let pass* as, when to shun
that difficulty which pinched him (says he) in my demand, he framed it f^^re
otherwise then it was prep^^nded Reply page* 93 94.
.

See the answer thereto, whether the Jesuit played not Simplician in the
demand. For the ^^i^ passages, which he likewise complains of, the Jesuit
promises afterward to discover the^ etc. To which we refer the Reader.

Yet one thing the Jesuit must not let pass to observe that when he said that
the Answerers Religion cannot be ^^ue, because it disalloweth of m^^y chief
articles, which the Saints and f^thers of that pri^itive Church of Rome did
generally hold ^o be true, the Answerer will needs prescribe unto him what he
must prove saying, that it will not ^e sufficient for him, that some of the
Father^ (...) some of those opinions, but he must prove, if he will deal to
the purpose, that they held them generally, and held them too, not as opinions,
but (...) d^ ^ide, as (...) to the substance of faith and Religion Reply page 94
.

Surely if these be not fit ca^tions for them to observe that by antiquity*
universalitie and consent of Fathers pretend to find the truth of doctrine, let
any modest nature discern, for if the Jesuit observes not these rules, he may
urge at pleasure, but can prove nothing* if they be of faith now, they must
have been so in the Primitive times; for that rule is unalterable and without
change* And besides Tertul. d^ Virg. vel. c. 1. Regula fidei una omnino est
sola illa immobilis and i^reformabilis.
if they were then reputed points of faith, the rule to prove doctrine by
consent would fail, if the Fathers did not generally consent in every one of
these: for if Fathers did di^fer in grounds of Faith and Catholic Religion,
where was their harmony?

And if they consent not in all, why should their consent be made a rule, for
the confirmation of any Call Lex. Iurid. Regulae of^icium est, exhibere
nobisgeneraliter definitionem juris.
? But wherefore does the Jesuit distaste these? he shows it is not for any
just exception he can take against them, but out of a jealou^ie from whence
they proceed, whether from charity, which he will not believe, or which is
more likely perchance from a conceit of his weakness, and ignorance whereby
(the Answerer) was afraid that he knew not himself, what he had to prove, or
how it might be pr^^ved Reply page 94
; which the Jesuit (for his ownesake) is unwilling to acknowledge.

For (says he) though I confess my self to be the weakest of a thousand, yet
have I no reason to think that he would any way support my weakness. who has
undertaken to enter into (...) with me before such Spec^^tors, ^^ in their veiw
the ^east ^^yle cannot be re^^ived without a great disgrace ^bid.
.

Here the Jesuit manifests his charity. but declares no syllable for
defense of his knowledge; He makes his own glory the end of his quarrel, and
deemeth the Answerers endeavors to look toward the same end; but it i^ (...)
glory ^^ disgrace, that his (...) resolution (...) ^^ fears: ^^ (...) God^
^^uth from the (...) of (...)* to keep^ Christ's (...) from (...), this i^ the
work (...) he be reviled by frogs and ^^custes* he despises it, (...) ^e
known will (...) in ^er (...), and wisdom will have a time as to be justified
of so to (...) her children.

And (...) Answerer^ (...) what he esteems them, the Jesuits cha^^ty
appea^^s but small, that feeds Christ's flock (like the hireling) for the
wages of appl^^se, and not from the ground of (...) Pases, because* he (...)
the Lord. For ^er him (...) of the most lea^^ed (...) c^^^itie to himself, or
(...) toward the Fathe^^ (as ^^ pleases) I am (...) ^e has said nothing
here, that may persuade us* that he has swallowed down all antiquity, or
that his knowledge is so great, that from the Answe^^^s learned (...)* he might
not receive instruction. But the Jesuit (...) know that these are not the
reasons that moved him to persuade the obs^^^ation of these rules, but their
desperate impude^ci^s; for who knows not that they can pretend Fathers for
their cause, that held (...), and by devising a (...) etc. (...). (...)*
make them their friends when they are urged against them, and also make that
faith, which was not in the Fathers Creed, neither found in any of their
expositions upon the same. This is the reason of giving these c^^tions, because
they use the Fathers to blind, not to manifest the truth of the ancient ^aith:
and therefore* the Jesuit may see how ^ond his imaginations are, and how poor
h^^ conceit* But the Jesuit sees the Roman faith to be such, that he dare not
undertake to prove it but bysome few, and that not as points (...) but as
points held by them (...) by presu^ptio^* as if in antiquity there were not a
(...) betwixt their Creed, with the points therein, and other remote deductio^s
from the same. (...) from hence are the (...) whether this (...) which the
(...) of Fathers. Now he will give (...) wherefore he (...) these (...) and the
(...) is, he (...) any pu^pose.

For first he confesses it absurd (that is (...) Fathers (...) and saying of
all and (...) time (...) Religion: and therefore it will be much more (...) to
find out their general consent that a^^ so l^ng de^^. And there he would ^^ve
the Reader (...) that the agre^ment thou (...) one (...), which i^ not
otherwise (...) by the (...) ^^ ^^^led the general con^ent of a^^cient
Fathers* and to prove this he has urged S. Augustine, That when he disp^ting
(...) the Pelag^^^s, (...) the (...) of (...) Fathers, he thoug^^ ^^ had (...)
thereby the common ^aith of the wh^^e Church. And the (...) of Ephes^^ having
produced ^^t ^en Fathers, made no (...) but tha^ by the^^ agreei^g a^thority,
the consent of the whole* Church w^^ f^lly (...) against Nest^ri^^, for ^^
(...) doubt ((...),) but th^s^ (...) did i^ j^dgement agree with all the rest
of their (...) Reply page 94* 95.
.

But all the wh^^e he does little consider, that his own do not agree with
him, what makes the consent of Fathers: For (...) would have those to be
coun^^^ all the Doctors that (...) be justly (...) from the (...) of their
(...), (...), and (...), and the rest neglected Greg. de Valen. loco supra
citat. Omnes esse censentur i^, quorum (...) omnibus consideratis, ^ruditionis,
pi^tatis, (...), etc. ut a prudentibus certe ^^^um solummodo ratio habe^i
deb^^t, c^^^ris neglectis, quasi nihil (...), si cum illis (...).
, etc. (...) ^^ was of (...)* that (...) of (...) (...) (...) ^^llect by hi^
practi^^, (...), says he conc^^^ing Augusti^^, who (...) Ma^^chi^s day^^^
sacrifice of (...) and p^^yers of (...): and (...) in the (...) ^ A^or inst.
Mor part. 1. lib* 10 cap. ^^.
(...), (...) there be on^ (...) Do^^ors ^^^ing, th^^ is, (...) the rest. Now
if (...) take consent of Fathers, according to (...), then we ^inde a consent
of Fathers in a point of (...), against (...) Catholic Church, ^^ (...).

(...) Fathers, (...), (...), Orig^^, (...), (...), (...)* (...), A^brose, ^
Stapleton de^ens. Ecclesiastic. (...) quod (...) ante (...) (...) non sunt
^^sens^, sed sententiam contrariam tradiderunt.
Clem^ns (...), and Ber^ard, did not assent unto the (...) (which (...) (says
he) in the (...) of Fl^rence, (...) if you desire more, (...) (...) Justinius
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...) with these (...) (...) (...), (...) and (...)
(...) obligandi.
.

For your consent, whether it would prove better for you th^^ (...) has done,
I cannot tell, but I am sure that the Answerer, who durst try the (...) by the
Fathers, which he is ^ot ^oun^ unto* their consent being not (by (...)
confession) the (...) of faith, ^^ con^ident that by them you will not find
two witnesses, much lesse^enne that will justify your cause, without a
personal, or (at least) material opposition: And therefore howsoever this be
not their general consent, (if we speak properly) yet we will presume i^ to
be so for the present* to see whether you be able to perform^ any thing, that
so gloriously boast of so much, which we are confident you cannot in regard
some of your points mentioned are confessed by your own, neither to be in
Fathers* o^ Scriptures at all; as Ad^^^tion of Images for so Mass^^^^ in
libelli^ de Picturi^ and Imaginib^^, does seem to acknowledge, and Roffens^s
your Martyr has the same opinion, or but a very little better of the scorching
Article of your Purgatory faith See before page ^4.
, so that the Jesuit has little cause to think* that we ^ea^e the
testimonies of Father^ for the points in co^^^over^ie* when as wise as himself
know, that they are not th^^^ to be found.

But though w^ ^ermit this for the prese^^, to see whether the Jesuit can
prove any thing by his own ^ou^hstone* yet it will not be amiss to consider
that his *collection out of S. Augustine is rejected by that Fathers testimony:
for whereas the Jesuit insin^^teth, that S. Augustine was of opinion, that the
common faith of the whole Church may sufficiently* be* pr^^^d by the unif^rme
doctrine ^f 1^. chief Fathers. Yet when S. Hierome brought a ^umber of
Fathers, S. Augustine sticks not to answer him in this manner. I might as I
believe easily find^ some Fathers to be of the contrary opinion, if I did read
much; but the very Apostle S. Paul ^ffereth himself ^^t^ ^e^ for all these,
y^^ above all these. To him I ^lye, to him I appeal^ from all other
interpreters, and seek unto him in that which he writes to the Galathians
A^gust* epist. 1^. ^o^^e^ qu^dem ut arbitro^, facile repe^^r^, ^i (...) ipse
(...) ^ro his (...), ^^o supra ^os omnes Apostol^^ Paulus ^ccu^^^^* Ad (...) ad
ipsum a^ omnib^ qui aliud sen^i^nt lite^^^^^ ejus (...) provo^^^ (...)
i^^^oga^^ (...), and ^^* qu^^o in ^^ quod (...)
.

And by this which has been said, we perceive that the Jesuit in a manner
is urged to confess, that this Rule wants perfection, and that the Fathers
consent cannot be absolutely produced, but presumed only.

Neither does it please the Jesuit the other caution laid down, th^^ he
must* pr^^ve that the Fathers held th^se points not only generally, but as
app^rt^ining to the substance of faith and Religion: and from hence he would
collect, that the most learned Answerer fears that they shall be able to
prove, that the Fathers h^lde them generally indeed, and therefore provideth
this revye, ^rgeing them to prove further, that they held them as appert^ining
to the substance of Faith and Religion Reply p* ^^.
.

A fit collection for a wise apprehension, before he tells us, that in points
no^ determined, she (the Church) gra^nteth free liberty unto all Catholic
Doctors, to expound ^swell the Scriptures, as the Fathers, for the upholding
of that part, which themselves do think to be most probable Reply page* 9^
. In which he means that the Scriptures in points not determined, as in the
cause of Predestination, and conception of the blessed Virgin* might be
interpreted against the general consent of Fathers, as the two Jesuits
Pererius and Maldonate have done, and the Fathers themselves expounded with
such a gloss, as makes best for the upholding of that part.

Now if the general consent of Fathers be able to determine a point that is
not de fide, why are they rejected by the Jesuits, and the Jesuits justified
by Mr Malone? if the Fathers consent has strength only in points of Faith,
why does he quarrel at this caution, which he must acknowledge necessary, not
proceeding from fear, but from a wise and prudent consideration?

And to prevent us herein (says the Jesuit) he affirms before hand, that
the said points be not all chief articles of faith Reply page 93.
. what does he labor to prevent you in, unless it be in resisting you, making
those articles of faith, which were never of universal belief in the
Christian world?

But to whom does he tell these tales? if to those of his own profession, it
is idle and needless: if to us, it is most ^^^rue: for (says he) it is well
known that with us they be cer^^inely accounted chief articles of faith,
being all of them declared for such by the sacred and infallible ^^th^^itie of
the Church Reply ibid.
It is neither ^eedelesse for his own; nor untrue, being delivered to your
selves; For the most reverend Father knows it is his duty, daily to persuade
against faith-intrusions for the preservation of his own, neither can your
Arguments make it untrue: for are all things you account, or the Trent C^^ncell
has determined of so necessary light, that every man must believe them?

You may persuade this in Peru, or Mexico, but your neighbors the V^^etians
will not believe you, that dwell nearer home; neither have all your Catholic
Children such opinion of that Council as to receive it.

Now our Jesuit would have them of faith from our confession. Neither can our
Adv^rsaries themselves (says he) deny that they appertain to the substance
of Faith and Religion, s^^ing that they condemn them for heresi^ in us Reply
page 93.
.

Here the Jesuit will not have an Heresy to be but in point of faith, that
the denial thereof might exclude us from salvation; if this be the rule by
which the Jesuit will try Heresies, I think these will not prove of that
stamp in our opinions; For first we deny not salvation to those which by
ignorance communicate with them* that embrace these gross follies. Secondly,
we say not that they belong to any article of the Apostles faith, but are
additions, that had nothing to glue them to the Creed; but Babylonish Clement:
We take them for gross corruptions, but to make them errors in fundamental
points, our Church has not I think declared it.

Heresies of deeper error and more elavated pride, then are found in this
Catalogue, proclaim themselves among you, those pe^ces declare no^ your
greatest defection.

Who abhorres not your tyrannical Hildebrandine insurrection, whereby you
trample upon Gods power, the authority delegated to Kings, and Bishops, and the
whole Preisthood of the Catholic Church? Secondly your Conscience* Monarchy
whereby you cast Christ out of his chair, and give the Pope Christ's infallible
office. This Constance could not endure, and Sess* 2* and 4*
Basil Sess* ^3*
thought Heresy never doubted of.

Who is ignorant, that heresies have had their degrees, which they could not
have had in respect of faith* if all did equally totter the foundation?
Augustine defines an heretic otherwise then from the foundation; He is an
Heretic, that for l^cre of any temporal commodity, and especially for his
own vainglory and preferments sake (as your Courtiers do) does beget or
follow false or new opinions August* in libro de utilieredend. ca^s* 2^* quest.
3. c* Haereticus (...) qui alicujus te^poralis commodi, and ma^imae gloriae,
principatusque fui gratia falsos, ac ^o^as opiniones, vel gigni^, vel sequitur.
; and this may be done in points which are not fundamental. Besides, how many
are accounted Heretics in this common course of appellation, and yet free
from denying the foundation of Faith? For we find Leo the Xth. in his Bull
against Luther 4* I^^^^. 1^ ^^
to style it Heresy, for any man to say that the Church, or himself has not
power [ statuere ^rtic^l^s fidei] to make new articles of faith; as also that
Luthers assertion was no less, [ optima p^^it^^tia, nov^ vita,] new lif^ was
the best repentance: and yet I hope the Jesuit will re^oove these far from
the foundation.

And if the Pope may err in his Bulls, to call that Heresy which is not
fundamental error; why may not you give leave to others to use the same
Liberty seeing he is the pattern of imitation? unless you think the Pope
above Angels, and that he may deliver what he pleases, and make Heresy what
he list, and the Anathema that thereby he deserves himself, by his very
pleasure should fall upon others. Nay, you have gone further, De Consecrat:
did: 5. Cap. ^t jejun* that he will never be a Christian, qui confirmatione
Episcopali non fuit Chrismatus. Now if a man may be counted an infidel and
unbeleiver by you, for omission of the Ceremony of Confirmation: why should
you draw from the liberties of men's tongues an Argument, that whosoever by you
or our selves are styled Heretics must needs in regard of those points, err
in the foundation?

Do you not know it often falls out (as when you charge us) that after the way,
which is called Heresy, so do many of the faithful serve the Lord God of
their Fathers? Shall we condemn to eternal fire Irenaeus, Iustine Martyr, all
the Millenaries, and all those which consented to those points which
Epiphanius, Augustine, or Alph^^sus de Castro have styled Heresies? it were too
rigide a censure, and more fit for the Judges of Hell, then the Priests of God.

So that this proves but a vain ground to infer these points to be of faith,
because they are accounted heresies; and if we will observe it, we may from his
own words find, that heresies have declared themselves not so much from the
matter whether fundamental or not, as from the perverse manner of holding an
opinion against any ones conscience being lawfully convicted of the same. And
therefore our Jesuit will not have them Heretics that deny tradition, Images
etc. simply by a bare and naked negation, but wilfully and perversely by
obstinate denial.

Yet will our Answerer say (says the Jesuit) that by the Fathers they were
held but only as opinions, and not as belonging to the substance of faith, and
this is but his own opinion, for wheresoever the Fathers do profess them in
their works they never tell him that they hold them for opinions rather then
for points of faith Reply page 9^*
.

The Jesuit speaks of the Answerers divining, but here divines amiss
himself and indeed proves downright a Deceiver, for if the learned Answerer
will say that the fathers held them as opinions why should he require the
Jesuits proof for their consent? and therefore let him fasten this opinion
upon whom he can, the most reverend Primate knows well enough, that they
neither held them generally as opinions, or of faith, neither is he so ignorant
in antiquity, but that he well understands those ancient Soldiers of the
Catholic Church were always ignorant of the after invented marches under
Roman Colo^^s, so that the Jesuit would persuade the reader by a trick of
deceit that (...) knowledge the Fathers general consent in these points as
opinions, but not as of faith, which was never dreamed of by the Church; By
this it will appear that they care not by what means they establish their
decrees, nor what fetches they use to drag the people to their opinion, so they
may sway in the Church of God, and tyrannize with their Antichristian Scepter
over the Kingdom of Saints.

The Jesuit before he leaves off, would feign say something for himself and
cause, as first that wheresoever the Fathers do profess them in their works,
they never tell him that they hold them for opinions, rather then for points of
faith Reply page 95
, which we acknowledge, for indeed there is no such profession in the
Fathers, yet I think and upon good grounds, if they had known of any such
fundamental points, some would have declared them to the Church.

Secondly he confesses that some of the said points were not declared by the
Church in former ages to be necessary and chief Articles of faith and
Religion; yet they were ever belonging to the substance of faith from the
beginning and without doubt were held for such at least implicitly and
virtually by the holy Fathers, howsoever our Answerer upon no better ground
then his divining humor does give out the contrary Reply page 9^
.

Surely it could not be faith at any time, if not then, for to the Church long
before was declared the whole counsel of God, so that indeed it may be of the
Popish faith, which may be declared 1500. years after Christ, but not that of
the ancient Church, which was once delivered to the Saints; And if the Jesuit
will have that of the Foundation which was never so declared or reputed till
our last times, let him prove ex re ^at^, that it is so, and not think
himself able, by his without doubt, to persuade us that the Fathers held those
points virtually and i^plicitely, ^^ belonging to the substance of faith, and
then he does something, for if the bare act of declaration may make an article
of faith, the Bishop of Rome, with his ^^^ncell, may make us an other belief,
and turn Christianity into a new mould, a thing much desired, if more then
probable grounds do not deceive us.

But if these points were decreed in aftertimes from some inward and virtuall
substance of faith which was inherent in them, let him declare it, and by some
means or other help our eye-fight, that can perceive no such thing in the
points here mentioned.

And whereas the wisard thinks every man of his own profession, he is
deceived, his conjectures are far from the grounds that are followed by the
most learned Answerer; and how far it is from divining, to express a truth,
any will apprehend that knows that divining has relation to things to come,
and not to things past; But what he promises in the next Chapter, we will
examine whereby I think we may come to more perfect knowledge of their
Catholic fr^^des, though not of their (...), as he would persuade.

SECT: XII.
THe Jesuit having travailed in the defense of certain points (from the
Fathers testimony) that are not of the foundation of Faith; and fearing to be
censured by Lyrinensis, who says, that the aunci^^t consent of the holy
Fathers is with great care to be s^ught and followed by us, not in every
petty question belonging to the Law of GOD, but ONE (...) at least principally
in the Rule of Faith See the testimony urged by the most reverend the Lord
Primate, in his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge page 26.
, does in this Section enquire; H^^^ a point of Faith may be discerned from an
indifferent opinion in Religion Reply p. 96.
, and declares the reason of his so doing, Forasmuch (says he) ^^ our Answerer
affirms, that all the points by me laid down in my demand, be not chief
articles, I thought it meet by this disputation, to disproove him herein, and
to show that they be all such chief articles of faith, at the obstinate
denial of any of them depriveth a man of all true belief, and makes him a
faithless Heretic. For performance whereof we are first to enquire, which is
the way or certain Rule to know an article of Faith, from an indifferent
opinion? and that being found out, by squaring the said points thereby, we
shall easily understand, whether they be theife articles, yea or ^^ Reply page
96
?

Now in this passage the Jesuit meets not at all with the most learned
Answerers observation; For he denies all the points propounded by the Jesuit
to be chief articles, in regard of those which are more necessary, and
fundamental, (which only are to be enquired of by consent of Fathers in
Lirinensis his judgment See above lit. ^.
, and not because in their own nature they are indifferent, for if he should
conceit them such, why should he style you Heretics for your false
declarations concerning them; nay why should there be controversies at all
betwixt us?

Secondly, all that the Jesuit urges here, satisfies not the most learned
Answerer in show only: For unless he can prove, that these points were
according to his Rule declared by the Catholic Roman Church for chief
Articles of Faith, before those Fathers times which he urges, in Lirinensis
his judgment; all his quotations of antiquity in defense of them are to no
purpose. And I would willingly see where the Roman Catholic Church by her
declaration has defined these points de fide, before the Ages of those
Fathers, which the Jesuit produces for confirmation of the same. But
notwithstanding he goes a by way, and follows not his Answerer, yet I will
not leave him, but take some breife veiwe of this discourse also.

And first he excepts against the Scriptures; These must be no Rule, whereby
to discern chief Articles of Faith, from indifferent opinions in Religion;
nay, to make Scriptures the Rule, is but to shake hands with all condemned
Heretics Reply page 96
. And this (he tells us) he has already discovered; but fearing least it be
in conceit and opinion only, he is here resolved further to prosequute the
same, and lays this for his ground, There be many confessed points of Faith,
which are not in any sort expressed, or as much as once touched by the
Scripture Ibid.
.

Sure they are of the Popish Creed, or not at all: for the Catholic Church
taught none as necessary to salvation, but what were contained in the
Scriptures Bellarm. de verbo Dei non scripto. l. 4. c. 11 Dico illa omnia
scripta esse ab Apostolis, quae sunt omnibus necessaria, and quae ipsi palam
omnibus vulgo praedicaverant.
. Yet he will prove his proposition from Augustine. The Apostles truly (says
S. Augustine as he is urged by the Jesuit) have not delivered any thing
concerning this point: but that custom which was alleged against Cyprian
ought to be held to have been derived from their tradition Reply page 96
.

But what point is this? Rebaptization, a point as far from the foundation,
as Rome from Heaven, that only concerns the manner and for^^ of (...)
Baptism. What points else has he tha^ ^^ not concludent from the Scripture?
Not one, unless (you suppose) that he keeps them as concealements, yet he
thinks he does something when he tells us from Hierome that the scriptures
consist not in reading but in the true understanding of their sense and
meaning, and that by an evil interpretation the Gospel is no more the word of
God, but the word of man, yea which is worse, the word of the Devil Reply ibid.
: As if this were not the matter that we complain of, that Popes will
interpret as they please, and presume to say; this shall be the sense of the Holy
Ghost. But to fit himself for performance of what he has undertakes, he
says, that there be ^^^ three means or ways, by which a Conclusion deduced
from the scripture may be pretended to be infallible Reply page 97
.

But what is this to the foundation of Faith? I hope every infallible
proposition is not of such necessary belief, that a man must believe it on
pain of damnation. You told us, but (...), that your new Creed was propounded
only to Scholle^s, and cheifely unto such as are to receive promotions unto
Scholasticall or Ecclosiasticall dignity Reply page 98
, what are all laymen Clerks, or is the nature of your faith changed?

Now the Jesuit names his three only means; the first humane discourse, the
second Private inspiration, the third the authority of some externe mean
ordained by GOD betwixt the Scripture and us etc Reply page 97
.

To avoyde the two first, he makes a long discourse, but he fights with his
own shadow; for we make not the Scripture of private interpretation, as being
against the Apostles rule 2 Pet. 1. 20.
, neither do we make our reason the only Inquisitor to find out the sense of
Scripture knowing, that the carnal man perceives no^ the the things that are
of GOD: Yet this we say, that reason being assisted by grace becomes a divine
instrument, whereby the scriptures may be used to saving knowledge and to find
out the mysteries of our Faith.

Now seeing that neither humane discourse (says the Jesuit) (...) by God
betwixt the Scripture and ^^* (such as is the authority of the Magistrate (...)
the Princes law and the people) that it (...), and propound unto us all
decisions and (...) whatsoever Reply page 97
.

The Jesuit shall never find that there is any such exter^^ infallible means
(...) by GOD betwixt the Scripture and ^^ to (...), (...) and propound unto us
all decisions and conclusions whatsoever that we are bound to believe (...) of
(...) Neither when they come to point it out are they agreed who it is. For
sometime, it is the general and uniforme consent of ancient Fathers that is
the assured Touchstone to try all controversies betwixt us See the Jesuits
Epistle to the King.
, and this general consent may consist of (...) fathers Reply page 94
, ^^^ sometimes of fewer, (as in (...) of the Commandments and leaving out the
Second, they cannot find the one half to reckon them after that sort^)
sometime the practice of the Church; sometime the rule of Faith; sometime the
Councels interpretations; and sometime, all must vanish, and that which the
Head determines is a known truth, that which the Head condemns is a known
error Heart colloque cum Rainolds. page 44.
.

Now which of all these are infallible? For Consent of fathers, Cajetan will
tell us, that God has not tied the exposition of the Scriptures to the sense
of the Fathers, and therefore he resolves to follow a new sense agreeable to
the Text. [ (...) a (...) alienus] though it be repugnant to the stream of the
sacred Doctors Cajetan. in Prooem. comment in Genes.
. In like manner Andradius Andradius Defens. Triden. Fid. l. 2. page ^^^. Non
(...) debentur eorum explicationibus addicti, and alligar^, quin sit (...)
omnibus illis (...) quid Dei praesidijs adjuti explicando valeamus, and sensum
alium (...) etiam dissimilem afferre atque noris explicationibus (...)
Ecclesiae and sanctorum (...) fidem; atque pietatem illustra^^.
.

For the practice of the Church; (if they mean the Roman) it is no good
direction, in regard (as we have showed before) it is very subject to variety,
as in the point of Childrens receiving of the Eucharist See before page 25. ^
See before page 10^.
, and in the point of Judges and the like, all which are full of uncertainty.

For their rule of faith, we see, that this may be in the Roman Church
enlarged, extended; yea we have wits in the Church of Rome that can censure it
making it in some considerations standalous, heretical Censura Symboli
Apostolorum censur. ar. 3. Tota Haec propositio equivocatione la^orat, quae
inducere potest in haeresim propter ambiguas particulas de and ex: and quia
ordinaria de habitudinem importat principij componentis etc. Ideo propositio in
hoc sensu falsa est, scandalosa, haeretica.
, (...) Censur. ar. 4. Haec propositio ambigua est, and aliquo sensu haeretica.
-- Periculosa est propositio, and (...) obrium illum sensum intellect^, quas^
divini^as aliquid passa, aut ^^^tua fuctit, non solum haeretica est, sed etiam
impis, ^ blasphema.
, deceitful Censur. ar. 2. Tota haec propositio captiosa est; and ^^llax.
, blasphemous See before lit.
, erroneous See hereafter lit. ^.
, false See before lit. ^.
, dangerous See before lit. 7.
, absurd Censura ar. 9. Absurda.
, ambiguous See before lit. ^.
, contrary to the word of GOD, the common sense of the Fathers and of the
universal Church Censura ar. 7. Propositio (...) est, (...), falsa, and
erronea, nec non verbo Dei, and communi Patrum totiusque Ecclesia sensui
contraria. ^ Wadding. Legate. Phil. 3. Sect. 2. orat. 9. 9. Pro Petro and in
fide Petr^ succedentibus, non pjo Concilio oravit, and exoravit. Adversus ho^,
and adversus Ecclesiam in Petro, in illisque fundatam, non adversus Concilium,
dixit, infernum non praevalituram, (...) ^oncilia errasse viderimus quando a
suo capit^, a quo (...) sanctius and veritatis influentia, recesserant vel
dissen^^r^nt. Non ^^^buit (...) ^em Pontifici, sed a Pontifice habet
Concilitum, ut sit ratum ac (...).
.

For Councels interpretations, we shall have as much to do for to find out
the sense of a Council, as of the Scripture it self. Besides, how many weak
particulars may suspend a Council from her pretended infallible authority, as
if not rightly called rightly headed etc? So that there remains none but the
Pope for whom Christ prayed; It is he that gives authority to a Council, not
the Council to him* But if this Lord (that would be of our conferences) prove
a Lord of Mis-rule, where then shall we find this Judge, that represents the
Magistrate betwixt the Scripture and us? And surely, if the Spirit of GOD does
interpret the Scriptures, as he delivered them (holy men speaking as the spirit
gave them utterance). I have said sufficient before to declare, that your Popes
are no such manner of men. And many of your own exclude the Pope from this
sovereign power of interpreting the Scriptures Bellarm. de Council. ^^c^. l. ^*
c. 14. Concilium esse supra Pontific^m asscrit candinalis Cameracensis, Ioannes
Gerson* Iacobus Almainus, Nicolaus Cusanus, Pan^^mita^us, Cardinalis
Florentinus, Abulensis et alij. -- Alij vero vol^n^ Papam esse in Ecclesia id,
quod est Dux Venetiarum in republ. Veneta.
, some reckoning up his Here^i^s as Alphonsus de Castro Advers. Haer. l. 1. c.
4. Omnis enim home, erra^e potest in ^ide, etiam ^^ Papa sit. Nam de Liberio
etc.
.

Yet if the Jesuit will have another Judge then the Spirit of GOD in his word,
let him be ruled by it; He s^^^^e none of our ruler; we follow that rule which
the Apostles have taught Acts, XV. XXV III. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to ^^, etc.

Neither is this supreme Judge without atongue dumb and mure (as they
caluminate,) but speaks by the writings of the Prophets and the Apostles,
wherein every necessary point of Faith is determined and made known. And who
can be judge of these hid and secret matters, but he that knows them and makes
them known, even the Spirit of GOD? 1. Cor. II. X. XI. XIII. Who should
interpret the law but the maker of it Vult. com. in^^ l. 1. tit. 2.. 9 n. 1.
I^s interpretandi leges, est penes ^undem, qui habet jus ^^^^n^i leges.
? Whose words are the Scriptures, but the words of the Spirit of GOD? Acts, XXV
III. XXV. II. Pet. 1. XXI.

Neither is it to be omitted, that the Scriptures speak as a Judge, for what
is attributed to GOD in regard of his supreme power and justice. Romans XI.
XXXII. [ GOD has concluded them all in unbeleife, that he might have mercy
upon all] is spoken of the Scriptures, Gal. III. XXII. [ The Scripture has
concluded all under ^i^^^, that the promise by faith of JESUS CHRIST might be
given to them that believe.] Who is it that accuses? who is it that condemns
but this Judge? Io. V. XIV. The law, the word, is the Judge absolute and
infallible; a ministerial duty only is committed to the Pastors of the
Church. Io. XII. XLVIII. Neither are Papists able to cast of this blessed
Samuel from judging Israel and to erect up their own Saul, but by blaspheming
the word of truth, charging it with imper^^ction, obscuriti^ (and what not?)
that may deprive it of its power. So that there is nothing but the wrangling of
Heretics to plead for the Papal Headship and this is as vain as the rest;
for unless he may irresisteably enlighten not only the understanding, but
also the will, he can never compound and silence Controversies; in regard his
words (let them make them divine or otherwise) are as subject to
misinterpretation, as the Word of GOD, and may with more facility be perverted.

But if we do but observe, we may perceive how they casting off the absolute
direction of Truth, are involved in error and blindness. For by making their
Church the only teacher, and determiner of an article of faith, they tie
themselves to receive no other light from the Scriptures, then Lucifer their
Pope, (for he is their Church) will convey unto them. And howsoever they boast
of the Fathers, of Councels, of the Church; yet when all comes to all, their
Judge of Controversies is only their Roman Bishop Gr^gor. Valent. tom. 3.
Commentar. in Thomam disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 1. Cum dicimus propositionem
Ecclesiae esse conditionem necessariam ad assensum fidei, ^ nomine Ecclesiae
intelligimus ejus caput, id est Romanum Pontificem perse, vel una cum Concilio,
ex praedicta auctoritate propositiones fidei fidelibus declarantem.
, either with or without a Council Ibid. punct. (...) Si quando oriantur
controversiae de Fide, Ecclesia non potest in ijs definiendis a verita^^
aberrare, Haec autem Ecclesiae infallibilis auctoritas ad definiendum non est
in singulis fidelibus, quippe qui sine controversia possunt errare singuli.
Neque est etiam in omnibus omnino fidelibus Frustra enim data illis esset cum
^ieri vix possit, in fidei causis, ut ab omnibus illis sigillatim sententia
dicatur. Sed residet summa illa Ecclesiae auctoritas in Christi Vicario s^^^^o
Pontifice, sive una cum Episcoporum Concilio, sive absque Concilio res fidei
defini^e velit. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 3. Summus Pontifex cum to tam
Ecclesiam docet, in his quae ad fidem pertinent, nullo easu errare potest. --
Constat generalia concilia saepe errasse, quando caru^^unt Summi Pontificis
suffragio. -- Ex quo apparet totam firmitatem Concilio^um legitimorum esse a
Pontifice: non partim a Pontifice, partim a Concilio. Stapl^ton. relect. prin^*
doctr* contr. 6. quaest. 3. in explicatar. 5. Potestas and infallibilit^s
Papalis est potestas and gratia personalis, personae Petri and successorum ejus
a Christo data* -* Majoritas discretionis and maturitas judicij, si de scientia
rerum sacrarum intelligatur* non solum Concilium, sed and Theologo^^m
collegium, imo unus aliquis Theologus Pontificem facile superabit. Si autem de
judicio fidei, and determination^ sensus Scripturae, quem credere oporteat
intelligatur, non est Concilium supra Papam, sed unus Papa Petri successor, cui
uni Christus inde^ectib^h^atem fidei impetravit, super omnes est.
, (it matters not.)

So likewise they are deluded with the spirit of error in giving the power
they do to this external Judge; for our Jesuit will have the Judge to be the
rule whereby to discover which is a point of faith, and which not; the manner
how, I have told you before; whatsoever he says is faith, must needs be so,
let it be with a Council, or without. Others make the Popes authority equal
to the Scriptures Christophorus de Sacrobos^o. Defens. Decr. Triden. part: ^ c.
6. Dico Ecclesi^ authoritatem parem esse authoritad Scripturae, and ratio est,
quia unu^ and idem Deus; qui regebat Apostolos and Prophetas, ne e^^arent
scribendo, diright Ecclesiam, ne labatur in interpretando.
, to the v^yce of GOD. Neither will they have their Pope or Church only equal
to the Scriptures, but also somewhat superior thereunto Albert. Pighius l. 1.
Hierat. Eccles. c. 2. dicit, non so^^^ non infer^orem, non sol^m parem, imo
quodammodo ^^periorem, and ^ ^otiorem Ecclesiae autoritatem autorita^^
Scriptura^um.
; for the Church is a Prophet Defensor. Iohannis Pistor^^ falso 415. Ecclesia
Prophe^^ est.
, more then a Prophet Idem falso 224. Pl^^qua^ Propheta.
, yea, greater then all the Prophets Idem circ*fals. 286. Major omnibus
Prophetis.
, having the Spirit of GOD for (...) ^i^ar Idem (falso 416.) Spiritum Sanctum
Ecclesiae Vicarium dicit.
.

Thus we see what judge the Jesuit does contest for, and how far they
labor to extend his power, to wit, that the Pope (who is not only a Prophet,
but more then a Prophet, yea^ greater then all the Prophets who has the Spirit
of God for his Vic^^) either with or without a Council, has only power to
determine matters of Faith, whereby we may know what to believe, and what not,
with authority not only equal, but superior to the scriptures. Now what
strength does the Jesuit bring to confirm this Rule?

His first place is Esaias LIIII. and the 17. Thou shall judge every tongue that
shall resist the^ in thy judgment Reply page 99.
.

Surely the Jesuit is like to their Divines in the Council of Trent, who
being restrained to the Scriptures, and forbidden schoole-disputes, brought all
the places out of the Prophets and Psalms, where they stand the words
Confit^^r and its verbal Confissi^, to prove Auricular Confession, and they
were accounted best learned who brought most of them Hist* Council. Trid^^ l. 4.
p. 345.
: For here is nothing whereby to make the Pope the infallible Judge of
Controversies, unless he will conclude, that wheresoever Judge or Judgment is
expressed, it is meant of him.

The second is out of Mat. XI and the 18. H^ll gates shall not prevail against
her Reply ibid*
.

We confess that all the powers of Hell shall never prevail against the
Church; but we say this Church is neither the Pope naked, nor Roman as has in
many places been showed: Yet I would gladly know to what purpose this text is
here produced.

The third place is Mat. XVIII. and the ^7. H^e that will not hear the Church,
let him be to thee a^ a Heathen, and a Publican Reply ibid.
.

If an infallible judge be here pointed out, then all these ab^^^dities will
follow. First, that every particular Church should be infallible, and the
Judge of Controversies; for, D^c Ecclesia has relation to particular Churches,
not to the Catholic. Secondly, a particular Church should not be subject to
error in criminal causes, if this place pointed out an infallible judgment:
when as this infallibility is denied not only your own Councels, but your Popes
also. 3ly, If the Churches judgment must be infallible, because CHRIST
requires us to hear the Church: How can the Pastors of the Church be
excluded from this privilege, when the people are enjoined by the Apostle to
obey and follow them, Heb. XIII. 17.

His fourth place is, Ephesians. IIII. II. and 14. God has placed in the Church
Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Doctors etc. To the end that we be ^^ more
little children, ^a^oring with every wind of doctrine Reply ib^^*


I shall show hereafter that this text makes against his Judge, his Monarch;
for the present he may take this with him. First, that we acknowledge as long
as the Church had Apostles and Prophets, their testimonies were divine and
could infallibly direct. Secondly, although the ^a^tors now are means ordained
by God, to the end that we be no more little children wavering with every
wind of doctrine: yet it does not follow, that they are infallible Judges,
seeing the argument may as well hold of each as of all who are ordained to the
same end, which I think the Jesuit will not acknowledge.

His last is 1. Tim. 2. The Church is the Pillar and foundation of truth Reply
ibid.
.

What? therefore the Pope the infallible Judge! This follows not: For he is
the rock (if we believe Popish interpreters) upon which the Church is built:
How then can he be the Church infallibly to direct? The foundation surely
differs from the roof; the Church that is builded, from the rock that she is
builded upon. Secondly, the Jesuit may know that we envy not the privileges
which GOD has given his Church, nay he were no member of her, that should not
reverence her with obedience; and therefore we acknowledge her, the pillar and
ground of Truth (if containing the Apostles) absolutely, perfectly; if without
the Apostles, we deny not her Counsels* but with all obedience embrace them, if
she command (as she is limited in matters of faith) by the Scriptures. But we
see this place is more for the Church of Ephesus, concerning which the Apostle
speaks literally, then Rome; and yet experience has persuaded us, that there
is no infallibility there. Further then this, some of your own dare not go,
but make a difference betwixt the judgment of GOD, and the judgment of the
Church, the one (they say) is infallible, but the other may sometime deceive
Panorm. in Decret. De senten. Excom. cap. 28. Iudicium Dei veritati, quae nec
fallit, nec fallitur semper innititur, judicium autem Ecclesiae aliquando
sequitur opinionem quae s^pe fallit and fallitur. Dried. de dog. Ecclesl. 2. p.
58. Generale Concilium Papae, Cardinalium, Episcoporum, Doctorum ^^ Scripturis
propheticis intelligendis non est tantae authoritatis quantae fuerit olim
Apostolorum collegum.
.

For Ruffinus his testimony, that S. Basil, and S. Gregory Nazianzen did take
the interpretation of the Scripture, not according to their own proper
understanding, but according to the tradition of the Fathers Reply p. 99.
. The Jesuit points not out the place; if he did, I think little would
appear for his purpose, in regard he is to prove the authority of a Judge, not
the discretion of a Doctor. And who doubts, but any wise interpreter will use
all means that may inform him to perform his work? But let Ruffine pass,
Augustine makes an outcry.

And does not S. Augustine cry out (says the Jesuit) that Truth reposeth in
the belly of the Church etc. Reply ibid.


And who says otherwise? He that should think, that Truth is removed out of
the Church, thinks amiss. But to conclude from hence, the Church, the Roman
Church, the Roman Pope to be the Judge or Rule of faith, is inconsequent.
Neither does that place of Augustine, cited by the Jesuit in the Xth Section,
[Evangeli^ non credere^^, nisi me Catholica Ecclesiae commoveret authoritus]
contain any thing to enforce this; for many things may move us to believe,
that are not the Rule of Faith. Miracles did this work in many, but this (I
hope) is far from your Rule. What is urged from Vincentius Lirinensis, has
been fully answered. His note from the Geneva Bible proves nothing: If he find
this Judge at Geneva, he speedes well. In these words I fear he cannot be
espied.

And now having little or nothing, he begins his Per^ration. Behold here,
gentle Reader, how although the articles of our Faith be grounded some way or
other in the Scripture, yet the Rule to find out which is a point of faith,
and which not, must be taken from the Church Reply p. 100.
.

Observe here what we gain from the Jesuit, and then we will attend his
arguments: First, he that in the page before told us, that there be many
confessed points of Faith, which are not in any sort expressed, or as much as
once touched by the Scriptures Reply page ^^
: in this place would persuade the gentle Reader, that the articles of their
Faith are some way or other grounded in the Scripture.

Secondly, he makes the ground of Faith to be the Scripture, yet the Rule to
find out which is a point of Faith, and which not, must be taken from the
Church, so that although he make their Pope their Cater-Pillar, yet Scripture
is acknowledged the ground of Faith. But to make this discourse an oversight,
I would know how the Rule can measure without the ground, or how Faith can
remain grounded in Scripture, when their rule measures without it?

Now the Jesuit would make this known by the practice of the Primitive
Church: but before he begins, he prepares his Reader. Some points there are in
which controversy arising, (...) the affirmative, nor yet the negative part is
by the Church declared to be true, nor commanded to be so believed, and
professed by her followers; in which (says S. Augustine) that Faith whereby we
are Christians remaining safe, either we do not know which part in true* and
^^ suspend our definitive sentence: or else by humane and weak suspicion, we
do guess otherwise then the truth is, and consequently are deceived Reply p.
100
.

We know that Augustine in this place speaks not of any matter of Faith,
that is or can be by declaration of the Church, but tells us, that our
belief whereby we are Christians remaining sure and settled, our ignorance and
error in other things, which are far from being of faith, will not be so
dangerous.

And other sort of points there is (says the Jesuit) wherein when
controversy does arise, one part is already found declared for true, and
commanded of necessity to be so believed by all, and in these, if a man be
advertised of the Churches declaration, and notwithstanding will obstinately
maintain the contrary, then is he said to hold against a point of Catholic
faith, and therefore accounted to be an heretic. Let us suppose (says S.
Augustine) that some man does hold of CHRIST that error which Photinus held,
which he thinks to be the true Catholic Faith; I do not yet account him
for an Heretic, except when the doctrine of the Church is laid open unto
him, he yet makes choice to continue in that error which before he held Reply
ibid.
.

Was ever any man so mad, to think, that the Church could not point out an
article of Faith? This may be done by private Churches, private Doctors: but
show us if you can, that Augustine made a point of Faith from the naked ground
of the Churches declaration, with Scriptures, or without, only, and for no
other reason, then because it is declared. Augustine affords nothing here for
this purpose* he shows his charity, that if some man by weakness and
infirmity, hold on heretical opinion if it be not obstinately and
pertinaciously, he does not account him an Heretic, ^ut I ask you (although
(...) with mercy the errant) whether you are persuaded, that he would do so
of the Heresy? The point is, whether S. Augustine would have accounted Photius
his opinion denying CHRIST to be GOD, an indifferent point of Religion, (as the
Jesuit would persuade us) before it was defined by the Church? No, the words
of Augustine plainly declare, that the doctrine of the Church taught from the
Scriptures, not defined by a Council, is sufficient to detect Heresy, though
he would have the obstinacy of the party appear against the truth before he
condemns him for an Heretic.

But this will appear (says the Jesuit) yet more manifest, by the manner
wherewith S. Augustine excused S. Cyprian etc. for that his error was not
against any point as yet declared by the Church Reply ibid. and page 101.
.

Surely S. Augustine does not contest for that the Jesuit dreameth. He
excuses Cyprian, and why? Because the Roman Church had not condemned this
opinion. This is false, for this opinion was condemned, and Cyprian
excommunicated by the strength of Rome (as is before showed and confessed by
your own See before Sect. 10.
) and yet he adhered thereunto. But that which Augustine says here, may be
interpreted by his words urged immediately before, that though Cyprian held
this opinion, yet was it not with obstinacy, as the (...) maintained theirs,
but that he would have forsaken that error, if the falsehood thereof had been
demonstrated unto him, not by a General Council only (as it was at Nice) but
(as the Jesuit urges his words) if any man had showed the contrary unto him.
Now the Pope with his Council did decree against it, but this Augustine did
not conceive (as the Jesuit would collect) to be a demonstration sufficient to
convict S. Cyprian; so that the Jesuit does but trifle in urging this testimony.

Now (says the Jesuit) although this point is made plain (...) by this holy
Fathers authority Reply p. 101.
etc.

What has the (...) no more but one Fathers authority and (as you perceive) a
poor one for his infallible Judge? Yes, That I may leave it past all doubt
(says he) or replication, we will give a glance to see how the practice of
this Doctrine was performed: and to this purpose he tells us, that we shall
find how 68. Bishops writing from Garthage to Pope Innocentius, after having
related unto his Holiness, what they had concluded themselves in the matter,
they say, that they thought it convenient, to intimate the same unto his
Charity, to the end, that unto the decrees of our mediacritie (say they) be
annexed the authority of the Sea Apostolic, for the preservation of the
health, and good estate of many, and also for the correction of the perversitie
of some others. And that the second Council held at Milevitum, sent an epistle
to Pope Innocentius about the same matter beginning with these words. Seeing
our Lord God by the gift of his especial grace, has placed you in the Sea
Apostolic etc: we beseech you to use your pastoral diligence in remedying
the great dangers, wherewith the weaker members of Christ are environed Reply
p. 101. 102.
.

Nowhere is nothing that may conclude the Roman Bishop to be this infallible
rule, it being manifest that other Bishops were sought unto and consulted as
well as himself, nay after he had declared his judgment: For in the point of
Easter after the Bishops of Egypt had declared their minds, and the Church of
Alexandria (with the Bishop of the Roman Church) had defined the matter, yet,
They do as yet expect my sentence, what I think fit to write concerning
Easter day, says Saint Ambrose Ambros. ep. 83. Meam adhuc expectant
sententiam, quid (...) scribere de die Pascha.
. But we are not ignorant that the consent of the Patriarchall Sees was a
great help to the advancement of Truth and repelling of error, and therefore
those Bishops were sought unto to add their assistance for suppression of
innovations or arising Heresies. Yet was not Rome sought unto in point of
infallibility any otherwise then Alexandria: For we find lovinian seeking to
Athanasius, that from his handwriting he might receive an exact exemplar or
declaration of the Faith Theodoror. histor. Eccless. l. 4, c. 2.
.

But what Judgment would the Jesuit have their Innocent to have had? A
judgment of assent? This, what Bishops had not? Eusebius of Nicomedia and
Theoguis of Nice (Heretics) exercised it Sozom. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 15
Illa quae vestro judicio decreta sunt, non contradicendo impugnare, sed
consentientibus animis confirmare decrevimus, et hoc libello consensum illum
roboramus.
: Yea Liberius a Pope desires the Emperor, that the Nicene Council might in
the same manner of all Bishops be confirmed Sozom. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 10.
Liberius postulavit ab Imperatore, ut fides in Concilio Nicaeno tradita
subscriptionibus omnium obique Episcoporum confirmaretur.
; which I am persuaded he would not have done, if he had conceived that
subscriptive. Confirmation had made a Judge of Faith.

It may be he will have the Bishop of Romes subscription to make an Edict! Why,
if this were granted, it were too weak to conclude him the rule of Faith; for
Emperors did the like with a power not usurped but solicited and that by
Councels and Popes too. The first Council of Constantinople petitioned
Theodosius to ratify the Decrees of that Council, that as by his Letters he
called the Council, so by Seal he should fortify their Decrees Epistola
Synodalis ad Theodosium Imperatorem. Rogamus igitur tuam clementiam, ut per
literas tu^ pietatis ratum esse jubeas, confirmesque Concilij decretum, et
sicuti literis, quibus nos convocasti Ecclesiam honor prosecutus es; ita etiam
summam little quae decreta sunt conclusionem sententia ^tque sigillo tuo
corrobores.
. And Euagrius reports your Pope Felix to do the like, sending his Nun^ies to
the Emperor by his authority to confirm the Chalcedon Council Enagrius
histor. Eccles. l. 3. c. 18 Mittantur a Felice ad Zenonem Vitalius and Misinus
Episcopi, ut ejus authoritate tum Concilium Chalcedo^^^se confirmaretur.
; and many places to the like purpose may be urged.

But if the Church be the rule of Faith, how many absurdities will follow
thereupon? As first, that there must be a Church before (and so without)
Faith; because faith in the Jesuits judgment cannot be before it is defined.
Secondly, the Church must be the Rule of it self, unless they will put forth
that Article [ The holy Catholic Church] out of the Creed. Thirdly the Church
must rule the foundation upon which it is builded. Ephesians. 2. Revel. 21.
Fourthly, it is not denied by the Jesuit, that this rule is ruled someway by
Scripture, and therefore it has not its rectitude in it self. So that we see
the Church of God has her ministry; the word of God the control. The
Council of Nice did her duty, but Theodores tells us how, l. 1. c. 8 Ibi
animadversa fraudulc^tia allegarunt Episcopi ex Scriptura resplendentiam
soutem, flumen charactera ad substantiam, and hoc, In lumine tuo videbimus
lumen, Et hoc, Ego and Pater unum sumus: and luculentius deinceps ac com
pendiosius conscripsere, EIVS. THEM CVM PATRE ESSE FILIVM ESSENTIAE.
.

And that all may perceive with how much fraud and falsehood these places of
Augustine are forced, we may consider that the Scriptures are sufficient
August. in Joan. tract. 49. Cum multa fecisset Dominus Jesus non omnia scripta
sunt sicut idem ipse sanctus Evan gelista testatur multa Dominum Christum and
dixisse and fecisse quae Scripta non sunt, electa sunt autem quae scriberentur,
quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. Sermon. 38. ad fratres in Eremo
inter opera August. Legite sacram Scripturam in qua quid tenendum, and quid
fugiendum sit, plene inveniet^.
, not only to teach faith, but also to condemn heresies See before page 199.
in that fathers judgment: and that General Councels themselves may be amended
See before page 319.
. Further he would never have moved to have past by the Councels of Nice and
Ariminum August. con. Maximin. l. 3. c. 14. Neque ego Nicenum, nec tu debes
Ariminense tau quam praejudicaturus proferre Concilium. Nec ego hujus
autoritate nec illius detineris. Scripturarum autoritatibus, non quorumcunque
proprijs, sed utriusque communibus testibus res cum re, caussa cum caussa,
ratio cum ratione decertet* (Reply page 100.
, if the Church had only ruled the Faith. So that the Jesuit has concluded
upon halting principles: For never was the Pope acknowledged always or at any
time the only Pastor of the Church; neither the Roman Church the rule to find
out heresies or to declare truths: neither did the ancient Bishops dream of
submitting to the Roman Church as the only way to prevent error: neither did
they think Arius his blasphemy only cursed after the determination at Nice:
neither did Augustine ever breath forth as the Jesuit would father upon him y,
(though with caution) that an opinion which formerly was not held for a point
of Faith, may by the declaration of the Church be received and held for such:
Neither lastly did the Catholic Church expressly declare the Jesuits points
for Cheif^ articles of Faith.

True it is, that a point of the Catholic Faith may not be so fully preached,
or so openly professed, or so publickely declared at one time as at another;
but that the same article might be no chief point of faith at one time in the
Christian Church, and at another time by the Churches declaration be
fundamental, is gross and ridiculous. For either the Churches declaration
does make that, which was not, to be of the substance of Faith, giving it
authority and credit, making it of necessary belief and so fundamental;
which is too gross to be defended at Midday: or else it does declare to
others what was formerly the foundation out of the Scriptures against some new
arising Heresy: And what does the point gain from the Church? whether
authority or light? Authority they fear to say: Light they cannot affirm;
for by the producing of it the darkness is detected, the Heresy is condemned.
Truth it receives not, for it was there before. Nay how could an Heresy
against the foundation be observed, if the Truth were not before known? The
declaration does not make it Faith, but shows that the faithful do adhere
unto it as revealed by God: for if the truth were not there the declaration of
it were an Hersie or error at least.

Neither does he produce any thing: afterward to make the Church the rule of
faith: Whereas, he tells us that S. Augustine writing to S. Hierome requesteth
him that setting down the Catalogue of Heretics he would jointly express in
what points they had been condemned by Catholic authority: and again in
his Preface to the above mentioned Catalogue of Heresies, he mentions
himself, what the Church holds against such Heresies, without making any
mention of the authority of Scripture Reply p. 10.
.

I think the Jesuit would have a Church embracing heresy? What does the
Churches adherence to truth make her the Judge or rule of it? and because
Catholic authority condemns Herefie, must therefore the contrary truth have
its life from the declaration thereof? Faith must then follow the Church, not
lead it. The Jesuit may conceive, that this Father means not by the Churches
authority, a power inherent in their Roman Apollo, excluding all other
assistance, but a lawful determination according to the Scriptures by the
Bishops and Priests of the Catholic Church. For otherwise he must acknowledge
in the Church such a domination, as was amongst the Gentiles, Luke 22. But sure
it is, that S. Augustine dreamed no more of your Judge, then the blessed
Apostle S. Paul, who in the enumeration of the diverse degrees of the ministry
[Ephes. 1111. v. 11.] left him out. Besides, the Jesuit by Apostolical
directions in matters that concern faith, may see a Rule, not a Judge pointed
out, as having authority to guide us. Phil. 3. 16. Gal. 6. 16. by which rule as
the Church receives strength, so limitation.

Finally (says the Jesuit) observe how all the points laid down by me in my
demand, being declared by the Catholic Church for articles of faith, are of
necessity to be believed, and held for such, and the contrary for d^^^able
Heresy Reply p. 104
. What the Jesuit does say for the express declaration of all his points of
Faith, will be examined in their several places* here an induction he brings us,
and a conclusion, whereby he would prove, that the only Rule to know a point
of faith from an indifferent opinion in Religion, is the declared and
determined judgment of the Church; by which all the points laid down in his
demand being propounded unto them for such, must of necessity be accounted
chief articles of Catholic belief Reply p. 105. 106.
. But from whence the Jesuit draws this conclusion, I cannot see: for if the
Church command by the express Scripture and sense agreed on in all ages; the
Church then does judge at least with undependant authority, but direct* calling
for obedience to a former judgment: if it decree in points doubtful, the
Churches declaration can bind us to peace and external obedience, but here no
infallible judge is allowed to make matters that were doubtful to be of faith,
or to create from uncertainties a new Creed.

That the Church by her particular ministers and body representative has
applied the Scriptures to several heresies and thereby detected and condemned
them, we deny not: but will this make every point decreed by a Council
wilfully and from their own ends without direction or limitation to be a
chief article of Faith? Your Quartadecimani were convinced of heresy by the
Scripture as Alphonsus de Castro tells us Alphons. de Castro advers. Hae^. l.
12. de Pascha. Istorum ergo sententia inde convincitur haerescos, quod supra in
titulo de lege o^tendimus esse h^resim asserere caeremonias and judicia legis
veteris obligare tempore legis evangelicae -- Nam Paulus reprehendens Galats co
quod caeremonias legis observandas puta^ent, inter alia dicit, Dies observatis,
and menses, and tempora, and annos.
, but where by the naked declaration of Pope Victor without this rule? Neither
did he excommunicate all the Bishops of Asia in this cause, if Alphonsus speak
truth, but they escaped it by Iren^us his chyding of your Pope Idem. ibid.
F^cisset nisi illum Iraeneus ob hoc redarguisset.
. Here you see that these heretics of the East after the Pope had condemned
them, had one Catholic Bishop pleading for them. In like manner the Novatians
Alphons. de Castro adver. haer. l. 12. de ^^^n* hae^ 3 Cum non sit alia res
pluries and apertius in sacris condicibus p^odita, quam mis^ricordia quam Deus
erga peccator^s maxim poenitentes exercet, illis peccatorum suorum
indulgentiam tribuens.
, might be condemned, as the Arians Socrates Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 7.
Evangelici enim and Apostolici libri, n^^non antiquorum Prophetarum ora cula
plane instruunt nos, inquit (Constantinus Imperator in Nicaea Synodo) sensu
numinis. Proinde hostili polita discordia suma^^us ex dictis divini Spiritus
explicationes quaestionum. Haec and his similia memorabat ille velut amans
paterni nominis filius, sacerdo^ibus tanquam patribu^, cupions confiteri
Apostolicorum dogmatum unitatem. Quibus and assensus maximae conventus partis
acce^^it.
, Macedonians Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 9. Iam enim semel formam
protulimus, ut qui se Christianum profiteatur, server ^a quae ab Apostolis
tradita sunt, quum dicat Sanctus Pa^lus: Si quis vobis annunciat aliud quam
accepistis, anathema esto.
, Nestorians Epistola Cyrilli and Synodi ad Nestorium. tom 1. Act. Council.
Ephesians. Occum. c. 14, Haec tenere, haec sapere, cum a sanctis Apostolis and
Evangelistis, tum ab universa quoque sacra and divina Scriptura* tum ex veraci
denique sanctorum patrum confessione edocti sumus.
, E^tich: Euagrius Histor. Eccles. l. 2. c. 4. Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
confitemur etc. si^ut antiquitus Prophetae de ^o, and postille ipse Christus
nos doc^^t, and idem ipsum nobis Patrum Symbolum tradidit.
, Pelagians Council. Milevit. c. 2.
, and the Monothelites Council Constant. Universal VI. Act. 1. and 2.
Propositis in medio Sanctis and intemeratis Evangelijs*
: but was this done by the judgment of the Church only and absolutely? surely
no, but by the Scriptures.

And it is more then clear that the reason why you distaste the Scriptures, is
as Clemens Alexandrinus observes because you hold not the rule of faith
Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. l. 7. Necesse est enim labi in maximis, cos qui res
maximas aggrediu^tur, nis^ reg^lam veritatis ab ipsa veritate acceptam
tenu^rint. Qui autem s^nt ej^smo^i, ut qui a recta via excide^int merito etiam
falluntur in plu^imis singularibus, propterea quod non habeant verorum and
^also^um judicium plan^ exercitatum in ijs quae opo^^et eligere. Si ^^im
haberent, pa^erent Scripturis divinis.
.

But the Jesuit that will have the Church to have this absolute judgment, that
what is decreed must be a point of faith has in his Catalogue left out the
fifth General Council, where he might have found the Pope confirming [ TRIA
CAPITVLA,] the three Chapters Baron. an. 553. nu* 218.
which are fraught with Heresy, and the Council detesting him, and accursing
his act Ibid. nu. 219.
* yet never was this Council reputed Heretical, but with reverence received
in all Succession Ibid. nu* 229. and An. 869 nu. 58.
.

And let the Pope their Church declare what he pleased and let what he declares
be faith, yet no man is bound in Conscience to it, unless that which he
declares be agreeable to the law of God, the sacred Scriptures, for seeing the
sentence has not strength further then it is declarative of the law, when he
is not an interpreter of the right law, his sentence is void in conscience
Sotus l. 3. de Just. and Iure. Quia cum sententia nullum habeat robur, nisi
quia est juris declarativa ubi non est recti ^uris interpres ^ulla est in
Con^^ien^ia.
, and therefore your Judge of Controversies was in the sixth General Council
and others also adjudged (for declaring Monotholisme contrary to the
Scriptures) an Heretic See before page ^07.
.

For those other that follow in your Catalogue, most of them were condemned for
the Truth, and therefore the Popes sentence was no sentence, when he declared
his own bloody disposition and not the Truth from the law of God against them.
And as at all times, so especially ought we in the height of Antichristian
tyranny to fly to the Scriptures; The reason you may find in the author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew amongst the works of Chrysostom. Then when you
shall see the abomination of desitation standing in the holy place. That is,
when you shall see w^^ked Heresy, which is the have of Antichrist, standing in
the holy places of the Church, in that time those which are in Judea shall fly
unto the mountains: that is, those that are in Christianity, shall betake
themselves to the Scriptures ^omil. xlix. Tunc cum videritis abominatione^
desolationis st^^tem in loco sancto.) Id est, cum videritis haeresim impiam,
quae est exercitus Antichristi, stante^ in locis sanctis Ecclesiae, in illo
tempore qui in Iudaea sunt; fugiant ad montes: id est, qui sunt in
Christianitat^, conferant se ad Scripturas.
. And wherefore does Christ command all Christians at that time to betake
themselves to the Scriptures? Because at that time* when heresy shall have
prevailed over those Churches, there can be no trial of true Christianity, nor
other refuge of Christians willing to know the v^rity of faith, but the divine
Scriptures. For before it was sundry ways apparent; which was the Church of
Christ, and which Gentilis^^: but now it is no way made known to those who
desire to understand which is the true Church of Christ, save only by the
Scriptures Ibid Et quare juber in ho^ tempore omnes Christiano^ confer se ad
Scripturas? Quia in tempore hoc, ex quo obti^ui^ haeresis illas ecclesias,
nulla probatio po^est esse verae Christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse
Christianorum aliud, volentium cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi Scripturae
divinae. Autea enim multis modis o^^endebatur, qu^ esset Ecclesia Christi, et
quae gentilitas: nunc autem nullo modo cognoscitur, volentibu^ cognoscere quae
sit vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi tantummodo per Scripturas:
* and, Who therefore would know which is the true Church of Christ, whence
shall he know it, but only by the Scriptures? For the Lord knowing that there
would be so great a confusion of things in the last days: did therefore
command, that Christians, who are in Christianity, willing to be confirmed in
the true Faith should fly unto nothing, but the Scriptures. Otherwise if they
shall have respect unto other things, they shall be scandalized and peris^, not
understanding which is the true Church Ibid Qui ergo vult cognoscere, quae sit
vera Ecclesia Christi, unde cognoscat, nisi tan^^mmodo per Scripturas? Sciens
ergo Dominus tantam confusionem rerum in novissimis diebus esse futuram; ideo
mandat, ut Christiani qui sunt in Christianitate, volentes firmitatem accipere
fidei verae, ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi ad Scripturas. Al^^qui si ad alia
respex^rint, scandalizabuntur, et peribunt non intelligentes quae sit ve^a
Ecclesia.
.

So that the Jesuit has made a long transcription to little purpose, it being
plain that Scriptures, (as I have showed both here and elsewhere) were ever
the resolvers of all doubts and controversies.

Yet before this Section pass, I pray the Jesuit, that terms all these his
points chief Articles of Catholic belief, to tell us what articles of their
Faith ought not to be called Chief? Whereby I think we shall find that all
are not chief articles of faith which are declared by their Church; or that
something is of Faith with them that the Church never declared.

For his Coleworts that conclude this Section, they have been answered before
page 199.
: and the most learned Primate does not think that Heresy can escape the
judgment of God, where men hold their peace. Their own think it inconvenient
to stay for the determination of a Council to make the denying of the
immaculate conception an Heresy: May not the breath of Gods mouth do as much
as the Popes? Herefie is condemned when it is revealed; and what light shines
clearer then the lamp of divine truth? If it shall destroy the whole glory and
kingdom of Antichrist: shall we think that the train of his iniquity, (these
points,) will escape as fugitives. Ebion and Cerinthus, were condemned by the
Scripture, to wit, the Gospel according to S. John Alphons. de castro advers.
Haer. tit. de lege. haer. 1. B. Hieronimus in libro illustrium virotum dicit
beatum Iohannem rogatum ab Asiae Episcopis scrip sisse Evangelium contra
Ebionis dogma.
; without a declarative sentence of the Church: and so is Popery, though the
execution be suspended till the appointed time.

SECT: XIII.
THe Jesuit tells us, that he must for a conclusion enquire, How vainly our
Answerer charge us with Noveltie Reply p 106.
, and in his inquisition he proceeds in this manner, Notwithstanding that our
Answerer sometimes affirms our opinions to he far spread Heresies, and of
so long continuance, that the defenders of them are bold to make universalitie
and duration the special marks of their Church: yet forgetting himself in
other places, he is not ashamed to term them, profane novelties, and
heretical novelties Reply ibid.
.

I have made it good before, that Heresy is more ancient then the Papacy, and
that duration does not exclude their opinions from being profane and
heretical novelties Before p. 193. 194.
, in which place, as also hereafter, the Inquisitor may receive satisfaction.
But he tells us, that the most learned Answerer consequently will have us to
believe, that his Religion is of more antiquity Reply p. 106.
.

Now as the Jesuit distasted the term of Noveltie, deservedly cast at
himself and his, so he is impatient, that antiquity might any way belong to
us, and therefore in a disgraceful manner says, that the most learned
Answerer endeavors to make good the antiquity of his profession, first by
jumping at once over a Thousand six hundred years, and squaring his faith by
that of the Apostles Reply ibid.
.

But this is not vanity (if it were done) unless the Jesuit will condemn
himself as vain also. For in several particulars he is forced to jumpe to
the Apostolical times himself, as has been before observed Page, 86. 87
. Neither dare he adhere to his touchstone [the fathers] but where his holy
Father has approved him Reply p. 98.
. And for GODS Pen, although he does distaste it, yet he is willing to pretend
from thence some safety, though imaginarily, when otherwise he can find no
protection at all See the direction at the letter.
, But let the Jesuit know, that he leapes short that reaches not the
Scriptures. And to be taught by any other, without CHRIST and his Apostles, in
divine mysteries, is to be deceived. Give GOD and his Word the first place, the
Fathers will never be denied to be great helps to truth and devotion, and
this is all that the most learned Answerer does desire.

Secondly (says the Jesuit) by adventuring (though faintly) to justify it by
that which the holy Fathers in middle ages did profess Reply p. 106.
.

Here the Jesuit detects himself, that what he has uttered before is untrue;
for there he charge the Answerer with jumping at once over a Thousand six
hundred years, and yet in this place he acknowledges him to justify our
profession by that which the holy Fathers in middle ages did profess. Here we
may see the reason why Mr Malone pleads the Fathers for his touchstone, and
accuses us for rejecting them; not because he accounts them the Rule, or is
confident in their trial, but because the people (whom they daily deceive) are
not so well able to make use of them, whereby to convict their errors. These
are they that cry, the Fathers, the Fathers, and yet despise them. We keep
them under the command of their MASTER, yet deny them not their just
reverence, their deserved honor.

We have seen (says the Jesuit) how he has failed in the first, producing
no more for himself then all Heretics have ever done Reply p. 106.
.

If the most learned Answerer had only pretended Scripture without the truth
or true sense of it, he had done no more then the Devil, Papists, and other
Heretics have done: but how will the Jesuit prove this to have been
practiced by his learned Answerer? The Scriptures he desires not (as Papists
and heretics have abused them) but in their true sense. This light because
you cannot endure, must you therefore be a conqueror? Poor fugitive! How does
he dream, when he flies from that power that prosequutes and would condemn
him? For the sword of the Spirit would not only as the sword of the Angel
make the Ass bruise the leg ^^^. ^^. ^^.
, but even break the heart of the false Prophet, if his eyes did behold the
brightness of it.

And as vainly does he charge the most learned Answerer with fear and
shameful tergiversation from the Fathers testimonies Reply p. 106.
, when as whatsoever he has said concerning them is the same that some
Papists, nay the Jesuit himself (notwithstanding he calls them the
touchstone) has affirmed. Was it not Mr Malone that rejected the Fathers
generally consenting, and defended them that did likewise Reply p. 92.
? Who declared it lawful for every one in points that the Pope has not made
faith to press and urge the Fathers, or reject them as they please Reply p. 93.
? Does not a troop of their own exclude them from that authority in the Church
which the Jesuit would seem to give them, neither affording the^ the honor of
a rule, or touchstone either Bellarm. ^ de Council. author. l. 2. c. 12. Scripta
Patrum -- non sunt Regulae neque habent auctoritatem obligandi. Wadding legate.
de concep. Virg. Mariae. sect. 2. Orat. ^.. 6. Nec enim parvum Doctorum
aggerem, sed Dei sapientiam, and spiritum pro regula, and rectore veritatis
habet sancta haec nostra, quae fall^ non potest, matter Ecclesia.
?

The Jesuit further tells us, that the Answerer in demonstration of his
forwardnes takes upon him to give the first onset himself* But it is easy to
espy (says he) how this pretended hardines is nothing else but a mere cover
and cloak to hyde the weakness of his cause, and to boulster out his book with
a show of antiquity, more then with a substance of verity, being flush always
in words, and refined periods, yet still failing in sound reason and judgment
Reply p. 106.
.

What the Jesuit has espied, I presume he has not kept secret, and therefore
whether this conceit be not one of his self flatteries will be espied in the
proper place, where he has declared what he has been able to perform. But
though we should grant him (says the Jesuit) whatsoever be alleges out of
the Fathers, and that we should confess their sayings to make altogether for
him, has not his own mouth pronounced, that all this will not be any way
sufficient, forasmuch as no authority but that of the Scripture can suffice?
And if he had reason to cry out with S. Augustine and say, let humane writings
be remooved, let Gods voice sound, with what sense now may he be thought to
have stuffed such a deal of Paper with humane authorities? It will be answered,
that it is done only to show* the confidence he has in his cause, and that
the Fathers, howsoever he esteems them little, make wholly for him, and
against us Reply p. 107.
.

To this we answer, that i^ his cause did not gain by it, yet the Catholic
Church is no looser, when the grand deceivers of the Roman Faction are
detected, and their pretenses of antiquity made known for delusions. Secondly,
is the cause of Religion no way assisted by the writings of the ancient
Fathers, unless we acknowledge them with the Jesuit, the assured touchstone?
Navigators (as are all that sail in the S^ippe of the Church) have much
comfort and direction by the other Stars, although the North alone infallibly
direct their course, and assists them to the haven.

Thirdly, if the most learned Answerer said no more then S. Augustine, Let
humane writings b^ removed, let Gods voice sound. I would know of the Jesuit,
why he might not urge antiquity as well as that Father did, and to as good
effect?

But how vain he is h^re^in, his own Masters and Grandsirs do sufficiently
declare (says the Jesuit) whilst they themselves confess, that the holy
Fathers do altogether stand for us, and therefore with one consent, they do
utterly disclaim from their opinions and doctrine, as here in part shall
breifely be made known, to the end that our dog Bagg, even by the C^rrs of
his own tow^e may be made cry, and run away, after being shaken in the mire
before his own door Reply p. 107.
.

Vocis horrendae frag^r per ora missus terno. Will no tone affect the Jesuit,
but that of open-mouthed Cerberus? Will no march please him that is not under
Rabs^eka^'s colors? Does he think the day is won, if he can revile the
host of the living GOD? Believe it, this was Golia^s heresy, though it were
never condemned by Papists, who most constantly practice in this kind. But
pardon me ( M. Malone) that I bark not for company, but pass by your furies
with contempt and silence.

Yet it may be observed how the Printer amending the coppie and for Bragg
impressing Bagg is so distasted by the Jesuit that though he let pass many
of his own o^ the Printers errors* yet this is put amongst his Erra^^, as
indignely taking it, that the Dogg-letter should forsake his discourse, or the
D^gg-starre be left out of his Calendar.

But leaving this; two things we find here insisted upon by the Jesuit, first,
that the most learned Answerer his own Masters and Grandsyrs (as he styles
them) do confess that the holy Fathers altogether stand for them. Secondly,
that we utterly disclaim from their opinions and doctrine, Both which are so
notorious untruthes that no modest man would ever affirm it: For the place in
Cartwright is his only evidence to prove the first, and I suppose he never saw
i^, for he has cited him falsely, the book being, The defense of the Answer
to the Admonition against the Reply of T. C. where we find that M. Cartwright
favored not S. Augustines rule; but this was so far from being approved by the
confession of the Church of England and other learned Protestants, that the
rule by the Jesuits own confession is av^^ched by the most reverend Father,
Archbishop Whi^g^ift to have been of credit with the writers of his time:
namely with M. Zuingli^^, M. Calvin, and M. G^alter: yea, (as the Jesuit Reply
page* ^* li^* ^ i^ m^rgi^*
tells us) he was persuaded, that no learned man dissented from them. And that
the Rule was true and good, and so far from establishing any p^ice of Popery,
that it quite overthrows the same, it was then published by that most
reverend Father In that defense of the Answer page 10^.
, and so received of all other for any thing the Jesuit has said.

Now the rest of his particular witnesses tend nothing at all to his advantage;
for either they point out only particular Fathers, which will not conclude with
the Jesuit, that the holy FATHERS do ALTOGETHER stand for them: or else
particular points, as Freewill, M^rite, Invocation of Saints, Limbus Patrum,
concerning which the Papists are no more beholding to them then we our selves.
For in the points of Merit and F^^ewill, Maldonate tells us, that the
Prodigal by loosing his substance is interpreted to loose his freewill by Many
Fathers Maldonat. les. com* in ^^n^. 15. ver. 13. Solent pl^^ique substantiam,
quam pr^^ig^s d^citur p^r^^disse Luc. 15, Liberum arbitri^m*^ interpreta^i. Sic
August. ^^da, Euthym. and Bernard.
. And Augustine gave less to the will, then the Schoolmen did, in the
judgment of Eras^us Erasmus epist. dedicat* ante libros Hilarij. Divus
Augustinu, adversu^ Pelagium di^i^ans minus trib^it libe^o hominis arbitrio,
quam* nun^ ^^ibue^^dum putant, qui nu^c in schol^s regnant sc^olasti^is, possem
^ujus generis exempl^ multa comm^^o^are*
.

As for Merit, the Fathers are also charged with error by our Adversaries
Pe^e^. Ies. comm. in Romans ^. dis^* ^^. number. 106. and disp. 23. number* 111. Gr^ci
Patres ne^ panci La^inorum* Doctorum arbitra^^ sunt Praedestinatio^^ causam
fuisse praevisa hominum opera, ^u^ fidem, non me^^^ Dei gratiam. Sed hoc
Scripturae adversatur.
. Further, whosoever will read the Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, shall see
how little advantage they get by the Fathers words concerning some of those
points, although in some sense they are not received by us. Yet I could wish
the Jesuit to consider how grossly he has abused the most learned and reverend
Bishop Bilson, by urging his objection for his solution, when as if he will but
see the Author himself, he shall find that he concludes no such thing.

For the second; that we utterly disclaim from the Fathers opinions and
doctrine. I have showed before with what truth this is affirmed* yet I will lay
down his argument, whereby he seems to enforce this, that by the repetition
of it, all may take notice of the Jesuits vanity. For is there any consequence
in this, that because Cartwright, Luther, etc. have excepted against the
Fathers (and it may be with terms not altogether so decent) therefore all the
reformed Churches do utterly disclaim from their opinions and doctrine? This
is so weak, that it falls of it self. But if better Arguments then this will
serve, we have manifested that the Fathers have forsaken their corruptions,
though they seem to follow after with a corrupt pursuit by clipping and
cankering, forging and fretting, when they could not persuade them otherwise to
plead their cause See before sec. ^
.

And if to argue after the Jesuits manner will be received by himself, we can
tell him that Ludovicus Vives being well acquainted how the Fathers were
accounted of in the Roman Church, spared not to say, that those which served
not to their purpose, were of no better esteem then a company of lewd women in
a weavers shop or the baths Lud. Vives co^* in Aug. de civit. D^^ l. 20. c. 26.
Itaque illa demum ^is videntur ^dicta and co^cilia quae in rem s^a^ faciunt,
reliqua non pluris a sti^anda qua^ conventum muli^rcularum in textrina vel
thermis.
. And let the Jesuit resolve, whether we may conclude, that they have utterly
disclaimed from the doctrine of the Fathers, because Sixtus Senensis has
mentioned eleven of those Ancients that held prescience of Merits, and were
therefore censured by him for condemned Pelagians Sixtus Sen^^s. Bibliot^*
san^^* l. 6. Annot. 251. Haec igitur sunt Patrum dict^, (scil. Chrysostom
Orige^ Am* ^ br^s. Hi^roni^* Augustine. The^d^^^t. S^d^l. Th^^phylact. O^^^m^n
Th^^dul. etc.) ex quibus collig^ videtur. Praescientiam me^itorum esse causam
divinae praedestinatio^is, quae quidem sententia in Pelagio damnata est.
. Moreover Baronius has slandred all the Historiographers of the fourth age
with words as uncomely, as any the Jesuit has produced from any of ours,
charging some with obscurity, others with defect of ^rder, diligence, piety,
truth, and some with writing lies for private affection Baron. Ann 395. n. 43.
Licet tot historicis haec ae^as abundasse videatur* tamen adhuc i^op^ harum
facult^^um remansit* and in no^nullis obscura; quod ex his alij res multas*
brevitate nimia contra; ^e^int, alij intactas penitus reliquer^^t: desideretur
au^^ in alijs ordo, in alijs ve^o te^po^^ exactio^ indagatio* pericli^enturque
alij veritat^, a^ pariter ^i^tate* affectuque privato ducti pro arb^tri^
mendacia veris a^texuerint.
. And in the point of the immaculat^ conception, although the affirmative point
brought more Doctors then will make a consent in the Jesuits judgment, yet
the negative ^ast them off, and tell us, that they are not tied to so poor a
number of the Fathers Wadding Legate. de con^^^^ Virg* M^ri^ sect. 2* orat. 9.
6. Totidem (scil* 15.) and plures Doctores non ita potestatem Ecclesi^
coarctent, and ligent, ut si consultum, and rectum duxerit non possit contra
^os cum alijs d^fi^^^^*
, neither has the Church the Fathers, but the wisdom of GOD and his Spirit
for a rule and governor, which cannot be deceived Ibid Ne^ enim parvum
Docto^^m agg^rem, sed Dei sapientiam and spiritum pro regula, et rectore
veritatis habet sancta haec nostra, quae falli non po^^^, M^t^^ Ecclesia.
.

Further Alphonsus de Castre will believe Anacletus (a Merchant) better then
either Augustine or Hi^rom^ Alfons. de Castro adver. haerverbo Episcop. ^uic
Anacle to ^oli magis credid^ri^ quam ^ille Wicle^itis, im^o magis quam
Hi^^^nymo aut Augustine.
: Yet although they thus censure, sometimes justly, ofttimes unjustly those
Ancients, I will not conclude against them, that they utterly discard their
opinions and doctrines.

Now as their own affirm, that although the writings of the Doctors are to be
received with reverence, yet they bind us not to believe them in all their
opinions, but that we may justly contradict them when they speak against
Scripture or truth Turrec^em in cap. sanct. Rom did. 15. n. 12.
, so the Fathers themselves profess the same, as I have at large showed in
many places before See before S^ct. 5.
. And S. Augustine as he could not please himself without the Scriptures, so
he feared to offend others, and therefore presupposing, as the most learned
Answerer has affirmed, that without Scripture no certainty, no satisfaction
can be had, he thus declares himself. That which I say brethren, if I cannot
avouch it as certain, you must not be offended, I am but a man, and what I am
assured by the Scriptures, that I dare affirm, and of my self nothing. Hell
neither I have yet experience of, neither you; and perchance there shall be an
other way, and by he^^ it shall not be. For these things are altogether
uncertain August. in psalm 85. Quod dici^^^ fra^res, hoc si non vobis tanquam
cert^^ exposuero; ^e ^uccenseatis* ^omo enim sum; and qua^tum conceditur de
Scripturis ^anctis tantum a^deo dic^^e, nihil ex ^e: In^e^^^ne^ ego exper ^us
^um ^dh^c, nec vos: and (...) alia via erit, and non per in^er^um (...).
I^cer^a ^^nt enim haec.
. So that we see the most learned Answerer his lesson. [ Allege what authority
you list without Scripture, and it shall not suffice] is both Orthodoxe and
ancient also.

But letting this pass, as sufficiently urged already, will our Answerer have
the Forehead now (says the Jesuit) to charge us any more with Novelty Reply
p. 10^.
?

Truth needs not a brazen Forehead, but where it is persecuted, and then it
has defense little enough to have not only her Forehead, but face of brass
also: For how does the Jesuit outface, brow-beate, triumph, and tell every
Passenger, that he has beaten her (against her nature) into a Corner, when
there is no thing but a raging Sea, and watery foame.

But the great ones of his own profession teach him (says the Jesuit) that
the ancient Fathers did maintain those points we now defend against him: and
therefore one of them calls our Religion, A patched Coverlet of the Fathers
errors sowed together. Although then our Religion did consist of errors; as
Whitaker does affirm, yet may our Answerer blush to call them novelties,
seeing they be confessedly as old as the a^^ncient Fathers themselves Reply p.
^^^
.

All this will not suffice to exempt the Jesuit and his party from Novelty:
For it being admitted by him, that their Religion does consist of errors,
notwithstanding that we in courtesy should grant, that they lay long lurking
among those that were ancient, they will yet deserve, and (I doubt not)
obtain of all men the title of N^veltie. For as I have before declared, that
is new in Religion, which is not most a^^cient Page 19^. 194
: yet I will wait upon his repetition a little, and show, that if the Jesuit
cannot derive his Religion further then from the Fathers, the tradition
whereupon it is builded, is then but humane, and so a new thing, even Novelty
it self. And therefore T^rtullian tells us, That is most true, which is most
ancient: that most ancient which was from the beginning, that from the
beginning which from the Apostles Te^^^l* l. 4* a^ M^rc. Id veri^^ quod ^r^^s,
id pri^^, quod est ab initio, ab initio quod ab Apostoli^.
. How convincing an Argument then has the Jesuit produced for his purpose?
Will he find a truth in Faith that was not from the beginning? If CHRIST was
always and before all, Truth is a thing equally ancient, and from all
eternity, says the same Father Idem de Veland* Virgin. c. 1. Si ^emper
Christus, and prior omnibu^ ^que veritas sempite^^^ and antiqu^ res.
. And therefore whatsoever savoureth against the Truth, this (says he) is
heresy, though it be of long contin^ance Ibid. Quodcunque advers^^ ve^itatem
sapi^, ho^ erit h^resis, eti^^ ve^us co^su^^^e^.
. And although errors which are as ancient as some of the Fathers, be not
Novelties in the Jesuits judgment, yet they are new, and herefies also to him
that has received his Commission and doctrine from CHRIST; for which cause
Tertullian advises those that measure Novelties, as the Jesuit does, Viderint
quibus novum est quod sibi vetus est. Let them behold to whom that is new,
which they appreh^nd as ancient Tertul. loco vlt. cit.
, supposing that present Heretics many times conclude that for ancient, which
CHRIST and his Apostles distaste as Novelty.

Besides, if the Jesuit collect aright, the Church of Rome has in many things
defined for Noveltie against antiquity, rejecting sundry points which the
major and sounder part of the ancient Fathers did teach in the Church Wadding.
legate* de Concep. Virg. Mariae. Sect. 2. orat 9*. 6. m^^. 31. ^lures sunt and
graviores ij, quos supra retuli, contra quos cum alij^ definitum est circa
anima^u^ ante di^m Iudicij, beatitud^^em. Plures and gra viores, contra quos
docet ecclesia A^gelos esse spirituales* Plures and graviores, contra quos ^el
quibus dubitantibus d^ varijs libris and Scripturis Canonicis ^o^umque
editionibus, pl^t^ sunt statuta ab Ecclesia Multi and graves sunt, quos quidam
citant ^t volunt ^^nsisse ipsiss^^am hanc Virginem actualit^r pecc^sse, contra
quos tamen actualem ejus in^o^en^iam (...) ^^^dit Ecclesia. Aliaque multa sunt
h^jusmodi.
.

And if his confidence in this kind of reasoning be so strong, why does he
after labor to manifest us for Novelists, when Brist^ acknowledges, That some
there have been in many ages, in some points, of the Protestants opinions Mot.
pre^* et Mot. ^^.
: And Reinerius has (as before Page (...) in Margin
has been showed,) derived our doctrine condemned by you in the Leonist^,
from the Apostolical times.

Whereas he says that the most learned Answerer may much more be ashamed to
tear^e them profane and Heretical, when he is not able to find out, as I
said before, (says the Jesuit) that either by authority of Church, Council,
or Fathers, they have been condemned for such Reply p. 109
: I have answered hereunto before Page 99.
, and but even now told him out of Tertullian, that whatsoever savoureth
against the Truth is Heresy Above lit p.
: but if a point as Bellarmine affirms may be defined usu ecclesi^ Bellarm. de
Reliq sanct c. 6. (...) determinata ^rat usu totius Ecclesiae.
, why may not the precedent Non-use of the Church condemn their intrusion of
those points which the Church in her best times never practiced? And if no
points of Religion can be profane and Heretical, but such as are condemned by
authority of Church, Councels and Fathers; I desire the Jesuit that he would
forbear to style us either Heretics or profane, until he can produce one
Article of those agreed upon in the Synod held at London in the year 1562.
(concerning which he and all his Accomplices have been Challenged In the Lord
Primate his Prefac^ to the Reader, before the Answer to the Jesuits Challeng^.
* but have given no Answer thereunto) that has been condemned by authority
of Church, Councels or Fathers, within the first 500. years.

Now the Jesuit vainly conceiting that he has freed themselves from the
imputation of Novelty, proceeds in this manner; Let us (as heretofore we have
often done) retort his terms upon himself, and make him swallow down his
throat the shameful reproach of Novelisme Reply p. 10^.
.

Here is a Champion in campis Gurgustidonijs; He tells strange things, monsters
of his own labor; yet very few (I think) will believe him. But how will he
perform this? Why, by proving that Martin Luther was the first broacher of the
Protestants Religion Reply ibid*
.

The Jesuit (I suppose) knows that the Apostles were first called Christians
at Antioch, though the Reformed Churches are mistyled by them after Luther
began to Preach: But let them prove the Doctrine as new, as the name they have
given it, otherwise they vainly contend.

Whereas he is further of opinion, that this same cannot be more strongly
proved, then by the open confession of the said Luther himself Reply p. 109.
etc.

To This I Answer, that if Luther should speak as the Jesuit bears us in
hand, yet this should sway no more with us, then Tetzelius did with Luther when
he preached for Indulgences. But I know not how this Jesuit is turned out of
the way, for we find him snarling at a Latin work formerly set forth by the
most reverend Primate (but never answered by any Jesuit) wherein he has
pointed out a continual succession of his Church for many ages before Luther,
but with such unfortunate event, as even his own (if we might believe the
Jesuit) have judged him ridiculous herein Reply ibid.
. And for what reasons I pray you? Because first of all (says the Jesuit) he
took upon himself a task impossible to be performed, when he went about to
search, and to find out his Church in those times, wherein, by the conf^ssion
of his own learned Fathers and Br^thren, it was invisible, and not able to be
s^^n^ Reply p. 1^^*
.

This will be be tried in the examination, when the Jesuit will entreat one of
his Brethren to examine the same and answer it. In the mean time he charge
us falsely to hold the Church absolutely invisible. For if the Church be
considered, as containing all, of all ages, that believed the truth; this we
say is not totally visible, the greatest part being in Heaven. If we take the
Church for those which are sin^^re in their profession and are true members of
CHRIST [2. Tim. 2. 19.] Then we say, that an humane eye cannot behold any
member thereof, but by probability and conjecture. If for the people that
profess and the Pastors that teach the faith of CHRIST in several ages; this
we say was never totally invisible, but was known to them that professed the
same, though to persecutors that contemned the faith [2. Cor. 4. 3.] or sought
to oppress it [Rev. 12. 14.] it might many times be hidd. So that all the
places brought by the Jesuit may be answered by that which has bin said: for
some speak co^paratively in regard of the outward glory of the Ro^an Synagogue,
some in regard of precedent times, some in regard of the world that persecuted
them. But does the Jesuit conjecture that the most rever^^d Primate thought by
that book to declare the Church in her succession as outwardly visible and
glorious as R^me? This was not his in^ent, but to declare that there were many
that professed the truth of CHRIST in all ages though under persecution in the
succession of the Babylonish tyranny. And this the Jesuit might have observed
if he had read the same, for by the place of Ambrose in the Title Page, we may
conceive that his intention was to show, that though the Church be in condition
many times like the M^^ne, at full, decreasing, increasing, yet it ever does
remain a Church* and such a one, whose motions may be discerned and described
Ambros H^x^^^er. l. 4. c. ^. Ecclesia vide tu^ sicut Luna d^ficere, sed no^
d^ficit, ob^^^^ari po^^^^, (...)*
.

Secondly, (says the Jesuit) he brings in for Pillar^ of his successive
Church* Waldo, Wicklife and Husse Reply p. 110.
.

Here is sufficient to show, that the Jesuit does not care what he says, nor
fears to censure things that he never saw: For it is c^^are that the most
reverend Primate in that Historical explanation did not descend to the ages of
Wickli^^ or Husse, and therefore could not bring them in for P^l^ars of his
successive Church.

The Jesuit further tells us, that they are confessed to be damned her^ticks
Reply ^. 11^.
: but brings not any testimony for the same. He that speaks most bitt^rly
is O s^a^der against the Waldenses who taxes their opinions as absurd etc. But
I hope we are not tied to bel^ive him, where it is apparent he was altogether
deceived. That the most learned and holy Bishop I^well did cast off the
Waldenses as none of ours, may be imputed to this, that he b^held them as
their persecutors painted them out with spots of Ma^ich^isme and other
heretical errors. But if the Jesuit will read that discourse which he
cavils at, he shall see that the heresies imputed to them were bred in the
malicious minds of Papists, who did therefore f^ig^^ these opinions to be
theirs, because they reproached their dissolute lives and no otherwise Girard.
Histor. Franc. lib. 10. Quam. vis pravis i^buti ^^erint opinionibus, non hoc
ta^en tantum Papae and magnorum Principum odium in ^os concitabat, quantum
libertas orationis, qua dic^o^um Principum atque Ecclesiasticorum vitia and
mor^s dissol^tos culpare, ipsiusque Papae vitam and action^^ reprehendere
cons^everunt. Haec praecipua res fuit, quae universorum ^is con^^avit odium,
quaeque ^ffecit, *ut plures ^efari^ affingerentur ^is opiniones, a quib^^ (...)
^^^^ant al^^^^*
.

Thirdly (says the Jesuit) both Luther himself and all his followers, do
make him the first Author of Protestan^y Reply page* 110.
.

What, Luther the first that ever taught the doctrine professed by Protestants?
Those that are better read in story then our Jesuit confess otherwise; for
Poplinerius acknowledges the Waldenses and Protestants to differ little and
that this doctrine was preached and def^nded throughout Europe, in France,
Spain, England, Italy, Germany, and other Nations also Popli^er. hist. Franc.
lib. 1. ^dit. a^. 1581. fol, 7. b* Hi (Albigenses) invitis Principibus
Christianis omnibus, circa annum 1100* and temporibus subsequentibus, doctrinam
suam, ab ea quam hodie, PROTESTANTS amplectuntur parum differentem, non per
Galliam solum totam, sed^^iam per omnes p^n^ Europae ora^ disseminarunt* Nam
Galli, Hispani, Angli, Scoti, Itali, Germani, Bo^^mi, S^xon^^* Poloni, Lithuani
and gentes aliae, ^am ad hunc diem pertinaciter defenderunt.
. But I need not to stand in defense of that book which does defend it self,
and ever will against either the Jesuit or his fellow laborers; neither has
he urged any thing worthy observation against the same; For there is no
question but Luther did powerfully preach against Popish corruption, and by his
ministry (together with others whom GOD raised up with him) did publish the
Gospel, the light whereof for a long time they did disgrace and revile. It is
not enough to make Luther the Author of our Religion, because after your
Apostasy he^ was one that at first did publickely and zealously preach the
same. When the Arians persecuted the Catholic Faith, eclipsed, obscured it,
and made it reputed H^resie, insomuch that the whole world See before page* ^5
lit* ^ in marg.
was an Arian, and Catholic also in her own judgment; was the Catholic
faith afterward published with zeal and victory, the birth of Christian
Religion, the beginning of our Creed? Nothing more trivial.

That which the Jesuit speaks afterward of Luthers remorse of Conscience is
ridiculous and might have been spared: for who can doubt, but that in his
^calous performing of his duty in publishing the Truth of the Gospel of
CHRIST, the Devil did as violently assault him within* as the Pope without,
and thereby he was afflicted, with as many superstitious fears within, as
outward terrors? and for the same reasons* (I suppose) in regard the
preservations of their kingdoms did depend upon it.

Now at last that he may conclude, he casts up his Audit; S^^ing that our
Answerer cannot tell us that which we dema^nded, to wit, when or by whom our
Catholic Religion was first brought in Reply p. 11^.
.

Although there is no Injunction for it, (as has been showed) that he should
answer your Demand; yet he has in all your particulars discovered your
innovations; which how it has been avoided wilbee examined in their due place.

Yet the Jesuit tells us, that he will do the Answerer the favor to tell
him briefly where, when, and by whom his Protestant Religion was first begun
Reply p. 113.
.

But I ask the Jesuit whether in his Conscience he is not checked for urging
Calvin etc, with a corrupt mind* when from their words he would have it
concluded that the Catholic Faith did first b^gin at Witt^nberg^? I hope the
Jesuit can consider, that the repairing of the Temple, was not the laying the
foundation of it: neither David, H^^^^hiah, or Josiah their regulating of
things amiss, a bringing in of a new law. Teaching for doctrine, the
Traditions of men, this makes a beginning: but let the ancient of days be
preached in the last times, this is no Nov^ltie, no new thing.

But says the Jesuit, Lo^ here then the place where, Wittenberge: the year
1517: the day of the month, the xxxi. of Oct^ber: the day of the week^,
Saturday: yea the very hour of the day, twelve of the clock, when first
Protestancie was br^^^hed by Luther Reply p. 1^3.
.

Nothing more fond: Luther resisted Popish abuses such a day, therefore the
Faith preached by Luther did then first begin. What? did de make a new Gospel,
as some of you have attempted See before page 330. 331*
* or frame a new Creed, as you have lately done See before 359.
? I desire the Jesuits evidence, or his modesty; his evidence to convict
Luther, or his modesty to condemn himself. For if the opposing of I^dulgences
be the beginning of our Faith, as the Jesuit does insinuate, Bellarmine will
show that he has failed both i^ person, time, and place Bellarm. de Indulgen.
l. ^* c. 1. Primi q^^ indulgentias contempserunt and oppugnarunt, fu^ru^^
Walden^^^. -- Seq^^tus est Valdenses, Ioannes Wicle^^^* -- Wicle^um seq^^ti
s^^^ Hussit^ -- Hos MAIORES and PARENTS hab^it Ma^tin^s Lutherus.
. And although he give Luther the name, yet Bzovius will not have Luther, but
Sta^pitius to have first begun the work Bzovius Annal* Eccles. in ann. 1517.
number. ^. Sta^pitius quoque quamv^^ PRIMV^ ^ap^d^m, valid^ori postea brachio
vibrandum, contra Ecclesiam conj^^iss^t, sect^ tamen, cujus si non ^^ctor,
certe promo^o^ (...) ^^^en dar^ non potuit, sed ^^rpi^^dinem hanc Luthero
reliquit.
. And notwithstanding the Jesuit tells us so confidently that Protestancie
was first br^ached by Luther the year 1517. yet the same Author affirms that
he disputed against them in the points o^ freewill, m^rits, and traditions the
year before Ibid. nu^* 1^ Superiore po^^o an^o 1516* Idem Lutherus disputavit
con^ra Scholastico^ Theologo^, de libero a^^^trio, merit^s bono^um op^^^^* and
traditionibu^ Ecclesiastici^: ^asque propositio^e^ To^o* 1. op^^u^ (...)
^^ser^it* ^^ (...) ^^ique appa^e^^ (...) jam (...)*
. So punctual the Jesuit is that in the judgment of his own he has in every
circumstance troad awry.

His repetition of A^g^stines rule [ That Custom which ^en looking up into
former ti^^s, do not find to have been brought in by any that lived after
the Apostles, is rightly believed to have been delivered by the Apostles
themselves.] helps neither them nor their cause, for they never have, nor ever
will be able to manifest either by our confession, or otherwise that Ro^ish
customs have been universally received, neither can they defend them from
Noveltie in their ^^^rance. wherefore they may well be cast forth into the
D^nghill, as wanting the Salt of Apostolical institution for their seasoning.
So that S. Augustines Rule condemns their Novelties, and the GENENERALL
CONTROVERSY is cleared, but indeed no otherwise then to the detection of their
Egyptian Darkness.


