ANAPAYSIS REST FOR THE Restless Soul.

By ARCHIBALD SYMMER, Minister of the Gospel.

MATTHEW. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for WILLIAM SHERES, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir John Hanbury, of Kelmarsh Knight, peace
external, internal, supernall, eternal.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
GReat is the love of Christ to his 1 Ioh. 3. 16.
Saints, and gracious is the effect thereof in them, which is their Christian
charity one to another. This is not in word neither in tongue only, but Verse
18.
in deed, and in truth: and such is that of your Worship to me. This is a
comfort; but what shall I say? it inferres a difficulty, it must be mutual,
love requires a requital, and how can Cleanthes requite a real, a golden love
with the airie store of his fantasy? For poverty is the patrimony of the
Muses. Noble Sir, though Momus reckon, that letters are but the clouds of
Helicon, yet in Apolloes esteem they are durable riches: yea so lovely is
learning, and gracious are the Muses, that Favin. Parisien. in his Theatr.
Honor.
the Rose is become their livery, and the Hieroglyphick of such as love them;
and good reason, for most tried is the truth of that posie: Dignum laud virum
Musa vetat mori: For The Immortal Sisters Chaplets in their bowers, They wither
not, as do all other flowers.

Reject not therefore (I humbly entreat) this poor present of my rustic muse,
the testimony of my love; so shall my little infant being swadled in the gentle
bands of your most worthy acceptance, batten at the last among men, and its
parent shall be bound to continue,

Your Worships humble Orator at the Throne of Grace, ever in the Lord Jesus to
be commanded, Archibald Symmer.

Comfort for a weary soul humbled for sin.
CHAP. 1. All men are weary.
MAn that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble:
Surely every child Job. 14. 1.
of Adam is altogether vanity: for all that is under the Sun is vanity, and
vexation Psalm. 39. 11.
of the spirit; Which the wise man declares by his own example, and very
Ecles. 1. 14.
dear experience. And if that wise and peaceable King of the Lords peculiar
people, and glorious type of Christ the 1 Timothy 1. 1.
Prince of peace, and author of our hopes and happiness, Psalm. 39. 5.
was on the highest sphere and top of all his earthly prosperity, and rest,
altogether vanity, what shall we say of Epict.
our selves, who are but punies, and Wretches, yea mappes of miseries and
calamities, in comparison of him?

Now this universal labor of man's mind, and unresisted vexation of his
spirit, is properly when we can neither obtain that which we desire, nor
shun that which we loath. And as the mutinous perturbations and affections of
our hearts and wills, and the desires of our flesh are in number and variety
many, so are the afflictions and vexations of the spirit; for every affection a
several affliction. Every carnal desire causes sorrow, and sorrow is a
tedious labor and toil to the mind, Pro. 15. 13. Every carnal affection
causes grief, because it is always confounded and disappointed. What if the
carnal heart obtain all that it desires? yet is it frustrated, and
disappointed still; for it hoped for more comfort in its perishing hopes and
earthly transitories than ever they can possibly afford: the hope of earthly
comforts is better than the fruition and enjoyment of them. Thus every man
labors, is heavy laden The labor of the unregenerate.
and weary under the burden of vanity. The proud and ambitious man labors for
honor and glory, and curryes the applause of the world with all his might, to
touch heaven, like Herod, with his finger, and the firmament, as Lysimachus,
with the point of his lance, and all is vanity. The mammonist and idolatrous
worldling covets to wax plentiful Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. Mammon in the Syriack
dialect is the desire of riches.
and rich; this is the moiling toil of his miserable carkeis by day, and
watching vexation of his restless spirit by night. This labor is never at an
end in this life: for mammon increases as fast as money, the love of riches
increases with the vanity loved: The Epicure and voluptuous man labors for
pleasure, and to plunge himself with the sow in the mire of sensuality, and
perishing delight.

This is the most brutish labor of all: for hereby a man Crescit amor nummi,
etc. Iuven.
is, as it were, metamorphozed and turned into a beast. The envious man labors
to annoy and endammage his neighbor: Thus did those forty men travel with
mischief, that vowed Paul's death: their labor was painful; for they would
neither eat nor drink, till they had effected their purpose, Act. 23. 12, etc.
Thus all men labor by nature, and all are weary, and all these labors are
sinful.

The Saints and spiritual Ones of the Lord also labor, but after another
manner; theirs is a blessed labor, for it is for the remission of sins, and
peace of conscience: they are weary under the burden of Iniquity, and
therefore cry out every one with David, Psalm. 51. 2. Wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin; and with the holy Apostle, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

CHAP. 2. All find not rest.
ALl our cares tend to this end (says Saint Augustine) No true rest for the
wicked.
that we may enjoy the thing we desire. And the heart finds rest when it
obtaines that which it hops and labors for. Now Christ will never fulfill
any carnal desire, therefore the natural and carnal heart shall never find
content and rest; there is none for such in Christ, for Cassiodor. Psalm. 6. A
narrow sea between the haven Aulis of Beotia and Eubaea, Arist. Isa. 57. 21.
carnal men are none of his, whom nothing can please but the new creature,
Gal. 6. 15. For they have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. And without
Christ there is nothing but labor and toil, vexation and weariness. The
world is like an Irish sea, wherein is nothing to be expected, but the stormy
tempests of adversity. It is like Euripus, which ebbeth and flows seven times
a day, constant only in inconstancy. Behold therefore the carnal man's folly,
though there be no peace to the wicked, says my God; yet will he seek for
content and rest by the means of his own labor, and to quiet his
discontented heart by his own ways, but all is in vain. Riches cannot
possibly satisfy the covetous man; if Jupiter (as the heathen reports)
should multiply his sheep still at his request, he would mutter
notwithstanding: Pauperis est numerare pecus, he is but a poor man that can
number his flock. The Epicure and sensual man thinks to satisfy the
concupiscence and lusts of his flesh, by obeying and following the same, but
he is grossly deceived: for as oil being cast into the sea mitigates the
violent surges of the same, but for a moment, and by and by they become a great
deal fiercer: so the thing that a voluptuous man desires, though it abate the
toil of his laboring mind, it is but for a while, and never fully, but
presently afterward it befalls him as it did the monster Hydra; when Hercules
Simile*
had cut off one head, two did rise in the place, so the Epicures labor, and
vexation of his swinish heart, after it is a little mitigated, increases, and
arises to an higher pitch than ever it did before. As then he that has the
dropsy can never quench his thirst by drinking, so can no carnal and
unregenerate man content and quiet his spirit with the vanities of this world,
nor the sensual soul its brutish desire with pleasures.

CHAP. 3. All and only the weary members of Christ are refreshed.
HO, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, etc. for thus says he
that is high and excellent, he Isay 55. 1.
that inhabiteth the eternity, whose name is the holy one. I dwell in the high
and holy place, and with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite
heart, Isay 57. 15. And again, Come unto me all ye that labor Mat. 11. 28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Such as feel the burden of
their sins original and actual, and groan under the same, laboring to have
the release and ease of Matthew. 5. 3.
them, and such as are poor in spirit, and sensible of their spiritual wants
and weakness, lowly in heart, and base in their own esteem, and therefore
labor for the free pardon of all their offenses for the righteousness of
Jesus Phil. 3. 9.
Christ, which is by faith, and a joyful sense of the love and favor of God,
which is better than life it self, and pray for that peace of God, even that
tranquillity of conscience that passes all natural understanding; such as are
thus humbled, are fit objects of mercy and compassion: C. 4. 7.
for the Lord gives grace unto the humble: they are capable of rest and
refreshment. Such broken hearts are the sacrifices Iam. 4. 6. Psalm. 51. 17.
of God; a broken and a contrite heart, O Lord, thou will never despise; who so
does pray with David, hide thy V. 9, 10, 11, 12.
face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities: Create in me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me; Cast me not away from thy
face, and take not thy holy spirit from me: Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, etc. that poor soul shall be liberally comforted, and fully
refreshed in the bowels of Christ's endless compassions. Never did any
Faithful penitent heart depart from the throne of Grace without some sensible
consolation. Never did Christ since the foundations of the Isa. 1.
world, reject any of his poor ransomed members; but though their sins were
as red as crimson, they became as white as snow, so that the bones which the
Lord had broken, did ever thereafter rejoice in his mercy.

CHAP. 4. The reason of the former point.
ALl the weary Saints of Christ are refreshed, whether Gal. 3. 28. Ephesians. 6. 9.
these be rich or poor, Jews or Greeks, bond or free, mals or female: for
with God there is no respect of persons, but as many as walk according to this
rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Who Gal
6. 16.
else should be invited unto the participation of mercy, to be partakers of the
privileges and comforts of the Kingdom Phil. 2. 8, 9.
of Christ, but such as he came into the world to save? whom should he refresh,
but those whom he has redeemed? Matthew. 10. 6.
And whom should he exalt, but those for whose sakes he was humbled, and
afterward highly exalted? Now it is evident that Christ was sent of the Father
into the world, not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, and to
save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, for the same was prophesied of
him, by the holy Ghost, long before his Incarnation, Isa. 61. 1. etc. And when
Christ himself came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, he went (as
his custom was) into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and the book of this
Prophecy being delivered of the Minister unto Luke 4.
him, he expounded the same: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me,
that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty
them that are bruised, and that I should preach the acceptable year of the
Lord, Luke 4. 16, 17, 18, 19. Hence it is evident, that our blessed Savior was
sent of God the Father not for his own cause, but for his afflicted members
sake, neither came he to be Lord over all, but to redeem all his own. So God
the Father delivered Mat. 11. 27.
all things unto him, he gave him all power both in heaven, and in earth, and
made him Lord over all; that he might deliver C. 28. 18.
us, wretched souls, from the jaws of hell, and pull us out of the paws of
that infernal Lion Satan, whose bondslaves we were, sitting in darkness, and
in the region and shadow of death, till that dayspring from on high visited
Isay 9. 1. Luke 1.
us, and set us at liberty. Thus our blessed Redeemer sits at the right
hand of God, and makes intercession for us, he helps his afflicted servants,
and sends them release in Romans 8 34. Genesis 45. 5.
their distresses. So was Joseph sent into Egypt by God, and there exalted for
the preservation of his Church, and so he was a type of Christ. So David was
preferred, and advanced Psalm. 18.
unto the Kingdom of Israel, and so was he likewise a figure of Christ, 2 Samuel 22.

CHAP. 5. Damnable is the case of all such as are strangers from Christ.
WHat shall we say then of those that are enemies unto the Cross of Christ
Jesus? what is the condition Ephesians. 2.
of such as are strangers from the life of God, aliens from the common wealth
of Israel, and forrainers from the Covenants of promise, who have hope, but are
without God in the world, walking according to the course of the same,
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience? Their estate is most damnable and woeful; the
tragical plight of all such impenitent and senseless sinners is to be
deplored even with tears of blood. The Atheist, that is abominable and
disobedient, and unto good works reprobate, though his cauterized conscience,
and senseless heart hardened through the custom and habit of sin, seem to
rest and sleep for a while; yet shall he be awakened with a The misery of the
Atheist.
doleful wakening, when the dreadful sense of the wrath of the Lord of hosts
shall lash and whip him naked, as he did Cain, and as the furies of hell did
monstrous Nero. Then shall he cry out with cursed Caligula: A wounded
conscience Genesis 4. Sueton. in Ner.
who can bear it? Where shall he rest then? all his former pleasing courses
then shall he condemn, as Job did his friends: miserable comforters are ye
all, Job. 16. 1. Thus Pro. 18. 14.
is the wicked like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt, there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isay 57. 20, 21. The
proud Pharisee and Justiciarie Hypocrite, that flatters and deludes his soul
with a groundless opinion of his own righteousness, shall in stead of peace
and rest inherit trouble and sorrow: for all his righteousness is instar panni
menstruati, like a filthy Of the proud Pharisee.
clout, Isay 64. 6. and therefore when Isaiahs hungry man, after his dream,
Isay 29. 8. and Passets, the Juglers guests shall be satisfied, and filled with
the fantastical shows, and vain appearances of imaginary and vanishing
dishes; then shall the hypocrites heart be quieted and refreshed through Isay.
29 8.
his own righteousness: for his most plausible works of morality, and
seeming devotion, are so imperfect, and polluted, Jewel.
that they are not able to abide the examination of Jehovaes all-seeing eye,
and trial of his dreadful tribunal: none but that pure and perfect
righteousness of Christ can endure it: none but the contrite heart, that is
clothed and armed therewith, shall ever be able to stand before him.

If such smooth formalists find no true rest, what shall Of those that seek
for help of wizzards etc.
we say then of such as seek for comfort and ease, not through any appearance
of goodness, or so much as any show of holiness; but by the means of the
devil, as wizzards, and witches? cold is their comfort: it is like a draught
of cold water to a man that is sick of the dropsy; as that hasteneth him to
his grave, so does this diabolical comfort drive the Sons of Belial to the
pit of hell. What fruit reaped Saul by his conference and consultation with the
witch at Endor, and with the devil himself? A woeful answer: Tomorrow shall
thou and thy Sons be with me, and the Lord shall give the host of Israel
into the hand of the Philistines. And what was the effect of this answer?
Surely nothing but bitter fear, and fainting infirmity, 1 Samuel 28. 20. Ahaz
died the death because he sent to enquire of Baalzebub the devil, god of
Ekron, 2 Kin. 3. 4. Thus are all the enemies of Christ, and such as are
strangers from him, ever confounded.

CHAP. 6. An Exhortation to come unto Christ.
WHosoever then would find rest unto his weary soul, must come unto Christ:
for he is that Ladder 1 Samuel 28. Christus scala coeli.
which Jacob in the way to Haron, saw reaching to Heaven, whereby God and man
are joined together, and by whom the Angels minister unto us: all graces,
joys, and rest by him are given unto us, and we by him ascend into heaven,
Genesis 28. 12, 13. Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there
is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12.
And this is our glorious prerogative, and consolation, that if any man sin,
Jesus Christ the just is our Advocate with the Father, and he the atonement for
all our sins. 1 John 2. 1, 2. For the office of his intercession and redemption
are joined together. And howsoever he prove a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness unto the Grecians: yet unto them which are called, both of Jews
and Grecians, Christ 1 Cor. 1. 23 14
is the power of God, and the wisdom of God, yea he is all in all, Col. 3.
11. He is our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1.

Without Christ then, and the grace of his Kingdom, there is nothing in the
world but vanity and vexation of spirit. Learning, and victory, plenty, and
pleasure, honor, and length of days, vanity of vanities, without Christ all
is vanity. As Aristotle's learning increased, so did the care and toil of his
restless and wandering spirit, ever till the first borne of death had the
dominion over him. As Quint. Curt. V^us Pellaeo Iuveni non sufficit orbis, etc.
Iuven. Sat. 10.
was the master, so was his Scholar. Alexander the great, when he had
conquered and subdued Grecia, Asia, and India, all these triumphant victories
could not content his unsatiable heart, but he wishes that Phlegra field had
been full of Giants, like Porus, that most magnanimous and mighty Indian
Prince, to fight withal, and that the vast Ocean had been firm land. There
is no earthly material thing that can satisfy the heaven-borne, immateriall
soul, none but that infinite God of spirits is able to content Eccles. 12. 7.
man's unsatiable spirit. For the Lord made it for himself, to feed on his
immortal joys and dainties: Plutarch therefore derides and mocks the Epicure
and sensual man, that would delight and please the soul with the pleasures of
the body. This is impossible: Let the Ruffian labor to drown his melancholy
fit, and cheer up, and refresh his pensive and languishing heart, with
quaffing, and swilling, and healthing; yet shall he be confounded; drink may
make him mad, but never truly merry; he may roar, but never rejoice, for this
is the privilege of the sober Saints of Christ Jesus, Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in
the Lord, rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in
heart. But some man will object, What? did not the noble Socrates, (who called,
as it is reported, and brought as it were Philosophy down from Heaven) and
divine Plato, who taught the Art of prayer, and wise Seneca, who wrote so In
Alcib. 2. vel de voto. Null. secund, Plutar.
learnedly of the tranquillity, and peace of the mind, etc. Did they never
attain unto true blessedness and rest? Surely no: for though they sought and
searched for consolation and peace to their troubled minds; yet did they never
labor for this peace of God, which passes all natural understanding, Phil.
4. 7. For they knew it not, and why? Because they knew not Christ, the Lord of
glory and peace, 1 Cor. 2. 8. So without Christ the way unto peace, they
wandered out of the path of peace, without Christ the Truth of peace, they
obtained at the most but John 14. 6.
a shadow of peace, as Ixion embraced an empty cloud in stead of his beloved
Juno, and without Christ the life of peace, they ended their lives, and their
peace together. Wherefore, if any man would live in peace and joy with God and
his own conscience, which is Gods continual Deputy, he must begin, continue,
and end in Christ. No beginning of true peace, till a man begin truly to live
in Christ; and no continuance and perpetuity of rest, unless 1 Pet. 2. 25.
he continue and rest in that God of rest. If after we are received in the
sheepfold of that Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, we go astray at any
time, and pass beyond the limits and bounds of his blessed will, then do we
disquiet and trouble our souls; we refuse Isay 8. 6.
the waters of Shiloah, that run softly, and sweetly, and go to the swelling
and raging waters of Jordan. What trouble and sorrow, and bitter anguish of
heart did poor David suffer by the means of his sins? how heavy complaints
and lamentations did he express, Psalm. 6. 25. 32. And how strong tears and
prayers sent he up to the Lord again for mercy and forgiveness, and for the
renewing of his holy Spirit of peace, and joy in him? Psalm. 51. So does every
sanctified sensible soul feel the smart of sin, and breach of peace by the
same. When God is offended, the conscience is troubled; and till he be
pacified, peace cannot be recovered. Therefore the wounded soul must run
unto Christ, and rest in him.

Now the man that comes unto Christ for mercy How we should come unto Christ.
and peace, he must run unto his Redeemer, with the two spiritual feet of
faith and repentance; of faith, because it is impossible without faith to
please God: for he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that seek him, Hebr. 11. 6. And he that asks and
beggeth of Christ what he needs, must ask in faith, and not waver: For he
that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away.
Neither let that man that doubts of Gods will, think that he shall receive
any thing of the Lord, Jam. 1. 6. 7. He must run likewise with the foot of
Repentance: For we know that God hears not impenitent sinners, contemners of
God, and such as delight in wickedness, John 9. 31. Which that blessed man,
after Gods own heart, confessed, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard wickedness in mine
heart, the Lord will not hear me. He that comes unto Christ to be
comforted and exalted, must first be 1 Samuel 13. 14.
humble and dejected, and in the humiliation and lowliness of his heart enter
in at the strait gate, and walk in the narrow way that leads unto life: For
the man that is stuffed up with sin, and puffed up with pride and arrogance,
with lust and covetousness, with a natural conceit of righteousness, with
malice and envy, etc. such a one is too too big to enter in at that strait
gate, and walk in Matt 7. 13.
that narrow way; he can no more get in and walk there, than a Camel can go
through the eye of a needle. But the contrite and broken heart, the soul
sorrowful for sin enters in at that gate, and walks in that narrow way,
which leads it assuredly unto solid and true rest. The Jer. 6. 16.
true penitent is conducted and led unto true rest, and his joy is certain:
For Christ promises the same assuredly, Matthew. 11. 28. Refocillabo vos, I will
give you rest. He promises more than any corporal Physician dare, or can do
to his patient: he can but offer his pains, and promise to do his best
endeavor; but he cannot promise recovering of health to the sick: But Christ
does infallibly assure his spiritual patient of true health, and peace to his
soul. Never was there from the foundations of the world, any contrite spirit
disappointed of this joyful refreshment, nor ever shall be. A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will never despise, Psalm. 51. 17. Christ the God of
truth has ever fulfilled his promise. And as this rest is certain, so is it
solid and true: the remission of sins, the sense of Gods love, and the peace of
conscience, is heaven upon earth: is it a continual Feast, which makes a
cheerful countenance, and causes good health, Prove. 17. 22. yea it sustaineth
and bears the infirmities, and all the crosses, and vexations of this life,
Prove. 18. 14. Prove. 15. 13.
And finally, being the first fruits, and beginning of eternal bliss, it is
the infallible note and token of the same. Who so finds, and enjoys this
rest, the same shall be glorified after this life with Christ in the heavens
world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Tho: Wykes.
Land. Oct. 10. 1637.

