A PARADOXE, Proving by reason and example, that Baldness is much better than
bushie hair, etc.

Written by that excellent Philosopher Synesius, Bishop of Thebes, or (as some
say) Cyren.

A Pretty pamphlet, to pervse, and replenished with recreation.

Englished by Abraham Fleming.

Hereunto is annexed the pleasant tale of Hemetes the Heremite, pronounced
before the Queens Majesty.

Newly recognized both in Latin and English, by the said A. F.

(...).
The badge of wisdom is baldness.
Printed by H. Denham. 1579.

(...).
(...).

The life of Synesius drawn out of Suydas his gatherings.
SYnesius borne at Ptolemais a City in Pentapolis, Bishop of Thebes in
Aphrica, being a Philosopher, and a Churchman, wrote sundry books, both of
Grammar, and of Philosophy: he wrote also Orations of commendation, or
demonstration, to Princes and Great men; as the praise of Baldness: and a
meruellous notable treatise concerning Providence, and that in the Greek
tongue. Furthermore, he made many other books, and Epistles, full of
wonderful wit, learning, and judgment.

Thus much for the credit of the Author.
The Epistle Apologeticall to the lettered Reader.
IT might be demed dotage in the Deviser, and madness in the Translator, that
they both by consent, would publish and disperse a toie so ridiculous, as this
appears to be, penned in the praise of Baldness. But the Deuisers settled
judgment discharges him of dotage, the Translators aduisement cleereth him of
madness, and the work it self consideratiuelie perused, does answer for them
both.

Whosoever therefore, at some evening vacation from their necessary affairs,
shall pleasantly pass over this pretty Pamphlet (being but an hours
reading) marking how the whole discourse is knit together by iointes and
sinews: the reasons natural, pithie, and ponderous: the examples historical,
short, sweet, and ancient: I think they will vouchsafe it such favorable
sentence, as a certain Philosopher gave in the like respect.

"Namely, Sapientiam, quae splendore suo semper circumfunditur, in minutulis
rebus sese exerere: fautoresque suos, vel in leuiusculis conatibus, nobilitare.
That in matters of small moment, Lady wisdom, alwais compassed with her own
brightness, aduaunceth her self: and such as love her, though the trade
wherein they travel be not weighty, she makes famous."

Which saying to be true, the euentes themselves give in evidence. For, such
is the nature of wisdom, that where she deals, she leaves beauty: yea, even
in so base a thing as Baldnes is, though it seem but a fable at the first blush.

This being well weighed of our ancients, (men, for their ornaments of mind,
matchless: and singularity of praise, peerless:) they might well enough,
without controllment, make their knowledge known: poudering trifles with
gravity, vnlikelihoodes with probabilities, and follies with wisdom.

This has been a common practice of our Predecessors, men furnished with
sundry gifts of excellency, as by examples of particularities, as well in
Orators, as also Poets, both foraine and domestical, may be proved.

"For, Lucian, and Apuleius vvrote of an Ass, Themison in praise of the herb
Plantaine, Homere in commendation of Wine, Ephren in dispraise of Laughing,
Orpheus and Hesiodus of Fumigations, or Perfumes, Chrysippus of Colevvortes,
Phanias of Nettles, Messala made for every several letter of the A B C, a
several book, Virgil of a Gnat, Ovid of a Nut, and Erasmus but lately of the
praise of folly, and Heywood yet later, of the Spider and the Fly."

Shall we give rash and unseasoned sentence against these learned men, naming
them brainlesse and brainsicke: or otherwise prescribing unto them matters
more meet whereon to meditate? No.

"But as the vvorkemanship of Myrmecides was vvonderfull, who made four
horses dravving a cart, and their driuer with his whip, in such curious
compass, that they were hidden under the wings of a fly: and Callicrates a
ship, the whole body whereof a little bird couerd with his feathers:" even
so these, and the like vvriters, in small matters bevvraieng great wisdom,
deserve no less praise for their travel, than others desire pleasure and
profit of their toil.

And therefore, well advised and prudent Reader, vouchsafe Synesius, a most
learned and ancient Bishop, the reading: whom although some unskillfully (I
fear) shall condemn, yet you discreetlie (I hope) will commend.

" Vera namque and germana laus eorum ab ore manat, qui omnia suo modulo metiri
norunt: spuria vero and adulterina, quae reru^ vmbellas sectatur. For, that is
true and perfect praise, which proceeds from the mouth of them, that have
skill to skan all things in their own kind: as for such praise as seeks after
shadows and fancies, it is false and counterfeit."

With which sentence I conclude, in the behalf of mine Author, submitting
his travel to the censure of the sage, among whom, as all wise heads deserve
inrollment, so I wish them vviselie to weigh his words, who has written
this work upon the vvarrant of wisdom.

Thine for thy pleasure and profit Abraham Fleming.

A pretty Paradoxe pleasantly painting out the praise, profit, and preferment
of Baldness, etc.
DION This Dion, surnamed Golden tongue, was both a Rhetorician, and a
Philosopher: his wonted fashion was to go abroad with a Lions skin over him, to
the end that he might be the more reverenced among men. In process of time he
became so familiar with Traian Caesar the Emperor, that he rode in the chariot
of royalty with the Emperor as his companion.
with the Golden tongue, wrote a Book in the praise and commendation of
frisled and shocked hair, a Book so well stored with plenty of good matter
and gaie words, that every balde pate must needs be ashamed of him self, in
consideration of ye worthiness of that man's work. For why, his whole
discourse agreed with Nature: because all and every one of us, even by the
inclination and drawing on of Nature, covet to be fair, handsome, and well
favored: to the atteining whereof, hair well grown, is no slender help, which
even Nature her self has appointed to spring and increase with us, as we our
selves rise in age. When this ornament of hair decaieth and falls away, it
strikes sore torments into the heart. Heerevpon I thought, that my luck was
to suffer far more grievous inconveniences, than the Atheniens did at the
hands of Archidamus, in the cutting down of the Among all other
discommodities, which Archidamas did to ye Atheniens, it appears that he
hewed down their goodly woods and groves, least by them they might any way be
succored.
trees of Acarnania. Presently upon that conceit, I fell in opinion, that I was
one of the unseemly Euboeans, of whom Homer reports, that being balde
before, and hairie behind, they marched unto Troie. Thus doubtful of mind,
and at defiance with destiny, as a favorer of This Epicurus denied Gods
providence, affirming that the world was not governed there by, etc.
Epicurus, I said: What place is there left unto divine providence, seeing
that all things fall out and happen to all men otherwise than they deserve,
considering that their worthiness would be well rewarded? And what offense
have I committed, that I should become so unsavory and unsweet a morsel
unto women kind? If I were only contemned and set light by of such women, as
are neighbors and borderers hereaboutes, I should be never a whit grieved,
considering that I keep my concupiscences in such subjection, and my ranging
lusts in such bondage, that I dare, for continency and honesty, make
challenge even to Antea the wife of king Praetus, lay sore at Bellerophon, and
used all alluring means, that she might, to have carnal knowledge with him: but
he having regard to his own honesty, and to the kings honor, with stood her
incontinencie by his chastity.
Bellerophon. But my mother which bare me, and my sisters which sucked of ye
same milk, what say they? Their words are these, that beauty and well
fauourednesse stands much upon the hair. This is confirmed by the doing of
Queen Parysatis, who restrained her kindness and love from king Artaxerxes,
when she saw before her the amiable personage of Cyrus. But whiles I mused
upon this mischief, I began to take stomach, and put reason in arms against
my fighting affection, which giving place by little and little, as unable to
encounter, I became well appeased. For against two, no not Hercules himself had
strength sufficient, who when he was violently set upon of These were the
sons of Neptunus and Moliona, whom Hercules overthrew in a combat at
Olympus, a hill in Thessalia.
Cteaton, and Eurytus, by privy assaults wanted ability and force to
withstand them: and had not Iolaus assisted him against Hydra, a foul water
Serpent, aided with the sea Crabbe, Hercules had not escaped death. As for me,
in so much as I have not This Iolaus was Hercules nephue, by whose help the
heads of Hydra were cut off, and consumed in fire.
Iolaus to take my part, I am commanded to give over all unto Dion. But yet,
when I enter league with reason, and deliberate with my self in this manner:
O! of al bald pates thou art the most excellent, and worthiest to wear the
golden spurs: thou art valiant and victorious in deed, which make no
account of calamities, but at great banquets and solemn feasts, when
baldness is called in question, and demaundes made concerning high forheads,
steppest out and show thy self to the company, as doing thy diligence to
maintain an honest seemelinesse: I forbear Dion in his foolish fancy, and in
A city in Greece, where such as should try masteries at Olympus, were
admitted.
Pisa (as the Proverb is) I prepared my self for this present purpose. And as
Ulysses, notwithstanding that he felt in himself a disposition to wrath and
vengeance, brideled him self with patience, saying to him self: (...), etc.
Heart hold out, for thou have endured far greater greefes than this, etc.
Homer Odyss. 20.
Ulysses continued constant and patient, not storming at the wantonness and
lasciviousness of his maidens, nor violently rushing upon them, as greedy of
reuengement, notwithstanding they were merry and pleasant with their
Paramours: even so will I behave my self toward Dion, and all his
affections. To the intent therefore that I may not forget his long and gallant
speech, which is continually before mine eyes, I will rehearse part thereof,
and so proceed.

When I was risen up early in the morning, and (after my common manner) had
made my prayers to the gods, the next thing that I had to do, was to bestow
some time and travel in trimming of my hair. For, in the years of my
minority, being under age, and but weak of body, I was not so wise as to
have regard unto it, but let it grow disordered and entangled, like wool upon
weathers backs: yea more foul and filthy, than it is now fine and frisled.
It appeared therefore wild and rough to the eye, and could not be sundered in
locks, nor parted for comlines, without tearing and renting from the scalp.
Moved hereupon, I undertook to disperse the praise and commendation of such,
as were delicate and nice about wearing of their hair, whereof, whosoever be
not careful, in keeping it in such sort, I can term them no better than
dolts and dissards.

He proceeds to enter discourse of womanlike gallants, such as carry in
their bushie hair It should seem yt their hair was meruellously curled, yt
it could keep the bodkin fast whersoeuer it did stick.
an Iuorie bodkine, that when leisure and time served, they might busy
themselves in trimming the same: and of such also, as sleeping upon the ground,
bolster up their heads in such sort, as they may at no hand touch the earth,
having greater regard to the neatness of their hair, than to the sweetness
of their sleep. For sleep makes men clubbish and careless, but hair makes
them amiable and terrible. The It is a custom among the Lacedaemonians, in
adue^tures of life and death to comb and trim their hair.
Lacedaemonians (as it should seem) were not negligent in this behalf, of
whom but poor three hundred being assembled in arms, and looking for the
coming of king Darius to a fearce and furious conflict, set them selves a
work in the mean time about their hair, trimming and making the same
handsome. Homer in this case uses no small diligence and commendation, so
often as he names the Homer calls them (...), Black eied Graecians.
Graecians. For he does not so often praise the eyes, as though the beauty
and well fauourednes of Gallants consisted therein, as he does the hair. And
though he commends Agamemnon for his black eyes: yet notwtstanding he
imparteth the same praise indifferently to other Graecians as well as him. But
he commends Agamemnon by name for his hairie locks, even as he does all
other noble Gentlemen for the same property specially. He praises Achilles
for his yellowe locks, Menelaus for his Orange colored hair, and Hector for
his bright graie bush. Again, what does he most commend: naie, what other
thing does he praise in Euphorbus the Troiane, whom Menelaus slew, but only
his hair, using this kind of speech for the setting forth of that
necessary seemelinesse: His lady locks like to the Nymphs,
with blood seemd rustie red,
With gold and silver knotted up,
to beautify his head.
The same Poet speaking of Ulysses, whom Pallas made honorable, says thus:
Of her he did receive long hair,
of iron color very fair.


Homer therefore is of opinion, that the ornament of the hair, does better
beseem men than women. For, in extolling the Goddesses, and ascribing unto
every one of them their particular praise, he medleth not with their hair,
but builds their commendation upon other grounds: namely, the parts and
members of their body, aiming at their proportion and making. He calls
Uenus, (...).
Golden Venus, Juno, (...).
Buleied Juno, Thetis, (...). Homer Iliad. ^.
Siluerfooted Thetis. And setting out Jupiter in his majesty, he begins
with his hair, and calls it heavenly, using these words: Homer in his
Iliads. lib. a
The Immortal king God Jupiter,
his heavenly hair did shake,
Which made the starrie firmament,
to quiver and to quake.
But I hearing this harmony of Dions tuning, became a Prophet to my self,
gathering by coniecturall reasons before hand, that it would fare with me, as
with The allusion is to one Thrasymachus, who maintained, more impudently than
learnedlie, that justice is to be counted among evil things, and injustice
among good: which opinion of his, Socrates made him, with shame enough, to
recant.
Thrasymachus, namely to be put to shame and silence. Howbeit, this passion of
mind has but slender hold, when I try Dions discourse by the touchstone of
truth: whose whole oration consists upon smooth words full of gravity, but
in effect it is nothing, for it wants pith and substance. If he had
undertaken to commend baldness, as he has attempted the contrary, he had (no
doubt) gotten him self greater credit, and purchased more praise. For, if so
be that in a trifling thing, he be so well furnished, what shall a man think
of him, if he had a weighty matter in handling? For he having hair enough to
make him comlie, and learning likewise to show himself cunning, presumed to
speak his mind in the praise of shocked hair. It may be, he is one of those
which carry about them an instrument of their vanity, namely a bodkine,
therewith at due leisure to trim their flagging locks.

For So Much therefore as I have the more excellent cause to defend,
notwithstanding my cunning be not counteruaileable unto Dions, why should I
not make ready my self, according to the equity of my cause, to praise
Baldpates, and to dispraise such as are laden with hairie locks? And for
entrance into my matter, I need no curious or vehement beginning, which I am
content to leave unto Whose manner it is to use some plausible praeamble, or
praeface thereby to wind them selves into the admiration of their auditors.
Orators, as properly pertinent to their earnest cases, wherewith they give
strength to their present purpose, arming it (as it were) against the
adversary, as the ships (called men of war) are prepared against the
enemy. Neither will I take unto me for a president, Musicians or Minstrels,
whose manner is in trial of excellency, either for praise or pension, nimbly
to finger, and run over to and fro, the strings of their Lute, Citerne, Harp,
or other melodious instrument whatsoever: as though there rested not a further
proof of cunning.

Dion thus begins. When I was risen up early in the morning, etc. He does
not commend such bushe hairie fellows, as in deed he ought. It is the point
of an Orator, one while to delight his hearers, another while to amaze them,
and set them a wondering, which things although This (...), or modesty of
mind, when a man does not think too well of himself, is a most commendable
virtue.
I cannot compass, as wanting that measure of knowledge (and yet not utterly
destitute:) with that little which I have nevertheless, I will do mine
endeavor, as one not trained up, nor practiced in the Art of Rhetorike, but as
a husbandman, or rude country clown, brought up at home, and exercised at
plough and cart, digging and deluing, grafting and planting, keeping of cattle.
etc, so that with the spade and hedge bill, the pitchforke and plough handle,
in sted of pen, ink, and paper, my hands are grown hard, and my fingers
worn. For we will not vary from the custom of our country. Not that he
wanted cunning or knowledge: but note rather herein his humility.
Neither will I begin with smooth and delicate words, but according to my
country fashion, as plain as a packstaffe: for that does like me best.
Assisted therefore with the goodness of the cause, I will set foot in feeld,
and enter combat: framing my tongue rather to revenging than reasoning: that
is to say, not uttering my words after the For the Phrygian fashion of
sounding their words, is more stirring, wherewith Timotheus the musician moved
king Alexander oftentimes to make war: as for the Dorian sounding of words,
that is more mild*
Dorian manner, but after the Phrygian fashion. For the matter which I have in
hand requires earnestness, and must have a good heart, and a full mouth.

We therefore thus determine and say: That a balde pate, of all other, has
least cause to be ashamed. For why, having a smooth head, and a thin: he
has wisdom enoughe both for him self and his friend. Such a one does Homer
report Achilles to be: who tare his hair from his head, as esteeming it
naughtes worth, because he was content to part from it him self, to bestow it
upon a How deuouty Achilles dealt with the dead body of Patroclus, cutting
off his own hair, and burning it in the fire, Homer reports in the last
book save one of his Iliads.
dead corsse: and to bury it with the body of his friend. For, what is the
hair, but a certain thing void of life, yea a dead thing, belonging to the
parts of the body endued with sense and feeling? Beasts therefore which are
far from understanding and reason, have all their body ouergrowne with
hair: but man, for that he is partaker of a more excellent estate of life,
appears more naked and bare, but less hairie. And to the end he might not
keep company with other creatures, his hair grows not every where: but
scatteringlie here and there. Whereby it comes to pass, that how much the
less hair any one has about his body: so much the more does he excel
other, even as far as a man is to be preferred before a beast.

And as man of all other living creatures is the smoothest, and the wisest:
even so Hereof comes the common Proverb, As simple as a sheep, when we will
note any one that wants wit and discretion, or other wise an innocent.
a sheep of all living things, is the foolishest, because there is no part of
her body without hair. For what hair is to other beasts, that is woll to
the sheep. Hereupon it follows, that the having of hair bids battle
unto wisdom and discretion. For they will not be together at any hand. Such
dogs as have smooth ears and bellies, are most fit for ye game: but rough
curres, which have more hair than heart, as they are rash and hasty, so they
are soon dashed: it is greater vantage to the huntesman, that such hounds
were kept away, than appointed for the game, least in meddling they mar all.

Plato (as I take it) means by these two horses, Reason and Affection, which
draw the minds of men contrariwaies, even as they are of force one above the
other. Read him in Phaedro suo, touching this matter.
Plato speaking of the two horses, which the soul (as a waineman) drives and
directs, calls that a crafty, a stout, and a stubberne stallion, which by
reason of hair ouergrowing his ears, waxes dumb, and has lost his hearing.
Which must needs be so, as he in process of time shall become blind, who is
full of hair about that part, which preserves the sight. Nature cannot away
with this, that vile and contemptible things should be joined in fellowship
with precious and excellent things. The five senses are precious things, and
those parts whereby all living creatures have life and feeling, are excellent
things: among all which, the sight is the quickest, the liueliest, the most
necessary, and (you know) the eyes have their smoothness and baldness. That
therefore which in man is of this kind, deserves most honor. So it follows
in conclusion, that the very best things are bald. For we showed a little
before, that man is so much more excellent than any other creature, by how
much he has the less hair.

Seeing therefore man is a living soul, and a most excellent creature: I say
that such as by Fortune have lost their hair, and are become bald, must and
ought to have preferment above the rest. Hereupon Diogenes, Socrates, Plato,
and a world of wise men, incomparable for knowledge, learning, utterance and
judgment, are painted with balde pates. Let not This Apollonius let his hair
grow about his shoulders in length, and he was such a seducer of men, that
among other honors done to him unmeet for a mortal man, Alexander the
Emperor, and son of Mammea, worshipped him for a God, placing his image
between the image of Abraham and Christ, in his closset.
Apollonius Tyanaeus with his hairie locks scoff at our speech, neither let
any other seducer, whatsoever he be, contemn our saiengs. For, unless this
kind of coggers had not shocked hair, the ignorant multitude could not so
lightly be blinded with their iugglings. The black art or science (as they
term it) is no wisdom, but a wily working of wonders: it is no knowledge,
but a certain counterfeit show of cunning. For prudent lawemakers count
wisdom most honorable, and against witches, sorcerers, coniurers, and such
like, they maintain executioners. We say therefore in truth, turn it as you
list, he that is wise, the very same is bald: and if he be not bald, surely
he is not wise.

In like manner it falls out in divine affairs, that is, in things belonging
to the supernall Gods. These festiualles were kept and holden at Athens, when
winter wore away, and the weather waxed warm.
For in celebrating of Bacchus solemnities, they to whom the charge thereof was
committed, were al over grown with hair: but the younger Satires, who had
about their heads, garlands of Pine tree leaves, were most reuelling and
outrageous. Now, in such a hurly burly as it were of dronkards and Bedlems,
bald This Silenus, being an ancient Satire, was tutor and guide to Bacchus, and
was ring leader to all the rest of the Satires.
Silenus bare principal rule: which was done, not without the great care of
Jupiter: that a Baldpate, endued with wisdom and soberness, should be
fosterfather unto Bacchus, least through his natural inclination to wine
bibbing, he become mad, and so falling into an extremity of lunacie, outface
his father Jupiter, and deny him all dutiful obedience.

Socrates, among all other good properties, being possessed with the spirit of
modesty, and marvelous sparing to spread his own praise: rejoiced
notwithstanding, and boasted of himself, that he was like to balde To whose
images, Alcibiades compared Socrates, for that as the grauers of the^ cut them
cunningly, in out ward show homely: but inwardli, their cases, wherein they
were kept, being opened, they seemed divine and heavenly: eue^ so Socrates
outwardly appearing but a simple man, inwardly notwithstanding, was another
manner of fellow than he was taken to be.
Silenus. For the head is the castle of knowledge, and wisdom. This
comparison is not perceiueable to the unskillful. Bushie hair is a beauty unto
youth, in whom wisdom is not yet grown to her flower: but when age is come
upon us, which breeds in us understanding and experience: what mean we (old
doting fools) to be proud of our hairie locks? If an old fellow be curious
and delicate in trimming of his hair: surely he is brainesicke.

The case therefore stands thus, that hair and wit will not draw under
one yoke: but are like affected one to another, as light and darkness,
whereof the ones departure, is the cause of the others succession: that is, the
one must needs be absent, or else the other cannot be present. Will you have
the cause of this contrariety laid open before your eyes? Of all things,
hair, as it is simply the basest, and of least account: so is it most subject
unto change and alteration. In imperfect creatures it does overcome, and bear
a certain swaie: but in perfect and excellent bodies, it has no such force,
but falls off and consumes away. Do but call to your consideration the
trees of the earth, whose end is to yield and bring forth fruit. In the
Spring time what gaie shows do they make, what variable colors do they
bear in their blossoms, with what beautiful braveness are they garnished?
They have their blossoms, their buds, their leaves, etc. all which (when the
fruit comes to ripeness, whereof those are but certain foretokens) wax
dry, wither away, and turn to nothing. For that which is perfect in it
self, needs no beautifieng: and a thing is then said to be perfect, when
there is to be seen in it, the appearance of another seed.

Moreover, A city in Greece, the people whereof, in celebrating the festiuals
of Ceres, called Anacalypteria, which are kept at such time as the fruits of
the earth appear in their ripeness, are bald and bareheaded.
Eleusis does celebrate the solemnities of Ceres, called Anacalypteria.
Again, the mind of man, for so much as it is the most excellent of all seeds,
which descend from above, and has his mansion or dwelling house in the head,
the fruit whereof is substantial understanding, it comfort and reuiueth
the head to have fair hair, which is (as a man would say) but buddes and
blossoms. And as before the fall of the leaf, the fruit is not come to full
perfection: no more is understanding settled in the head, until such time as
all superfluities are fanned away. When therefore you see a baldpate, suppose
straight way that the fruit there has attained perfect ripeness, and made
the head a garner to preserve it: yea, you may boldly guess, that such a head
is the Temple of God. The festiualles therefore of Ceres, as wisemen would have
them named, were also called In english, Ascendings: because the minds of them
that were occupied therein, were lifted up aloft.
Epibateria, because of the ascending of the mind up to the contemplation of
heavenly things. Which festiuals, contrariwise, are termed of the simpler sort
Anacalypteria, because that in celebrating of the same, the assembly were bald
and bareheaded: thus imagined the multitude. For he which begins to be bald,
has entered holy orders, and is instructed and taught from above the mysteries
of the highest God.

And as Pomegranates, and walnuttes are naught which die in their shells: so are
al heads stark naught, which want the heavenly fruit of wit, being
ouergrowne with the superfluous moss of a dead thing. The Egyptians shave
their bodies all over, to the end that no vermin or other filthiness may
breed about them, when they are busy about the service of their Gods.
The Priests of Egypt used of custom to keep their eye liddes void from
hair. Whereby although they seemed in show to be but fools: yet
notwithstanding they were the wisest men in the world. For it is a common
Proverb, that The Egyptians excel in wisdom. For there ought to be no
agreement between things everlasting, and things corruptible. The bald pate
has a kind of natural acquaintance with God. Now Sir, whether God be bald,
or not: that is counsel to us. Of this I am assured, that the things which are
next unto God, are the Spheres of the heavens, and they are balde: in like
manner are the stars. The Heaven it self appears balde in our sight: in
the praise whereof what so ever we can say, the same may well serve to
commend baldness.

And although Homer the Poet, and Phidias the Painter, give Jupiter such He
alludeth to the words of Homer, in the first of his Iliads, (...), that is to
say, Jupiter shook heaven.
long shocked hair flagging about his shoulders, as that with the wagging
thereof he makes the very firmament to quake and tremble: yet notwithstanding
what a Jupiter is in heaven, we are not now to learn. Whether there be
besides him, another visible Jupiter, consisting of soul and body, members
and limbs, etc. it passes my skill to conceive. But if there be such a one,
let him be so good as to stoop: for there is one above, whose majesty is
vnexpresseable. But yt there is such a Jupiter, whose hairie locks make him so
wonderful, who affirms it, but the Poet, and the Painter, men so far from
setting out truth in her nakedness, that they delight wholly in the
flattering colors of falsehood and lies? Poets and painters have a quicker eye
to their own private praise than to the setting out of truth in her kind.
They are fantastical bragging fellows, and what soever they do, they do
it for their own vain glory, and not for truths sake.

The ignorant sort imagine that bushie hair makes men honorable: and at all
external or outward things, if they be gaie and rare, the rude multitude do
wonder. Creatures having outward hair, it is to them in sted of outward
goods. In place of the Mind: Nature, yea variable Fortune has the hair at
commandment. The gifts therefore of Nature and Fortune, are supposed of the
unskillful commonaltie, to be (as it were) bridges to blessedness. He which
either writes or speaks to the unlearned people, necessary it is, that he
get their good opinion: yea, he must invent and devise, reason and discourse of
such matters, as the people like well of, and allow. The unlearned and untaught
multitude are favorers of absurd opinions: whereby it comes to pass, that
if any one presume to bring in a thing contrary to common custom, he must
needs He alludeth to Socrates, who was condemned to drink poison, when he was
accused of Anytus, and Melytus, that he thought scarce well of the Atheniens
Gods.
drink poison: this punishment cannot be avoided. Unto what torments (think
you) would the Graecians have condemned Homer, if those things which he spoke
of Jupiter had been consonant and answerable to the truth?

The Egyptians, and specially the Wise men and Prophets, put not men of
occupation in trust with the making of the images of their Gods: but look what
baggage chances to fall from the greedy Hawke and rauennous A bird in Egypt
cole black, which deuoureth much noisome and venomous vermin. Cicero speaks
of them somewhat largely, lib. 2. De natura Deorum.
Ibis bills, therewith they deceive the people in the Church porch, whiles
they themselves being in the Chauncell, hide their sacrifices, and proceed in
their solemnities in the clossettes of their Gods, where certain round boxes
are kept shut, whereof if the people should have but a glimpse, it were as
much as the Sacrificers lives were worth: or else they show unto them
Aesculapius with his bald pate, although the Graecians have him hairie locked in
Epidaurus, a city in Peloponnesus, wherein was built the famous temple of
Aesculapius.
Epidaurus, but they neglected the searching out of the truth. The Egyptians
maintain the art of enchantment toward their Gods, and they speak by
certain signs and figures in their tongue.

Now, if you say that a blasing star is a hairie star, it rests to be
proved first that it is a star in deed: but doubtless it is no star,
although it be termed so amiss: neither does it continue above four days,
and then consumes away by little and little. But suppose it were a star, and
consider what a mischeeuous and evil thing the hair thereof is, which
brings decaie even to the star it self (if it be a star:) besides
innumerable miseries whereof it is a foretoken, all which I pass over in this
place. Have we ever read that any good star wasted to nothing? But this
star with crisped hair vanishes, and the substance thereof dies.

Seeing then that all celestial bodies are blessed, and therewith also The
round figure which keeps in it self an even proportion: of this figure is
the Heaven, etc. His meaning is, that if the outgrowings of the hair were
shaven away, the head would have a resemblance of that perfect figure.
the sphericall figure: I would wish that both I my self, and all my friends,
were endued with that good thing, that we may be like Gods. Look what things
are like the true God, we may boldly call them fair, beautiful, and amiable.
But you will say, it is a fond thing, yea repugnant to reason, that we should
attribute unto baldnes such honor, as to give it divine names, and heavenly
praises: considering that it has no likeness or agreement with things
celestial. But we being disposed to speak well by, and to please baldpates,
say, they are certain little Moons: neither know I what may be applied unto
them more deservedly, or more peculiarly. For first of all it appears with
two horns, then it enters into the quarter, afterward it shows more than
half, and lastly arises the full Moon. So it fares with baldpates, who are
(as it were) full Moons, or rather Suns, because they diminish not, but
keeping continually their full compass of roundnesse, give light unto other
stars in the skies.

We read of the Among the rest, Melanthus is mentioned in this manner, (...),
etc. They fly upon him, they catch him by the cocks comb, and hold him fast
by the hairie locks. Hom. Odyss.
wanton wooers with whom Ulysses had to deal, after his return from his long
travel, how he being a baldpate, made a slaughter of above a hundred hairie
locked yonkers with his own hands, having none other help. Baldness therefore
is an excellent thing: for it has light in it self, and it gives light unto
others. The cause of this brightness is baldness and smoothness. At what
time we go to the better, at the same time we depart from the worsser. Life
and light being two of the best companions, are contrary to death and
darkness. And if so be that brightness have nakedness, and yet beautifieth:
darkness undoubtedly having hairmesse, of necessity beseems. But you say
that hair is a natural shadow, such as the praises whereof the Poet
Archilochus describes in the person of an harlot, saying: Her neck and
shoulders darkened were
with shadow of her brodered here.
And as for shadow, what is it else but darkness? The night is the greatest
shadow of all shadows, proceeding from the earth, which in deed stops the
Sun beams. Woods and Groves, because they are dim and dark,
notwithstanding their pleasantness, are destitute of light, even at noone
day. Light, for so much as it is the proper goods of the Gods, is heavenly,
and therefore is to be ascribed unto heavenly things. Whereupon when many
yield their heads to the Barbars scissers and raisor, to be shorn and shaven,
yt thereby they might recover and preserve their health, which of al things is
the most excellent, being in deed heavenly, it falls out, that they are no
sooner bald, but by and by they are safe from sickness, which otherwise they
might have sustained. A reason drawn from health, whereby Synesius persuadeth
baldness to be very commodious and good.
The rheum leaves them, deafness forsakes them, bleeriednesse bids
farewell unto them: and a multitude of other maladies, which proceed and issue
from the head, vanish away: all which prove sufficiently, what a worthy and
notable thing it is, to be bald and without hair.

To the head, as to a Castle or Tower, the strings or ropes of diseased are
tied, and hang down through the rest of the body. If any be bald, then is he
healthful: yea, he bears about with him, the image of bald This Aesculapius
was the first finder out of Physic, and was bald: whom diverse people adored
and honored as a God.
Aesculapius of Egypt, of whom he is lively representation and pattern. He
that intends to recover and preserve health, let him address him self to be
like the first finder and inuenter of Physic. The skull abiding bare, and
suffering the heat of the Sun, and the rage of tempests, in short time
changes from bone to iron: and thereby is set free from the assault or danger
of any sickness. And as the spears of the mountain, are much more excellent
than those of the fennes: even so a bald and smooth skonse, is to be preferred
by many degrees, before a shocking frisled hairie head.

Chiron was Achilles Master, and made him a spear of Ash, which grew upon the
mountain Pelius, this spear none could handle but on he Achilles, as Homer
says, (...), etc. Achilles only had skill to handle it, etc.
Chiron, not without good cause, cut Achilles spear out of the mountain
Pelius, where it grew, and not out of any low land or down. A hairie head
may be compared to trees growing in fennes: for as they, so this is nourished
and fostered in the shadow, and therefore unfit to come in place, where there
is any war or dangerous tumult. About Arabia toward Egypt, in a conflict
between Cambyses and Psammenitus, there was a sore slaughter made of both
their soldiers: for the putting apart of whose carcases, (the dead bodies
lieng mingled one with another) they had none other mark whereby to know
them, than their heads: and where they were slain, there they were buried. Now
they were discerned by this token. The heads of the Medes are thin, tender,
and not able to abide the bitter brunts of war, yea so soft they are, that a
stones cast is able to bruise and break them. Contrariwise, ye heads of the
Egyptians and Aethiopians are thick, hard, and tough: so that it had need be
a sharp and shreud stone that must make them smart. What was the cause of this
difference? The Medes do wear thick couerings upon their heads: but the
Egyptians are brought and trained up in the scortching Sun shine. Synesius
proves his reason by example of experience and trial.
If this will not breed in you belief, then hear what I shall tell you. Give
a Scythian a hard blow on the head, he dies by and by thereupon: strike the
Mede, he complains not of pain.

Dion tells a tale of certain games called Which were solemnlie kept ye
first day of every month, or of every new moon. They may be called in
English* The feasts of the new moons.
Hieromenia, at the celebrating whereof, an odd fellow having a bald pate,
suffered a Ram to run full butte against it with his horns. This fellows
use was, to get him day by day to the Barbars, and after his shauing, to have
hot pitche powered upon his pate. The Megarenses would stand in need of
flaggons, if they should hitte them against such a stony skonse, where unto
potshardes oftentimes stick fast, and make it harder. Synesius answers ye
objection of Dion, affirming (as Pindarus ye Poet says) that need and hunger
will make a man do that which is against honesty: again, he says that the
deed of one private man, ought not to turn to the blame of a whole company.
This was Pindarus wish or request, yt having enough to serve our turn at
home, we might sit in the Theater, beholding and hearing such things as were
said and done. And if so be that this failed, yet desires he thus much,
namely, the suffering of many miseries, rather than to fall into the extremity
of all euilles, even impouerishment and famishment. For they that are driven to
distress, being destitute of succor, are compelled to lead the life of
Plaiers, to strippe themselves naked upon a stage, to bewray their exceeding
folly and madness, to iuggle them selves into sundry shapes, and to become
gazing stocks to the whole multitude, etc.

Dion supposing hair more handsome for men, than for women, speaks against
him self, and tumbleth out flat contraries. For how should we attribute that
to strong men, which when they have, makes them weak? Furthermore, it was
decreed by law, that men should not always have hair. For the This field
fell to ye Lacedaemonians by law of arms: after which time the Argiues
sustaining the loss, vowed baldness, till they had recovered Thyreae field
again. The Lacedaemonians contrariwise, enacted by law, the wearing of long
hair, which before they neglected.
Lacedaemonians, after ye strife about a parcel of land, called Thyrea field,
which they, being on the surer side, had in possession: and the Argiues before
the same variance, both of them suffered their hair to grow. As for women of
all ages, and all quarters of the world, because it has been, and is a great
ornament unto them, they make much of their hairie locks, they comb, they
sponge, and they trim them with no small care and diligence: neither has it
been heard, that any woman has suffered her head to be shaven with a raisor:
and as for any of that sex, there has not been seen any one, time out of
mind, having a bald pate. But if they chance to be bald, or otherwise to have
scant of hair, that is to be imputed unto sickness: for sickness is a cause
of baldness. Name me any one man, that having lived out his full age, has
not been bald. Baldness therefore is the end of nature, which end every one
has not ye gift to attain.

The Herodotus in his seventh book of histories, called Polynmia, sets out
this Stratageme at large.
Lacedaemonians incamping in Thermopyle, and looking for the coming of the
enemy, exercised themselves, in the mean space, in trimming and dressing
their hair: but though in this they thought them selves iollie fellows, yet
notwithstanding not one of them was partaker of victory. The hair is a dead
and senseless superfluity, and in dead things they have their nourishment.
The Egyptians shauing off the hair of their dead bodies, even to the very
stumpes: found notwithstanding their hair grown again, and their beardes
shot out in length the year next following. Dion passes over with silence,
those valiant Graecians, which got the conquest. He makes no mention of those
that went on warrefare with Read Quintus Curtius, writing of the feats of
arms, which Alexander and Darius did.
Alexander, and fealt ye force of Darius to their smart, the Lacedaemonians
alone plaging them: in which skirmish or encounter they perceived what a foul
discommoditie and inconvenience, the soldiers at A country in Persia, where
the mighty power of Darius was vanquished.
Arbela, in a battle there fought, sustained: who when they were shaven, and
disburthened of that combersome superfluity, Fortune was so favorable unto
them, that they endured the fury of the conflict.

Ptolomeus the Son of Lagus, was present at a combat fought between a
Macedonian, and a Persian, wherein, at the beginning of the encounter, the
Macedonian lay so sore at the Persian, that he went to the worst. But the
Persian, casting his weapon one way, and his target another, got within the
reach of his enemy, and catching fast hold of his beard and hair, laid him
along upon the ground, and slew him. The example of one private man followed of
a mighty and populous army, to their great advantage, fame, and renown.
The Persians seeing this, as their Countrieman had done before, so did they,
not neglecting so good an advantage. For it grew to be common through out all
the Persian army, yea it was to them all an infallible rule, that if they
might come within the Macedonians, and lay hold upon their hair, it was as
much as they required toward the obteining of the conquest. Hereupon it came
to pass, that such soldiers in Alexanders host, as were bald, endured the
whole force of the conflict, and bare the burden of the battle: Alexander
himself, being glad to put off his armor, and warrelike furniture, fled with
shame enough out of Cilicia. Afterward when he had caused his host to be
conducted out of the enemies reach, and had paused a space, he persuaded the
Macedonians to shave off their hair, of which hinderance when they were eased,
he returned with a fresh power, took courage, gave assault to the Persians,
encountered with them valiantly, and triumphed over them victoriously. If not
terrible to their enemies, then amiable to their lovers: such will seldom
prove stout soldiers.
A bushie beard therefore, and shocked hair, make not men seem terrible,
unless peradventure unto fearful infants, in whose sight they appear like
Robin good fellows, or Hobgoblins.

How then are the enemies terrified? When there is a strong bright helmet upon
the head, which (to speak plainly and to the purpose) is nothing else but an
armed skull: it is that wherewith the enemy is terrified. And if it so fall
out, that for ornaments sake, any one, or more, beautify their headpeece,
with the hair of a horsemaine, considering that usually it hangs behind,
this is no hinderance at all unto baldness. If Achilles (as Dion reports)
had long hair, it was in the heat and flower of his youth, when his mind was
prone and inclinable to anger. Of such speaks the common proverb, More hair
than wit.
His head was wild with hair, and his mind was wood with wrath. But as (for
Achilles sake) we commend not anger in the mind: so do we not (for his sake)
praise bushie hair upon the head: and yet Achilles did set so little store by
his lovely locks, that he was content to let For he cut them off, and cast
them into the fire, to be burnt with the body of Patroclus.
Patroclus father them. Dion does not rehearse the words of Homer truly, but
applieng the verse to his purpose, falsifieth the Poet. Whose saying is this.
Behind Achilles back did stand
A Goddess passing fair,
And plucked with her heavenly hand
his yellowe colored hair.
Whereas indeed the Poets words lie in this order. Down Pallas came, in
nothing slack,
that Iunos grace beesought,
And standing at Achilles back,
his hair behind she caught.
Out of which speech of the Poet, his meaning may be coniectured to be this,
that Achilles baldness Because his hair failed before, and grew all behind:
as it should seem by the Poets manner of speaking.
at that time took beginning. Aristoxenus reports of Socrates, that he was
quickly kindled to anger, even by nature: and not only to anger, but also to
other evil and lewd vices: but mark this by the way, he was not then bald.
Afterward, when he grew to be five and twenty years of age, Zeno and
Parmenides the Philosophers coming to Athens, to see the festival solemnities
of five days continuance, called The Festiualles of Minerua, which lasted five
whole days, with great solemnity: these festiuals in Latin are called
Quinquatria.
Panathaenea, kept in the honor of the Goddess Pallas, he turned over a new
leaf, and learned another lesson.

As is to be seen in Homers Iliads, lib. 7. To whose worde^, Philostratus
assenting says: (...): That is, He chid and took up Paris, as one fearful
and too much given to niceness.
Hector vpbraided his Brother Paris, for the womanly triming of his hair:
whereby it appears, what resemblance, or rather aliance there is betwixt
baldness, and wisdom. Moreover, the verse of Homer, which Dion repeateth
concerning Hector, is mangled: neither is any such verse found in that Poet.
For I think that Jupiter himself, should hardly have a place in his works,
in that respect. If Menelaus had yellowe hair, yet notwithstanding we gather
not thereby, that he had bushie locks, neither did his commendation depend upon
his hair: but the Poet described the whole personage of Menelaus, by naming
one part. Dion lacking matter to whet his wits withal, supposes that the
praise of his hair, and the praise of his person are all one, without
difference.

When Juno desired the carnal company of Jupiter, and longed to lie with him,
among all other light allurements to make her self amiable, Homer affirms it
in his Iliads, Lib. 14. where he showing the shifts that Juno used, to flatter
Jupiter, says of her: (...) that is to say: When she combed her hair, she
folded up her locks very cunningly.
the trimming of her hair was a principal. I confirm not my matter with
lies, as Dion does. I allow not, that any hairie thing should have a
dwelling place in heaven. In the Stars there is nothing to be found that
smells of Venus. As for Jupiters hair, I say the Poet spoke after that
sort, for the capacity of the people, whose ignorance must be helped by
demonstrations. Dion, in all his discourse, concludes not that hair is a good
thing to them that have it: nor that it is an evil thing to them that have it
not. Our treatise contrariwise searches out the very secret properties of
things, and finds by reason, that baldness is excellent, that it is
heavenly, that it is the end of Nature, that it is the thing whereby we
attain heavenly wisdom, and that it purchases to them, which have it, the
possession of innumerable benefits, as well of the body as of the mind.
Whereas indeed bushie hair, in steed of commodities, brings
inconveniences, and namely, likeness unto beasts. For hair, being but an
excrement, or needelesse thing, the toies of Nature, and relics of an
imperfect stuff: besides that, being common to beasts, puts them in mind,
whose lot is to have it, of their brutish nature, and of all things contrary
to that which is divine.

Of this stamp are adulterers, and lascivious livers. Homer was of opinion,
The mischiefs which follow that vanity, in either sex, are like: for
thereupon insueth shipwreck of honesty, and other villainies.
that violatours, or rauishers of Uirgins, were semblably given to have their
hair delicatelie trimmed, as wanton women to the coloring, counterfaiting,
fri^ling, and laieng out of their locks, which is a ready help to make them
harlots. And surely the Poet spoke but the truth. For take me such a one, whose
delight is in this vain niceness, and it is a hazard if he or she be not
lewd of life. These are the ringleaders to all villainy, who have laid their
honesty to pledge, never minding to redeem it: a kind of people given to the
spoil, void of hope, without grace, destitute of truth, etc. Some lusty
yonker, whose beauty has bred in him extreme boldness, has the face to
entice and carry whither he will, both by sea and by land, men's wives, and
daughters, without remorse of conscience: they have the cast to convey them to
this corner and to that, there is no darkness to fail them in their knauerie.
The silly weak soul, thus kept like a captive, doing service with her body
to a whoorehunter, has her mind perhaps upon her husband. The whoorehunter
with his harlots hair, and minionlike manners, inchaunteth the woman's wits,
whereby it falls out, that the husband loses his wife forever, having no
hope of recovery. This bushie hair, with the like yoke fellows, have been
the overthrow of many a populous City. What other cause was there that Asia
and Europa were in arms, but adultery? What other thing set the Graecians on
fire, to destroy the He means Troie, whereof Priamus was king: who^e Son
Paris, through the help of V^nus, with whom he was in favor, for preferring
her in beauty, before Pall^s, and Juno, stale away Helena, ye fair Lady of
Greece, whereupon followed a bloody battle of ten years continuance.
City of Priamus, but adultery?

There is yet a mischief much worse than that of Paris, wherewith This
Clisthen^s being given to lewdnes and wantonness, would be sure every da^^ to
be ^^^med at ye barbars, that he (...) always (...) young.
Clisthenes, This Timar^^^s was so ^^^^tinent and filthy that he made it (...)
matter of conscience to deal with his own ^^^^e and na^^rall mother.
Timarchus, and all those are impoisoned, which blasoning their beauty, sold
themselves for salarie and wages to commit filthy lewdness: and if they all,
at all times, did not for money, make an exchange of their honesty: yet they
spared not to do it, for the satisfieng of their abominable pleasure. To be
at a word, such as so deintilie do dress their crisped skonse: what are they
but effeminate fellows, womanlike wantons, and hucksters of their own
honesty? For what do they else but train customers unto them? And he
thinks best of himself, that can come nerest to women in niceness, whereby
favor is obtained. Now Sir, they that are of the Goddess Cotys religion,
other judgment than this shall not prevail against them. Let them counterfaite
their hair often, let them frisle and crispe it often, let them tie it up in
locks often, let them perfume it with sweet ointments often, and this report
they shall have for their labor, namely, that they offer unto This Cotys was
the Goddess of filthy bawderie, and was highly honored at Corinth. Priapus
the God of Gardens a medler in the same merchandise. Horat. Satyr. 8. Lib. 1.
Cotys and Priapus, sacrifices fit and seemly for their personages.

Pherecydes meeting a youth with frisled bushie hair, hid his eyes with his
cloak, pointing as it were with his finger, at the disease wherewith he was
infected. For he declared by his body, what was in his mind: whereby
Pherecydes judged, that he was of the right stamp of stallions. Again, if
Proverbes have in them any smacke of wisdom, as Aristotle is of opinion. For
he says that Proverbs are certain ancient remnants of Philosophy, left
unharmed after a great slaughter of people, and that for their shortness, and
wittiness, they are kept and used. A Proverb therefore is a speech having in
it a kind of excellency, and bearing a badge of his auncientnesse, that it
was taken out of the treasury of Philosophy. For our fore-liuers were much
more bent to the contemplation of the truth, (called Philosophy) than we are
in these days. If Proverbs therefore have in them any smacke of wisdom,
what then is the meaning of this Proverb? There is no bush hairie fellow,
but, But he is baudie. For so Beatus Rhenaenus supplieth the rest of the
Proverb, in his comment upon this place.
etc. The end of this Proverb I will suppress with silence, referring it to
the sound of the Echo: for I make it a matter of conscience, to express that
in plain speech, which is filthy in nature and in name. Good Lord, have you
found it? How think you? Is it not truth it self? Surely I take it for an
oracle. Thus you may see, what pith there is in Proverbs. Furthermore, Proverbs
are warranted and authorized as well by the testimony of those that have them
now in their mouth, as by the witness of them which lived long ago. For
nothing makes Proverbs immortal, that is, always to continue in memory, but
the tongues of such as daily and accustomablie do use them, who by their
speech keep that thing alive, and as it were in doing, which is meant and
signified by the words. For Proverbs springing from particular deeds, and
grounded upon special examples, do not only purchase to themselves the more
credit, but also by their testimony confirm examples. To what purpose serves
Platoes disproofe? He rejects the testimony of Rhetorike, as not indifferent
in this case: because like loves like. For a flourishing tongue, and a fri^^ed
head have some agreement.
He being an Orator, manifestly shows, that Rhetorike is a smooth, a
painted, and a pausible science: and therefore more addicted to flattery, than
to truth and equity.

They are much bound to Dion, (and no men in the world more) which betake
themselves to woods, caves, and dens, choosing rather there sauagelie to
live, than in places of civil society: that with an unjust eye, they might
long after that which is not theirs: and with the hands of violence pluck
unto them that which belongs unto others. Whatsoever is commended by common
consent, that must needs be embraced and followed, if it be with credit and
belief received. Whereupon it comes to pass, that Dion would choose rather
to advance a rabble of outrageous rioters in our City, than contrariwise. Such
as we set against these hairie heads, are men of all other most praiseworthie,
in whose number are to be reckoned the Officers, who had the ministration of
all holy rites and ceremonies in their hands: as our Bishops, Persons, and
Curates, etc.
Flamines, the Prophets, the Aedites, etc. Reverend officers in the temples of
the Gods: Teachers and instructers of youth in Schools, and places of
learning: Generals, Captains, and Lieuetenants, in armies: Governors of
housholdes and families: with diverse more, which excel each other in
dignity. Agamemno^ would never commit fair Lady Chrysis to the credit and
keeping of him that was bush hairie. And it is wisdom in men, that they will
not have nere their wives, to serve them such nice and effeminat fellows: with
whom to see how women are pleased, and delighted, it is a worlds wonder.
Agamemnon never put a bushe hairie fellow in trust with a Gentlewoman nobly
borne. When Painters delineate and portrait out in colors any yonker bawdilie
bent, or an adulterer, they will be sure to remember his bushie hair. But in
setting out ye image of a Philosopher, or other grave, and wise honest man,
they make him bald: noting in the one a youthlie wild lightness, and in the
other an ancient soberness. I am of belief, that Philosophers, Governors of
Commonwealthes, discreet Citizens, and all modest men, will take in good part
this discourse of ours. And although the common people will not (peradventure)
altogether allow it, let them notwithstanding, that are Which have curled
pates, whose hair hangs about their heads, as moss upon trees, etc.
mossie headed learn this lesson: that if they mean to be sober, honest, and
prudent, the next way for them so to be, is often to be shorn and shaven. And
let them furthermore esteem such happy and fortunate, as Because of their
baldness.
need not the edge of the scissers or rasour.

It is not I that deserve thanks for that which I have written, but the equity
of the cause, which has offered me this discourse: whereby, he that is never so
babish in knowledge and utterance, shall be sufficiently furnished to reason
with the wisest head in the world. My wish and desire is, that this travel
of ours, may turn to the benefit of many, whereby we also hope to have
commendation.

FINIS.
The tale of Hemetes the Heremite pronounced before the Queens Majesty.
NO more, most valiant Knights. He speaks unto two knights that fought there.
Uiolence must yield to virtue: and the doubtful hazard you be in, by a most
noble help must be ended. Thus the immortal Gods by immovable destiny
have decreed: therefore cease your fight, and follow me: so shall you hear
that, which you would little believe: and shall have with me that, which will
most behooue you. He speaks to a Lady present.
And you (fair Lady) fall into this company, where it shall appear Sibylla
said true, and your misfortunes shall have end.

Most excellent Princess, He speaks to her Majesty.
appointed from above, with your presence to please, and your virtue to profit,
more than you are ware of: how much you are bound to the immortal Gods, and
mortal men bound to you: our present case will partly prove. But before you
understand the worth of your virtue, it may please you to hear the
variableness of our adventures.

Not long since, in the country of Cambaia, which is situate near the mouth
of the rich river Indus, where a mighty Duke bare dominion, called Occanon,
who had heir to his estate but one only daughter, named Gandina. This Lady
then, more fair than fortunate, lived most dear to her father, and most
beloved of his people. But to prove that beauty is not ever a benefit, nor
high estates be always the happiest: it chanced within a while, Gandina
(sought by many that were great, and served by many that were worthy) had
more competitors of her beauty, than did either well content her, or prove it
commodious unto her. For love, which is not led by order, nor chooses by
appointment, limed her affection immovably, with the liking of a knight of
estate but mean, but of value very great, called Contarenus, who exceedingly
loved her. So the desires of many other was somewhat for her glory, but
nothing for her gain. In small process of time, the secret fires of their
fancies discovering the smoke of their desires, bewraied this matter to her
father, long before they would.

The Duke dissembling what he saw, determining to disappoint that which he
most misliked, nether made challenge to the knight, nor charged his daughter
for any love that was betwixt them: but devised a way (as he thought) most
sure, but (as it proved) most sorrowful, to set these lovers in sunder, by the
work of an Enchauntresse most cunning in her kind: who had caused Contarenus
to be caught up, and carried in the air, from the coast of Cambaia, to the
very bounds of the Ocean sea, which cost Occanon twenty M. Crowns: a dear
price of repentance.

But it is no novelty to Princes, to make their wills very costly: and
sometime to pay dear for their own displeasure. Contarenus thus strangly
divided from his joy, and perplexed above measure, was charged by this
Enchauntresse, to wear his punishment with patience, which necessity did put
on, and destiny would put off. And ere seven years came about, she truly
assured him, that he should have, for his reward, the height of his desires:
but first he should fight with the worthiest knight, and see the worthiest
Lady in the whole world. Now, the whilst, she told him, that he must take the
guard of a blind Heremit, who should recover his sight, and he his satisfaction:
both at one time. So she left him on the earth, and went her way again into
the air.

Gandina now lacking long that she looked for: namely, the sight and service of
her knight, fell soon into those diseases that accompany such desires, as she
was accumbred with, to wit, distrust, curiosity, and exceeding troublesome
thoughts. At last, (as Princes do few things so privily, but they have
partakers of their counsel: and heirs of crowns lack never servants of
hope, which be curious to please them: the devise and dealing of Occanon came
to the ears of his daughter.

The which being told her: And is it even so? (quoth Gandina.) "Care kings for
no right? And right cares for no kingdom. It is neither the court of Occanon,
nor the country of Cambaia, that I can account of, if Contarenus be gone.
Farewell unhappy country, and most cruel father, that turns me to this
fortune, to follow my faith: which neither greatness of estate, nor hazard of
mine adventure, shall make me forsake. But if I loose not my life, I will find
Contarenus, if he be in the world."

This said, she pursued her most hard determination, and taking only a damsel
with her, in simple habit, with such things as were necessary, she straight
conveyed her self most closly from the borders of Cambaia, and with toil (too
long to tell) passed perils past belief, till at last she arrived at the den
of Sibylla, where (by chance) she met with a most noble knight icleped
Loricus, by love likewise drawn thither, to learn what should betide him.

This Loricus loved a Lady that was matchless, in such manner as was strange.
For after much devise, and diligence, to attain to this favor, that she would
be pleased he might love her, not looking for reward, seeing no glimpse of her
liking, his uttermost devotion to find surely out her fancy, which she carried
most closely, he made a strange assay with all semblance that might be showed,
to set by her but little, that was so sought for of all. And the better to
color the passion, which he was not able to conquer, he made a show of choice
of a new mistress, that lived every day in her eye (a piece surely of price,
but far from such a perle as his heart only esteemed:) and to this idol he
seemed to offer all his love, and his service, leaving no manner of observance
that to love appertains, as wearing her colors upon his back, and her
picture in his bosom, keeping her company before all other, and continuing
most at her commandment. Which deed espied by the Lady, (whose peer and
equal, for any natural quality, either of body or mind, was no where to be
found) though she cared not for his choice, yet she showed scorn of his
change, and disclosed by gelousie that which love could not discover.

Loricus this perceiving, fell by and by to consider, that it was the want of
his worth that made his service unacceptable, and no impossibility in her will
to receive them to serve her, that merited the honor of such favor. Therefore
he left his own country, and betook himself altogether to travel, and to
arms, desiring with most endeavor to deserve that reputation, as this great and
noble Mistres would but think him worthy to be hers, though she would never
be his. So thinking no toil too tough, and no attempt too hard to attain to
renown, he wandered through the world, till by painful ways he came to
Sibyllas den, where he met with Gandina.

There these two lovers having occasion to unfold all their fortunes, the Lady
seeking to know the end of her travel, and the Knight some advise for the
ease of his hope: they both received this answer of Sibylla: "That as they
were now coupled by fortune, so they should never part fellowship, till they
had found out a place, where men were most strong, women most fair, the
country most fertile, the people most welthie, the government most just, and
the Princess most worthy. So should the Lady see what would content her, so
should the Knight hear what would comfort him."

Now (most dear and best deserving Lady) it falls to my purpose, and your
praise, to say somewhat of my self. And though you see me here old, wrinkled,
and cast into a corner, yet once have I bin otherwise a Knight known, and
accepted, even with the best in the world. And living in a Court of most fame,
amongst a swarm of Knights and Ladies of great worth, and rare virtue, where
beauty bad the base, and desire sought the goal: it chanced me to love a
Lady, to be beloved of He means Cupido, who is feigned to be blind.
Love himself, if he could have but seen her. But as she was such as did
excel, so was she of wonderful condition, without disdain to be desired,
but most deintie to be dealt withal. For touch her, and she would turn to
twenty diverse shapes, yet to none but to content me as I thought, who supposed
still to touch her was a heaven. And so it seemed by my hold, that was most
loath to let her go, till she liked (alas) at the last to put on the shape of
a Tygresse so terrible to behold, that I durst hold her no longer. And being
so escaped, I could never more set eye upon her

Madam, thus began my pain: but you hear not yet my punishment. Being shifted
from the sight of that I sought above all things in the world, and then little
delighting to look upon any thing else: I took by and by a pilgrimage to
Paphos in Cyprus, trusting to hear of my Mistres there, where Venus was most
honored: whither when I was come, I began to step in at the doors of her
temple, and was suddenly stricken blind. Astonished at my mischance, and
understanding no cause, I fell on my knees, and said: "O fairest of the
Goddesses, and furthest from cruelty, what has bin my fault, that you are
thus offended? Thy folly and presumption, (quoth Venus Chapleine) as I guess.
From my youth up (quoth I) I have bin an honorer of virtue, a delighter in
learning, and a servant of love. But it is no parted affection (quoth he) that
Venus will be honored with. Books and beauty make no match, and it is a whole
man, or no man, that this Goddess will have serve her. And therwithall taking
me by the shoulders, he thrust me out of the temple."

So with sighs and sorrows I sat down in the porch, making intercession to
Apollo, the particular God I honored, to have compassion of mine estate. Now
faithful prayers being heard, ere they be ended, Mercurius commes unto me,
and bids me be of good comfort. "The Gods (quoth he) be just, though women be
angry. The Goddesses be all found to have this fault. Diana with Acteon,
Pallas with Arachne, Juno with Teresias, were angry without measure: so is
Venus now with thee. The cause with thy remedy shall be told thee at Delphos,
whither straight I must carry thee." Which he had no sooner spoken, but by and
by I was set in the temple of Apollo, where first demanding my fault, the
Oracle made answer, " Thy fear, and not thy faith. And what (quoth I) may be
my remedy? The best besides the beautifullest", the Oracle straight answered.

With this, Apollos Priest took me by the hand, recounting unto me the whole
course of my life, whom I loved, and how I lost her. And when I told him of
the faithfulness of my service, and the faultlesnesse of my meaning: of the
variableness of her condition, and at last, of the fearefulnes of her
apperance: "Ah good Hemetes (quoth he:) it is not the kind of women to be
cruel, it is but their countenance. And as for their variablenes, who so will
not apply himself thereto, shall not much please them, nor long hold them.
Neither is it to be found fault withal. Nature herself loves variety, so
it be without deceit. Now for thy faultlesnesse, it suffices not. The servant
of Venus must not only have faith, but also lack fear. Fear lost thee thy
Mistres, and thy boldness to enter into Venus temple, being unacceptable, made
her strike thee blind. But Apollo biddes me tell thee, the Gods accept whom
women forsake. The eyes shut from delight, have minds more open to
understanding. This punishment shall be thy profit. Venus can bar thee but
from her felicity of love, but for the devotion thou bear to Apollo, he
gives thee this gift: to be able to decipher the destiny of every one in
love, and better to advise them than the best of her dearlings: and further now
does promise thee, in revolution of years, thou shall recover thy sight. But
this shall not betide thee, till at one time, in one place, and in a country
of most peace, two of the most valiant Knights shall fight, two of the most
constant lovers shall meet, and the most virtuous Lady in the world shall be
there to look on. And when thine eyes may behold that thy heart delights in,
a Lady in whom inhabiteth such learning and beauty, as never was in any
creature, then shall they be opened, and that shall be thy warrant. All Apollo
says is sooth. The whilst it is determined, thou shall dwell in an
Heremitage, where nothing that longes to natures use shall be lacking unto
thee."

So suddenly I was shifted to this hill hard by, where I have wintered many a
year, far from the woes and wrongs which the world besides is full of. And now
(best Lady and most beautiful) so termed of the Oracle, and so thought of in
the world, what the Enchauntresse told Contarenus, Sibylla showed Gandina and
Loricus, and what Apollo said to me, by your most happy coming is verified.
"The most hardy Knights Contarenus and Loricus here have fought: the most
constant lovers Loricus and Gandina here be met, and I poor Hemetes (as this
Knight knows) full long blind, have received again my sight. All which
happened by ye grace of your virtue, which the best so much do honor, and we
are now most bound unto."

And so I present these noble persons to please you with their service, and my
self to serve you with my prayers. And leaving the lovers to their delight, I
must leave Loricus this advise* Knight, prosecute thy purpose, it is noble
(learning by me) not to fear, and of thy self to take pain, remembering that
nothing notable is won without difficulty. Hercules had by his labor his
renown, and his ruin by his love. Loricus, thine end will be reward: at least,
most reputation, which noblest women most esteem. But I fear I have too long
tired your most noble ears, and therefore only now I beseech your Majesty,
with your happy presence to honor my poor home, whither I mean straight to
guide you.

This tale ended, he led her to his Heremitage, where when he was come, he
used these words following, and so did leave her.
Here (most noble Lady) have I brought you to this most simple Heremitage,
where as you shall see small cunning, but of nature: and no cost, but of good
will. Mine hours approaching for my Orisons, which according to my vow I must
never break, I must hear leave your Majesty, promising to pray as for my
soul, that whosoever wishes you best, may never wish in waste.

FINIS.
Fabula ab Hemete Eremita coram Maiestate Regia prolata.
SAtis iam (milites inuictissimi) satis decertatum est. Alloquitur Equites
duos, qui tunc temporis ibidem pugnam inibant.
Virtuti vim cedere oportet, ancepsque martis alea nobilissimo auxilio
dirimenda est. Sic dij immortales, ineuitabili fato decreuerunt; absistite
itaque pugna, meque sequimini; sic audietis ea, quae minime credituri estis;
mecumque eo fruemini, Alloquitur Heroinam quandam ibi praesentem.
quod vestri permagni intererit. Tu autem (Virgo venustissima) ad hanc te
societatem adiunge, vbi facile constabit ea vera esse omnia, quae fatidico ore
cecinit futuri praesaga Sibylla, tuis iam tandem aduentare finem aerumnis.

Illustrissima Princeps, Alloquitur Reginam.
diuinitus dimissa, vt esses quae and praesentia nos oblectares, and virtute
opinione magis prodesses tua; quantum dijs debeas immortalibus, mortales autem
tibi; huius nostri acerbissimi casus recordatio demonstrabit. Sed prius quam
tantae virtutis tam admirabilem (excellentissima Princeps) dignitatem
despicias, placeat (quaeso) Maiestati tuae varios casus, and crebras fortunae
nostrae commutationes intueri. Non ita multis abhinc diebus, in terra Cambaiae,
quae sita est ad ostiu^ Indi fluminis praediuitis; Occanon dux quidam, magni
nominis, and fama percelebri, rerum potiebatur, vnicam, quam duntaxat habebat
filiam Gandina^ (sic enim appellabatur) principatus sui relicturus haeredem.
Haec, a forma, magis quam fortuna foelix, vt chara patri, sic omni grata
populo, and periucunda fuit. Caeterum, non semper formae decus possessores beat
suos; nec sublimis semper fortuna foelix: exemplo erit Gandina, (ad quam
nobiles proci, nec pauciores haud mediocri dignitate serui confluxissent) long
plures formae riuales habuit, quam aut ipsa percuperet, aut rationibus suis
magnopere expediret. Siquidem amor, qui nullius ad vota consilio directis
vestigijs insistit, sed caeco semper preceps impetu ruit, sese huic dulcissimae
virgini, in venas atque medullas sensim infudit; mentemque illius Contareni
cuiusdam desyderio, qui eam quoque misere deperibat, haud magni sane loci
militis, sed maximae virtutis, incendit. Vnde adeo factu^ est, vt ille tantus
nobilium amatorum concursus, plus ad formae famam, quam ad mentis
tranquillitatem delectationis attulerit. Etenim, non ita multis interiectis
diebus, igneus ille ardor, qui secreto intus exaestuabat incendio, se prodit;
and, long antequam illi volebant, ex fumo flammas incensis subesse pectoribus
persensit pater. Veruntame dux, quae vidisset dissimulanda ratus; atque id,
quod tantopere displicebat, nouo atque inaudito commento auertere cogitans;
neque equitem, neque filiam, vllius vnquam insimulandum amoris existimabat.
Caeterum, quo infoelices quamprimum disiungeret amantes, firmssimum ad id ipse
(opinionis errore) consilium suscepit; sed (vt exitus docuit) infaustum nimis,
and perlugubre. Veneficae cuiusdam artificio, quae in suo genere, scientia
long caeteris omnibus antecellebat, Contarenum in aerem magno miraculo
sublimem rapi fecit, atque Cambaiae in vltimas Oceani oras transferri; quod vt
fieret, viginti aureorum millia veneficae dederat. Magna (hercle) poenitentiae
merces.

Verum illud principibus in viris neque nouum, neque inusitatum videri debet;
quorum plerumque desyderia, immanibus solent condiri sumptibus; magnique maxima
interdum emuntur incommoda. Contarenus interea tam admirablli modo ab amore
diuulsus suo, consternatus, atque animo (supra quam dici potest) anxius, a
venefica admonebatur, vti eam, quam fatum inflixerat, eandemque breui depulsura
foret necessitas, calamitatem, aequo and recto animo perferret. Futurum namque
(idque persancte recepit) vt nondum peracto septennio, patientiae praemium
obtineret suae; votique compos fieret: ante tamen cum perstrenuo sibi milite
depugnandum, and Heroinam etiam videndum, vnam omnium, quas sustinet terrarum
orbis, praecellentissimam. Interea vero, caeci Heremitae curam susciperet; and
quo is tempore amissum recuperaret lumen, eodem illum idipsum, quod tantopere
cupiebat, consequuturum. His quidem dictis, pertristi and lamentabili fato eum
relinquens, in aerem denuo subuolauit.

At Gandina, dum nusquam Contarenum videt suum, nusquamque eum, quem ante a
quotidie, incredibili cum voluptate, suis irradiantem ocellulis intueri
consueuer at, aegra animi, ijs morbis conflictari coepit, qui inseparabiles
talium plerumque cupiditatum comites existunt; suspicionibus nimirum, and
crebris curiosarum querelarum procellis, tum anxiferis vndique cogitationibus,
and acerbissimis cruciamentis diuexari. Tandem (neque enim magnorum Principum
negotia ita clam tractantur, vt non multos habeant consiliorum participes:
Regumque haeredibus nunquam desunt spei satellites, qui futurae foelicitatis
spe illecti, quoduis facinus suscipere non recusant) ad aures infoelicis
siliae, paternae crudelitatis fama peruenit. Quae a luctu in rabiem versa
(tantas perbibit medullas amor,) Itane vero? (inquit.) "Nullane Regibus
iustitiae cura? Nec igitur regnandi iustitiae. Neque enim Occanonis aulam,
neque Cambaiae regnum tanti aestimo; si sine meo mihi Contareno contabescendum
fuerit. Infoelix o patria! tuque o crudelissime pater! valete; qui me hanc
huius nefandae tempestatis calamitatem subire cogitis: te vt sequar (alma
fides) quam vtique vt violem, neque celsae fortunae meae dignitas effecerit,
neque periculi magnitudo. Etenim, si non squallore prius and lachrymis
confecta, hanc miserabilem and aerumnosissimam animulam dimisero; nunquam
desistam, donec te, te mi Contarene, vbicunque terrarum es, inuenero."

Haec fata, instituti itineris consilium prosequitur; vnaque duntaxat
pedissequa adhibita, vilibus induta vestibus, rebusque omnibus ad vitam
pertenuem and lugubrem sustentandam compositis, atque comparatis; clam Cambaia
proficiscitur. In itinere vero, quas quantasque molestias pertulerit; quibusque
fuerat iactata casibus, commemorare vt longum foret, and auditu certe
incredibile. Nihilominus tandem, post anxios ancipitesque labores, ad Sibyllae
antrum deuenit. Ibi Loricum, quendam equitem perillustrem, qui eo quoque saeuo
compulsus amore, fati eruendi causa concesserat, offendit.

Heroinam amabat Loricus iste, tam naturae, quam fortunae dotibus plane
incomparabilem; sed amore mirabili inusitatoque. Nam cum omnem operam, omnesque
ingenij ac industriae machinas adhibuisset, eam vti se apud illam in gratia
poneret; nullo vt quamuis alio proposito premio, permitteret tamen semetipsam
ab illo duntaxat amari: illa autem immitem se semper atque inexorabilem
praeberet; and nihilo p^orsus illius inflecti vel sedulitate, vel obseruantia
co^moueri videretur; statuit miro quodam artificio arcana mentis consilia, quae
illa tam caute contexerat, expiscari. Eam itaque, cuius amore omnium
inflammarentur animi, (tanta erat vultus venustas) vili se pendere prae se
tulit. Et quo melius cordis, quod restinguere nequierat, dissimularet
incendium; nouam sibi Heroinam delegit, quae quotidie repudiatae oculis
obuersaretur; pulchram illam quidem, and peramabilem; sed nihil ad hanc, quam
animo medullitus adamarat. Huic se diuae totum dederat, huic sacra quotidie
faciebat, omnique obsequio, cultu, and obseruantia, sese ad illius finxit
arbitrium. Nihil omisit eorum, quae a percuriosis amantibus fieri consuescunt;
adeo vt humeris colores ipsius gestarit (obsequij and amoris insignia:) in sinu
autem expressam imaginis formam, a perito artifice eleganter depictam,
circumtulerit. Accedit praeterea, quod caeteris omnibus fastiditis, in illius
se penitus consuetudinem immerserit: seseque totum ad illius nutum
voluntatemque conuertit. Haec cum animaduertisset praestans illa, (quae parem,
omnibus corporis atque animi, quae conferri a natura possent, muneribus, nullam
vnquam inuenit) quauis de delectu magnopere non laboraret; immutati tamen
amoris contumeliam, indignius far visa est. Vnde factum est, vt quod amor
nequierat; zelotypia detexerit.

Loricus hoc animaduertens, plane perspexit indignitatem illius; non autem
vllam Heroinae implacabilem importunitatem facere, ne grata viderentur ea, quae
ab illo proficiscerentur officia: facilem quippe ipsam, perque benignam videri;
talemqne prorsus, quae tanto dignos honor protinus susceptura foret,
meritosque meritis affectura praemijs. Itaque relicta patria, labori, atque
armis totum se deuouit; omnique conatu in hanc duntaxat cogitationem incubuit:
eam vt demum, meritorum fama, consequeretur gratiam; vti ab hac nobilissima,
omnique laudis splendore circumfluente Heroina, dignior censeretur, qui ipsius
esset; quamuis ipsa illius nunquam futura foret. Proin, deserta patria, nullos
non experiundos subcundosque labores; nullum non audendum, quamuis perarduum
facinus existimans; miseris actus erroribus; omnem terrarum orbem itineribus
asperrimis difficillimisque peragrauit: donec tandem ad Sibyllae antrum, vbi
Gandinae obuiam dederat, peruenit.

Ibi vero, duo amantes isti, omnem fortunae suae acerbitatem, omnesque, quas
perpessi fuerant aerumnas, exponunt. Gandina enim praelongi laboris finem
praenoscere auebat; Loricus autem curarum and spei solamen exoptabat; vtrique
tandem Sibylla hanc in sententiam respondit: "Quod quemadmodum iam societate
coniuncti erant, ita a consortio non se abstraherent; donec eo tandem
peruenissent, vbi homines strenuissimi, terra fertilissima, foeminae
pulcherrimae, populus ditissimus, regimen iustissimum, Princepsque dignissima
inuenirentur. Sic autem Heroina, quod magis optaret, videret; milesque solamen
animi sui exaudiret."

Iam vero (praestantissima Princeps, omnique virtutis decore circumfusa,) cum
huius instituti sermonis ratio, tum laudum tuarum praecellens splendour, and
dignitas admirabilis, postulare videntur; vt de me ipso nonnihil dicam. Senem
quamuis me (Regina) videas effoetum, squalidum, rugis deformem, and velut
mortalium omnium exclusissimum, hanc in solitudinem and tenebras detrusumitamen
fui (Regina) fui inclyti nominis eques, summoque in honor habebar abijs, qui
fortitudinis tum fama perinsignes, totum pene terrarum orbem, rerum gestarum
gloria compleuerant* Versanti autem mihi quotidie in Aula celebri, atque
pernobili; fortissimis vndique Equitibus, ac Heroinis, excellenti venustate ac
virtute praeditis, affluentibus; vbi pulchritudo formaque palmam, meritis autem
praemia cessere: euenit vt cuiusdam Heroinae amore miser implicarer, cuius in
ore tantus fluxit honos, tantaqeu maiestas Veneris, v^ipse Nempe Cupido, qui
cassus l^^nine fingitur.
filius (si eam conspexisset) eodem (proculdubio) flagrasset incendio. Verum
enimuero, quemadmodum illius in ore Venus omnes suauitates atque delicias
illigarat suas; ita natura fluctuoso illam ingenio finxit, planeque mirabili.
Siquidem amantes illa non est aspernata suos: sed inexpiabilem se semper
praebuit ac difficilem; omniu^que, quae vnquam vixerunt, mulierum maxim
intractabilem. Etenim, si quando tetigissem, in centum se protinus verteret
formas; nullam autem speciem vnqua^ suscipere visa est, quae non oculos meos
incredibili voluptate perfunderet. Sic nimiru^ (Regina) eo contactu afficiebar,
vt quoties is mihi contigit, in coelo cum dijs immortalibus versari viderer.
Facile autem id quiuis intelligere potuisset; quandoquidem semel si
apprehendissem, denuo dimittere, mortis erat instar; donec se tandem in
tygridem conuertit. Tum vero monstro conterritus, amplius contueri non audebam.
Itaque mihi e manibus elapsa, nunquam se postea conspiciendam praebuit.

Ex hoc font (Regina) initio dolores redundarunt mei. Nondum tamen audis, quae
poena hanc tantam acerbitatem excerpserit. Nam cum hunc in modum eius rei
priuarer aspectu, quam supra terrena omnia concupiueram; adeo vt assidue eam
intuens, in eamque oculis semper and cogitatione defixus, nullam prorsus
caeteris in rebus contemplandis, voluptatem perceperim; Cyprum versus, ad
insulam Paphos peregrinari coepi: meque hac spe miser consolabar; fore, vt
illic aliquid certi de mea cognoscerem: quandoquidem Venus ibidem
religiosissime coleretur.

Eo cum venissem, atque templi iam limen institissem; illico me oculis captum
sensi. Tam horrendo obstupefactus casu, neque vllius mihi conscius sceleris; in
genua prouolutus, haec (lamentabili voce) profudi: "Alma Venus, dearum omnium
pulcherrima, quaeque ab omni prorsus crudelitate abhorres; quod in te tantum
facinus admisi; quo numen mihi tuum tam infestum reddiderim? Stultitia and
temeritas tua, respondit (vti reor) Veneris antistes. At (inquam) a teneris
vnguiculis virtutis amator fui, doctrinae cliens, captiuus amoris. Imo vero
(inquit ille) non dispartitus debet esse is, qui Veneri defertur honos.
Inuigilare studijs, non adeo Veneri conuenit; totum nempe dea hominem, aut
omnino nullum requirit. His dictis, continuo per humeros violenter arreptum,
templo me praecipitem eiecit."

Tum vero acri percitus dolor, aegrisque imo ductis pectore suspirijs; in
porticu, vbi moestus consederam, Apollinem peculiarem meum, quem prae caeteris
semper colui, deum obsecrabamque vt supplicis sui sortem commiseresceret.
Enimuero, quae fide concupiuntur vota, ijs vix dum finitis protinus occurrunt
coelites. "Astitit namque mihi precanti Mercurius, (and) Bono sis (inquit)
animo. Qua^uis enim mulieres ira and indignatione acrius interdum efferuescant;
dij tamen aequi semper and placabiles esse consueuerunt. Hoc morbo laborant
pleraeque omnes. Sic Diana Acteoni, Arachnae Pallas, Teresiae Juno; praeter
modum omnes aduersae infestae que fuerant; veluti iam tibi quoque Venus.
Tantarum autem irarum causae, vna cum remedio, Delphis tibi postmodum
aperientur, quo transferri te confestim oportebit. Haec fatus, in templo
Apollinis protinus me constituit; vbi primum cum ab Apolline sciscitarer, qua
in re deliquissem; aeditum est oraculum huiusmodi: Formido, non tua fides.
(and) Quod igitur (inquam) remedium? Praeter (inquit) pulcherrimam,
praestantissima." Exinde vero Apollinis sacerdos manu me prehendit; omnesque
anteactae vitae meae miserias atque aerumnas enumerauit; cuius amori me
dederam, ac quibus eam modis perdideram. Atque hic cum ego constantiam mentis,
integritatem herae meae; varios volubilesque mores, speciem denique in quam se
induerat, terribilem indicassem: "Ah bone Hemetes (inquit.) Non ita medius
fidius natura mulieres implacabiles sunt atque immites; vultu duntaxat ita se
componunt, vt quamuis non sint crudeles, videantur tamen. At varietatem quis in
foemina reprehendit? Quin potius tempestati obsequeris; teque ad earum
voluntates atque ingenia accommodes: secus enim qui fecerit, is certe neque
placere multum poterit, neqe expetitis diu perfruetur voluptatibus. Quanquam
quid est quod eo nomine mulieres in crimen voces? Ipsa Natura namque, quam non
insidiosae varietatis amans? De innocentia vero quid attinet dicere? Innocentem
esse, non hoc quidem ad id quod quaeritur satis est. Veneris enim clientes, non
fide solum praeditos esse oportebit; sed omnis etiam formidinis expertes. Nam,
quod desyderium amiseris tuum, timoris erat id quidem tui; quod oculos,
audaciae; quippe qui Veneris templum alienissimo etiam tempore inuisus intrare
non dubitares. Veruntamen haec vti renuntiarem mandauit Apollo; consuescere
deos immortales eos in fidem suscipere, quos a se mulieres ablegarunt: and
clausis ad libidinem oculis, praeclaro tamen scientiae lumine saepenumero
collustrari. Et quidem haec poenae calamitas, plus tibi, ad vitam recte
instituendam, momenti attulerit; quam oculorum tuorum caecitas damni aut
dedecoris inflixerit. Oculis enim te duntaxat and amoris foelicitate priuauit
Venus. Apollo vero (tanti est apud ipsum is, quo eum prosequeris honos) hoc
tibi concessit; futurum, vt praescius, quo quiuis fato amet praenoseeres;
magisque consilio tuto, quam qui sit ex Veneris delicijs, valeres. Pollicetur
deinceps; fore, vt post aliquot annos, amislum lumen recuperes. Sed hoc non
ante tibi contigerit, quam vno eodemque and loco and tempore, in regione pacis
atque otij gloria florentissima, duo inter se equites strenuissimi
conflixerint, totidemque amantes constantissimi obuij ibidem erunt,
intereritque huic spectaculo praestabili insignique virtute Heroina, vna
omnium, quas orbis terrarum sustinet, amplissima. Cum itaque oculis tuis contra
tueri licebitid, quod tibi maxim cordi futurum scio, praecellenti virtute
Principem, and eruditione incomparabili redundantem; naturae vero ipsius habitu
tam diuino, nullo vt vnquam mortali in corpore par decus ac pulchritudo
extiterit: tum demum (nam id tibi signi instar erit) oculi confestim
aperientur. Nihil Apollinis oraculo certius. Tibi autem interea, ista dum
eueniant, solitaria quadam in cellula manendum est, vbi omnia ad vsum naturae
necessaria suppeditabuntur."

His dictis, hoc in colle, quem iuxta vides, protinus constitutus sum; quo in
loco multos iam annos incultam quidem and sordidam, sed tranquillam vitam
extraxi; aerumnarum earum omnium atque iniuriarum expers, quibus impurus atque
lachrymabilis mundus vndique scatet. Nunc igitur (Princeps augustissima)
mortalium and optima omnium, and pulcherrima, sic Apollinis oraculo dicta; sic
vniuersi terraru^ orbis consensu celebrata; quicquid Contareno venefica,
Gandinae and Lorico Sibylla, mihi autem Apollo praedixerunt: ea omnia tuo
foelicissimo illustrantur aduentu. "Contarenus and Loricus, milites impigerrimi
depugnarunt; Loricus and Gandina, amatores fidelissimi conuenerunt; ego autem
pauper Hemetes; qui perdiu (quemadmodu^ scit miles iste) in hisce syluosis
latebris caecus delitui, nunc tandem te (Regina) sexus tui lumen, and totius
orbis stellam, intueor." Haec, excellenti and peradmirabili tuae virtutis
magnitudine, confecta sunt; quae vt optimi cuiusque mentem sacra veneratione
perfundit, sic nos sibi deuotos aeternum obstrinxit.

Quapropter, hos nobilissimos, and perillustri praeditos virtute viros, tuae
Maiestati (Regina) commendo; obsequio proculdubio, and obseruantia, magno tibi
semper vsui ac voluptati futuros: me autem ipsum, qui ardentissimis apud Deum
Opt. Max. votis pro incolumitate tua susceptis, Amplitudini tuae perpetuo
deseruiam. Prius tamen, quam amatores hos expetitis desyderijs reliquero,
Loricus paucis admonendus mihi videtur. Macte itaque virtute miles, disce ex me
(siquidem apprime tibi vtile fuerit) nihil timere; a te autem ipso, dura pati.
Amat ardua virtus; nihilque praeclarum, quod non difficile. Labor Herculi famam
attulit, mortem autem amor. Lorice, ne dubita; hic exitus erit virtutis tuae
praemium; saltem nominis gloriam consequere, quam nobilissimae foeminae
caeteris omnibus rebus anteponunt. Sed vereor ne celsitudinis tuae auribus,
nimis diu submolesta, and iniucunda fuerit oration mea. Quapropter, hoc vnum
deprecor, vt humilem hanc meam and subagrestem casulam, quo te confestim
deducturus sum, claris and praefulgentibus Maiestatis tuae radijs illustrare
digneris.

His dictis, atque peractis, Maiestatem Regiam in cellulam deduxit suam; vbi
his verbis veniam ab eadem petijt.
Iam iam (Regina) omnibus modis semper dignissima, Maiestatem tuam in hanc
cellulam agrestem conducere prae me tuli; vbi non artem, sed naturae dona;
neque sumptus inofficiosos, aut conditioni meae dissimiles, videre dignabere.
Hora enim orationibus meis assignata appropinquante, (vota namque maximis
occasionibus obstantibus perimplenda sunt) Maiestatem tuam ibidem derelicturus,
veniam peto. Deum tamen ipsum obtestor, me clementiam misericordiamque ^uam,
non secus quam pro anima mea, deprecaturum; vt qui optime celsitudini tuae
voluerint, id nusquam, nunquamue frustra deprecari valiant.

FINIS.

