THE GERMAN HISTORY CONTINVED. THE SEVENTH PART. Wherein is contained the
principal passages of the last Summer. Methodically digested into times,
places, and actions, and brought down to this present. With the siege and
taking of Regenspurg, as also the Siege and Battle of Norlingen, with an exact
Map thereof. Lastly is added certain Misselanies of Stories of most parts of
Christendom. All which is done not by the former, but another Author.

Quid suecus vel Cimber agit vis forte videre
I, fuge sed poteris doctier esse domi.
LONDON: Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1634.

To the Reader.
He that shall adventure to set forth a Story, is as sure to meet with
scoffs, as a soldier is with knocks. The best Historians has not escaped
uncensured: Livie, so much commended by Quintilian, was condemned by one of too
much verbositie: by another of affected Patavinity: I am ready to undergo the
common fate, armed against ill Language, with that innocence which accompanies
Truth, and my desire of communicating, that Intelligence, (which at first was
private) to the public benefit: He that ingrosseth all to himself, may
think himself wise, but will scarce prove himself honest* and they which
censure the labors of them, who intend a common good, give evidence against
themselves of a snarling Cynicisme, not Scholasticall ingenuitie. I dare boldly
say, I have delivered truth unpartially; and although collected with much
labor out of scattered papers, yet it is set down so methodically, that a
mean capacity, may run along with the History; apprehend by Jmagination,
what was don by Action: I wish it may in the reading work as well upon the
generous English spirits, as Xenophons Cyropaedia upon the African Scipio, that
all may be inflamed with a desire of honorable actions, and able to undergo
the charge of Commanders, if thereunto required, by their King and Country: so
he wishes who has exposed himself to your censure, and this work for your
information.

N.C.

The Contents of the whole Book.
Chapter 1. The Actions of the King of Hungary, General of the Imperial Army;
and the opposition made against him by the Duke Bernhard Weymar, Gustavus
Horn, and Otho the Rhinegrave, principal Commanders for the Princes and
Swedes. Chap. 2. Duke Bernhard Weymar, Gustavus Horn, and Otho the Rhinegrave.
Chap. 3. The Actions of the King of Hungary, and Duke of Bavaria, in Franconia,
and Bavaria, with the proceedings of Duke Bernhard Weymar, and Gustavus Horn,
two principal Commanders for the Princes of the Union there; or a relation of
what has been done on both sides since July the 20. Chap. 4. The continuance
of the King of Hungaries Story, wherein you have the several Relations of the
siege and battle of Nordlingen. Chap. 5. The Actions of Otho Lodowicke the
Rhinegrave. Chap. 6. The Actions of the Landtgrave of Hessen, and the Duke of
Lunenburgh, in Westfalia, Paderborne, and Brunswickland, and elsewhere. Chap.
7. Further Actions of proceeding of the Landtgrave of Hessen, and the Duke of
Lunenburgh. Chap. 8. The Actions of the Electors of Saxony, and Brandenburgh.
Chap. 9. Saxon and Brandenburghs proceedings continued. Chap. 10. Further
proceedings of the Dukes of Saxony and Brandenburgh. Certain Missellany
Relations. The great Deluge in Holsatia. Chap. 11. The Actions of France,
Italy, Spain, and the Low Countries. Chap. 12. The magnificent interment of
the King of Sweden. Chap. 13. Certain passages of Russia, Poland, and Turkey.
Chap. 14. The siege of La Motta in Lorraine. Chap. 15. The return of Monsieur
into France, Paris the 12. of October. 1634. Chap. 16. An Edict of the French
King concerning the Duke of Lorraine.
In the Misselanies, fol. 32. for Persia, read Prussia.

depiction of the military camp near Nordlingen A true Delineation of the
Swedish and Imperial Camp near Nordlingen and in what this City was (...)
AFter that the King of Hungary after the taking of the Imperial City of
Regenspurg, had likewise brought under his power, the City of Donawerth, and
other places thereabout, He thereupon took a resolution to march into the
Country of Wirttenberg, and to refresh there again his half starved Army.
And that the easier he might perform it, he marched first of all directly
against the City of Nordlingen, and begun to assault the said Town in a
hostile manner. But Duke Bernhard of Weymar, and the Field Marshall Horn having
few days before conjoined their forces, perceived betimes the King of Hungary
his intent; wherefore all their care was, how they might hinder and divert it.
To which end they marched the 9.19. day of August, at Leypheimb over the
Danubie, and from thence they marched toward Giengen, Heydenhem, Aalen and
Bopffingen: where they, after that they had before cut off and put to the sword
about 1000 of the Imperialists, and some 100 taken prisoners, pitched their
Camp upon a Hill near a Forest over against the Imperial camp to expect there
the Rhinegravish, Wirtenbergish Franconian and D. William of Saxon Weymar his
forces, which were commanded to join with them, and then if occasion would
serve, to give battle unto the enemy. But that in the mean time the City of
Nordlingen might not be mastered by the enemy, Duke Bernhard of Weymar, and the
Feeld-Marshall Horn resolved to strengthen the Garrison in the town with more
forces, and to impart to the City their intention. For the effecting of this,
and if possibly occasion would serve to give battle unto the enemy; being by
the prisoners certified, that the enemy was much disperced, and had sent many
troops abroad, they the 14.24. of this month, put their forces in battle
array, and perceiving the enemy to lay over a passage near a little River that
flows through the City of Nordlingen, and down from the Hill they could not
well discern, how the passage was, Duke Bernhard with the right wing advanced
till unto the passage, and all the Imperialists which he found on this side, He
chased over the River, and thereupon made a stand at the passage, seeing he
could not well get over the same in the presence of the enemy, till the
Feeld-Marshall Horn had brought the succor into the City. Whes this was
successefully performed, the Duke intended to retire again. But as soon as he
was gone a little way from the passage, the enemy with all his Regi^ents of
Crabats, Hungarians, and German horsemen, sell upon the Arriereguard, with whom
they engaged themselves so much, that it was impossible to part agai^e:
wherefore Duke Bernhard was forced to turn ba^e again, and assault them with
all his strength, and pu^ all the Regiments into a confusion, and to flight, so
that many of them were slain, and had not the night so sudd^nly fallen upon
them, the slaughter would have been much greater. Thereupon the Duke held all
that night nea^e the said passage, till the morning, and then he made h^re
treat again to the rest of the Army upon the aforem^ntioned Hill. Mean while
Colonel John de Werth be^ ^an likewise to pursue the Duke, but was quickly
beaten ^cke. In these several skirmishes above 2000 of the Impe^alists party
did run over, and partly were slain or taken prisoners. The Earl of Cratz
being also arrived about ^at time in the Camp. The both the Generals advanced
the 26. day of Aug. 6 of Sep. with their Army to taken hill which commanded
the Imperial Camp, and about evening they routed the Spanish and Italian
troops, and obtained 12 Standards, and doubtless they would have obtained a
great victory, had not the night overtaken them. The next day following, they
begun on both sides to skirmish again, till at last the Feeld-Marshall Horn
with the foot forces got a part of the Hill, and brought upon it 6 Pieces of
Ordnance, and begun to play with them against the enemies Camp, and at the
same time some Swedish footforces got over the trenches into the camp, and
took of the Imperialists some Ensigns which they brought back along with
them. But at last the charges being often renewed, the Imperialists drew all
their forces together, and assailed their enemies foot-forces, so that after a
long fight, they put them into a confusion, and overthrew them. But the most
part of the horsemen retired in reasonable order, the Ordnance being taken away
by some runneawayes, was lost, and the baggage was most part plundered and taken
away by the Swedes themselves.

A. The City of Nordlingen. B. The Church upon the Hill, where two Batteries
were raised. C. S. Leonhardt, where 1. Regiment had approached already into the
Garden. D. The Hill where the Gallows stood. E. The whole Imperial Camp, upon
the Steffel hill. F. Two Demicanons. G. Three field-peeces. H. Three Regiments,
and some pieces of Ordnance. I. The Head quarter Emerling. K. One company of
Currassiers, that keep the watch. L. One Regiment of foot. M. The Tent of the
King of Hungary. N. Crabats. O. Germane horsemen P. Foot forces.
Which presented themselves in battel-array when D. Bernhard of Weymar arrived.
Q. The River of Eger. R. The Lhoe-mill. S. Vndermeiningen. T. Hollzheim. V.
Ertlingen. W. Baldingen. X. Topffingen. Y. Eringen. Z. Bintzenzimmer. a.
Blaumloh. b. Kraulhausen. c. Trohtelfingen. d. Wallerstein. e. Kirchheim. f.
Osterholtz. g. An Imperial Watch.
In these Villages, and thereabouts were the Quarters of the Imperial horsemer
1. Bopffingen. 2. The Ipff. 3. Flohe hill. 4. Oberduffe. 5. In the 8. Mill on
the River of Eger. 6. Auff Haysen. 7. The beginning of the River of Eger. 8.
The Breitwangel. 9. The Swedish Camp. 10. The Ordnances. 11. The House of
Hohenberg. 12. The way to Vlm. 13. The Forest. 14. Keckingen.




The Actions of the King of Hungaria General of the Imperial Army; and the
opposition made against him by the D. Bernhard Weymar, Gustavus Horn, and Otho
the Rhinegrave, prin^all Commanders for the Princes and Swedes. CAP. 1.
THe siege of Ratisbone by the Imperial and Bavarian Armies, with some
preparations made by Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weymar, for the defense thereof,
concluded our last discourse of his proceedings; we must now alter the scene,
and follow him into another Province, where he falls upon the Enemy, burning,
and wasting his Country, whilst his power is employed in this offensive
foreign war.

It is an Aphorism among Physicians, whose study only tends to the
preservation of the Natural body, that if a flux of sharp humors fall upon
the eye, or any such tender part, that if by fit purgative medicines they
cannot carry it away, the stream must be turned, and the matter transported to
the common ordinary neighbor Emunctories: And many wise Commanders, whose care
extends it self to the preservation of the body politic in peace, have
followed this Rule, That when the Armies of aliens in hostile manner shall
invade their territories, the only expeditious way of securing their own, is to
fall upon the Enemies land, that so he may be called home, and diverted from
his former counsels. Thus Pericles in the Peloponnesian war, twice, and both
times speedily, and happily delivered the Athenians country from the
formidable Host of the Lacedaemonians: Thus Agathocles the King, opposing fear
to fear, and force to force, conveighing his Army by sea into Africa, suddenly
raised the Siege of Syracusa, when Amilcar was set down before it, the
Carthagenians being constrainedly willing to purchase their safety, with the
quiet of their Enemies. Thus Hannibal when the Romans had so strongly planted
themselves before Capua, that he esteemed it a matter of extreme difficulty,
if not impossibility to remove them by force, brought his Army to the gates of
Rome, deeming this the surest way to quit his friends from imminent danger: and
this device was so successeful, that Fulvius Flaccus one of the Consuls, was
instantly sent for home from Capua, for the relief of the City. And the D.
attempted about May 27. June 6. to deliver the City of Regensburg from the
fury of the besiegers, by an inroade into Bavaria, pillaging and spoiling the
enemies country, blocking up one place, besieging another, and doing him what
damage they could in every place. And this course of his was the cause that
about June 11/1 some Imperial Regiments were sent back into Bohemia, to assure
that Country against the Protestants, and some of the Bavarians Army marched
downwards by Strawbingen into Bavaria to secure those coasts from invasion.

The Fort of Ro^berg besieged by D. B^.
And yet the D. Weymar at his first going from Rhegensburg, looked not toward
Bavaria, but Franconia; and therefore marched by Newmarck a town in the upper
Palatinat toward Altorff, where we find him in his head quarter May 31 /
June 10. But hence he straight dislodged, marching toward the river of
Pegnitz, and thence he first applied himself to the strong Fort of
Rottenberge, where he left the Lieutenant Colonel Laverwaldt, with 1500
Musketeers and sufficient ammunition to besiege it, who so well discharged his
office there, that by June 5/15 he had made his approaches to the very walls
near the Shiniger steeple, secured his Army from the danger of the Canon, and
much discouraged them within the Fort, who were not only hemmed in by Enemies
without, but pincht and ready to faint, for want of water within.

Thence he marched with the rest of his Army to Forchaim, a City which had
not only formerly supplied the Castle of Wilsburg, when it was besieged by the
Swedish Colonel Sperreuter, and Landgrave John of Hessen: but now also is a
nest of trouble some guests to their Neighbors, daily doing much harm about
Megeldorff, Gleishammer, and the places thereabouts, by pillaging. (...) act of
a Swedish S^
We cannot here pass over a memorable adventure of a Swedish Sergeant, whose
name though it be not discovered to us, is worthy to be recorded for his valor
and wisdom. Some ordinary men have done strange things casually, but few by
praeelection and judgment; but this man showed as much discretion in the
prosecution of his design, as boldness in the first undertaking; The story is
briefly thus: About June 1/11. 400 foot, and 80 Horse of the Imperialists at
Forchaim* having laid a bridge over the river of Pegnitz above Megelldorff,
went a bootehaling, in the Country thereabouts, and had drove away many of
their cattle. This Sergeant accompanied with two Horsemen, as he was coming
to the D. understanding of it by chance, associates himself with them
immediately, professing himself to be an Imperialist, till the whole company
being divided to seek for more prey, be (under pretense of a fair booty) had
drawn out a Standard, and an Ensign so far fromt he rest, that he had
sufficient opportunity to dispatch his first intended business. And now having
thus surprised them, he discloses himself, tells them plainly what he is, a
Swede and their enemy; sets upon them when they looked for no such
entertainment, and had killed them presently, bad not they craved Quartier. But
this sudden unexpected change of his words and behavior, made them petition
for their lives, which he granted upon their disarming, giving up their
Pistols, and submitting themselves to his command. This act of his, could not
be done so secretly, but that it must needs, and was in the end discovered to
the rest of the Imperial party; and therefore about 20 of them presently
pursue after him, as well to avenge themselves upon the Swede, who had thus
deluded them, as to recover the Standard, and Ensign. But he who had gotten a
pretty advantage of way before them, posts on with his prize and prisoners
toward Noremberg, whither at last, being happily preserved by the fortunate
coming in of some Musketeers from the Suburb of Werth, who were marching
against these boote-halers, and the Boores of the Country, who had taken up
Arms, and were come together to save their cattle, which by this means were
regained: he speedile arrived, bringing in the prisoners, the Standard, and
Ensign, which the next day were presented to the Duke, who with the
Field-Marshall Horn was come thither June 2/12 that with their presence they
might honor the funerals of the General Major Corville, who was slain by a
wyer-bullet before Regensburg (as we have related in the supplement to the
sixth part of this History) and was after the Military manner honorably
buried in the Suburbs of Werth, June 5/15. The Standard had on the one side the
picture of the Virgin Mary, on the other, an hand reaching out of a cloud, and
the Ensign was blue, and white, which this adventurous Sergeant thus
achieved. A strange attempt, and hardly to be paralleld in History. Neither
the fact of Zopirus in bringing the Babylonians to his master Darius his
subjection, nor the stratagem of Hannibal in taking in the Roman Cities by his
Africans, whom he had caused to be perfectly instrusted in the Latin tongue,
and dressed in the Roman garb; nor the device of our own Countrymen in the
year 1388, in the time of Richard the second, by entering and taking the town
of Mont-ferrat in the lower Auvergne under the show of merchants, being every
way comparable to it: Zopirus by mangling his face, and false tale, had brought
the Babylonians into such a fools paradise, that they could not think, but
that he was at terms of enmity with his master, and would take occasion of
vengeance; The device of Hannibal was rather an evidence of a cunning, reaching
head, than valiant man; and the design of our Nation, was without show of
peril, there being many undertakers, and the town unfortified, and without a
Garrison, disable to resist them; But this man singly exposing himself to
certain death if once discovered, gave a good testimony as well of his valor
as policy. And doubtless he was well instructed in his Shibboleth, being not
only perfect in the Enemies language, but able to conform himself, to their
behavior, and gesture.

Forchaim blocked up.
And now to return to the D. himself, we find him marching toward Forchaim,
a city (if Mercators report be true) belonging to the Bishop of Herbipolis,
commonly called Virtzburg, and having the river of Regnitz on the west, and the
Wisent on the east, which emptieth it self into Regnitz at the south point of
the City; before this place he sat down with part of his Army, about the 7/17
of June, not only for the causes aforementioned, but also because the
Norrimbergers received much damage, as well by the Garrison here, as those in
the Fort of Rottenberg, this being not above 15, the other but 9 English miles
distant from that city, and having blockt it up, and cut off that stream of
the Wisent which waters the City, left the Field-Marshall Crats before it
with some Regiments, who as they write from Norimberge June 7/17 has raised 5
batteries against it, and makes no spare of powder and shot to batter it,
Sultzbach taken by Scalado.
and sent Colonel Rosa to Sultzbach, wherein the Ambergers had laid a guard of
150 Dragooners, who by June 10/20 had taken it by Scaladoe, put the Dragooners
to the sword, and made good booty there. He went with the rest of his Army
toward Bavaria, being joined by the way with Gustavus Horn at Donawerth,
where now for a while we shall leave him wasting and spoiling the Country.

The continuatio^ of the siege of Regensburg.
And now we return to Regensburg, a city not so famous either for her first
Founder, which was Claudius Tiberius Nero the third Roman Emperor, or the
royal name he gave it, which was Tiberina, or Augusta Tiberii, or the proper
name of Ratisbona, given it in after times, for the good ships which were
thence set out, or the many names given it by strangers, as Reginoburgum,
Rhaetobonna Rhaetopolis, Hyaspolis, Imbripolis, Regnipolis, Taetratopolis,
Quadrata, and Germansheim, or that it was once the Metropolis of Bavaria, and
principal seat of residence of the Kings and Dukes of that Region, as it is
now likely to be by this present siege, wherein the besiegers have hitherto
showed no better arguments of their purpose to take it, then the besieged have
done of resolution to keep it. Their disputations on both sides are with shot
and sword, and the oppositions of the one are not more fierce and fiery, then
the answers of the other are round and speedy.

In what estate the D. Bernhard left the City, we have formerly declared; we
will not now look behind us to what was then, but before us to what is done
since.

Diverse assaults had the Imperialists made upon the city, before the 17.27. of
lune, wherein they gained so little, that as yet they could not be masters of
so much as one outwork, though with the loss, and lives of many thousands of
men, whereof some part was slain before the town, another taken prisoners,
and the third ran away, and starved; it see me that they came on desperately,
and were repulsed valiantly. Thus we are informed in general, but to give the
Reader the more satisfaction, we shall put down some memorable particulars.

Whilst the Imperial and Bavarian Armies were jointly set down before this
city, with about 150 pieces of Ordnance, they first battered that place of the
wall, where D. Bernhard first made the breach, when he took it; but finding the
event not to answer their expectation, their Army being thus quartered, in
Regiments, in all making 6000, whereof 2000 were Musquettiers, placed on the
North side of the Donaw; near the Ship-bridge; 7 Regiments of Foot consisting
of 5000 men, under the command of the General Altringer on the Bavarian, or
Southside, 6 companies under the command of Gallas; 7 companies of Dragooners
under Piccolomini: 9 companies of Pollacks; and 2 of Prench at Kalmuncz; 15
companies of Cuirassiers, at Swandorff, 3 Regiments consisting of 16 companies,
6 companies under the command of Colonel Hummerton, and 8 under the command of
Colonel Butler at Smidhalen. Upon Whitsunday May 25. June 4. when they
continued playing with the canon upon the City, and the horneworke, till 4 in
the afternoon, they made 3 several assaults upon the horneworke, which though
it was not built to the full perfection, was courageously defended by Count
Thurn and his soldiers, whose valor that day was not so commended by his
friends, as admired by his enemies. The loss the Garrison had in these
assaults, was not great, compared to that of the Imperialists: they lost not
above 12 men, amongst which were none of note: the other many, the number is
uncertain; amonst which was the Baron of Teubrize, who had formerly been
Commander in that City while it was under the Duke of Bavaria, who with the
General Major Dietrichstein, Colonel Iulidado, and other principal Officers,
was slain, Colonel Breuner, who was first wounded in three several places, and
afterward with Mariams Lieutenant Colonel, the Major of Colloredoes Regiment,
and other Officers of note in the Army were taken Prisoners.

These three were the most furious assaults, which the Imperialists have
hitherto made against the City: the unhappy events whereof, made them
afterward to go on more warily, and to endeavor by mines and more secure
means to compass their desires. And herein the defendants apply themselves to
defeat them in their manner of working, unwinding the clue as fast as the other
make it up, countermining against them, to undo what the other have done. Two
sallyes made by the Garrison upon the Cam^pe.
And yet these attempts of the Camp, were not altogether unrequited in their
own kind by the Garrison, who both upon Whit-munday at night, sallied forth of
the city, beat the Enemy out of some of his trenches, took 15 prisoners, got
above 100 Muskets, slew many ordinary soldiers, and some Officers, whose swords
they carried away with them into the city; and upon June 10.20. appeared
again without the Hornworke, as if they meant again to have done the like:
whence presently as afraid of their Enemy, they retired purposely toward the
town, to draw the Imperialists to pursue them, to the outworks, where they had
placed some fieldpieces, charged which small shot, for the slaughter of the
assaylants, if they should chance to follow them. And this device took such
effect, that the Camp being encouraged, by this (as they conceived) timorous
flight pursued them to the very outworke, where these Murderers being
discharged upon them, made such a Massacre, that many of them there lost their
lives, to the great discouragement of the Army, and encouragement of the
Regensburgers. It is good to look before we leap; policy is often superior
to power, and wisdom prevails against unregulated might.

Hitherto we have discoursed but of the beginning of this siege, the
proceedings whereof (with the want of present provisions for that numerous Army
before it) have been terrible, and many Well-willers to the Evangelicall party,
have been persuaded, that before this time, the King of Hungary would have
risen from before the City: But he who is resolved either to take it or spend
himself before it, still makes great preparations against it, and has sent
for 9 whole Canons, and 2000 barrells of powder, from Brauna, in Bavaria, and
4000 weights of all sorts of Ammunition to be brought unto him out of Bohemia
and Austria.

Kelheim taken by the Imp.
While things are thus carried at Regensburg, Colonel Rosa who was then at
Kelheim, a town situated upon the Bavarian side of the Donaw, at the very
point where the Altimull comes in, to pay his tribute of waters to that more
famous stream, and distant from Regensburg about 10 English miles to the
Northward, was besieged there by some Imperial Regiments of the Army, and as
if he had lost the courage there, which he showed in the surprisall of
Sultzbach, surrendered it upon composition June 6.16. being forced to march out
without Ensigns, or weapons, to the great offense of the Duke, both because he
had not first burnt the Ship-bridge, as also for that he held not out one day
longer; which if he had done, he had certainly been relieved. The surprisall of
Sultzbach was quickly avenged by the Imperialls at Amberg in the upper
Palatinat, who presently thereupon set upon 4 companies of the Weymarish Horse,
defeated them, and took from them 3 Standards, and the most part of their
Baggage: And this action again was requited by the Swedish Garrison in Weygen,
which defeated an Imperial convoy, which was going with 40 Wagons laden with
victuals, to the Imperial Army at Regensburg, and carried away the provision:
The Dye falls not always alike, Gamesters must expect to lose, as well as to
win, and the fortune of war, does not always carry the same face: A lowering
evening has sometimes seen him a Captive, whom a glorious flattering morning
has laughed on, as a Conqueror.

A piece of political discipline shall conclude this Chapter, wherein war
appears more illustrious then peace; A Swedish Lieutenant hanged.
for that, which in a quiet and settled estate may sometimes without danger be
neglected, in a tumultuarie hurry cannot safely be omitted. A Swedish
Lieutenant having taken upon the Boden-sea (a known lake betwixt Helvetia and
Schwaben) 2 ships laden with come and wine, left the ship, and went on shore
with his soldiers to drink; The Mariners, who were better inclined to the
Imperial, then the Princes party, instantly made use of the time, hoysed up
sails, and carried the prize to the Enemy. It was then in vain to look after
the Saylors, who were gone out of reach; the Council of war therefore made
inquiry after him, who was in their power, arraigned, and hanged him. An
excellent piece of justice; The very name of treason is abominable, and though
it discover a malicious mind, and inclination to do evil, yet it is not
always seconded with the occasion, and power of execution; wilful negligence
in matters of importance, is almost, if not altogether, as bad; for hereby the
adversary has fit opportunity of doing what mischief he can desire. A good
soldier must have a vigilant eye, and an industrious hand, as well as a loyal
heart; for otherwise, he exposes himself, and confederates, to much
necessity.

D. Bernhard Weymar, Gustavus Horn, and Otho the Rhinegrave. CAP. 2.
OPportunity, whether in peace or war, if not neglected, is the best engine,
and most advantageous; in peace, the thriving Merchant, by taking the benefit
of wind and tide, makes a quick return, and gainful; and in war, the spoiling
bands of the soldiery by seasonable use of their present occasions, load
themselves with the prey of their Enemies. The several engagements of the Duke
Bern: of Saxon Weymar, and the Field-marshall Horn, and the disunion of their
Armies, which so continued, till July 1.11. when they were united into one body
betwixt Donawerth and Augspurg, John de Werth pillageth Ortinguen. etc.
gave opportunity to the Bavarian Commander John de Werth, to range about
Franconia, plundering and spoiling those places, which had any relation to the
Evangelicall party. June 2.12. he showed himself with 50 Cornets of Horse, all
Crabats and Hungarians before Hippolstein, Windelstein, Heideck, and some other
towns in Franckenland, presuming sometimes to advance even to the Gates of
Norimberge. But all this was but a bravadoe, his design lay elsewhere; nor
stayed he long to show his bravery, but quickly returning toward Bavaria by
Pappenheim, upon the Altimull, and Donawerth upon the river of Danubie, he
straight wheeled about again, toward Ortinguen, and Dreutinguen, which he
sacked in the absence of these Generals, and the particular Commanders of
those places, carrying away a great prize, 2000 heads of Cattle, 300 sacks of
meat, and 300 prisoners to Ingolstade. In like manner, the Governor of Aicha,
knowing that Horn having other engagements, could not give attendance only
upon that place, as soon as he understood, that he was gone from thence with
his Army contrary to the agreement, and his promise, returned again, and
re-possest himself of the place, from which he had so lately been ejected.
The town of Aicha re-taken by Horn and the Governor hanged.
I know not in this action, whether he was more to be condemned of folly, or
falsehood, both these appear plainly in his undertaking, folly, in that he
could imagine himself able to hold the place, which was now unfortifyed, (for
the gates were demolished, and the fortifications cast down by Gustanus Horus)
which he could not keep fortifyed* falsehood in breaking his word and oath,
then which nothing ought to be observed more religiously. Peradventure he had
learned the doctrine of Jesuiticall Equivocation, and only meant to keep his
promise of not returning, as long as the Field marshall stayed there; it had
been better for him to have dealt plainly, and kept his word punctually, for
by the forfeiture of his credit, he lost his life ignominiously, and betrayed
the City to desolation utterly: the treachery was soon discovered to the
Marshall, who returned instantly, and stayed not to summon the town, but took
it by assault, put the most of the to wnsmen and soldiers to the sword, hanged
the perfidious Commander before one of the gates, and burned the town to the
ground. This was good justice and required by the law of Arms, for he that
does not punish such faithlesnesses, opens a gap to all perfidiousnesse.

John de Werth taken prisoner.
The Army of the Ba^arian Werth, who dealt more fairly (for he did nothing but
what was lawful for an Enemy) has since his practice of hostile pillaging,
been once defe^^d by G^shav^ H^rne near Auspurg, whence he had the pursuit of
his confused Army, almost to ^achaw, the space of, and German miles, and in the
end ^orly ^uined by D. B^burd I^ 7.17. betwixt Landshut and Psaltenhoven, where
(...) of his Soldier were shine, and himself ^tly ^s^ped.

Dachaw, Frysing, Mosburg, and Landshul taken by Duke Bern^.
And now to pass over the several encampings and removings of these 2. great
Commanders before the meeting of their forces, in the first place I find, that
by July 8.18. they had taken by composition, Dachaw, upon the river of Amber;
Frysing, and Mosburg, upon the Iser, which Cities to save themselves from
pillaging, promised to supply the Army with as much come as they could get, and
as much provision, as they could conveniently spare; and from thence marched
toward Passaw, with intent to releeve Regenspurgh, in which attempt, I shall
for a short space leave them; for now, we must looks abroad toward Alsatia,
and the Lake of Constans, where the Swedes, and Soldiers of Otho the
Rhinegrave are bickering with the Imperialists, and these again, returning of
blows to them.

The Rhinegrave Otho Lodowick, to whose care the war in Alsatia was first
committed, being gone from thence toward Tyroll, to attend the coming down
of the Cardinal Infant with his Italians (whom he waited upon with 7000. men
taken out of his Army, and 9000. others sent unto him upon the way, by the
direction of the Rixchancellor Oxenstierne) and having deputed his brother John
Philip his Lieutenant Generally the Imperials in the garrison near to
Rhinefelden, seeing the Leagues thus weakened, entered into a consulation how to
deliver the town, and to deliver the Imperial commander Morcye who kept in,
from the Swedish Armies. To this purpose, June 5.15. all the horse in Brissuck,
and 400 Mus^etiers, being sent from thence, joined with ^o ^in Villinguen, and
1000. Boores, marched directly against the Camp before Rhinefelden. This plot
of the enemy, was not carried so closely, but that it was in good time
discovered to John Philip the Rhinegrave. And he to secure the Camp, sent out
a party of 25. Horse to descry the number of his enemies, and the manner of
their March, and upon the view, by shooting off their pistols, to give a
general warning to the Leaguer; they were not gone far from the Camp, but
they had espied the Imperialls upon their march, who at once giving sire upon
the Rhinegraves horsemen, did (what they should have done) give notice to the
Camp of their approaching; and the volley of shot, was not only harmless,
to the 25. horsemen, but beneficial to the Camp, and hurtful to themselves.
For they presently perceiving, themselves to be discovered, fled in such
disorder and confusion, that not above 100. of them went together any one way,
and (as it is probably conjectured) those few horse which were sent out to
discover them, might alone have made flaughter of many hundreds of them, if
they had pursued them. But they returned to the Camp, and thence some others
were sent after them who overtooke some straggling Companies, and slew as many
as they found.

4. Companies of Lorraine Horsemen defeated by the Garrison at Ensisheim.
The same night, and to the same purpose, 4. Companies of Lorraine horse
intending to have joined with the Brissackers, Villengueners, and Boares of the
heart, (the woodland of Alsatia) were discovered in their March by the Swedes in
the garrison of Ensisheim (situate upon the Ill, a river, in the edge of the
Heart) who presently made after them, overtooke them in the Forest within two
German miles of Ensisheim, and six from-Rhinefelden, set upon them instantly,
slew 40. of them, took 16. prisoners, and got 50. fair horses with their
sadles, and pistols.

The first defeat of the Brissackers, had not so much disheartened them, but
that within few days after having peeced again their scattered forces, they
renewed their former attempt; but how unhappily they proceeded, let this
following letter of John Philip, to his brother Otho Lodowicke the Rhinegrave
speak; whose tenor is as follows.

A Letter sent by John Philip to his brother Otho, etc.
Noble, etc.
Whereas I perceived, that the Enemy did strengthen himself more and more,
with an intention to releeve Rhinefelden; I consulted with my self (your
Excellency by letters having first advised me thereunto) how I might defeat his
counsel, and prevent his design. To this end after I had sent abroad many
Spies, at last intelligence was brought me that they lay on an hill, which
though it was steep, and not to be passed without difficulty, yet then the
passage was more open, then it had been formerly, when besides the acclivitie
of the place, the way was stopped up, by trees which were cut down purposely,
and laid athwart it, to make it unpasseable. Wherefore I dislodged the last
wednesday night July 11.21. with six companies of your Life Regiment, the 5.
Meckelburghish troops, the 12. companies of Strasborough musketeers; some
frenchmen, and 60. Benfeldish Musketeers (in all about 4000. men) and took my
way directly against the mountain. Here while the Margyraffish Boores, (who
were the first which discovered to me the place of the Enemies abode) and the
Lackeyes, fired some houses, opened the passage, and chased away the watch
which kept it, the Enemy who lay but 2. hours march from thence, got notice
of our coming, and as well as time permitted, fortified himself against us.
Hereupon I commanded the Count of Nassaw, with 6. Companies, to advance against
him, but he perceiving our forces, left his Quarters, and went to the cloister
of S. Blasius, cutting down the trees in the Forest as he went, to impeach
our speedy passage after him. This action of his much hindered, but made us not
give over our course, our hard labor undid what he had done, and we followed
him, which thought none had pursued him. At the Cloister our Horsemen first
appeared, which when the Enemy saw alone, thinking them to be unbackt, and not
succored with foot, he made toward them so furiously, that he caused them to
retire, with the loss of 4. of their company. The foot were by this come, and
brought in, whom as soon as he had descryed, he left the Cloister again, and
betook himself to an hill, thinking verily, so to escape, and retire to
Villenguen, and in his flight to surprise the Colonel Gassion, who was
quartered in a small Dorp, by the way. I suspected his meaning, and followed
him at the heels; but by climbing up the hills, our forces, as well as his,
especially the Horsemen (a thing to be wondered at) so wearied themselves, that
neither man, nor Horse (of which many were killed by hard riding) were able to
go a step farther. I know not how it came to pass, (nor can I ascribe it to
any other cause, but his providence, which disposes all things) at last the
Enemy craved Quarter, which being granted by us as willingly, as begged by them
humbly the Lieutenant Colonel of Shonaw Commander of all the forces, althe
Officers, which came from Bryssack (whose names are under written) and above
300. common soldiers, were by us taken prisoners. And thus (God be thanked)
this Army which intended the succor of Rhinefelden, is totally ruined, and
dispersed, and no offices escaped, except 2. Lieutenants, which still were
foremost in the flight, and (I think) would have been last in battle. The
Villinguenieres, were pursued by the wearied horse, and men, as fast as they
could, and some of them put to the sword, many of them leaped from their
horses, and hid themselves in the hedges, and ditches, the rest, (as the
Lantgrave of Stulingen certifieth) fled as fast as ever they could toward.
Villinguen, without so much as looking back. The Forest, and the Hills were
the refuges of them which escaped, for could we have brought them into the open
field, few, either of horse, or foot, had escaped our hands, though by those
Coverts, and flight, some have for the present, avoided us. I shall certify
you, upon the first occasion, how the Abbot of S. Bl^sius has hitherto held
correspondence, with the Enemy, and how the Rhinfelders hereafter shall be
have themselves.

Dated before Rhinefelden, June 16.26. 1634. P. Script. I have immediately
advised the Commander Gassion to have an eye at Villinguen, whether, he has
yet done any thing, I long to hear. To the 3. Zillhartish companies I have
given order to march immediately downwards, that none of the Runa ways might
get into Pryssack.




The names of the officers, which were take prisoners are these;

1. Lieutenant Colonel Shonaw which commanded as General. 2. Fybues a
Rittmaster, and a Lieutenant of the Horse. 3. The Captain Hydeek, who had
formerly been prisoner at Ruffach. 4. William Bergher, Captain of the
Commander Mercy his Regiment. 5. John George Reich of Plats, Captain of the
Ascanish Regiment. 6. Sebal Meyer of Nieren, Lieutenant of the old Shamburghish
Regiment. 7. John Michel Haller, a Cornet. 8. Wolff Christoph: of Reinach a
Captain of the new Shamburghish Regiment. 9. Nicolas Horneker a Captain of
Colonel Mercyes Regiment.
Thus he expresses his victory, modestly and religiously, neither extolling
his own wisdom in foreseeing the danger, nor valor in conquering the
Enemy, but imputing the first to his Brothers care, and ascribing the last, to
him, who might challenge it justly; and doubtless, herein he speaks truly,
for it was not his own sword, and his bow, but the hand of God which gave him
the victory.

This defeature has not only much discouraged them at Rhinefelden, but at
Bryssack also, for so they write from Colmar, an Imperial city in the upper
Alsatia, distant from Bryssack about 8. English miles. They at Rhinefelden
during the absence of the Swedish Army, had gotten-in two small boats laden
with provision; and because it was perceived by the General at his return,
that this might make them not come in, therefore about June 24. s^ilo n^v^, he
intended to assault the town on both sides, and had done it, if he had not
been that morning assured by some which escaped out of the City, of the great
want, and penury therein, that they already were glad of Horseflesh, and had
devoured at least 26. Horses, and that the officers had rigged a Ship, and
intended to escape by the River; this information diverted him from his first
advise; and instead of attempting any thing upon the town, he put forth many
vessels well manned to the Rhine, to attend there, if happily they should
attempt that way, to evade him. The Bryssackers, though they have a strong
garrison, yet knowing that the activity of the Soldiers depends upon their
leaders, are much dejected, because their chief Commanders are surprised, and
may not return from Colmar, (whither they were brought after the last action)
to do them service. And now we may briefly see the general estate of the
upper Alsatia, much distracted by these wars, and the particular estate of
Rhinefelden, much distressed, and that of Bryssack much perplexed.

About the Bodensea, neither the Swedes, nor Imperialists are idle, in that
little corner, both parties are interessed, the one endeavors both to keep
what he has gotten by the sword, and enlarge his territories; and the other
strives to hold, what he is now, and was, possessed of formerly, and to recover
what he has lost lately. Buckhorne a little town, but of much importance,
near this Lake, is daily strengthened, by the Swedes, with new fortifications.
Here are many Ship-wrights set on work, to make men of war, after the
fashion of the Hollanders, twelve whereof were finished about the beginning of
June, which since have done so much harm to the Imperialists thereabouts, and
put them to such fear, that they dare no longer rove abroad at Sea, as they
have done formerly, but are feign to solicit the neighboring
Romishly-affected Sea-townes against these Enemies, who now appear as terrible
upon the water, as they have been formerly, at land; 5. Ships taken by the
Swede^ upon the Bodensea.
for presently, upon their first launcing, they took from the Imperialists,
upon the Lake of Constance, 5. Ships laden with Ammunition, and military
instruments, (in one of which they found 1000. Rexdollars, and many Jewels of
good value) and put the Soldiers which were in them to the Sword

Ratolfoe Cell, beleaguered.
The Imperialists to avenge their loss at the Lake, fell soon after, with
their united forces, upon Ratolfoes Cell, a town upon the under Lake; this
town, the Vberlingers, they of Lindaw, Bregents and Constance conjoyning their
forces battered out of 5. ships by Sea, while their land men strengthened with
a supply of Spaniards, about 4000. strong thought to have pent up the Swedish
Commander Shavellskie at Arch, and detained him from either coming to releeve
of succor his friends in that town. But he at length, by the Wirtenbergers,
and some of the Rhinegraves forces, being delivered, from that restraint, went
immediately to the beleaguered place, whence he wrote to the Major of his
Regiment John James Fefferling at Ravenspurg, to inform him of the state of
the City as follows. June 26. July 6. P. P. The town of Zell is not yet in
danger, the Enemy has besieged it by water and land, and battered it hard by
the space of 3. days on both sides; especially that time, when we arrived,
when, though he ceased not to play upon it the whole night, (thanks be to God)
he got but little of the town. I am certified, that yesterday they have
carried to Constance 2. ships full of dead, and wounded men; that day we sallied
forth, and put many of them to the sword, and after our retirement they
assaulted us, but to their loss, our soldiers fought courageously and heat
them back. This day they stir not, and to morrow (God willing) I shall be
supplied with some fresh Muskertiers, and will then try all possible means to
chase them away. God grant us good success. Thus far the Colonel, And his
actions seem to have kept time with his words, The siege raised.
for shortly after being seconded by his friends from the Dukedom of
Wirtenberg, he raised the siege and chased the Enemy from that town; which
he presently supplied with a garrison of 400. men, victuals, Ammunition, and
other necessaries for a whole half year, and himself marched to Buckhorne,
still keeping a watch over the Imperialists, and attending their future
designs. This misadventure of the Imperial undertaken has been since that is
evil to some of the places from whence they came, as it was then unhappy to
the persons engaged in the business. Vberlingen, which a little before was
left by the Swedes, and had gotten at least a breathing time of liberty, is now
again hereupon blockt up by the Wirtembergers, which lose no time, nor spare
no cost to bring their works to perfection, but employ daily 1500 men to labor
in their fortifications. At Constance, besides the mutinies of the Soldiers,
who are discontented for not receiving their promised pay; there is daily heard
the voice of woeful lamentation, and direful exclamation, mothers and children
bewailing the loss of their husbands and fathers, and exclaiming against the
Commander Wolffegg, who persuaded many of the Citizens to leave their lawful
occupations, whereby they got their livings, and follow this unfortunate war,
wherein they lost their lives.

The state and actions in the upper Palate.
The stream of the story should now run to Regensburg, where the Cyclopes in
Vulcans forge labor not so hard to make Mars his Arms, as his followers do
the^ to mar them; but that, the upper Palatinat never so glorious by the
famous City of Norimberge, (Qua non Germanis est ulla celebrior oris) as now
unhappy by war, commands the quill to distill a few black drops in remembrance
of her misery. Bruck and Reitenbach burned.
The Ambergers are still ready to deface some part of the beauty thereof with
fire; Bruck and Reitenbach a fair marker towns, being already by their
voluntary hostility, consumed by that devouring Element, and Chamb a town of
note in the Eastern part thereof threatened with the like fa^e for hospitality,
and ^ertaining (the Swedes) strangers. And yet, why should accuse the Ambergers
(...) it was not the natives or in^itants which did this evil, but the
Soldiers in the Garrison* (...) since that time, being visited with the plague
of pestilence, whether by contagion of air, putrefaction of their victuals,
these secundarie means, or the immediate h^nd of God. The Garrison at Amberg
visited with the plague, quit the place.
I dispute not: having willingly left this refuge, and held it safer for
themselves to adventure upon the sword of their Enemies abroad, then to hazard
the deadly shot of that arrow which flies at noone day, and strikes mortally
before it appear visibly.

Colonel Corpus defeated.
But besides the harms done in those parts by the Garrison, the Baw^rian
Colonel Corpus, ranged about the Country, and did much violence; Him, the
Weymarish Lieutenant Colonel met withal about Tachaw, June 15.25. (that very
day, wherein Aicha was first taken by the Field-marshall H^u^) and though he
was attended with his Regiment of 800 Horsemen, fought with him, foiled him,
put a great part of the Horshmen to the sword, amongst which were some
Rit-masters and Officers, and took many prisoners; in the number whereof, was
one Lieutenant, and 2 Ritt-masters. And thus this Country is for the present
relieved a little, but if long it will so continue, it is not in us to
determine, that is only known to him, who disposes of times and seasons at
his pleasure: we may pray for the peace thereof, which is likely so long to be
uncertain, as the warring parties stand in any opposition.

The story of Regens. continu^.
The designs formerly mentioned, are but as light skirmishes to a fet battle,
or as those Myrmitoleones in Pliny, to the Lybian Lion, in respect of the
service at Rhegensburg: The King of Hungary is yet resolved to take it, or
lose his Army, and the besieged have still concluded to hold it, or spend their
bloods in the quarrel.

2 Burgundian Regiments ruinated by a sally.
While part of the Imperial Army was before Ketheim, the Citizens and Soldiers
made a sallie upon the Camp, and utterly ruinated 2 whole Regiments of
Burgundians, took the Officers prisoners and brought them into the City, and
^ew the rest with the edge of the sword. This wound in the Army went fo^c^hing
near the quick; the King himself (who is said once to have laughed, when he
heard that 3 or 400 men had lost their lives in a desperate assault) was
sensible of the loss, and sent to Vienna for fresh supplies, 6000 fresh men
sent from Vienna.
whence he was shortly furnished again with 6000 new soldiers, which hoped in
3 weeks at the furthest, to have their quarter, not without in the trenches,
but within the walls and houses of the City. This was about June 16.26. The D.
of Bavaria in the Camp.
Some few days after the D. of Bavaria in his own person came into the Camp,
and with his presence and large promises much encouraged the assailants: Other
4000 men come to the Camp.
and within a week after that, the Commander What went down from Amberg with
4000 men, and 4 fire morterers, the better to finish this work, which at the
first they thought so easy, and at last found so difficult. And now began that
flame to burst out, which was not to be extinguished, but with rivers of blood,
the swords of these adversaries clashing together strike fire, and a springing
fountain from their own veins must quench it.

The D. of Bavaria who had taken up his quarter at Degenheim above Donawstauff,
perceiving the Prebunner steeple in the wall to be boared in many places with
the canon, but not battered down, promised the Canoniers a sum of money, if
they did so beat it down, that it might fall into the moat, supposing the
rubbish thereof would fill up the ditch, and make a plain way for an assault.
The Gunners in the Leaguer labored tooth and nail to effect it, and they in
the town did their best endeavor to prevent it, who sallyed out upon the Camp
June 22 being Sunday, set upon the Boeckish Regiment at Brull, and brought it
to utter ruin.

The Boeckish Regiment ruinated.
In these manners of attempts, wherein they have since that time been
frequently practiced, the Boores of the upper Palatinat (of which sort of
people there were many in the town) did good service. The Boores within do
much hurt with their morning star.
These rustic fellows, being first well lined with liquor, oft-times fell upon
the Imperialls in their trenchee, where with an instrument, called by them the
morning star, (it is a short club armed with pikes, the same weapon the Boores
of the upper Austria used, when they rebelled against the Emperor) they
^nocked them down^ with mortal strokes, every blow they gave being as deadly,
as their adventure was desperate. This unkind entertainment did yet no whit
abate the courage of the besiegers, the Bavarian on the one side of the
Danubie, and the Imperialls on the other, still continued their batteries, and
making their approaches nearer to the Outworks, 4000 shot made upon the City.
by June 30 had made 4000 great shot upon the City: and yet, the besieged
showed no token of dejection, themselves by letters presently after certify
the D. Born. that they could yet with convenience expect his succors, that yet
there was no want of provision within the town, that though they had lost some
number of men in the Enemies a ^ulte, and their own sallyes, yet they could
make of Boores, Cit^ns, and Soldiers, 8000 able fighting men, and that they
would rather sacrifice their lives in defense of the city, then leave it to the
Enemy for a prey; and the Imperialists themselves testify, that for all that
which had been done hitherto, the Garrison and City would hear of no
agreement; though they believed they would quickly change their minds, when
they found their friends, for w^nt of ability, failing them; and themselves
pinched with those miseries, which must necessarily fall upon them.

The happy proceedings of the Saxon, and Swedish forces in Silesia, and a
flying report of Duke Bernhard, and Gustavus Horn their coming down (which
was afterward confirmed by the Dukes own letter^, directed to Count Thurn,
and intercepted be the Imperialists) by this was brought to the Camp; and then
the Generals thinking it necessary to send some Auxiliaries to their Army in
Bohemia and Silesia, (for a Currier which came post from thence, brought
Letters which certified, that ^lesse they did so, and did it speedily, all was
lost) and ^willing to have this Swedish Army come upon their backs* they
intended to make short work of this siege, that so they might anticipate D.
Bernhards counsel, and after they had done here, make speed against the Saxon,
and Brandeburgher, with a sufficient force to encounter them, though both their
Armies should join together: and now, they play at all, their batteries are
multiplied, their assaults more frequent, and resoluter, then they had been
formerly; their fire morterers are employed, and Grenades cast into the City,
that so every way they might impeach it, and bring it to their subjection.

The City assaulted on both sides.
About July 3.13. four Regiments at once assaulted the Earl of Thurne his
quarter, behind and before, and forced him to retire from his Horne-worke, with
the loss of 30 men which were ^laine out right, 10 Soldiers, 1 Captain, and 1
Lieutenant which were taken prisoners, and carried to the Camp; and on the
other side of the City, the Bavarians set upon the Overwerth and Vnderwerth at
once, and took the first, with the Sconce belonging to it, but were repulsed
from the other, the Soldiers within behaving themselves manfully, to defend the
Mills upon the Danuby, and building again by night, what was beaten down by
the Canon in the day: Count Thurn in d^nger.
In the first assault it was reported, that Count Thurn himself was brought
into captivity, but the relator was misadvised, it was his Lieutenant Colonel,
not himself; who, though he was in such peril that he craved quarter, yet
that being denied him, he escaped by flight, avoiding a great volly of shot,
made after him by lying prostrate on the earth, and his captivity, by speedy
rising, and running before the Enemy could well charge again. This was the day
when the letters sent by D. Bernhard (as is formerly mentioned) were
intercepted; and now they set all their instruments at work, a furious
battery, which lasted the space of 2 whole days was the first course, and this
being seconded by an assault, which lasted from morning till night, about July
8.18. wherein the Imperialists were beaten off, with the loss of 400 men; the
Grenades were set on work, and they from the City, with their hand
Grenades, and hot pitch, returned the like violence to the Camp; and thus
they still continued, neither the Imperialls having as yet got any assurance of
winning the City, nor the besieged of keeping it.

The last assault
July 10.20. was the day which was indicatory, if not critical to the City;
then the Imperial Army assaulted it on all sides, then the besieged showed
their inclination and power of resistance. Blood was then spilt like water upon
the earth; and the ammunition, hardly got, and dearly purchased, was
prodigally wasted and spent in smoke, nothing remained of their Saltpeter and
brimstone, but an unsavory fume, whose natural stench was increased by the
ungrateful savours of dead carkeises, many of the beleaguerd that day (if many
may be extracted from few) being forced to pay the debt of mortality, and 4000
Imperialists buying the reputation of valiant men, with the loss of their
lives.

Courage, if it be not well ordered, is rashness; A true valiant man looks
not behind him to what is past, but about him, and before him, weighs his
business in the scale of wisdom, is confident while there is probability, not
presumptuous, when he sees impossibility; the Garrison and Citizens had for a
long time behaved themselves in defense of the City stoutly, even to the
admiration of the Imperialists, who had lost before it (by their own relation)
8000 men, slain upon the place, 6000 others who had run away, made 15000 Canon
shot upon the town, cast above 2000 Grenades into it, the most part whereof
weighed severally 150 pound weight; and endured (if the figures be not
misplaced) 465 several sallies from within the City. But now, the Dye was
turned, the besieged wanted powder, and were not able to fight without weapons,
they might sit down to eat, and drink (there was still in the City belly
timber enough, 4000 simmers of corn, 2000 heads of cattle, 500 barrels of
beer, 300 hogsheads of wine) but could not well imagine themselves able to
hold out longer against the Imperialists, their powder being totally spent, to
700 pound weight; a small proportion, for so great opposition, and the City
undermined in 7 several places, all which were likely with the touch of a
March, to have been as so many several Gates to give the Imperialists
entrance. The white flag was hereupon hung out, and after some few days
treaty, the City was surrendered upon these Honorable Articles (which express
as much good nature in the young King of Hungary, as wisdom on the other
side) concluded betwixt his Majesty the King of Hungary and Bohemia, etc. to
the use of his Imperial Majesty King of the Romans, etc. and his princely
Grace the Elector of Bavaria, etc. on the one side, and betwixt the Crown of
Sweden; the Protestant confederates appointed General Major the Lord Kagge,
and the rest of the Commanders; as also the City of Regensburg, the
Chamberlain, Senate, and Citizens on the other side, as follows.

1. The City, as it now stands, shall be surrendered unto his Majesty, the
King of Hungary and Bohemia, to the use of his Imperial Majesty. 2. All
damage done, either to the Ecclesiastical or Civil persons, in the time of
the two last sieges, whether in their buildings, goods moveable, or immovable,
corn, cattle, or otherwise, shall totally be forgotten, nor shall any thing
in liew of it, be desired of the City, the Chamberlain, or Senate of the same.
3. The City, Chamberlain, Senate, Citizens, Ministers, and Schoolemasters of
either religion, shall not contrary to the conclusions at Passaw, and against
the quality of either a religious, or profane peace, be pillaged or molested,
but the City shall be left to her Imperial liberties, privileges, and old
customs, free, safe, and without any hinderance. 4. No other, but an Imperial
Garrison shall be laid into the City, nor shall any other command there, but
such an one as has his immediate dependence upon his Imp: Ma. 5. All Citizens,
strangers, and inhabitants in the City, which have served under the Crown of
Sweden, or the Confederate princes, shall in no sort be punished for it, nor
shall any damage accrue to them thereby. 6. If any Citizen, inhabitant, or
stranger, Merchant, or other, which has traffiqued unto this City, shall
desire to go forth with the Garrison, himself, and all that belong to him,
shall have free leave so to do, without any impediment. 7. All those of the
Senate, all Officers, Ministers, Citizens, Inhabitants, Strangers, Widows, and
Orphans, shall have liberty to depart free, and without hinderance, either in
respect of Office, or pretense of common debt to the City, whatsoever it be,
and as many as desire it, shall have a Pass, and Convoy, either by water or
land; and if any Merchant or Chapman have occasion to abide still in the City
for sale of his wares, he shall have two months assigned him to that purpose,
and shall afterward enjoy the benesit of a Pass and Convoy, as well as they
which depart away presently. 8. The Soldiers, and all which belong unto them,
their chief and inferior Officers of Horse and Foot, Masters of the
Artillery, and others, shall march forth free, with displayed Ensigns, erected
Standards, Trumpets sounding, D^ beating, high and low Arms Bullets in the
mouth, and Pistols in the hand, with drawn Cocks, with bag and baggage, and
whatsoever belonged unto them, they shall be conveyed to Newmarch; and from
thence, without any hostile hinderance, shall have liberty to go toward
Norimberg. 9. It shall be permitted to the Garrison to carny along with them 6
pieces of Ordnance, 4 great ones, and 2 lesser, which themselves should choose,
and they shall have 6 Wagons to carry their ammunition and other materials.
10. Because there is great want of victuals in the Country, the Garrison shall
have leave to take out of the City, as much as will suffice the Soldiers upon
the way, and there they should be provided of all other necessaries. 11.
Provision shall he made for the sick, and maimed, certain ships shall be
provided to carry them to Donawerth, and some officers of the garrison, shall
be left at Regenspurg as Hostages, till the ships and Convoy shall return,
who afterward shall be sent in safety to Donawerth. 12. No officer, or
soldier, who had served under the Crown of Sweden, or any of the confederate
Protestant Princes, of what condition or quality soever he be, shall upon any
pretense be stayed, for any space of time, or be compelled or enticed, by word
or deed, to forsake his colors, and if any of them shall revolt, it shall be
lawful for the Commanders of the Protestant Army, to punish him, either in
life, or body at their discretion. 13. If any officer, or soldier shall be
found in the garrison, which has served formerly under his Imperial Majesty,
or the Elector of Bavaria, he shall not be attached for it, but remain still
in the Company where he now is, and not be drawn out of the troops. 14. If
any sick or wounded soldier be found in the garrison, which cannot
conveniently, and without prejudice of his health, be brought forth
immediately, he, or they shall be left in the City, be well attended, and
provided of necessaries, till his or their recovery, and then have a free pass
to go to his, or their own Regiment, without any hinderance. 15. None shall
search the wagons, or cariages, appointed for the garrison, either by water, or
land, not take any thing away from them upon any pretense, nor molest them for
their customs. 16. All prisoners on both sides shall be mutually set at
liberty without ransom, and permitted to go to their Regiments; and all
Citizens and inhabitants of the City of Regenspurg, which be arrested by the
Imperialists, or Bavarians, and imprisoned to nomine, shall be set free without
ransom, and suffered to return to their houses. 17. This present day July
16.26. before night one gate shall be surrendered, namely the outmost gate,
near the Eastgate, together with the Zuinger, and horneworke near it, and on
the morrow, the other ports shall be surrendered, without any secret hidden
fire in the gates, or in the city, and without further losing of time, all the
contents of the concluded Articles, be performed.
And now besides the promise made by the Camp, upon the dignity, word, and
faith of his Majesty the King of Hungary, the Elector of Bavaria, and all the
Cavalliers, that all these Articles, with all their clauses, right sense, and
meaning, should be kept firm, constant, and without breach; for their more
confirmation, there are 4. several copies drawn after one and the same form,
one to be kept by his Majesty the King of Hungary, another by the Duke of
Bavaria, a third by the garrison, and the fourth by the Chamberlain and Senate
of the City; all which were subscribed by his Imperial Majesty's Councellor
of war, Lord Chamberlain, Lieutenant General, and appointed Commander, the
Lord Mathias Earl of Gallas, deputed for his Majesty the King of Hungary; by
his Imperial Majesty's and the Duke of Bavaria his Counselor, Lord
Chamberlain, master of the Artillery, and ammunition, and appointed Commander,
the Lord Otto Henry Fugger, Earl of Kirchberg, and Weissenhorne, Knight of the
golden fleece deputed for the Duke of Bavaria, the Lord General Major Lars
Kaggen, and the Lord Hieronymus Bergen the governing Chamberlain of
Regenspurg, for the City and garrison. Signed before, and within the City of
Regenspurg. July 16.26. 1634.

These were honorable terms wisely concluded, the Commanders being as
careful of the City in their composition, as their Army, and faithfully
performed, the King of Hungary showing no less justice in his action, then
clemency in a willing yielding to all demands, as if he meant to win the
hearts of the Germans, not their towns, and held it more glorious and sure,
to overcome them with courtesy, then to conquer them with his sword.
Questionless it is the more thriving way, and works powerfully upon the
affection of men, to reduce them to a willing obedience, when cruelty and
blood-thirstinesse, harden them in rebellion, and obstinacy. The gracious
proclamation, and pardon, granted by his Majesty the King of Hungary to the
City is a full testimony of his goodness, and the letters testimonial
subscribed by the Chamberlain and Senate of Regenspurg, sealed with the City
seal, and given the General Major Kagge, before his departure is a witness
beyond exception, of his wisdom, and valor, in managing the war, wherein he
was especially trusted, the Copies of both which, we have here inserted, as
follows.

The K. of Hung: Proclamation of pardon to the City.
WE Ferdinand the third by the grace of God, King of Hungary, Bohemia, etc.
Make it known to all men generally, by these presents, That, whereas the
Chamberlain, and Senate of the City of Regenspurg have again with all
humility submitted themselves to his Imperial Majesty, as their natural
Lord, and have promised to continue in all subjection, obedience, and devotion
to his Imperial Majesty, (as it becomes the faithful subjects of the
Empire, and the house of Austria) and have humbly requested, that we would be
pleased to defend and protect them, with the Citizens, Ministers, and Officers,
and that we would graciously pardon all misdemeanors, and behavior, passed,
since the taking of it by the Swedes, according to the Articles agreed upon;
We as appointed high General by his Imperial Majesty, our most gracious,
and loving father, and in the name of his Imperial Majesty, fully, and
graciously forgive, and pardon the Chamberlain, Senate, and Citizens, and all
which belong unto them their misbehaviour passed, and will so take them into
the Imperial grace, favor, and protection, that the often mentioned his
Imperial Majesty, and We also will protect, the aforesaid Chamberlain, and
Senate, against all sorts of men in general, and every one in particular. For
the better assurance whereof, we have subscribed to these presents, and sealed
them, with our Royal hand, and privy signet. Dated in our head quarter at
Brielen, July 16.26. in the year 1634. in the years of our reign over our
Kingdom of Hungary the ninth, and of Bohemia the seventh.

The Letters testimonial given to the General Major Kagge.
WE the Chamberlain, and Senate of the Roman Imperial City of Regenspurg,
make it known to all, and every one; That where as after the taking of our
City, and departure of the Bavarian garrison, the Noble Lord Lars Kagge
appointed general Major, and Commander by his Majesty the King of Sweden of
ever blessed memory, was laid into this City, with 4. regiments of foot, and
200. Horse, as the chief Commander in the garrison, in the name of the Crown
of Sweden, and the Protestant confederate Princes, by the Illustrious and high
borne Prince, and Lord, the Lord Bernhard, Duke of Saxony, Gulick, Cleve,
Bergk, etc. He, the said general Major after the City was beleagueted by his
Majesty the King of Hungary his Army, and the Army of the Duke of Bavaria,
behaved himself, as a careful, and faithful Commander, did as much in
fortifying the City, as could be advised by humane wit, opposed himself
stoutly in resistance, of the Assailants forces, feared no danger, spared no
labor, day or night, but performed all duties required of abrave hardy and
valiant soldier, the other Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers doing the like
in their several charges, and places. But because we neither had assurance,
nor intelligence, either by word or letter of relief, because our ammunition
was wasted, even to a days spending, if we had been again assaulted, and
for that the Enemy, had made all his preparations so ready, that he might
easily and without resistance, again, and again attempt upon us, hereupon,
and upon our declaration, consent, and request, He, being willing to spare the
shedding of innocent blood, agreed with his Majesty, the King of Hungary, and
the Duke of Bavaria upon honorable conditions, wherein respecting principally
our good, and benefit of our Citizens, he gave no way to the impeachment of our
privileges, immunities, and free exercise of religion, but concluded for us as
happily, as we our selves could have desired. F^ all which we acknowledge our
selves much bound to the General Major, all the Commanders, and Officers, and
shall ever extol, their valor, wisdom and sincerity; In confirmation of
the assurance whereof, we have given them these our letters testimonial,
sealed with the seal of our City, Dated in Regenspurg, July 17.27. 1634.


How excellent a thing is it, to be faithful in a matter of trust? What a
sweet savor does the name of an upright wise man leave behind him? True
virtue needs no trumpet to blazon out her fame; The friends of a good man,
unasked will load him with favors, and his enemies, though they gain only by
his imperfections, and weaknesses, not by his ability, and wisdom, will
admire his graces, extol his merit, shake the hand of love with him upon
occasion, as the Imperialists in their ranks did with the garrison, when it
went forth of this City, July 18.28.


The Duke Bernhard, and the Field-Marshall, seeing the apparent danger,
whereunto they should expose their Army, if they should attempt upon the
Leaguer, that being secured from hazard, by the many maeanders and windings of
the trenches, thought it better to adventure upon some pieces of importance
abroad, where there was probability of a proportionable gain, then to hazard
all upon a doubtful battle, where there was no likelih^od, but of loss.
Landshut taken by assault.
Landshut, a City upon the Iser, built by Lodowick Duke of Bavaria, in the
year 1208. famous for the excellent Architecture of the private houses, one
goodly Church beyond all the rest, and the new palace of the Duke of Bavaria,
was the first place they fell upon, after the taking in of the places
abovenamed. Altringer slain.
Hither was Altringer, the Bavarian Fieldmarshall, sent with some troops to
succor it, a man known to the world, for a prudent and wary, ^ldier, but he
in a battle being slain, with a shot through the head, his Army was routed,
and the town laid open to invasion of the Evangelicall Army, who July 12.22.
took it by assault, fired the Castle, and Suburbs, pillaged the City, and put
as many as they found in Arms, to the Sword. Dingelfing, and Landaw yielded by
composition.
Thence they passed down the river to Dingelfing, Landaw, both which yielded
upon reasonable composition.

I willingly omit the Actions of the Leaguer before Forchaim, and the untimely
death of the Lord Vngnad, basely murdered by his own servant, as he was in
the way thither, about the end of June; Let this one suffice for all, upon
Tuesday July 15.25. when the funeral of the Lieutenant Colonel Frederick
William Ebleben, who was slain before Forchaim, was kept at Norimberge, the
Commander within conceiving that without doubt all the horsemen, would be
commanded, to attend the procession, and honor the funeral rites at
Norimberg, The Commander in Forcheim attempteth upon the Camp, and is
overreached in his own design.
he purposed with all his forces, to make a sally upon the trenches, and bring
the remnant of the Army, which was left behjnde to utter ruin; This Counsel
being either suspected, or discovered to the Fieldmarsht Cratz, he caused some
Companies of horse, the same day, with their displayed colors, to march as
toward Norimberge so openly, that the besieged might only have a sight of
them, and no more; but then to wheel about again, when the Enemy could not
perceive them, and place themselves in a convenient ambuscadoe, whence they
might have opportunity to return with violence upon the backs of the Enemy,
if he should adventure to sally forth upon the Army; It is a masterpiece to
kill a man with his own weapon, and to overreach a contriving head, in his
own way. The counterplot must in all circumstances answer the ground, if it
fail in the least particular, it is probable to be defective in the total;
and here, as the Fieldmarshall had cast it, all things fell out accordingly.
The glimpse of the horsemens march animated the garrison to the enterprise,
they stayed but to Arm, and then fell so furiously, and pressed so hardly upon
the Leaguer, that many of the Swedes were hurt, and wounded; but the horsemen
quickly arose from the Ambush to their succor, and fell so close to their
tackling, that they slew 130. of these adventurers, took some prisoners, and
made the rest to take their heels; and now they keep close within their walls,
they neither being forward to start out, nor the Fieldmarsh: to assault it,
having determined not to undertake that course with those small forces (which
were rather left to block it up then besiege it,) but to force it to yield, for
want of necessaries, the river being cut off, as is related formerly, and he by
this means having a hope to take it.

About the same time the Captain of the Dragooners in Weyden a town of the
upper Palatimate, understanding that the Imperial Commander Husman, by reason
of the plague at Dachaw, was retired fro thence to one of his Farms, near
Frawenburg: Colonel Husman and his family surprised*
He and his Dragoniers, being then occasionally at Flossenburg, marched from
thence by night, early in the morning surprised the Country house, took the
Commander, and his wife and child, with a Countess of Guttensteine, his
brother in law Colonel Klepping, the Jesuit Father Federle (who before that
Weyden was taken in by the Swedes, had openly delivered in the pulpit, that the
Lutherans deserved to be tied together in bundels, like birds upon a stick, and
to be hanged) and all their servants, pillaged the farm, and brought the
prisoners into Weyden, where they are close kept, and under a strict watch. And
now having taken this short view of the actions in Bavaria, the upper
Palatinate, and Alsatia, we will pause a while, before we are weary, in
following the Evangelicall, and Imperial Armies, whose succeeding actions must
now be referred to another discourse.

The Actions of the King of Hungary, and D. of Bavaria, in Franconia and
Bavaria; with the proceedings of D. Bernhard Weymar, and Gustavus Horn, two
principal Commanders for the Princes of the union there: Or, A Relation of
what has been done on both sides, since July 20. CAP. 3.
WHen the K. of Hungary, after his victory at Ratisbone or Regensburg, had
appointed a guard of 1000. men under the command of Col: Goltz to defend it
(which Soldiers, as they write from Franconia, July 29. were not then lodged
in the City, but the Out. works, because of an infectious disease which reigned
within, whereof there dyed daily ten or twelve persons) and the D. of Bavaria
had laid the Regiment of the Colonel Comargo, who was slain before
Regenspurgh, into Strawbingen, the King himself (it is said from Auspurg) July
28, went toward Passaw, his Lieutenant Gen: Gallas marched toward Bohemia
with 11 Regiments, and the rest of the Imperial Army was conjoined with the
Bavarian. And this report though it was at the first confirmed from diverse
places, yet at last they all conclude generally, that both the King himself,
and the Earl of Gallas, returned speedily toward Bavaria, intending to pursue
their fortune which had been so favorable to them in those parts. His first
design was against Donawerth, wherein the Lieutenant Colonel Termo lay and
commanded. The manner of the Kings march thitherward, is thus expressed by
Letters from Nordlingen, a city upon the borders of Wirtemberg, in the mid way
betwixt Donawerth, and Bopffingen, distant from each about; German miles, who
had it by relation of two Soldiers which ran away from the Imperialists, and
came to Nordlingen, Aug. 5.15. two soldiers which were of the Field-Marshal
Horns Life-Regiment, and had been taken prisoners by the Imperialists betwixt
Moseburg and Landshut, when they had been kept in fetters by the space of
certain days unransomed, and unexchanged, were constrained to take pay under
Colonel Fugger, but yesterday morning, when the Imperialists were measuring
out the Camp for the foot forces near the town of Rain (a place upon the
Bavarian side of the Danubie, upon the Lech, almost opposite to Donawerth, and
distant thence about two German miles) faining as if they went to fetch wood to
build their tents, came hither, and reported that the Imperial Horse 15000
strong, and the Infantery consisting of 20 Regiments, were within but little
more than an hours journey from Donawerth; that they had with them 60 pieces
of Ordnance, and 2 fire morterers; A true relation, the like being reported
from Auspurg Aug. 6.16. and made manifest by the consequence, which was the
taking in of Donawerth Aug. 7.17 by composition but afterward pillaged.

From Donawerth the Imperial Army marched against Nordlingen, as appears by
these Letters underwritten.

Weysenburg. Aug. 12.22.
THe Enemy before Nordlingen goes very slow to work, it is in a manner only
blocked up, for the Imperialists cannot bring their Canons near the town,
they within the City wherein the blew Regiment is lodged, so strenuously
oppose them.


And this Story was confirmed by 2 Letters from Bopffingen, and one from
Franconia, the first whereof bearing date Aug. 13.23. is thus.

THe Enemy assaulted the City of Nordlingen but few days since with some
selected troops, thinking to surprise it unawares, but the Commander there is
a brave Soldier, never had his eyes hurt with smoke, and by watchfulness
prevented them. Hereupon the King of Hungary, with his whole Army marched
before it, and has battered it without intermission the space of 3 whole
days. Now the besieged have need of present succor and relief, as soon as the
Rhinegraves Army, which is expected hourly: some forces from the Bodensea,
which the Field-marshall Horn has sent for, and the Wirtembergers shall
arrive, (all which may well be within these 2 days) then Duke Bernhard, who
this day with the Foot-forces and Artillery is arrived here, and the
Field-marshal Horn who was come with the Avantgard yesterday, are resolved to
try their fortune, and to relieve the City, and to give battle to the Enemy.


The second is thus:

As Soon as the Enemy before Nordlingen heard of the coming of our forces, he
dislodged from before it, and sent all his baggage toward Donawerth; It is
reported that he stands in battle array within 1 hours march of this place,
that he has called unto him the Commander Isolan, that he has sent for those
troops which were left about the Danubie, and the river of Lech, and the
Commander John de Werth with his Horsemen. We never were so near the Enemy, as
now.


The last bearing date Aug. 17.27. is thus:

Even now we receive Avisoes, that Duke Bernhard and Gustavus Horn assaulted
the Enemy upon Friday last, Aug. 15.25 before Norlingen, and in the fury out
off 2000 Imperial Curassiers The particulars we expect hereafter.


They wrote from Auspurg, July 30. Aug. 9. the D. Bern: marched from thence
over the Danubie, and the Field-marshall toward Landsperg and Gongaw, to have
an eye upon the Enemy. And yet this division of these Commanders, exposed the
Cities and Country of Franconia, and about the Danubie, to the spoil of the
Imperial Army, 14 days the D. spent in strengthening his Army with new
supplies, being forced for that purpose to raise the siege of Forcheim, and
recall the Field-marshall Cratz from thence, to send for some other troops
which lay in the lower Palatinat, the trained hands of Franconia and
Wirtemberg, all which required time, and gave the Imperialists much advantage.

The siege of Forcheim raised.
The Field-marshall Cratz as it is written from Franconia July 27. Aug. 6. had
so insconced himself, that he was secure from danger by assault of the Enemy,
and brought the Garrison to that extremity, that they within were much scanted
of victuals, and in such want of ammunition especially, that the Citizens were
constrained to give them their Pewter dishes (as some prisoners reported) to
make bullets, and began to speak of yielding by composition, but the sudden
rising of the Camp eased them of these necessities, and brought much vexation
to the neighboring territory. During the time of the siege, as they of
Norimberge not without joy delivered it, the ways were passable, the Country
delivered from Boot-halers, and the price of food brought down to a reasonable
rate; yet that siege was no sooner raised, but the Garrison stragled again
abroad, pillaged the Country, till with in half a German League of Norimberge,
burnt to ashes many Villages, which had not paid contribution in that time, as
namely, Cros-r^th, Klein-re^th, Love, Malms-hoffe, Crafts-hoffe, Neun-hoffe,
Hewltzberg, and Fa^h, omitting to do nothing there, which had a relish of
hostile insolency.

This was a time of sorrow and lamentation to all that Province, which longed
for deliverance, but had not as yet strength to bring forth. The Imperial army
ceased not from doing whatsoever might any way molest, or offend their
adversaries. Hippolstein assaulted.
Upon Monday Aug. 3.13.130 Imperial Horse suddenly assaulted Hippolstein, beat
down one of the Ramparts, broke open the outmost gate, and had thought to have
plundered the town, Greding and Dietfurd plundered.
as before they had done at Greding, and Dietfurd, but the Citizens quickly
betaking themselves to their Arms, and the hinderance by the drawbridge which
was then taken up, did then frustrate that attempt, which is reported to have
been performed the Thursday following. But that very Monday (though the fortune
of war smiled a little upon the Evangelicall there) was more unfortunat to this
party about Norimberge, A Swedish company of 25 Horse surprised
for the^ 25 Swedish Horsemen, going from thence to the Army, were suddenly set
upon by 2 Imperiall-troopes, which being hidden in a thicket, sallyed upon them
in the way, slew some of them, and took all the rest prisoners, except the
Captain, who alone with his wife escaped; 15 Wagons laden with Merchants
goods, taken by the Imperialists.
then 15 Wagons which came from Vlin and Nordlingen, laden with Merchants
goods toward Norimberg, were surprised by 200 Imperial Horsemen, the Convoy for
the most part slain or wounded, and all the Wagons but one, which was laden
with bedding, carried away toward Deversdorff, and little Abenberg.

About the same time they of Forcheim sent out a party almost as far as the
Imperial City of Winshaim, which burned Newstat a City in Franconia, upon the
River of Aisch, Daxbach, and many other places; the Imperialists surprised
Kaufforyern in Schwabenland, carried away the Garrison soldiers, which were
about an hundred Foot, and 25 Horse, prisoners; plundered Ottingen, and
Wendlingen; Onspach taken, and the Marquisate given to John de Werth.
and John de Werth the Bavarian, lately a prisoner, but then ransomed, took-in
the City of Onspach, laid into it three Imperial Regiments for a Garrison,
and was rewarded for his service with the honor of the Marquisate thereof, by
the K. of Hungary, who in requital of his action, conferred that honor
freely upon him.

Barreuch, a City in the upper Palatinat, was assaulted by the Imperialists of
Averbach by night, Aug. 5.15. but the Lieutenant Colonel that conducted this
Army, and commanded in Averbach, lost himself there, being slain with many
others which followed him, and so they were forced to return without any
honorable achievement

The City of Weyden in the upper Palatinat was twice assaulted by the forces in
Amberg, Tershenrent, Partestein, and other places Friday 8.18. August
especially, but then they were va^ly ^a^en off, and forced with great loss to
return from whence they came.

^otenberg an Imperial City upon the Ta^ber in ^oma, was summoned Aug. 10.^.
by the Kings Army, and threatened, that if it would not surrender, they would
put all both young and old to the sword, but the Citizens having received into
the City 130 Swedes the day before, resolved to stand out to the last man; and
on Monday morning about 7 of the clock, sallyed forth with some selected Boors,
whereof there were 600 in the town, cut off 6 of the Army, without the loss
of one man, recovered 150 great cattle, which the Imperialists had got by
pillage thereabouts: whereupon the Enemy the next day following departed thence.

The Swedes at D^gelspiell Aug. 12.22. under the command of Colonel Ros^,
sallied out, took 100 prisoners, slew 200 men, and recovered the greatest part
of the Cattle, Horse, and other booty, which the Kings Army had gotten in
Pranconia.

Three or some days before, some Regiments of Horse and Foot were sent against
Ger^n^, an Imperial City in Schwabenland, in the frontier of the Dukedom of
Wirtemberg, but few of them returned back and thereabout as they write from
Bopffingen, Aug. 13.23. in the space of two or three days, were flame outright
above 1200 Imperialists, whereof many were hanged because of their insolencyes,
and almost as many taken prisoners, the greatest part whereof were Officers,
Lieutenants, Comets, and the like. To this estate matters were brought before
the coming down of the Evangelicall armies, alter they were once divided; The
taking of Landsh^, and death of Altringer.
Turn we now back to the taking of Landsh^, and death of the General
Altringer, which though it be ^ched before, yet because it is now more fully
discovered by out latter intelligence, though it was first in time, may fitly
be here inserted, and it is thus set down in a Letter out of D. Bernhards
Camp in Bavaria, July 26. Aug. 5. We were fully resolved, if it had been
possible, to have releeved Ratisbone, but being herein disappointed, we
marched toward Landshut, and came before it July 10.20. we hoped that the City
would have yielded upon fair terms, but the Inhabitants were too confident of
their own strength, which consisted of 3 new Regiments of Dragoniers, besides
the ordinary Garrison, and relief by the Bavarian Fieldmarshall Aleringer, who
appeared on the other side of the Iser, within a Canons shot of the City, and
therefore refused to hearken unto any terms of composition, The Duke Bernhard
hereupon assaulted the Castle, and Gustavus Horn the City, the walls whereof
being battered, were broken down by violence of the Canon, and the breach
entered by the Soldiers, who destroyed many in the fury, took prisoner the
Commander Hinderson, a Lieutenant Colonel, and many other Officers of note,
chasing the remainder over the bridge, and through the Iser.

The Bavarian General, which came to rescue the besieged, was himself so put
to it, that he perceived no way of safety left him, but by flight, and this way
he would have used, but his Army being rowted, the bridge was thronged with
clusters of men, and the passage so barricadoed with the crowde of his flying
soldiers, that he was forced to leap into the stream, where the mortal shot
of a musket overreached him, the watery Element did not cover his head, on which
the bullet smote him so deadly, that thereon he died immediately.

The Imperial Horse posted then with all speed toward Regensburg, being
pursued by the Princes forces no farther then Eckenmuhl, because the Foot could
not easily pass the Laber.

The Citizens and Soldiers in Landshut spared no pains to defend the breach
from invasion, thither they carried hay, straw, brush fagots, and the like
fuel, which they kindled, thinking by that means to keep the Swedish
Soldiers from scaling the walls, but the sire catching some houses near,
quickly increased so violently, that the Castle and half the City was burned
to the ground, while the other half became a prey to the Army.

And now we return to see the passages of those 2. great Armies in Franconia,
upon which the eyes of Germany are more specially fixed, the flower of the
Empire, being set to play together, for no less a stake, then a large and
goodly Country. Both parties are now busied in making up their Armies full,
the Bavarians rejoyned themselves with the Imperialls, from whom they were gone
for a little space, to look homeward, upon the desolation of their own
Province, and to avenge themselves as occasion offered it self, upon their
enemy; The Spanish forces, 12000. strong, under the Cardinal Infants (who had
stayed so long at Inspruck, to strengthen his Army, with the remnant of those
which served lately under the D. of Feria, and some fresh Germans and
Millainers) repaired to the Imperial colors at Nordlingen, Duke Bernhard, and
the Fieldmarshall Horn, bring their Armies together, that so they might
jointly oppose them. The first intention of the Evangelicall Commanders, was,
to releeve the city of Nordlingen, which the King aimed at in the first place,
and then to give battle to the whole Imperial party. The beginning of these
enterprises was prosperous, for as it is written from Weysenburg; Colonel
Plato, and the Lord of Hoff-Kirchen, having dispersed 500 Imperial
Curiasseirs, which were set to keep the passage to the City, the Fieldm: Horn,
brought in 300. Musketeers, conferred with the Governor the L. Ebrahed
Dacbitz, and the Citizens, and returned back, before the Imperial Arm^ was
aware, this was done August. 14.24. The Commander in the town encouraged by
this new supply, the same night about 2. of the clock, sallied forth to assault
one of the Kings works, thinking to burn it, but the baskets and wood being
green, would not take fire; and so missed this design; yet the next day about
3. of the clock in the afternoon, he sallied forth again, betwixt the
Rimlinger, and Deininger gare, assaulted another battery, made of dry wood, so
large, that 6. Canons might be well planted upon it; chased the Imperialists
out of the trenches, in which they lay insconsed thereabouts, slew some, and
took 4. prisoners, and burned the battery to the ground.

The City thus fortified, the Evangelicall Commanders make preparation to
assault the Imperial army, the more encouraged hereunto, by their good
success in many skirmishes, betwixt some Regiments of both Armies, wherein the
Swedes had always the best, the alacrity of their own soldiers, which
expressed a cheerful desire to fight, the multitude of prisoners they had
lately taken, all which reported, that there was such a famine in the Imperial
Camp, that a little loaf of bread was sold for 2. Rixdollars, that the
sickness was very hot amongst them, that the Enemy was so far retired from
Nordlingen, that he could scarf reach it with the Canon, that though it was
reported, that the whole Imperial, Bavarian, and Italian Armies were 40000.
strong, yet in truth they were not above 30000. for so it is written from
Dunkelspiel Aug: 20.30. that when the roll of the Imperial Army was lately
examined, it was found that above 3000. men had been lately lost; that the
Hungarians would not fight, because John de Werth had opprobriously called them
scurvie dogs, that they believed verily, that if the Imperial Army was put to
it in earnest, they would not stand to it, because they wanted necessary
provision, and ammunition, and the like; the truth of which appears for the
most part, and the manner by the extract of a letter, written in the swedish
camp, at the Imperial City of Bop^in^en, Aug. ^.^0. as follows.

When we had passed by Keipheim over the Danubie, the next day after in the
afte^on^, we matched by Gieng^n, who^e Duke Ear^hands Life guard, and the
Chu^la^dis^ Regiment, which had the Van, Aug: 10.20. defeated 6^0. of the
Imperial Curi^ssi^rs, and took many prisoners, which related that the Kings
Army was in great perplexity, and that John de W^rth, with 7. Regiments, had
made an invasion into Franconia.

Hereupon a Council of war was called to advise, whether it was ^ot bent in
the absence of this Commander, to t^ ^e the advantage, and give present battle
to the Enemy, but it being resolved on, that it was best first to secure the
Country of Wi^tenberg, and then to Attach the Enemy, we marched the same
evening to Heyde^heim a frontier City of the Dukedom, and thence the next day
Aug: 11.21. Duke Bernh: marched betimes with the horse men, to Aw^en, where he
eat off above 1000. straggling Imperialis, and took 300. prisoners, thither we
also arrived at night, and the next day the Avantguard under the Fieldmarshall
Horn arrived here at Bopsingen, took a passage (which opened the way to the
Imperial City of Nordlingen) from the Crabats, Hungarians, and Pollacks which
kept it, before the Duke Bernh: could reach hither, who came not to us till the
next day, with the maine body of the Army.

The report of the prisoners, that John de Werth, with his 7. Regiments was not
yet returned out of Franconi^, and that the Imperial Army was very weak,
encouraged us not a little to put some thing to an adventure, and thereupon
resolved to dislodge betimes the next morning Aug: 14.24. that we might take
the high ground, which lay before us, and as occasion did present it self,
fight with the Enemy.

The day following Aug: 15.25. we stood betimes in the morning in battle array,
when the Duke Bernhard, with the Avantguard, and some selected Musque^rs, beat
off the Hungarian^, and Crabats, from their station, upon the mentioned Hill,
and became master of it. Hence we perceived that the Imperial army kept
another passage near a little river, which runs through the City of
Nordlingen, but could not well discern how it stood, and with what convenience
we might pass that way. The Duke himself therefore advanced thitherward, with
the right wing of his army, and chased the Imperialists headlong through the
River; and then perceiving it to be dangerous to attempt any further that way,
in the presence of the Enemy, they all concluded with one general vote, only
how to succor the City of Nordlingen, to furnish it with more soldiers, and
to advise the garrison, and citizens of their full intention, and thereupon we
stood armed upon the passage, to hinder the Enemy, from marching over it,
whiles the Fieldmarsh. Horn might go in safety to the City, which he did
without hinderance, and as well as could be wished. Below the City, some of the
Enemies troops, attempted to go over, but were encountered by the Lord of
Hoff-kirchen, who beat them back* and made them tu^ne headlong through the
River. By this the Fieldmarsh: Horn had releeved the City, and was upon his
return, and then the Duke beginning to draw back his forces from the passage;
the Enemy with all his Regiments of Crabats, Hungarian, and Germane Horsemen
fell upon his Excellencies Rear, and forced the Duke himself to return, who
thereupon assaulted them so furiously, that he put them to a confused flight,
wherein many were slain, and more, out of all question, if the darkness of
night had not suddenly hid them, had lost their lives. The Duke then sounded
the retreat, and kept upon the passage till the dawning of the day; at which
time he repaired to the Army, the which, whilst he would have lodged securely,
John de Werth set upon him with 2. Squadrons, but was beaten back by his Life
Regiment, whilst the rest of our Army were brought to their Quarter. In these
skirmishes there was slain of the Imperial Army, and taken prisoners, above
3000. and many revolted, and came on our side.

The forces from Wirtenberg, consisting of 500. men, with the Ranzovish
Regiment, as also 600. horsemen, and 400. Dragooners are arrived here with
Colonel Shaffelitzkie; we only expect the coming down of the Rhinegrave,
with his troops, and then we intend to reassaile the Imperial army, with whom
we are already so far engaged, that they must sight of necessity. The
Wirtembergers deal with us both faithfully, and friendly, they spare not to
send us store of provision, to the great encouragement of our army. Yesterday
the Duke Beruh: caused a young Gentleman of Shonefeldt, to be hanged, who was
sent by the Enemy to view our army, and yesterday the Swedish Commander at
Wallerstein, slew 60. Imperialists, and the Commander in Giengen 50. and took
many other prisoners. Thus much speaks this letter which shows the
confederate princes in these attempts to have been till then, if not
victorious, yet not unhappy.

THE CONTINVANCE of the King of HUNGARIES Story to be annexed to the former.
BUt the fairest morning is quickly overcast, the wheel soon turns about,
and this fortune which smiled thus at the first aspect, almost in a moment
changed his visage, to teach us, (may it be lawful for a Christian historian
to make this application) not to trust to the arm of flesh, in these, and the
like occurrences, but refer all to his discretion, and ordinance, which
changes the times and seasons at his pleasure, suffers the brittle vessels
of clay to be dashed in pieces, when they presume too much of their own temper.

The outrages done by the Imperialists at Hochstatt in Swaben, if there had
been nothing else, could not but move the Protestant Generals, to engage
themselves in fight with the Kings army that either by victory they might
secure their friends from the like cruelties afterward, or by the adventure,
they might give a testimony of their zeal to the Country of which they had
undertaken the protection. The bloody dealing of the Polakes, and Crabats sent
by the Imperial Commander Isolani to Heckstat, to summon the City, is scarce
credible, yet it is thus reported by letters from thence, July 21.31. The
12.22. of this month when this City was first summoned by some troops of
Polakes, and Crabats, the inhabitants in general both Protestants and
Catholics, ran to the Gates immediately to set them open, to the commanding
soldiers. But the Crabats not staying the time while this might be done, cut
down the gates, and furiously plundered the City from 9 in the morning, to 6.
in the evening, torturing many of the inhabitants most barbarously. They
ravished of the women, even to death; powered dunghill water, and vinegar into
the thr^at^ of seven men, and women, tied chains, and cords about their heads,
and twisted them so hard, that they fell down dead upon the ground; some they
hanged up by the privy members, sawed off the legs of some; rubbed off the
flesh from the legs of others to the very bones, tied the arms of others
backwards, and so hanged them up by those distorted parts, drew many through
the streets of the City stark naked, beat and wounded them with axes and
hammers, and generally used them with such barbarous cruelty, that every man
begged to be shot, or slain instantly, rather then to live and be partaker of
such misery. The Master of the Hospital they roasted alive, and sacked the
City so miserably, that they spoiled what they could not carry away, as if their
intention, was only for waste, and devastation. All the corn and provision of
victuals, they took away with them, and left the place so bare, that many of
the best rank for the space of 8. days after, saw not one bit of bread, but
were glad to feed upon unripe fruit, and water, and yet, as if all this had
been too little, they spoiled the inhabitants of their garments also, and
exposed them to that nakedness, that neither man, woman, nor child had
clothes to put on, but all went up and down, in their shirts and smocks,
having nothing else to cover them. Thus writes our discoverer. But this was
not all, the Fieldmarshall Horn had given his word to the Commander in
Nordlingen, to succor him, the King played fiercely upon the City, and it
could not hold out, the Swedes must put forward, if they intend to stay the
conquest, and on they went, though unfortunately, as will be more particularly
discovered by what follows. I find the battle expressed diversely, as the
relators stood affected, the best relation is full of horror, both in the
present fact and consequents, and have here set them down, that the readers
may be fully informed of each particular.

The first of these is set out by a German Catholic, and is titled Victory,
etc.

A True Relation, and as the same is delivered unto the Elector and Archbishop
of Main^z, by his Noble Counselor and Governor of Pri^lar, Christoph Heinrich
of Griesheim, Sept. 2.12. Concerning The great and glorious Victory which was
obtained by His Majesty the King of Hungary and Sohemia, against the Swedes
and their adherents near Nordlingen the 26 of Aug. the 6. of Sept. An. 1634.
where the before mentioned Governor himself was present.
Illustrious Archbishop and Elector my Gracious Lord,
THough both the Lieutenant General Earl of Gallas, and the Field-marshall
Altringer pro^ed to gratify my desire, in sending some auxiliary Regiments
with me, yet I was forced to wait all this summer, from one week to another,
till the day of the happy surrendering of the City of Regensburg; after the ^ng
whereof, I again desiring the before (...) i^ned Lieutenant Gen e^all Gallas ^o
(...), ^ee answered, that at the coming of the Italian forces, sufficient
mean^ would be to succor us: I therefore conferred about it with the Imperial
Commissary Ossa, who desired me to go down with all speed, and (...) sten the
coming of some of our Regiments toward the P^ontiers of Alsa^ia, and then we
could be succored again by the Italians.

Now in respect of the long and dangerous journey through Burgundy and
Lorraine, I sent from Lindaw with consent and knowledge of the Colonel
Vi^th^mb a Trumpeter to Ravenspurg, to the Swedish General Major Colonel
Shafflitzky my near kinsman, and desired of him a Pass to travail into
Th^ringen to mine own, which he not only granted, but likewise suffered me
to go first to Ulm and Goppingen: But when the aforesaid Colonel
Shaffelitzkie came to the Duke Bern^ard of Saxon Weymar, and had there made
mention of me, the Duke was some what displeased at it, and commanded him that
he should bring me back again to him: He came to me just at that time, when
I was taking Post, and called me back, but promised me by the faith of a
Cavallier, that no harm should be done unto me, and the license of ^asse which
he had given me, should be faithfully observed; which was done according to his
promise; and (...) was not (as it was here rumored) held as a pilso^?

A^oone as I came into the Swedish Camp, about ^opssingen, the Field marshall
Horn sent for m^t^ (...) and dine with him, and entertained me very
honorably: but amongst other discourses he said, that we did long very much to
come into the Country of Wirtemberge, and we had been about (...) th^se ^
years, we should be patient only, for the Children of Israel had wandered 40
years in the wilderness, before they came into Canaan. The next evening I was
called again to supper, where the Duke Bernhard of Weymar spoke in this manner
to me, Master Griesheim, how come you hither? whereupon I answered him, that
he had graciously commanded it, else certainly I would not have come into the
Camp, for my journey was for Thuringen: whereupon he said, that you knew how
despised and hated you are, and can you think to come safely thither? Yes I
answered, by the Pass which the General Major Shaffelitzkie had granted unto
me; a little while after Duke Bernhard said, that three days ago he had
caused a young Noble man to be hanged, which did come thither to discry the
Camp: which discourse I did not like very well, notwithstanding the
Field-marshall Horn, laughing, said, it was not spoken to me, my Pass should
faithfully be kept; I must only expect, till this occasion was passed, and
they might see what the issue thereof would be.

Notwithstanding I remained somewhat perplexed, and the next morning following
I made an humble supplication to his Excellency, and promised in it that I
would sit still in Thuringen, if so be I could enjoy the liberty of mine own
Religion; if a peace should be treated of therein, (...) do profitable
service, being ^inted with all the Counselors in the Imperial and Catholic
Electors and Princes Courts. In the mean time I would be quiet, and employ my
service no further, hoping that I should be set at liberty. The Duke Bernhard
of W^y man ^enie audien^e the space of an hour and a half hare headed, spoke
about many things with me, especially about a peace, and made mention of the
Duke of Freidland, saying, he would not have trusted him, and although he had
come unto him: moreover he told me how much I was bound to his Electorall and
Princely house, and yet I had been so zealous in the Imperial service; my
Religion he would put unto mine own conscience, only he hade ^work^ remember,
that in the time of Charles the Great, the Pope was only a Patriarch, like
unto the Grecian Patriarch. He asked me how strong the Imperial and Bavarian
Armies were, whereupon I told him, that the Imperial Army was at least
effective 28000 strong, and the Italian 12000 complete; at which he laughed,
and answered some what roughly, he did well enough perceive what I had yet in
my heart, I should only tell it none of his men, because none of them would
believe it: for both the Imperial and Bavarian Army were not above 9000
Horsemen, and 8000 Foot, and the Italian Army were likewise not so strong, and
that the King of Hungary had done very ill to engage himself again with the
siege before Nordlingen, he could not now well leave the siege with
reputation, and if so be he intended to retire again, he would be very nimble
to attend him. Further he told me, that the Elector of Tryer had done very ill
in taking into his Fort the Frenchmen; he was verily persuaded that they would
rather see the Swedes in it; for perhaps they (...) the Imperial Cou^ that the
Swed^ could so (...) ^e go out of (...).

During this discourse the Swedish Weymarish H^n^ General the Lord of (...)
hein comes into the T^, (...) certifies, that ^is Co^n the King of Hungary
his Marshall of the Court the Lord of S^b^ry des^red to confer with him upon
Cavallions P^la, which was likewise done; and the Sweder reparted that their
conference had bin about a treaty of a peace: Moreover (...) said, that his
Majesty the King of Hungary was very desirous to confer with the Duke Bernhard
of Weyma^ himself* But Duke Bernhard said always, Ye Papis^ never keep faith
and promise, ye hold still to your old rule, Quod Herelicis non sit servand^
sides, but I replied, if that were thus presupposed, then no treaty of peace
could over be instituted; further I said that his Excellency know very well,
that if on our side it could not be effected by the German forces, but must be
done by the help and assistance of outlandish Potentates, then our dear
native Country must still remain the miserable Theater, whereupon all over
nations played their bloody Tragedies, and thus must needs come to an utter
mine.

The conclusion of all was, I must tarry and see how this occasion would fall
out, if so be he obtained the victory, they would notwithstanding be ^lined to
a peace, for his part he never thought to keep the Bishoprich of Wertzburg, if
so be any other satisfaction had been made unto him, and the contributions
which were expressed by the imperialists in the Country, were (...) to (...)
again by the Bishops of Wertzburg and Hamberg.

Last Saturday was sevennight, the 22. of Aug. the 2. of Sept. the Italian
forces arrived in the Imperial Camp, whereupon the City of Nordlingen was
very hard battered with the Cannons, the besieged sent forth a Post, and
desired succor else they could not longer hold out: the next day following
being the 23 of Aug. the 2. of September. the Swedes held counsel of war, Well
advised, and perhaps it had bin better if they had followed this counsel.
and it was concluded, that they should not fight, but rather loose Nordlingen,
then endanger the common affairs of Germany, they should rather stay till the
Rhinegrave with his troops was arrived. On Monday following, being the 24. of
August. the 4. of September. the Fieldmarshall Cratz, together with the General
Major Kagge, and some Durlachish forces arrived not far from the Swedish
Army, whereupon Duke Bernhard took again the resolution to fight; On
Tuesday, being the 25. of Aug. the 5. of September. they conjoined their forces,
and sent the Baggage somewhat back, and about Evening they advanced into the
Valley under Goppingen, half a league from the Imperial Camp, whereupon I
entreated and obtained it, that I might go to the Baggage, for if so be that
any of the Imperialists should see me, they should not know, in what manner I
had come hither; this day the Mechelburgish Regiment was defeated by the
Crabats, and the half part of the Fieldmarshall Cratz his Baggage was
plundered. This day was sevennight being the 26. of Aug. the 6. of September. on
the day of Zepherene Pope and Martyr, the Swedes very early before 6. of the
clock assaulted the Imperial entrenched Army with great fury, obtained 2.
Standards, and 2. Ensigns, together with some pieces of Ordnance, and took
one of the Sconces in which the Vitzthombish and Limpachish Regiment took
their lodging but to their small profit, for the Sconces were either
undermined, or by themselves, in not looking well to the ammunition, were
fired, and thus both the Regiments flew up into the air toward Heaven: the
Imperialists had covered all their ordnances great and small, which were
charged with hail or small shot, and when the Swedes came e some what nearer,
they discharged and shot them off all at one time, which did incredible harm
amongst them, and caused such a confusion, and made partitions amongst them
like streets, in so much that our Currassiers assaulted them with all their
force, and within the space of two hours, rather by the clear assistance of
GOD, than by human hands obtained the victory; on our side not many have
been slain, For as the Swedes themselves confess, although one of their
Regiments presented it self to fight, it was immediately assaulted by 6.
Imperial Regiments, and ruinated. As for the horsemen, the Duke of Wirttenberg
himself writes to his Officers, that 2000. of them were slain upon the very
place: of the Footforces, few or none escaped, except those that remained about
the Baggage, which took the horses from the wagons, and saved themselves upon
them, the rest were either put to the sword or taken prisoners; and besides the
Swedes, above 4000. Wirttenbergs of the trained band were put to the sword, the
enemies Ordnances, ammunition, and all their wagons together with Duke
Bernhards best goods were apprehended about Neressen: and they themselves
confess, that they have lost above 4000. wagons, laden with Baggage,
provision, and ammunition; hence it may eastly be judged, how many 1000. horses
our forces obtained. The whole Swedish Army together with the Wirttenbergs
Boores was strong about 22000. men, of which some 1000. horsemen fled to the
Coppinger Valley, where the Rhinegrave arrived, and conjoined his troops with
them, and made up an Army of 5. or 6000. horsemen without Foot-forces,
ordnances, Baggages, or ammunition, of which they nothing left; which way the
same turned, and what end it took, with the pursuit after them, I do not
know, for when I saw all soldiers to betake themselves to flight, I did the
like, and the same night I came to the Fort of Shorendorff, in the Country of
Wirttenberg, where the General Commissaries Offenburgers servant, and both the
Commanders Tupadels and Obms wives were yet the same night fetched and carried
to Strasburg, in so much that they are not confident to maintain that strong
Fort.

On Thursday in the morning, the relation was brought of those high officers
that were slain and wounded, which I will relate not for certain, but as I
have heard it. Duke Bernard of Weymar was shot through one of his arms, the
Landtgrave John of Hessen, was wounded in his face and in his neck, and fled
bloody to Vlm, Field-Marshall Horn is dead or taken prisoner, because he is
not found amongst them. Field-Marshall Cratz is dead, General Major Vitz dumb
dead, General Major Kagge dead, Colonel Watchtmaister dead, which was very
famous amongst them, Colonel Liebenstein dead, Colonel Lieutenant Grun dead,
Colonel Lieutenant Willibardt dead. When I rode forward on Thursday, I found
the high ways toward Stutgard, full of fleeing soldiers and inhabitants. The
Duke of Wirttenberg posted yet the some day in all haste toward Strasburg, all
Noble and rich men followed him thither, the inhabitants ran out of the
Cities, carrying only their children in their arms, with great lamentation
and crying, and when I asked them, whither they intended to go, they answered,
God knows it, we do not know whither to run in such a haste: they cried
still woe and ever woe that the Swedes came into the Empire, before we could
treat with composition; now all goes to ruin: the Imperialists had behaved
themselves very well in Shorendorff, but the Swedes now and the Counsel at
Franckford had their moneys and goods, and would now depart and leave them in
such a misery.

Our Army doubtless possesses now the most part of the Country of
Wirttenberg, they find in it an incredible quantity of Corn and Wine, of
which they have now more to drink, than they had fresh water to drink 10 days
ago. The Field-Marshall Horn himself spoke to me, that in the Country of
Wirttenberg, 1500000 Commisse bread were baken for them, which will do now
much good to the Imperial Army. Nordlingen must now needs surrender on
discretion, in which are about 3000 horses which were brought thither from the
Country to save them, of which our soldiers will make good booty, and the
great quantity of corn that is in it, will serve for the victualling of
Ingolstatt. In Augspurg is already great famine, they eat dogs and cats. The
Granarie of the City of Vlm namely the Country of Wirttenberg is no so
exhausted, that those Cities will be forced to creep to the Cross: all the
Garrisons were taken out of all places about the Rhine, except Philipsburg, and
the soldiers sent to the Swedish Army, and now they are massacred, and they
themselves confess, that they cannot bring together again so many foot-forces
to form a new Army. All this I have partly seen with mine own eyes, partly
heard it of many chief men of their own, which I thought to relate
accordingly. Thus this Catholic Gallant with a large preface of himself,
writes gloriously of his own adventure, and the victory, adding something
peradventure to the tale, which is delivered otherwise in the next discourse,
which is as follows.

The Battle and bloody Encounter, which happened the 26. and 27. day of
August; before the City of Nordlingen.
WHereas by the long hoped surrendering of the Imperial City of Regenspurge,
and the taking of many other places on the Danubie, the courage of the
Imperialists was some what increased. The King of Hungary thereupon, after
that he had likewise brought under his power the City of Donawerth, took an
absolute resolution to march forward toward the country of Wittenberg, and
there to refresh his halse starved Army. Now whereas he thereupon marched
against Nordlingen. pitched his camp before it, assaulted the said town with
all his force, and likewise drew all his Spanish and Italian forces together.
The Swedish forces in the mean time formed their Camp about Bopffingen,
expecting there the conjunction of the Rhinegravish, and Cratzish troops, as
also the trained band out of the Palatinate and Swaben. But when in the mean
time the Imperialists continued assaulting the aforesaid City more and more,
and putting the besieged daily harder to it, and surrounded the city in such a
manner that the Swedish forces feared that the Commander in it, although he had
beaten off manfully diverse assaults, and done great harm to the enemy in his
works with his continual sallying forth, would not be able to hold out longer,
against so great force, which the enemy used before it. Here* upon they, after
that the Cratzish troops, and some troops of the Swabish trained bands were
arrived, resolved in Gods name to approach nearer unto the enemy, and to try,
whether they could get any advantage of him, or constrain him to abandon the
siege And thereupon after a precedent deli^ration, advanced the 26. day of this
month in the ^r noone toward the enemy. Where the Avan^g^a^d of our horsemen,
before the Forest throrow w^i^h they must needs pass, lighted upon five
tro^pes of the enemies Currassiers, which they charged and put them to flight,
and afterward assaulted three Regiments of the enemies horsemen in a valley,
which they dispersed, put above a hundred to the Sword. Amongst which the
Commander Aldobrundini, together with four Captains was slain, and obtained
likewise 7. Standards. But because the Swedish foot forces with the Ordnances,
by reason of the situation of the place, and the inconvenience of the narrow
passage, could not march forward so speedily, and the evening drew night; the
same day nothing more was attempted against the Imperialists by the Swedes
which stayed behind in a village, and put their forces in battle array; yet
at night they mastered one of the enemies works, in which lay 300 musqu^tiers,
which they put to the sword: many likewise of the enemies soldiers, which were
hidden here and therein the Forest, they chased out of the same, and put them
to the sword. In the mean time, the enemy on the right hand of the Hill planted
his Ordnances, and put his foot forces in his entrenched camp in Battle
array. Now when the next morning following, at the dawning of the day, the
Swedes labored to get up the Hill; they at last mastered an high ground on the
left side, although somewhat lower than the enemies ground was. Whereupon they
could plant the Ordnances, and thus they visited one another with the Canons,
the horsemen likewise making diverse encounters. In the mean time a part of the
Swedish foot forces labored to master a Sconce, in which the enemy had planted
three Demicanons together with some small pieces, and did with them more harm
to the Swedes, than the Swedes could do unto them, by reason they had the lower
ground, after many sharp and bloody skirmishes, the Swedish forces did beat
the enemy out of the said sconce. But being by reason of their improvidence,
the powder that was present there happened on fire against al hope: the Swedish
soldiers received not a small hurt by it; yea, such a harm, that they were
forced to abandon the same again; and upon the fierce assaulting of the
enemy, to retire again to the Swedlish army, that stood in battle array.
Whereupon the enemy with his continual shooting out of his ordnances from his
batteries, put the Swedes so hard to it, that after that they had lost a great
many of their officers and soldiers, it was thought best of all to retire in
good order a little way off from the hill, down into the valley, where they
might be free a little of the force of the ememies Canons.

In the mean time 100 men of every Brigade or Regiment of foot with a good
Officer, and horsemen adjoining on both sides were commanded to maitaine the
place, where the Swedish stood, till under the favor of the same, they had
gained a firm ground in the vnlley, and then these that were left behind to
maintain the place, might the better retire toward them. But the enemy
perceiving their intent, commanded on the right side some Regiments of Crabats,
and on the left side the Spanish forces to out off the passage from them which
assaulted them, who were left to maintain the place so furiously, that by
reason of the situation of the place, none could second the other, but fell
into a confusion, and every one began to save himself as well as he could, and
retire toward the woods. By which confusion, they lost together with the
Ordnances, the most part of the Ensigns and Baggages. The enemy pursued after
the fleeing Swedes with some 1000 Crabats; but because his Excellence the
Rhinegrave Otto Ludwig with his forces was nigh at hand to conioyne with the
Swedish forces, the Crabats retired, and put up the pursuit of the Swedish
forces.

What and how many of the Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers on the Swedish
side were slain, we have not yet any certainty of it, except what we hear by
the relation of some Officers and others that were taken prisoners by the
enemy, and now released again, and by other intelligences we understand, that
the Field-Marshall Horn, together with the Field-Marshall Cr^tz, the General
Mayor Rostein, the General Mayor Shaffelitztry, and other high and under
Officers are taken prisoners. The young Maronesse Frederick, the Lord of
Cherolin, the Commander Shneidwind, which commanded as General Mayor, Colonel
Wettverger, and diverse other Officers were slain. The Lord of Hoff, Kirchen,
and many others were wounded and hurt.

After this unhappy accident, Duke Bernhard retired first to Constate, from
thence to Heylbronne to recollect again the dispersed troops, where the
Rhinegrave yet continues, and forms an Army to keep the enemy a little
back, till the Swedish forces are rallyed, and then they will oppose the enemy
with all their power.

After the battle was ended, the enemy turned again toward Nordlinge^, and
after that he had battered the same again very hard, the said Town was
surrendered the next day following. Thus this battle is related diversely, and
wherein the more probability of truth is set down, we can only discern by
consequents, doubtless a great blow was then given to the Swedes.

After so great a letting of blood, we have reason here to conclude this part
of our History, and to give time and leave an^o the weakened party to recollect
strength again. Therefore hoping to get both matters and encouragement for the
continuation of these relations of Germane affairs, and to begin again here
where now we break off; we will but slightly touch such actions as being
befallen since the battle, may require the first place in the next book.

They are contained in a letter written from Mentz the ^. of November. 1634.
which says thus much.

Nordlingen being yielded unto the King of Hungary, he turned with the best
part of his Army toward Vlm, and summoned, or rather commanded, the same to
yield. But upon an answer, whereby these of Vlm, declared faithfully to stand
to their word given to the united Princes and States. The King took his march
into the Dukedom of Wirtemberg. There Lieutenant Colonel Gronway (of General
Horns Regiment) having been left to command the garrison in Geppingen, he
with four Companies (being the garrison) entered into the Kings service, and
delivering that Town, was in recompense made Colonel.

There was a Garrison also in Kirchei^; an other reasonable strong Army which
the Commander there (named Li^ck) did likewise surrender to the King. This
example was followed by all other Towns of that Country, they being (though
wailed not fortified, and especially by the two Imperial Cities, Eslingen and
Reutlingen. But Shorndorf, Ashberg, Aurach and other strong places and Castles,
(being well provided with Garrisons and necessaries) does both hold out and
much annoy the enemy. All the open Country of that Dukedom has been put
under contribution, notwithstanding that all such goods (especially Corn and
Wine) as was sound, has been transported to Ingolstat, Brissach, Lindaw, and
other places. And to express the cruelties there committed without respect of
sex or condition, would require a whole Book.

The Imperial Army came from thence before Heilbronne, and troubled the same
with no ordnance but only with grenades; in such manner; that at once there
were put on fire and burned to the ground above 140. houses. Lieutenant
Colonel Senger of Smidbergs Regiment, commanding in the City, being slain in
a sally; The Magistrate began to hearken to, and correspond with Wolfgang
Rudolf of Ossa, persuading the Inhabitants to forsake their own Soldiers:
who, upon threatenings of the Magistrate and Burghers, were forced to make a
composition with the Imperiallists, which was not better kept than that of
Nordlingen, both garrisons being forced to serve under the King of Hungary. At
Heilbren order is taken by the King to establish a Magazin, and to fortify the
City. This being done, the Army was divided into three: Whereof the Spanish
and Italian Army, commanded by the Insant Cardinal, marched directly by the
Forest called Odenwals toward Miltenberg, which they took, as likewise
Ashaffenburg, both upon composition, but kept as the former. Thence they went
on to Frieberg, and so past the Rhine: using in their march all possible
hostility and eruelties. Five Imperial Regiments of Horse, and diverse
Regiments of Crabats and Hungarians (commanded by Isolani) did conduct the said
Army; by reason whereof these said light horses did infinitely trouble the
ways and country about Francfort and Hanaw; The garrisons whereof (especially
of Hanaw) have by frequent sallyes often requited their unkindnesse. In
Francfort commands General Major Vitzdumb, and Colonel Dewitz, who did
command in Noralingen, and Colonel Forbus.

The second Army (being Bavarian and Leaguish) is now commanded by the Duke of
Lorraine, as General and marched from Hailbr^ into the Marquisa^ of Durlach,
and into Alsatia, where* once the Rhinegrave O^ta Jews was almost ^en had hoe
not cast himself with his horse into the river. The said Duke having sent
monitorie letters to the City of Strasburg, and received thereupon a cold
answer. He went back agains to Durlach, and there he yet remains, gathering
contributions, and appoynting some Rendyvous, as he does likewise in
Wirtenberg.

The thirdand, pri^pall Army of the King of Hungart, commanded under him, by
Gall^ and Pice^lamini, past into Fran^, and took there partly by composition,
partly by treasons, and par^ly by the revolt, of some Boores and other
inhabitants, several places, especialls E^tenburg Mas g^thal, Onspach,
^uenfurt, Kitzing^, the Town of Witzburg, and lately Swinefort. Although it
was thought, that Army would go on directly against Bannier, or hinder him and
the Lan^gr^ of H^ss^, to join or to make any recto^s and ^deavo^. Yet it is
discovered, that the said a^y inten d^ to retur^backe in to Wirtenb^rg, le^uing
only Isola^ with the Hung^ions and ^aha^in those pag^ especially in the
Country of Fulds, (...) second the garrisons left in the new reconquered
places. Whether they intend to take their Winte qua^ers, or to join agains
into on^ hody with the Duke of Lorraine, and make ye^ some no table ^p^ise,, is
no^as yet known.

Concerning the Swedish and Pro^tant^imy, the said General Rhinegrave, having
b^ught his forces back toward Spire, he fell ^ke and died at Spire, of a
pest^l^nt^ all feaves, ^n the (...) of October last past and in this pince did
presently succ^d the the old Rhinegrave Ott^e. Rhinegrave. John ^hilip being
made his Lieu^ant General, Collonell Canofsky General Major of the Horse, and
Colonel Rantzow Major of the foot.

Duke Bernhard has kept a rendezvous, and the Army (both Officers and
soldiers) have bin sworn again to him. But whether these armies of the Rhine
grave and the Dukes shall be joined, is not yet known.

The army of General Bannier, having past into Thuringia, has been
inquartered about Magdeburg, and Anhault, there to be refreshed; until some
recrewtes be levied, which goes so well forward, that that army is shortly to
march again.

Touching the Lantgrave of Hessen, he has order to (...) if need be) either
the Duke of Luneburg, or Duke Bernard, or Bannier. and he now has marching
diverstroups of horse, to follow the leaguish army, which the Intant Cardinal,
with other German troops has sent back under the Count of Mansfield: who
seems to intend to ^ade the country about Mentz.

The French are leauying an army of Germans, which is to be commanded by the
young Duke of Wirtenberg, who is now Lieutenant for the French King at
Philipsburg: And Monsieur de la Force lies with an army of 20000 men, at and
about Landaw; almost whole Alsatia and diverse other towns of the Rhine, and
neighboring countries, being in the French protection.

Mean while the Elector of Saxony does treat of a peace, his Deputies being
with the Imperial Deputies still at Pirna. God grant a good and universal
Peace; for Pax una Triumphis
Inumeris potior.


CHAP. 5. The actions of Otho Lodowick the Rhingrave.
THe care of the Country about the Lake of Constance, was committed by the
Princes of the union to the Rhingrave, who in discharge of that trust which was
reposed in him, used all means possible to keep what they had, and to win
upon the Imperialists; what was done by the forces under his command at
Ratolfoes Cell is declared in a former history, where the siege of Renfelden a
strong Fort upon the Rhine, five German miles from the famous University of
Basell, was also mentioned, and yet but mentioned, because our intelligence was
not then so full, as to bring it to a period; Now it is surrendered, and shall
be the first thing we shall pitch upon in this discovery. Five months fiege
the Garrison and inhabitants there had endured with much extremity, while John
Philip, brother to Otho Lodowick the Rhingrave lay before it with a little
Army, the particulars whereof are remembered in the forenamed history; in the
end Otho himself marched thither-wards in person, Aug. 1. intending briefly to
finish this enterprise speedily, that he might the more conveniently join his
forces which those of Saxon Weymar to oppose the King of Hungary who made
havocke of the Protestant towns about the Danubie. A combat betwixt the
Rhinegrave and the Bryssackers.
He then had been in the Dukedom of Wirtenberg to leavie new forces, and
having sent 2000. fresh Musketeers to Rhinfelden; for the more dispatch,
himself lodged one night with 40. horsemen only at Frybourg, within two
German miles of Bryssac, from whence going the next day to the Leaguer, he was
set upon by 50 Brissackers, who thought to have surprised him in his journey.
But this experienced soldier suspecting what might peradventure, and
afterward came to pass, was prepared to battle, and with his retinew entered
into combat with the assaylants. The fight was long and sharp, the Brissackers
were armed cap a pre, and pressed hard upon him, as if secure from danger
because of their Armor: his horsemen were stout and well disciplined soldiers
and knew how to come on, and give fire, to indammage their adversaries, and how
to traverse their ground, and retire orderly for their own safety. A good
while the battle lasted, and in the end, the victory fell to the Rhingrave,
who slew 10. of these assaylants outright, took 20 prisoners, yet had not one
of his own men deadly, though he that escaped best was lightly wounded.

Thence he posted with his prisoners back to Fribourg, and sent to the Camp,
whence he heard that the City was in an agony, so distressed for want of
victuals, that at all the prisoners related, they had nothing but what they got
by stealth in the darkness of the night, and this was a great extremity;
though yet was it more necessitated by relation of a Clarke of the band to
Captain S^mid^, a Commander in the Fort, who was taken as he was swimming
down the Rhine with two Burgesses of the City, to look out for succors. His
name was Theobald Frederick, borne in the Diocese of Altkirken; he was taken
Aug. 7/17. and then made this relation. That for the space of 7. days before,
there had been no bread in the City, that they had spent what could be made of
Akorn^, that the Commander Mercy had given all his horses for meat to the
Garrison, only one excepted, to incite the other Commanders by his example to
do the like, that amongst the whole troops, there were but 11. horses left,
that the soldiers would be glad to have the Town surrendered or taken by
assault, for they rather desired to dye valiantly, than be starved; that if
they did not receive succor the next day at the farthest, the Commander would
be forced to surrender, yet that he hoped to have good conditions, in respect
that he before time had done a courtesy to the Rhingrave, and that there was
no Ammunition left, except one barrel of powder. All this was truth, and the
next day the Colonel Mercy sent a letter to the Rhingrave, in which he
entreated him, that himself, his Officers and Soldiers, the Clergy,
Citizens, and inhabitants, might freely depart without restraint or
molestation, which was answered respectfully, and Aug. 9/19. articles of
composition were signed in the Camp, and the Town surrendered accordingly; the
tenor whereof follows. Whereas the high borne Earl and Lord, the Lord John
Philipsen, Wildt and Rhinegrave, Earl of Salm, Lord of Vlushingen, etc.
General Major and Commander of the horse by order of the Crown of Sweden, and
the confederate Princes, was humbly requested by the Noble and valiant Otho
Ludolfen, and Captain Ieande Seines, agents for the Noble and valiant Frantz
Mercy, a Colonel of foot, and chief Commander in Rhinfelden, to grant him a
fair quarter, and honorable terms of composition, in that the said Mercy had
done nothing during this siege, which sorted not with the honor and dignity of
a soldier. Hereupon he the said John Philipsen, etc. propounded, and the said
Mercy accepted these conditions. 1 That the soldiers in garrison, should march
out with swords at their sides, bag and baggage be safely conveied to
Constance, and in the way be accommodated with necessaries, lodging, and
victuals. 2 That at their departure they should not pillage the Citizens, nor
Boores, nor receive any goods to carry them away privately, and for the
performance of this Article, the Commander Mercy should give a caution upon the
faith of a soldier. 3 The Clergy men shall enjoy the liberty of conscience in
the free exercise of Religion, and not be troubled therefore, as in all places
where there is the like toleration. 4 None of the soldiers shall be compelled
to leave the Imperial Colors, and serve under the Crown of Sweden, or the
Princes. 5 The Citizens shall have the same freedom in matter of Religion,
which is granted to the Clergy, and their privileges shall be maintained. 6
The sick and wounded soldiers shall be left in Rhinfelden till they be
recovered, and in the mean season be provided for, as if they served under the
Rhinegrave. And lastly for the accomplishment of these conditions, the
Commander Mercy shall this present day surrender the place, and all the Forts
thereunto belonging, with all the pieces of Ordnance great and small, the
ammunition and other provision to the Rhinegrave, if there were any secret
mines, or hidden fire he should discover it, dealing sincerely in all points,
as it becomes a Noble Soldier. Dated in the Camp before Rhinfelden, Aug.
9/19. 1634.

During the time of this siege, nothing was done in Alsatia but what is
expressed elsewhere, and would be in vain repeated; only the fortification
of the Imperial small Town of Buckhorne is worth the recording, which in this
time the Swedes so surrounded with water, and strengthened with walls and
bulwarks, that it is now held impregnable, and that they built a ship there
after the Holland fashion, which carries 22. pieces of Ordnance, to scour the
Boden-sea or Lake, and called it after the name of the Queen of Sweden,
Christina; and that the garrison at their departure uncompelled (for herein the
Rhine-grave observed the conditions propounded) voluntarily, and of their own
accord took service under the Princes, the Commanders only and the Officers
excepted. As Soon as he was gone, the garrisons in Lindaw, Brigents, Constance,
and thereabout, as is written out of Schwaben, and the Boden-sea, August 21/^.
had an enterprise against Buckhorne, but were defeated by the Lord Kanoffskye,
who slew the most part of the Cavallarie dispersed the rest, took many
Officers prisoners, and forced the Imperial Colonel Vitz-thumbe to leap into
the water for safeguard of his life, where after he had endured by the space of
an hour, or thereabouts, he got into a small ship, and so escaped.

The neighboring Cantons, whose union has been kept inviolable for many
ages, during this time fell into a difference, the Catholics disagreed with
the Protestants about the march of the Infant, the one yielding him, the other
denying his passage through the country, and about the Commander Kesselring,
whom the Catholic Cantons had condemned to death, but the Protestants and the
French King by his agents desired to have restored to the government of Torgaw,
holding him worthy of that Province which the other did esteem him deservedly
deprived of, for some pretended offense. The contention was so sharp, that two
Diets were called to compose the grievance, the one by the Catholics, at
Lucerne, the other by the Neutrals and Protestants, at Solethrane. At Lucerne
these two questions were propounded, upon what grounds they should persuade the
Protestant Cantons to keep the Swedes out of their defenced Towns; and how
the strong Fort made by the French near the Rhine in the Grisons country,
might be demolished; and at Solethrane, it was questioned whom they should make
their General in the daily expected war, and concluded upon the Rhinegrave,
whose faith or valor they did not doubt of, in redressing those injuries to
which they saw themselves exposed, they are the words of my Relator, by the.
Catholics confederation with the King of Spain.

All this business in Switzerland, was only yet in conception, things were
not yet brought to maturitie, some hope of agreement was yet remaining, both
parties were allied to two puissant Princes, the Protestants, to the French,
who had commanded his agents to divide his pensions only to the Protestants,
the other to the Catholic K. who as it is remembered formerly in the larger
history, had made a special league with them; Otho Lodowicke was not yet
called, to the assistance of the Protestants but engaged by order from the
director General to stay at home, and join with the Duke of Saxon Weymar and
the Feeld-marshall Horn, to oppose the Imperialists in the confines of Swaben,
and Franconia, for the victorious proceeding of the King of Hungary, troubled
the Peers, and Estates assembled at Francfordt, who as they write from
Franckeford, August 28. September 7. willing to have the French their friend,
concluded that the fort of Philipsburg should be surrendered to the King of
France upon these conditions. 1. That the Governor therein should be a Prince
of the Empire. 2. That the Garrison should make their oath of fealty to the
King of France, the Crown of Sweden, and the Estates of Germany. 3. The
Christian King should have possession of it during his life time only, and
that at his death, it should return again to the Estates of the Empire; and
in lieu thereof the King of France should maintain, to the advantage, and use
of the Princes 10000. men; yet this was not all, Otho was presently enjoined to
assist the other two forenamed Generals, but how he sped there, it is not here
to be repeated, it is set down in the King of Hungaries history.

For conclusion of this Chapter, we have here set down the list of the Princes,
assembled in the Diet either in person, or by proxy, they are thus marshalled
by a French Discoverer. The Princes Frederick Marquess of Baden. William
Lant-grave of Hessen, and Christian Count Palatine of Berken field. And
Oxenstiern Rixe-Chancelcellour of the Crown of Sweden, Philip Maurice of
Hanaw, Minsberg, William of Solius; Henry Volrad of Stolberg, John of Nassaw
Sarbrug, and his brethren. Wolfgang Henry of Isamburg, and Philip Earnest of
Isamburg. The Deputies of the Electorall Houses those of the Electorall House
of the Prince Palatine, of the Palatine of the two Bridges. The Palatine of
Lautreich. Those of the Electorall house of Saxony, of the Dukes of Cobourgh,
and Isenach, of Sax-VVeymar, and Sax-Altenbourgh. Those of the Electorall house
of Brandenburg, of the Dukes of Brandenbourg, Culmach, and Brandenburg
Onolshack. The Agents of the other Princes which have place in this honorable
assembly, the Agents of D. Frederick Vlrich of Brunswicke. D. Augustus of
Luneburg, of the D. of Wirtenberg, the Lantgrave of Hessen Cassell, the
Marquess of Baden, the Duke of Pomerania, the Bishop of Breme, the D. of
Mechlinburg Gustraw, Schuerin, Christian and George Ariberth of Auhault, the
Deputies of Silesia, of the Counts George Frederick of Hohenloe, and his
brother. Of the Counts of Hanaw Dillembourg, and Hanaw Lichtenbourg, of John
and James Counts of Eberstein Philip, and Jews Emich, Counts of Leningben;
Jews Wolfgang Earnest, and Frederick Jews Counts of Levenstein and Verten,
and of Jews Count of Erbach. The Deputies of the Nobility of Franconia,
Swaben, the Rhine, and VVeteraw, and to conclude the Agents or Burgesses of the
confederate Cities of the four Circles of Swaben Franconia the Higher and
Lower Rhine; to wit, the Burgesses of Strawsbourg, Norimberg, Spire,
Franckford, Worms, Vlme; Sweinford, and Ratis-bone, though it is conceived
that the last had not now any sufferage at this meeting.

CHAP. 6. The actions of the Lantgrave of Hessen, and D. of Lunenburgh.
AFter the Battle with the army of the Catholic Leaguers under the command of
Boninghausen the Lieutenant General, and the Field-Marshall Gehlen, and the
taking of Hamme: these two Princes May. 27/27, marched directly toward
Munster, the chief city of Westphalia, situate upon the Amisis, or River of
Eems, and distant from Hamme (Northward) about sixteen English miles, to
prosecute their victory. The estate of the Catholic army at that time the
distractions of the Commanders, the hope of succors from the D. of Newburg, who
was then mustering of Forces about VVermes-Kircken, Linnep, and other places,
the distress of Munster and the summons thereof, with the propositions made by
the D. of Lunenburg, and the request of the Elector of Collen to the Lords
estates of Holland, to take the Bishopric of Munster into their possession,
to continue the Neutrality, and to send no succors to the Lantgrave and Duke;
put a full point to the discourse of these two Princes proceedings in the
supplement. The issue of the Leaguish hopes, the effects of the Embassage, the
Military actions on both parts, and the Fortunes attending them, as far as
they have gone, and we have understood of them since, must be the subject of
this relation.

Philip of Mansfield, Generalissimo of the leaguish army, being come in person
to Boon, May 25, June 4, was sent for thence with a strong convoy to come to
Collen, to confer with the Elector, about relieving the army, which being
hemmed in at Munster, by the Hassians and Luneburghers were as much
necessitated by famine, as threatened by their enemies sword. And here was no
time for a long consultation, an expeditious action was the only means to
rescue them; and to do this affectually, more power was required, than could
be levied by the Leaguers instantly. Therefore the Earl who had a general
Imperial Commission to leavie Forces (if occasion required) to oppose the
Princes, and to call to the Catholics to assist him with their auxiliary
powers, having given order to his Commissaries to muster up the soldiers
enquartered about Hauff, upper Cassell, and the places adjoining. Philip Earl
Mansfield soliciteth the D. of Newburg to transmit his forces to the Catholic
League.
Himself went in person to the Duke of Newburg, then at Dusseldorp, to desire
him, to transmit his army which he had now ready into Westphalia, where
being seconded by Augustine Spinola, a near Kinsman to the Arch-dutchesse her
late General, who was come thither from Bruxels to the same purpose; he spoke
to the Duke to this effect, I come not to complement, it neither suits with my
vocation, a rough soldier brought up in the camp, not in the Court, nor can
it be suffered by mine occasion, which requires my quick explication, and
your speedy resolution. Your Highness cannot be ignorant of the miserable
condition, not of Westphalia only, but all Germany, and the sacred Roman
Empire. I cannot think of it my self without a sorrowful passion; nor can I
conceive that any other, who has not put on the Stoics stupidity can hear it
without compassion.

The enemies of the Roman Church and Empire, having made a confederation
against his Imperial Majesty, his Catholic friends and Allies, do not only
make their inrodes into our territories, but strive to lay our dwellings waste
and deprive us of our inheritance; and whether it was through our fear and
sluggishnesse, or their courage and forwardness, I know not, their attempts
against us have been so unfortunate to us that our armies have turned their
backs to these enemies: the same troops which once were fed with the prey, and
clothed with the spoil of these Adversaries, have lately been made a prey to
them, and Victory which formerly attended the Roman Eagles, now waits upon
their Standards, and has taken up an Habitation in their Pavillions. I need
not tell you, how since the first coming in of the Swedes, we have bin
incroacht upon in Silesia, wasted in Franconia, ruined in Pomerania, and other
places, by the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, the D. of Saxon Weymar, and
Otho the Rhinegrave, the Dukes of Mecklenburg, and the united forces of these
Swedish strangers: It is too well known to the Christian world, I wish it never
had been published in Gath, or Askelon among the Turks and Mohammedan
Haggarenes. But in these regions, my self had no particular engagement, I am
only bound to pity their deplorable condition, nor to give account of them.
Let them answer for it, to whose custody they were deputed. Westphalia is my
particular Province, committed to my trust, as well by his Sacred Imperial
Majesty, as the Spiritual Lords, the Electors and Princes of the catholic
League. For the defense of this Country; I shall willingly hazard mine own
person, and employ my forces, not doubting of the best assistance of my
Catholic friends, (whereof your Highness is not the least) who professing with
me one and the same religion, cannot (in probability) be divided from me in
affection. And now by the file of my discourse, you may easily perceive the
intent of my coming hither, not to before a formal visitation, but the
transmission of your army to our Leaguish forces, who being much distressed at
this present, might themselves soon be relieved, by the coming in of your
auxiliaries, and the Bishoprics of Paderhorne, and Isnabrug lately lost by us,
and gained by the Swedes and Hassians, peradventure be happily recovered. I
have said, and now expect a quick and effectual answer, without delay or
denial, if not in political respect of your own conservation; for assure
your self in this Neutrality, whether we stand or fall, you cannot be safe;
yet in respect of piety, for I know your Highness to be no Meroziri, and
would not be liable to the curse of the Angel, for not going forth to the
battle which is for the propagation and defense of our Catholic Religion.

This was the speech of the Count Philip to the Duke, who after a short pause
thus replied. The Duke of Newburg answer,
I am too well acquainted with the sad history of this bleeding country, where
every gash which has been made by the sword of the enemy cries louder than
the mouth of a Lazer by the way begging relief, (...) more moveingly; than the
tongue of an elegant Orator can pers^ade. I should long ere this willingly have
given my helping hand, to extinguish that Flame, were not mine own Dominions,
in perpetual danger of combustion. But compassion must not r^e, but be
governed with discretion; and wisdom first looks that all be well at home,
before she engages her self in any foreign adventure. What you would
persuade me unto by policy, and piety, experience and reason dissuade me from:
The extremities which a neighbor Prince, the Bishop of Wirtzburg, lately
suffered, by conjoyning his forces with the Imperial, when in providence he
should have kept them for conservation of his own estate, may teach all after
ages to stand upon their own guard, and not to weaken themselves, to support a
Confederate; it was not the titular dignity of the Duke of Franconia, nor his
defenced City fortified with ditches, walls, and bulwarks, nor his (supposed
impregnable) Castle, that could secure him against foreign invasion, so long
as his soldiers continued with him, he was free from danger, but their absence
disarmed him, and exposed him to that misery, which straight pursued him
eagerly, and overtooke him speedily. I have resolved, from this precedent, to
ward close, and not to lie open, when I may prevent it; if unexpected mischief
attend this resolution, it is but in doubtful expectation: time, friends, and
means may make my peace; which I am certain would be-lost by (your advised)
alteration. And yet I would have my policy to serve, not overrule my piety,
and may they sow wheat, and reap briars, which will not go forth to the
battle of the Lord with the mighty, if it be required by necessity, and may
be done with safety: but the first condition of these (I hope) is not yours,
the last (I am sure) is not mine: my Country is little, and not so populous as
thence to raise two Armies, one to attend you, and another to guard it, and if
I could raise them, I have not means to keep them, it being no fit season to
plant, or sow, or reap, during the time of such warre-like preparation. I must
conclude, I speak it sorrowfully, I cannot, I speak it positively, I will not
herein condescend to your desire; My good wishes shall go along with you; may
the stars from Heaven fight for you, may the stars fight in their courses
against the Enemies of the Roman Church, and Empire, but mine Army, I must,
and will keep at home, for mine own conservation.

The Duke of Luneburgh was all this while before Munster with 8000. horse, and
7000. foot, which were increased with 5000. Hollanders, under the command of
Pinsen, Collone^l Pinsen joined to the Duke of Lunenb. at Munster.
who having first taken his oath of faithfulness to the Lants-grave of Hessen
was advanced by him, to the office of his Lieutenant General, while his
Excellency at Franckefort negotiates himself, with good success, in the
friendly correspondence and agreement of the Circle of the Lower Saxony, and
the rest of the Circles at the Diet there.

The time thus spent was not lost; His recesse from the Army was not frivolous,
it had been vain either for himself, or the other Princes, to have fought
abroad in the General cause, if there had been dissension at home: But by his
endeavors the Evangelicall States, were accorded at Franckeford, and an
universal hope of prosperous success in the war, was conceived to follow
this union.

At Munster, the Duke of Luneburg rested without doing any thing till the sour
days, the time set down, for the Cities answer to his propositions was
expired; and then finding that the Articles were not accepted (as in all
probability they would not) the strength which was left of the Leaguish Army,
being then in and about that place, and the City flattering it self, that the
States of Holland would take it into their protection, (as they had vainly
desired) and knowing the wants of provisions which they within suffered, as
also the differences betwixt the Clergy and lay-citizens; the Clergy being
much offended, that the remnant of Boninghaush and Geleens forces was to be
maintained, at their sole charge, thought that this City would not long hold
out, and therefore first attempted by battery, to shake it, and afterward by
blocking up the passages, and cutting off their carriages, and convoyes of
victuals to starve it, himself in the mean time not being careless to
provide food for his Camp, without which the soldiers would have as small
courage to go on, as ability of body to do him service: Famine began to show
his deformed meagred visage quickly within, the public Magazine was not so
stored, as to afford every man his proportion, and those private men which had
stored up any thing more then need required, sold what they could spare at an
excessive rate; cheese, stockfish, and oats by the eighth of June were
amounted to u quadruple piece of what they were before. Rashfeld and L'Eremite
routed.
In this distress, two Imperial Colonels, Rashfeld, and L'Eremite assayed
with three Regiments to break through the Hassian Army, and so deliver
themselves from that lingering necessity. And the issue partly answered the
Attempt, present death acquitted them of their fear, of languishing misery,
which is a worse evil, then a speedy ruin. They knew, that they must pass
the pikes, and fight before they could pass the Army, and had no hope of
victory, but by a tumultuous conflict to purchase their own liberty, and
fight they did valiantly, though unfortunately. The Hassians who expected such
an adventure, stood in Battalia, and notice being given them, by their
Sentinels, of the coming on of these Colonels, they entertained them so
roughly, that with the loss of seven Standards, the most of them lost their
lives, upon their hope of liberty, they two Commanders only, and some few
horsemen escaping, to report the death of the soldiers to their friends at
Collen.

This beginning put a good hope into the friends of the Evangelicall General,
that the City could not long hold out, but would certainly be quickly taken in
without much time, or labor. But the accidents in war are most uncertain,
the events here do not always suite themselves to man's hope or desire: the
same fate which waited upon the Roman Consul Metellus, in the Spanish war
against Sectorius, seemed to attend the Lanenburger at Munster. The Roman
presumed to take the City of the Lagobietes, within five days the Roman,
unfurnished of provision for his Army, sent out a strong party to fetch in
forage for his horses, and food for his men, but they being surprised by the
vigilance and valor of Sectorius, he was constrained to raise the siege, and
this General himself conceiving, that this City would quickly submit, being
thus necessitated, to relieve his own Army, Welfer the Hassian Ritmaster
surprised by the garrison, at W^rendorff, and 40. wagons of victuals taken
from him
he sent out the Rittmaster Gechard Welfer, to fetch in provisions, but he in
his return with 40. wagons, laden with victuals, being surprised by the
Imperial garrison at Warendoff, and the food intended for the Hassian and
Luneburgish Army carried thither; the Duke in the end was forced also to rise
from Munster, and leave it; dividing his Army for a time to several
expeditions, one to be employed abroad, and the other to continue yet, and
wait upon the Leaguish Army, which would not be drawn from under the Cannons,
though there was fair occasion offered to fight.

The surprisall of the Hassian Riemaster was partly recompensed by the States
forces in the Netherlands, who being advertised of the return of Augustine
Spin^la from Dusseldorp to Bru^ells, set upon his Convoy, defeated them, and
carried away 80. good Horse^. And yet as if this bad been too little to
repaite the Hessish honors, as not done by themselves but their confederates,
or to make amends for their loss, this prize being no way equal to the
others; the fortune of war, twice gave them opportunity to avenge themselves,
which they both times apprehended quickly, and prosecuted happily. The one was
thus.

Paul Dawben taken prisoner by an Hassian Ritmaster.
Baltazar Rudiger, an Hassian Ritmaster, having conveyed some goods from
Pader^rne in Westphalia, to Cassell, (a prime City in Hessen land) as he was
coming back, light upon Paul Da^ben, an Imperial Lieutenant Colonel, with
whom he encoun^ted, and the fight was not long ere Dauben himself was taken
prisoner, his Standard Bearer and many others of that regiment slain, and the
rest so dispersed, that they will scarce piece together again.

Another thus. L'Eremite, the Colonel, after he had a little breathed himself
at Collen, accompanied with the Commanders Lohh, and Shartzenburg, and attended
with then Regiments, posted from thence into Saverland, where he intended to
repair his forces, L'Eremite Ioh. and Shwarzenburgh defeated by the Earl of
Eberstein.
and having made up his Companies to follow his former intentions against the
Hassian Army, his coming thither, and his counsel was revealed to the Earl
of Eberstein, then Commander under the Lantgrave in Cassell, and he not
deserting time, having mustered up his forces, sought after them, and found
them near Medenbach in the County of Waldecke. His expedition was so speeds,
that his Infantry was a great way behind the Horse, when he first discovered
them, and yet he set upon them with his weatie Horsemen (which had been
ranging over the Mountains there abouts, and almost tired themselves before
they could spy out their enemy) with such courage and resolution, that he
routed them totally, and followed them in execution, till night had drawn a
black curtain over them, and the fainting Horses could not longer follow
them. Whether through haste, misinformation or modesty, this defeature is but
slenderly reported from them of Medebach, who by letters bearing date June
23/23. the next day alter this conflict, report only of the gaining of 200
Horses by the Hassians, the taking of diverse prisoners, amongst whom was the
Leaguish Ritmaster Waldecker, and the winning of 4 or 5 Corne^s. They of
Collen, who are more sensible of the love, and were spectators of the Gallantry
of these Cavalli^ at their going from thence, and eyewitnesses of their
miserable return, which was Tune 12/2^. relate it though briefly, yet more
fully. These are the few words they deliver this story in. Last night arrived
here the Colonels L'Eremite, Shwartzenburgh, and Loh, very poorly, with 25
Horsemen, which were all that escaped in the last encounter with the Hessish
forces in Saverland: a great hinderance to Count Philip his leavies, for the
Soldiers are hereby much disheartened: 60 Horsemen are already fled to the
Enemy, and it is believed more will follow. Thus this misfortune of these
Catholic Soldiers is described by them shortly, I will not stand to enlarge
it, which neither love to do it, nor would be thought to have a delight in
insulting over misery. These two defeats given by the Hassians to the Leaguish,
might stand for a sufficient requital of the loss which they sustained by the
Garrison of Warendorp, in surprising of their Convoy of victuals: yet a third
occasion presented it self, to make them the more full amends, which they
neglected not, to their own advantage, and much hurt to the Enemy. An
Imperial convoy was going out of Westphalia to Collen, with 40. Lasts of
corn, some hundreds of men were appointed to guard and secure it from the
Luneburghers fingers. But they by their scowts being informed thereof, made
after them presently, overtooke them in the way, beat the convoy, and carried
away the provision, to the supplying their own wants, and disfurnishing of
their adversaries. And thus by the beginning of July (the time wherein this
last action was done) they had again recovered the damage, and restored their
honor (if it had been any way impaired by the misfortune of the Ritmaster
Gerard Welfer.)

But the seasure made upon the convoy, much avayled the besieged in Munster,
where the Luncherger proceeded not in that rigid manner afterward as he had
done formerly. The camp wanted victuals, and so greats body as an Army of
20000 men, could not, be sustained with that little which was left; the
General therefore held it fit to dispatch away a part of his Army to a more
convenient place, where the Horses might find pasture, and themselves take
repast, and with the other to stay before the City, and expect the issuing out
of Boning-hausen from under the Canons, with whom he had a desire to meet in
open champagni: and though his course was prosperous the one way, yet it was
not so fruitful the other: for the Leaguish Commander durst not yet put his
fortune to the Hazard, which he knew was safe while he lodged under the
Ordnance at Munster, but was questionable if he attempted to range abroad. Once
indeed he endeavored to break through the Leagner, but being driven back to
his former Hold, till the Army was quite risen from thence, he held it no part
of wisdom to undertake the like adventure. The forces employed abroad, sped
better. Ludinghausen taken by assault.
Upon Whitsunday May 25. June 4. they left the Camp, and sat down before the
strong Fort of Ludinghansen, where after a few hours the Town was taken, and
the Fort of Fishering adjoining unto it, the Castle only, wherein the
Imperial Soldiers lay, still held out, whether incited thereunto by
expectation of relief, or trusting to the strength of the place, the Hold
therefore was first battered by the Hassians, with 4 pieces of Ordnance, by the
space of two days, and then taken by assault May 29. June 8. when all the
Soldiers within were put to the sword, and the Hassians much comforted, by
finding much of that provision which was taken from the Convoy, the
Warrendorffers having sent part of it to this Fort, (such piety is amongst
Soldiers) to the sustentation of this Garrison.

This design proceeding thus happily, the Generals advised that four men
should be selected out of each company in the Army to march against Limburg
upon the Leghne, Limgburg forsaken by Went, and burned.
where the Imperial Commander Went, (unfurnished of victuals for a siege) lay
with his troops to keep it, if yet, we may believe that he lay therefore the
preservation of the Fort. Who not staying the coming of his enemy, confirmed
the place by fire.

This desolation thus happening at Limburg and Boninghansen, being not to be
drawn into the field, there was a counsel of war called in the Protestant
Army at Munster, and a consultation held about the next expedition. Some of the
Colonels propounded a march over the River of Lip into Saverland, to prevent
the Leaguish attempts there but the major part concluding it more necessary and
honorable, first to take in the other Towns in the Bishopric of Munster,
Borkem besieged and taken by composition.
the D. of Luneburgh and the Lieutenant General Pinsen marched directly
against Borkem, where the Commander Neginger lay with a Garrison of 800 old
Soldiers; Milander in the mean time watching about Warendorp to prevent the
excursions of the Imperial Soldiers there. At Borkem the batteries being
raised June 11/21. they played upon the Town the whole day, with 4 whole
Canons, and the Soldiers replied to the Camp in the same language, showing
their strength consisted not so much in their walls and Bulwarks, as wills and
valor. The next day many Grenades, and fire-workes were thrown out of the
Camp, into the Town, and the Swedes toward evening began to assault it but
were repulsed by the resolute Imperialists within. The Army for all this, was
not daunted, here they had pitched, and hence they would not depart, they
again renewed their Batteries, made their approaches, and omitted nothing
which was required for the effecting of their design; the besieged seeing how
the Camp was bent to the business, for 3 or 4 days made as much preparation
for their defense, as the other did to offend them; but then whether enforced
thereunto by necessity, or persuaded by reason (it is not yet come to our
understanding) they yielded the Town to the Swedes upon this composition, that
the whole Garrison should march out, with their full Arms and Baggage, and be
conveyed to Keyserswerth; and thence to pass the Rhine all which was
faithfully performed, save only the stay of the Garrison at Keyserswerth,
which should not have abode there, but passed further, as it is thought they
would, had they not been commanded to the contrary by the Generalissimo, who
perceiving the Duke of Luneburg, Milander, and Pinsen jointly and directly
marching thitherward, placed these Soldiers as praesidiaries there, to defend
that City, if these Commanders should attempt to take it.

This action at Borkem, gave Boninghausen an occasion to escape the pursuit of
the Hassians; for he seeing the coast clear about Munster, stood not to
dispute the case, whether it were fittest for him to abide still in the
Bishopric, or to go whilst he might to his friends at Collen, Boninghausen
e^capeth to Collen.
but with his 10 Regiments of Horse which were left, the number whereof was
about 2500. the medietie of what they were formerly, made such haste toward
Collen, that for the space of 12 hours, they lighted not from their horses,
and were feign to leave many wagons, and 200 horses behind him. A speedy
flight, they only staid to bait their Horses a little in the Corn before
Wipperfurde.

But this flight preserved him; Grasse-Divell the Imperial Commander in the
Bishopric, by a little time of abode there, met with a mischief which
Boninghausen thus avoided, Grasse-Devill defeated by Geise.
Geise and Hassian Commander understanding that this Imperial Gallant abode in
the Diocese of Padorborne, and not far from the Episcopal Sea, with 500
horsemen, mustered up immediately 150 musketeers, and 120 horse, experienced
Soldiers, and marched directly toward him. He met him quickly, just at the
Towns end, where he had billited his men, as he was going from thence: and
here began the skirmish; the Imperialists out-went him in number, his forces
only excelled them in hardiness, and well practiced discipline. The
Imperialists seeing the ods betwixt themselves, and their adversaries, went on
bravely, and their Dragoones at the first, gave a fierce charge upon his
Musketeers, who, attending till the storm had spent it self, and getting a
little advantage by their enemies carelessness, returned their pellets amongst
them like an Hayle-storme; the fury whereof dis-ranked the horse, and brought
them to a confused flight. The Hassian Horse, as well instructed to use, as to
get a victory, slipped not this advantage, they made after them with all speed,
and in the flight of the Enemy, took 22 prisoners, amongst whom was one
Lieutenant Colonel, two Sergeant majors, and one Captain; slew about 30 men
outright, wounded many others, themselves all this while having but one
mortally hurt, and that with a shot, an invisible dart, not to be discovered,
till it be felt, and so not to be avoided. Gods blessing (questionless)
protected them, for had not he covered their heads in the day of this battle,
the issue had been desperate, which by his assistance was thus fortunate.

Here I would stay my pen, (for I mean not yet to follow the Lantgrave, who
went from the Diet to his Army, July 7/17, and the duke of Lunenburgh toward
the Rhine, but that Hildesheim in Brunswicke-land not so famous, either for
antiquity, or the famous Temple there, the Tower whereof (if Hondius his
report be truth) is covered with gold, or the Episcopal Sea, or that it was
the native Country of Ludulphus Coloniensis, that excellent Mathematician as
the great opposition these six months made against the Swedes deserves and
requires not to be forgotten.

They which know the miseries of war, can better conceive than I can
express, what extremities this place during the time of this siege has
endured. The time for ever since it first began, has been a time of anguish
and sorrow, affrightes from without, and fears within, have still prosecuted
the Inhabitants, that their time of repose has bin nothing else, but a
tumultuary dream; if they found any rest, it was afearefull one; the rest from
their trades and occupations, whereby they should get their living. They which
had any relation to them, in this distress, could not but show some tokens of
their commiseration, and their Allies about June 1^/21, in this consideration
did their best to succor them. The event of that attempt, shall conclude this
Chapter. The Imperialists attempring to relieve Hilde sheim defeated.
The Camp before the City was conceived to be much weakened; as well because
it was thought to be much wasted before this city, as also because of the
absence of the Commissary General Anderson, who was reputed then not to have
returned to the Army, because he had lately gone from thence. Hereupon the
Imperialists which were about the River of Weser conjoined their forces,
intending to surprise the Brunswickers in their quarters, before they were
aware. But the Commissarie, who was no Carpet Knight, and went from the Leaguer
not to follow his pleasures, but had an eye to the maine still, had already
brought to the Armiefoure fresh Regiments, and was himself in person present
at that time, though they supposed him absent. To his Quarter, their Fortune,
and way led them, where they showed as much bravery in their loss, as he in
his Victory. The assault was so furious, and their sudden coming so terrible,
that the Bruswickers hopes had failed them, had not the Courage of their Leader
something quickened them. But he breaking out like sire coped up in a watery
cloud, with more imperiousness, at that time again re-animated his men to
fight. And now behold another storm falls violently upon the besiegers, the
Garrison sallied out to the succor of their friends, and renewed a Combat
that was not ended but with the deaths of many of both parties. The Brunswicke
General Mayor, was here in danger to have been taken, a Lieutenant Colonel
had caught him in his arms, and was carrying him into the City, when his
soldiers enraged at that disaster, and scorning this affront, as they
conceived, not prising their lives, as their Glory sell upon them so
desperately, as if their own liver had been too small a ransom for his liberty.
Armed with this resolution, they recovered the Commander, and with a gr^
s^ughter of the besieged, drove them back into their City. The Candle blazeth
most when it burns in the socket: the Rivers there are greatest where they
loose their names, and their glory is buried; and this was then supposed by
the assaylants, the last attempt which the besieged would make upon the
Leaguer: Hostages given and a treaty of Agreement.
for within two days after, they desired a conference and exchange of
Hostages, till by conference they might make their composition.

But the conclusions of soldiers in war are only conjecturall, not
demonstrative: there was good probability of agreement, and yet the success
answered not the expectation of the Camp punctually, and upon the instant the
Hostages were kept on both parties, and the treaty continued till July 5/1^,
the camp and the City herein only differing, That the Leaguer would exclude
the Jesuits and Friars, whom they conceived (perhaps not without cause) to
have bin abbettors of the soldiers obstinacy; the Garrison unwilling to have
them forgotten in the treaty, and left to the mercy of the Conquerors: the
Swedes would have proceeded against them as they thought they had deserved in
justice; the Garrison protected them against their displeasure, in a religious
observancy and respect of pierie. But their respective reverence, to their
Order of Priesthood, was not the only thing which prolonged the Treaties the
soldiers were as loath to loose the opi^ion which the World had of their
Valor, in so long with standing the Sweadish army, as to forsake their sooting
in H^ldesheim, they wanted power and provision to keep is longer by force, and
because they could fish no longer in the troubled wat ^us, they would cast one
hook in ^ou the^eleare stream* Some relie^e they expected from the in friends
abroad, and till that came, they subtly delayed the time, by propositions of
Articles of peace, which would otherwise have^in too lavishly spent in wan: and
their confederates July 7/17, again indeauored to have delivered them, by
making a suddenassault upon the Sweads in the trenches though, as apppeareth by
the sequel it could not be done either so secretly or so fortunatly, as they
imagined: the Story is thus. Three Imperial Garrisons, one at Neustatt upon the
river of Glein, two other at Ny^nbourg and Mynden, both upon the Weser,
conioyning with two Spanish Regiments, which came from Munster under the
command of the Colonels Waldecken and Shelhamer, A second attempt of the
Imperialists upon the Army.
brought together about 4000 horse and foot to Neustatt, the place for their
Rendevouz, the day abovenamed, with a purpose to fall upon the Camp before
Hildesheim, before the Leaguers should know of their intention. But the
Swedish, Commissarie Erich, Anderson, and the General Major Albrecht of Vstar,
being informed the same day by their scouts, of their meeting, and suspecting
the cause of their banding thus together, immediately called a Council of
War, and concluded without delay the same night, before these troops of
strangers could come thither, to make an assault upon the City about midnight,
and so try whether they could prevent the enemies counsel, in taking that by
force, which they had been about by the space of almost a for tningh^ by
conference and composition. All things, against the hour appointed were
provided for the business, the forces were drawn out of all the three
quarters before the City, lodged, covered, and all things made ready for the
assault, save only the watchword was not given, which a sudden rain fell so
violently, that the Soldiers could neither conveniently handle their ^pons,
nor take firm footing upon the slippery ground, which made the Commissarie
give order to the Army, to defist from that course, and to conclude upon
another, which was (thus) put in practice the day again appearing.

The Commanders, first suspecting, by the squibs and fire works within the
City, and hanging out of lanternes upon the steeples, as a sign to their
Imperial friends, and afterward assured by the spies, that their enemies were
upon their march, gave order immediately that the Soldiers should march
forward speedily, and meet together, near the Stier-waldt, and so encounter
the Enemy. What the Commanders had enjoined, the Soldiers of the Camp
quickly performed, no time was lost, for early in the morning they were gone
forward as far as Sachstatt, a City upon the River of Inder, about five or
six English miles from Hildesheim, where, hearing the Enemies Drums beating
a far off, the General major Vslar set the Army in battle array, planted the
Ordnance upon the high ground near Hilperbercke, commended the protection of
himself, and his forces to God, gave the Army the word JESUS, and presently
discovering the Imperialists nearer approaching, began the battle with the
Cannon, the Ordnance of each side playing upon the opposite party: and this
manner of sight continued by the space of three hours. The Evangelicall
Commanders then perceiving, that the Imperialists would not willingly move out
of that posture, commanded the Major of Shonaich with 400. Musketeers of the
white Regiment, and some troops of horse, to wheel about, and gall them in
their flanckers, that so he might either provoke them to join in a nearer
battle, or break them of their order, wherein they stood, and were yet as
well guarded by observation of their ranks, as protected from the Cannon by
convenience of the place which they were possessed of. It was done accordingly,
and the first attempt made against them, was performed so bravely, that the
wary Imperialists expecting that the maine body of the Evangelicall Army would
second the first onset of the Major, and suspecting, their own power, to be
disable to oppose their united force, retired suddenly, but orderly, to
Heyfede, a neighboring Village in the Diocese of Lawenburgh, and fired the
same, thinking by the smoke to hide themselves from sight of their adversaries,
and so to avoid them. But the General Major, with the maine body of his Army,
was already advanced forward, come so near them, that he had them in his eye,
and pursued them so fast, that within an English mile, or little more, they
were feign to make a stand, and put it to trial, whether they might save
themselves by battle, when they could not escape by flight. The Avantguard of
the Evangelicall had the first bout with the Imperial Rear, wherein, though
at first the Imperialists stood to it stoutly, yet their power of resistance
was soon so much weakened by the courage of the Swedes and Brunswickers, and
the diverse charges made upon them, that within one hour, they fled in a
disorderly confusion, and the rest of the Army within as short a space, was so
utterly routed, that of 2500. horse, scarce 250. returned to Newstatt: their
foot forces being at the first 1500* were almost all slain upon the place,
save some few which hid themselves in the Forest, the moorish ground, and the
corn. About 1000. prisoners were taken, and carried to Sachstatt, Collenberge,
Pattensen, and Hanoner (three Cities upon the Gleine) amongst which were two
Lieutenant Colonels, two Majors, seven Ritemasters, three Captains, eleven
Lieutenants, and nine Cornets, and the Evangelicall carried away 13. Standards,
four great pieces of Ordnance new cast, and all their Ammunition. This was a
memorable victory, as advantageous to the Swedes, as pernicious to the
Imperialists (the Cities of Mynden, and Nyenburg were hereby weakened, and the
state of Hildesheim, which before was but languishing, hereby grew desperately
evil, and out of hope of remedy) was not to be passed over, without an Hymn
of thanksgiving in the public Congregation, which was done so religiously by
the whole Army, in the great Church at Sach-stat, the same evening, whence, as
soon as they had performed this Christian Office, they returned speedily, and
without stay to Hildesheim, to end that work, which they had been so long in
doing.

The absence of the Camp this short space, was some hinderance to the
Brunswickers before the City, and might have been much more, had not their
return bin speedy; the garrison, and Citizens within, in this short vacation,
had burned some of the Leaguers works, filled up their trenches again, and
were endeavoring to have brought a new store of provision into the City, but
the industry of the Swedes and Brunswickers quickly repaired the works, and
scowred the Trenches anew; and their speedy return prevented the victualling
and new furnishing the City with Ammunition; of both which, when they within
saw themselves deprived, they quickly yielded upon composition: their agreement
being in effect the same which was made at Hammelin, when it was taken in;
subscribed to the Articles July 13/23. being Sunday: And upon Thursday, July
17/27, (having first delivered up the Swedes, and Brunswickers, whom in the
time of the siege they had taken prisoners, and a Regiment of the Evangelicall
horsemen, and two Companies of their foot, being first laid into the City)
marched forth, and took their way toward Munster with a sufficient Convoy to
guard them, according as it was concluded upon in the Articles of agreement,
the tenor whereof was as follows.

1. The Commander in the Garrison shall next Thursday in the forenoone (if the
Trumpeters which are sent to Minden with the Evangelical hostages be by that
time returned) or upon the first return of the Trumpets, surrender the City
to the Lord General Major Tylo Albert of Vsler, to the use of the high and
mighty Prince, Frederick Vlrich, Duke of Brunswicke, and then give up the
keys of the gates thereof, should have no hidden fire, or private mines, to
the danger of the City, and that presently upon the subscription of the
Articles before the Garrison departed; the Ravelin before the Eastgate, shall
be guarded by the Brunswicke General Major his forces, 200, men only being to
be appointed to that service, as few as necessity requires. 2. All the
Ordnance, Ammunition, and whatsoever else appertained to the Artillery, shall
be delivered to him whom the General Major shall assign to receive it, and
nothing shall be concealed from him. 3. There shall be granted to the aforesaid
Commander, the Commissarie Speck, all Officers and common Soldiers, horse and
foot, none excepted, free liberty to march out, with their drums and
kettle-drummes beating, their Trumpets sounding, displayed Ensigns, open
Standards, high and low Arms, bandeliers filled with powder, bullets in the
mouths, burning matches in the cocks, with their own baggage, and none other:
and to as many Citizens, their wives, widows, servants, and children as would,
freedom of egresse with the soldiers, and all jointly to be conveyed with
four troops of horse the next way to Munster, that they shall be transported
over the Weser, betwixt Rintelin and Hammelin, be provided of victuals and
fodder (that is to say, Grasse-green Oats, Fitches, and Beans) as is
convenient for them on the way, they should not be compelled to march above
three German miles in a day. That if it was possible, they should be lodged at
night during their iourny, in houses, not in the open field: that for the
safeguard of the Convoy, one Imperial Rit-master, and one Captain, should be
left in the Camp as Hostages, and till the garrison was safely arrived at
Munster, an Evangelicall Ritmaster, and one Captain should be sent to Minden,
and as soon as this Article was performed, the Hostages on each side should be
set at liberty. 4 That all the prisoners taken by either party during this
siege, should be set free, without any ransom. That those soldiers of the
Garrison, which through hunger, or by some other accident were constrained, or
otherwise had willingly served in the Leaguer should be sent back to their
first Colors, and the revolters pardoned. 5. Free leave of departure with the
garrison, shallbe granted to all, and every one of the Colonels, Counselors,
their officers, and servants, to the Thumb or Chapter, and all the Clergy in
general, Monks, Friars, males or famales, by what name soever they are called,
as also all those, which are professors of the Roman Catholic Religion, and
have lived for some time in the City, shall have license to depart, and carry
away their proper goods; But if any one, or more, or all of them (except the
Jesuits, who shall be gone and are excluded from any benefit of this clausein
the Article) would stay in the City as private men, and pay their
contributions, and impositions, they shall herein have their desire, upon
condition, that they abstain from giving intelligence, holding correspondence,
and practicing to and with the enemy, and live upon their goods, and lands; and
then they shall be protected In juribus and actionibus, in the right of Law,
and suites commenced according to Law; not be condemned upon any man's
accusation, without due examination, and orderly trial, be held as the other
Subjects, and upon their occasions to travel abroad upon their private
business, have a license to pass and repasse, without contradiction. But as
for tolleration of the public exercise of their Religion, the assigning of
one Church to that purpose, and an yearly revenew to the use of the Friars,
for their maintenance, this cannot now be granted, for they must petition his
Princely grace F. Vlrich Duke of Brunswicke, from whom they may hope for a
gracious answer, the General Mayor promising to promote their cause, and to be
an intercessor for them. 6 They shall not carry away any, but deliver up to the
officers appointed to receive them, all the Church Ornaments, the Records,
Chantries, and Registers of this Bishopric, the Cloisters, Colleges,
Diocese and City; all the Doc^es of inheritance, and other conveyances
belonging to the Church, Hospitan, and Mils, and other possessions and
jurisdictions particularly, those which they had taken away from the Senate of
the City, and some private persons, Widows and citizens, namely Captain
German, Doctor Anthony Walthausen, Doctor Susserman, Doctor Ifflands Widow,
Ludolften Berling, Henry Hansen, and others: all the Efcrits sent thither from
the Bishopric of Eglem, Magdeburg, and Halberstadt, and now remaining there,
the instructions, reversals, obligations, and certificates beloging to the
same; much less shall they export or carry with them any goods of the
Citizens, or any other stranger which brought them thither for the more safety,
only the Clergy shall have liberty to take along with them out of each
Cloister, one habit, with all thereunto appertaining, as it is used before the
Altar. 7. If any that departs thence, whether he be a Clergy man, or
citizen, or soldier, shall leave any of his own goods in trust with any
remaining to be kept for his use, they shall not be diminished, imbezelled, or
detained from him, upon any color or pretense, but restored when it is sent
for, and have a free pass for it. 8 The officers Counselors of the City, and
others, shall not be taxed, for what they perform, and subscribe ratione
officij, nor be accountable to the Imperial Garrison, for the Corn in the
Magazine. The Jews shall remain in the City, till the General Major receive
order for them from his Princely Grace, the Duke of Brunswicke, and in the
mean time be protected from pillage and plundring. 9 Lastly, to those which
march forth, is promised upon the dignity and honesty of the Commanders (to
which purpose the Hostages are also given) that they shall not be assaulted or
molested in their way, either by any Swedish troops, or any troop of the
confederate Princes, Elector, Peer, or State, and that all fained letters
which the Imperialists had formerly used by way of stratagem, especially those
under the seal of the Senate and City, should not now be questioned, or be
prejudicial to any instrument used in the action, whether (...) was a Senator
or ordinary Citizen. These Articles dated in the Camp before Hildesheim, for
their better confirmation, were sealed and subscribed on both sides, July
13/23. 1634.
The Trumpetters were in the end returned, and the people which went from
Hildesheim, in number about 2000. were brought to Munster, about July 26 old
style. I know not whether to the greater comfort of their Princely friends
there, to see them thus happily delivered from restraint, or grief of the
city in general, which being formerly pinched with hunger, and not able to
provide for it self, must now relieve these guests, especially, being
disappointed of the provision which was there expected, 33. Wagons taken by the
Hassian Commander in Rhenen.
the Hassian Commander in Rhenen, by name Raubenhaushampt, having about a day
or two before the yielding of Hildesheim, intercepted 33 Wagons laden with
victuals, which should have been carried thither, but were thus occasionally
with their Convoy brought to Rhenen.

The Armies under the Commands of George Duke of Lunembourg, Melander
Lieutenant General to the Lants grave of Hessen, and the Netherlander Pinsen,
were now disjoined: Pinsen by command of the States, under whom he served,
being enjoined: Melander with his forces entertained for the space of five
months in the States service: and the Duke required by order of the Director,
to look back toward Westphalia. The first thing the Duke intended at his
return, was to ioyn with the Swedish Commissary at the Camp before
Hildesheim, and to hasten the Siege. Being upon his March thitherward with
five whole Regiments of Horse, as namely the life Regiment, the Commander Kings
Regiment, the Bremish Regiment, Kniphausens old Regiment, and the Commander
Kaggen his Dragoniers, and his own life Regiment, and Burgsdorffe his Regiment
of foot: he received intelligence about July 10/30, of that Victory at
Sachstatt, and suddenly changed his course, going with his foot, and the
Artillery toward H^meline, directing his Horse toward the Lage, and
Gofelder-bridge: with which army he is now set down before Minden, a city
much weakened by the late overthrow of their forces, by the Swedes, Minden
blockt up by the D. Lunch. Wolfenbottle by Lohehausen.
and now having in Garrison, only 200 men which he has blockt up. The
General Major Lohe-hausen having done the like before to Wolfenbottle, a City
of strength upon the Eastside of the river Alre; in which actions they were
still busy; but how successful, we must refer it to another discourse. Let
this suffice for this time to close up the Chapter, and to make a conclusion of
these Princes actions, the Hassians before were engaged to the States, took in
Armsberg, a City in the Archbishopric of Collen betwixt the County of
Waldecke and the Mark, being one of the five Servi or Milites Imperij,
Servants or Soldiers of the Empire (for so I find them reckoned; Waldeck,
Hinten, Fulchen, Arnsperg and Rabnaw) and so a place of much importance, and
consequence.

CHAP. 7. The actions of the Lantgrave of Hessen, Duke of Luneb. etc.
THe Generalissimo of the Leaguish Army preparing himself to make head against
the Hassians, Swedes, and Luneburghers in Westphalia, sent out some straggling
troops to pillage the Countries which were under either their protection, or
in confederation with them, but stayed in person at Collen to make up the maine
body of his Army, and to furnish himself with money. He had often labored in
vain to persuade the Duke of Newburgh to transmit the forces which he had
leavied, to the Leaguish Army, and seeing that labor lost, he desired to be
supplied by him, and the Colleiners with money: A placard made by the
Generalissimo against the Duke of Newburgh.
and entreaties not prevailing with the Duke, he sent a Proclamation in the
name of his Imperial Majesty, to the Officers, States, and Countries under
the Duke of Newburgh, to this effect. Whereas, upon the complaint made to his
Majesty by the Estates and towns of the principalities of Gulick, Berg, and
the incorporated Country, that the Palatine of Newburgh, against their
privileges, and without their consent, has lately laid upon them, many
grievous and unsupportable impositions, and especially one monthly
contribution; his Imperial Majesty has given us an especial commission to
examine and redress these grievances; for due execution of which, we have
lately summoned the said Estates to appear at Collen. We now give you to
understand, and seriously charge you, by virtue of that power given unto us,
that you pay nothing of those contributions, which willingly, or by enforcement
you have already subscribed unto, and yielded to pay to the Duke of Newburgh,
and that you restrain your hands from disposing of the money already
collected, or to be collected upon the monthly contributions, and to keep the
sums in deposito, till you receive order from us for the payment thereof. In
which case you may be assured of the favor and protection of his Imperial
Majesty, as if you do the contrary, of his anger and displeasure. This I have
advised you of, as being and desiring to be accounted your affectionate and
well wishing friend. Mansfield.

The Dukes Countermand
This placard being published, July 22. was countermanded by another from the
Duke, who certified his subjects thereby, that the Generalissimo had no
Commission from his Imperial Majesty to take this course, that it was only a
device to affright them, and make them plyant to his motion, and advised them
to continue in their faithful obedience to him whom they had always found
their gracious Prince, assuring them also, that he would never behave himself
otherwise to them, than lovingly. The people were not more distracted with
these charges and countercharges, than the Generalissimo was perplexed with the
Dukes refractory and unperswadable obstinacy, and that he might bring something
to effect, in the end he again summoned the States of Gulick and Berg to
appear at Collen about the beginning of August, where he renewed his first
propositions; but as it is written from Collen, Aug. 10/20. could not prevail.

From these treaties it proceeded to hostile actions, the Generalissimo forced
the City of Mulhem, a German mile or thereabout distant from Collen, on the
East side of the Rhine, to receive an Imperial Garrison, and Boninghausens
soldiers began to pillage the Dukedom of Gulick, as if it had been the
enemies land, and would have proceeded to an higher pitch of violence, if the
Boores had not with all their might withstood them; but they bad them welcome
in a churlish manner, not stroaking them lovingly, but striking rudely, beating
them down with clubs, when they saw a fit opportunity. And these dealings, as
it is related by the Coloners, made the Duke after many treaties with the
Marquess de Aitona to require the assistance of the States of the Netherlands
to defend his territories.

He that has no enemy, has no friend; and they which would comply with all,
provoke him to be an adversary, which would willingly embrace his love. The
States of Gulick and Berg, it is thought, and so expressed directly from
Collen, would have yielded to Mansfields propositions, had not the Lantgrave in
the time of the treaty, sent them an admonition not to do any thing which
might prejudice the Crown of Sweden, and the confederate Princes, lest they
smarted for it: and this Menace made them suspicious of their friends too, not
daring to entrust themselves with those who had not formerly, (and it is to be
hoped) will not hereafter offer them any violence. Some Agents for the D. had
conference with the Commander in Sirburg, and it was thence conceived that the
Palatine would have joined his forces with the united Princes; but this was but
a conceit, for yet he hovereth uncertainly, and has not declared where he will
fasten. Letters from Collen and Dusseldorp affirm, that not only, while he
was mustring one company at Mulheim upon Tuesday, July 25. Aug. 4. himself was
shot either casually or wilfully, by some of the trained band through the Hat, a
Soldier in the side, and a Trumpetter through the neck, whereof he dyed the
next day following. Another strange accident is related by a letter from
Dusseldorp, Aug. 2/12. the contents whereof are thus.

July 31. Aug. 10. betwitxt the hours of 10. and 11, we had here exceeding
great Thunder and Lightening; the Lightening struck into a steeple behind the
Cloister against the Cathedral Church, in which stood above 300 barrels of
powder: the powder presently took fire, and made such a terrible noise, that
it was generally thought in the City, that the end of the world was come. This
one stroke in a moment beat in pieces about forty, or fifty houses, and there
was scarce one house in the City, which felt not the violence thereof.

The great Church and the upper part of the steeple, were totally ruined. In
the Castle the glass windows were all shattered to pieces, and many houses
utterly demolished, by this one blow; a great canon was thrown from the Walls
of the city quite over the Rhine. At Rollingen and Kaysers Werth it has
likewise done much harm. The people of this City were for the most part then
in bed and at rest, but many of them rose no more to see another day. We have
already found by digging above 60 men dead, and many wounded: and many more
we still hear crying pitifully under the buildings, which are beaten down. In
the beginning, the City began to burn in three several places, but the
flame was quenched by the industry of some people, who if they had not
bestirred themselves, the City had bin utterly ruined. The mayor part being so
astonished, that they had lost the use of reason. A strange accident, the most
Highest sometimes speaks in Thunder, and happy are they which understand that
language.

The Count of Mansfeld thus disappointed of his expectation in the D. of
Newburgh, desired of the city of Collen 37500 Rix-dollers to pay his army, and
the city of Deutz (divided from that Archiepiscopall Sea, only by the Rhine,
as Southwarke is from London by the Thames) for the service of his Imperial
Majesty, and a retiring place for his Army; but the Senate gave way to
neither, being unwilling to have the Hassian fall upon them, who lay at
Dirlaken with 5000 horse, 4000 Dragoniers, and six Regiments of foot. And then
the Abbot of Seeburg, taking occasion by his necessity, offered him a sum of
money to take Seeburg, then, and now possessed by the Swedes. It is a strong
Abbey upon the river of Se^g, which falls into the Rhine at Bonne; but he
viewing the place, and considering the fortification of it, returned thence
without assayling it. The Generalissimo as it is written from Collen, is now
upon his march into the field, but yet we find him not there, only some of
his troops have been late abroad, to plunder the Protestant countries. The
maine army is not yet come to invade them. July 30. Aug. 9, as it is reported
from the Wester-Waldt, 200 Colennish horse, and some foot, made an invasion upon
the Nassew Dilling berghish, and Saynish villages, as namely Kirspell, Grand
Burhach, and Neunkirchen, carried away their clothes, victuals, horses, and
cattle; forbear not the Churches, took some noble Personages prisoners, slew
some of the Inhabitants and spoiled what they could not carry along, to the
great terror of the country people, and about August 12/22, some of the
Generalissimo's Horse plundered the Earldom of Henneberg, and carried away
some cattle, but that Province being under the Protection of the B. of
Wertzburg, upon the complaints of the inhabitants to him, and his negotiation
with the count, they were promised to be restored, though it be yet uncertain
whether this promise be performed; and to continue the Story of the
Generalissimo, it is written from Collen Aug. 5/15, that two Regiments which
he had thought should have served under him, namely that belonging to the
Prince of Barbanson, and that of the Count of Isenburgh, marched that present
day over the Rhine, toward the Spanish camp near Mastrich, as being
appointed to the King of Spaines service.

The Lantgraves army was not yet returned from the Rhine, August 2/12, he
kept his head quarter at Dinslaken, where he expected the return of his
Lieutenant General Melander, whom he had sent to the Prince of Orange, who was
then with the States Army, at the common Randevouz, Niemegen; The Duke of
Luneburg in the mean time slacked not the time of action, but having blocked
up the City of Minden, as it is mentioned elsewhere, sent part of his forces
from thence to Buckenburge, which took the Town July 21/^1. The garrison upon
the Luneburgers first coming betaking themselves to the Castle, which they
surrendered also; July 28. Aug. 7. all the Soldiers which lay in it taking pay
under the Duke, except the Commander Job Henstman who was a Captain, and his
Lieutenant, one Sergeant, and a few of his servants, which were conveyed to
Mynden. This City famous for its first foundation, as being given by Widekind
Duke of Saxony, upon his conversion to Christianity, to Charles the Emperor,
to build there a Bishops Sea, and now of note both for traffic, being
accommodated with the Weeser whereon it stands, and strength, was fully, after
the taking of Buckenburge, besieged by the Duke; who, July 26. August 4. caused
many bottomes to be brought from Hammeln to Rintelin, that he might make a
bridge of boats over the River near the fort of Berg, for the service of his
Army. The Commander Shelhammer, to impeach the Dukes progress, sallied forth
upon him, and gave him fierce charge, but was beaten back with much loss by
the Swedes, and Luneburgers, who entertained him with hostile fury. This is a
valiant Gentleman, and it is thought even by the Dukes Army, would have done
more for the defense of the City than he has done hitherto, had he not been
crossed in his course by the Earl of Wartenberg, which lies in the City
also, who being ambitious of supremacy in command stands upon terms of
competition with the Collonell, which being a known expert Soldier, and
deputed to this Province by authority, will not submit to the Count, nor be
over-topped by him. Such heart-burnings, and differences betwixt men of
Authority, seldom breeds good blood, they spring from undigested conceits,
and these evil humors, make the whole body liable to sickness.

The Duke hereupon caused the Zigell hoff or Tyle host before the City to be
assaulted, which he took, together with one of the Redoubts, and then
immediately assaulting the great Sconce upon the Bridge, he took that also
with little loss. Where he presently raised a battery, and planted his
ordnance, and was before mid-August come under the Cannons, and secure from
hurt by shot of Cannon.

From Brunswicke the letters bearing date the 23. of August, report that it
cannot long hold out. Here it is fit to add some other letters, which write
thus: Upon Monday last August 11/21 about 4. in the afternoon, Frederick
Vlrich Duke of Brunswicke, after he kept his bed 6. weeks, because of a
broken leg, dyed, and now it is thought, the Duke of Luneburg who is the next
heir to the principality, will be more forward in the business to clear his
country.

The Lantgrave of Hessen after he had visited the Rhine, and conferred with
the Prince of Orange a Wesell, returned to the Ruhr, and I find him in his
headquarter at Blanken-stein, August 4 14. thence he marched to Shwierdt, and
came from thence in person upon Monday, Aug. 11.21. to Hamme (which was taken
by his forces in the end of May last) where he mustered the 4. Companies
consisting of 500. men which lay in the City, joined to them 2. Companies more
consisting of 260 men, for whom the Citizens must provide meat, and drink,
because the common contributions of the Country are not paid orderly, and
returned to his quarter at Shwierdt in the Westhoven, whither he summoned the
Governors of the Earldom of Hamme to appear, and had with them some private
conference, the effect whereof is not yet discovered. I find not either
himself, or the maine body of his Army yet in the field, only some Hessish
forces I meet withal under the Earl of Eberstein besieging Stathergen, and
those again as it is written from Collin were raised by the Leaguish Colonel
Wendt of Cratzenstein, and Perse, who marched against them with two small
field-peeces, and 2000. men: and that Colonel Giesen having possessed himself
of the lower City of Marsberge, spares not by battery, to attempt the
winning of the higher City, but with what success, it is yet uncertain; time
is mother of truth, and will discover it.

The actions of the Electors of Saxony, etc.

The Actions of the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg. CHAP. VIII.
THe Army of the Saxon Lieutenant General Arnheim, after the battle at
Liguitz, being refreshed with two days r^st at Liessa, and provisions for
Viands at Broslaw (as has been related in our former book) was divided, by
his direction, into two bands, as well to make the more quick dispatch, as also
because be knew that the powers of the Imperial party, being sca^rered, and
much impared by his former victory, were not able to make any strong
resistance. One part of the Army passed the Oder-bridge at Breslaw, and went
directly Westward toward Oels and Namslaw, the other, which himself commanded
in person, marched East-award toward Olaw, a place distant from Namslaw 7.
German as English miles. Neither of the Armies, at either of the places, found
the least opposition* only, Olaw burnt by the Imperialists
at Olaw the Governor Rostick being aduartised of the Saxons coming, burnt
the town, and betook himself to the Castle.

Namslaw and Oles taken by the Saxons.
At Oels, the Go^rnour, D^n (...) Languiall yielded presently to the merry of
the Saxons, and was taken prisoner with his ^00. soldiers. From Namslaw the
Imperialists were fled before the Saxons could come thither, yet upon pursuit
were overtaken, and 100. of them made captives and brought to the Camp.

The Saxons expeditions were so quick and fortunate, that within 20 or 22
days they had recovered, besides the places aforenamed, Steinaw, Drachenberg*
Micl^ts, Beinstat, and others; almost cleared Silesia of Imperialists, opened
the way into Poland, thence to fetch provision of Victuals: and the price of
Cattle, Salt, and other necessaries for sustentation of life, was fallen to
the moiety of what it had been formerly.

In the time that the Saxon is thus busied in Silesia, General Banniere
marched from Franckford upon the Oder, Crossen besieged by Banniere.
where, with the Town, he had taken 20 Standards and Ensigns) against
Crossen, a place of note in the Marquisare bearing the none of Dunehy; and the
region about it called by that general name, being one of the 7 Provinces of
this Elect ore dominion Here being set down about May 27 June 3. he sent away
the Swedish Col^hell Borgsstorff, into Silesia, to the General Arnheim, to
advertise him of therecou^rie of Franckford, and to aduse with him, about
further proceedings. Nothing was wanting to serve him in his journey, had not
himself been too secure a sufficient co^oy of har die Soldiers, as well armed
and provided of weapons to offend an enemy, as resolved to fight upon
occasion, and as well disciplined, as either armed or resolved; was sent to
attend him: With this Guard he passed b^y^d great Glegaw, when thinking
himself out of changer he^ missed his safeguard (a certain evidence that he
was more adue^ons then wise) for his friends had no sooner left him, Colonel
B^rgsstor taken by Crabats.
but the Crabats* or Croatians (for they have not this name from any peculiar
service wherein they are employed, but their Country) met him, set upon him,
wounded, and carried him prisoner to great Glogaw. Hence, some sew days after,
as he was to be transported to Lignitz; the same fortune which appeared in so
many forms to the old Romans in the second punicke war, seemed also to play
in the like manner with this Commander.

There (to speak in the phraise, though not in the language of Sabellicus)
she^ struck the Roman Commonwealth at Ticinum, broake it at Trebie, laid it
flat down at Thrasymene, afflicted it at Crunae, began to lift it up, and
cherrish it at Nola, raised it in Spain, restored it at Metaurus, and
proclaimed it victorious at Zama: and here she affrighted the Colonel by the
unexpected assault of his enemies, wounded him by his captivity, comforted him
again by the sudden coming in of his friends, Collo. Borgsstorff delivered by
the Saxons.
some Saxon troops, as he was on the way toward Liguitz, and restored him to
his former liberty, and dignity, by means of his valliant confederates,
which beat the Guard that carried him, delivered the prisoner, and brought
many of them which erst insulted over him, to his late restrained estate.

Crossen surrendted to the Swedes and Brandenburguish, by composition.
The City of Crossen at the first seemed as if it meant to hold out, and was
assured of succors, doing some damage with their Ordnance to the Army* But
this resolution held not long, in a few days their Powder and Shot was spent,
and the place surrendered to the Swedes and Brandenburgers, upon these Articles
following, which were first subscribed by David Dromand, on the behalf of the
Leaguer; and Maximillian of Stegken, on the behalf of the Imperialists, June,
2.12. for their further confirmation.

I That the Imperial Garrison, should march forth with white staves, and the
Soldiers, as many as would, should take pay under the Swedes. II. That the
Commander and the Captains, should have each man a Wagon laden with baggage,
and with the Lieutenants* Ancients, and Sergeants, should be safely conveyed
toward Morania. III. That they should not dare, or attempt, to carry away
Neyle, or spoil any of the Ordnance, Ammunition, or other instruments of war,
which did not belong unto them. IIII. They should not pillage, oppress, or
rob any of the Citizens, by taking away their goods, much less do any
disparagement to their persons. V. That they should deliver all the prisoners
they had in their custody, and set them at liberty without any exception. VI.
That the Conuoy was returned safe again to the Army, they should leave two
sufficie ^e men for Hostages, which afterward should be carried to places of
safety. Lastly, that the Capitulation being subscribed, they should instantly
surrendes their Ourworkes, and the innermost gates, to the Camp, they should
guard them that night with their own men, and early in the morning march
forth.
All this was done accordingly, and the next day, June 3.13. 900 of the
Soldiers taking pay under the Swedes, as they write from Leipsig June 13.23.
the rest of the Garrison marched from thence, according to the order of the
first Article, leaving behind them, besides their Ordnance and Ammunition, 10
Ensigns; and took their way through Poland, to go into M^rania.

This place thus happily taken in, Glogaw besieged.
the Swedish Bauniore marched directly against the great Glogaw in Silefia,
there to join his Forces with the Saxon Lieutenant General, because this was
a Town of strength, and had formerly done them much annoyance: Here these two
Commanders having enquartered their Armies, one on the East side of the Oder,
and the other on the West: Nothing was omitted by the which was either for
their own defense or offense of the enemy; and the besieged showed as much
care in fortifying themselves, to the measure of their means, as courage in
opposing their weak forces against such warlike preparations: The besiegers
planted their Batteries, and made their approaches so near the City, and so
speedily, that within less then five days, they were so nigh the walls, that
they might cast stones into the Town, and the beleaguered (forcing the
Lutheran citizens within to help them) strengthening the walls with
palizadoes, to prevent the scaladoe, threw many boards into the ditches,
through which they had driven many nails, to lame the the feet of the
Soldiers, if they should attempt to assault them, and shot fiercely from the
Town, upon the Camp, as though they intended to pay them in their own coin,
fight it out to the last, and never come to terms of composition: But their
resolutions altered with the occasion; discretion commanded them to yield to
necessity, which had broke them utterly, if they had not bowed of their own
accord, and willingly; succors they expected, and that at the first encouraged
them, and four regiments of Imperial horse endeavored to relieve them, but
sailing of their purpose, the spirit of the Garrison drooped, Glogaw yielded to
the Saxons.
and the City was given up by composition, June 7.17. upon these Terms
following.

I. That the Governor should march out of the City, Castle, and Thumb, or
Cathedral Church in the Evening, about 4 of the clock; and surrender the same
to the Saxons. II. The Commander should neither himself, pillage, do any
injury or violence, to the poor Citizens, nor permit any of the Soldiers, at
his departure to do it. A good proposition, and well advised of, it shows
that the Army came not against the City to oppress it as an enemy, but relieve
it as a friend. III. That if there were any private Mines, or secret fires
hidden in the earth, the Commander before his going out, should discover and
reveal them. IIII. That all the Canons and Ammunition should be left in the
City, be delivered to the Saxon Lieutenant Colonel of the Artillery, no Piece
should be concealed from him; if any were hidden in the earth, or any other
secret place, the Commander should disclose it. V That all the prisoners which
heretofore had served in the Saxon, Brandenburgish, or Swedish Army, whether
they were taken during the time of the Siege, or before, should be set at
liberty. VI. That all the Ensigns and Standards should be delivered to the
Saxons. VII. That, because it was sufficiently known, that some Wagons laden
with Baggage, and belonging to diverse Regiments which were beaten at Lignitz,
were brought into that City; therefore the Commander should be bound to deliver
them to the Saxon forces. VIII. That none of the Garrison Soldiers should be
compelled to take pay under the Swede, Saxon, or Brandenburger; but that as
many as would willingly serve under these colors, should not be hindered.
Lastly, that the Commander, his Officers, and Soldiers, should march forth
safely, with high and low Arms, their Drums beating, their Bandeliers full of
Powder, Bullets in the mouth, and burning Matches in the Cock, with all their
own Horses, and Baggage, and whatsoever else ^ppertained unto them properly,
and for their better security in the way, should be guarded with a sufficient
conuoy to Glatz.
This is the sum of the Articles of agreement, and it was an honorable
composition on both sides; the Evangelical Generals did hereby give a good
remonstrance of piety, neither thirsting after blood, nor insulting over the
enemy, by propounding any thing which might be prejudicial to his honor and
reputation: And the Imperial Commander gave a good testimony of his wisdom,
not being ^bstinate, when his estate was desperate, and courage in the two last
Articles, whereby he kept his own good name untainted, and the Soldiers
credit vnviolated.

The Imperial Boot-halers of Lignitz surprised.
During the time of this siege, a troop of 500 Imperialists which came forth
of Lignitz, had plundered some Villages, and little Towns the labors,
intending to return with the spoil to Lignitz* these the Colonel Gersdorff,
Commander of the garrison as G^rlitz, surprised with his Regiment; sl^w most of
them and recovered the booty again. The General Arnheim at Dresden, acquaints
the Elect. with his good success.
And so fortunate have the Saxons lately bin in Silesia, that upon June 11.
when the Lie^enant Gener^ll Arnheim was come in person to Dresiden, to acquaint
the Elector with his good success, and the General major D^mer the same day
had pre^e^ed to the Prince the Cornet^ and Ensigns which were gotten in the
battle or Lignitz* The Elector straight gave order to have the some day, both
in his Chapel at the Court, and in the City Church a Sermon of thanksgiving
for the former blessings which GOD had bestowed upon him, Public prayers and
thanksgiving.
and solemn prayers for continuation of his mercies hereafter. A good evidence
of a religious grateful heart, comm^ndable in all sorts of men, but especial
in a Prince, whose example gives life to his actions.

A Treaty of Peace at Leuthmaritz.
May 20.30. in that very time when this Elector was so victorious with his Army
in Silesia, the King of Hungary sent him a kind Letter; whereby he ga^e him to
understand, that his Imperial Majesty, his father, had given him full power
and authority, to Treat with him of a Peace; that he doubted not of the good
issue of the T^ea^y, the propositions on the Emperors part, being so
reasonable, and the means he had to effect it so likely and probable, that he
had sent to Leuthmaritz (a Town bordering upon the Lower-Saxony) his
Commissioners, the Earl of Tran^mansdorff, the Lord of Qu^s^nberg, and Doctor
Ge^herd, with full instructions and authority, and did therefore desire him to
send his Ambassadors or Deputies, to the same place, that so this negotiation
might be brought to some conclusion.

The name of Peace is so glorious a name, that the Heathens, in their
blindness, esteemed it as a Deity; and the Christians yet account it, as a
principal Temporal blessing, when every one with security, and dreadlesse of
an enemy, may repose himself under his own Vine and Fig Tree. He that will
not seek it, has the character of an unwise man; but he that shall refuse it,
if offered sincerely and without fraud, has put off all humility; man, by his
propper inclination, being a sociable creature not armed by Nature, out by
^ightinesse of heart^ malice, and desire of revenge: And most true is that
Apothegme of Augustus Caesar, mentioned by Caspinian, It is the only evident
taken of an ambitious Spirit, for the pomp of a vain triumph, or a La^rest
Wreath, is h^zard the (...), and security of the people. This motion therefore
was not unwelcome to the Elector, who, according to the Kings desire, June
2.12, sent his Commissioners, The Lord Nicholas Gebbard of Mel^itz, a Pricy
Counselor; the Lord Frederick of Metsh, President of the upper Consistoriall
Counsels Doctor Oppell, Counselor of the Count, to the place appointed, to
hear the points of ref^rence; where they were brought in, and entertained by
the imperial delegates, in such pomp, and mignificence, as was fit for his
dignity whom they represen^ed.

The Treaty was then immediately begin, but the good ^cesse is much to be
feared, for they write from Dresd^, June 7.17. that the Elector had c^lled his
Agents back again from Leuthmaritz, the Imperial Commissioners not
descending a^ any particular, but insisting upon universal propositions, or,
if they came to any, it was only this:

That his Imperial Majesty would presently exempt this Elector from the
execution of the decree (whereon the whole business refled) and leave the
Ecclesiastical goods which he had in his hands hareditary to him; but the rest
of the Electors and Princes, should suffer the execution to go on, till the
expiration of 100 years.


If this report be true, out of question, this Elector has not forgotten the
conclusions in the Diet at Heilbrun, and will not for his own private
interest, neglect his Confederates; but thinks it more sure and honorable,
to promote the public good, and advance in common, then to stand or fall alone.

The Imperialists about May 25. June 4. being 3000 strong, Horse and Foot,
marched out of Bohemia toward Annaberg in Misnia, to make an invasion and
spoil the Country thereabouts, but were incountred by the Saxon Colonel
Dauben, who fell upon them with his horsemen, beat them back, and with the
loss of 3. Soldiers and one Lieutenant, slew above 20 of them, whereof one
was a Ritt-master, and took 15. prisoners. And this Elector, as they write
write from Dresden, May 31. June 10. had then levied a fresh Army of 1200 men,
furnished with all things necessary, which he late kept in readiness, with
200 lusty and able Pioners, Horses and Carriages for the Artillery, to he
employed upon the next occasion; and thus they treat of Peace, with their
swords in their hands; and while they speak of it, on both sides they prepare
to battle.

Nor was it a time indeed to lay down their Arms, for the Saxon Forces were
no sooner gone from Glogaw, but the Imperialists and Crabats began to appear
again, and to do much harm in Silesia, where besides their frustraneous
attempt, for the surprisall of Bernstat, wherein they were prevented by the
vigilance of the Governor Keep. June 6.16. ten Cornets of their Horse came a
Boot-hailing to the very gates of Breslaw, fired two villages, and carried away
much Booty, so prevent which inconveniences, The Lieutenant General Arnheim
sent back to the Army.
the Elector having honored his General, with a costly gold chain, which he
gave him, advised him to confer with Banni^r, about their further proceedings,
supplied him with 3. Companies of the life Regiment, and two other whole
Regiments; one under the command of Colonel Losen, the other under Colonel
Wickstorff, and appointed all the forces lately levied, to follow him; remitted
him to the army, where Banni^r and he divided their forces, the one taking upon
him the charge of Silesia, the other setting forward to Morauia and Bohemia; a
country so torn and ruined with these late wars, that the face of it is now
so much altered, that it appears wretched; so poor, that it can call nothing
his own, the the very rest and motion of it, depending upon the rest and
motion of others.

Saxon and Brandenburgs Proceedings continued. CHAP. IX.
THe first design of this new raised Army, honored by the presence of the
Saxon Elector himself, who has engaged his own person in the expedition was
against Lignitz, Lignitz forsaken by the Imperialists.
which had formerly been an harbor of Imperialists in the lesser gusts of
War, but was now conceived by themselves, to be no sufficient shelter against
this violent storm which threatened them; yet here the Saxons stayed not,
before they came hither; the Imperialists had pillaged the City, and forsaken
it, so without stay, hence they marched in a straight line toward Sittaw, a
Town in the upper Lusatia, situate upon the River Nisse, and distant 4 Germane
miles from G^rlitz. This was a town of strength, better manned, and of more
importance, and not to be got without strokes. The Garrison here was 1200.
foot, and two regiments of horse, and were so far from yielding to the first
summons, that Sunday night, June 29, new style, as soon as the Electour was
set down before it, they made a salley upon the Army, so courageously, that
they had much endamaged the Saxons, had not they behaved themselves in that en
counter bravely; but 30, of their aduenterers were slain outright, and 80, of
them taken Prisoners, by the Saxon Colonel Gristow, upon whose quarter they
fell in this enterprise.

This action of the besieged, so much incensed the Elector, that he having
made his way a little open by battery; upon Thursday night, July 4.14. about
10. of clock, gave order to assault it in three several places; the word was
no sooner spoken, but his forward Soldiers went to the business cheerfully,
and by one in the morning, though not without strong opposition, scaled the
outworks, beat the Imperialists into the City, and followed them so close,
that they thrust themselves in at the gates after them; Sittaw taken by assault.
and so took possession of what their enemies strove to detain from them.

The issue of the assault was bloody on both sices, the Saxon Lieutenant
Colonel Wanger, was slain near a Gabeon, by a bullet of four pound weight,
and the one half of his head erased from the other, by violence of the shot;
the Inginere Peter Heart, who was appointed to have fastened the Petards to the
gates, if need required it, was was likewise slain* with 50. common
Soldiers, which atended upon that service: and the Master of the Horse to the
Duke Francis Albert of Saxon Lawenburg, received a mortal wound, whereof he
died within few hours after: This loss had the Saxon, in his winning. But
besides, that, the death of these men of note in the Army, was partly avenged,
with the like fate of the chief Commander within, Lieutenrant Colonel Fuchs,
who in the beginning of the assault, was deadly wounded, the slaughter of two
Captains, and 50 or 60 Soldiers, and captiuating of the rest; the prize there
taken, made some amends for the loss (if the life of men, and men of emenencie
may be vallewed) the City being plundered by the Souldi^s in the fury, and
the Elector not more strengthened, or enriched with the Ordinance, and
plentiful store of Ammunition. 70000 measures of meal, and corn, and other
neccessaries which he found there; then honored with the tokens of a Trophee,
twelve Ensigns, and two Standards, the spoils of the Enemy, and retords of
his Victory.

Before the Saxons had thus taken in Zittaw, the Swedish Bannier, General for
the Brandenburger, and deputed to the province of Silesia, upon the 29. of June
(Saint Peter and Paul's day,) it seems that the Catholics tutelary Saints were
at that time otherwise busied; then to look after them) entered into a set
battle with 15000. Imperialists, under the conduct of their General
Coloredoe, and got a noble victory.

Coloredo, his Army routed near Griffenburg,
The place where this battle was fought, was near Griffenburg, a City in
Silesia, which the Imperialists had burnt, and were going forward to make
havoc of the Country, when the Army of Bannier met them, and by a prosent
fight, prevented the outrages which they intended: in this battle, the
Imperialists are said to have lost three or four thousand men slain upon the
place, many Officers were taken Prisoners: thirty Cornets, 70 Ensigns, and 38
pieces of Ordnance, which were gotten by the Swedes from this puissant Army, it
was a terrible blow to the Imperial Partee, their hopes of recovering Silesia,
being set upon those forces, which being thus ruinated, have in part secured
the tenure of Silesia, to the Saxon, and exposed the Kingdom of Bohemia, to
the invasion of the Swedes, and Saxons, which at Sagaw, June 25. July 5.
concluded a joint expedition against it; and which our narration must now
follow them.

The fortune of a day does sometimes change the fortune of a Kingdom. But in
the way, I find young Maximilian of Wal^enstein, (whom because, I might rather
reckon ^ngst the B^ndetties, the noble Souldi^, making ^ill^g^ both upon his
friends, and enemies, rebelling against his ^ate Master, for the death of the
Duke of Friedland, and yet in Hostility with the Evangelical: Maximilian of
Wallst^in defeated by the Saxon Domer.
I should willingly pass ou^t as not worthy to be reckored amongst these
noble Spirits, which without any finister ^espect^, but perswation of their
conscience (as I think) ^n both sides, fight for their religion, and Country,
but that the Saxon Lieutenant Colonel D^nner, deserves an Honorable mention
for the defeature of his rouing troops; let this suffice for him briefly.

As this young Walstei^ (...) ^ging ree^ Glat^, where he holds his Randeue^z,
the Saxon Gommander, who was gunded with 400. Horse, lighted upon him, routed
his trooper, carried away 300 good Horses, and two of his Captains Prisoners.

After the di^at^h of the former business in Silesia, ^an^ (...) with his
Armyco Sit^, whether he came (...) the next day after the Town was taken; and
(...) he ^ooke his way by appointment of the Elector, into Bob^mia. Leuthmer^
which erst was appointed the place of treaty for peace, being now the first
mark he ayme^at. A Scirmish near Luthmar^z.
Thither he came about* July, 7.17. and after a small ski^ish betwixt part of
his Auant-guard, and six Imperial troops of Horse; under the command of Don
Balchasar, and the General Mayor* Lamboy, which had been abroad, and not yet
returned into the City; his for^ ^ing defeated them, pursued those that fled,
soclose, (...) they had not eseaped, had not the Horsemen ouerwent them, and
out off two of the arches of the Beidge* which before they could be repaired,
for the Army to follow after (though the work was hastened as much as might
be by the General) got them so much advantage of the way, that they were not
again to be overtaken.

The Elector having set led things at Zittaw, joined hi^ own Lieutenant
General Arnh^, to stere his course (...) the (...) pear occasionally.

Ba^, (...) foured a yes (...) this ^ing to Beutlment^ had take (...) G^st^in,
the place of (...) of the ^ate General (...) a City there sited, where the
River of Mol^ burieth it self, in the chai^ of the E^ and part of Ar^ei^
Army, by July, 16.20. was (...) to the gates of Prague, which being no O^ of
defense and weakly manned, was conceived could not hold out, but here for the
present we must leave them.

Two Pro^gies, the first at Berlin, the second ar Dresden.
I cannot here conceal two ^wo prodegies, which (a^ ^ey write (...) those pa^)
(...) happened in the Marc^^ate of Bra^d^, and Duked one of Sa^y, and at
Berlin; where about mid June, it rayned Blood and Bri^stone; the other at
Dros^, June 23. July 3. where toward Enening; at five of the clooke, the S^n
was first^ (...) white as (...), and then sudd^ly (...) dark, (...) if a mist
went over it; It appeared first in form of (...) Crow^, and then like a
^eather, red as (...), in which postures, when it had continued by the space of
ha^se (...) no^re, it returned to (...) the sanguine new till it went down;
(...) he^sing, retained the (...) bloody ^spect, till (...) be ^eere in that
Hor^on.

I ^ow that whatsoever the Physiolog^ (...) of ^rall causes, yet such (...)
bodies, is always prodig^ (...) but expect them, a (...) play on either side,
and presage probably, good or ^ll to ^ther party.

I dare not meddle here: My wish is -- (...) hosts Convert^ -- and my Prayer
shall (...) (...) out thine indignation (O LORD) upon (...), and ^hy wrath upon
them, which have not called upon thy Name.

If (...) it might pear harm been almost ^at; the Country was (...) free of
the misery of War, only 700. Imperialis^ Lignitz, and fifty or (...)
Soldiers at Ola^; under the command of a Sparnish Gol^n^ll ^here something
molested that Pro^ince; and now the ^otor of Sani^y, (like that Larian King
reported by ^bulous an^quitie to have two faces, because of his pro^derce, and
(...) circumspection) looked at once, as well behind him (...) before him;
prouides both for the f^ture quiet of Sile^a, and the extending of his
victories in Bohemia.

The Diet at Bres^.
About that time, at Breslaw, was called a Diet, where the P^eres of the
Country being met together, they concluded the ^u^tomes of that Territory,
should for ever be p^d to the Elector of Saxony; committed the direction of
all things to the Commander, and general field Commissary, the Lord Da^
Vitz^thumbe, and adiourned their mee^ing againetill the month of August; when
upon the coming (...) of the Princes and Dukes of Brieg* and Lig^, wh^aue
promised then to meare; a full conclusion should be made, and the business of
that Province dispa^ed.

The General Comissary was faith full in his trust, and first, ha^ing (...)
the Lieu^ant Colonel Tronsdorff to view the Castle of Olaw, mustered ^p the
Saxon forces, left in that Territory, whereof there were sieve Regiments, left
under the Commander S^b^der, by the Elector; supplied them with 60^ others
drawn out of the City; and The o^ Br^s^* ^ed them with Ordnance, taken from
the Imperialists by his Excellency, the General Arnheim, in the ^ell a^
Lig^tz, and left by his command in Breslaw; assigned them two Morterers, and
other materials, and appointed them to assault Olaw first, and Lignitz,
afterward, where what their proceedings have been, shall be known after.

The Saxons and Swedes Proceedings in Bohemia.
The Elector of S^y, (...) thus ordered the affairs of that (...) with his
design for the Kingdom of Bohemia; he^ he expected strong opposition:
there^ort being common that (...) (who for all that, was still at Regenspi^g)
was marching thither, with a great part of the (...), to assist Color^do,
loyned with a strong suspicion* that the King of (...) himself, would have an
eye thither ward, where he clained the Crown, and professed himself to be a
Sou^raigne King: and 7. Imperial regiments being already P^zell, and Fratenaw,
to stay the conquest^ of the S^edes, and Saxons, or hinder them in the course
of their victories. This made him strengthen his Army with a new supply of
Ammunition, and access of new forces; at length having prepared a 100. Pieces
of Ordnance, and sitted them upon their cariages, and joined his own forces
with the Swedes and Brandenburgers, under the General Bannier, whose own Army
consisted of 108. Companies of Horse, 24. whereof were leauied by the Marquess
Elect or of Brandenburg; 5. Companies by the Duke of Pomerania: 8. Companies by
the Dukes of Mechkleburg; 9. Companies belonging to, and under the General
himself immediately. 8. Companies under Colonel Wedel. 4. under the Earl of
Hoditz. 8. under Krackhawen. 4. under the Lord of Fels. 6. under the Commander
Boy; and 32. Companies of Swedes and Finlanders, all Cauallary. 126. Companies
of Foot, to wit, 30. Companies of the Elector of Brandenburg. 16. Companies of
the Duke of Pomerania. 12. Companies of Mechkleburg. 12. Companies under the
Commander Karr. 12. under Colonel Dromond. 12. under Porr Sanson. 12. under
the Command of Weduss. 8. under the Earl of Hoditz, 12. under Lohausen: and
18. Companies of Dragonneers. 6. under Lohausen. 6. under Colonel Muller, and
6. under Porr Sanson: About July 15.25. having formerly (as they write from
Vienna) taken Shlun, Leuthmaritz, La^, Brundeise, and other places, marched
over the (...) M^l^ (...) which (...) is now for^ifie^ (...) as ^e^r^y it has
b^ when it was ^ine to ^br^it to the Man of the Field, and t^ (...) not to be
taken but by Arms and a ^og^, the Armies, ha^ (...) ^g^e^ed, with what
success^, it is yet vncert^e, but doubtless, it is not to be expected that it
should (...) so easily gained as the ^axon Commander Paul Daube, took the
(...) of El^g^, upon the Eger: He^ by a strata^me though (...) was both well
fortified, and manned, and had but one way of ^o^ming to it, quickly entered,
and put the Garrison to the s^d.

And now to ^mo^ the of ^o^eedings of the^ Princes, from May, ^ll the 20. of
July; you may ^ee them come from Fra^keford upon the Oder, to Prague, the sp^
of of 120 miles, no enemy yet stopping them; a quick expedition done in a sho^
^me, and yet as ^ppi^, a^peedie.

Further Proceedings of the Duke of Saxony and Brandenburg. CHAP. X.
The Saxo: and Swedes actions at Prague.
THe Saxon and Swedish Armies being advanced from Silesia into Bohemia, found
more opposition at Prague then was expected; 12 Regiments of Horse, and 7 of
Foot, every Regiment consisting of 12 or 1400 hundred men, were there under the
command of Coleredue and Don Balthazar, two expert and valiant soldiers, which
neither omitted the fortification of the City against assauls, nor shunned the
danger of fight, to ann^y their adversaries. The hands of all the inhabitants,
whether Christians or Jews, Priests, or lay men, upon the first report of the
approaching of the Saxon Army, were employed about Redouts, Sconces, Horneworke
and the like pieces for defense, and the Arms of the Imperial soldiers were
practiced to offend the Swedes and Saxons upon their first coming.

The Saxon General being satedowne about July 15.25, upon the one side of the
City, and Bannier upon the other, the (...) upon the C^ty (...), by the ^a^ of
(...) and were replied (...) the (...) in the like kind, not (...) out some
^osse on both ^les; 8 ot ^00 men of the Saxons and Swedes being ^la^e, and 600
(...) criali^e, who had the advantage in height of ground and for^ification.

The City, in this short space, had been so liberal of their Ammunition; that
they had spent their shot, and were brought to such an exigent, that they
forced the Jews to deliver them 4000 weight of Tin to make bullers: But the
besiegers were brought to a greater want, of Victuals; the Imperialists having
before pillaged the Country about, from whence they sought for provision of
which, they were by this means disappointed. This made the Generals
unwillingly rise; Arnheim marching toward Leuthmaritz, to refresh his Army in
the Konigritz Circle, and Bannier toward F^ger.

This sudden change caused a general suspi^on in the United Princes, that the
Elector had mad^ a ^ruce for 4. weeks with the Emperor; and this jealou^
could not be concealed, but burst forth into a ru^our and the tale was
augmented by often repetition, the shadow of the truth thereof being confirmed
by report of Trumpets sounding, and Heralds proclaiming a cessation from Arms,
during such a season. Icalousie is still proiecting, and works commonly upon
the worst; It appeared quickly, that all this report was grounded but upon
imagination for the Swedes and Saxons still prepared to war; ^id the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, perceiving the fruitless hopeless issue of the
Treaty, desired leave to depart, and a Connoy to V^.

The Duke Electors daughter married to the Prince of Denmark.
The Elector himself was by this re^ned unto Dresden H^ ^ed his company at
home^ as well as Bellona abroad; his daughter was espoused to the Prince of
Denmark and the solemnity of the Nup^alls requited his personal presence. And
yet the time thus spent, was not upon (...) and R^ the common graces of such
hono^ble actions: In the mid^ of these sports, he ^st a serious eye, upon the
maine ^y^esse; an as if, these usual exercises, at such an extraordinary time,
had been but rememb^rs of what must be done in ea^est; he le^ed new F^ to
strengthen his Army, which, August 6.12. as they write from Drosden, marched to
the Army in Bohemia, which was afterward said to be complete of 30000 Swedes
and Saxons, lasty able men, trained up is discipline and desir^ to sight. His
Lieutenant General upon this occasion, retired himself thither also, for the
space of 3. or 4. days; but as one which mooned out of his properelement,
while he was not in war, in this short space dispatched his business at
Court, and having given the Bride a chain, worth 8000 Rixdollars, as an
acknowledgment of gratitude to the Saxon Family, returned to the Camp at
Melnick.

This occasion, though it thus removed the persons, who had the prime charge
in direction, did not call aside those who were deputed to the devout
attendance of the Array in religion; the Chaplains, appointed to the worship
of GOD, remained behind them, and were still busied in their ministry.

A strange apparition in the Air at Melnick.
At Melnick was the Randeuouz of the Saxon Army; and here, in time of prayer,
July 24 August ^, was a strange token in the Air, which is thus delivered by
Letters, bearing date the same day.

This day about Evening, when our Electors Chaplain was at Prayers, there
appeared a sign in the Sky, liken fiery Beam: when he had finished his
course and the Lieutenant ^enerall Arnheim his Chaplain did his offices, there
appeared another in the form of a Scepter fiery-r^d, just over the house where
he made hi^ Sermon, asso^e us Prayers were d^e, and the Chaplain had spoke
Amen; the sign vanished: It was seen of many, etc.


(...) to from (...) his (...), and (...) o^ the (...) where they (...) the
(...) to preach again; and having (...) things there* (...) are kingdom,
reso^d en^ (...) in (...) with the ^iall Army there, or by (...) the chief
C^ses and p^ces of (...), to bring the people to obedi^. Their march begot a
gener^ (...) throughout the whole ^gdome of Bohe^, at (...) e^lly, from w^ the
^e^, and all the (...) and Tryars ^led, except a few (...) which abode still in
the old City.

At Melnick there had been lately abridge of Boats (...) the (...) for the
convenient passing, and repas^ of the (...); but the (...) rising high, whether
by (...), (...) might (...) the South pare of the kingdom of Boh^, o^ by the
opening of some Sinces, as some conjectured, the Bridge was broken in pieces,
and made vselesse; and a new one was feign to be made, here (...), not without
great charge to the Electon* both man and wor^en being brought out of M^ (...)
this work.

The Armies are now jointly mar^ing forward ((...) about 10000 men which were
(...) toward Z^ickaw and (...) passage)and August 6, 1^, they came (...) the
of L^miburg, which ^h upon the Elue, about (...) from Pragas, and s^oned it to
(...) the (...) and Ga^rison, standing too stiffely (...) to re^is acmy, Li^g
taken by a^lt.
it was straightway (...) (...) by the Canon, a breach made in the walls, ^ed
by the Swedes and Saxons, who ca^ed the place before them, and in the heat of
fury* forgot to show any mercy. In the City, the ^ay (...) Co^ of I^
Drago^neers, and three companies of foo^e, these ^ou^ers, assisted with the
Ci^ons, and (...) (of which there were many is the City) and Women, which out
of a d^sporate madness, threw burning pitch, and scalding w^er upon the Army:
made what resistance they were able, thinking thereby to save themselves, but
their unadvised actions provoked the in^aders to anger, which was not pacif^ed
but with the death of above 2000, persons in that City The principal
Commander, in the midst of the slaughter, with 150. Soldiers retired into the
Castle, and (...) called down to the Evangelical Commanders, ^raued quarter,
offering to pay a great ransom. But the same tongue, which then begged basely,
had formedy rayled against the persons to whom it was now a Petitioner,
despirefully; they stopped their cares against the Petitioner, and put him to
the Sword also, with all those which were with him, except some few which
obtained quarter. Some Imperial succors were coming to relie^ this place,
but those the Army encountered also, slew many, took the Wagons, and
carriages, and formed the rest to confused flight; it was a crue^ victory, but
what also can be expected from an offerded and enragedie^ There is a fate in
Mortality; and foolish men by their w^rds, and works, call upon themselves a
swift destruction.

This City is a place of importance it yields a free passage to the Army,
either for Mora^, or Austria, and as themselves write, they can how at their
pleasure, cut off all provision from their enemy, and force him to come into
the open field.

After this victory, the Cenerall Bannier posted to the Elector at Bresden,
whither he arri^ed, August 12.22. and his Army marched toward Br^deise,
where they first got the bridge from the Imperialists, and broke it down, then
^t in pieces 200. ^abats, which were hindered in their flight, by reason of the
^uec, and lastly took the City.

Ioachims. Thal yielded by composition.
(...) is, about I^ly ^7. August (...) the Saxon Com^es Barshe^, which 5.
Companies of Horse, and ^00. Masque^ires, affaulted the Castle of
Ioachims-Thal, in which lay one Company of Imperial foot. They within desen^ed
themselves well for the space of 3. hours; but then the Saxon being got under
the palisadoes, and secured from the Musket Shot, they came to agreement,
marched forth with Bag and Baggage, high and low weapons, and were conducted
by 3. Companies of Horse (...) Shleckendmald.

The Diet at ^resl^w.
The second Sessions of the Prouit crall Diet for Silesia, was held about this
time at Breslaw, and thither his Imperial Majesty sent an Agent to advise the
Princes, and Poeres that they would continue in his Imperial protection,
assuring them that upon their obedience all things should be and remain in
their former state, and dignity. The answer of the Poeres in unknown; yet
they write from Silesias August 4.14. that they consulted principally how to
desend themselves, and aid the Consederate Princes; in the mean time it is
certain, that there was on neither part any cessation of Arms; Hirtshberg
burned by the Imperialists.
Hertshberg a fair Town in Silesia, upon then river Bober, had afforded much
Corn, and other provision unto the Imperial Army, when it went, from that
Prouine into the King dome of Bohemia, and had obtained a special safe-gard
from the Field-Marshall Coloredoe, under his hand, and seal, yet 2000.
Imperialist afterward, without respect, either of the benefit they had formerly
received from thence, or the condition made by their principal Commander,
assaulted it about July 19.29. and after a small resistance, made by the
inhabitants; set the Suburbs on fire, which was so increased by the whisteling
wind, that it took hold of the Town also; where the flames so prevailed,
that not so much as one house escaped free, but 341. Dwelling-houses, and 56.
Barnes were burned to ashes, and there perished in the fire 36. men, and 2000.
beasts. Goltz taken by Vitz-thumb
About the same time the Saxon Commissarie, Vitz-thu^be went with some forces
against Goltz, a place of strength upon the river of Oder, and having forced it
to yield to the discretion of the Saxons, 100. Soldiers that were therein,
took pay under him, but the Commander, which was a Lieutenant Colonel of
Rostocks regiment, 2. Captains, and other Officers were sent as Prisoners to
Breslaw, and then as they write from Breslaw, was the Oder totally cleared,
till beyond Oppelen: about which time also, one Partee went from Brieg, toward
Neuse, where the Imperial General Mayor, lay with 600. men, and brought away
above 400. head of Cattle, and other booty: and another Party apprehended a
Captain of Rostocks regiment, with his 20. horsemen, and brought them
Prisoners to Brieg; Lieba taken by Onslat.
and the Commander Bosen, which lay in garrison at great Glogam, took the
City of Lieba by Onslat, in the night; put 70. Imperial Musquetires to the
sword, and obtained a rich booty: so that now as they write from Breslaw,
Silesia is fully clear of Imperialists, save only at Neuse, Lignitz, and
Olaw, which last, is thought, will quickly be surrendered, because the Colonel
Roland, who commands therein, had some conference about July 24. August 3.
with the Saxon Lieutenant Colonel Pebitz, to that purpose.

AN Extract of some principal Letters from Holstein; as namely from Husem,
Bredstadt and Shlesewick, in which is described an perfect relation, of the
terrible and great Flood; and what harm it has done at Fundren, and in the
same Circuit and Countries; as also at Bredtstedt and in the same Circuit and
Countries, and what Villages, Churches, Schools, together with an innumerable
multitude both of men and Cattle perished, and were drowned in this Flood; as
also of the ouerwhelming of the Nordtstrandt; all which happened the 12.22. of
October. 1634.
Imprinted at Shlesewick. 1634.
Dear Brother,
I Cannot but write unto you of our sorrowful and miserable state and
condition in these parts, namely, of the late great deluge of water, which
subverted our whole Country; washed away and overwhelmed both Villages,
Churches and Schools, insomuch that it is not known where one or other
neighbor dwelled, and it is not known what became of Friends,; Father,
Mother, Sister and Brother: So that the misery of this our Country is so
great, that it cannot sufficiently be decribed. Many Market Towns and Villages
were drowned and overwhelmed, together with many thousand men, some few which
escaped, saving themselves upon the great and high walled houses. The
Ocheholmer Church was whole carried away by the water, and left in the Long
Horn; and in Ocheholm were drowned above three hundred men young and old,
together with the Minister of the said Town, and above six hundred heads o^
Cattells, besides Sheep and Hogs: Moreover, you shall know, that the most
part of the Town of Earoltofft, together with the Ministers and Inhabitants
thereof are drowned: the Repshlegers Tents, together with all the people that
were in them are likewise driven away and overwhelmed; Further, our good friend
Peter Shlusen-Bawer, together with his tent and sixty men is carried away and
drowned, and the water did flow over all Diecke; hence ye may easily judge how
high the water has been in these parts: In Bargen Kirchspiel were drowned
above 250 men, together with all the Cattle; Sted^, Sandt, the whole
Kirchspiel, Sublomers Brugge, and both Krugen, together with all the People,
Children and Cattle are also likewise drowned and overwhelmed, and no man can
see where a dwelling house has been: Wideken-hardl and Mohr, and all the
Country of Hardl are overwhelmed, and almost all the people and cattle in it
drowned; and betwixt Wannegardt and the old Dicek, in the way toward the Mohr
the country is so spoiled, that the ground will hardly be tilled any more. The
1828 of October, the Breitsleders went abroad with Boats, and rowed up and
down the country, they carry along with them, fresh water, Beer, and Bread,
and victuals, thereby to save some folks, if they can find any yet alive. At
Ro^rbeck in one of the Kirchspiels, were drowned above 1000 persons, together
with all the Cattle both small and great: Further you shall know, that the
whole Nordstrandt is drowned, and all the Goods, Wares, Woods, Forms: Chests,
Trunks and other Wares lie on our side in such a quantity, that if some hundred
Wagons carried all the year long, they could not carry all away: there were
likewise ships on the other side of the Nordstrandt, which sailed quite over
the land, and lie now here in the Geest upon the dry land in the Sand, and must
be carried away again in pieces. The flood also has done so great harm in
Windinghard and Ries^mohr, in Eyderstade and Nordw^t Dilma^h^, that in the m^st
places, of 100 men, there escaped not above 8 of 10. and of the cattle not
about 2 or 3. The loss is so great, that no man is able to express it; and
Churchyards here are daily used for burial of the dead bodies; and they have
every day enough to do to bury them. In S^entebull is not one man lest alive.
There happened likewise a strange example, for there was found a dead man,
which was very well known, and near him was found lying a great Dog, whom the
people chased away, and afterward went for a Wagon to carry him to the
Churchyard, but when they came back again to fetch away the dead corpse, and
to bury it, they found there again the aforementioned Dog, which had dug
a hole with his feet, and put the dead man's head into the hole, and covered it
with earth, what he meant by it, or what the signification of it was, we do
not know, notwithstanding the people carried the said dead man away, and buried
him. The miserable and doleful estate and condition of ^d^stadt and
Stablehalm, for breuities sake, and because I am in haste, I will not describe;
By reason of the great sorrow and sadness, I can write no more.

H^sen. October. 19 29. 1634.

CERTAIN MISCELLANY RELATIONS, OR PASSAGES, Concerning Rome, Italy, France,
Spain, the Low Countries, Turkey, Poland, Rushia, Swedland, and elsewhere.
Containing many very remarkable things, done this last Summer, and since.
Written, by the same Author.
Imprinted. 1635.
THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE CARDINAL INFANT INTO BRVXELLS.
THe fourth of November, about four or five in the afternoon, the Cardinal
Infant entered into Bruxells by the Louaine gate, though he had been
entreated to stay a little longer, that the Citizens might have time to make
there preparations.

He was clothed in crimson veluer, trimmed with plate lace, he had his sword
by his side, mounted upon a white horse, attended with Torches of white wax,
and accompanied with above a hundred Gentlemen of the Country, richly suited.

Betwixt the two gates, in a Basin of Gold inammelled, they presented to him
the Keys of the Town, which he took, but restored them again immediately,
and it was observed that he did it with his left hand.

The Queene-Mother stood at her window to see him pass by, whom as soon as
he perceived, he put off his hat ten paces before he came before the
window, and did not put it on again, till he was passed by the like distance.

He made his first descent at Saint Argoule, where they sung Te Deum: and
thence passing by the Towne-house, where triumphant P^ge^s wo^e errected for
his entertainment; Queene-Mother of France.
he went to the house of the Queene-Mother, who received him with all respect.

As soon as she was advertised of his Higenesse approaching, she came from
her private Chamber, into the Presence Chamber, whence as she was making a
step or two into the Hall, which looks down the stayers, the Jnfante
himself came up, did her reverence, and saluted her, so they entered into the
Queens Chamber, where he stayed about a quarter of an hour. The Mounsiers
Wife.
The Princess Margarite was there before him, and because he did not salute
her at this interview, the Marquise d' Aytona excused him saying, that the
Infant deferred it only till he should come to her House.

From thence his Highness went to the Court, where he supped with the Duke,
of Newburg, and the prince Thomas, who left a void space betwixt themselves and
him; this night, and two other following nights Bon-fires were made in all the
streets of Bruxells.

The 5. day he was before Saint Argoule, in the habit of a Cardinal,
accompanied with the whole Court.

The 6. the prime Courtiers came in pomp to complement with him; and the
Magistrate of the Town, presented him with the best Wine of the Country,
according to the custom. All the Provinces also prepared by their deputies, to
congratulate his welcome.

The Chapiters and Churchmen did the like, and they of Tourney sent their
Bishop and Deane for the same purpose. But it fell out unhappily at Milotet,
the Guard of the Queene-Mother were forbidden to wait, by father Campaign
companion of father Chanteloupe, for not keeping the window before the Queen.

The 8. about noone, the Sieur d' Amontot, Lieger of France, went to salute
him, and to have audience, attended with twenty French Gentlemen: But his
Highness having told him, that he must enter alone, he answered, That it was
not the custom of France, and that he would not come in without his
attendants. This was granted, and he complemented with the Prince, who was then
in a red Hat, and a Cloak of the same color.

CHAP. XI. The Actions of France, Italy, Spain, and the Low Countries.
HOw happy are we here, which under a blessed King, enjoy the blessed fruits of
peace? the people of foreign Nations speak of it with admiration (for so I
find it in a French abstract of the present affairs of the World, dated July
6. Stilo novo, Come l'Angleterre est detachee de tout le monde, etc. As England
is divided locally from all the world, so is it also disburdened, of those
afflictions, with which other people are incombred) and we our selves cannot
think of it, without thankfulness to God, by whose mercy: and to his
Vicegerent our Sovereign, by whose wisdom, and justice religiously grounded
in himself concionable and indifferently ministered to us, divinely blessed,
and happily continued, we reap that Harvest, which other Realms would feign
but see in the blade and cannot; they which know him, may see in him the true
character of Kings in the beginning, whom the Historian witnesses not to have
been raised to the height of Majesty by popularitie, but their known
moderation; and they which can look back to almost 80 years past, if they
but consider, how mercifully for so long time together, the Lord has dealt
with this Nation, may conclude that observation of Bodin to be false, that
there is commonly an intermixture, and successive vicissitude of good, and
evil Princes; ever since the first entrance of our Deborah, by whose hand the
Gospel was so planted, that it took root in this land, we have lived in the
Sunshine of true quiet, by the means of those two nursing Fathers of our
Israel, the royal Father now which God, and his Son our anointed King now
(and may this Now be long) with us whose prosperity, we have just cause to
pray for, our safety depending upon his, to whom that Elogium given to Charles
the great, the Roman Emperor, suites properly tantae est integritatis ut nulla
aetas superiorem, nedum parem habuerit, Look about the world, inquire into all
ages past, and present, in respect of his integrity, it will be hard to find
his equal, impossible to find his superior. We that be his subjects must
needs confess this truth; We under him, find that easy access to true
sanctimony, by the free passage of the Gospel, which while Rome boasts of, is
a Nursery of treason, and conspiracies, the venomous effects of cankred souls.

But to come to our Narration. The City of Rome challenges a superiority of
power (how justly or unjustly, it is not here to be controverted) and
precedence in place over and before all the world, and in this History I shall
be so favorable to her suite as to record her first, though I find her not
so active as passive adorned with robes of triumph, but mourning. The death of
the Cardinal Virile, and his superstitious burial in the habit of Saint
Francis, put the City for a time to some lamentation, but his large Legacies,
and pensions bequeathed by his Will 12000. crowns to one, 100. crowns yearly
pensions to others, and 60 crowns given in the same nature to a third sort of
people, made them quickly pull the onions from their eyes and forget the fate,
which was natural to him, and so beneficial to them. The only memorablething,
which is worthy of record is this About May 13. a Friar of Ancona, named
Cherubim Saraphim, of the age of 38. years, of the order of the Minorites,
being clapped in prison by the Commissaries of the inquisition, broke out of his
chains, and by slipping down by his bed-cords, for a time escaped. Notice
hereof being brought to the Bishop of that Sea, a Proclamation was presently
published, menacing death, confiscation of goods, and Excommunication to all
persons; which should conceal him, and promising 500. crowns to him that
should reveal him, and deliver him into the hands of Justice; The people upon
this promise, were very careful in the search after him, the ways were laid
every where, the marks given out, whereby he might be easily known; and it
was almost impossible, but that he should be again apprehended. A Franciscan
attempteth to murder the Pope by Sorcery.
And yet for all this, five days he travailed undiscovered, and was gone as
farre'as Rietti, a Village within two Italian, or English miles from Naples,
100 miles from Rome, when presently he returned to Folegni, where he had a
familiar friend, in whom he reposed much confidence, and from whom he had
received many kind letters and presents, during the time of his late
imprisonment; The acquaintance between the Friar and the Folignian, was not
unknown to one Martinengoe a Commissarie of the Inquisition, who suspecting
what the Friar intended, took Post, and came to Foligni; about the same time
this Friar entered into the gates of that City. At his first arrival he
published the Proclamation made at Rome, against the Minorites, set a strong
Watch, at all the gates of the City, which artested the Friar, as he would
have fled from thence, upon the marks which he was set out by, and there he
was lately in prison, laden with irons, and watched narrowly, for they
proceeded against him, says the French relation, from whence I had this story,
leutement, not speedily, but softly as in matter extraordinary, and of great
importance. I know not whether this Franciscan was more wicked, or unfortunate,
more wretched by his execrable mischief, or last apprehension; (if yet, that
may be any way ascribed to fortune, which is done by the providence and finger
of God) the powers of Heaven, appeared to be offended at his former escape, a
sudden tempest of thunder and hayle, falling at the same minute of time, when
he broke loose so furiously, that it beat down four houses at Bracciano, to
the astonishment of the people. The crime whereof he was accused is this; He
and certain others (amongst whom was the Nephew of the Cardicall d' Alcoli)
having plotted the death of the present Pope, conspired by Necromantie and
Witchcraft, to take away his life, intending to have the Cardinal of Alcoly
Elected to the Papacy, whom this shaveling affected, especially as being one of
his Order, and supposed would easily attain to that dignity by his faction in
the Consistory of Cardinals. To effect this cursed design, the Conspirators
made a sacrifice to the Devil; and offered, that some one of them upon whom
the lotte should fall, should emancipate himself, to the service of the prince
of darkness, and make him Lord, both of his body and soul. The Lots were
drawn, and he to whose lot it fell to he thus made a vassal to Satan,
trembling at the horror, either of the fact, or his own mishap, fled
presently, discovered the practice to the Inquisition, who thereupon
apprehended these malefactors, clapped up the Nephew of the Cardinal, (for his
safer custody) in the Castle Saint Angelo, and the rest in several prisons.
There leaving them, let us look upon the preparations for war made in Italy
by the Catholic King, and the progress of his brother the Cardinal Infanta.

Marquess Spinola made Viceroy of Sicilie.
The Catholic King, whose dominions in Italy are governed by Vice-royes and
Deputies having deputed the government of Sicilie to Marquess Spinola for the
space of six years, upon condition that he should relinquish his Generalate
of the Horse in the Dukedom of Millaine, Don Carlo de Collonna Governor of
Millain.
and appointed the Government of Millaine, to Don Carlo de Coloma in the
absence of his brother the Cardinal Infanta, about the beginning of May, began
to raise an Army of Italians, who being joined with some Spanish forces, were
to be commanded by the said Infant Cardinal as their General. Whether these
forces should be bound, the neighbor Princes which had heard of the
preparation knew not the Rhingrave as it is related formerly, attended their
coming in the higher Germany, the States provided for them in the
Neatherlands, and the French King mistrusting which way they would rake,
Piguarola fortified.
caused Pignarola a town in the East part of Piemont upon the river Poe, and
Cassall another strong Town there to be fortified with five new Regiments. The
time of their stay about Millain and Naples increased, the Princes suspicions,
for the Army was six weeks in readiness before it set forward, the Catholic
King having commanded, that they should not go forward, till he had taken
order with the Catholic Cantons in Swisserland, (with whom he was to make an
offensive and defensive league) for the safeguard of the Dukedom of Milan.

The consederation betwixt the King of Spain, and the Catholic Cantons.
To this purpose the Catholic Cantons sent their Ambassadors to Millan 24, in
number, who arrived there June 21. old style, where they took an oath to
continue firm friends to the Crown of Spain, during the life of the King,
and the Cardinal Infant his brother; promised to furnish out an army of 12000.
foot, for the securing of the Dukedom of Millaine, against all foreign
invasion, and were Princely feasted, and entertained, sutably to the Dignity
of so great a King, and the weightinesse of the negotiation, The relation of
the particulars is thus; The Confederation betwixt his Majesty of Spain, and
the Cantons being ratified with much solemnity, in the great Church, a
magnificent Banquet, was made for the Ambassadors in the Infanta's Palace,
where the Cardinal first began, and the Swizzers afterward pledged the health
of the King of Spain, in a large bowl of wine, and after the feast was ended,
the silver plates, were given as a token of Princely bounty, to the Wayters,
every one of them being permitted to catch what he could, and to appropriate it
to himself. Nothing was omitted here, which did but relish of royalty, the
walls of the Palace were as much beautified, with Symbols and artificial
inventions, to give the Helvetians delight and contentation, as the Table was
stored with rarities to please the palate. Upon the porch of the Palace stood
the Arms of the Catholic King, as in a center, the circle whereof was made of
diverse Scutcheons, of the achievements of the Catholic Cantons; which there
was drawn the picture of two hands joined, with these words Sic Concordia
stringit. the Eyes, and palates of the Ambassadors, being thus pleased with
these several objects, the Cardinal did also delight their ears, with the
promise of the full payment of the remainder of their private and common
pensions within the space of five years, and the organ of feeling, with the
delivery of some duccats in ready money, the free gift of a chain of gold
worth 300 crowns, and 100* crowns in coin to each Ambassador for their
expense in their journey, and of a lesser chain of gold, and five Pistolets to
each of their servants.

Monsieur betaketh himself to the protection of the K. of Spain.
About the time of this League thus confirmed, the Monsieur of France made an
agreement at Bruxells in the Netherlands with the same King of Spain upon
these Articles following: 1. Monsieur does betake himself wholly to the
protection of the King of Spain, and will not enter into any treaty with the
King of France; within one year and an half, without order and consent of the
King of Spain; nor when that time is expired, shall he make any agreement
with the French King but by consent, and approbation of the King of Spain. 2.
Monsieur shall command an Army of 12000. foot and 3000. horse. 3. The same
Army shall consist of 6000. French, and 6000. strangers, the Officers and
inferior Commanders, for the strangers to be appointed by Monsieur, and for
the French by the King of Spain. 4. There shall monthly be paid to Monsieur
45000. crowns for the pay of the 6000. French men. 5. This Army shall be
ready and complete in the month of September. 6. The aforesaid Army shall be
enquartered upon the Borders of France, till a fit time shall come to conduct
the same into the Country. Lastly, if it should happen that there should be a
difference or breach betwixt these two Crowns of Spain and France, then
Monsieur should adhere to the Spanish party.

This done June 16. the Avantguard of the Cardinal Infant, betook themselves
to their March toward Como a City in Lombardie upon the Lake de Como, distant
from Lecco Westward about 8. English miles, himself being to follow them July
11. with the other part, which as some say, made about 10000. or as other 12000
men. And here arose some dispute among the Commanders, about the way they
should take, the difference being grounded upon a suspicion of the French
designs, the Christian King, The Cardinal Infant's March.
having by his special Ambassador the Lord D'Emmery not only procured the
Duke of Savoy (of whom before he stood in some jealousy) to lay down his
leavies, but had obtained of him also 10000. sacks of corn for the victualing
of Pignaroll and Cassall, and liberty for the passage of some thousands of men
into Montferrat, which way the Italian army intended to have gone; and
projecting also the danger whereinto himself and his Allies were liable by the
Spanish confederation, which the Cantons and Monsieur had entertained the
States extraordinary Ambassadors de Paw and Knuill bad them welcome, given
them audience, promised to continue his alliance with them, resolved the next
August to send a puissant Army to the relief of his confederates, and already
published his Patents, to levy 20. Regiments of foot, 12. Cornets of House,
and four Companies of men at arms. But the Controversy was ended by the
coming in of the Cardinal himself, who without pause took his way through
the Veltoline into Tyroll, and so passed to Insprucke. The beginning of the
voyage was somewhat untoward, a storm upon the Comer sea somewhat distempered
his body, and caused him to repose himself in the Veltoline for the space of
three or four days to recover his health: upon the march some part of his
Army ran away by 20. or more in a company, whereof some being taken suffered
exemplary punishment of death for a warning to the rest. But I must now look
to the actions of the Spaniard, and Hollander first in the West Indies, and
then in the Netherlands, wither the Cardinal is going to take upon him the
Government, in place of the defunct Infanta Isabella Archducheffe of Austria.

Every particular man is best able to tell his own story; Though there are few
which will extenuate their glory, or relate their own actions too modestly,
but swelled with the timpanous wind of ambition, make mountains of molehills.
Yet in the American business we will permit the Dutch to tell their own
tale, which I must desire the Reader to take it as themselves have delivered it
in a letter from the Reciff of Farnambuco dated April 8. as follows.

The Spanish and Lowe-Countrey actions in America.
After the taking of the famous Castle of Riogrande the Deputies of the
West-Indian Companies seeing themselves strengthened with a good number of
shipping, well manned with soldiers, thought it good to make a new attempt
upon the Spaniard; and gave command to Giseling, and the Colonel Sigismond, to
sail toward the Cape of Saint Augustine, where they arrived the fourth of
March last, upon the end of Winter. The day following Lichard a Dutch Captain
came on bravely, and put in first with his ship into the Haven, and was
followed with 9. others of the same squadron, which entered happily also;
notwithstanding the thunder of the Cannon, and hayle-shot of the Muskets from
the Fort, and landed their soldiers to the great discouragement of the
Spaniards, who presently fired their Sugar-houses, and retired into the Fort
Nazarett. The have of the Spaniards to get into the Fort was such, that they
were constrained to leave in the Haven fifteen Carvels and Barques laden with
1300. chests of Sugar and Brasill wood, as a prey to the Hollander, (who being
first seized of that prize) Colonel Sigismond went down the his Soldiers to
the point of land near the Fort, the Spaniards sallying out to make
resistance, were constrained to return with the loss of some men, who were
slain and deadly wounded, beyond the power of Chirurgerie to recover them;
This retreat brought time to the Colonel to entrench himself in that Island,
which is called New Valkere, for the resemblance it has to an Island of that
name in Holland, and is so fortifird since, that it is master of the Haven, the
Spaniards in the Fort being brought to a desperate estate, and without hope of
succors; If you now demand what the Spaniards which are in the Country do,
while we of Holland are blocking up the Cape of Saint Augustine they thought
to have surpr^z^d this Peninsula de Reciff, which is a Colonie of Hollanders,
and lies at the very mouth of Fernambuck; but the plot held not. Queleun the
Governor here, was informed of their design, expected their coming, attended
upon the Haven with all his souliders well appointed, and two Companies of the
inhabitants of the place, made them take their going for their coming; so they
returned upon their departure, having given order to Captain Byma his
Lieutenant, to assault the Spanish Fort Royal in the next Island, the
Lieutenant wtih a 1000. soldiers, some grenades and two Morterers marched
thither according as he was directed, repulsed the Spaniards, who sallyed out
upon him from the Fort, summoned it to yield, but getting no other answer, then
what was delivered by the mouth of the Ordnance, he returned, content to have
thus recovered the honor of the Nation, which was supposed somewhat blemished,
by the Spanish adventure in Reciff

It now only remains, that I give you an account of what has passed lately at
the Castle of Riogrande in Brasill. The Captain Gersman who commanded there,
having diverse times gone abroad, to see if he could find any Spaniards
remaining in the Country, (for upon them only he cast his eye) finding the
coast clear, came from thence of his own accord with all his Ammunition. He
sent us word, that Rotelet de Tapoier an Indian and native of Brasill (being
one of them who had stood in opposition with the Spaniards) first sent unto him
an Ambassador some few days since to give him notice, that he was coming to
the Commander, and desire his amity, and himself followed immediately after a
Company with 300. men, and that they have made together a fast alliance and
confederation: For assurance whereof, the Indian sent his Son 18. leagues
from hence with 160. soldiers of his own, and 30. Hollanders who have slain
all the Spaniards they could find; and afterward when himself departed from
the Commander, promising to return quickly with 1700. men, which should be at
the Hollanders service, he left his Son behind him (as a pledge of his
truth) with forty Savages, which give remonstrance either of their affection
toward the Spaniard now, or hope of reconciliation hereafter. Thus much writes
the Dutchman; And it is written, this Sugar and Brasil to be lately brought to
Amsterdam, where the Saylors confirmed this Letter. And thus much for their
actions abroad.

Now we come to take a short view, of what they have done on both sides lately
at home; the place is nearer to us, and the intelligence something fuller; I
shall only look upon their public acts of Hostility, not the private
quarrels, which have been betwixt some Spaniards and the French belonging to
Monsieur; Such as presume to take the sword of vengeance into their hand,
without lawful authority, ought to be punished with the hand of Justice, and
to have their names forgotten, and they only which fight for the maintenance
of their Religion, and defense of their Country lawfully warranted, are worthy
to be recorded to eternity.

An Edict against the payment of Contribution to the States.
The Marquess of Aitona began this year, with his Pen and Paper to oppose the
purposes of the States, he published an Edict, forbidding the subjects of the
King to give any more contribution to the Estates, and was replied unto by a
Counter-placart, or Proclamation by the States of the United Province, and the
tenor of the first of them runs in our English tongue, thus:

A Coppie of a Proclamation written by his Excellency to the receavers of the
Contribution, for his Majesty of Spain particularly in the Quarters of South-
Holland, Althen, Bommels-Weerd, Huesden, Maeswael, and Nimmegen.
RIght Well-beloved, you know that the King in the behalf of his Subjects, to
ease them, and to bring those, who are separated from us to obedience; has
contented himself with any indifferent Subsidies and Contributions; But the
rebellious States foolishly behaving themselves, have to his Majesty's
hinderance, and the grief of those which pay Contribution, exacted six times
more, then his Majesty has done, although his Majesty has both right and
power, to receive as much as they, especially in those parts where his lawful
title to the royal Government is acknowledged. It is also manifest, that the
Enemy (not contenting himself herewith) pretends himself to be Lord and
Master, of the greater part of the aforesaid Contributarie Provinces, and not
long since endeavored with a new trick, never heard of before, to forbid the
Inhabitants of the Marquisate of Bergen-op-Zome, and the Majoraltie of
Shertogen-bosche, to pay the duties to his Majesty, concluded by the last
meeting of the Counsel of Brabant, to be due unto him, themselves, (by
assaulting of their safeguards, and attaching the Kings Officers) exacting from
his Majesty's Subjects, in the quarter about Antwerp twice as much, as his
Majesty in the process of the said Counsel had eased them of, which inhabit
in the forenamed Marquisate and Maioraltie. And though his Majesty (who can
do no less then maintain, and defend his true and loyal subjects) has used
all means to hinder those rebels, from doing any violence to the inhabitants
of the Marquisate of Bergen-op-zome; and Maioraltie of Shertogen-bosch, yet we
have lately seen (which is strange,) many Priests and religious persons
imprisoned and haled away, as well in the Dukedom of Brabant, as in the
Earldom of Flanders, upon an order made by the enemy, to imprison all
Spiritual persons, as Bishops, Abbots etc. (except those of the said
Marquisate and Majoraltie, Over Mase, and Knicke) whom he pretends to be his
Subjects, against all reason, against the will and well-liking of the King and
Clergy, and the other inhabitants of those parts. It would be a great grief
unto us, to find that our enemies should insult over our Subjects and our
Soveraigntie, and to do it upon the terms of a lawful war, and as though
they had right so to do; It is therefore requisite that they should now stand
to us and obey our command, paying their Subsidies, and Contributions to us, as
they have done formerly to the Enemy, and according to the same rates paid the
last year to the States by the Majoraltie of S' Hertogen-bosch denying to give
way, or make payment of Contribution to the Receivers, or Deputy receivers of
the Enemy, according to that good reason which we hope to manifest, and make
known to all, which shall speak against it.

We therefore, as well to uphold our Religion as Soveraigntie, and for the
security of our loyal Subjects, and to defend them from so many injuries and
wrongs, by a List made by us, and sent to all the Governors of our Frontiers,
charge all prisoners, and other persons which pay Contribution to the Enemy; to
be careful, that our Authority be maintained, and that this inhibition of
the said payment be observed by the inhabitants of the said Marquisate and
Majoraltie within 14. days after the Date hereof upon Penalty, that if they
take in a safeguard from the Enemy, we shall carry our selves toward them,
as his Majesty has commanded; and ye shall make this our pleasure known to
the inhabitants of the said Contributarie Countries, and other Frontiers, by
all the expeditions, ways, and means which may be; and so Welbeloved I commit
you to Gods protection.

From Bruxels the 6. of June 1632. Signed and Subscribed by the Marquess de
Aitona, and by Seignieur Della Failla.

THis was the Effect, and the full tenor of the Spanish Edict, which was
Countermaunded with another from the States, as follows:

The States Counter-plachard.
The General States of the United Provinces of the Neatherland to all those,
which shall see, hear, or read these send Greeting. We give you to
understand, that whereas the Enemy, after the Victory gotten by us at S'
Hertogenbosch has (without ground or foundation) pretended a title to the
Majoraltie thereof, and after a kind of unlawful Usurpation, as well over the
Spirituality as Temporaltie, done what is directly against all the Conditions
observed, between us and them in these Neatherland wars, making themselves
Lords, over all which belonged to the said Province, clayming a jurisdiction
over the said Countries, forcing them to pay Contribution, against the usual
custom here, and reason, and under pretext of a Title of right to the
Majoraltie, disanulling us of our Soveraigntie and Government thereof; We
therefore thinking it fit to maintain our selves and Dominions, by all means
We can devise against them (which begun with unreasonablenesse and tyranny,
and since continuing to heap wrong upon wrong, are grown to such excess,
that at this present, they extract both from the Spirituality and Temporaltie,
all that they have, without giving any reason or account of what they do; by
which proceedings, it appears clearly that the Spanish Government tends
not to the conservation of the Inhabitants and Subjects of the said Country
under Contribution, but rather desires their ruins, that so they may maintain
their tyrannous Usurpation) have thought good upon mature deliberation, and
advise, (which we have used the rather, to bring the enemy fairly to reason)
to forbid all Clergy men, and the other inhabitants of our Majoraltie of
Shertogen-bosch, and by these presents do forbid them, and all others in those
Frontiers, to exercise the Romish religion, either in private Conventicles,
Churches, or other public assemblies; upon penalty of Arbitrarie correction
to be inflicted upon all them, which shall transgress in that kind. And
because the Enemy has formerly banished the Ministers, and Preachers
appointed to Gods service, from the said Majoraltie, our will and meaning is,
that not only there should be any exercise of the Roman religion there, until
the said Ministers and Preachers be restored, but also that the Romish
Cleargie-men which live under ue, and go to other places to exercise their
Religion, shall be held, and counted as Romish Priests of that place where
they practice in that Religion, and not as our Subjects. And because it
appears by the Copy of a Brief dated the 6. of this Month, and directed by
the Marquess of Aitona, particularly to the Receavers of Contribution for the
King of Spain in the quarters of South Holland, Althen, Bommells-weerd,
Heusden, Maes-Well, and Nimmegen, that their intent is after few days to
break up all our safeguards in the Countries aforesaid; Therefore we can do
no less but make it appear by a sudden example, that we shall do the like
in other quarters, where there is any resort of the Enemy, and that we hold
our selves discharged of any condition made betwixt us and the Enemy, in the
said Majoraltie. And because no man shall hereafter plead ignorance, but that
they may the better know our intention and meaning, this our declaration shall
be set up in all places expedient, with all speed written at the Hage, under
our Seal by our special Secretary, June 20. 1634. Signed by Van-Beaumont the
President; according to the Decree and ordinance of the high and mighty Lords
the Estates General, subscribed by Cornelius Mush, Sealed with red Wax, and
imprinted by the Lords the Estates Printer, at the Hage.

The several Edicts distracted the people, no man thought himself safe in
those parts, to which these tempests tended, and though as yet there was no
Sword drawn thereabouts, the people fled with their goods to places of more
security, all suspecting that this proceeding was but the Prologue to a
Tragedy, and not to be concluded with light words, but mortal strokes.

It had been well with this Country, if there had been no other but a Paper
war; words cannot wound, but when the Quill and Parchment are turned to fire
and sword, then Horror appears in its proper Image; dreadful to look upon,
even with the eye of imagination. But mischief grows quickly to the height; a
spark of fire produces a flame sometimes, which does not blaze for a while,
but like that conserved at Rome by the care of the Vestall Virgins does last to
after-ages. And yet I do not foretell, but fear the continuance of War in
that Region, which after the publication of these Edicts, as much cried out to
her friends, to deliver her from her enemies; The Princess of Orange delivered
of a Daughter.
as the the Princess of Orange did at the same time for a Lucina to discharge
her of her Princely Burden. It was with this excellent Lady, after the course
of Women, the pangs of her childbirth were soon forgotten, by the birth of a
young Princess, which was Baptized with all solemnity; June 7. in the Court
Chapel at the Hage, and named Albertina Agneta; the particular Witnesses, or
Gossips being the Eldest Daughter of the Queen of Bohemia. The Lords the
Estates of Zealand and Over-Ysell, the Count William of Nassaw; and the
Deputies of the Cities of Amsterdam and Leyden, which the same afternoon were
feasted by the Prince of Orange in Princely state, according to his and their
Dignities.

Preparatie made by (...) and sand.
The Country is still in travail, by Sea, and land preparation is made for
War; the Spanish and Holland ships like the Trojan Horse, are stuffed with
armed men; the one bringing fresh forces to Dunkerke, to be employed in the
Kings service, and the Hollanders Admiral being sent to Sea with his men of
War to encounter that Navy, which consisting of 11. great ships landed at
Dunkerke before the Admiral could reach them; The Spanish Soldiers as they
write from Antwerpe, being 2000. in number, were very poorly apparelled, but
the Catholic King to show his own Magnificence, and not to have them despised
because of their outward habit, gave them 10000 crowns to furnish them, that
they might appear as brave men outwardly, as perhaps they were valiant minded,
for virtue is often clothed in rags and course garments, when fools and
cowards strut in the Poppinjayes feathers, having nothing to be proud of but a
gawdie outside, and gay clothing.

This new supply of Forces being thus brought to the Spanish Army, the
Marquess sent his forces in the field in the end of May, which because they
appeared first about Axell in the Earldom of Flanders, the Prince of Orange
sent thither Count William of Nassaw, with 60. Companies of men, in all about
6000 to attend upon their doings, to raise some Sconces and redoubts against
the strong Sconce upon the Polder, thereby to secure the City of Hulst, which
lies from Axell about 7. English miles, if the Spaniards should happily attempt
any thing there. But the Scene where Mars was to be an Actor, lay not here;
Thence the Spanish Army marched toward Gulich-land, and first enquartered
themselves in the little City of Berber situate upon the River Erp, belonging
to the Earl of Reifensheid, the Hollander having a suspicion, but very
uncertain of what the Spaniard then intended.

There was sometime spent, before the Counsel of the Marquess was discovered,
they of the Catholic league, hoped that this Army had been raised for their
succor, that it should march over the Rhine into Westthalia to withstand the
Luneburgher, and Hassian, which had so distressed the Leagnish there, the
Prince of Orange suspecting, what in the end proved true, that it would make
some enterprise upon Lemburg or Mastrick in the Bishopric of Liege, marched
after with his Forces, caused 400. hundred men to be laid in Lemburge, to the
400. which were there before, claptin 4000. head of great Cattle into
Maestrick, gave order that every housekeeper should provide victuals for a
year and an half, and put as many as could not so do out of the town, the
Garrison there being strong fifty four Companies of foot, and eleven
Regiments of Horse, and so thought sufficient (if provided of necessaries) to
keep the town, though the Marquess should besiege it.

The Fort of Argentill taken by the Spaniards.
The first design of the Spanish Army was against the Castle of Argentill, a
Fort strong by nature, and art but weakly manned, and it is to be thought
worse commanded, 35. Soldiers only were in it, and these might peradventure
have kept it if their Leader Iunius had not been either a coward or worse, but
he yielded upon the first summons, and was arrested afterward at Mastrick by
command of the States of the United Provinces, and not undeservedly; a tempest
at Sea proves a Pilot, and the affront of the Enemy, discovers the Soldier.

And now the Army being passed the Maese by a Bridge of Boats laid over the
River by direction of the Marquess, they busy themselves in making a Fort
upon the River near Eisden, to block up the City Maestrick; and this was
finished by July 16. the interim of time being spent unhappily in two attempts
upon Limburg and Rhineberge, for June 27. July 7. 400. Spanish Horsemen going
to make booty of the Cattle about Lemburge, the Garrison there having some
notice of it sallyed forth with six or seven hundred Musketeers preserved the
beasts from plundering, and made the Horsemen fly, having some of their
company dead behind them. At Rhinberge their hap was somewhat worse; I shall
relate the story as it comes from Bruxels, though the Hollander make the loss
somewhat more, it is thus. The defeat of the Spaniards at Rhinberg.
A Bourgesse of the town, having discovered to the Spanish Commander in
Guelderen, a way whereby he might pass the Moate, and come into the City
secretly, he revealed it again to the Count John of Nassaw, who thereupon
giving out, as though he would go to Collen with his Cavallary, marched
directly toward Rhinberge, intending to take it by Onstaught, upon St. James
his day at night; But a power beyond that of the Spanish (supposed) tutelar
Saint protected the City, and their design was prevented by the care of the
Governor Colonel Winbergen, who being informed by a Corporal which was
privy to the plot of the Spanish project, doubled the Guards that night with
his men at arms, and expected when the Spaniard would give the onset. The
night was dark, like the sad fate which attended the adventurers; When Count
John and the Spanish Commander came before the Town with 48. Cornets, 2000.
Harquebusses a Crocke, and six Canons; 200. Spaniards passed the ditch, were
clambered upon the Ramparts, and come into the City, when some other which
followed with more haste then good speed, had no sooner cried out, The Town is
ours, but the Guards within set upon them, and being as much encouraged by the
bruit of the Alarm as the Spaniards were disheartened by darkness, and
hindered by the rain which then fell abundantly, beat them back, slew 40
soldiers and two Captains, as many more in the ditch, and took 50. prisoners,
the Count himself escaped not without a wound, being shrewdly hurt at the
Gates as he attended upon the retreat of his soldiers; And thus was that
attempt prevented; the States thereupon strengthening the Garrison, and
rewarding the Corporal for his service, with 100. Rixedollers paid presently,
and a pension of 12. Franks to be paid him monthly, as long as he shall live.

The Fort being finished by the Marquess, the siege of the City of Maestrick
was expected daily, but though it was blocked up, it could not be said to be
beleaguered July 20. New Style, (at which time this History for the present
concludes generally) no Enemy being to be seen in tho field from the highest
steeple in the City, nor no Mount or bank as yet cast up against it; Three
Frenchmen taken by the Garrison, dismissed without ransom by the Duke of
Bovillon.
this is only memorable here, that upon July 8. a footman of Monsieurs and two
servants of the Seigneur de Puylaurens, being taken by the Garrison at
Maestricke, as they were straggling from the Spanish Camp; when they were
brought into the City, were made to drink by the Duke of Bovillon, who
dismissed them without ransom, and sent them back by a Trumpetter because
they were Frenchmen; A noble Act, and shows that the Duke loves his Nation,
and was not unrequired by Monsieur in the same kind, within less then a week
after, the chance of war then ministering occasion to the French Prince, The
like Noble favor showed by the Monsieur to some of the Garrison.
to show the like courtesy to some of the Garrison; it was thus, July 23. The
Marquess de Aitona had sent some of his Horse to make a bravadoe before the
works of the City; but suddenly the Garrison sallyed forth, took some of
them, and slew five others: Fleshed with this spoil, they proceeded further to
pursue the Spaniards, but were suddenly fallen into ae Ambuscado of foot, laid
by the Commanders, who slew 7. of the Garrison, and took six others
prisoners, amongst whom were one Scottish Cornet and a Frenchman, whose
ransomes Monsieur paid, and sent them back to the Duke, giving each of them
three Pistols, that he might not seem to come behind the Duke in Nobleness.

The Prince of Orange in hand with a great design.
The Prince of Orange during this action of the Spaniards, was not idle, he
still keptan eye over their actions, and leaving his Army for a time at
Nimmegen, returned to the Hage, where after a serious Consultation with the
Lords the States, he appointed a general day of fasting and prayer to be
observed through all the United Provinces upon the second of August, and then
came back to his Army, where he caused the Bridge laid over the Rhine at
Wesell, to be brought to Rhinberge, for the commodious passage of some Hassian
and Swedish troops, whom the States had retained in service, and with them,
and fifty two Regiments of his own Army departed from Nimmegen about some
great adventure; The Duke of Lerma hereupon came into Consultation with the
Marquess de Aitona and they concluded to send some Forces toward Dunkerke to
strengthen the places thereabouts, and the young Count of Feria went from the
Camp July 27. with the Regiment of the Marquess de Sfondrat, and a Wallon
Regiment, to abide in the Vaces for the conservation of that Province, which
was deputed to his government. The mistake of the forty five Spaniards of the
Regiment of Rouroy, which skirmished with fifty others of the same party, and
charged home, holding them for Enemies, till an Italian Ensign was slain, and
many of the rest wounded, is not worthy of this Story* It is usual in the
state of War, to suspect all men, and oft-times a misprision surpriseth
friends in stead of foes, either by accident, or providence of the all
directing power, I shall conclude with the Spanish proceedings against some
Noble personages formerly trusted in the managing of the affairs of State, and
now suspected of disloyalty, and either mercifully pardoned, or meritoriously
punished. The first is the Duke of Arschot, a Brahantine (for so his title
speaks him) who was imprisoned at Pinto, kept under a strict watch: accused of
speaking lavishly, convicted upon his own Examination, and condemned by the
Commissaries appointed thereunto, (which were in number twelve, amongst whom
was the President of Castile, Italy, and Arragon, the Secretary Rocas, and the
Father Confessor to his Catholic Majesty) yet afterward mercifully pardoned
by the King, and so had not the sentence of condemnation brought to execution;
The next is Don Bona-fides, which lost the Plate fleet about four years since,
and is now condemned* and executed; The third the Marquess De Catarita, who
(as some say) being Admiral of the Indian Fleet, is imprisoned, because he
fought with the Hollanders men of War without order, notwithstanding that he
had the victory; but as others more probably, for imbeaz^lling, or concealing
the Kings part, there being found in his Navy four hundred thousand Crowns
worth of uncustomed goods, which were thereupon confiscated.

And now in this Story, I am come to the Pillars of Hercules, where I find a
Nil ultra Hereafter we may perhaps adventure upon a further discovery, and
eraze that inscription which now forewarnes us to pass no further.

CHAP. XII. The Magnificent Interment of the King of Sweden.
IF the death of Gustavusses were frequent (to wit, the triumphant Angustusses
of the North) their foot in the stirrup, their Sword in their hand, and in
gaining of Battles, I might then expect some other occasion might present it
self, to demonstrate unto the world the manner of their Interment; and from
the vanity wherewith the greatest part in these times are infected; who affect
not to hear one thing twice, easily furnish my self with an execuse. But
intruth all that has yet been written concerning the Interment of this great
King of Sweden, were but the preparatives to the true Pomp: the Reader
therefore that desires an exact Relation of the affairs of these times, may
one day justly accuse me of negligence; if by forgetting the last act of his
tragedy, I rather apply my self to please some particular persons, then by the
recital thereof, satisfy the just curiosity of all others.

The 34. Provinces of the State of Sweden, not thinking it enough to have
undergone the extremity of grief: for this year and an half, since the
doleful news of their Kings death; having decreed by the common consent of
their three Estates, to render unto him their last devotions, assembled for
that purpose the 15. of June last at Meoping, either in person, or by their
Deputies; that great City being far too small to receive the multitude,
which from all parts flocked thither. The Ceremony was first disclosed in the
great Regal Hall of the Palace, where the Lord John Skite, Governor general
of Livonia with a masculine eloquence opened again the wounds, which time
seemed to have salved up; whose powerful Oration was seconded by the
Exposition of the History of King Josias, made by the Bishop of Westeras, the
people often with their heavy sighs, making doleful periods: But all this
was nothing in comparison of the mournful, and not studied accents, which the
whole multitude made, when they heard the pitiful rumbling of the Coffin,
being shook as they conveyed it down the stairs of the Hall into the great
street. The Coffin was made of Silver, and covered with black Velvet, which
trayled on the ground, with a great Cross of white Satin, charged with
Scutchions of all the Provinces, richly imbrodered in gold, silver, and silk;
from the Hall it was carried to the Gate of the City tending toward
Stockholme, by 24. Gentlemen, and there put into a Chariot, a 100. other
Gentlemen marching before, each one bearing in his hand a Table, wherein all
the Victories of this Prince were most accurately represented, as well those by
him obtained against the Danes, Polanders, and Muscovite, as his other great
Feats of Arms in Germany, the Forts, Cities, and Castles, by him conquered;
and the Battles by him gained: two Regiments of Foot, and as many of Horse,
made the Van. and Reare-gard, and in the front of the train were 8. great
Cannons taken from the Enemy, each being drawn by 20. Horses. Before and on
each side of the Chariot wherein the Corpse lay, being drawn by six white
horses covered with black cloth hanging to the ground, then marched a 100.
Gentlemen in mourning, and mounted on Horseback, next followed the
Counselors of Estate, and company of the Guards, and last of all, the Count
Palatine with the two Queens, both Mother and Daughter, bathing their cheeks
in unfeigned tears. From Meoping this Convoy went to Sitrosta, distant but two
Leagues from thence, and in the Church thereof was the Corpse laid, and guarded
by the Soldiers and a 100. Gentlemen. The next day about noone they parted
from thence and lodged two leagues further, continuing this order and time in
their daily marches. Until the 20. of June, when they arrived at the Town of
Brewkyekya, distant but half a mile from Stock-holme; then began the great
preparation for the Funeral show, which on the two and twentieth day of the
said month entered in this manner into Stockholme.

The Colonel Claz Horn marched in the head of a Regiment of Swedish Horse, and
two Regiments Nobility and Gentry all in Armor, and their horses in mourning,
being followed by two Regiments of foot, lead by the Lords Axel Lilly and Otho
Sparling likewise in black, their arms, and trayling their Pikes. Next
followed two hundred Gentlemen which were Officers of War, and had assisted
the defunct King in his Battles, every one bearing an Ensign gained in
Germany. After them came the eight Cannons; And next came Gabriell Gabrielson
Oxensterne, Rector, and eight hundred Scholars of the University of Vpsall,
with all the Officers of the City, both Bishops, Doctors, Judges, Ministers,
and then came the great red Ensign borne by Frederick Stenbock, Colonel of
the Cavalry; Then 34. Ensigns of the several Provinces borne by as many
Gentlemen; Next followed a Horse led by two Pages, and covered with black
Taffaty hanging to the ground; each of them trayling after them an Ensign;
then came the Barron Charles Horn clad in the gilt Arms of the dead King,
mounted upon a lame Horse covered with black Velvet, holding in his hand the
Kings Sword as yet all bloody since the Battle of Lutzen, attended by his
Pages and Lackies; Next followed the General Tortenson trayling along the
streets the great mourning Ensign; Then came the Kings horse for battle,
covered with black Velvet, and crossed with white Satin, and the Arms of
Sweden led by the Pages of the Chamber, assisted by John de Rothkerke Master of
the Horse; Then followed Charles* Morner great Chamberlain, and Gasper Otho
Sparling Marshall of the Camp in the head of 400. Courtiers; Next came the
Heralds of Arms with their silver Maces and after them Gabriell Kell Colonel
of the forte clothed in violet, and Otho Sak Colonel of the horse clothed in
Red: next came Colonel Knut soop, carrying the garter: and Otho Van Sheyding
Governor of Smaland bearing the Chain of Diamonds and the Ensign of Saint
George; next came the five Principal officers of the Crown to wit the Lord
Gabriel Oxensom great treasurer of Sweden bearing the key of Gold then Peter
Bannier Vice Chancellor bearing the Ball of Gold personating the absent
director, then Charles Guildenheim Great Admiral bearing the Scepter, and
James de la Guard great Marshall bearing the great Sword and last of all
another Oxenstern chief Justice of Sweden bearing the Regal Crown, next
follows the kings body borne by an hundred gentlemen twenty and five at a
time supporting the Coffin by which four great Lords went; then followed the
Count Palatine with his two young sons and George Guldensterne and after him
came another troop of an hundred Gentlemen two heralds and two masters of the
kings household, then came the Queen mother to the Princess now reigning led
by two of the ancient Counselors in the kingdom Asiles Bisike, and John
Shytte and after her the young Queen, conducted by the Lords John de la Guard
Governor of Stockholme and Vpland. And Achatis Aceeli Counselors of Estate,
also then followed Princess Palatine and her two daughters, each being led by
two other Lords, the rest of the Ladies and gentlewomen followed after in white
robes, and lastly Burgers and their Wives without order or number this train
was closed up with two Regiments on foot and horse, and in this order were the
Corpse conveyed unto the Gray Friars Church, which is situate in the Island
which was hung all over with black, Doctor John Bothvidi, Bishop of Lincoping
made the funeral sermon taking his text from the death of Judas Machabeus,
which was ended by a Vollie of fifty Cannons from one side, and threescore
from the other, all cast in Germany, and transported them thither for other
uses, which was answered by Nymes, so many by all the Vessels in the Port,
which is the Capital of the Kingdom; for they spared not Salt Peter at the
death of that Prince, who living so much delighted to see it burn.

CHAP. XIII. The Russian, Polander, and Turks.
THus far we have made an Historical contexture of several Princes
actions; and would have gone forward in the like kind, with the Polonians and
Muscovites, but that themselves have made an happy conclusion of peace. That
controversy which is resolved satisfactorily on both sides, was well
undertaken, and it is a blessed war which produces so sweet an issue, and is
the decision of all quarrels, and ground of friendly Union, such was that
betwixt his Majesty of Poland, and the great Duke of Mosco which at first
though it was prosecuted with all eagerness, May 29. a peace (some report it
for 25. others for forty years, others for ever) was made betwixt the Princes,
Pro regis Poloni, and reip. dignitate, to the honor of the Polonian, and not
much to the prejudice of the Dukedom of Muscovia. The siege of Bielha.
The Scene for the War was Bielha a City in Bielskia a Province of Muscovia,
situate upon the West side of the River Hinissa, upon the North side of the
great Forest Wolknoske, and distant from Mosco about 100. English miles.
Within the City was a very strong Garrison, and well furnished Magazine of
provision of victuals and ammunition. The Poles were forty thousand strong,
conducted by a valiant and wise General, well furnished with Military
instruments, and would not for all the preparation otherwise desist from that
design, which they were resolved on, but by Mines and their Ordnance went
about to effectuate their intendment, for taking of this City. The whole
passages on both sides, from the beginning of the War to the end, might
perhaps (if well known) make up a little Volume, but I was not as Polybius
in the Wars of Hannibal, an eyewitness of the Guests there; nor must I
transcend my intelligence by imagination of what might be done occasionally
(that might suite with the Poet, whose fancy has liberty to play in shape of
truth not with an Historian tied to his tedder, and limited without addition or
substraction to relate things truly) nor must I look backward to any time
before May, at which time this presented discovery has it is first beginning.
In this space I find some assaults made by the besiegers upon the City, but
unhappily being still beaten back with loss, to the grief of the King of
Poland, who was not used thus to be repulsed, when he had undertaken a thing
formerly. The besieged made some sallyes upon the assaylants more happily; but
of all, this is the most memorable; About the end of April, when they had
played upon the Camp all day with their Ordinance, at night they sallied sorth
by a Grotte, or Cave under the ground, fell upon the Poles in their trenches,
and having slain many of them, retired into the City, by the same way, which
they came out, the Earth over them being better then Armor of proof to defend
them from the injury of the shot made out of the Trenches against them. This
was but the first Act which they then performed; this was presently seconded
with another of greater consequence, and had the Russians either not neglected,
or gone on prudently to pursue the occasion, might probably have drawn the
King to have offered them more honorable terms of agreement, then such as
they were glad to accept afterward: The King had raised a Fort before the
City, as desensive for his own Army, as offensive to the Muscovites; in this
he had placed two whole Regiments, one under the command of the Colonel
Donhoffe, the other under Rade Welson, this Seonce the Garrison understanding
to be at that time weakly manned, the most part of the Regiments being gone
abroad a boote-haling, they set upon the next, put the Soldiers to the sword,
demolisht the Sconce, and carried away the Ensigns, and all which was there
remaining. A prosperous beginning, and might have given resolvedmen hope of a
wished End; but opportunity once slighted, is not easily recovered, and the
Crown of a Soldier is made of Mulberry leaves; called by the Naturalists
Arborum sapientissime, and Primroses discretion must be mixed with
forwardness, they must be valiant in undertaking, and wise in the prosecution
of their victory. Thus much they did, and did no more afterward, as if their
only aim was to gain their liberty; and had no hope of victory.

The King much displeased with this-unsuspected mischief, put forth the work
with all means and speed possible, besides the batteries with which he played
continually upon the City, he prepared then three Mines to blow up the Walls
thereof, which being hindered of their work by fortune, want of skill in the
Miners, and the industry of the besieged, (for the first was filled up by a
violent shower of Rain, and so made useless the second, when it was sprung,
recoyled backward, and slew four hundred Poles in the Leaguer, without
endamaging the City, the last though it wrought it is effect, was prevented by
the Byelthers, who had raised some other works within, just-against the place
where the breach was made, and the King after wards assaulting the City, being
repulsed by the valor of the Soldiers, who in the fight became Masters of the
Colonel Weyers baggage, the Wagon appointed for the carriage of the Silver
plates, and some Standards which they carried into Byala; A Peace concluded
betwixt the Pole and Muscovite.
His Majesty offered conditions of peace to the Russians, which they accepted
in the Name of the great Duke, and are here set down as follows. First, that
the City and Territory of Smolenskoshouk remain for ever to the kingdom of
Poland; 2. The King of Poland should have free liberty to pass with his
Armies, and repasse at all times through the Dukedom of Muscovi^ into
Swedland. 3. Because his Majesty the King of Poland, does relinquish the title
of the Duke of Mosco, the said Duke shall pay unto him two hundred thousand
Rubells (every of these is about a Mark English) and one hundred
Zimmer-zobels. 4. His Majesty the King of Poland, and the great Duke of
Muscovia shall aid and assist each other at all times, when necessity
requires it. Lastly, all the soldiers which are willing to serve his
Majesty of Poland, shall have freelibertie to be in pay underhim, and fight
for him. The news of this Treaty, and conclusion was welcome to the neighbor
Countries, the Towns of trade especially Dantzick in Prussia and Lubeck; In
Holst gave tokens of joy for the friendly amity of these two Princes, by
singing Te Doum, Bonfires, and discharging their Ordnance; But the Duke
himself was not so well pleased, the relinquishing of Smolensko a City upon
the Boristhenes or Nieper a place of importance, and the payment of so much
money, upon so small a consideration so distasted him, that it is said he
beheaded the Field-Marshall, for descending, and yielding to such dishonorable
conditions. The execution of this soldier, begot by consequence another
mischief; He had a Nephew of a rash fiery spirit, who in revenge of his
Uncles death, hired some lewd fellows made for nothing but evil, to set the
City of Mosco on fire in diverse places, which complying with his wicked desire
kindled that flame which could not be extinguished, until the greatest part
of that great City was burned to ashes; An horred fact; and it so incensed the
great Duke to anger, that he now threatened vengeance upon all the tribe,
imprisoned the Field-Marshalls son, Nephew, and all the kindred, and (if our
intelligence be true) has already executed many of them; so procreative is
mischief, that it seldom is without issue, and though the first Parent be
pernicious, yet the child is commonly worse.

This conclusion was far more grateful to the King of Poland who besides the
benefit of dis-ingagement from this War, had now time (and it was high time so
to do) to look homeward for the security of his own Country, The Turkish
and Poles preparations.
which was threatened with an invasion of Turks and Tartars, a more populous
Army then could be found in Russia, and a more formidable Enemy. Preparing
therefore all possible opposition the King sent the Grand Seignieur an
Ambassador, to whom though there was at first a fair tale told, that these
forces were not leavied to be employed against the Pole, but the Persian who
had taken Jerusalem from the Grand Seignieur, yet in the end, it proved a tale
indeed, for the Turkish Vant-guard by the beginning of July New Style. were
come over the Nepper, but were hindered of their present purpose by the Pollack
Field-Marshall and Cossacks, which surprised them before they were aware, put
two thousand of them to the sword, and going further entered the Turks
Dominions, pillaging and wasting the Country, upon hope of present supplies
from his Majesty, whereby they might be the better enabled to encounter so
potent an adversary. This fortune of the poles, so enraged the Grand-Seigneur,
that he presently sent out his whole Army to oppose them 60000. Tartarians, and
30000. Wallachians were appointed to invade Polonia, whom the Field-Marshall
again encountered but not with like fortune, as formerly his Vantguard was then
cut off by the Mahometanes, and himself hardly escaped from being made (if not
their slave) their prisoner. This news put a quickness, to the dispatch of
business at home, The Diet at Warshaw.
A Diet was called before this at ( Warshaw, and the Peers assembled; where
the King hastening the business propounded only three general things to this
assembly, and enjoined them to give a speedy answer; 1. Granting of Subsidies
for payment of his Majesty's debts, which were occasioned by the Muscovian War;
2. the managing and preparation for this Turkish War, both with men and
money; Lastly, a treaty of peace with the Swedes with whom the time of a former
Truce was shortly to be expired; and these three were as quickly answered,
Subsidies were granted, the managing of the War referred to his Meiestie, and
promise made to furnish him with the sinews thereof, money and Commissioners
appointed to Treat with the Crown of Swedland, about settling of peace betwixt
these two warlike Kingdoms.

And by the last Letters From Danzike, arrived here the 16. of this Month of
November 1634. it is assured, that that brave King Vladislaus came no sooner
with a great Army toward the Swedeners, but he made and concluded a Treaty of
peace (wholly to his own advantage and honor) with the Turk; and thereupon
caused his Army to march backwards toward Persia, there to make as glorious
Peace with the Swedes.

CHAP. 14. The Siege of La Motta in Lorraine.
THe great preparation made by the Christian King, for his own expeditions, and
help of his friends is mentioned formerly; but advise without execution is
frivolous: Consultations must be produced into Actions, the Hand must second
the Heart, that is the Instrument of Instruments which works effectually;
what else but notionall, and concluded in the Fantasy? The King upon his first
determination was resolved to proceed accordingly, and unwilling to omit any
occasion, having formerly given liberty to the Captains, and Officers of his
army to retire themselves upon their own private occasions, July 4, new style,
A proclamation that al captains should repair to their several charges.
by a public proclamation, he gave warning to all the Camp Masters,
Captains, and Officers of his troops of Horse and Foot, in his Army and
Garrisons in Picardie, the Frontiers of his kingdom, and other Places,
Principalities and Dominions, that within 8. days after the publication of
this Decree, without color or pretense of excuse, they should repair to their
several charges, upon pain of being casheared, and loss of their offices.
Enioyning the Marshall de la Force his Lieutenant General in Germany and
Lorraine, all his Governors and Lieutenants Generals of the several Provinces
of the kingdom, the particular Governors of his towns in Picardy, the
frontiers of the Realm of France, and other places, that their soldiers
should be presently in their Garrisons, that themselves should out of hand take
notice of his pleasure to publish it by their common cries, and sound of the
trumpet, and to affixe it to their gates and eminent places of their cities,
that no man might plead ignorance of his Majesty's pleasure, and so think to
excuse himself.

The siege of La Motta in Lorraine.
Here I must leave the King in the midst of his preparations at home, and set
down his proceedings abroad; and his conquest of La Motta in Lorrain, being the
principal; thither our story now bends (omitting the negotiation of his
Ambassadors in the Court of Rome, which was only for confirmation of that
Bishops love to the Nation, and comprotection of the Crown of France, both
which though strenuously opposed at first, at last were granted. The Cardinal
Barberino being designed by the Conclave to the last, and this we shall relate
no otherwise, then it is set down by a French discoverer intwo several
Letters, which being taught to speak our language, thus delivers it.

July 19. 1634. That I may not yet be ranked among the old men, which can
better distinguish of things a far off, than those which be near. I give you
not a nosegay of diverse flowers gathered out of the common Garden of the World,
but a particular flower, the siege of La Motta; the sprigs whereof will fill
the hand, and give full satisfaction to the nicest curiosity.

The situation of the place.
The town of La Motta (the strongest piece of Lorraine and as hard to be
won as all the towns of that Dukedom besides, so verrifying that
description of it made by the Historians and Topographers which aver it to be
impregnable) is 12 leagues from Nancy; scituaned upon an high and strong rock,
from whence it has its denomination. This is that which makes it command the
Country; there being no hill near it so high by 500 paces, and the
inhabitants lately having fortified, an adjacent rock, at this present joined
to the town, and called the Garden of his Highness. The hill is only a
little declining upon the side toward the East, and there only to be batrered
with the Canon. It is fortified by Nature 1000 paces in length, and three or
four hundred broad, compassed with a Mote or ditch 18 paces broad, and seven
foot only deep because it is upon a Rock, without water, save in one place
only deeper dug than the rest to that purpose. Four mounts east against
the town.
The Sieuxd' Ische a Loriner has the command there of 500 men in the Garrison,
and others the Inhabitants. The second week of Lent last, the Viscount of
Arpajoux, and the field Marshall de la Force, gave order to block it up, at
which time the Sieur de Bussi, quartered with his light horse upon the
Northside of the town, repulsed some of the Garrison, which sallied out upon
the Scottish quarter, and planted three ba^teries; one upon the next hill on
the East side, against the place where the mountain on which the town
stands a little declineth, and two other upon the North-side, whence we have
played with our Ordnance, and made a breach. Our trenches are generally about
400 paces from the town, and contain near 4000 in their utmost extent. We
have raised here four mounts, one against the port of the town which alone
is open. The second upon the West side near the same gate, which two are
commanded by the Viscount d' Arpajoux, and have upon them three batteries: the
first of seven pieces of Canon, the third of five, and the third of four. The
second mount is upon the South side of the town commanded by the Marquess de
la Force: and here are two batteries, one of four pieces of Canon, and another
of three. The fourth upon the North side of the town betwixt his Highnesses
Garden, and the town, commanded by the Colonel Hebron, and has two
batteries, one of three and another of four pieces of Ordnance, besides five
mines in the bowels of the earth, so that in the earth and air with the help
of the third Element of fire, we are now laboring to bring it to obedience.
Five mines made in the earth.
The first mine is in the quarter of the Viscount d' Arpajoux, 32 paces in
length good earth, fit for the use of the Potter. Here we are constrained to
dig 35 perches deeper than in other places, because of the hardness of the
Rock, and yet herein we go forward two perches every day. Here we make five
several chambers or cells, every one of which shall be charged with 10000
weights of powder, and this is the Mine which in the end must give the fatal
blow, being not to be prevented with a counter-mine, and sufficient alone to
blow up the fourth part of the Town. The second Mine is in the quarter of the
Marquess de la Force, all Rock, of white and hard marble, and some pieces of
it have been sent this week to his Majesty by the Sieur de Vignoles, who was
sent to relate our proceedings in this siege. This is 25. perches long, and is
divided into two branches. The third is in the quarter of Colonel Hebron, full
of veins of slate, and rockie, and is 26. perches in length. The fourth is
also in the quarter of the Vicount d Arpajoux, all rock, and harder than the
rest, in length 8. or 10. perches. The fifth and last in the quarter of the
Marquess de la Force, a Rock also, and of twelve or fifteen perches long.
These two last have their mouths near the verge walls of the City, and are
governed by the direction of the Sieurs Sexce, and S. Aman. We cannot above
ground peep so narrowly into the bowels of the earth, as to prefixe a certain
day, when these works will be ready for the intended service, but it is
probable, it will be in the beginning of the next month. The Sieur de Serre
beside his other employments, is also busy in making furnaces in the Docke,
wherein he is much eased by the crevises which be therein. Some of our forces,
though they are already in the Ditch, which they are become masters of by their
trenches, and approaches, yet they were there lately subject to many
inconveniences by the musketshot from the City, and broken pieces of the
Rock, which are cast upon them so abundantly, that the 6. of this month (a
thing almost incredible) a religious man, strong and valiant, or other to the
Governor, cast from a Gabeon in less than three hours more than six
cartloads of stones upon the Regiment of Tonneins, every stone weighing 150.
pound; the continuation whereof would have much endamaged our Army, the place
naturally yeel^ing to the besieged these offensive weapons plentiously: but the
night following the Campe-master the Vicount de Turenne won the Gabion, and
planted there a counterscarpe which he defended against the besieged as
courageously, as dangerously. The Vicount in this design got himself much
honor, as well by his wise direction, as valiant action; and though it was but
a short combat, yet it was of much consequence, the hearts of the besieged
hereupon so failing them, that they did no more appear near the brinke of the
ditch. Perpouctier Lieutenant of the Regiment of Turenne, Chelle the Sergeant
Major, and Ferriere and Ensign of the same did bravely in defense of their
quarter, though the two last were wounded, the Serieant Mayor with a
musket shot in the shoulder, the Ensign with a blow of a stone in the head.
Lartigole, and Falaiche, 2. Serieant Majors, the one of the Regiment of
Normandy, the other of Tonenis were mortally wounded, one with a shot in the
thigh, the other in the arm. The Count of Poillea escaped more happily, a shot
from a Falcon broke his saddle and pistols, threw him to the earth, bruised his
thigh, and did him no more harm. There are at this present before the Town
15. Regiments, besides those of Pieardie, Navarre, and others which be not
far off, and 28. Cornets of Horse which are entered into the guards. The 7 and
5. pieces of the two first batteries upon the second mount, play at this
present upon the Ravelin by the gate, and the neighbor Bastion, and it is
thought they will make a breach, because there is no Rock to defend them. Here
are also prepared 3. or 400. scaling ladders, to be used in assault as soon as
the mines have plained the mountain, the soldiers being forward to the
business, grenades of 250. and 300. pound weight being also in readiness,
and the besieged lately much daunted, and not daring to peep out of the walls,
since the Lacquy of the Governor was taken, as he was going forth with
letters, which could not be concealed from us, though he using a strange
invention, to hide them, made them up in form of a suppository, and put them
into his fundament. Victuals are here good cheap; the Army is well paid; and
the providence of the King is such, that he has sent diverse brethren of the
Charity, and other expert men, to cure the Soldiers of their wounds, and
maladies. The besieged cannot suppose the French want courage, they see they
have no other hope of succors but in the Kings clemency, and know it dangerous
to continue in his displeasure, to whom it is all one to have any man his
friend, or his enemy: Thus the French makes his first discourse of the siege in
his first letter, the event of which work he expresses fully in another,
bearing date July 18.28. as follows.

The hearts of the inhabitants of La Mothe, are no less appalled within, than
their walls are valiantly assaulted without by the Kings Army, who with
patience and courage have finished their works under ground. But when the
Marshall de la Force perceived that the maine design of the besieged, was to
deprive him of receiving any intelligence out of the City, he resolved to try
what effect his Mines would work, beginning with the least of all, which was
one of the three guided by the Commander Serres, which on the 26 of July, the
Marshall then assaulting the place, was blown up two hours before day. The
Marquess of Tonneins being that night in guard in the trenches, who relieved
the Baron of Montsvil, and who was to be relieved by the Vicount de Turenne.
This Mine, though little in respect of the other five Mines, was nevertheless
filled with 4500 weight of powder, and sprung with such impetuosity, that it
blew up all the forepart of that great Bastion, except about a fadome, which
the Marshall de la Force assaulted, together with a corner of the Flancher of
the said Bastion, the earth which by the violence of the powder, was blown up
into the air, fell into the ditch, making the access to the breach, so easy,
that 25 men might enter abrest; there was on the Bastion when the Mine wrought,
but one Sentinel, whose body the next day was found bruised amongst the
ruins. The blow was so furious, that there was found an infinite number of
huge stones a full quarter of a mile, which stuck deep in the earth with
violence of the fall, yet this Mine wrought so favorably for the besiegers,
that there was but one Sentinel of Monsieur de Franciers company slain
thereby, who was 800 paces from thence. The design of the besiegers, besides
the enforcing the breach, was to lodge themselves at the foot of the ruins
thereof; for which cause the sprung it so soon, that by the favor of the
night (which was prolonged for the space of an hour by the clouds of dust)
they might accomplish it. As soon as the Mine had wrought, the defendants
appeared in the breach, armed with swords, and sh^oting incessantly with
Muskets, being favored by their Cannon which played on the same place. The
besiegers placed a great many Muskttiers on both sides the breach for to favor
their lodging, the time on both sides being entertained with continual
skirmishes. The assaylents being thus ordered; first a Sergeant with 6
Soldiers armed, advanced to discover the breach, at the top whereof, two of
them were slain: but in case these had been able to force the work, there
was appointed to second them 120 more, commanded by a Lieutenant, whom also
all the Voluntieres, to the number of six score followed, who were men chosen
out of the Army by the Commanders du Pont, de Courlay, and du Tetrenne: this
troop of Voluntieres was the flower of the Army; for the greatest part of
those Officers that were not that day in guard in the trenches, were of the
number: after all these followed a gross of a 100 Pikes and Musketeers, but
the breach by reason of the obscurity, being not to be plainly discovered,
every man kept his standing in the trenches, expecting the morning light, which
no sooner appeared, but it manifested unto the assaylants, that the advantage
they had, was beyond their expectation, wherefore they resolved to force them
presently, advancing for that purpose, but the besieged seeing the breach so
easy to be forced (which by the extreme darkness of the night, they were
not able to discern before, although they had cast a great many fireworkes in
the ditch, as well for that purpose, as also to short on the assaylants with
greater facility) they resolved to parley, and demanded for that purpose of the
Commander Vandreour, who was in the quarter of the Vicount Arpajon, if some of
them might come forthwith security, which being granted unto them, they were
received by the said Vicount, who questioning with them concerning their
Commission, and understanding that they went only with some complements to the
Marshall de la Force, answered them, that if their business was for nothing
else, they might save that labor, and consider by what means they might
resist the Kings forces, but they finding themselves surprised, with a
necessity of treating, demanded an hours respire, promising in that time to
return with full power, which they did; three of the City coming forth for
that purpose, to wit, the Sieur de Stinuill, son to the Governor, a Sarjeant
Major, and one of the principal Gentlemen of the country (who was to remain
as hostage for those that should go into the City) the sieur de Vandecour being
commanded to enter at the same time (as hostage for them) whilst the Deputies
made their propositions (which for your satisfaction I will procure you) but
considering the strength of the one part, and feebleness of the other, it is
believed that they shall be such as it shall please his Majesty to set down,
wherefore I speak unto you as of a place already taken: for beside the
Marquess de Tonnins (the ability of whose Regiment (regard we either the
conduct of officers or co^rage of soldiers) assure us an easy entrance at
that breach. There was fire to be put the same day unto a new Mine made in the
quarter of Collonell Hebron, and the Town to be assaulted in two places
together. The Sieur de Manican, master of the Camp of Normandy, who entered
that day in guard, having made all things ready for that purpose, insomuch that
the place is already in the Kings power, in one fashion or other; which news
the Chevallrie de Roches is gone this evening to carry unto his Majesty from
the Marshall: for affairs were reduced unto their terms, that the Kings
Commissioners were appointed to enter the City the 28 of this present. The
besiegers have lost only seven men in this last action, to wit, the Sieur de
Vaux, one of the Vicount de Turrenne's Gentlemen, who was slain as the
assaylants endeavored to lodge at the foot of the breach, he being first
Sergeant of that Regiment, the three Soldiers that mounted the top of the
ruined Bastion, and two others* There was 25 hurt, amongst whom was the Sieur
Madallie, one Captain and Lieutenant of the same Regiment. The besieged
acknowledge the loss of some brave men that day, amongst whom was that great
caster of stones, that Ecclesiasticke of whom I spoke in my last extraordinary
named brother Eustall; for until then, presenting himself upon all occasions
in the greatest danger, he had not been so much as hurt, but being then shot
through the arm, he was therewith no whit discouraged, but retiring for to
have it dressed, (which no sooner was done) but he presently returned unto the
breach, on the top whereof he stood dreadlesly in sight of the assaylants,
which were there placed to make good their work begun at the foot of the said
breach. The chief cause that has seduced the Garrison unto this extremity
they are in, was the death of their Governor, the Sieur de Is^he, slain six
weeks since by a Cannon that made against the parrapet of the great Bastion, a
splinter from thence hitting him on the stomach, the Sieur de Vattervill
succeeded him, a Swisse by nation, a man of approved valor, but inferior unto
the precedent in reputation amongst the Garrison. Now if you ^y take my
Prognostication is not pre^c^y accomplish, which promised the taking of La Mo^
(...) beginning of his month) you may see it readered before the end of the
same, which is wholly to be attributed unto the good fortune and conduct of the
Kings Armies, who faciliate their victories beyond expectation; and for to
teach the enemies of this State, that his Majesty's is no less redoubted in
peace, than war, seeing the destiny of his Reign is such, that those that
refuse the effects of his clemency; are not able to escape his force.

This following Letter, translated out of the French does express the manner
of the siege of La Morre. The cause why the Christian King invaded the Duke of
Lorrains territories, and the terms upon which this strong place was
surrendered.

The cause why the King besieged La Motta.
Whereas the Christian King could not longer keep off the Duke of Lorraine
from plotting and practicing with the Spaniares, against his confederates, and
allies, and had (...) notice and good entrance, that he intending to join his
forces with those of the Catholic King would arm his subjects, and employ
them against the friends of his Majesty, as also that he meant to keep the
sort of La Morta, as a place of safety for he Burgundian Army to retire unto.
Hereupon his Majesty caused the place aforesaid which was held impregnable) to
be besieged by (...) Marshall (...) Force, and in fire places to be unders^,
one of which mines being spring effectually July ^6/^, Monsieur de Tho^eins
assaulting the sort im^e^tly thereupon, and taking one of the Bastions, the
Governor d' I^ being formerly slain, with a shot from a great Ordnance, this
agreement following was offered by (...) ^sey, and St. Yo^, Commanders there,
and accepted July ^/^; upon which day a Regiment of Normans to (...) possession
of the place, to the use of his Majesty, and the General de la Force, entered
into the town^ (...) day following. The Articles are these.

The Articles of the surrender.
1 That the Governors, Captains, and Soldiers which lay there, should march
out with such furniture as was necessary for soldiers: their Drums beating,
Matches burning, displayed Ensigns, and be safely conveied to Luneville. 2.
That the moveable goods of the widow of the deceased Governor, the Captains
and O^ (...) which they were at that present seized (of whi^ (...) give in the
particulars upon their faith and (...) be left unto them peaceably, without
res^ (...) passed in the time of the siege, yet they she (...) to any part of
their goods which they had (...), and were gotten by the army from the
beginning of the siege to that day. 3. That all the Inbabitants and the Clergy
men should have liberty to remain there, and hold their lands quietly, or
leave to depart at their own choice, without hinderance, and in all safety.
Lastly, That the garrison should have 20 wagons, and a sufficient convoy to
carry away their goods and Baggage. Dated in the Camp before La Motta, July
^/27. Signed Chaumont La Force, Steinville, Prinsey, and St. Yo^.
CHAP. 15. The return of Monsieur ^to France, Paris 12. of October. 1634.
SIr, by my last I advised you of his Majesty's rest. ^on for sending his
puissant Army into Germany, under the conduct of the Marshall de la Force, at
present I shall give advice more advantageous for France; which is, that the
Lord d' Elbene atrived yesterday in Court from Monsieur with letters to the
King, which report that Monsieur resolving to retire himself out of the hands
of the Spaniard, and return into France, taking opportunity of the Marquisse
of Ayetone his absence, communicating his design unto some few of his most
confidents, who with others to the number of about 15. were ready provided. The
18. of this present about 8. a clock in the morning, they parted from Brussels
under pretense of going a hunting, each man leading an horse in his hand beside
that he rid upon, as indeed there was need; for Monsieur spoiled two in riding
25. leagues, for in all the journey he baited but once, by which you may guess
at his haste, Monsieur the same night about nine a clock arrived at Capelle a
frontire City, and from thence next day went to Soissons, in perfect health,
as he testified by the rejoycings he made for having escaped out of the power
of Spain.

The Enterview of the King and Monsieur.
Saturday last the 21. of this present, an hour after noone, Monsieur the
Kings brother arrived from Ecovan at St. Germin, where the Lord of St. Simon
chief Es^ire unto his Majesty, received him in the first Court, the King had
then dined, believing that Monsieur would have deferred his journey until next
day, because the weather was very windy and tempestuous. But when his Majest^
was advertised of his arrival, he went forth of his Cabinet into his
Bedchamber, being accompanied by the Dukes of Longeville, Monthazon, and
Dechans, the Count de Soyssons, the Marshals of Chastillon, D'Estre, The Keeper
of the great Seal
and De Bresse, the keeper of the Seal, the great Master of the Artillery and
Superintenderie of the Finances, his Secretaries of State, Captains of his
guard, and other Lords, and Gentlemen, which either their duty of their charge,
or curiosity to see that famous action had drawn thither in so great number,
that that spacious Chamber was not able to contain them, although the Vshers
would admit none but those they could not refuse. All the passages unto the
lower end of the stairs were full, and the preasse so great, that Monsieur was
almost a quarter of an hour in breaking through it, which in the end having
passed, he bowed himself very low before the King, who attended his coming
near the door, and said unto his Majesty, Sir, I know not whether it be
fear or joy that has bereft me of speech, for at present I can do no more
than demand your pardon for all that is past. The King embracing him very
streitly, said unto him, My brother, I have pardoned you, speak no more of
what is past, but only of the great joy I conceive by seeing you here: then
embracing him twice more with such tenderness that it drew tears of joy from
all the spectators. The Lord of Puyllaurans rendered his most humble obeisance
unto his Majesty, who embracing him, acknowledged the remembrance of the
dexterity he used in bringing back the said Monsieur. This done, the King led
Monsieur his brother into his private Chamber, whither the Lords and Gentlemen
aforesaid followed them. The Cardinal Duke coming from Ruell, entered in also
a little after, and saluted Monsieur: who embraced him with great
demonstrations of affection. The King saying unto his brother, My brother, I
pray you love my Lord the Cardinal. The M^sieur answered, Sir, I love him as
my self, and am resolved to (...) his counsels. This done, the Monsieur caused
the Vshers of the privy Chamber to bring in the rest of his train that had
accompanied him to this interview, to wit, the Lords of Davaille Captain of
his guard, La f^-imb^ du fargis Briancon, du Coudray, Montpensier, la Please
Vicount d'Autel, the Barons de Rare and Baugefroy de Neves, de Verderonne la
Vanpot, Count de Montresor, the Baron de Cire, Somerne, Drovart his Esquire,
St. Vrin Lieutenant of his guards Charni^ and diverse others who being presented
unto the King did their obesance unto his Majesty, who graciously received
them. These passages were so pleasing unto all, that they lasted almost 2.
hours, until one said unto Monsieur, that it was time for him to go to
dinner: (but he answered him, these four years have I dined without seeing
the king, I can do no less than prefer this days good fortune, before any
dinner) which being prepared for him in the kings secret Chamber, at length he
sat down to table, being served by his Majesty's Officers; the aforesaid
multitude still following him, that by the violence of their thronging the
skreene of the door was thrown down, which had (...), but (...) of heads and
shoulder (...), and by that means made this happy (...) guilty of no ominous
disaster. Presently after Dinner, Monsieur went again to see his Majesty, but
his visit was interrupted by the extraordinary Ambassadors of the King of
Sweden and Ger^ who had that day assigned them for audience: so (...) Chamber,
he (...) of the afternoon (...) of Courtiers; he also ^ted the Queen, who
that day arrived at Paris. That night he supped with the King at his own
table, and the next day was entertained at (...) by the Cardinal Duke, to
(...) he would needs go, where he was received with great magnificence, and
his Majesty's Monsiers and the Cardinals health^ remembered. At night he
returned unto Saint German, from whence on the 23 of this present, he parted
for to go to his fair house of Limours, where at this present he now is.

CHAP. 16.
LEWIS, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all to whom these
presents shall come, greeting. We having for a long time since, many just
causes of suspicion, that Charles, Duke of Lorraine has taken advice, and
practiced with them which repine at the greatness of the Crown of France, and
that afterward he many times gave entertainment to the Rebels of this
Realm, and drew our Brother the Duke of Orleans into his Country, where, not
only the said Duke was engaged with strangers, the enemies of this estate, to
enter into Arms, to the confusion of the Authors of that design, the end
whereof was most unhappy, but also soulely neglecting his respect to us, and
abusing the disloyalty of the servants of our said Brother, has caused him
clandestinely, and without our knowledge, to be espoused to the Princess
Margaret his sister, again shall order, as well Ecelesiasticke as civil,
against his own precise word often times given to us in his name by persons
directly sent unto us; and against the treaty lately agreed upon betwixt us,
and him, wherein he promised not to intermeddle in the affairs of our Brother,
nor to adhere to those designs, to which those Rebels who had gotten into his
good opinion, had drawn him to our prejudice, to cease from all correspondence
with strangers ill affectioned to this State, and not to do any hostile act
against us, our friends and allies: and for the assistance of this promise, had
put certain places of his, into our hands, notwithstanding that he ever
persisted in his evil behavior toward us, continuing his practice and
intelligence with the said strangers, enemies of this Realm and using diverse
hostilities against us and our allies, and in the end caused the pretended
marriage betwixt our Brother the said Duke of Orleance, to be published by the
Cardinal his Brother, though he always before kept it seeret from us. The
which caused us the last year upon a just resentment to tra^sport our Arms
into his Country, and besiege the City of Nancye, which the Duke seeing
himself unable to defend, by a late treaty at Charms, put into our hands,
promising as well then and there, as formerly, to abstain from practicing with
the said strangers, from hostility against our allies, and to do what was
possible to dissolve the pretended marriage betwixt our said Brother, and his
sister; which promise he thought himself no more bound unto, than was his
Brother Nicholas Francis, late Cardinal of Loraine, each of whom refusing
being required of our part upon that occasion, to do some things both just and
easy, have thereby, and by many other actions testified, that they would
maintain the said pretended marriage; so that seeing the said Duke to stand
off from giving us satisfaction, and to renew this enterprise, than which
nothing could be attempted more in juriously by a vassal of this Crown (such
as he is) against us his sovereign Lord.

Now we resolving seriously (as we have done) to give him such a just
ca^gation, as he has merited, by the means which God has put into our hands,
to the end, that posterity may know, that in this action we have don what we
ought, for the good and greatness of our State, and that during our Reign, we
will not suffer the breach of the principal and fundamental Laws of this
Crown to escape unpunished. In which God has blessed our just intentions,
having on the one side given such an happy success unto our Armies, that they
have brought all Lorraine under our subjection: and on the other, the course we
took in our Court of Parliament, for punishment of the crime of Rape committed
by the D. of Lorraine, upon the person of our said Brother, the D. of Orieance,
was found so just and lawful, that our said Court by an Act of the fifth of
this month, declared the foresaid pretended marriage of our Brother with the
Princess Margaret not to be contracted valuably, and adjudged the said D.
Charles, vassal of our Crown, for the attempt and Rape committed by him, as
also the said Nicolas Francis, and Henrietta of Lorraine to be guilty of
Treason, felony, and Rebellion: that the condemned. Duke for his restitution,
should confess unto us (as to his Sovereign) in a place we should choose
before the Princes, Dukes, Peers, and Officers of this Crown, That by treason
and conspiracy he attempted to make a contract, of the said pretended marriage
not only against our Will, against the assurance he had given unto us,
against his promise to undertake nothing without our consent, and the prejudice
of his fealty due unto us, as being our vassal, but also against the Laws of
France, the Ordinances of the Kings our predecessors, the honor of our Crown,
and the security of the estate, of which he now repents, and humbly craveth
pardon. To which declaration, the said Nicolas Francis and Henrietta of
Lorraine, should also stand: and our Court also banished the said Charles,
Nicolas Francis, and Henrietta of Lorraine, out of the Realm for ever;
declaring, that all the Estate they held of the Crown mediatly or immediately
should return, be reunited, and reincorporated unto it; and that whatsoever
goods they had in France, whether moveable, or immovable, should be confiscate
unto us; and to the end that the memory of Justice done upon such an attemp^,
Rape, Felony, and Rebellion, might be conserved to all posterity, a Pyramid
should be raised in some place of the City of Bar, where on an engraven plate
of Brass shall be fixed, containing the Arrest, and the just causes thereof.
And because the said D. Charles has infringed the treaty, broke his word, and
violated his Faith, We were humbly entreated by the said Arrest of Parliament,
by the way of Arms to satisfy our self upon his other lands and goods not
being in France, which we also judged to be more advantageous for the good of
our State, the quiet of our Subjects, and glory of our Crown. For all which
causes, we had just reason to conquer the said places, which we put into our
hands: and upon the occasion, the rest of the country formerly in his
obedience, which we have done by our Arms, the country being now totally
subjected to us. And because we are desirous to keep the people in peace and
tranquillity, in their franchises and accustomed liberties, with all sweetness
and equity: We have advised hereafter, to administer Justice in our own
Name, and under our Authority. For these causes, and for other good
consideratio^s us thereunto moving, we have declared, willed, and ordained,
declaring, willing, and ordaining, and it is our pleasure, that hereafter for
the Dukedom of Lorraine, and all other places late in the said Dukes
obedience, except the liberty of the parts adjoining to the Court of
Parliament, established in the town of S. Michael, Justice shall be
administered at Nancy, by one supreme Council, and for the parts adjoining to
the said town of S. Michael, it shall be rendered by one intendant of Justice
and Policy, whom we shall depute to that Office, who shall also be President of
the said Council. The supreme Council we will, shall be composed of two
Presidents, 17. Counselors one Advocate, one Procurator General, and one
Secretary; giving to the said Council, all Jurisdiction and cognizance of all
affairs, Civil and Criminal, of Policy, Domaine impositions, Aides, Tails,
Finances, and all other generally whatsoever; of which the Council of Estate,
the Parliament of S. Michael, the Chambers of accounts, the Court of Aides, and
other supreme Judges in the tertitory of Lorrain formerly settled, were wont to
take notice; that is to say, for the justice and policy in Lorrain, and other
places, (except the liberty of the borderers upon the said Parliament of S.
Michael) and for all affairs of Domaine impositions, Ayds, Tails, and
Finances, in all Lorrain (except the liberty aforesaid) and the Duchy of Bar
with full power and authority of supreme judicature: and in the last place, all
the said affairs, as well those of the first instance, as which shall be
brought upon appeal, to the Council of Bailiffs, their Lieutenants and other
Judges, whose appealls have bin to the Council of State, Parliament, Court of
Aides, and other supreme jurisdictions, observing the Customs, and usage of
the places, as near as may be.

To this end we inioyne all Bayliffes, their Lieutenants, and other Judges to
bring the appeals, which shall be interiected, upon their sentences, and
judgments to the said supreme Council, to pass nothing to the prejudice
thereof, upon pain of nullitie of their sentences, costs, and damages to the
interessed party, and interdiction and suspension from their offices, to which
they were deputed by the said Council. We also will, and require, that
immediately after the election of such Bayliffes, their Lieutenants, and other
Judges, they shall be called to take their oath of fealty to us, and so be
admitted to their offices; otherwise, and for default hereof, they shall be put
out, and others put into their places by the said Council, which shall admit
of none, to be established in those functions until they have taken the said
oath; after which as well the said Bayliffes, as others, shall execute their
places only provisionally, and until some other order be made by us. The said
supreme Council shall have authority to take the oath of fealty, of all
Ecclestasticall persons, Gentlemen, and others, which were formerly subjects to
the Duke of Lorraine, and shall generally take notice, of all things (as it
has been said) concerning the Justice, polity, and finances of the said
Country of Lorraine, and other places, which have been formerly subject to
the said Duke, and all this, with a proviso, till it be ordered by us
otherwise. We have also given in charge to our dear, and faithful Signior,
and Knight, the Keeper of the Seal of France, and our loving, and faithful
Counselors, which shall be appointed by us to compose, and hold the said
supreme Council. That every one of them have these presents transcribed, to
cause them to be read, published, and observed, according to their form, and
tenure: Commanding also, and inioyning all the said Bayliffes, their
Lieutenants, and other Judges, and generally all Ecclesiastical persons,
Gentlemen, and others of the said Territory of Lorraine, and other places
subdued, to recognize, and obey the said Council, and the Arrests, and
judgments which shall be made there: For such is our pleasure. In testimony
whereof, we have made our Seal to be affixed to these presents. Given at
Monceaux the 17. of September. in the year of grace 1634. And of our reign the
25. Signed Lewis. And upon the reply Bouthillior. Upon which Reply it is also
written, Read, and published by the ordinance of my Lord Signier, Dautri
Knight, Keeper of the Seal of France, Moi Councellor to the King in his
counsels, and great Audiancer of France. And registered in the Register of the
Audience of France, at Paris September. 16. 1634. Signed Olier.

The Kings Commission.
LEWIS by the grace of God, King of France, and Navarre, to our beloved and
trusty, the Sieurs, Charp^er, Councellor in our Council of State, and
President in our Court of Parliament at Metz: Gobelin, Councellor also of our
Council of State, Master of Requests in ordinary of our Household, and
Intendant of justice in our Army of Lorraine, the Masters of Bullion, M^oso^;
Fremin, Merault, Mallebranche, Gaultier, (...), Fo^quet, Royer, Arnold, Ioly,
le Feure Treasurer of France, Intendant of our Finances in Lorraine, Machault,
Collomibell, Corberon, de la Motta, le Ragois, greeting. We having by our
letters of declaration, bearing date this day, and for the causes and
considerations therein contained, created, and erected by provision, and until
we can order it otherwise, one supreme Council, in the City of Nancy, the
chief City of Lorraine, as well for distribution of supreme Justice, under
our Authority, as to take cognizance of polity, affairs of Domaine,
impositions, aides, tailles, Finances, and all things whatsoever generally, the
cognizance whereof appertained to the Council of State, Court of Parliament,
Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aids, and other supreme Jurisdictions, formerly
established in Lorraine, which appears by our letters of declaration. Which
said Council is to consist of 2. Presidents, 17. Counselors, our Advocate,
and Procurator general, and one Secretary; for which purpose it was needful
to choose personages of sufficiency, and known honesty, and integrity, which
would discharge their places, according to our intention, to the benefit and
encouragement of the inhabitants of the said City of Nancy, and Country of
Lorraine: We adiudging, that we could not fall upon persons more worthy then
your selves for this occasion, and trusting to your fidelity, and affection,
sufficience and experience, to promote our service, for these causes we have
authorized and appointed you, and by these presents signed with our hand do
authorize, and appoint you, the Sienrs, Charpentier, and Go^eli^ to bear the
Offices of Presidents of the said supreme Council: you of Bullion, Marescot,
Fremin, Merault, Mallebranche, Gaultier, Morilon, Fouquet, Royer, Arnand, Ioly,
le Faure Treasurer of France, Intendant of our Finances in Lorraine, Machault,
Collombell, le Ragois, de la Mothe, Corberon, the offices of Counselors, your
Fourer^y, the office of our Advocate General, Rigault, that of Procuraton
General, and C^thert to do the office of Secretary. Commanding, and inioyning
you to repair with all speed to the City of Nancy, for the establishment and
settling of the said Council; giving you full power and authority to hear all
matters, and actions Civil and Criminal; appeals for causes criminal, when
there shall be any question of corporal punishment, or torture, of the
officers of Judicature, or Graduates, if then you be assembled to the number
of seven, and with you the Sieurs, Charpentier, and Gobelin, Counselors of our
Court of Parliament at Metz, and to proceed (there being the number of seven of
you) to judgment upon them accordingly. In like manner, to hear and judge all
matters of polity, Domaine, Impositions, Aides, and finances, the cognizance
whereof appertained to the court of Parliament, Council of Estate, Chamber of
accounts, Court of Aides, and other supreme jurisdictions of the country of
Lorrain, and all this, until we shall order it otherwise, and according to the
purport of our Letters of declaration. To do this, we have given you, and do
give you power, authority, commission, and especially command by these
presents, commanding the inhabitants of the city of Nancy, and all others whom
it may concern to acknowledge, and obey you in all things, touching, and
concerning the premises, for such is our pleasure. Dated at Monecaux, Sept. 16.
The year of Grace, 1634, and of our reign the 25. Signed, Lewis. And a little
lower, By the King, Bouthilier, and sealed. Read, published, and registered.
Heard and required by the Kings Procurator General, to be observed according
to this form and tenure: Done, at the supreme Council at Nancy. October. 17.
1634.

Colbert.

The declaration being read and heard by Four croy the K procurator general,
the prime President having collected the Counsel, pronounced the Arrest
following.

The supreme Counsel has ordered, and does order, that upon the reply,
letters shall be drawn, which having been read, published, and registered,
heard, and required by the Kings procurator general, to be executed according
to their form and tenure, Copies shall be sent to the Bayliffes of the
liberty, to be there likewise read, published, and registered. The said Counsel
does expressly forbid, all Bayliffes, their Lievetenants, and other Judges and
officers, as well of the City of Nancy, as the liberty, to exercise their
offices, until they have taken the oath of fealty to the King, either in the
chamber of the Counsel, or before the Commissaries which shall be appointed to
that purpose, under pain of a Fine. Made at the supreme Counsel at Nancy,
October. 17. 1634.

The form of the oath of fealty, which all Ecclesiastical persons, Gentlemen,
Officers, and others the late subjects of Charles, D. of Lorraine shall make to
the King.
YOu shall swear and promise by God well and faithfully to serve our
sovereign Lord the King in all things, and against all men, in the cause of
his Duchy and Country of Lorraine, the Duchy of Bar, and the Country of
Barrois, and to attempt nothing against his service, or against the security
and conservation of the Towns of his said Dutchies and Country in his
Majesty's obedience; but to obey him, his Ministers, and Officers, and to do
all things which good and loyal subjects ought to do. Also you shall swear
and promise with the heart, as well as the mouth, without any exception,
subtilty, or mental evasion.

An arrest of the said Counsel, enjoining public prayers to be made for the
King in the extents of his D. of Lorrain.
Upon that, it is showed to the Counsel by his procurator General, that all
the towns and places of the D. of Lorraine by the power of God being brought
to the Kings obedience, it is just and requisite, that public prayers should
be made for his Majesty in all the Churches of the Country. Requiring also
that commandment should be given to all the Curates of parishes, and other
persons having charge in the Churches of the said Duchy, and Country of
Lorraine, of what rank and quality soever they be, to satisfy him herein,
like good and loyal subjects, upon consequence of the oath made to his
Majesty, and under such a penalty as the Counsel shall be pleased to order.
And that the Arrest to be made, should be published in the open congregations,
and affixed to the gates of the Churches. The Counsel does hereupon injoyne
all Curats of Parishes, Primats, Provosts, or Deanes of collegiate Churches,
Chanons, Chapiters, and Communities, and all persons having the administration
of religious houses, as well in this City of Nancy, as in the whole Country of
Lorraine, to make public prayers for the King in their Liturgies and Masses,
upon pain of loosing their temporalties, and be proceeded against as Rebels
and disturbers of the public peace. The said Counsel has also ordained, that
this Arrest shall be read at the public meeting of the Parishes in their
Churches, and be affixed to the Church doors. Inioyning all the deputies of the
procurator general to put their hand to the execution hereof, and to certify
the Counsel within three weeks, upon pain of loosing their places. Made at
the supreme Counsel, October. 19. 1634. Signed. Colbert.

They have since made an Arrest against five religious persons, who would not
take the oath of fealty to the King, by which they are commanded to avoid the
City of Nancy this present, and the Dukedom of Lorraine, within three days,
and forbidden them to come into the Kingdom, upon pain of death.

FINIS.

