The ATHENIAN Babbler.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S in Oxforde, the 9. of July, 1626. being ACT-
Sunday.

By Humphry Sydenham, Master of Arts, and Fellow of WADHAM-Colledge in Oxon.

LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. FAUCET, for JOHN PARKER. 1627.

TO THE HOPEFVLL EXPECTATION, BOTH OF HIS NAME, AND Country, Sir HVGH PORTMAN,
BARONET, this.
MY HONOVR'D Sr.
HOweuer the publishing of other Labors may entitle me to Ostentation, this
cannot but touch upon Humility, since I have exposed that to the Eye only of
a Nation, which I had formerly to the Ear of a World, a University; a World
more Glorious then that which inuolues it, by how much it exceeds the other, in
her Judgment, in her Charity, and (what is Noble, too) her encouragement; of
the latter, I had some taste in the delivery of this, when I was a fitter
object of her Pity, then approbation, whether she reflected on Mind, or
Body, my Discourse, or Me. But that was the extension of her goodness,
nothing that my weakness could expect, or point at, but the Mercy of my
worthyer Friends, amongst whom, as, you were then pleased to approve it, so,
now vouchsafe both to peruse and Countenance; In that you shall glorify the
endeauours of him, who looks no higher, then the honor of this title,

Your Friend that ever serves you HVM: SYDENHAM.

THE ATHENIAN BABBLER.
Text. ACTS, 17. Verse. 18. Some said; what will this Babbler say?


THe Life of a true Christian the Apostle calls a continual warfare; The life
of a true Apostle the Christian calls a continual Martyrdom; Each act of it
has a bloody scene, but not a mortal; A few wounds cannot yet terminate his
misery, though they begin his glory. There are diverse tough breathings required
to the Celestial race; many a bleeding scarre to the good Fight, sweatings,
wrestlings, tuggings numberless to the crown of Glory. PAVL had long since
begun the course and finished it, and can show you a platform of all the
sufferings; the scrowle is ready drawn with his own hand, Verse. 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28.
you may peruse it if you please, 2. Corinthians. 11. where cruelty seems to be
methodicall, and torment accurate, persecution tumbles on persecution, as a
billow on a billow, this on the neck of that; one seals not the truth of his
Apostleship, many shall. Act. 14. v. 10.19.
He was but now at Lystra, where he cured a Cripple, and he is stoned for
it; by and by at Philippi he casts out a Devil, Act. 16.18.23.
and he is scourged. Here Is not all; sufferings of the body are not load
enough for an Apostle; if he love his Lord and Master (as he ought) he must
have some of reputation too; he that has been so long acquainted with the
Lash of the hand, must now feel that of the tongue too: Buffettings are not
sufficient for Disciples, they must have reuilings also for the name of JESUS,
PAVL therefore shall now to Athens (the eye of the learned world and seat of
the Philosopher) where he meets with language as perverse as the Religion, and
amongst many false ones, finds no entertainment for the true; The mention of a
JESUS Crucified stands not with the Faith of an Athenian, nor a story of the
Resurrection with his Philosophy. The Altar there consecrated to the unknown
will not so soon smoke to the jealous God. Act. 17.23.
The glorious Statues of Mars and Jupiter, cannot yet be translated to the
form of a Nazarite. It Is not a bare relation can plant CHRIST at Athens, it
must be Reason, the sinew and strength of some powerful Argument, and to this
purpose PAVL was but now in hot Disputation with the Jews there in the
Synagogue. Act. 17. v. 17.
By this time he has disparcht; for lo yonder where he stands in earnest
discourse with the people in the Market? The tumult is enlarged, and the
Athenian already tickled with the expectation of some novelty; Anon, the Gown
besets him, and all the rigid Sects of the Philosophers; as the throng
increases, so does the Cry; On that side, Censure, -- Some said he was a
setter forth of strange Gods, on this side, Prejudice, -- And some said, what
will this Babbler say?

In the division of which tumult wilt please you to observe mine.

1. The persons Prejudicate, maskt here under a doubtful Pronoune, Quidam -
some, - (...), - some said. - 2. The person prejudiced, clothed in a term of
obloquy and dishonor, (...) - Babbler, - What will this Babbler say? Thus the
Field stands pitched where we may view the parts, as the persons, In a double
squadron, no more. PAVL and his Spirit in one part of the Battalio; Epicures,
Stoickes with their Philosophy, in the other, the rest are but lookers on, no
sharers in the conflict. Heeres all; All that is natural from the words, and
not wrested; For (mine own part) I Will not pull Scripture into pieces, digging
for particulars which are not offered, for that were to torment a Text, not
divide it. I affect nothing that is forced, love Fluentnesse, and (what the
majesty of this place may (perchance) look sour on) plainness. Howeuer, at
this time, I have a little endeavored that way, that those of Corinth and
Ephesus may as well hear PAVL as these of Athens. I come not now to play with
the quaint ear but to rub it, nor to cherish the dancing expectation of
those Athenians which cry - News, Act 17. v. 21.
News, - but to foil it. And this is well enough for a Babbler, that is the
doom at Athens, mine, now, and justly too. I may not expect a greater mercy of
the tongue thence, then an Apostle had, especially when a Stoicke reigns in
it. Whose Religion (for the most part) is but snarling, and a maine piece of
his learning, Censure; But let us hear first what he can say of the Babbler,
next, what the Babbler will say. I begin with the persons preiudicate, (...),
Some said.

Some? Pars 1.
what some? The front of this verse presents them both in their quality, and
number; Philosophers. What of all Sects? No. - Verse. 17.
Certain Philosophers - of old, (...), since, by the modesty of PYTHAGORAS a
little degraded of that height, as if it trenched too near upon ambition to
entitle themselves immediately unto Wisdom, but to the love of it, and
therefore now, (...), yet still of venerable esteem amongst the Athenians. In
cap. 17. Act.
ARETIVS calls them their Divines; BRENTIVS, their Patriarchs and their
Prophets, Each word they spoke was as canonical as Text, and they themselves
both Masters of it, and of the people. Of these there were diverse Sects, two
(here) specified. Epicures, Stoickes; these were extremes in the rules both
of their life, and tenent; the Epicure in the defect, the Stoicke in the
excess. Aretius in cap. 17. Act.
Between them both were the Peripateticks and the Academicks, better mixed and
qualified in their opinion, stooping neither to the looseness of the one, nor
the austeritie of the other; but of these no mention in the Text. The
Areopagites (intimated in the foot of this Chapter) were not Philosophers, but
the Athenian Judges, some say, others, their Consuls, or their Senators: In
the street of Mars (where the Athenians brought PAVL, Act. 17. v. 22.
and enquired of his Doctrine) was their Tribunal, where they sat upon their
more weighty affairs, and, Genesis not. ibid.
of old, arraigned SOCRATES and condemned him of impiety. But I have no
quarrel to these, since I find they had none to the Apostle; The Stoicke and
the Epicure are the sole incendiaries and ringleaders of the tumult, whom the
very Text points out in this, - (...) - some said, - men as opposite in their
opinion, as to the truth; one seated his chief happiness in the pleasure of
the Body, the other in the virtues of the Mind. The Epicure attributed too much
to voluptuousness, Aretius in cap. 17. Act.
the Stoicke to the want of it; that would have a vacuitie of grief both in
mind, and sense; this taught his - (...) - a nullitie of all affections in
either. These are the broad and common Differences in their opinion, and such
as here tread opposite to the Doctrine of Saint PAVL; but there are others
more cryticall and nice, which not finding touched by the pen of the Holy
Ghost, I presumed to enquire after in their own Schools, in Zeno's Stoa for
one, and in Epicurus Garden for the other. A travail somewhat unnecessary for
Athens amongst Philosophers, where they are daily canuast. Yet (perchance)
there may be - some Nobles here of Berea, and Chief women of Thessalonica,
which have received PAVL with all willingness - which know them not. I shall
be only your remembrancer, their informer.

Epicures (for I begin with them, they have the precedence in the Text)
challenge both name, and pedigree, from EPICVRVS the founder, and Father of
that Sect. He was borne at Athens seven years after the Death of PLATO,
where he lived, taught, dyed. He wrote 300. Books in his own Art, without
reference to a second Pen, and (what is strange) observation; no sentence, no
precept of Philosopher, but his own; those of DEMOCRITVS, de Atomis, and of
ARISTIPPVS, de Voluptate, DIONISIVS HALICARNASSEVS calls his. Lib. 2. Hist.
His deportment and way of carriage in matters of Morality was very
remarkable. Lib. de Epicur.
In Parents pietas, in Fratres Beneficentia, in Serves mansuetudo. ('It Is the
triple commendation LAERTIVS gives him,) And in lieu of these, and the like
virtues, his Country afterward erected many brazen Statues, and ATHENAEVS
wrote certain Epitaphes to the perpetual embalming both of his name and
honor. He was one it seems more irreguler in his tenent, then his life,
abstenious he was, moderate, in his repast, A Ferc sic in Lorum.
in his desires, - Oleribus vtens exiguis, HIEROME says, and he confesses
himself in his Epistles, that Temperance was his Feast, the lowest stayre of
it, Allexand ab Alex. lib. 3. Genaelium Dierum. Cap. 11.
Parcemonie: Aqua contentus and polenta. His place of teaching was in Gardens,
and the manner not only to the capacity, but the Disposition of his hearer.

The whole Fabric of his precepts he builds upon this double ground; Anima
mox vt exierit veluti fumus vento diuerberata, dissoluitur, But the Soul is no
sooner separate then blown away, like smoke scattered by the wind. So S.
AUGUSTINE relates the opinion in his Tract. De Epic. and Stoic. 5. Cap. On this
foundation was raised their great opinion, that Man's chiefest happinesses
consisted in the pleasure of the Body. The rest of that was the end of all
Blessedness, For to this purpose do we all things, In Epistol. ad Herodetum.
that we may neither be disturbed nor grieved, ('it is EPICVRVS own Doctrine.)
Yet every pleasure is not so magnified, as that of the Palate by superfluity,
of the Body by effeminatenesse; But, when after a long tolleration of sorrow a
greater pleasure ensues, when the Body is no more beaten with grief, the Mind
vntost and free from all waves of perturbation, there was the true Happiness.
He was blessed that enjoyed those Delights in present; future, they neither
believed, nor cared for, Death was the slaughterman of all: And therefore
SENECA calls the School of the Epicures; Delicatam, Senec. lib. 4. de Benefic.
and vmbraticam, apud quos virtus voluptatis ministra. For if the Soul also
perishes with the Body, the dirge and requiem that they sing, is Ede, Bibe,
Lude, Eat and Drink, for to morrow we shall Dye; and after Death what
pleasure? And therefore we find their usual Epicaedium (...), - Death is
nothing to us, for what is dissolved wants sense, Lib. 3. Pyrron. Hypotyp. cap.
24
and what wants sense is nothing to us. For if Man be composed of Body and
Soul, and Death be the dissolution of both, the burden of their song runs
instantly, Cum sumus, non est mors, cum autem mors est, non sumus, so SEXTVS
EMPIRICVS; Moreover, they would have the Soul a kind of body, otherwise (say
they) it would neither do nor suffer, Incorporeum, with them, is all one with
Vacuum; and therefore, the Soul (they said) was composed of Atoms, and when
the Atoms in a man were dissolved, then the Soul dyed, as EPICVRVS himself in
his Epistle to HERODOTVS.

The other foundation is on Gods part, Epicure grants there is a GOD, but
denies his Providence; howbeit, under a glorious color - Deum ad Coeli
cardines obambulare, Gualt. in Locum
and nulla tangi mortalium cura, as if, forsooth, it would not stand with the
majesty of the world to regard what is done in those sublunary parts, Jn
Apoleg. aduers. ginits. cap. 24.
and so make God (as TERTVLLIN complains) Otiosum, and inexercitum neminem in
humanis rebus, - happily conceiting it might detract somewhat from his delight
and pleasure, to molest himself with the care of this nether World. Above all
things this moved him most, - Homines Religiosos, - that the most Religious men
were most of all afflicted, whereas those which did either wholly neglect the
Gods, or serve them but at their pleasure, came into no misfortune, or at least
no misfortune like other men. And, in fine, Ipsa etiam Templa fulminibus
constagrari, - he observed that the Temples also raised for the honor of the
Gods, and dedicated to their service were oftentimes burnt with fire from
Heaven. Out of which premises the silly Heathen gathers this desperate
Conclusion: Allexand ab Alex. lib. 3. Genalium Dierum. Cap. 11.
Surely the Almighty walks in the height of Heaven, and judges not; Tush,
GOD cares not for those things.

Stoickes (so derived from Stoa where ZENO taught, the Master of that Sect)
were of a more sour and contracted brow; their severity drew their name into a
Proverb, Stoicum supercilium, grauitas Stoica: their Precepts were for the
most part but a Systeame of harsh and austeere paradoxes. A wiseman is then
blessed, Tull. 5. de Finibus and 1. Academ.
when under the greatest torments. Merellus lives not more happily then
Regulus. A wiseman is free from all passions. He is a fool that does
commiserate his Friend in distress; Lypsius in manuduct ad St^^^am Phylesoph.
Mercy and Pity are diseases of the mind, and one with the species and
perturbations of grief, Mental sicknesses disturb no wise man's health. He
can norther err, nor be ignorant, nor deceive, nor lie. He is alone to be
reputed rich, a Master of his own liberty, a King, without sin, equal to
GOD himself; Hoc est summum bonum, quod si occupas, incipis Deorum socius
esse, non supplex, it is SENECA'S Stoyicisme, in his 31. Epistle. In all
Virtues they held a paritie, Tull. 1. de not. Deorum.
and so in Sins too, He no more faulty that kills a Man, then he that cuts
off a Dogs neck. Touching GOD and the nature of him, they strangely varyed.
Some thought him - an immortal living Creature, Tull. lib. 1. de not. Deorum.
a perfect rational and a blessed; others granted him a Being and Providence;
but this Providence they vassal to their Stoyicall fate, Diogen. Laert. in
vita Zeno^. lib. 7
and make Gods government not free and voluntary, but necessitated and
compelled. Vt Deus ipse sati necessitate constrictus cum Coeli machina
violenter ferretur. (so CALVIN.) In 17. cap. Act.
Touching Man, they taught that his chiefest Happiness was placed in the Minds
virtue, which opinion though it show fair and glorious, In Locum.
tends but to this - Quemvis mortalem faelicitatis suae artificem esse posse,
(says BVLLINGER.) Every man should be the contriuer and squarer out of his
own Happiness; and thus weak man is hereby blown up with a proud
confidence, that, being virtuous he should be adorned with the spoils of God,
- Est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum, ille naturae beneficio, non suo
sapiens est. I forbear to translate the proud Blasphemy, it is SENECA'S in his
53. Epistle. But me thinks this vaunting Stoicke might easily have been taken
down by his own Principles, for ask but any of them, how long their soul
shall enjoy that supposed happiness. TVLLY makes answer for them, 5. de
Finibus.
- Diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper negant, - Like long-liued Crows, they
last out some years after the bodies Death; but by their own confessions grow
old continually, and dye at last; and then wherein may the Stoicke brag more
then the Epicure? Laert. lib. de E. picue.
In this, little. They both held, the Soul was of it self a body; the Stoicke
did extend it a little further, and then, obnoxious to corruption, too. And yet
ANTIPATER, and POSSIDONIVS (chief members of that Sect) said, the Soul was a
hot spirit, for this made us to move and breath; And all souls should endure
till that heat were extinguished, CLEANTHES said, Sextus Emper. Pyrron. Hypol.
cap 24. lib. 3.
but CHRYSIPPVS, only wise-mens. Thus some are as giddy in their opinions, as
sottish; others, as detestable, as giddy; one dotes on the world, and would
have it to be - Animal rationale, - The universe must have a Soul, that
immortal, and the parts thereof, Animantium animae. A second falls in love
with Virtues, and would have them to be glorious living Creatures; but this
fool SENECA lashes with an - O tristes ineptias, ridiculae sunt, in his 113.
Epistle. A third adores the Stars, and would have them nourisht, the Sun
from the Sea, the Moon from the lesser waters. A fourth grows salacious, and
hot, and would have a community of Wives, to Wise men, of Strumpets, to the
residue. A fifth, yet more devilish, will have a liberty of Bed from the
Father to the Daughter, from the Mother to the Son, from the Brother to the
Sister, and so back again: and to make all completely heathenish (and I
tremble to breath it in a Pulpit) A Son may participate of the body of his
live Mother, and eat the flesh of his dead Father. (...) detestabile; Cries
SEXTVS EMPERICVS - Zeno approbat quod apud nos Sodomitae, - in his 3. Book
Pyrroniarum Hypotyp^si^^. Cap. 24.

Thus, with as much brevity as I could, I have traced out the principal
positions of these divided Sects. Worthy ones no doubt, to bandy against the
sacred Fundamentals of an Apostle, yet if it now please you to follow them, - E
stoa, and hortis, in Synagogam, - From their Gallery and Garden where they
taught, into their Synagogue, you shall overtake them there all flocked
together about S. PAVL, Act. 17. v. 17.
and (as the Text describes it) encountering him. Here is just matter for
observation, if not for wonder. Epicures, Stoickes, men which jarre as much as
any that bear the name of Philosophers can do amongst themselves, are ready
(nevertheless) to meet in a tumult and join forces against an Apostle,
strange, did we not know that the wisdom of this world were enmity against
GOD, and that - CHRIST unto the Jews a stumbling Block, 1. Cor. 1.23.
unto the Grecians foolishness. What the ground was which should occasion this
assault, SAVGVSTINE conjectures to be (and it is not repugnant to the drift of
the Text) Quid faciat beatam vitam? What might make a man most happy? The
Epicure he answers; Calvin. in Locu^.
Voluptas corporis, the pleasure, but with this limitation, the honest pleasure
of the body. The Stoicke he says, - Virtus, - The virtue of the mind; August.
Tract. de Epicur. and Stoicis, cap 7.
the Apostle replies - Donum Dei, it is the gift of GOD: LYRA adds, that from
thence the sequel led them to the Resurrection. Lyra in cap 17. Act.
For the Epicures joy could last no longer then his subject; his bliss must
dye with his body; and the Stoickes foresaw not the Souls immortality, and
therefore could not promise everlasting Happiness. But the Apostle he
preaches a Resurection of body and soul, and by that Eternal life, Act 17.18.
and so by consequence everlasting Happiness through CHRIST, both of Soul and
Body. This seems to have been the subject of their Dispute, but their
Arguments I can by no means collect; Be like they were so silly, that they
were not thought worthy to be enrolled amongst those more noble Acts of the
Apostles, only their impudence, that is so notorious that it may not be
omitted. For on what side soever the victory goes, theirs is the triumph; the
cry runs with the Athenian, the Philosopher has non-plust the Divine, and
the Apostle bables. Thus the wicked have bent their bow and shot their
arrows, even bitter words, bitter words against the Church and her true
members in all Ages. The natural man led on by the dull light of reason,
making Philosophy his Star, endeauours with those weak twinklings those
lesser influences to obscure the glory of the greater light, that of Divine
truth; so it was in the first dawne and rising of the Church. IANNES and
IAMBRES, the great Magitians of Aegipt, withstood MOSES working miracles before
PHARAOH. But all the spells of Magic with their black power, never wrought so
mischieuously against the Church as the subtle enchantments of the Philosopher.
Christianity never felt such wounds, as from the School of the Athenian. The
Seminary of the wrangling Artist; the Epicure, Stoicke, Platonist; they were
Philosophers, that is enough; they not only strugled to oppose Fundamentals of
Faith, but to destroy them. Every age of the Church, and almost every place of
it will give us a world of Instances; one Alexandria affoords at. Aetius and a
Demophylus, against CHRIST, one Constantinople, a Macedonius, and an Eurox,
against the Holy Ghost; One Ephesus, an Anthemius, and a Theodore, against the
Virgin MARY; One Athens (here) an Epicure, and a Stoicke, against PAVL; Nay,
the sophistry of one perverse but nimble Disputant, has cost more lives then
are now breathing in the Christian world, and opened such a sluice and Arch
through the body of the Eastern Church, which was not stopped again almost in
the current of 300. years, when down it blood ran swiftly from the butcheries
of Valens and Constantius, and the limbs, the thousand limbs of slaughtered
Infants swam with the violence of the Torrent, even then when Christianity
groaned under the merciless inventions and various tortures of the Arrian
Massacre and persecution. Philosophers were the first Patriarchs of that
Heresy, and hence I suppose was that Edict of Constantine, Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 5.
that as a badge and character of their profession, they should be no more
called Arrians, but Porphirians, the venomous brood of their cursed Master, and
one that then blew the coal to most combustions of the Primitive Church; For
at the Council of Nice (the place, and means ordained by that good Emperor
for the suppression of Arrius, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Anno Christi, 3.25.) some, if not of his name yet of his profession, (for they
were Philosophers) trooped thither in droues and multitudes, not only to
oppose the Bishops, but to vpbraid them. Odio imflammati quod superstitiosa
Gentilium religio antiquari caeperat, - as Ruffinus, lib. 1. cap. 3. And before
that (in the Apostles time) about the year of CHRIST 75. they went about from
City to City with this pretext only to reform public misdemeanors, and to
that purpose had certain Sermons to the people, for rectifying their
Conversation in morrall cariages, and so seemed industrious to reduce them to a
better form, but the maine project was to confront the Apostles doctrine, and
establish them more immoueably in the former superstition of the Gentiles, thus
did Dyon, Apollonius, Euphrates, Demetrius, Musonius, Epictetus, Lucian, and
others, as Baronius in his first Tome 777 page nay, Ad Annu^. 75.
the very dregs of them (says the Antiquarie) the Cynieke, and the Epicure, so
violent (here) against PAVL. Hos prae caeteris infestos sensit Christiana
religio. - These were the heathen Ianizaries, the chief Soldiers and
speare-men against the Christian Faith, when at Rome the sides of that Religion
were struck through with their blasphemous Declamations, Et petulantiu^ eorum
calumnijs and dicterijs misere proscindebatur, Baron. Ad Annum, 164.
the same Baronius in his second Tome, page 154. Thus all violent oppositions
of Christian truth had their first conception in the womb of Philosophy; The
Fathers which traffick't with the tumults of those times, said in effect as
much, - Omnes haereses subornauit Philosophia, - MARCION came out of the
School of our Stoicke, CELSVS, of the Epicure, VALENTINVS, of that of PLATO;
all heresies were the flourishings and trimmings of human Learning. Inde
Aeones, and formae nescio quae, and Trinitas hominis apud Valentinum. Thence
those Aeones (I know not what Idaeas,) and that triple man in Valentinus, he
was a Platonist. Thence Marcions quiet God, it came from the Stoickes; And the
Soul should be made subject to Corruption, - is an observation of the
Epicures, and the denial of the Resurrection, the joint opinion of their whole
Schools. Lib. de Prascript. aduers. Haeres.
And when their - Materia prima is matched with God, it is Zeno's Discipline,
and when God is said to be a fiery Substance, Heraclitus has a finger in it,
Comment. in Nahu^. ad cap. 3.
thus Tertullian. S. Hierome keeps on the Catalogue - inde Eunomins prefert.
Thence Eunomius drew his poison against the Eternity of the Son of God, For
whatsoever is begotten and borne before it was begotten, was not; Thence
Nouatus blocks up all hope of pardon for offenses on Gods part, that he might
take away repentance and all suite for it, on ours. Thence Manichaeus double
God, and Sabellius single person; and to be short - De illis fontibus vniuersa
dogmata argumentationum suarum riuulos trahunt: - Menandrians, Saturnians,
Johan. Baptist. Chrispus de Ethnic. Philos. Caute Legend. Quinar. 1.
Basilidians, Ammonians, Proclians, Iulians, and the residue of that cursed
Rabble, had from thence their conception, birth, nourishment, continuance.
Hereupon the great Doctor of the Gentiles, writing purposely of their Wisdom,
alleges no other reason why they were not wise unto Salvation, but the
wisdom of this World. The world through Wisdom knew not God. 1. Cor. cap.
1. verse. 20. And therefore he prescribes the Collossians a - Cauete ne vos
seducat, Colos. 2.4.
- Take heed least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit.
Fuerat Athenis, De Praescript. aduers Haeres.
S. PAVL had bin at Athens (says Tertullian,) and knew by his often encounter
there, how desperately secular and profane Knowledge wounded Divine truth.
Insomuch, that the Father is of opinion. Vna hac sententia omnes haereses
damnari, in his 5. Book against Marcion, 19. Chapter.

But whilst we go about to vindicate our Apostle, let us not be too
injurious to the Philosopher; The Epicure and the Stoicke had their Dross and
rubbish, yet they had their Silver too, which had past the furnace, tried and
purified enough for the practice of a Christian. Though they had Husks and
Acornes for their Swine, yet they had Bread for Men. It was not their
Philosophy was so pestilent, but the use of it; our Apostle reprehends not the
true, but the vain; no doubt there is that which is Sanctified, as well as the
Adulterate, otherwise the Fathers would never have styled Divinity,
Philosophy; That is a glorious ray sent down from Heaven by the Father of
Light; This but strange Fire, some Prometheus stole thence, and infused into a
piece of babbling clay which circumuents weak men, and under a shadow and
pretext of Wisdom, oftentimes carries away probability for truth. And it was
this latter that inflamed the youth of AUGUSTINE to the study of it; but he was
soon cooled when he descried the other; Cap. 4.
then - Nomen Christ's non erat ibi, - in the 3. of his Confessions. And the
words - (...) were not now to be read in the great Peripatetique. - Insomuch,
that that former asseueration of his - Phylosophos tantum extuli, quantum
impios non oportuit, - he recants in the first of his Retractations; Cap. 1.
and against the Academicks he is at once zealous and peremptory. - Hujus
mundi Philosophiam sacra nostra meritissime detest antur, Lib. 3. cap 19.
- Our sacred Discipline utterly detests Philosophy; But what? The Philosophy
of this world, which I know not whether it has more convinced, or begotten
error, or improued us in our knowledge, or staggered us. In Col. cum Trypho
Indaes.
And therefore Justin Martyr, after his Conversion from the Philosopher to the
Christian, complained he was deluded by reading Plato; and Clemens
Alexandrinus reports of Carpocrates and Epiphanes, who reading in PLATOES
Commonwealth that - Wives ought to be common, taught instantly their own to
follow that virtuous principle, it is Baronius Quotat. Ad Annu^. 120.
in his 2. Tome, page 76. Thus the Gold which SOLOMON transports from Ophyr,
hammered and polished as it ought, beautifies the Temple, but if it fall into
the hands of the Babilonians they work it to the Ruin of the City of GOD.

And by this time PAVL has past his encounter, and begins now to suspect the
censure of the Philosopher. He that enters the Synagogue at Athens is to
expect nimble Ears, and sharp Tongues. If he Dispute, he must hazard an
absurdity; if he Preach, he Babbles. What he does on the one side less
affectedly, and plain, the Epicure wrests instantly to the censure of a Bull,
what more tiersely, and polite; on the other, the Stoicke to a strong Line.
Thus between the acuteness of the one, and the superciliousnesse of the
other, PAVL shall not escape his lash; but the comfort is except that the
Parallel (here) exceeds the pattern, our Critics are not numberless; only,
(...) - some said; and these some (too) very probably, but Philosophers; that
is, - Gloriae animalia and popularis aurae atque rumoris venalia manoipia, as
HIEROME characters them. Creatures that will be bought and sold for popular
applause; and when those factions are thus met, that is the issue? All they
leave behind is but a mere saying. - (...). - some said, - and not said only
of late, but done too, done violently against PAVL, not only at Athens, in the
Synagogue, Act. 17. v. 22.
but in the hill of Mars too, the place of their consultation, where if the
rude Epicure and the Stoicke cannot cry him down enough, at Corinth, Jews
shall rise against him, and bring him to the judgment seat before Gallio the
chief Deputy, for doing things otherwise then the Law; but maugre all their
spite, it was found (said the Text) out a - cavil of names and words, Act.
18.5.
- and he is dismissed the Tribunal with consent of the judge, and little glory
to the Porsecutor; The story you may find in the 18. of this Book, the
application nearer home, thus. There is an outside austeritie which looks
grim upon offencos; and pretends strangely to public Reformation; but the
heart is double, and the design base, when it is not out of zeal to the
common cause, but envy to the person. There are some which can harbor cleanly
an inueterate grudge, and like cunning Apothecaries guild handsomely their
bitter Pills; but when occasion of Revenge is offered, like Wind that is crept
into the Cauernes of the earth, it swells and struggles, and shakes the whole
mass and bulk till it has vent, which not finding close enough by their own
persons, they set their Pioners a digging, and their Moles are heauing under
earth, thinking to blow up all unseen. There is no malice so desperate as that
which lies in ambush, and with her fangs hid, that project is ever merciless,
though the stroke miscarrie.

Beloved, if Athens be thus an enemy to Athens, and will nurse up Snakes in
her own bosom, and vultures for her own heart, what can she expect from the
lips of Aspes, and venom of sharp set Tongues, which cry of her as they did
sometimes of Jerusalem, Down with it even to the ground? - The Virgin,
daughter is become an Harlot, the rendeuouz of the Epicure, the Synagogue of
Lewdness, the Pappe of exorbitancie, - (...), - Some said it. Some, that not
only went out from us, but were of us too, but whilst here little better,
then profess Epicures, at Rome (lately) bold Stoickes, and in a beardlesse
austeritie, cry down the Discipline of Athens in open Senate; There are some
so ambitious of the thing called Honor, (indeed but a mere tympanie, and air
of true Honor) that they will venture for it through the jaws of Perjury,
forgetting the loyalty they owed to their sometimes Mother, and the fearful
engagements made her by way of Oath for the vindicating of her honor; but
these have said, and had they said truly, it had been in such a high
injustice, and in sons too broadly discouers their little truth of affection,
and less of judgment. As for those ignorant cries, the monster multitude
casts upon Athens, here, she has made the object both of their scorn, and
pity. The wounds, the unnatural wounds from her own NERO so touch our
AGRIPPINA.

And now the Epicure, and the Stoicke, have said, said; and done what they can,
against PAVL, and against Athens; you have heard their violence; please you now
turn your attentions from the Philosopher to the Divine, and hear - What the
Babbler will say.

What will this Babbler say?
A GOD at Mylcium? at Lystra, MERCVRIE? Pars 2. Act 28. verse. 6. and Cap. 24.12.
and at Athens, a Babbler? Sure men's censures vary with the place, and as the
Clime is seated, so is the opinion: Had they steept all their malice and wit in
one headpiece, and vented it by a tongue more scurrilous then that of
RABSHEKEY, they could not have profaned the honor of an Apostle with a term
of such barbarousnesse and derogation. Babbler; A word so foul and odious, of
that latitude, and various signification in the original, that both
Translators, and Expositors, H sichias - (...) - Leonardus Arctinus. Beza^n
locum, Ve^us lectio.
have been plunged strangely and divided in the apt rendering it in a second
Language; to omit the vulgar ones of - Nugator, Rabula, Gaerrislus, Blaterator,
- as of those which follow the heel and tracke of the Letter, merely; others,
which more closely pursue the Metaphor give it us, by - Seminator - verborum, -
a sower of words; Erasmus in locum.
others - Semin^ - verbius - a seeder of them, a third sort, - Seminiligus, - a
gatherer of seeds, - and this latter seems to Kiss and affie nearest with
the nature of the word (...), Caietanin lo^u^.
an Atticke one, (says Caejetan) metophorically applied (here) and has
reference to those (...) certain Birds ( Aretius tells us) so called, Aretius
in locum.
- (...) - from gathering of Seeds, or - (...) - from sowing of Speeches, -
though this latter deriuation affect not some, as doubly peccant, in the
Etymon, and the Metaphor; for then (...) had been more genuine, Beza vt supra.
so Beza. Birds they were of vile esteem amongst the Athenians, vselesse,
neither for food, nor song, - Sed garritu perpetuo laborantes, - so continually
Chattering, that they did rack and perplexe the ears of all that heard them,
insomuch that it grew prouerbiall amongst the Atticks, Athanaeus citatur ab
Erasmo in locum.
that he that was loud in his discourse, or impertinent or profuse, was
instantly - (...), which seems to sound one with that (...) Athanaeus touches,
- (...) - quoted by Erasmus. The first (for ought I read) that ever made use
of the word in this disgraceful way was Demosthenes, Aretius and Erasmo in
locum.
and he flung it upon Aeschines, who being an Athenian, dropped it (be like)
afterward amongst some of the Philosophers, and a Stoicke takes it up and
bestows it here on an Apostle. It was well shouldered from the Philosopher to
the Divine; but, me thinks it should not stick there. Babbling ill becomes the
lips of the Leuite; and it cannot hang truly upon that tongue which has
been touched with a Coal from the Altar; and sure justice cannot put it on us,
it must be malice, or prejudice, or both, and both have done it, not only on
us, but that great Apostle PAVL himself, though choycely verst in all ways of
Learning, a known Scholar, a profess Disputant, a great Doctor of the
Gentiles, brought up at the feet of Gamaliell, one that had done so many
Miracles to the Conversion of many, astonishment of all, yet he cannot pass
an Athenian; without his lash, a Philosopher without his Quip, - where the
Gown is so frequent hard baulking the Cryticke; Lyuie will not like Trogus,
nor Caligula, Lyuie; Athanaeus, Plato, or a third Athanaeus; Tully;
Demosthenes, or the Lypsian, Tully; so many fancies, so many censures, - no
avoiding them at Athens. Nay, were PAVL a second time to arrive it, he might
yet perchance meet with an Epicure or a Stoicke, would have a fling at him
with his Quid vult Seminilegus iste? What will this Babbler say? And this Venom
toward PAVL swells not only at Athens, but at Dirbe, and Lystra, and the
chief Cities of Lycaonia; scarce one in a Kingdom but would jerke at a Paul;
and if he chance to come before Foelix the Governor, some black mouthed
Tertullus will be bawling at the bar ready bill'd with a false accusation,
Act. 24.5.
- This man is a mouer of Sedition, goes about to pollute the Temple, a chief
maintayner of the Sect of the Nazarites. - Thus secular malice (through all
ages) has opposed the true members of the Church, and if it cannot disparage
the honor of their title, it will spitefully plot the traducement of their
honor. - Up thou Baldpate, 2. King. 2.23.
Up thou Baldpate, Children can cry at Bethell; - and, He is factious, he is
uncomfortable, he is a Babbler, at Athens, is the popular and common Vogue.
Here is a large Field offered me through which I might travel, but this is
not my way, it is too trodden; every Hackney rodes it, I have found out as
near a cut, though the passage may seem more stony and uneven; thither bend
I, where I shall show you, how in Divine matters we may be said to Babble?
how in Secular? in either how not? The Symptoms of that Lip - disease, the
danger, the judgment on it, the cure. Let the Epicure, and the Stoicke,
(awhile) lay by their censure, and hear, now - What this Babbler will say? -

Speech is the very image whereby the Mind and Soul of the speaker conueyeth
it self into the bosom of him that hears. Heoker, lib. 5. Eccles. Pol.
The Stern and Rother of the Soul which disposes the hearts and affections
of men, Charron, lib. 3. Wisdom.
like certain notes to make up, an exact harmony. But this must be sort and
gentle then, not ouerscrued; It is with Speech, as it is with Tunes, if keyed
too high, rack no less the Instrument then the ear that hears them, when
those which are lower pitched make the harmony both full, and sweeter; your
tumid and forced language harrowes the attention, when the facill and flowing
style does not so much inuit applause, as command it; it is a gaudy, but an
emasculate and weak eloquence, which is dressed only in a pomp of words, and
glories more in the strength of the Epythet, then the matter; this is the Body,
the other but the Garment of our discourse, which we should suite as well to
every subject, as occasion; sometimes more liberally, sometimes more
contractedly, least we be said to Babble, Heccatus.
- for it is true what Archidamus told the Orator of old, - They which know how
to speak well, know also their times of silence. - And (indeed) to speak
appositely and much, is not the part of one man, Ecclus. 21.25.
I am sure, not of a wise man. - The words of him which has understanding,
are weighed in the balance. - Mark - weighed, in the Balance. - Here is
deliberation of speech, evenness - Pone Domine custodiam ort meo, Psalm. 141.3.
- was the Prayer of Daeuid, - set a watch before my lips. And in the Law of
Moses, the Vessel that had not the covering fastened to it was unclean; and
therefore the inner-Parts of a Fool are resembled to a broken vessel, which
has neither part entire, nor covering, He can keep no knowledge while he
lives, Ecclus. 21.14. Plutar.
Hereuppon those more nobly bred amongst the Romans learned first to hold their
peace, and afterward to speak. De 3. plici Custodi^: ling. man^ment.
- For Vnde illi cura Cordis (says Bernard) cui ne ipsa quidem adhuc oris
circumspectio? He is an ill treasurer of his own thoughts, that keeps not
the doors of his lips shut; and that heart is never locked fast upon any
secret, where a profuse tongue lays interest to the Key.

And therefore, Nature has provided well by fortifying this member more then
any part of the Body, setting a garrison of the strong and stout men about it,
Eccles. 12. doubly intrenching it with lips and teeth, not so much to oppose
a foreign invasion as to allay mutinies within, for the tongue is an unruly
member; and sides much with the perverseness of our will; and therefore Reason
should keep strict sentinel upon it, and as well direct, as guard it. Nature
has proportioned us a double Ear and Eye to a single Tongue, and Reason
interprets instantly - We should hear and see twice, ere we speak once. And
indeed our Tongues would follow our sense (says Augustine) and not our will,
Ad Fratres in Erem. sermon. 2.
and the Father puts the Fool handsomely upon him, - Qui non prius verbum
ducit ad linguam rationis, quam educat ad linguam oris. -

Let Reason (says the Son of Syrach) go before every enterprise and
counsel to every Action, Ecclus. 37.16.
- to every virtuous action, (besides the latter of these) the Philosopher
allows a double Aduerbe, - Scienter, Aristoil^ Elluc. lib. 3.
Constanter. - So that every discreet design must have besides Reason,
Knowledge, Counsel, Constancy; Reason and Knowledge, the pole and card to
direct it; Counsel, Constancy, to steer and ballace it. Hence it is that
the tongue of a Wise man is in his heart, Ecclus. 21.
and where the heart of a Fool is, no ignorance so womanish but tells you.

So that the observation of S. Bernard comes seasonably here, Bernard vt sup.
- Non personam tibi velim suspectam esse, sed linguam, praesertim in s^rn
ocinatione communi, - In common talk we are not to heed the person so much as
the tongue, for by the babbling of that we may roue at the weight or weakness
of the Master; for commonly he that nothing but talks, talks nothing,
nothing of bulk or substance, shells only and barks of things without their
pith or kernel.

To avoid then this disease of Babbling and profuse emptying of vain words,
Mark, 9.
the Disciples were prescribed, - their - Habete Sal in vobis; Leuit 12.13.
Colos. 4.6.
- and Salt (you know) was commanded of old, not only to Men, but to Sacrifices
and Words. Ad Fratres in Erem. sermon. 2.
That to words (not sauoured aright) S. Augustine calls, - Sal infatuatum ad
nullum condimentum, - it seasons nothing as it should do, every thing relishes
amiss it touches. For the Babbler does not measure words by their weight, but
by their number, neither regards he what he speaks, but how much; Thus whiles
he labors to persuade the ear, he wounds it, and to inuit his hearer, he
torments him. In the Leuiticall Law, the man that had - Fluxum semims, - was
unclean; - And Gregory turns the Allegory, on the dispencers of holy
Mysteries. - GODS Word is the Seed, the Preacher the Sower of it; August. in
Parab. seminat.
or, as The Father has it on the Parable, - Cophinus seminantis, - the
Seedesmans basket. - If he be then - Jncaeute loquax, - vnpremeditately
babbling. - Non ad vsum generis, sed ad immunditiam semen effundit, - and such a
one in Primitive times was called - Semini - verbius, Greg lib. 2. Past. cap. 4.
- the Father tells us in the 2. part of his Pastorals, 4. Chapter. And no doubt
he that sowes overmuch by the Tongue shall seldom fructify, except the seed
be choice and orderly disposed, Charron. lib. 3.
Speech being the more exquisite communication of Discourse and Reason, which
as it should not be too coursely open, so not inuolued; Themis^ocles. -
Hence the Athenian compared it to a rich piece of Arras drawn out in variety
of Stories, which displayed, opened both delight and wonder, but folded up,
neither; For, it is with Speech as with some Aromaticks and perfumes, which in
the mass and role smell little, but beaten abroad fill the room with
fragancy. Matter wound up in obscurity of language grows to the nature of a
Riddle, and is not so properly Speech, as Mystery; Things that hammer only on
our ears, not our interlectuals, are no more words, but sounds, mere -
babbling - air (only,) beaten with distinctlesse and confused noise, nothing
of substance in it for matter, or for form; And the man that affects such
marticulatenesse, hear how Gregory plays upon, Nazian. in Praefat. A^ol.
- Ego solertiae nomine admiror, ne dicam, stultitiae. A Wise man (says the
Philosopher of old) when he opens his lips, Socrates.
as in a Temple we Behold the goodly similitudes and images of the Soul, -
And indeed that Eloquence that is made the object of our sense, and
intellectuals carries with it both majesty and imitation, when that which
runs in a mist or veil, Censure for the most part, sometimes, Pity. Let the
Babbler then that thus speaks in a Cloud, - Pray that he may interpret, 1.
Cor. 14.13. 1. Cor. 14.13.
it will require a Comment from his own industry; others, are too dull to
undertake a task of such an endless travail. It is a preposterous way of
interpretation, when the gloss grows obscurer then the Text; Sermons which
were first intended for the illumination of the understanding, are at length
grown like those answers of the Oracles, both intricate and doubtful, They
will require the heat of a sublimated brain, either to apprehend their
raptures, or to reconcile them. But why at Athens such prodigies of Learning?
Such monsters of affectation? Why this elaborate vanity? This industrious
Babbling? Let it no more touch the gravity of the Typpet, or the Scarlet, as
fitter for a Deske then a Pulpit, and a lash, then a reproof. But, soft
Stoicke. Let me not be censured here too hastily a Babbler. I am not so much a
friend to the slouenly discourse, as to loath that which has a decent and
modest dress; words apt and choice, I hate not, only those tortured, and
affected ones; I prefer S. Augustines golden Key before his wooden, though
this may unlock Mysteries as well as that; yet would I not give way to the
kick-shawed discourse, where there is commonly more sauce then meat; or, as
Quintillian spoke of Seneca, - Chalk without Sand, - more of luster then of
weight; It is the well wouen and substantial piece taskes me, yet that too,
not without the flourishings and intermixtures of discreet language. For it is
here as it is in Needle-workes, where we allow light colors, so the ground
be sad. The Brestplate of Judgment which Aaron wore was made with
embroydered works, Exodus 28.15.
and in the Ephod, there were as well diversities of colors as of riches, -
Blew silk, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen. - That then of Epiphamus
is worthy thy both of your memory and imitation, - whose works were read of
the simple for the words, of the Learned for the matter. - So, - he that will
not run the censure of a Babbler, must have as well his deepes for the
Elephant, as his shallowes for the Lamb; Knowing that some are transported
with heat of fancy, and others with strength of judgment, and it is in the
choice of either, as in that of Stuffes, which some buy for the roundnesse and
substance of the thread, others for the lightness of the color. Matter not
clothed in handsomeness of words is but dusted treasure, and like some
Gardens where there is fatness of earth, no Flower. Your embellisht phrase
without sollidnesse of matter, but - Copiosa aegestas (as Saint Augustine
styles it) a gaudie poverty, and like some unhappy Tillages, where there is
more of Poppie and Darnell, then good Corn; But, where the materials are
clean, the language keem'd, there is the workmanship of an exact Penman; If
they are both well mixed and cemented, there is a choice masterpiece, Apelles
himself has been there.

And howeuer, the discourse that is so brusht and swept others have thought too
effeminate for the Pulpit, yet, in some it is no way of affectation, but of
knowledge. High fancies cannot creep to humble expressions, and the fault is
oftentimes in the prejudice or weakness of the receiver, not in the
elaboratenesse of the Penman. Sermons are not to be measured by their sound,
or the haste and uncharitableness of a dull organ, the Ear is a deceitful
one, full of winding and uncertain doors, and often carries false messages to
the Sense, the Eye as it is a more subtle organ, so a more certain, and though
that be sometimes deceived too when it is not master of the distance, yet upon
stricter perusal of the object, it gives you vncorrupt intelligence, when
words pass (for the most part) by our cares like tunes in a double consort,
which we may hear, not distinguish.

And yet notwithstanding, though at Athens amongst Philosophers, this polite
way of discourse may be passable, and draw on sometimes approbation, sometimes
applause; yet at Ephesus (where PAVL is to encounter Beasts) it is but mere
Babbling; Act. 26.13.
And to what purpose those lofty varieties, in sprinkled Congregations?
Raptures and high visions are for Cesarea, Act. 28.14.
when PAVL is to speak before Agrippa, thinner exhortations will serve the
Brethren at Putcoli. - And when all those descants and quauerings of the
plausible and harmonious tongue shall loose their volubilitie and sweetness,
and forget to warble (as the time will come (the Preacher tells us) when all
those Daughters of Music shall be brought low) the plain song must take at
last, Eccles. 12.
that which is set to every capacity and ear; and yet will afford you, as
well her varieties of satisfaction, as delight; to the judicious sollid
fluentnesse, to apprehensions lower-roofed ways more trodden to advise, and
comfort; to the weak and Soule-sicke, the still voice, to the obstinate, and
remorselesse, louder sounds; perchance this thunderclap may breed a shower,
that shower, a sun shine. Tears and Comfort are the succissory children of
reprehension, sometimes, the twins; Let the sword of the Spirit then cut both
ways, but more to reproof, then menacing; master thy Vinegar with Oil, so
thou shall not so much sharpen the heart of the Sinner, as supple it; some grow
more refractary by rebuke, and some more slexible; For, it is with the word of
a Preacher, as it is with Fire, which both mollisies and hardens Steel,
according to the variety of heates. If we derive only from one Throne coals
of fire, and hot Thunderbolts, we kindle despair in him we teach, not
reformation; It is the temperate and gentle fire sparkles into zeal, when that
which is too high and turbulent grows at an instant both flame and ashes.
Psalm. 141.5.
Let the Righteous smite me friendly (says the Kingly Prophet) but let not
their precious balmes break my head. - I allow reprehension a Rod, but not a
Fleyle, a hand to lash the transgressions of the time, not as some do to
thresh them.

PAVL will prescribe the Spiritual combatant a Sword, but not a Spear;
Achillis.
except he had the Grecians, - which would both wound and cure. Marah may have
bitter waters, but Gilead must have balm too for the broken heart. Where
sins are full kern'd and ripe, I deny not a Sickle to cut them down, but the
sinner, whither as Corn for the Barn, or Chafe for the fire, I leave to the
disposal of the great Haruestman.

In the apparition of GOD to Eliah, on Mount Horeb, (you know the Text, 1.
King. 19.11.12.
and therefore guess at the allusion.) A strong wind rent the Mountains, and
brake in pieces the Rock, before the Lord; but the Lord was not in it, and
there was a great Earthquake and a Fire, but the Lord was not in it. And in
those winds and fires, and earthquakes which are both seen and heard on our
Horeb here, the Lord oftentimes is not in them, for then the mountainous and
rockie heart would be cleft a sunder, now it is vnbattered and rib'd with
Adamant proof against persuasion,

Knowing that these are but Men of Thunder, counterfeit thunder too, and there
is a GOD that rules the true, his hot bolts and coals of Fire they quake and
tremble at, not those fire-workes, and squibs, and flashes here below, which
spleenaticke men fling about (as they think) to terror, but they return by
scorn. Bernard ^e triplies C^^lod.
It is true (says Bernard) - Sermo est Ventus, but it is not always, - Ventus
vrens, - surge Aquilo, veni Auster, perfla hortum meum, and sluant Aramata
illius, - Arise O North, and come O South (the one (you know) is moist, and the
other cold) yet both of these must blow on the garden of the Spouse, that the
Spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.6.
Cant. 4.6. In the Song of Moses, did not Doctrine drop as the rain? and
Speech still as dew? as the shower upon Herbs? and as the great rain upon
the Grass? Deuteronomy. 32.2.
I confess, on Synay once there was a thick Cloud, Lightning and Thunder, and
the mountain smoaked; Exodus 20.18.
but the Text says, - The people fled from it. - But on mount Tabor, the
Cloud was bright, the Sun clear, and a Voice heard in stead of Thunder, and
then the Disciples cry, - Edificemus Domine, Mat. 17.2.4, 5.
- Let us build here.

Amongst the numberless Gods the Heathens had, and the diverse ways of
Sacrifice they appeased them with, the Romans had their - Hostiam Animalem, -
in which the Soul only was consecrated to GOD, - the Host they offered must
be pure and choice, not of Bulls or Swine, as creatures fierce and unclean,
but of Kids and Lambs, more innocent and mild, and of these too, such as were
not lame, or diseased, or had - Caudam aculeatam, or, - Linguammgram, - says
my Antiquary. Alexand^a^ Alex. lib. 3. cap 12
You see stings in the tail, and blackness in tongue are exempted here and
thought unfit for this sacrifice of the Soul.

Let the virulent Babbler leave the Letter and take the Allegory, and he has
applied; - For venomous and foul language does exasperate and obdure even
those which the modest and gentle pierces. Let Billows beat against a Rock,
they fall back without wounding it, yet if moderate and gentle drops fall on a
Stone they hollow it, not by violence, Jn Praefat. Apolog.
but the often Distillation. Sheep (says Nazianzene) are not to be governed
by rigor, but persuasion; all those impulsions of necessity and force, carry
with them a show of tyranny, and hold neither with Nature nor observation,
Idem Ibid.
- Non secus ac planta per vim manibus inflexa, - says the Father. Bend a
Plant (and it is with most men as it is with plants) it turns again. There
was never disposition, not cowardly and base, that violence could work upon.
Ingenuitie if it be not always voluntary, it may be led sometimes, but
never drawn; And therefore Peter feeds his Flock, not by constraint, but
willingly, and (as your common Bablers never do) not for filtby Lucre, but a
ready mind. 1. Peter, 5.2. 1. Pet. 5.2.
And indeed it is this filthy-Lucre - has occasioned so many Bablers in our
Church, those that will say any thing for the inhauncement of their profit,
the improuing of their Stipend; Brey at Universities for a morsel of bread;
give blows against Learning, make scarres in the face of Knowledge, cry down
the use of Arts, or what is curiously strung in secular Learnings, abandon them
from the sippes of the Preacher, and confine him only to a sacred dialect
without intermixture of profane Knowledge, or sleeke of humane Eloquence; No
marrow of the Father, no subtilty of the Schoole-man, no gravity of the
Philosopher, no policy of the Historian; thereby depriving the Church of
variety of Gifts, and manacling and pinning the Holy Ghost to a defect of all
outward ornaments, as if that wind which blows where it list were forbad to
breath any where but in their newfangled and braine-sicke endeauours.

Hence it is, that the distribution of holy Mysteries grows so to contempt,
the dispencers of them entitled to terms of obloquy and scorn, exposed to
the Paraphrase and Comment of the jeering adversary. Our Athens disparaged,
Learning of no price and value, Preaching, Babbling, and the main reason and
inducement why the whole body of Arts thus reeles and wauers. I have at length
met the Babbler, I desired to grapple with, and we must exchange a few blows
ere we part, in which I shall be home without much flourish. Stoicke, once
more forbear. Stand aloof till we have past this Duel, then let thy censure
fall, as the wounds do, lustly. Suppose we then a man harnessed and clad with
all the glories and habiliments of Nature, besides the rich dowry and treasure
of Art and Knowledge, yet say I not that this man without a supernatural light
from the Scripture, is able to utter those Mysteries as he ought, either in
their strength, or decency. Doubtless, the best of ours, either for depth of
Knowledge, or sublimitie of Invention, or accuratenesse of Composure, or
cleanness of Zeal, are comparatively mere Bablings, and fall many bows
short of those inspired ones of old; neither are they Gods word (says Hooker)
in the same manner that the Sermons of the Prophets were, 1 b. 5. Ecclist.
Polit.
no they are ambiguously termed his Word, Doct. Cowels Defense, (...) he
Chapter of Preaching.
and are no more the same, then is the Discourse the Theme, or the Line the
Rule, by which it is drawn; yet have they a peculiarity both of virtue and
success; strange prerogatives over the sudden passions and affections of most
men, whom they not lead only but entangle, and not fetter barely, but
entrance; in a word, they reign over us and establish a violent empire and
command over our very Souls. Divinity we confess the sovereign Lady and
Queen of all Sciences, Arts (if you approve the style) her Maids of honor.
Are we not sacriligious then to the state of Sovereignty when we rob it of
her train? The chiefest complement of Greatness is the retinue, take away her
equipage you disnoble it. Bar sacred Learning of the attendance of that which
is secular, Arts, Sciences, you disrobe it, strip it of its glory. Divinity
(says Basilly is the fruit, Arts as the leaves, and leaves are not only for
ornament but succor.
Certain truths in her cannot fully be discovered without some measure of
Knowledge in them all. The Axioms and principles of Humanity though they a
little run by those of Divinity, yet they do not thwart them, there may be
difference, no contrariety, no not in those things which seem to carry a show
of contrariety. Reason our Mistress tells us, - Verum vero consonat, - and
Truth stands diametrically opposed to Falsehood, not to a second truth; for -
Vero nil verius, - Philosophical truths challenge the same sowrce and pedigree
Theological do, the same fountain, and Father, GOD, and are of the like
Truth, though not of the like Authority.

Hence flows that admirable consent and harmony between the natural
patefactions of GOD, and the supernatural; Amand. Polan. lib. 2. Logic. fol.
213.
for from God is both Reason and Scripture, and Reason being obscured by Sin,
and blemished by her many errors, the Scripture does vnscale and beams
again, and so sets her free from her former obliquities and digressions, De
Fugasaeculi. Cap. 3.
the light of Nature being dimmed (says Ambrose) was to be cleared by the
Law, the wrests of the Law by the Gospel, so that Grace does not abolish
Nature, but perfect it, August. in Has. 101.
neither does Nature reject Grace (says Augustine) but embrace it. Nay, my
Author (and I have gleaned I confess some few ears of Corn from his more
plentiful crop) quotes Tertullian too very appositely, Theolog. Logic. page 200.
(and it is like Tertullians both for the marrow and the reach.) - God first
sent Nature to be our Schoolemistresse, being after to send Prophecy, that
thou being first the Disciple of Nature, might afterward the more easily
be induced to believe Prophecy. We may not think then the Ipse Dixit of the
Philosopher, or the weighty depositions of profane Authors, to be mere
Chimaeraes, fruitless Fancies, Bablings of no consequence; though some of them
were not true Visions, yet they were not all stark Dreams, PAVL then would
never have confuted the Idolaters of Athens with their own * Text, Act 17.2^.
- Some of your own Poets have said it; There may be much Hay and Stubble
amongst them, but there is some Gold, and precious Stones; try them, if they
endure not the touch, throw them by as metals too course and drossie; but if
there be rich Oar mixed with veins of Earth, why not separated? Why not purged
by the fire of Gods word? Why may not this stranger to Israel, her head
shaven, and the hair of her eyebrows cut be admitted into the Sanctuary? If
one Copernicus be troubled with the Vertigo, and would have the earth run
round as his head does, shall a whole Sect of Aristotelians be liable to a
disease of giddiness? Though a Stoicke or an Epicure oppose PAVL, yet at
Athens there were Academickes, and Peripatetickes, Philosophers too, without
their tumult, and for ought the Text caueat's me to the contrary, they were
his Conuerts too. And it is evident that the Apostles, and after them the
Fathers, Doct. Cowell.
made Arts the Chief weapons against the Enemies of the Church, for as some
opinions would not be convinced without humane Learning, August.
so others affections would not be persuaded without that eloquence, thus they
wounded the Heresies and Apostasies of their times, when the Revolted Julian
was impelled to say: Greg. Nazian.
- We are struck through with our own Darts. - All Science whatsoever is in
the nature of good; and good is good, wheresoever I find it. August. de
Baptist. contra Dotist. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Upon a withered branch (says Augustine to his Donatist) a Grape sometimes may
hang, shall I refuse the Grape because the staulke is withered? If on a
tempestuous shore I meet by chance a rich piece of Amber, or richer Pearl,
amongst oar, and shells, and froath, and sands, shall I refuse either for the
stench of the place or the companions? I have seldom read of any thing but a
foolish Cock that refused Treasure, though on a dunghill. I know Heathens had
their slime and mud, and some of their streams ran impurely, yet they had
their Crystal fountaynes too, especially the Platonists, of which we might
draw, and drink, and drink our fill, and drink as our own, too, ( Augustine
says) they being in the tenure of unjust possessors. August lib ^. de Doct
Chrish and cap. 40.
For as the Israclites (it is the Fathers similitude) took from the Egyptians
their Idols, and Rings, and silver, and Gold, and bestowed the same upon the
adorning of the Lords Tabernacle, which they had abused by pride and riot, to
the beautifying of the Temples of their false Gods, and did this - Non
auctoritate propria sed praecepto (says the Father) not by the instigation of
their own will, but by mandat, sic Doctrinae omnes Gentilium^, non solum
simulata and superstitiose figmema, etc. So all those Doctrines of the Gentiles
(their superstitious fictions expunged and laid by) their liberal Disciplines
and Precepts of manners (which were their Gold and Silver) may be reduced to
the use of sacred Learning, and a Christian may challenge them - Ad vsum justum
praedicandi Euangelij, - they are the Fathers own words. - Howeuer he puts
in a caveat by the way - a - sed hoc modo instructus, - the Divine that is thus
accommodated when he shall address himself to the use and search of these
heathen tre^^^res, Illud Apostolicum cogitare non cesset, 1. Cor. 8.
- Scientia inflat, charitas aedificat, - in his Lib. 2. de Doct. Christian.
40. Cap. I never yet read that the true use of secular Learning took from the
glory of that which was Divine, I have, that it has added, nor that any thing
gleaned and picked, and culled with a clean hand was distasteful unto GOD,
Epist. ad Cornel,
I have that it was approved. I know there is a Venomous eloquence (as Cyprian
wrote of that of Nouatus) and this perchance the Babbler himself uses, when he
leads silly Creatures captive, but it is odious both to GOD and Man, and has
been the maine Engine in all Ages by which Schisms and Heresies have wrought.
In those Sacrifices of old, Leuit. 4.5. You know whatsoever was unclean, was
an abominuation unto the Lord; the Offering it self must be without blemish,
the Altar seven days cleansed before it was laid on, the Priest too washed
before the Congregation, ere he dared to immolate; and why not so in this
Holocaust and Sacrifice of the lips? Why not the Offering without blemish,
the Altar cleansed, the Priest so in his Discourse too, that what is kindled
here may burn as a sweet Incense unto the Lord? smells that are unsavory
never touch his nostrils, sounds harsh and jarring, never his ears; and
therefore, the Bells of Aaron were of pure Gold, - Ne subaeratum aliquod
tinniat in Sacerdotio, - says Gregory. Greg Nazian. Apolog.


It is a sullenness, or rather policy, most in our age have got, that what is
in a way of eminence and perfection, they censure as a piece of affectation or
curiosity, when (God knows) it is but to color some sinister pretense, and
for a fairer varnish of their own weaknesses. You know the story of the
Painter and the Cock, and the Boy that kept the live ones from his shop least
coming too nigh, the unskillfulness of that hand should be discovered, which
had drawn the other at so rude a posture.

There is a malicious ignorance possesses many, by which they undervalue all
things above their sphere, and cry down that industry or Art in others, which
is beyond the verge and fathom of their own abilities. But why should Moles
repine that other see? Or Cripples murmr that others halt not? Toll quod
tuum est and Vade. Hierom. ad Col. phurnium.
Yet lo how even those last and gasping times keep up with the manner of
those of old, both in their spleen and weakness. There be (says the Father
to his Marcellinus) that account inciuilitie of Manners and rudeness of
Speech, true Holiness, Hieronimus.
- and with such, - Quis non Vicus abundat? Would I could not say, - Quae
Academia? These Cynickes are in every Tub, these Stoickes here at Athens. But
why should the talk of such be a burden in our way? Learning unto a Wiseman
is as an ornament of Gold, and like a bracelet on his Arm, Eccles. 21.15.
but Fetters about the feet, and Manackles about the hands; of whom? of him
that (but now) was the burden in the way, the Fool, Eccles. 21.21.
whom least we should leave without his companion, Syracides brings home to
the gates of the Babbler, and I will leave him there, - As a house that is
destroyed, Ecclus. 21.18.
so is Learning to a Fool, and his Knowledge is but talk without sense,
Ecclus. 21.18. the tail of the Verse carries the sting; for much of our
Bablers knowledge is little better then - Sermo sine sensu, Words without
Salt, Speech without Ballace. And yet (good Lord) how these lamps burn in our
Tabernacles, these Bells sound in our Sanctuary? They are the thunderbolts of
our Congregations, the Hotspurres of our Pulpits. Against the sins of the
time they clacke loud, and often, but it is like Mills driven by a hasty
torrent, which grind much, but not clean; And indeed it is not much they
grind neither, in substance, but in show, neither is the labor so
superlatiue, as the noise. Some that have been conversant in the trade, say,
that Corn that is clean and massy, will lie long in the womb and body of
the Mill and requires all the industry of stone and water, and will not be
delivered without some time and travail, when grains which are mixed and
course, run through with less difficulty, and more tumult. The Babbler will
apply. Thus we see empty vessels sound much, and shallow streams run swift
and loud, but on barren grounds, when those deeper ones glide slowly, as with
more gravity, so more silence, yet on fat solves, and so the neighboring
Fields grow fertile with their abundance. If all truth of Religion reigned in
the Tongue, and the subduing of our manisold rebellion, in the mortification of
the Look, there were no sanctity but here. - But the heat of this man's
zeal, is like that of Glass, which will be blown into any form according
to the fancy of him that blows it, sometimes into that of a Serpent, sometimes
of a Dove, but more often of a Serpent, then of a Dove, not for the wisdom of
it, but the venom. Every word is a sting against the Church, her Discipline,
truth of Government, He Babbles shrewdly against each Institution of it,
State, Ceremonies, makes them adulterate, the dresses of the Great whore, and
sets all without the walls of reformation, which Wheel and Role not with the
giddiness of his tenants. The Golden-mouthed Homilist in his fourth upon the
Acts, Chrysostom.
speaking of that miraculous way of the Holy Ghosts descent upon the Apostles
in the day of Penticost, observes nimbly, thus; - There came a sound from
Heaven, - As it were - of a Rushing and mighty wind, and there appeared to
them Cloven tongues, - As it were - of Fire, - Recte vbique additum est, -
Velut - nequid sensibile de Spiritu suspicareris, - says the Father. - And
indeed, in those phanaticke Spirits, though the Tongues be fiery, and the
voice as the Winds, rushing; yet in themselves there is nothing sensible; For
as those which appeared to the Apostles, were but - Velut igncae, Chrysostom
Homil. 4. (...) Act.
- and Velut flatus, - so this orall vehemence is but - Velut Zelus, and Velut
Indignatio, - False fire, or, at best, but some hot exhalation in the brain
set on fire by continual motion and agitation of the Tongue, and there it
burns sometimes to the madness of the Professor, most times, of the
Disciple. Again, these Tongues are said to sit upon the Apostles, - Sedendi
verbum stabilitatem ac mansionem denotat, the same Father - sitting presupposes
Stabilitie and Mansion, but most of these have neither, either in their
opinion, or course of life, but as the contribution ebbes or flows; so they
hoyse, or strike sail, either way, sometimes for the wide main, sometimes for
the next harbor. Again, the Apostles are said there, to be filled with the
Holy Ghost. - Recte repleti, non enim vulgariter acciperunt gratiam Spiritus,
sed eosque vt implerentur, the Father still. - Where the Spirit powers out it
leaves no part empty, it does fill, fill up even to the brim, gives power of
speaking roundly, and fully; where it does give power, - no Rhumaticke
Enthusiasmes, no languishing ejaculations, but such as the Spirit indeed have
dictated, such as flow from lips immediately touched with the true Cherubin,
and a Tongue swollen with inspiration. Again, the Tongues which sat upon the
Apostles were cloven Tongues, Vide Geneua Notes in 2. chap. Acts.
other tongues, Verse. 4. and S. Mark calls them new Tongues. They were not
confined then to a single dialect to Babbling merely in our Mother tongue, but
the Text says they had diverse Tongues, of the Parthian, and Mede, and Elamite,
Phrygian, and Pamphilian, and of those of Lybia which is beside Cyreue, And in
those and (other Tongues too) they spoke the sonderfull works of God. Act.
2.11. Lastly, this Vision they saw when they were in the Temple, not in a
Cloister, a Barn, a Wood, a Conuenticle, and they were in the Temple with one
accord too, with one Office, one Spirit, one Mind, one Faith; not here a
Separatist, there a Brownist, yonder a Familist, near him an Anabaptist, but
as their Faith was one, so was their life, and (if brought to the test) their
death too. That was not Religion with them which was divided, ^lin. lib 18.
cap. 2.
nor that not unity of opinion which they would not burn for. Some Heathens
have showed such resolution and truth even in their false Religion; such were
those - Aruales Sacerdotes - of old amongst the Romans, Caesar lib. 3. Galli.
the Solduni amongst the Aquitans; the Aegiptians also had their (...), so
called, because, promiscuously enjoying each others benefits, as in one
Religion, so in one Love, they would dye together; such were the Hunnes,
Hyberi, Cantabri, and others, Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 1. Cap. 26. and Cap. 12. lib.
3.
which were joynt-sharers of each others miseries, and fortunes; and if one by
disaster or disease met with Calamity, or Fate, the other sought it. --

-- Placidamque petunt pro vulnera mortem. If in matters therefore as well
Morrall as Divine, there was such reciprocation of old; and not only in
Religions, which were tainted, and smelt not of the true GOD, but in that too
which has been touched and influenced by the Spirit of the Almighty, there
was such punctual correspondence then, why such combustion now? Why those
daily scarres and wounds both by the Tongue, and Pen? Why so much gall in our
Pulpit, such wormwood at the Press? Why those Ciuill-warres in our own
tenants? Such stabbings in particular opinions? Such heart-burnings in our
Brethren? to the great disquiet of our Mother, Church, and her Son they so
labor to disinherit, the Protestant, the wounded Protestant, who has been
now so long Crucified between the - non - Conformist and the Romanist, that at
length he is enforced to fly to Caesar for sanctuary, and in the very rescue
and Appeal, like the poor man between Jerusalem, and Jerico, he falls into
the hands of Thieues, two desperate cut-throates and enemies to the Truth, and
him, the Pelagian and the Arminian. But no more (beloved) of those Daggers and
Stillettoes to our own breasts by the cruelty of our own Tribe; Know,
dissension is the very gate of ruin, and the breach at which destruction
enters. Ciuill-warres are as dangerous in matters of Religion as State, and
prove the Earthquakes both of Church and Commonwealth. The story of the
Romans shafts is both old, and trodden, but very pertinent; in the Bundle they
never felt injury of hand, one by one were the conquest of a finger, and
Tacitus speaks of Apronius Soldiers; - Satis validi si simul, etc. as long as
they marched in their combined ranks they stood aloof all danger, but, these
divided, they grew the prey and slaughter of the Adversary; and thus - Dum
singuli pugnunt, vniuersi vincuntur. A mutiny or rent in an Army is the
Soldiers passing bell, Death follows, or despair of victory, when those
which are knit-vp in one heart of courage and affection trample on distrust as
if they had already worn the palm and glory of their Triumph. And it speeds
no better in a divided Church, where Scismes and Factions like so many rents
and breaches, have hewed-out, a way to her overthrow and ruin. No more
struglings then by unnatural twins in the womb of our Rebecca. No more
war in her members, no more Bablings in their tongue, no more venom in their
Pen, to the great advantage of the Adversary, whose artillery is ready, his
bow bent, the arrow on the string and malice leuelling at the very bosom of
the Church, (I pray God, not of the State too) and waits only opportunity to
loosen it. But let us with all humbleness of mind, meekness; Ephesians. 4. ver.
2.3.4.5.6.
long suffering (supperting one another through love) endeavor to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, knowing there is one Body, one
Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one GOD, and Father of all, who is
above all, through all, and in you all.

And now PAVL has bin at Athens, past his bickerings with the Epicure, and the
Stoicke, had their censure, - He is a Babbler. - He is now rigged for Corinth,
and by this time arrived there, where I leave him - Jn earnest Disputation with
the Graecians in the Synagogue. Act. 19.5.
The Stoicke is returned to his Porch too, the Epicure to his Garden. But here
is an Athens too, though no PAVL, or at least no such Paul; and yonder sits a
Stoicke and he whispers to his Epicure, - What will this Babbler say? He says
- Glory to GOD on high, in Earth peace, goodwill toward men. He says, hearty
and true Allegiance to his Sovereign, - wishes the budding and continuance of
a temporal Crown here, and the assurance of an immortal one hereafter. -
He says, flourishing to his Church, his Commonwealth, his People; swift and
fierce destruction to his Enemies foraigne, and (if he have any such)
domestique. - He says courage to his Nobility, unity to his Clergy, love to
his Gentry, loyalty to his Commonalty. In fine; He says prosperity to Athens
(here) unanimity, true brotherhood, happy success to your studies, to your
designs; and The grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to you all, and with you all.
Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.

