LIFE'S PRESERVATIVE AGAINST SELF-KILLING OR, AN VSEFVL TREATISE Concerning Life
and Self-murder; SHOWING

The Kinds, and Means of them both: The Excellency and preservation of the
former: The Evil, and prevention of the latter.
CONTAINING The Resolution of manifold Cases, and Questions concerning that
Subject; with plentiful variety of necessary and useful Observations, and
practical Directions, needful for all Christians.

Is it lawful -- to save life, or to kill?

Mark. 3.4. Non est nostrum mortem arriperc; sed oblatam patienter far.

Hieron. in Jonam. By JOHN SYM Minister of Leigh in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for R. Dawlman, and L. Fawn, at the Brazen
Serpent in Pauls-Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST NOBLE LORD, ROBERT EARL OF WARWICK, Lord
RICH, Baron of LEEZE, etc. My very good LORD, and most noble PATRON: Increase
of Grace; Honor and Happiness.
Right Honorable,
THat Eminency that is in a most excellent Maecenas, to supply the defects and
meannesse of an obscure Author; and that Relation and obligation that a poor
Clerk may have to a most noble, worthy, and respective Patron, has made me
presume to make choice of your noble Lordship for a Guardian of this my poor
tractate: which is of a compounded Denomination, consisting of contrary
ingredients, of life, and death; of saving and killing; by such reflecting acts
of the doers upon themselves, as make the Agents and patients thereof to be the
same individualls.

The discourse is of a mixed and various nature; and the theme of self-killing
is the subject both of Divinity, and of humanity; of Religion, and of Law: the
full handling whereof may be serviceable to the Kings Majesty, for
preservation of the lives of his people, against the blows and mortal wounds
of a self-killing hand: and may be useful for the public good of the Church
and of the Common wealth; both for the safety of the souls and bodies of their
members; and also, in point of Honor; that the government of so gracious a
King, and the glory of so famous a Nation may not be ignominiously stained, by
self-murdring practices.

In which respects, it was most requisite that I should dedicate the treatise
of that nature to such a noble Guardian, as has a most special care to uphold
and advance both Religion and Justice; the honor of the King and kingdom; and
the welfare both of Church and Commonwealth, in all the members of the same, as
your Honorable Lordship always has, in the places of your employment and
residence: which, in cognizance of us in the Ministry, is specially apparent,
by your noble and pious care of providing able, painful, and godly Ministers
to the Churches under your special Patronage, bestowing your Church Livings,
both freely, and to the fittest and best deserving that you can find for those
places; and countenancing and furthering the Clergy, what you can, in all
godly and legal courses; whereby multitudes of souls being saved, and the
Church of England (under our Sovereign the King) advanced and supported in the
Honor of her Ministry, all have cause to praise God, and to pray to God for
your Lordship, and for your noble Family, the honorable instruments of so much
divine and public good; whereof many blessed souls in heaven (saved by that
means) are witnesses before God, to your eternal praise, honor and comfort,
with your renowned progenitors, of that practice.

And I confess, it is the duty specially of us of the Ministry to write your
most Illustrious name, and highest Commendations with the point of a Dyamond,
in letters of Gold, upon the most durable pillars of perpetuity; and ever to
celebrate your due praise, both, for honor of your noble deservings, and also
for virtuous and pious example and encouragement to all posterity, and noble
Peers, in that point specially of upholding and advancing true Religion and
piety, both in and by that careful and conscionable course of bestowing your
Church Livings, and regarding of your Ministers; and also, by your constant
profession of the truth; and, according to the same, professedly worshipping
the true God; thereby publicly obliging your self to such holiness of heart
and conversation in walking with God, according to the rules of true Religion;
as may give your Lordship sound and grounded hope of eternal life, and may
verify in you the realitie of that most Christian and heroic motto, Guard ta
foy.

In a word, Divine Providence, and Heavens favor has made your Lordship Rich;
not only by nature and name, but also in honor and manifold blessings upon
you, and in much good done by your means, whereby you stand bound to be
accordingly thankful to God; and to be ever mindful that your Eminency
objects your Lordship to the worlds prying observation, and to men's rigid
censure, which requires your more careful circumspection in your whole
conversation, that you may be as far distant from all ignoble vices, and
sinful courses, (which stains and abases Honor and greatness) and as
Illustrious in all virtues, and commendable actions, as your noble condition is
elevated above the common rank of men; which conciliates and procures Honor
and comfort of a higher nature; and of more lasting continuance, than that
which can be had from, or by Titles, and humane dignities, or from
sycophantizing humoring and flattering, that so you may attain to eternal
glory and happiness after this short life ended.

Most noble Lord, I commed this treatise to you, not only that you may put
credit and respect upon it, for public favor and entertainment, and to give
encouragement to the Author: but also, with all observancie, to subject it to
your judicious censure; and my self to the service of your Honor and noble
Family, for the furtherance of the good and salvation of you and yours, by the
daily prayers, and faithful labors of him that ever remains

From your Lops. Leigh in Essex. Your Lordships devoted, faithful and
obsequious servant in Christ, John Sym.

THE PREFACE TO THE READERS OF THIS TREATISE: AND To my Auditors in my
Ministry; specially my ever much respected loving Friends, and respective
Parishioners, the Inhabitants of Leigh in Essex: Grace and Peace be multiplied.
THis Treatise I can neither commend to you, from the pleasantness of the
nature of the subject of it, which is about Selfmurder; that is a wickedness
not to be named among Christians, in regard of likeing, or practice thereof:
nor yet can I magnify it to you for any thing that is simply mine in it;
although there is much more mine in it, than might have been, if there had
been full and complete Tractates made by other men of that subject; whence I
might have borrowed more, and have had more help, than now I could, to have
made this a more perfect and better polished piece.

I doubt not but it shall be found, in the advised and candide perusal
thereof, to carry in all the passages thereof the impresse and stamp of truth;
for which it may be worthy of your acceptance, both for information of
judgment; and also for direction of practice, in many important points and
cases.

Although I did not obtrude it to the press for public use, upon mine own
mere motion, or presumptuous self-conceit; yet I need not make Apology for my
publication thereof, from the encouragements and furtherance of such persons,
whose worth of Judgment and power of godliness is such, as might be
sufficient to put me forward to it; seeing that, in these days, wherein so
many do most wretchedly, and unnaturally kill themselves, it is a Tractate too
necessary and useful: which sufficiently warrants me, upon and with the
approbation of the Church, to divulge the same to the worlds view and service.

Although many men of learning and worth, Casuists, Schoolmen, and other
Divines: Protestants, and Papists, Ancient and modern, transmarine, and
Domestic have occasionally, or but brifely couched and condemned Self murder;
yet I have met with no single, nor complete Treatise of it. And therefore,
seeing how requisite and needful it is that there were in these days, such an
entire Tractate of that subject, when as of most other subjects, and of many
less necessary there is a surcharge of books and pamphlets; and finding my
self, in this particular unprevented by others of a Birth and opportunity free
for me to adventure to the Sea of publicknesse, I have imbarqued my self in
this bottom of dismal denomination from Self-killing; which notwithstanding
spreads and carries in the fore-top, and in the Ensign upon the Poup, the
white and comfortable Colors of Life's preservation, having all her force and
ordnance bent against Self-murder; to overcome and sink the same; for which
purpose it displaies the Flagge of bloody colors against it in the maine Top
of every page. And thus I have, for the good both of Church and Commonweal,
and of the souls and bodies of men, (all which this subject does nearly
concern,) adventured to commit my self to the stormy and unconstant
Ship-wrecking Ocean of this tumultuous and tempestuous world, under the sails
of the press, with flowen sheets, quo fata ferunt, whither divine providence
will carry me. I pray for heavens favor; for the worlds fair weather; and for
a prosperous voyage: desiring that my auspicable attempt may occasion and
provoke others of better abilities to perfect my good meaning and weak Assay,
by their more exquisite performances; and that my self may not be discouraged,
by counterblasts, or ill success, in my first setting sail out into the
worlds view.

The Contents and worth of the Treatise will be apparent to the judicious
Readers, upon the advised perusal thereof: and the fruit of the same will show
it self, in the Effects of it: and according to your esteem in both, I doubt
not but you will entertain and regard it. I pray you read consideratly every
passage thereof, and the whole to the end, before you rashly censure, condemn,
or reject any thing therein, upon the first mistake; either of the matter, or
of the Authors meaning. What shall be, upon good reasons, manifested to me to
be therein amiss, I will willingly endeavor to amend and correct; with
respective thankfulness to the Informer.

I affect not to stand upon the pinnacle of publicknesse; objected to the
contrary blasts of every bodies impetuous censure, neither agreeing within
themselves, nor many times with the truth; where passion, prejudices, or their
own private unsound principles, and by-respects yield them the premises of
their conclusions.

Although I am, in some sort, under an obligation of ancient intention to have
made some thing public, about the body of Practical and Case-divinity; yet I
may be excused for not performing; because the precipitating zeal and bold
undertakings of less considerate youth are often commendably moderated, or
recalled, by more mature and beter advised age.

I find so much, and so well, scatteredly done by others (of great worth for
judgment, piety, and experience,) touching that subject; which collected into
one body, out of their writings public and private, may suffice. And also I
do perceive that it may be hurtful, besides the difficulty of it, to descend
particularly and punctually to the special definite and public determination
in Print, of all incident cases, as the same may be diversified, by their
several circumstances and accidents: whereupon I have been hitherto deterred
from that task; which requires the united wisdom and experience of all the
most practically-judicious, pious, and profound Divines.

For the present, this Tractate I commend to your use. And above all, as I
stand most bound, I commend it to you my much respected Auditors and friends of
my peculiar charge; whereupon I have faithfully, although in weak manner,
attended and bestowed my labors in my ministry these seven and twenty
years, and upward; (in succession to a most Reverend, Judicious and godly
Divine, a Father both to you and me,) endeavoring to do you all the best
service and good that I could: and (I thank God) not without comfort of some
fruit of my pains among you; although it be not so much as I would, for the
salvation and welfare of you all; from whom neither any intestine discontents,
nor external invitations could ever hitherto prevail to draw me, to whom I
found my self so strongly obliged and tied, both by my comfortable calling,
and the Churches order, to be yours; and also by our mutual entire affection
and respects each of us to other; begun with your Ancestors, and continued with
your selves as the same ought to be between a Minister and his parishioners or
people.

In which regard I leave and commend unto you this Treatise, for a monument and
witness, in times to come, of remembrance of your true and dear Friend; whose
last farewell, he would be loath should be concluded with this lesse-pleasant
subject. Wherein (I confess) my care is most for you, that you may have
benefit, by that now subjected to your eyes; which for the most part of it, you
have heard sounding in your cares.

For which purpose, I beseech God through Jesus Christ, to give a blessing; and
to watch over, and keep, build up and strengthen you all in his grace, love and
fear unto the end; and in the End give both you and me the Crown of eternal
glory with all the blessed Saints in heaven. Amen.

And so he leaves you that remains ever Your own JOHN SYM.
Leigh in Essex.
To the Christian Reader.
SOLON, Cic. in orat. pro Rosc. Amerin.
the wise Lawmakers among the Athenians, being asked the reason why he made no
penal law against such as should kill their parent, returned this answer, that
he supposed no man would do it. He was thought to do wisely, Sapienter
fecisse dicitur, cum de co nihil sanxerit, quod antea commissum no^ erat, ne
non tam prohibere, quam admonere videretur, etc.
in enacting no penalty against that which had not then been done; lest he
might seem rather to put men in mind to do such a villainy, than to restrain
the doing of it. But after that woeful experience had given too great evidence
of men's impudency in committing this inhumane and unnatural sin, most severe
laws were made against the same. In like case has more woeful experience
given more abundant evidence of the more then most in humane and unnatural
sin of Self murder. And I suppose, that scarce an age since the beginning of
the world has afforded more examples of this desperate inhumanity, than this
our present age, and that in all sorts of people, Clergy, Laity, Learned,
unlearned, Noble, mean, Rich, poor, Free, bond, Male, Female, young and old.
It is therefore high time that the danger of this desperate, devilish and
damnable practice be plainly and fully set out: which to my best remembrance
has not before this been performed by a full and just Treatise. Chrysostom.
Hom. 84. in Ioh. 19. Augustine. epist. 61. alisque in locis. Hier. comment. in
Ion. cap. 1. Cic. de Fin. bon. and mal. l. 5. and Somn. Scipion. Proxima deinde
tenent moesti loca qui sibi lethum Insontes peperere manu etc. Virg. Aen. 6.


It has in sundry Sermons preached, and published, and in other printed
Treatises, been spoken against, and the heinousness and danger thereof,
somewhat to the quick, yea and life too, been declared: and that both by the
Ancient Fathers, and also by late Divines. Yea Heathen men by the light of
nature have damned it to the pit of bell: where they have placed Self
murderers, making them again and again to wish themselves alive on earth,
though there, poverty, grief, shame and all other evils should befall them.

Surely most seasonably is this Treatise here published by an Author well
fitted and enabled thereto. For he is an expert Casuist, by learning and
experience so fully accomplished, as he has for many years been accounted an
Oracle where be lives: and by all sorts, resort is made to him to be resolved
in intricate doubts. In handling this Treatise, like a skillful Artist and wise
builder, Luke 6.48.
be has dug deep to lay his foundation sure: he has begun with life, and
artificially distinguished the several sorts thereof, and showed the
excellency of every sort, that the heinousness of taking away so precious a
thing, might thereby be the more aggravated. Many pertinent cases are here and
there, yea every where in this Treatise judiciously discussed and resolved. So
good is the wine here to be had, Vino vendibili non opus est hedera.
as there needs no bush to draw thee to it. Let me but persuade thee to taste
it, I shall need to set no greater commendation upon it. I make no question but
that wheresoever it finds entertainment, it will prove a most sovereign
preservative against this horrible temptation to Selfmurder. The Lord give such
a blessing to it, as it may be a means of keeping men from laying violent
hands upon any, especially upon themselves, and of directing and inciting them
so to preserve their temporal and spiritual life, as they may be reserved
unto eternal life.

18. Apr. 1637. WILLIAM GOUGE.

IN DOCTISSIMVM, ET ELABORATVM HVNC TRACTATVM, Technas Diaboli homines ad
horrendum scelus (...) provocantis, mira art and pietate denudantem.
MOrtalibus vitae semel scintillulam
Natura cunctis indidit,
Tuendam ab omnibus virili prosua: ad
Imaginem quae condita est
DEI, cruore et sacro CHRISTI parta: huic
Larvatus invidet Serpens.
Hanc suffocare cordis pendulus (cujus
Curae anxiae cor vellicant)
Contendit: alter nescius probi, qui se
Nequitia totum faedat,
Illam aestimat parvi; scelesta dextera
Extinguit illam tertius.
Sic a DEO creata vitae scintilla, et
CHRISTI redempta sanguine
(Quae charior lapillis est, and purior,)
Morte interit repentina.
Quis non beatum praedicabit Symeum
( CHRISTI facit solertem quem
Gregis tuendi cura:) quipandit viam,
Qua possit haec scintillula
Vitae foveri: pendulum cordis (cui
Iter dolores obstruunt
Vocis) per anfractus doloris dirigit
Ad sempiterna gaudia.
Acumine insigni qui pandit subdolas
Technas diaboli, quibus
Vitae struit dolum: qui cunctos instruit
Vitam caducam degere,
Vt illius peracto cursugaudijs
Vitae fruantur aeternae.
Gregem o beatum, qui Tuo doctissimo
Labor ductus, abstrusa
Coelstium scitorum ediscit dogmata!
CHRISTUS diu Tesospitet,
Gregem ut Tibi commissum possis (quod facis)
Fovere, scriptis, and vita.
T.Y.
Haec amoris ergo apposuit, qui gravissimum hujus Tractatus Authorem vere
suscipit, and sincere colit.



A dear Friend to the Author.
FRom Albion (whence now we all be one)
with healthful salves, thou do assay to cure
Self-murders grief; that many long agone
does kill; and fill dark Hell, with souls impure:
Which sage Hippocrates, and Galen, (sure,)
could not prevent, nor heal, with all their skill.
But thou, by thy receipts, that will endure,
most skilfully can soundly cure this ill.
Go to, therefore dear Sym; God give success,
Like to thy skill, thy will, this to redress.
S.H.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters and several Sections, with their Contents.
CHAPTER 1. The general description of Self-murder. 1. Concerning life and
death; that they are things of greatest importance. Page 1. 2. Self-murder
described what it is, and of the three parts of the description. Page 2 3. How
self-murder is known by life: which it destroys: why evil ever cleaves to
good: and that all worldly things are subject to contrary passions. Page 2, 3.
Chap. 2. Of the kinds of the life of man, natural and spiritual; and what
the care of men should be of both. Page 4 Chap. 3. Of natural life in
general. 1. Of diverse sorts of life; of vegetation, sense and reason. Page 4,
5 2. That man only is subject to self-murder; and of the greatness of that
sin. Page 6 3. How natural life is known, in, and by the man in whom it is,
both by sense and understanding. Page 6 4. Of the souls double act in man; for
his person, and his works. Page 7
Chap. 4. Of man's natural life more specially. 1. Wherein the natural life of
man consists; which is frail. Page 8 2. Of the sweetness of natural life.
Page 9 3. How the loss of natural life is horrible and painful; and why.
Page 9 4. How life is dear and precious; with three reasons thereof. Page 10
5. Of natural life's preservation, the means thereof: and of cheerfulness.
Page 12 6. How to use Physic; with four cautions about the same. Page 14 7.
Of three deadly things to be resisted. Page 16 8. How to spend our lives well;
with three motives so to do: and how men mispend their lives four ways. Page
18
Chap. 5. Of man's spiritual life. 1. What spiritual life is. Page 21 2. Of
the acts of spiritual life; which are two. Page 21 3. Of the degrees of
spiritual life: which are two, and subordinate. Page 22 4. Who may have
spiritual life; which is denied to none; and by whose fault does any miss of
it, or lose it: How the Gospel was published to Adam and to all his posterity;
who for unbelief of the same are justly punishable. Page 24 5. Of the
excellency of spiritual life, in three respects. Page 26 6. How to obtain
spiritual life by means, which we are to use to get it, and grow in it. Page
28 7. How the Gospel works life, not physically or ethically, but
supernaturally by the power of God, working according to his own will upon
man's heart, that is the subject of conversion. Page 30 8. Why God uses means
to convert us; reasons three. Page 31 9. How the power of the Holy Spirit is
manifested and seen upon us in the means, by four degrees of operation And
of three evidences of the Spirits application of Christ to us. Page 32 10. How
the Spirit works holiness in us in two degrees, with their uses, and of three
grounds of actual obedience. Page 35 11. Of the four signs of spiritual
life. Page 37 12. How spiritual life may be preserved by use of six means.
Page 39 13. How man's care of his spiritual life should be great, preferring it
above his natural life. Page 42
Chap. 6. Of life's destruction, and of murder in general. 1. How man's life
maybe lost, both passively and actively. Page 43 2. How natural life may be
lost, by means both internal and external; casual and voluntary; justly and
unjustly. Page 44 3. Of the means of the destruction of spiritual life by the
justice of God, and by the means of men, and of man's subjection to death. Page
45 4. Of murder in self-killing; how the same is horrible, and of four things
observable in it. Page 47 5. How murder is vile, in three respects. Page 49 6.
Of the original of murder; how it self is an act of impotency, which we are
to abhor; and how none can murder another without murdering themselves: Page
51
Chap. 7. Of murder as it is of ones self. 1. Of the specificall nature of
self-murder. Page 53 2. Of the evil and greatness of the sin of self-murder.
Page 54 3. Of lawful self-killing of our old man, of the kind of that killing,
and how it is done. Page 54 4. Of diverse observations from the general
consideration of self-murder, for informing of our judgment, and directing of
our practice. Page 56
Chap. 8. Of spiritual self-murder in special. 1. That all perishing-soules
are self-murdered, and how soule-murder is self-murder. Page 57 2. Spiritual
self-murder defined what it is. Page 58 3. Of soule-murder, in two degrees, by
deprivation of life. Page 58 4. Of man's deficiency to be saved, in Adam and in
our selves; by a fourefold omission of doing our duties in use of means. Page
59 5. Of man's neglect and contempt of the power of the means that he uses.
Page 60 6. Of man's defect in obedience, both Evangelicall and Legal. Page 61
7. Of the reasons of our defect of obedience, which are four. Page 62 8. How
and why grace dies by man's neglect. Page 63 9. How the harm of omission of
duty is deprivation of life spiritual; and of negative righteousness, and
how the punishment of damage is greater than that of smart. Page 64 10. Of the
endeavor after spiritual life; wherein it consists, and of the lets thereof.
Page 66 11. Of the second degree of spiritual self-murder, which is in
subjection to death, by sins of commission. Page 67 12. Of the means of man's
destruction by breaking the Law of negative commands; and of four properties
of soul-murdring sins. Page 67, 68. 13. Of two causes of men's adventuring upon
sinful courses against the law. Page 69 14. Of spiritual self-murder by
sinning against the Gospel: and how the obedience of the Gospel differs from
the obedience of the Law, in four points. Page 70 15. Of infidelity against
the Gospel, and of the causes and cure thereof. Page 72 16. Of impenitency.
Page 72 17. Of the sin against the holy Ghost, and things observable about it.
Page 73 18. Of final Apostasy; and of the difference of sins. Page 75 19. Of
the malignity of the sins against the Gospel, above those that are committed
against the Law, for three reasons. Page 76 20. The uses and improvement of the
doctrine of spiritual self-murder. Page 77
Chap. 9. Of bodily self-murder in special. 1. How bodily self-murder is
defined and differenced from spiritual self-murder. Page 80 2. Of man's body,
in a threefold consideration, with its works; and of the souls three sorts of
moral works in the body; and how the body suffers by and for the soul. Page
81 3. Of the degrees of bodily self-murder, and the pronenesse of man to it,
upon two causes; which are removed by answers to both. Page 83
Chap. 10. Of the kinds of bodily self-murder, direct and indirect. 1. Direct
and indirect self-murder are defined. Page 84 2. Of the difference between
direct and indirect self-murder, in three things. Page 85 3. How indirect
self-murder is greater, in two respects, than direct. Page 87 4. How direct
self-murder is absolutely the greater, in three respects. Page 88 5. Of the
degrees of sin; and how to escape the greatest, and its end. Page 89
Chap. 11. Of indirect self-murder of the body. 1. The reasons why indirect
self-murder is first treated of. Page 90 2. How indirect self-murder is
wrought, two ways; by omission and commission. Page 91 3. How indirect
self-murder by omission is physically effected, four ways. ibid. 4. How
indirect self-murder by omission is morally wrought two ways; and that neglect
of means of preservation is tempting of God, and how. Page 94 5. A question
resolved, about standers mute, or those that refuse to answer legally, and to
submit to lawful trial when they are arraigned at the bar, for some
capital crime; the reasons pro and contra, with the conclusion, that such
mutes are indirect self-murderers. Page 96 6. The resolution of the question,
concerning malefactors arraigned for capital crimes whereof they know
themselves guilty; whether they ought in conscience to answer affirmatively or
negatively to the question made to them at the Bar, whether they be Guilty,
or Not Guilty; the reasons on both sides, with the conclusion for the negative;
that they may avoid indirect self-murmurder. Page 100 7. Of indirect
self-murder of commission, by distemperature, and needless mutilation of body,
or members, whereupon death ensues. Page 109 8. Of indirect self-murder of
commission by unwarrantable practicing of Physic, or Surgery upon ones
self, thereby killed. Page 111 9. Of indirect self-murder of commission by a
man's unthriftinesse and prodigality, bringing himself to destruction. Page 111
10. How indirect self-murder of commission is wrought by desperate hazard, in
six cases. Page 112 The first case is, concerning Braves, and desperate
undertakers. Page 112 The second case is, concerning purchase and reskue. Page
112 The third case is, concerning some soldiers. Page 113 The fourth case is,
concerning Mariners. Page 113 The fifth case is, concerning Duells. Page 114
The sixth case is, concerning desperate attempts, upon daring and wagering.
Page 116
11. Of indirect self-murder committed by covenant and society, with persons
destinate to destruction: in three cases. Page 118 1. Of Leagues. Page 119 2.
Of War. ibid. 3. Of presuming into infectious places, or company. Page 120
12. Of indirect self-murder of commission by doing that, which naturally
procures that which kills the doer of it. Page 121 13. Of indirect self-murder
of commission by wilfully doing capital crimes against humane Laws and
Authority. Page 120 14. Of indirect self-murder of commission by wilful
transgression of Gods Laws; after two several ways. Page 120 15. Of three
exempt cases, wherein men may expose their lives to death, without danger of
indirect selfmurder. Page 125 The first case is, concerning venturing life upon
lawful calling. ibid. 16. A question or case of conscience resolved about
Soldiers in danger of their lives, fleeing without order. Page 127 17. Of the
second exempt case about adventuring of life, without danger of indirect
self-murder; which is in urgent unavoidable necessity: in three points. Page
128 The first whereof is about both uncertain death for certain and necessary
good. ibid. And also certain death for Superiors, and for some friends. Page
129
18. Of the second point, which is concerning certain death for certain more
public good. Page 131 19. Of six questions resolved, that belong to this
second point. Page 133 The first where of is about a manslayer, what he is to
do, for whose sake his friends are pursued to death. ibid. 20. Of the second
question, which is about a man under deadly displeasure of Superiors; what he
is to do for to pacify their mortal wrath, reflecting (for his sake) upon his
friends. Page 133 21. The third question, which is touching the voluntary
appearing of Fellons or the like, at liberty upon bail, to submit to Justice,
for freeing of their bailes; with danger of their own lives. Page 135 22. The
fourth question, which is about, what an unquestioned, or unsuspected guilty
party is to do, for saving of a guiltless person that is brought to the doom
and danger of death, upon trial, by error, or misprision, for the capital
fact of the former. Page 136 23. The fifth question, which is about a man's
voluntary revealing to the Magistrate his own secret capital crimes, touching
his life; in case of importable distress of conscience for the same crimes by
him done. Page 137 24. The sixth question, or case, which is about burning, or
sinking a ship, in a sea-sight; and how far such a fight is to be mainteyned
against the Enemies; without danger of self-murder. Page 138 25. Of the third
point of the second exempt case, which is about venturing of life without
danger of indirect self-murder for saving of souls. Page 141 In two cases: 1.
About infectious persons. ibid. 2. About publishing of the Gospel, upon danger
of death to the doer. Page 142
26. Of the third general exempt case, wherein men may expose their lives to
death, without danger of indirect self-murder; which is about religion and our
own salvation; in four points, or cases. Page 143 27. Of the first point or
case, which is about defense of Religion, in peace and war. Page 144 28. Of
the second point of the third case, about adventuring and laying down our lives
for religion, without danger of self-murder; which is about the public
confession, or profession of the truth, with danger of life. Page 145 29. Of
the third point belonging to the third exempt case, which is about not-omitting
doing necessary duties commanded by God, in peril of life; upon humane command
or threats to the contrary: and of the several sorts of those duties, and how
far they bind us. And of the obedience and disobedience of Ministers to
suspension, deprivation, and the like censures. Page 146 30. Of the fourth
point of the third exempt case, which is about not-commission of any evil of
sin, upon any command or inforcement of man threatening death to the
disobedient. Page 149 31. Of the kinds of sins of commission to be avoided to
death; in things determinatly evil of themselves, both by the law of nature
and also by the positive Law of God. Page 150 32. Of indifferent things, and
how the use of them may be sinful, and in that respect then to be forborne.
Page 152 33. Of the diverse properties of an indirect self-murderer. Page 154
34. Observations from indirect self-murder, in three uses. Page 155
Chap. 12. Of direct bodily self-murder. 1. What direct self-murder is, both in
the general nature of it, in four things: and also in the specificall nature
of it; remote and near. Page 159 2. Of the imaginary good conceited to be in
self-murder. Page 163 3. Concerning the wills object; and its faultiness. Page
167 4. Of diverse observations from direct self-murder. Page 169 5. Of certain
exempt cases of some that kill themselves, and are not direct self-murderers.
Page 172
Chap. 13. Of direct self-murderers. 1. That practice and habit gives
denomination, and why. Page 175 2. How it is apparent by Scripture that many
men have murdered themselves: with diverse observations from the same about
self-murder, and horrible crimes falling out in the Church. Page 176 3. How
self-murderers are apparent by Histories, both profane and Ecclesiastical,
amongst heathens and Christians, and the reasons of the same. Page 178 4. That
self-murderers are known by continued experience: and of two uses of the same;
and how the motions of self-murder cleave to men, and prevail over them. Page
181
Chap. 14. Of the means and method of self-murderers murdering themselves
directly. 1. Of the means of self-murder, how none is lawful: of two uses,
showing how hard it is to do good, and easy to do evil. Page 183 2. The
self-murderers application of the means of self-killing; in premeditation and
determination of the end; and choice of the means to effect it; with
observation of three things therein, and of two observations for instruction
and use. Page 185 3. Of the self-murderers method, in executing murder upon
themselves, with observation of three things therein, upon two reasons; and how
hardly resolved self-murder is withstood. Page 187
Chap. 15. The self-murderers motives, whereupon they directly kill themselves.
1. That men by abused reason, do sin worst; and that there is no true reason
why any should kill themselves. Page 189 2. Of motives to self-murder there can
be none warrantably sufficient: and how arguments are deemed weak, or strong.
Page 191 3. Concerning the motive to self-murder from perverted Judgment, by
humane laws and customs: how both prevail against nature. How the judgment
of the learned and wise has the force of Law. How laws and customs against
Scripture and reason are erroneous, and not to be obeyed. A caveat against
vain praise of self-murderers. Page 192 4. Of the motive to self-murder from
perverted judgment, by mis-understood Scripture: the three causes thereof: and
of four means or rules of right understanding the Scriptures. Page 195 5. Of
the motive to self-murder from perverted judgment, by mis-construed decree and
destiny: and the grounds of the same: the errer of grounding ill practices upon
that foundation: with diverse observations about that course. Page 202 6. Of
the motive to self-murder from perverted judgment, by the conceited good of
self-murder: and how apparent good beguiles the understanding; And now the will
works upon the understanding to deceive it: and how self-murder blinds the
mind. Page 207 7. Of the motive to self-murder from afflictions; their several
sorts, whereof three are upon the body. Page 211 8. Of the motive to
self-murder from afflictions, upon a man's outward estate. Page 214 9. Of the
motive to self-murder, from crosses in points of honor. Page 215 10. Of the
motive to self-murder from disasters upon friends, in two eases. Page 216 11.
Of the motive to self-murder from trouble of conscience, the kinds and manner
of the same. Page 217 12. Of the motive to self. murder from disconcentment of
mind; and passion of love; the kinds, and causes of coffeehouse. Page 219
13. Of the motive to self-murder from disgrace and shame; 221. the causes,
effects and kinds thereof Page 222 14. Of the motive to self-murder from fear:
the causes and effects of it. Page 224 15. Of the true causes of self-murder in
afflictions; which are three. Page 225 16. That Affliction is no warrantable
motive for any to kill themselves; showed by four reasons. Page 228 17. Of
certain uses about afflicted persons. Page 230 18. Of the motive to
self-murder from anger and revenge; the kinds thereof against ones self and
others, good and bad, their causes, and powerful effects. Page 232 19. Of the
motive to self-murder from care of prevention of sin to come, in our selves, or
others: and how unwarrantable it is for any to kill themselves for that end.
Page 237 20. Of the motive to self-murder from ambition and excessive desire
after glory, praise, or a better life to come after death: and how
unwarrantable it is for any therefore to kill themselves. Page 241 21. Of the
motive to self-murder from the motions and temptations of the devil: how he
suggests the same; and to whom specially: how known to be from Satan; and upon
what reasons to be rejected. Page 246 22. Of the motive to self-killing from
frenzy: the kinds, the subjects, and grounds of it. Page 250 23. Of the
motive to self-murder from the examples of such as have murdered or killed
themselves: and of the insufficiency of that motive for any to do the like,
upon such presidents. Page 252
Chap. 16. Of Self-murderers introduction and entrance into the practice of
self-murder. 1. Of the persons most subject to self-murder, who are of four
sorts. Page 254 2. Of the entrance into self-murder, by four particular
degrees: where are handled two questions: 1. concerning desire of death; 2.
about the goodness of being; against them that wish that they had never been
borne, or never had being. Page 256 3. Of four signs of ensuing self-murder
near approaching. Page 259
Chap. 17. Arguments against self-murder, proving the same to be utterly
unlawful and damnable. 1. That self-murder is contrary to Religion, and how:
where two questions are resolved. 1. Whether the Supreme Magistrate may, for
any capital crime done by him, either kill himself; or be put to death, pon
his own command, or otherwise by his people. 2. How far a man condemned to
die may be active about taking away his own life. Page 262
2. How self-murder is against God himself; in four respects. Page 267 3. How
self-murder is against nature. Page 269 4. How self-murder is injurious to
mankind. Page 270 5. How self-murder wrongs man's self in doing it. Page 271
6. How self-murder is a sin most harmfull, and to whom. Page 272 7. How right
reason condemns self-murder, by nineteen several arguments. Page 273 Wherein
also is showed the reasons why the goods of self-murderers become confiscate,
and Deodands. Page 278 8. Of certain uses about the grievousnesse of
self-murder, and how men should beware of it. Page 286
Chap. 18. Of the final estate of direct selfmurderers; whether they be all
everlastingly damned with the devils in hell, or not. 1. Of the extent of
self-murder to the souls hurt, and how regardlesse self-murderers be of their
souls. Page 288 2. That all that kill themselves are not properly direct
self-murderers; nor are in their state of damnation: and who be exempted, and
upon what grounds. Page 290 3. That all proper and direct self-murderers are
reprobates, without the state of grace; and are in the state of eternal
damnation, and the reasons thereof. Page 291 4. That by the Testimony of the
Scriptures, both in doctrine, and also in all examples of self-murderers
recorded therein, all proper and direct self-murderers are everlastingly
damned. Page 293 5. That self-murder is a transcendent sin beyond both law and
mercy, and subjects the doers of it to damnation. ibid. 6. That self-murderers
want all true saving repentance, and likewise salvation. Page 296 7. How the
Church testifies by her judgment and usage of direct self-murderers, that they
are all damned in hell. Page 297 8. Of certain uses. Page 299 9. Of certain
objections made in favor of the salvation of self-murderers, answered: and
first touching that which is taken from the nature of self-murder compared with
other the most damnable sins committed against the Law and Gospel. Page 300
10. The second objection answered, which is made from the example of
self-killers, such as Sampson, Pelagia, and others who are saved. Page 303 11.
The third objection answered, which is taken from the antecedent prayer and
repentance of self-murderers for the intended fact of self-murder to come; that
for the same, the doer of it may not be damned. Page 306
Chap. 19. Antidotes for prevention of self-murder. 1. What a man is to do of
and by himself to prevent self-murder: in eight several particulars. Page 311
2. How to others we should make confession of our temptations, motives and
progress to self-murder, that we may prevent the same; and of the manisold
caveats and observations about confession. Page 317 3. Of the means to be used
by the tempted privately and publicly with others, against the temptations to
self-murder: with the grounds of hope of comfortable success to prevail
against them. Page 322 4. Of the course that others, without or against the will
of the tempted, are to use to save him, against the temptations and danger of
self-murder. Page 324 And lastly, the conclusion showing the great benefit of
recovery from the temptations and danger of self-murder, by the use of the
former course. Page 326

LIFE'S PRESERVATIVE AGAINST SELF-KILLING.
CHAP. 1. The general description of Self-murder.
. 1. Concerning life and death.
Life and death things of great importance, and much to be regarded, are not
rightly cared for.
LIfe and Death are two things of the greatest importance in this world; both
in respect of what they are; and whereto they tend: that is, their Essence; and
the great consequences that depend upon them: and yet there is nothing whereof
many men are more regardlesse, than of their lives; how wretchedly they spend,
and end them; and of their Deaths, how desperately they incur and contract
them; casting themselves into the danger of it, by the hands of others, or of
themselves; although the sins in which they die, can never afterward be
recovered, or eternal destruction be avoided.

And therefore, considering the dangerous and damnable practice of diverse
persons desperately destroying their own lives, and murdering themselves; with
so great prejudice to the Honor of God and his truth embraced amongst us; and
with so much hurt to themselves and others: I have adventured to treat more
largely of the point of self-murder, than yet I have seen the same done by
others.

Touching which I will first describe in general what it is.

. 2. Self-murder described.
What it is.
Self-murder is the voluntary destroying of a man's own life, by himself, or
his own means and procurement.

1.
In which description we are for the better understanding of it, to consider,
First, the object of self-murder, and that is the life of man.

2.
Secondly, the act it self; which is the voluntary taking away of life, or
unjustly destroying of it; which makes it to be murder.

3.
Thirdly, the efficient cause, or means of the destruction of man's life, and
that (in this case) is a man's own self by his own procurement; which
specifies the act, and makes it to be properly self-murder.

. 3. Self-murder is known by life.
Life.
In explicating these in order, I will begin at life; as first in nature, and
more auspicable; which is the object of self-murder. For, self-murder being
death, and death being only a privation, it cannot be known what it is but by
the knowledge of life, which is its contrary: for, no privation can be defined
(in regard of its want of entitie in it self,) but by its opposite habit: as
no man, that knows not in some measure what light is, can know what darkness
is.

Evil cleaves to good.
And self-murder being in it self evil, it cannot be but in and about that
thing which of it self is good. 1.
For evil cleaves and adheres to good for two reasons; first, that it may
subsist, which extra subjectum bonum, without the subject of good cannot be:
for, evil is like to the disease called the woolfe, which maintains it self by
eating and feeding upon the body wherein it is. For, as non datur summum malum,
nec datur merum malum per se existens: There is nothing absolutely evil,
neither is there a mere evil subsisting by it self, but in that which is
good.

2.
Secondly, evil adheres to that which is good, that it may convert and turn
the good subject wherein it is, into the quality of it self, so making it
naught, and destroying it; as loaven that sowreth the whole lump wherein it is:
the nature of all evil is ever active and destructive of that good that
entertaines it, or that it is exercised about, it being as the worm that
destroys the tree wherein it breeds and harbors.

Observe. All things are subject in this world to contraric passions.
From whence we may observe that, as all created substances are mutable, so are
they capable of, and subject unto contrary passions and qualities in this
world; and by how much the more excellent any good thing in this world is, so
much the worse is the contrary evil that attends upon and corrupts it; and
therefore the better that any created thing is on earth, the more danger it is
in, and needs the greater care and endeavor to be had about it, to preserve it
against its opposite evil: so, life being of the nature and number of the best
things, it is in danger of the worst evils, and therefore is with the greater
care and circumspection to be watched over, for its preservation.

CHAP. 2. Of the kinds of the life of man.
THat we may know what life is, and (because there be diverse kinds of it) which
it is that in self murder is destroyed by death; we are to consider there are
two kinds of the life of man; Kinds of life, natural and spiritual.
the first is natural, the second is spiritual; according as he consists of
two natures, and is an inhabitant of two worlds; being made of heaven and
earth, to inhabit both: there is no creature in the world that consists of such
various and different composition as man; nor is endowed with such multiplicity
of vital operations, or such variety of properties and qualities, fitted for
diversity of actions of so many kinds; and thereupon is subject to so many and
opposite motions and temptations.

Observe. Man's care must be of two lives.
From the diverse kinds of man's life, we may observe, that man's care must not
be (as the brute beasts) to live according to the instinct of nature, but that
he may live by a supernatural principle, and divine direction, a spiritual
life, even here in this natural life, as he expects to arrive, and attain to
a more excellent and heavenly end of advancement, than other earthly creatures
do, or shall: and there is a task of more and greater porformances required to
be done by him, than from any other creature on earth.

CHAP. 3. Of natural life in general.
. 1. of diverse sorts of life.
Kinds of natural life.
FOr our better understanding of natural life, we are generally to consider
that, according to the distinction of earthly living creatures, there be three
kinds of natural lives.

1. Of vegetation.
First, that which is called the life of vegetation; which is the life of
trees, plants, corn, and the like; whereby they grow and increase, both in
their several kinds, and in their individuals.

2. Life of sense.
Secondly, the life of sense, whereby irrational and sensitive creatures do,
besides their life of vegetation common with plants, live inlived with sense
and motion.

Now these two kinds of lives, considered specifically in the aforesaid
several kinds of creatures, fall not under the consideration of, nor are
subject to self-murder; because the law against murder is not given to them,
who are not properly capable of the same, by means of their want of reason:
neither are they subject to this fact and sin of self-murder, which by instinct
of nature they abhor, and do always naturally endeavor their own
preservation.

3. Rational life.
The third kind of natural life is that which is called rational, or of
reasonable creatures; which is proper to men; whereby they live, (besides the
life of vegetation and sense, common with other earthly living creatures,)
according to reason, or in a rational manner; both for the essential form of
their natures, whereby they are called rational creatures; and also for their
thoughts and actions; which for their original principle, whence they flow,
and for the rule whereby they are ordered, are reasonable, moral, and more
divine in all their motions, than are other earthly creatures; if the same be
not perverted by some other exorbitant principles, or accidents.

In and under this rational life of man, both the other lives are
comprehended; as things inferior and subordinate are contained in their
superior and summary head. Note. Man's perfection.
The perfections of all other earthly creatures are in man, together with, or
comprehended in that which is proper to himself, whereby he transcends them
all.

. 2. Man only is subject to self-murder.
Notwithstanding that man endowed with understanding has the greatest helps
against self-murder, and has the greatest reason of all worldly creatures to
preserve his life, it being so excellent above theirs, yet he only of them all
is subject to this fault and mischief of self-murder.

The greatness of the sin of self-murder.
And as all the aforesaid three kinds of lives are comprehended, for faculty
and virtue, in man's reasonable life, flowing from his reasonable soul, as we
see in the ceasing of them all in man at once, upon the departure of his soul
from the body; Note.
so the killing and destroying of man's life, is absolutely far greater than
the destroying of the lives of all other earthly creatures; because, both the
lives of them all for kinds, and also man's own proper life, that far excells
them all, in the destruction of man's life are destroyed: and also, all other
creatures were made for man, for the comfort of whose life all their lives do
serve.

. 3. How natural life is known by man in whom it is.
Touching the knowledge of the natural life of man, a reasonable living
creature apprehends the same, both by sense and understanding: This life is
known 1. by sense.
by sense, a reasonable creature not only descernes that it lives; but also
feels this life by the effects of it, to be a quickening power of inlivening
the body inwardly, and disposing and inabling it to action outwardly.

2. By understanding.
By understanding, a man knows that this life is an act of the spirit, or
soul in the body of man; or a quickening virtue of it, in a continued flux, by
the personal union of the soul and body together.

. 4. The souls double act of life in man.
The souls act of life in man.
This act of the soul in its union with the body, is twofold. 1. Making the
subject to live.
First, that which respects the body it self; or rather man's person, in that
work, or lively energie, which we may, in some respect, call opus ad intra, or
a reflexe work of man upon himself; upon the personal union of the soul and
body, whereby he becomes a living soul, Genesis 2.7. for extension, in all his
parts; and for intensiox, in fullness of lively power; for his subsisting and
growth to his appointed period; and for use of all his organs and faculties,
for their proper function; being thereby also able to discern, take notice and
judge of himself, his state and actions: For, not the soul only, nor the body
only is to be properly said to live, after their union together; but the
person, consisting both of soul and body, does live this life; which is not
the life of either of the natures, or parts of man by themselves considered;
Man lives or dies personally considered.
but the life of the person of man consisting of both natures personally
united. And therefore, when one kills a man, we say not properly that he has
only killed an earthly body; but we say properly that he has killed such a
person, as consists of a soul and a body: and therefore, it is said in
Scripture, that there were so many souls slain Joshua 10.28.
; not that the immortal spirit is in it self subject to such a death, or can
be slain; but in regard of its Acting and working in its personal union with
the body; whereby both of them live personally together, that life which is
the life of the person; which is destroyed, and ceases upon death, which is
further apparent by this, Reason.
because, the murder of a man is so heinous a crime, in regard of the
destruction of the Image of God in man; which is not only in the body, or
only in the soul, but is in the whole person of man, so long as the same
lives.

2 Making the subject to work.
The second lively act of the soul in this union with the body personally
considered; is that whereby it makes the body organically fitly disposed and
active to those duties, which we call opera ad extra, works about objects, not
it self: which works are the common outward works of the person consisting of
those two natures, and not of either of them apart.

Observe. Upon life depends the subsisting and working of the person.
Whereupon we may observe, that upon this life depends, both the subsisting of
the person of man in its being; and also all its actions natural, civil and
moral: so that, he that kills a man destroys his person, and abolishes all
his personal actions and activity, whereby he might be serviceable and useful
to God, to himself, to the Church, or Commonwealth. And yet we see no thing
more passionately and rashly enterprised than killing of men, than the which
nothing should be more deliberately and upon weightier causes done, it being no
lesser matter than to dissolve heaven and earth, by destruction of a person
consisting of an heavenly spirit, and of an earthly body, to destroy the
noblest natural life; and to deprive God, and the world of the most glorious
and profitable works. Such a thing is this natural life of man generally
considered.

CHAP. 4. Of man's natural life more specially.
. 1. Wherein the natural life of man consists.
Man's natural life is frail. Phil. 1.22. expounded.
Man's natural life consists (as in part we have heard) in the Act of the
soul united personally with the body, by means of the animal, natural, and
vital spirits: which the Apostle calls living in the flesh, Philip. 1.22.
which is to live neither to the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, nor yet is
it to live according to the flesh, directing our ways by our own carnal
wisdom and will: but, thereby is intimated living in a frail and sinful
body, subject to manifold troubles and infirmities: in which regard, it is a
fading and temporary life, as Saint James tells us, Iam. 4.14. comparing it to a
vapor that vanishes away.

With the which life all men that come into this world are endowed, as Saint
John affirms, Ioh. 1.9. and this natural life is only for this sublunary
world, and not for the world to come; for, our lives do differ according to our
estates, and places wherein we are to live.

. 2. The sweetness of natural life.
In what respect natural life is sweet.
Even this natural life is sweet, in regard of the union of the soul and body
together; and in respect of the preservation of our persons by it; and for the
works that we may do in it, for Gods glory and our own salvation.

1.
So that the less certainty that a man has of a better life, the more dear
this should be unto him, that therein he may enjoy the present, and may provide
for a better; 2.
and also the more zeal and desire that a man has to do good, in glorifying
of God, and in benefiting of others; (and the more care he has of advancement
of his own eternal happiness,) the more is he to respect his life wherein
the same is to be done.

. 3. The loss of natural life is horrible and painful.
How death is naturally horrible.
God has so ordained that, the departure of the soul from the body should
ordinarily be horrible to man's apprehension, and with pain and griese; not
only in respect of parting two such sweet Companions, which separated are
imperfect the one without the other; but also in respect of the utter
destruction of their common, natural, personal life; and the cutting off of
all these comfortable actions and affections, that depend upon, and do tend to
the perfection of the same: Which is to the end that man may naturally
endeavor the preservation of his life, against all dangers; and may abhor
self-murder, that deprives him of so much good.

. 4. How life is dear and precious.
Life dear.
There is nothing in the world more dear to a man than his life; in which
regard it was that Satan said to the Lord touching Job, all that a man has
will he give for his life, Job. 2.4. and, for the excellency and use of it,
Solomon calls it the precious life, Prove. 6.26. and therefore, he should not
part from it, or cast it away for a trifle, or in a humor; specially seeing he
can never redeem, or recover it again from death Psalm. 49.7.
.

Reasons. 1 It preserves the person in being.
For three reasons especially is the life of man precious: First, because by it
the person of man is preserved in its esse or being, by personal union of
soul and body; which otherwise would be dissolved and undone. Now, between
being and not being there is so vast a distance and opposition, that a creature
does naturally desire rather to live miseraebly, than not to live; as is
apparent by that natural instinct, whereby the creature, to save its life or
vital parts, objects and offers its less principal members to undergo the
danger: choosing rather to live mutilate and wretched, than, for prevention
thereof, to die. For, the loss of life is not only irrevocable, and
unmatchable in worth, compared with that worldly thing for which it is
exchanged; but also, it includes all other worldly losses in it; and therefore,
it is far the greatest loss that man can suffer.

2 It makes capable of comfort.
Secondly, it is by life that the creature is capable of any comfort, or of the
use and benefit of the blessings of good things, that God gives us to rejoice
in, in this world: for, to a dead man all this world and pleasure of it is
gone; and to him that wants sense, the use and delight of all sensible things
is lost: in which respect Solomon says, to him that is joined to all the
living there is hope: for, a living Dog is better than a dead Lion, Eccles.
9.4. so it is, under God, by the blessing of life, that other good things are
blessings to us; and that the miseries and calamities, that betide us here, are
less evils than death: for that, partial and initiall evils are ever less
than those that are complete and full; those that afflict, than those that
extinguish.

3. For the use of it.
Thirdly, life is precious for the use and improvement of it: 1 To Gods glory.
First, to Gods glory, in spending of it in manner according to his holy word;
with respect to God, for the end that we aim at: in which regard, godly
Hezekiah said, that not the dead, but the living praise God Esaias 38.18, 19.
.

2 To others.
Secondly, the preciousnesse of man's life is seen in the use of it, for the
good that thereby is done to others; both in civil and divine good offices, in
Church and Commonwealth: as the Apostle Paul confesses of himself, that he
did live for the spiritual benefit of the Philippians, Phil. 1.24, 25.

As for the dead, they are unprofitable to the living, as appears by Esaias
63.16. saying, that Abraham is ignorant of us: and the Psalmist tells us, that
we should not put our trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help: and then gives the reason of it; His breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish Psalm. 46.304.
.

3 To a man's self.
Thirdly, the excellency and necessity of life is seen, in the use and
benefit of it to a man's self; in fitting him for heaven, by working up of his
salvation here in this life, and in advancing himself in glory, both by
adorning his person with divine and saving graces of Gods spirit; and also, by
holy actual obedience, and dutiful performances to God, in tract of living.
For, if a man do not at all live this natural life, he cannot be capable of
eternal life: and although he do live this natural life, yet if he do not
endeavor to extend and employ it to the attainment of salvation, but that it
be cut off, before salvation be wrought, he cannot but of necessity perish for
ever. For, as the tree falls, so it shall lie, there is no amendment of our
estate and errors after death: as appears by the parable of the rich man, Luke
16.25, 26. if God do give a man life and time, he puts a price into his hand,
and gives him a great blessing, for his advancement to a better life.

And therefore, in all the aforesaid respects, it is apparent that life is the
most precious thing, that God bestows upon man, whereby all other blessings to
us are expressed: as appears by Abraham's speech to the Lord, saying, Oh that
Ishmael might live before thee Gen.17.18.
Use. To preserve life.
.

The chief use of the former doctrine is, to provoke and move us to use all
lawful means to preserve, and prolong our lives: for he that wills the end,
should also will the means, whereby he may attain to that end.

. 5. Of the means of life's preservation.
The means. 1. Prayer.
Those means are, first, prayer to God for to sustain and preserve our lives,
especially in apparent dangers: as David did, Psalm. 102.24. saying, Oh my God
take me not away in the midst of my days. For, as our lives depend upon him,
that is the fountain of life, Ioh. 1.4.
so our eyes must be to him for a continual influxe of continuing the same: in
regard of outward dangers, and inward mortality daily putting our lives in
jeopardy, which of our selves we are not able to resist.

2. Food, cheerfulness, etc.
The second means of the preservation of man's life, is the moderate and
cheerful use of necessary food and raiment, with other convenient comforts
and delights, needful to cherish and preserve our lives: according to Solomon's
direction, that there is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor, Eccles.
2.24. according to Jacobs desire, Genesis 28.20. entreating God, that he might
have bread to eat, and clothes to put on: not to hoard and lay up, but for
his use.

For a man to have plenty, and yet to be in want, is a miserable condition;
for, so he defrauds and wrongs himself; he is injurious to the creatures, in
not employing them to the use for which God made and gave them; and is
ungrateful to God, in not rightly using his blessings, so as he may thereby
do God the greatest honor and service.

Of cheerfulness.
Cheerfulness is an excellent means of life; for, as Solomon says, by
sorrow of heart the spirit is broken; and all the days of the afflicted are
evil; but a merry heart makes a cheerful countenance; and he that is of a
merry heart has a continual feast Prove. 15.13, 15.
: and therefore, Eccles. 8.15. he commends mirth; because a man has no
better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry; for,
that shall abide with him of his labor, the days of his life, which God
gives him under the sun: and for this purpose, God gives us some things that
are only for delight, and of other things he often bestows such plenty, upon
us, as shows it to be his pleasure that we should use them, not only for
necessity, but also for cheering of us; that we may both taste thereby how good
he is to us; and also, that we may the more joyfully serve him, with gladness
of heart, in health and in plenty of all things.

Grounds of cheerfulness. 1 A good conscience, grace and hope.
The grounds of this Cheerfulness are two; First, inward peace of conscience,
in the apprehension of Gods favor and love to us in Christ Jesus; in the
comfortable evidence of the pardon of our sins; in the undeceivable enjoying of
the saving graces of Gods spirit; in the truth of our conformity and obedience
to God; and in assured hope of everlasting life and happiness, all which will
make us to rejoice, yea even in tribulation, Romans 5.3. with joy unspeakeable
and glorious.

2. Outward blessings.
The second ground of our cheerfulness is, the outward favors and benefits
that God in mercy bestows upon us; whereof we are to take the present use and
sweetness; not depriving our selves thereof, nor deading our spirits with
fears of uncertain, or remote future evils: according to the direction of our
Savior, Mat. 6.34. Take no thought for the morrow: forbidding anxious
tormenting care for fear of ensuing crosses, and according to the practice of
Hezekiah, to whom the Lord had denounced fearful judgments upon his
posterity, who said, Good is the word of the Lord: for there shall be peace and
truth in my days, Isai. 39.8.

3. Physic.
Thirdly, to preserve our lives it is requisite that we use the seasonable, fit
and moderate help of Physic, to prevent or remove diseases; which are not
only the enemies of life, but are also an inchoate, or begun death; as
Hezekiah did take a lump of figgs, and laid it on his boil, for his recovery,
2 King. 20.7. according to Gods direction by Esaias the Prophet: in this respect
did Saint Paul direct Timothy to drink no longer water, but to use a little
wine, for his stomachs sake, and his often infirmities, 1 Timothy 5.23. that so a
man may not be a deficient cause of the preservation of his own life, when God
gives means to save, or prolong it.

. 6. How to use Physic.
Cautions about Physic.
1. That we trust not to it.
In taking of Physic we are always to observe these subsequent cautions:
First, that we dote not upon, nor trust, or ascribe too much to physical
means; but that we carefully look and pray to God for a blessing by the
warrantable use of them. For, it is God that both directs the Physicians
judgment, and conscionable practice about a patient; and also puts virtue
into, and gives healthful operation to the medicines.

2. Use it moderately.
Secondly, that we use Physic moderately; not out of wantonness, but for
necessity: nor as our daily diet, bringing our selves under a necessity of ever
using it; and so by repairing of the house of our body, we may waste and
overthrow it: neither are we then to use Physic, when there is no needful
cause, nor yet in such desperate cases, where there is no hope of life, but
apparent signs of approaching death; lest under an intent of prolonging life
we do shorten it, or of curing we do kill; where there is not strength of
nature to help physic to work its due effect.

3. Use it not rashly.
Thirdly, our care about Physic must be, that we do not unadvisedly and
rashly use it; either by practicing upon our selves, or others beyond our
skill, or calling: or else by taking Physic from others, that be either
presumptuous-ignorant Empericks, or profane and desperate dispensers and
undertakers, neither conscionable in their own lives, nor tender of the lives
of others: but, are more desirous of their patients moneys, than of their
healths: and therefore, our endeavor should be to take physic both seasonably
for time, and also by the counsel and direction of such, as be both skillful
persons in that faculty, and also conscionable, for religion and piety; that
God may bless their labors the better; who will be tender and careful of
men's lives, working by safe courses, and in manner fit for their patients good:
and herein, what ever the effect be, men may have comfort, when they shall have
insisted in a warrantable way.

4. Not to be perplexed about the event.
Fourthly, we are to take heed that we be not anxiously perplexed and
troubled, when upon the using or forbearing of Physic, upon warrantable
grounds, the effect answers not our desire or expectation: But, suppose the
patient dies, or labors under any grief unrecovered, without hope of cure: it
is folly to vex our selves, because we have not used this body, or that body,
this medicine or that medicine, thinking, or saying, if we had done this, or
that, our selves, or some other patient belonging to us, had been recovered:
just as Mary said to Christ, Lord, if thou had been here my Brother had not
died Ioh. 11.32.
.

When a thing contrary to our desire is done, wherein we are not faulty, when
we work according to our present knowledge and means, we should rest content
with the will of God, how adverse, or cross soever it seems to us:
considering that, as God appoints the end and thing that do come to pass, so
does he likewise direct and order the means to accomplish the same. For, God
oftentimes overrules our purpose, men's skill, and the nature and effects of
Physic, to the bringing to pass of his own purposes, contrary to our
expectation: which must be attributed to God the sovereign Lord, and is not
to be imputed to unblameable men and means, that are but the instruments
under God, and subject to his control and disposition: and therefore, touching
the events thereupon following, we must be content to be crossed of our wills
sometime, that God at all times may have his.

. 7. Of deadly things to be resisted.
4. Opposition of deadly things.
Fourthly and lastly, to preserve his life, every man is bound to decline, and
oppose all things that tend to the unlawful taking of it away: for, that which
other creatures do, by Antipathie, and instinct of nature, for shunning that
which is contrary or pernicious to them; man is, by the means of his reason
and will, to do the like for his preservation: who, by his intellectual parts,
can better foresee and discern what is hurtful and dangerous to him or his
life.

1 Invasion.
The things that especially he is to decline and beware of are: First, Forcible
invasion, whereby his life is assaulted or endangered, and his death attempted
by others: For, besides the peril that a man's life is in, by that inbred
poison of diseases and mortality in himself, it is liable to death, by means
from without himself, whereof a man is to be careful, both to foresee the
same, and to prevent it, or to extricate and free himself out of it: as we see
how Paul, (understanding of a conspiracy of above 40. men lying in wait to
take away his life,) used his best endeavors to decline and prevent the same,
by discovery thereof to the chief Captain, Act. 23.17. and so our Savior
himself gave commandment to his Disciples, that when their enemies did
persecute them in one city they should flee to another, Mat 10.23. according
to his own practice, who to avoid and escape the bloody hands of Herod, was
carried into Egypt Mat. 2.
: which course is abundantly warranted by manifold arguments and examples in
Scripture, and upon just reason, is so good, that necessity of saving a man's
life, against unjust and violent invasion, warrants him, both in the Courts of
Heaven and Earth, in his own lawful defense, to kill, rather than to suffer
himself to be unjustly killed: because, that love, which is the fulfilling of
the Law Romans 13.10.
, begins at a man's self, it being the rule, that we should love our neighbors
as our selves. How can it be expected that he will preserve other men's lives,
that is careless of his own? Qui sibi nequam cui bonus?


2. Dangerous undertakings.
Secondly, for preservation of man's life, he must not only not submit himself
passively to private deadly cruelties of others: but also he must not actively
expose himself to hazard the loss of his life, upon self-willed dangerous
undertakings, without a lawful calling, and sufficiency of strength to
undertake, or go safely through the enterprise: as our Savior intimates, Luke
14.31. in the parable of the King going to war, that would not undertake
above his power.

3. Motions of self-murder.
Thirdly, the thing that a man is to decline, for preservation of his life is,
that he do abhor and reject all unnatural motions, or resolutions of
self-murder. That the heart of man may neither be suffered to breed, nor to
entertain the thoughts of his own destruction; like a viper conceiving and
somenting such an issue, as in the birth thereof destroys the parent that gave
it being. The thoughts of evil, that a man does at first but dally withal,
and fearelesly beholds in his mind, (presuming of his power over them;) at
length possess him, and master him: and therefore, above all things, we are
to keep our heart, for, out of it proceeds all evil. Prove. 4.23. Mat. 15.19.
if the seed and spawne of sin in the motions of it in the heart be extinguished
and destroyed, then there is no fear of the breaking of it out in act: for, as
Saint James says, Lust first conceives before it brings forth sin Jam. 1.15.
.

. 8. Of spending our lives well.
To spend our lives well.
Another general use of the former doctrine of the pretiousnesse of man's life
is, that we be the more careful to husband and spend it well; to the glory of
God; our own good and comfort; and for the good of others, among whom we live:
considering that our life is too good to be spent away in idleness, to be
wasted prodigally; or to be mis-imployed in the service of sin and Satan;
and is irrevocable, when it is past, that it cannot be had back again; that
it might be better spent, and former errors be undone: and therefore, we do
ever need, with the Psalmist, to entreat that God would so teach us to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom Psalm. 90.12.
: being ever mindful of the Apostles admonition; redeem the time, because the
days are evil, Ephesians. 5.16.

Motives.
The motives that may move us to spend our time, and life well, are specially
these three following. First, 1. Badnesse of the times.
the wickedness of the world, which should make us more watchful, to catch at
all opportunities to do good; that our life, that will waste away with the rust
of doing nothing, may be comfortably spent, in well doing: Happy shall that
servant be, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find doing so. Mat. 24.46.

2. Shortness of our lives.
Secondly, the shortness and uncertainty of our lives, (which passes as a
shadow, or a vapor, that appears no more,) puts us in mind, not to defer;
but, while it is called to day, requires us, with sobriety and watchfulness,
to be courageous and incessant in well doing. Post est occasio calva, the
morrow is not ours; and if we be cut off before it comes, our work being
undone; how then will it grieve us that we were so slothful?

3. The benefit of well-spending them.
Thirdly, the weightinesse of that which depends upon well-spending of our
lives here; as, the comfort of our souls, and everlasting salvation hereafter,
calls upon us to consider, that no estate or stock need be so frugally spent,
as the short life and few days of man; than which, nothing is more wastefully,
worthlesly, vainly, nor worse misspent; specially three ways: to which we
may add a fourth.

How men mis-pend their lives. 1. By doing evil.
First, in doing of naughtiness and evil; which we ought not to do, it
being forbidden by God: whereby many men take great pains in vile courses of
profaneness, filthiness, drunkenness, fighting against the truth, and the
like, mis-spending their means, and lives, to oppose God, and to get, and go
to hell; by rightly employing whereof, they might, with far less trouble and
ado, happily do much good, and attain to heaven and everlasting glory.

2. By doing things impertinent.
Secondly, by doing that, which is little, or nothing to the purpose; for a
man's true happiness and comfort; as impertinent studies, pursuit of curiosity
and vanity, hunting immoderately, and prosecuting eagerly after the profits and
pleasures of this world; that before God will avail a man nothing for his
salvation, and eternal, or spiritual comfort; when the things whereupon the
same depends have been neglected: for as the Apostle says, bodily exercise
profits little; but godliness is profitable to all things 1 Timothy 4.8.
.

3. By idleness.
Thirdly, men do often mis-spend their lives, by wasting it in sluggish
idleness; when they mind and endeavor nothing so much as how they may sleep
at ease, or pass away their time in sloth, or sottishness; so driving their
days and lives to an end in doing nothing, although none have more to do than
they: while others complain of want of time in their employments, about their
commendable affairs; these object, that they have more time than they know
what to do with. Such are, iners and inutile pondus, an unprofitable burden,
and the excrements of the Church and Commonwealth; dead while they live, and,
as hoggs, more profitable by their deaths than by their lives: like ciphers,
they keep a place, but are of no value or worth: they go out of the world,
before they regard why they came into the world; when they are present, they
are unprofitable, and when they are gone, they are not missed, for any good
they ever did.

Causes of idleness.
The causes of which idle course of life, are, affectation of their own bodily
and worldly ease, contenting the flesh with doing of nothing; and care only to
avoid trouble, which attends upon active and industrious godly employment: but
we find the sentence of condemnation passed no less against those that
omitted to do their duties Mat. 25.43.
; than against them who committed that evil which was forbidden. Wilful
defects and omissions of doing good bring damnation. He that wanted his wedding
garment was thrust out of doors, and cast into utter darkness Mat. 22.13.

Why was Meroz cursed? because they came not out to the help of the Lord
against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. An idle and slothful spending of a manlife, is
every where in Scripture condemned; and by nature the Bees expel the Droanes.

4. By over-charging ones self in doing good.
There is another way of mis-spending a man's life, proceeding from good
affection, in a pious manner; by his over-tasking, or overcharging himself, in
religious performances, or good duties, above his strength: as in fasting and
prayer, in studies and labors in the Word, Neque immoderata imperamus jejunia.
Hieron. ad Demetriadem.
and the like: whereby a man's life is soon spent; like a sudden blaze consumed
in a present flame; which, by more frugall ordering of it, according to his
ability, might last much longer, to the greater benefit both of Church and
Commonwealth: and thus I have done with the discourse of man's natural life.

CHAP. 5. Of man's spiritual life.
. 1. What spiritual life is.
Spiritual life what.
We are now to consider of man's spiritual life; which is not properly the
life of his spirit, whereby the spirits of all men do live: but, it is the
life of a man, whereby he, personally considered, lives a spiritual, and
supernatural life.

Which consists in the gracious union of man with God in Christ; who is our
life Ioh 14.6.
: whom God sent into the world, that we might live through him, 1 Ioh. 4.9. by
whom we are delivered from death by his spirit; because of the spiritualnesse
of this our life, it is said to be hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3.

. 2. The acts of spiritual life. Acts of it.

1.
Of this spiritual life there are two acts: First, that whereby we, that were
dead in trespasses and sins, are quickened. Ephesians. 2.1. being translated into
a state of spiritual and eternal life; and endowed with a new lively
principle of grace; inabling us to spiritual motion.

2.
The second act of this life is, that, whereby we walk, and work, according
to the direction of Gods word; and the good motions of the good spirit: so
being made conformable to God, and walking with God, as new creatures, in the
estate of regeneration.

. 3. The degrees of spiritual life.
Degrees of it.
Of this life there are two degrees: 1.
First, that which is by faith, in the state of grace in this world, as our
Savior tells us, that he that believes on him has eternal life, Ioh. 6.47.
by this life we are to live according to God in the spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6. and
also, if we live in the spirit, we are also to walk in the spirit Gal 5.25.
. Faith and good works, as the cause and effects, are always together, Iam.
2.20.

The second degree of our spiritual life, is that which is by vision or sight,
in glory: whereof Saint John tells us, that we shall be like to Christ, for we
shall see him as he is, 1 Ioh. 3.2. and touching those things wherein it
consists, Saint Paul says, that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him 1 Cor. 2.9.
. And he himself, having been rapt up into the third heaven, confesses that
there he heard unspeakable words (...)
; which was not lawful for him to utter 2 Cor. 12.4.
, in regard of impossibility; there being want of words to express such
supernatural matter, and his conceiving being less than could comprehend what
was represented to him. This spiritual life, in the estate of grace in this
world, is apprehended, first, in the understanding, Heb. 11.1. but in the state
of glory in heaven, it is visibly enjoyed, by way of a spiritual
sensiblenesse. Note.
In the former state, life is put into us; but in this latter state, we shall
be put into life; filled with it, within us; and fully compassed about with it,
without us; as vessels cast into the sea are filled with water within and
without: so being comprehended by it, as well as it is comprehended by us
according to our model and capacity.

This life is one.
Although these degrees of spiritual life be several; yet the life it self
is but one, whereupon these subsist.

This life is begun here in the state of grace by faith in Christ, and is
consummate, and fully accomplished by vision, or sensible fruition, in the
state of glory in heaven, according to our hope, and Gods promises to us;
although at death faith does cease, yet the spiritual life, thereby wrought in
us, is not extinguished; for, or by the introduction of the life of glory; but
the manner only is altered, and degree of spiritual living intended to
perfection.

The degrees subordinate.
A man's several and graduall kinds of lives do stand in subordination one to
another thus, to the life of glory in heaven with the Lord, none can attain,
but those that first live by faith in Christ, in the state of grace; in manner
conformable to Gods word and will: neither can any attain to the life of
grace, but those that first live the natural life; which is the material, or
passive foundation of the other twain: for this natural life gives being to
a man; the other two do add perfection and happiness to him: so that if the
first be a blessing, much more are the other lives blessings, and highly to be
esteemed.

These three degrees, or kinds of life are like to the three rooms of the
Temple, where all entrance into the most Holy place was made by the Holy place;
and into this by the outward Court; so, none could come into the third, but by
the second, and none could come into the second, but by the first: whereby it
appears, that natural life brings man under a possibility and capacity of
the life of grace and glory; and the life of grace brings us, that certainly
have it, into fair assurance of attaining the life of glory; for that they are
specifically the same, but gradually different: as the twilight, and perfect
light at noone.

. 4. Who may have spiritual life, and by whose fault do any miss of it.
Denied to none.
Although all men, that do live the natural life, attain not to the
spiritual; yet spiritual life is denied expressly to no man, if they will
carefully use the means, and truly endeavor to have it: for, whosoever
miscarries and misseth of this spiritual life, he himself is guilty, and cause
thereof: Lost by our own fault.
for, God has given sufficient means of salvation, and made a general offer
thereof to all men: as Joshua did call Heaven and earth to record that day,
that he had set before the people life and death, and so did put them to their
choice, Joshua 24.14. if with Mary we choose the better part, we are happy:
it were better for us that we had never lived at all, than that we should not
live this spiritual life; without which we are dead while we live 1 Timothy 5.6.
.

None can be excused, by pretense of want of particular insinuation of the
Gospel; (that is) the power of God to salvation, to every individual man; or,
because it is not naturally ingrafted in every man's heart, as is the moral
Law, in the general principles, and matter unformed thereof; though not as it
is perfectly formed, in every particular precept. For the Gospel is not
contrary to the Law; but the Law, both moral and ceremonial, is our
Schoolmaster to drive and direct us to Christ for salvation Gal. 3.21.24.
; and that for the same we should neither rest upon our selves, nor upon the
Law. The Gospel to al published.


1. To Adam.
Again, when God himself, at the beginning, first after the fall, preached
and delivered the gospel to Adam and Eve Genesis 3.15.
, he did publish and give the same to every particular man and woman, then in
them, that ever should be borne into the world; to whom their parents were
bound successively to preach and deliver the Gospel, by a continued tradition.
Note.
If any of their children should have died before they were capable of
salvation by that mean; then (as it is most probable) they were to be saved, as
dying infants of believing parents now are.

2. To his posterity.
Furthermore, ever since the first promulgation of the gospel to Adam, it has
pleased God to repeat, and more and more fully to explicate the same by his
servants, with invitation of all men to entertain the same, from age to age,
in such places and companies, where all men might take notice thereof, if they
were not wanting to themselves, in adjoining themselves to, and keeping union
with the Church; where they might be within the hearing of the Gospel; which
is sufficient to leave men inexcusable, in their ignorance of it: Although God
by his providence and prerogative Royal, directs, dispenses, and applies the
Gospel, in the ministry of it, to some people, and not to others; according
to the good pleasure of his will, after the first promulgation: as we see how
the publication of Laws and proclamations of Princes, (which are as little
written in their subjects hearts as the gospel is in mankind) Comparison.
being published in manner, and in places, as Princes please, whereby, and
whence their subjects are to take notice of them; ignorance of the same excuses
not, but that the disobedient and transgressors of them may justly be punished;
notwithstanding that they never knew them: seeing every man is at his own
peril to look after, and take notice of those Laws, or ordinances, whereby
he is to live; whether they proceed from inbred natural notions, or outwardly
from the will of his Superiors.

. 5. Of the excellency of spiritual life.
Spiritual life's excellency
Man's spiritual life far excells his natural life; in three respects
especially.

1. For nature.
First, in regard of the things where in it consists: the natural life
consists but in the union of soul and body which are but natural things; and
holds by a tie of natural spirits in the blood; upheld by earthly natural
means, such as man is made and compounded of.

Spiritual life, which is now supernatural, consists in a spiritual union
with God, by his eternal Son and Spirit; and is upheld by supernatural
means, and divine influence, whereby we live the life of God; and also by God,
and to God Romans 14.8.
and so, as the life of natural or reasosonable men, 2 Cor. 5.15.1 Pet. 4.2.
far excells the lives of brutes; so does this spiritual life of Gods
regenerated people, far surpass the lives of mere natural and
unregenerated men: and therefore it is, that men are far more beholding to
the means and instruments of their spiritual life, than to the means of
their natural; for, natural life without spiritual, makes a man but subject
to misery; whereas the spiritual life, upon the natural, makes a man
everlastingly happy: which should quicken in us a desire, and endeavor to be
borne again, according to our Saviors speech, Ioh. 3.3.

2 For continuance.
Secondly, the spiritual life far transcends the natural, in respect of its
continuance: the natural life, depending upon mutable and mortal ties and
bonds, and subject to many external harmfull accidents; is frail, and, at
last is swallowed up of mortality; it being appointed for all men once to die,
Heb. 9.27. and few and evil are our days in this world; wherein we have no
abiding city, the spiritual life is eternal, without subjection to death;
because, it is in it self supernatural, and advanced above the reach and
power of all things that can destroy life, and is preserved and upheld by such
a fountain of indeficient and omnipotent life, and undecaying lively vigor,
and means of divine living, that never suffers the man, that has and keeps
communion with the same, to be subject to death: but makes him pass from death
to life, John 5.24. the faith whereof does free a man from the fear of losing
that happy estate, (while he continues to love it,) whereas others, in a
loseable and mutable estate of life, are, (by fear of being deprived thereof,
and being without hope of a better,) hindered in enjoying the full comfort of
the present good, that here is afforded.

3. For effects.
Thirdly, spiritual life surpasses the natural, in its effects: the natural
life enables a man to the doing only of natural actions, specially concerning
man's natural good; agreeable unto, and flowing from natural principles in
man; being, in the mean time, dead to any divine, or supernatural good:
neither actively doing that of goodness, which is truly moral or divine; nor
passively receiving and enjoying that thereof which is beatificall, or which
makes man blessed: and so he may, for all that life, the powers and actions
thereof, be miserable and perish; for, flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.

The spiritual life, by so near conjunction of a man with the fountain of
life Essential, the wellspring of infinite goodness, not only, by that
touch and union, does it make him so live, but also it causes him to be most
happy, both by making him able Actively to live the life of God Gal. 2.19.
, and to live to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2. and also by endowing him with
passive capacity, and with real possession of all such beatificall perfections
as are necessary for his advancement to, and in a glorious estate; far above
all other earthly creatures, in this world and in the world to come: whereby he
becomes so happy, that nothing can make him miserable, but even in tribulation
he has cause of rejoicing, Romans 5.3. and when he dies, yet still he lives, in
more excellent manner, as Paul said touching his afflictions, as dying, and
behold we live, 2 Cor. 6.9.

In regard of the aforesaid excellency of this spiritual life above the
natural, it was that our Savior did command his Disciples, not to fear them
that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather to fear
him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Mat. 10.28.

. 6. How to obtain spiritual life.
Use 1. To get spiritual life.
From the former doctrine, touching the excellency of this spiritual life of
man, diverse very necessary uses are observable. First, it may provoke and
stir us up to get this life, above all things in this world: whereof we are
borne destitute, yea dead in sin; to which life, by our manifold actual
transgressions we do indispose and unfit our selves: but yet the Lord of his
mercy has appointed us a way, whereby we may get this spiritual life: so
that, by our conscionable use of the means appointed by God, By means.
we may attain thereunto, in regard of his promise, and faithfulness, that
those that seek shall find. Amos 5.6.

And why to be used.
These means are we to use, in regard both of Gods commandment, who thereby
tries our obedience and faith: and also in respect of the dispensation of God;
who gives his graces only by, and in his own way, which otherwise cannot be
had. Also the worth and necessity of this spiritual life is such, as deserves
our best endeavors to get it: our esteem whereof is seen by our labors for
it, in Gods appointed way, without which, God will not give it; because, he
will have us active, about our own salvation; that the same may cost us the
price of our labors, to come by it; that thereby we may the more comfortably
know that we have it; when we know how we came by it: that we may be the more
careful to keep, what we have so laboriously purchased; and may assuredly
look for the reward of our labors; which God, that cannot lie, has promised
to those that seek life by his appointed means.

To use no means to get this spiritual life, is to contemn both it, and God:
and to endeavor to get it, by using other means than God has appointed for
that end, is to tempt God, or to prescribe him his ways of dispensing his
grace, and to prefer our own wits and wills above Gods; whereby such men
lose both their labor and expectation.

Which they be. 1. The word of God.
The means in particular, to get this spiritual life, are; First, the word of
God, specially the Gospel; which is as the material and seminall cause of it,
1 Pet. 1.23.

2. Application.
Secondly, the means vegetating and applying the Gospel to quicken us: which
is fourefold.

1. By the ministry.
First, the ministry of the word; by reading, and preaching of it, to the
enlightening of the understanding, and to the moving of the affections and
hearts of the hearers, to embrace it; for, Faith comes by hearing, Rom 10.17.

2. Christian conference.
Secondly, the Company and conferences of those Christians, that in this kind
of life, are (by their motion, and example) lively, and vigorous; able, by
their warmth and liveliness, to heat and quicken those whom they touch: as
Elisha, by his application of himself to the dead child, made it warm and
alive, 2 King. 4.34. and as leaven leavens the lump; and every thing affects to
procreate its like.

3. Prayer.
The third means of the Gospells application to quicken us, is servent and
effectual prayer to God, from whom is all the virtue and efficacy of it, that
he would make it effectual to us: for although Paul do plant, and Apollo
water, it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.

4. Sacraments, and the spirits operation in them.
Fourthly, the Sacraments, and in them the powerful operation of the spirit of
Christ, is that which quickens us when we are cast into the frame and mould of
the Gospel; until Christ be formed in us Gal. 4.19.
: so that in this work the spirit is the principal efficient cause: as our
Savior tells us, John 6.63. it is the spirit that quickneth.

. 7. How the Gospel works life.
1. How the Gospel works not.
So then, the Gospel works not this life in us, in a Physical or natural
manner; as having virtue naturally inherent in the words, to produce such an
effect in those that hear it. 1.Not physically
For then, men should be converted and regenerated in a natural, and not in a
divine manner: and also, then the Gospel would work alike upon all men that
hear it, that were alike disposed, and did not ponere obicem, or lay a bar
of their own to hinder it; except God should restrain the natural power of
it in working: but so, the conversion of man must be within the power of his
own act; and God could not be justified in his withholding grace.

The word is a supernturall instrument of salvation.
But, the conversion of a sinner is wrought by a greater virtue, than can
naturally and subjectively be in the words and sentences of the Gospel: for,
the word of God is not instrumentum physicum, a natural instrument, but a
moral, or rather metaphysicall instrument of effecting such a supernatural
work; according to the will of the first agent.

2. Not Ethically.
Neither in an Ethicall manner, does the Gospel work this spiritual life in
us; only by moral persuasion; as moral Philosophers, and Rhetoricians do
affect and draw their hearers; by reasons, and exhortations stirring up a
latent power inherent in us, and inclining our wills, by rational motives and
objects, to be made alive: then must it depend upon us, that we are saved; and
be from a power of our own, exuscitated by the word. 2. How God works by the
Gospel according to his own will.
But God works by his word, as a more puissant and independent agent; that
inintends and remits his power in working, according to his own will, by the
means; and uses means not as necessary for him; but that he can do as much
without them: in regard that the effect is his own, and man the passive
subject of it.

Man's will is the subject of conversion.
It is the will of a natural man that is most dead to Godward, and most
averse from him; and therefore, it is the will that is chiefly to be wrought
upon and made alive in conversion, whereupon all depends; but, we know that
nothing can make it self alive, when it is dead, but he that is the fountain
of life; the Son of God, Rom 1.4.

Note. Of the heart.
The illumination of the understanding, which is common to the wicked and the
godly, is presupposed as requisite to fit a man for conversion: and therefore,
in the work of regeneration, the scripture takes notice specially of the
heart, insomuch that the old Testament uses no other word to express the
understanding; because, in Divinity no knowledge without intertainement in the
heart, and without conformity of the will and practice to the truth, is saving;
action being the end of Theological knowledge in this life; words of knowledge
in Scripture commonly comprehend affections in them.

. 8. Why God uses means.
Although that God could, if he pleased, convey grace into a sinful man, by
immediate influxe, or inspiration; from which we cannot utterly exclude all;
seeing, the work of grace depends absolutely neither upon the nature of the
means, nor upon the abilities and will of the converted and elected, whereof
many are not, by that method of means, capable; but upon God, who works
according to the good pleasure of his will: yet he uses means; not to help
himself, as if otherwise he could not do the work; but in respect of us,
that are natural men, endowed with senses as well as reason, he appoints
means, Reasons of using of means. 1.
that by our using thereof, we may be active about the work of our own
salvation; and may attain the same by a way and course within the compass of
our own power and endeavors, as the reward and blessing of God upon our
labors, to our commendation before God and men. 2.
Again, means are appointed by God for our obtaining of salvation, that by
using of them, our says in Gods promises and power may be tried, in expecting
thereby so glorious effects, far above their nature: and also, our obedience
may be proved, by doing what God commands us to do, within the reach of our
power, to get life, albeit it do transcend reason, how by this way it can be
had: as appears by Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5.13, 14. 3.
And finally, God appoints the use of means for our comfort, that by our
constant conscionable using of the same, we may be assured of grace and life,
as certainly as we are of the use of the means appointed to get, and by which
God has promised to give it, by the working of his holy Spirit.

. 9. How the Spirits power is manifested and seen.
Use. To find the Spirits power by the means in us.
Now further, from the consideration of the excellency of this spiritual life
to be wrought in us by means, our use should be to end eavour to find and
feel, both the Spirits quickening virtue of regeneration, by the means,
powerfully working upon, and in us, and also, to discern this spiritual life
to be in our selves: seeing our comfort lies herein, and that the one can never
be without the other.

Manifest in 4. degrees of operation.
The virtue of the Spirit in us by the means manifests it self in four
degrees of operation: not to speak of illumination. First, both in making us
see and feel, with grief of heart, our own wretchedness and sinful
deadness, 1. Against sin.
and also by turning us from our sins and ungodly courses, with detestation of
them and with resolution and constant endeavors against them, it being the
work of the spirit to lust against the slesh; because they are contrary the
one to the other Gal 5.17. etc.
, both in nature and effects.

In which respect, the Prophet Hosea tells us, that if we will live we must
turn, Hosea 6.1. for, our sinful courses are the ways of death: therefore,
we should labor to be, and find our selves mortified to sin, with some kind
not only of voluntary indisposition, but also of strong antipathie, and
detestation of committing the same; as formerly we were prone, and affected
with delight to do; and that at the presence of sin, in its habit, or act,
we may with indignation be displeased and sad; having no joy nor contentment in
that condition. For, the motions of sin entertained, do work in our members,
to bring forth fruit unto death Romans 7.5.
.

Which by a contrary life of grace, are mortified and subdued: but, I confess
that this degree follows after faith.

2.Begetting faith
Secondly, the power of the spirit in us by the means, is seen, by the
working of true says in us; which the Apostle ascribes to the same, 1 Cor.
12.9. Ephesians. 2.8.

It is by this faith that we do divinely and spiritually live Romans 1.17.
Halak. 2.4.
, in the act of believing, uniting our selves to the saving and lively object
Christ Jesus, with his gracious promises, by us adhered unto, and thereunto
conforming our selves: without Christ we have no life in us: as himself tells
us, Ioh. 6.57. and without faith we can neither have him nor his blessed
promises; but by says we have them both; that so, by this spiritual
instrument, spiritual blessings may be spiritually enjoyed, whereof the soul
is the immediate subject; and secondarily the body, only by the soul; to this
faith our Savior attributes this spiritual life, when he says That whosoever
believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live John 11.25.
: therefore, it nearly concerns us all, to labor to get true saving faith;
and that we do make use of the same, in and about its proper objects: And for
our comfort, it behooves us to know that we have this faith: but, because the
signs how to discern it, is the general subject of most men in their books
and sermons, I pass it over with reference to them.

3.Applying of Christ.
Thirdly, the Spirit of God manifests the power of it in us, by the means, in
the application of Christ and his merits to us: whereby we become one with
Christ, and being grafted into him, have the adoption of the sons of God
Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 8.16.
; and free justification from all our sins, sealed up and assured to us, by the
same Spirit: whereupon, we may apprehend the sweet favor of God toward us;
wherein consists life, Psalm. 30.5. and may be filled with a lively vigor of
consolation, in the apprehension of the pardon of our sins, and upon the
assurance of the graces and blessings of God to us, for our eternal
happiness, in which respect it is called the Spirit of Consolation Job. 14.26.
; which makes us cheerfully to endure afflictions, and to run the way of
Gods Commandments, when thus we are enlarged by the spirit, and by the same
possessed of Christ and his graces; by and in whom we spiritually live: there
is nothing in this world, that we should be so careful of, as to bring forth
the fruits of the Spirit, giving testimony of our adoption by our good works.

Evidences of the work of the Spirit in us, applying Christ. 1.
But, of the aforesaid work of the Spirit in us, we may have some comfortable
evidences, upon these ensuing grounds. First, by the sense of the virtue from
Christ quickening us, we may assuredly discern that we touch him, and have
communion with him, being in him, as members under our head; and partaking in,
and from him, of all his merits and graces.

2.
Secondly, the same is evident by the change of our estates, morally
considered, in regard of what our dispositions and lives formerly have been,
and now are, touching virtue and vice, goodness and evil; concerning both
which, a supernatural change cannot be, but by a supernatural efficient and
divine principle: and so from the effects, we do conclude the eause to precede
or go before.

3.
Thirdly, the aforesaid work of the Spirit is manifested and discerned, by our
subsisting and keeping our standing in goodness, and in adhering to God, and
to his Word, in states and times, of great and manifold trialls; wherein
experiment is made of our strength, and sincerities, and cleaving to God: in
which condition, when the unsound fall away, those that are built upon the
rock Christ Mat. 7.24, 25.
, and from him are supernaturally furnished with all needful graces; (by
beholding and relying upon him that is invisible) they do receive from above a
continual influxe of assistance and abilities, whereby they stand fast and
endure, as did Moses, Heb. 11.27.

4. The Spirits work in sanctisication.
Fourthly, the Spirits work in us, by the means, is powerfully manifested, by
these lively seeds and divine principles of grace; which it infuseth or works
in us; called by the Apostle Peter, a divine nature. 2 Pet. 1.4.

Whereby the regenerated man is furnished, with all sufficiency of heavenly,
and new inherent principles, for the right ordering of himself in divine
manner: even as the natural man is stored with his principles of reason,
thereby to square his judgment and life, in natural manner.

. 10. Of the degrees of the Spirits work of holiness in us.
The degrees of grace. 1. Habitual. Which is the holiness of man's new nature.
The degrees of this work of grace and holiness of Gods Spirit in us, are
two. First, that which consists in habitual divine qualities; diffused
throughout all the powers and faculties of the man, in whom the same is; which
are wrought, or infused gradually, from one degree to another.

These are opposite to man's natural pollution of sin and malice inherent in
him, upon the which they being superinducted, they doc by degrees weaken,
dispossess, and abolish the same: as the light does the darkness. Use of it.
So then,the office and use of this habitual holiness, and qualification of
man with inherent graces of Gods spirit, is threefold.

1.
First, it serves to adorn, accomplish and beautify, in spiritual manner,
the regenerate man,

2.
Secondly, it subdues, mortifies, and expells the contrary vice, in equal
measure of extension and degree, as it self is.

3.
Thirdly, it qualifies and inables a man that has it, to the actual doing of
all holy duties; according to the quality and greatness of those divine
principles of grace, that is the inherent original of the same; so being both
the material and also exemplary cause of actual holiness of life; this
cannot be without that.

2. Degree is actual obedience which is the holiness of man's actions.
The second degree of this spiritual holiness, is that which consists in
actual obedience to Gods will, in all holy performances, rightly ordering all
our thoughts; all the inclinations of our wills; all the motions of our
affections; all the moral postures of our behavior; all the words of our
mouths; and all the actions of our lives; in abstaining; in sustaining; and in
active performance, exactly according to Gods commandments; with perfection of
integrity and sincerity.

The use of it. 1.
The use of this degree of holiness, consisting in actual obedience, is
threefold. First, to manifest the truth and power of man's in ward and habitual
grace.

2.
Secondly, to oppose and keep our corruption and sin out of that possession,
which formerly they had of our actions, and hearts.

3.
Thirdly, that the body, which is to be saved with the soul, may in all the
organes and powers thereof be honored in holy employment; for good example to
others, and for glory to God; before it be glorified with God.

The grounds of it.
The grounds and original motives of this grace and holiness, that consists
in actual obedience to God, are three.

1.
First, habitual grace in man, not considered as in an unformed mass; but as
formed in its several species or kinds of definable virtues, is the ground
and living spring, whence issues this actual holiness, according to the kinds
and degrees of the seminall or radical virtue whence it proceeds: without
which all outward holiness is but vanishing hypocrisy.

2.
The second motive is the external impulsion of Gods word, in the ministry
and use thereof, Gods word.
directing and exhorting us, in way of moral persuasion to do our duty: so
stirring up the grace of God in us, to show it self, in putting forth the
virtue thereof in action.

3.
The third motive is that influence and motion of the Spirit of God, which at
times, The Spirit.
both stirs up the graces of God in us, to make them lively, to put forth
their strength, to make resistance against sin; and to undertake and
prosecute the doing of good; and also it suppeditates and conveyes increase of
grace and spiritual abilities into a regenerated man; whereby he grows and
goes on, both in habitual and actual holiness: for being dead to sin, it
is requisite that we do live to righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. in regard that
the Prophet tells us, That be that does that which is lawful and right, shall
live thereby Ezekiel 33.19.
.

. 11. Of the signs of spiritual life.
Signs of spiritual life, are
Now it follows, that we do make inquiry and search, to find out the signs
of this spiritual life, whereby we may know whether we have it, or want it,
whereof I will give you some notes.

1.
First, it is discernable by a man's thoughts and affections; for, Heavenly
thoughts and affections.
if he have spiritual life, both his mind and thoughts will be taken up most
with God and heavenly things; and also, his affections will be most set upon
them, both with ardency of desires to have them, and also with abundant joy in
the hope and fruition of them; according to the command of the Apostle, who
bids us to Set our affections on things above, not on things on the earth:
because, our life is bid with Christ in God, Colos. 3.2, 3.

2.
The second note of this spiritual life is the powerful active effects of it;
His life godly.
whereby, the man that has it, does live: (for his divine and moral manner of
living,) according to the direction of Gods holy Word, and the motion of the
spirit of God; in manner and degree, far surpassing the power of nature; and
contrary to the disposition of flesh and blood; being hereunto moved and
strengthened; not only by outward moral persuasions; but, specially after a
divine, or renewed manner, by a spiritual principle of supernatural vital
motion within himself; whereby, after a sort, in some measure, he becomes a
rule and Law to himself of good life: as those that have the law not only
written in their hearts, but have also a power, with activity of endeavor to
do the same; with respect to a spitituall and supernatural end: and in this
respect also it is said, that the Law is not made for a righteous man 1 Timothy
1.9.
.

3.
The third sign of spiritual life in man, is his comfortable suffering for
the things belonging to that life; Patient suffering.
when he subsists under afflictions for goodness, with unrelenting courage,
adhering to the truth, and persisting in his integrity, against all opposition.

1.
Which manifests it self, first, in the measure of these afflictions, when he
bears the same with ability above natural strength, as did Moses, seeing him
that is invisible Heb. 11.27.
: by whose virtue he was supported. 2.
Secondly, by the manner of his undergoing of afflictions, in voluntary and
active submission, and not only passive, or by way of coaction, and
inforcement, wholly against his will subjected to them; but enduring with
joyfulnesse Romans 5.3.
; as those that the Scripture speaks of, who took joyfully the spoiling of
their goods, Heb. 10.34. which cannot be done, but by such as are endowed with
this spiritual life, whereby they live, even when they die.

4. Heavenly behavior in the world.
The fourth note of this spiritual living, is the regulatity of such a man's
godly behavior and conversation, in the worlds eye, in all his actions subject
to the direction of God, and moving from, and according to supernatural
principles of habitual grace; not walking after the judgment and examples of
the world, or of flesh and blood. For, he that is endowed with this spiritual
life, is a complete now creature, having judgment, will, affections, qualities,
senses, and deportment, far differing from the vulgar crew, and common
course; in a life, as if not of the world, but as he were a pilgrim in the
world, so his carriage in a manner is strange to the world.

And as the life of every creature is, so it affects the element fit for it;
as, fishes affect the water; the Salamander to be in the fire; and other
creatures, some to be on the earth, and others to fly in the air; so that a
man, that has spiritual life, delights to live with God and good men, as did
the Prophet David, Psalm. 84. and does desire to feed constantly upon such
divine ordinances and graces as do cherith that life, delighting to be
exercised therein, as in his proper element, as David confessed of himself to
God, O, how I love thy Law? it is my meditation all the day Psalm. 119 97.
.

. 12. How spiritual life may be preserved.
Means of preservation of spiritual life.
I will now briesly show you, how a man, that has this spiritual life, may
preserve, and strengthen it: which is done especially by six things.

1.Use of the means whereby it is gotter.
First, by the constant and conscionable use of the same means still, whereby
he got it: for, the procreant cause of any thing is also the conservant cause
of the same; because of their homogenean nature, and sympathy between the
patient and the agent, except in those things that are brought forth by
accident, or by the power of an efficient overswaying the instrument and other
causes, contrary to their natural disposition. So that such a Christian must
never be weary, nor give over the continued exercise of the same course of
godly means, whereby at the first he found this life of grace wrought in him.

2.Exercise in spiritual works.
The second means to preserve this spiritual life, in those that have it; is,
to exercise it in all the offices, and works thereof; both in believing in
Christ with application of the promises, and also in doing and suffering what
God requires or imposes; for, as faith draws this life from the fountain of
life, whereby we live, as men say, actu primo, so by the employment and
exercise of this life, in obedience to God, we live, actu secundo; preserving
and nourishing this life. For, we see that by rest and idleness things are,
not only often frustrate of the end of their being, but do also languish and
die; which by action, according to their natural faculties and proper use, are
preserved. For, all things that are in the way to their end, (as spiritual
life is here) are maintained and perfected by their motion to that end; where,
at last, they are to rest, there not being an ultra or more-over, for them to
aspire after.

3.Zeal.
Thirdly, this spiritual life is somented and cherished by stirring up, and
blowing the coal of godly zeal for goodness, and against evil; whereby a
man may quicken the things that are ready to die: this zeal is, as the lively
spirits that quicken this life, to make it active, whereby it grows and is
vigorous.

The weakness of zeal.
The things that weaken this zeal, are three. First, wearisomenesse and
satiety, contracted by the length of time in assiduity, about good things and
divine exercises. 2.
Secondly, by diseouragements, from all examples, and from opposition of
goodness. 3.
Thirdly, for the prevailing of vice in our selves, or generally in others,
carried with a high hand; and from the languishing of grace in our selves; and
from the general discountenancing of it by others.

Means to quicken zeal. 1.
The means to quicken this zeal are; First, the serious consideration both of
the excellency, and also of the usefulness of goodness, whereby we may be
inslamed with the love and desire of it. 2.
Secondly, the odiousness and dangerousnesse of iniquity and sinful
prevailing courses in others; may, by antipathie, and antiparistasis, kindle
our zeal the more against it: as David confesses of himself, that rivers of
waters did run down his eyes, because men kept not Gods Law, Psalm. 119.136.

4. Gods promises
Fourthly, this spiritual life is maintained by observing and collecting the
promises of the word of God; and marking how God fulfills the same to his
people: and so by meditating and relying upon them, we shall find
encouragement, and a lively influence come from the same, to uphold this
spiritual life in us, in all estates, when all other things do fail. As the
Prophet says, unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in mine affliction Psalm. 119.42.
.

5. Preseverance.
Fifthly, spiritual life is upheld in us, by having our eyes fixed upon God, in
constant perseverance in all well doing, (as did Iehosaphat 2 Chro 20.12.
) from whom there proceeds to us a gracious influence of divine life, as light
from the sun to the moon, when she is within the aspect of it.

6.Hope of happincsse.
The sixth means of preservation of this spiritual life, is hope, set upon our
future happiness: as did our Savior Christ; who, for the hope that was set
before him, endured the cross: Heb. 12.2.
by this anchor of hope a man rides safe in all storms, as held up by the
chinne, that he can never be drowned, when this anchor is cast upward within
the veil, whither Christ our forerunner is gone Heb 6.19.
: drawing us after him.

. 13. Of man's care of spiritual life.
Use 2. Man's great charge.
The second use of the excellency of man's spiritual life is, to instructus;
that man has the greatest adventure and charge, to save, or lose, of any
creature in the world: for, as he has both a soul and a body, so has he,
both a natural and a spiritual life to save, or lose: and upon the miscarying
of the spiritual, depends the misery of the natural

Therefore it is, that man is subject to most dangers of all earthly creatures;
and needs to be most vigilant and careful of himself: for, by how much the
more excellent he may be, if he be saved, so much the more miserable shall he
be, if he perish. And therefore, as of a ship lade with rich goods, more care
is to be had, than of a ship lade with coals or chalk; Comparison.
so more care is to be had of a man than of any other worldly creature; in
regard of the greatness of the aforesaid adventurer which may be fitly
represented by the answer of a certain Philosopher to a wretched fellow, when
they were both at sea in danger to be drowned together, whereof the Philosopher
was much more fearful than the other, who upbraided him for the same, and
demanded the reason thereof; to whom the Philosopher replied, that the loss
was far the greater for him to miscarry, than for many such fellows as the
other was, who were naught worth.

Use 3.
The third use observable from hence is; that if it come into competition
whether we should yield to lose our natural life, or our spiritual; when
both cannot be enjoyed to either, then we are to prefer the preservation of
our spiritual life before our natural, and, for saving of this, to do nothing
to hurt or prejudice that: remembering that our Savior says, be that loves
his life shall lose it; Terent S. natural before natural life.
and he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal,
John 12.25. for obtaining whereof many of Gods people little respected their
natural life, as they who Heb. 11.35. did not accept deliverance from death,
that they might obtain a better resurrection; Paul said that his life was not
dear to him; but that he was ready to die for the name of Jesus Christ, Act.
21.13. which was the ease of all the Martyrs; such was their esteem of, and
affection to spiritual life. We that live (says Paul) are delivered to death
for Jesus sake, that his life may be manifest in us. Which coademnes those,
that Esau-like set light by this spiritual life; preterring the world, their
lusts, their pleasures, or natural life before it: because, they neither know
the worth, nor comfort of it; nor have part or hope of it: which whosoever
has, will choose rather a thousand times to die this temporal death; than to
lose his spiritual life.

CHAP. 6. Of life's destruction, and of murder in general.
. 1. How man's life may be lost.
HAving spoken of man's life, which is the object of Self murder, now it
follows in the next place, that we consider the act it self of taking away
this life, specially in unjust manner. Life may be lost.


Of both the aforesaid kinds of life, natural and spiritual, a man may be
deprived, and that after two several ways: 1. Passively.
First, passively, as he therein is immediately but a sufferer, although
mediatly, or by original merit. he may be said to be efficient, in procurement
of his own destruction; but as he is merely passive he cannot be deemed to be
guilty thereof.

2. Actively.
Secondly actively, as he is an agent, in and about his own death, working to
effect the same, either meritoriously, or efficiently, and so he is a
self-murderer, and guilty of his own death.

. 2. Of the means of losing life natural.
Means of loss of life are, 1. Internal.
Man's life is loseable by two sorts of means: First, internal, arising from,
and within a man's self, that kills him as the worm that breeds of, and in the
tree, and destroys it: so in man's body do distempers and diseases breed of,
and from it self; whereby he is in deaths hands, and by degrees dies daily:
also in the soul of man sin does breed, that kills his spiritual life: and
so, he has in himself the principles and means of the destruction, both of
his soul and body; of his life, both natural and spiritual.

2. External.
The second means is external; inflicted from without a man; tending to that
taking away of his life: and the same is either casual, or voluntary.

1. Casual.
Casual, or accidental is; when, besides the intension of the agent, and
proper nature and end of the action, it falls out and comes to pass that
thereby the life of man is hurt, or taken away: as when, in felling of wood,
the axe flees off the helve, and unawares to him that uses it, kills a man
Deuteronomy. 19.5.
, herein the life of man is taken away, not without concurrence of the
providence of God; who is pleased, by suffering such an accident, to lay a
cross upon the agent, to whom it is a kind of calamity or punishment to be a
means (against his will) of the death of any man.

Also, to this casual destruction of man's life, belongs the perishing of the
souls of those, that unjustly take offense at other men's estates and lives 1
Cor. 1.23.
; for that which they lawfully and necessarily do or suffer, in their callings
and Christian condition; whereby such persons flee off from the truth; and fall
into, or persist in evil and damnable course, to their eternal perdition;
without any fault of theirs by whose occasion they (of their own wretchedness)
stumble and miscarry; and so go guilty of their own spiritual death; by
abusing of that, which is good, to their hurt and damnation; so falling and
ruinating themselves, by other men's rising and standing.

2. Voluntary.
Or else, the external means of taking away a man's life; do of themselves,
in their proper nature, and direct use, and in the intension of the agent, tend
to the effecting thereof: which (about our life that is natural,) is done
either justly; upon lawful causes; in just manner; Justly.
by those those that are sufficiently authorized to do the same: or else, it
is done unjustly; when the same is without just cause; Unjustly.
not by the hands of persons lawfully authorized to do it; or is not performed
in a just and warrantable manner.

. 3. Of the means of the destruction of spiritual life.
2. Of the soul.
Also, touching our spiritual life, the same is externally, or by means,
without a man's self, destroyed; either by the justice of God; 1. By God.
when he most righteously, in his act of vindicative and distributive justice
punishes man with eternal destruction, for his sins, Mat. 10.28. in which
case man, in respect of his own merits and deservings, is guilty of his own
perishing, and not God.

2. By men, two ways.
Or else, our spiritual life may miscarry by means of men; 1.
who First, by their corrupt doctrine, and evil examples do draw others with
them to perdition: as did the Scribes and Pharisees; that did compass sea and
land to make one Proselyte, whom when they had won, they made him twosold
more the child of hell than themselves, Mat. 23.15. or, by depriving them of
the means of their salvation; they are subjected to destruction. 2.
Secondly, when men, by compulsory means of unjust laws, and severe
threatenings and punishments, are driven and forced from the ways of
righteousness into sinful courses; as by Jeroboam, Manasses, etc. souls
are destroyed with a twofold guilt, both of them that force others; and also of
them that yield themselves to evil, upon such constraint.

Life is taken away: 1 By others. 2. By a man's self.
Again, the external means of depriving a man of his life is inflicted,
either by others; sometime lawfully, sometimes unlawful; or else, by a man's
own hands and procurement; which is ever, in all cases, unlawful for him to
do, mediately, or immediately, directly, or indirectly. But, it is to be
noted, that no man loses his spiritual life, but by his own means, and
merits procuring the same: for the spiritual life of man is subject to no man's
power; who can kill only the body and do no more, Mat. 10.28.

And God, that is esseatially and absolutely just, subjects not man to suffer
that, which actively he has not first some way procured, by his own doings
and deservings.

Observe. How subject man is to death.
From hence, it is observable, that the lives of no creatures are longer, and
with more ado hatchedup, and maintained, than the lives of men; and yet, the
lives of no creatures are subject to so many dangers, inward, and outward of
destruction; and sooner overthrown, than man's; we being like brittle glasses,
that contain precious balsame; and as choice flowers, hardly cherished up, and
soon blasted: which shows, both our weakness, and want of self-sufficiency,
to uphold our selves; and also, how we are possessed and compassed about, with
things adverse and dangerous to our lives; both of soul and body: of all
creatures man only being a stranger and pilgrim on earth, has, therefore, the
least kind entertainment in this world, and the most uncertain possession of
it; and is always nearest to be thrust out of it; walking here but as a shadow.

Use 1
Therefore, we should be more careful to cleave the more closely to our God,
who is the preserver of men; that by him we may be upheld and protected against
all dangers.

2.
And again, we should be the more watchful against carnal security; that we
do not presume upon our uncertain lives; nor suffer our selves to be
entangled with this world and the things of it; but that we be ever heavenly
minded, and ready for our departure hence; laboring to get, and keep that
spiritual and eternal life.

. 4. Of murder in self-killing.
Killing of a man's self is murder. 1.
In a man's taking away of his own life, two things are to be considered.
First, that it is murder, in regard of the nature of the act of it.

2.
Secondly, that it is murder of ones self, in respect of the object thereof:
and so self-murder is a compounded sin of more degrees than one, and that in
such a kind, as is the most heinous and most to be abhorred in humane society,
in regard that this destroys the substantial being of that which ought to be
of all worldly things most dear to us; whereas other sins, spoil the
welbeing of our selves, or others; which, so long as life lasts, is
recoverable.

Self-murder is horrible.
And therefore, whatsoever is to be thought of the vile quality, and of the
damnable deserts of murder in general, is to be conceived to be due, and much
worse, to self-murder in special. For, murder is but the genericall or
general matter, and not the special and formal nature of Self-murder: and
therefore, if it be horrible to murder another man, it is much more odious to
kill ones self. For, by natural reason, the more that any Genus, or general
matter, is restrained, and actuated, by its superadded forms and specificall
differences, the more it is intended, active and powerful; according to the
motion of nature, ab imperfectioribus ad perfectiora, proceeding toward that
perfection, wherein it intends to termine and end. Now, the perfection of a
vice (if I may so speak) consists in the highest exorbitancie of it, beyond
which none can pass, and in murder, it is certain that none can go beyond
self-murder, as afterward will fully appear.

4. Things are observable in murder.
In taking away, specially, a man's natural life unjustly and murderously,
four things are to be considered.

1. That death is undeserved.
First, that the effect done, or death of a man, in depriving him of his life,
is without due desert on his part, at their hands that put him to death.

2. Done without lavvfull authority.
Secondly, that the act it self, whereby that effect is accomplished, is
unlawful, on his part that does it, in regard of his want of authority, and
just calling to do that act: and if the sufferer have deserved death, and the
executioner have a lawful calling to kill him; yet, if his manner of doing of
it be contrary to the prescript and rules of his calling; and to the mind and
disposition requisite for such an agent in that act; then the same is murder.

3. Done wittingly.
Thirdly, it is considerable in murder, that the agent therein both knows, not
only that the nature of his action that he does, tends to death; but also
that morally it is an unlawful act, or thing to be done: and also does
voluntarily and wittingly intend the doing of that action, without regard of
the effect, or ensuing of death thereupon.

4. Death intended.
Fourthly, touching murder, it is remarkable that the agent do not only
voluntarily and wittingly a lethiferous or mortal act; but that he do also
intend, and desire to effect the death of a man thereby; whom justly he cannot
kill: otherwise, if a man should ignorantly, or unwillingly, in doing of his
lawful calling, be a means accidentally to take away the life of a man, he is
not therefore guilty of murder. For, for such God provided Cities of refuge,
for their preservation, against the avenger of blood. Deuteronomy. 19.3, 4, 5. Iosbua
20.3. by the first of these we see, that an innocent suffers death; by the
second we see, that the Agent or executioner is such an one as ought not to
kill him, although he were nocent: by the third and fourth it appear, that the
act is formaliter murderous, in regard of the knowledge, and intention of the
doer thereof.

Self-murder is most vile murder, in transcendent manner.
So, in Self-murder, as it is murder, an Innocent, (never deserving of himself
that himself should kill himself,) is slain: the Actor whereof has no
authority, nor calling over himself so to do: seeing, no man can be both
superior and also inferior to himself: and for a man to do an act upon
himself, which he knows to be both mortal, and unlawful; and yet will do
it, with purpose and intent to bereave himself of his own life, it cannot be
denied to be murder in the highest degree, and he a murderer that does it.

. 5. How murder is vile.
The vileness of murder in its effects.
The vileness of murder is not only seen, by its contrariety to Gods Law,
and the heavy censures and punishments thereof, and its incompatibility with
humane society; but also, by the effects thereof upon the sufferer. 1.It
destroves natural life.
For, first the act of murder utterly so destroys the natural life of man,
upon the departure of his soul from the body; that the same is never again
recovered. For, natural life depends, not only upon the presence of the soul
informing the body; but even upon our state of being in this world; insomuch
that after the resurrection, although soul and body shall be again united;
yet, as then our bodies shall be spiritual bodies 1 Cor. 15 44.
; so shall our lives be. So then, a murderer takes that life away, which he can
never give, nor restore; and destroys that which he can never build up.

2. It destroys man's persen.
Secondly, the act of murder destroys the person of man; which depends upon
man's life. For, neither is the soul alone, nor the body alone the person of
man; but the whole man consisting of soul and body with their properties
hypostatically united. So that, when the soul is in heaven, he cannot say, but
Synechdochically, that the person is in heaven Nor, when the body is in the
grave, can we properly say, that the person is in the grave. For, then, either
a man must be two persons one in heaven, and another in the grave, which is
absurd: or else one created person should be in diverse places at once; which
is impossible.

Observe where the person is after death.
If you say, where then is the person after death? I answer, it is not in
actual being, but potentiall in its constitutive principles of soul and body;
that are to be joined together, at the day of judgment. And therefore it is,
that the souls separate from the bodies think not, nor work in that manner
as they did organically in the body: whereupon the Psalmist says of Princes,
that when they die their thoughts perish Psalm. 146.4.
: and therefore, neither remember they, in that estate, things past; nor are
capable of present, under those species and notions, as they did here in the
body. So then, he that murders a man, destroies a person; although his distinct
natures do remain.

Thirdly, a murderer is injurious to God, not only in breaking his Law, but
also in destroying his Image; which is not properly in the body, or in the
soul apart; but in the whole person of man, consisting of both soul and body,
with their properties personally united: man was created in Gods Image: now,
the soul alone, or body alone is not the man, but both united, as is said: so
it is apparent, that wrong is done to heaven and earth, by a murderer.

. 6. Of the original of murder.
Murder whenee. 1. From our selves.
We are to consider, whence it comes that man does monstrously, First, fall upon
his own kind, to destroy it; and then upon himself. Of murder in general,
man's wicked heart and the devil are the parents: for, the inward principle of
motion to that vile sin; and also, the passive subject entertaining the same,
is man's own wicked disposition inclining him, (by inbred hatred,) to that
horrible mischief. For out of the heart proceeds murder Mat. 15.19.
, says our Savior Christ: which is a just recompense from God; that man, for
his rebellion and disobedience against God, should be given over, in revenge of
Gods quarrel, to destroy with his own hands his own kind, and self. So
that, he that will not agree with God and love him, cannot agree with, nor love
himself, nor his neighbor.

Satan is the principal and active parent of murder; who was a murderer from
the beginning; and now is still, in spite against God and man, a provoker and
stirrer up of man to murder; affording him occasions and opportunities to do
the deed; to the staining of the honor of God, and defacing of mankind; and
therefore, murderers are most especially the children of the devil Job. 8.44.
; and obedient to him, both in disposition and practice: they that wilfully do
the greater sin, do babitually and dispositively not stick at the lesser;
seeing that the lesser are ever, in some sort, comprehended in the greater.

It was an act of impotency.
This effect, in man's taking away the life of man, shows that man's ability
lies specially in spoiling and destroying of Gods handiworks; and argues rather
impotency than power in him; where there is no stronger power of preservation,
opposing of him. For, the proper effect of power is entity, or being; and
nonentity or not being is the effect of weakness. We see that, although a
man can kill, yet he cannot restore again to life; because, it is God only
that has power over the spirit, and that kills and makes alive again.

Use To bevvare of murder.
And therefore, all men should be careful how they take away the life of any
man. For, although by repentance they may make their own peace with God, for
their murder; yet they can never restore the loss, or damage: none can call
back the spirit, but the Father of spirits, to aenimate a dead body: neither
has any man absolute power over the creatures, to do with them as he list, but
as he is limited by Gods commission and will.

Observe.
To terrify a man from killing himself, he ought to consider how he is
limited and restrained, by his Sovereign Lord God, from rashly attempting, or
meddling to hurt the lives of any men, Man is restrained from murder.
whom he may not use, or dispose of, according to his own self-willed lust;
but, according to the good will of God, who is the supreme and absolute Lord
and master of all mankind, in special manner. Also, he is to consider the
odionsnesse and punishment of simple murder, It is odious.
in any man; and how loath he himself would be to do it, upon any other man:
that so he may much more abhor to do it upon himself: sins are more
discernable by us in others, than in our selves; as a visible object, close
upon the sense of seeing, cannot be seen so well, as at a greater fit
distance: what we do see to be unlawful and odious in others, others do see
to be no less, but rather more odious in us, if we excel them in place or
personal parts; where there is no accident, or circumstance that may extenuate
the same.

A man cannot possibly kill himself, but that thereby he is, in the lesser
degree of this sin, a murderer; in state common with Barrabas and others,
that murderously kill other men than themselves: and thereby is liable to the
like detestation and punishment, but withal in a far greater degree, for
killing himself.

Note.
It is remarkable, that no man can kill or murder another, but withal he must
kill himself, both soul and body. No man can murder another without murdring
of himself.
For, by his sin of murder he stabs his own souls, and subjects it to the
vengeance of God: And also thereby he makes his person obnoxious to the stroke
of justice, by the hand either of God or man, to suffer death for that horrible
sin: according to the threatenings and judgments of God; and the apprehension
of the murderers own conscience; and the hatred wherewith all men do
prosecute such detestable persons, as enemies of mankind, and of humane society
Genesis 9.5. Deuteronomy 19.12, 13. Genesis 4.14.
.

CHAP. 7. Of murder, as it is of ones self.
. 1. Of the specificall difference of self-murder.
BEsides the consideration of murder, in a man's killing of himself, the third
point in the general description of self-murder is the efficient cause, or
means of it; and that is a man's own self, by his own precurement; who is
also the immediate object of that vile fact; whereof now I am to speak.

Self-murders specificall difference.
Here is now the specificall difference of this sort of murder, whereby it
transcends, and is distinguished from all other murders; and consists in
restraint of the act of killing, in regard of its individual object, to a man's
own life and self; which is the greatest and cruellest act of hostility in the
world: when a man, who by nature is most bound to preserve himself, reflects
upon himself, to destroy himself; the horriblenes whereof is so monstrous,
that we read no Law made against it, as if it were a thing not to be supposed
possible. And this sin of all others is most against the Law of nature, for
that self-preservation, arms a man to turn upon others, unlawfully invading
him to kill him. And also, it is against that self-love, which is the rule of
our love to others; and therefore what we may not lawfully, in this case, do
to others, we can less lawfully do it to our selves, against this general
law of love; in breaking whereof, specially toward our selves, we violate the
whole law, the general sum whereof is love.

. 2. Of the evil and greatness of self-murder.
Whence it proceeds.
This is the malice of Satan, and our own wretchedness, to set us at division
and enmity against our selves; and in a monstrous manner to make a man both the
active and passive subject of his own action, and utter destruction of
himself; (the greatest mischief that can betide him in this world) and so a
man's self becomes his own executioner, by his own hands, or means;
principal, or accessory; by command, or otherwise.

Comparison.
If parricide be a grievous sin, as wilfully to kill our own parents;
children; wives; husbands, etc. who are distinct persous from our selves; much
more is self-murder abominable. For, by unity, things are preserved; and
individualls are principally one: and therefore, if individualls be divided
against themselves, the world cannot stand; when things shall cease to be true,
and amically disposed to themselves.

. 3. Of lawful self-killing.
Lawful selfekilling. Of our old man.
There is a lawful and commanded killing of our selves. For understanding
whereof, it is to be observed, that every one of us has in him a self-old-man
of sinfulness, lively and powerful in manifold lusts and wicked actions: of
which the Apostle tells us, Romans 7.5. That when we were in the flesh, the
motions of sins, which were by the Law, did work in our members, to bring
forth fruit unto death; when the Commandment came sin revived: the living
whereof does kill us.

In this case, even for our own preservation, it is necessary, and lawful for
us to kill our self-old-man, with the lusts thereof: as the Apostle commands us
to mortify our memhers, that the body of sin might be destroyed: we should
put off the old man. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.9. so that we should become dead to
trespasses and sins, wherein formerly we were dead.

The kinds of it.
This killing of our selves, is metaphorical and moral; by which death we are
made alive: For, if we do not thus die, we cannot live: as, the sown corn
must first die, before it can live and grow. Comparison.


How done. 1. In Christ.
This our self-old-man is slain by three several acts or blows. First, the
same, after a sort, was crucified in Christ, Romans 6.6. That the body of sin
might be destroyed; although, not the individual persons; but the common
nature of mankind aslumed by Christ did suffer death in him.

2. By change of our estate in Justification.
Secondly, our self-old-man is killed, by change of our state, upon our
grafting into Christ by faith: so that we are, in that respect, said to be dead
to the Law, by the body of Christ, Romans 7.4.6. and that we are dead to the Law,
that we might live unto God, Gal. 2.19. this is done at one entire act or blow;
in the act of our justification; so, by this death, freeing us from him, that
has the power of death, even the devil.

3. By the Spirit.
Thirdly, our self-old-man and the lusts thereof are killed, as touching the
dominion and corruption of them, by the Spirit of God, in the act of
sanctification: touching which the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.13. That if we,
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, (which is the work of
our whole life,) we shall live.

How we are actors in it.
This killing of our self-old-man should be done by our selves, being the
executioners of it; by assistance of divine power from God, in three several
acts.

1.
First, by our act of savingly believing in Christ, whereby our state is
changed from death to life.

2.
Secondly, by our constant endeavors to be conformed to Gods Image and will,
by daily renovation.

3.
Thirdly, by our continual warfare against our corruptions and temptations,
touching which, the Apostle says, that the flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. they are so contrary the one to
the other, that there is no living for either of them, but by the death of its
opposite: neither is there any peace, until one of them be dead.

Observe. The use of our Christian armor.
We should therefore ever use our Christian armor, and employ our utmost
endeavors to destroy our self-old-man; against which, if we do turn the edge
of our spiritual sword to slaughter it, with the lusts thereof, we shall be
diverted, not only from unjustly killing of others, but much more from killing
our selves, in any other respect, but when we, as Saul, do spare the life of
this Agag, or self-old-man, it causes us, by a just hand of God, to fall upon
our selves; to take away that life of our own which we should both spare and
cherish.

. 4. Diverse observations from the general consideration of self-murder.
Observe. 1. Man is in greatest danger.
From the consideration of self-murder we may observe: First, that man stands
in more danger of destruction, than any other creature: for, no creature is
subject to attempts against the life of it, by it self, but only man; who is
environed also with mortal dangers from without, but specially of his own
procurement, by opening the way for others to invade and hurt him, by breaches
and arms of his own making.

2. God wants not executioners of his justice.
Secondly, we here see that God wants not means of execution of his
judgments upon man; seeing, he can leave a man to fall upon himself, and be
his own executioner.

Use. Fear God.
The use hereof is, to make us afraid to offend God; or to provoke him to be
our enemy; or to live unreconciled with him, destitute of the assurance of his
peace and favor.

Distrust our selves.
Neither are we over-confidently to trust our selves with our selves; of whom
we have so little assurance for security and safety from self-mischiefe: and
therefore, we are carefully to cleave to God for preservation, praying him not
to give us up to our selves, who are mercilesly cruel to our selves, when we
fall into our own hands: for the nearer that any are linked and knit together
in condition, or affection, the more desperately opposite they are, when they
fall into division; because of the want of a fit medium or mediator of
reconciliation, between a man's self and himself: what mean is there, either
to keep himself from himself, or to reconcile himself to himself, when
himself is fallen out into murdercus resolutions against himself?

CHAP. 8. Of spiritual self-murder in special.
. 1. All perishing souls are self-murdered.
Soule-murder.
OF self-murder, thus generally defined, there are two kinds, or specialls; to
wit, spiritual, and bodily.

Although some may be said to be murderers of other men's souls, by their
scandalous practices; or by their corrupt doctrine, or by depriving them of the
means of their salvation, and the like: yet no soul can perish without the
intervening and concurring of the assistance and means of him that owes that
soul: whereby it comes to paffe, that all souls that miscarry are in some
sort, Is also self-murder.
self-murdered. For, although it is against nature to desire to be absolutely
miserable, and that he should in his last existing, in his last principles be
undone, or wretched: albeit he may affect the dissolution of his personal
subsisting, upon intention and hope, by his change, to be bettered in his
future estate: subsisting in his remaining principles: yet he may wittingly and
willingly do that, which may be the destruction of his soul: although he does
not intend that effect; and so commit not direct, but indirect
self-soule-murder.

. 2. Spiritual self-murder defined.
What spiritual self-murder is.
Now, that we may know what it is: Spiritual self-murder is the killing of a
man's soul, or spiritual life by himself, or his own means.

That which distinguishes this from bodily self-murder, is the subject killed,
which is the soul, or spiritual life: not that the soul, essextially
considered, or its natural life of being, and acting in it self, can be
destroyed by man, whereby it ever lives, to be capable of eternal misery, or
glory. For, such a death it cannot die, without being reduced into nothing, and
quite extinguished, in regard of the spiritual simplicity thereof, void of
composition, and the nature of it is an act: but this death is only of that
superadded supernatural beatificall life of grace and glory; whereof a man may
miss and come short, and be guilty of the loss thereof, although he were
never personally possessed of it: as those that are said 1 Timothy 1.19. to have
put away faith and a good conscience.

. 3. Of soul-murder, by deprivation of life.
Two degrees of it. 1.
Of soul-murder there are two degrees: the first is deprivation of spiritual
life, which is poena damni, or punishment of loss: 2.
the second is subjection to misery, in positive manner, which is called the
second death; and is poena sensus, or punishment of sensible feeling; because,
man was endowed at first, as it were habitually, with a spiritual life; in
gracious indowments, and communion with God: and now, by man's own fault, that
habit of spiritual life being destroyed, it may be truly said, that he
himself has killed it; in regard that he was radically and implicitly in
Adam; when he first destroyed and lost the same.

. 4. Of man's deficiency to be saved.
Means of man's deprivation of (...) all life, his deficiency.
The principal means of man's deprivation of this spiritual life is, his
neglect of means, when himself is the immediate cause and procurer thereof,
by his own deficiency: and that two ways.

1. In Adaw
First, as he is originally confidered in Adam, who was the root of mankind,
and whose first sin and effects thereof are equally reckoned to be all men's
in common, who then were in him: and so, thus radically in Adam all men have
deprived themselves of spiritual life, by their own act of neglect of eating
of the tree of life, and of others permitted for their use, and by their eating
of the forbidden tree of knowledge of good and evil.

2. By himself personally considered.
Secondly, as he is personally considered by himself, a man may deprive
himself of spiritual life, and so in that respect be a self-murderer of his
soul; which is done by his voluntary omission of duties, upon which life is
promised: every man is dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2.
, and thereby subject to death: but the Lord has abundantly provided us of
means to advance us to life; which if we do wilfully neglect, or contemn to
use (there being no other safety,) of necessiry we must perish, and be guilty
of our own destruction; as were the Jews, by rejecting of the Gospel, Act.
28.25.

Fourfold omission.
Of this degree of self-soule-murder or deprivdtion of life, a man may be
guilty, by a fourfold omission of things, that ought to be done by him, for
his salvation.

1. Neglect of the outward means.
First, when a man wilfully neglects the conscionable and diligent use of the
outward ordinances of Gods word, worship and Sacraments; the blessed means of
life appointed by God; without which no man of discretion in the visible Church
can be saved: the Apostle, Romans 10.13. limits salvation to calling upon the
name of the Lord; which cannot be without hearing of the word of God.

This neglect of spiritual means is either, by not going where they may be
had, and sincerely used: or, if he may have them, his neglect may be in not
frequenting, and carefully using them, in conscionable manner; nor submitting
himself to be wrought upon; that he may be molded in the form and frame of
the word Romans 6.17.
. But, does come to the means; either with a prejudicate opinion against the
truth; or with a resolution to continue still in his unregenerated estate; and
in his sinful courses: as those that with their mouth showed much love; but
their hearts went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. and as those that
Jeremy speaks of, Ier. 18.12. who said, We will walk after our own
devices; and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart: such
persons are as guilty of their own damnation, as a man is of self-murder of
his body, that out of stubbornness, or sullenness, will not eat, but in the
midst of plenty starve himself to death.

. 5. Of man's neglect of the power of the means.
2. The contempt of the power of the means.
The second omission, procuting deprivation of spiritual life, and so
consequently effecting self-soule-murder in that degree, is a man's contempt and
regardlesnesse of the spiritual efficacy and power of the means; for inward
change of his spiritual and moral state and condition; and for power of
enabling him to all holy practice of life and conversation; whereby he may be
borne again, and be made a new creature Job. 3.3.
: which is a thing most necessary and availeable for salvation, Gal. 6.15.

Such men are either, utterly careless and regardlesse of grace and spiritual
life; from their undervaluing of the worth of it, or from their esteeming of
the same to be needless.

Or else, they harden their hearts, as did Pharaoh, and set themselves against
the power of the Word; that it may neither enter into their hearts, nor make
any divine change in their states or lives; as if they had made a league with
hell and death.

What be those Contemners.
Such, are ever learning, but never attain to saving knowledge; they are ever
sowing, but never reap; they are ever in the hand of the workman, but are
never framed anew: they are fairly featured by some outward profession, but
are without life and sound grace: the reason hereof is, because such an one
rests upon and pleases himself in his own sufficiency, using the means,
without consideration of the end why God gave the means, and why we are couse
them; and without looking and seeking to God, for a blessing upon the means,
that they may be effectual to his salvation.

. 6. Of man's defect in obedience.
3. Want of obediencs.
The third omission, whereby a man excludes himself from this spiritnall life,
and so consequently subjects himself to spiritual death, is wilful want of
obedience to Gods word; and that in a double respect:

1 Evangelicall.
First, in regard of the Gospel; when he does not savingly believe in Christ,
as the Gospel requires: but remains in privative unbelief; whereby a man is
destitute, or deprived of Christ our life and Savior; For, we are frequently
said to live by faith Habak. 2.4. Heb. 10.38. Romans 1.17.
: and therefore, without it we are dead: and so, such as do not savingly
believe and repent, (which are the acts of Evangelicall obedience,) do deprive
themselves of salvation, through their own default: which is evident, because
they are willingly impenitent unbeleevers, resisting the motions of the word
and Spirit; not sorrowing for, nor striving against their unbelief and hard
impenitency of heart; but are secure, and do please themselves therein.

2. Legal.
Secondly, want of obedience to Gods word, that deprives us of life, is in
respect of the law; in omitting of performing and doing the affirmative
Commandments thereof, upon observation whereof all the promises of life
eternal are intayled, so that without the same we cannot be saved: and
therefore we should keep the Commandments as our life: the want of obedience
to the affirmative Commandments excludes from life; as the breaking of the
negative Commandments subjects the transgressors to destruction.

. 7. Of the reasons of defect of obedience.
Causes of want of obedience.
There are four special causes of men's neglect of the affirmative
Commandments, both of the Law, and Gospel.

1. Omissions.
First, because the sins of that kind are but omissions, which are not so
contrary to God, nor do so much trouble the conscience, as siunes of
commission: neither do the affirmative Commandments bind ad semper, to the
ever doing of them all at all times: and therefore, intermission being next to
omission, men do easily fall from the former into the latter.

2.Carnal reason.
Secondly, because, carnal men would subject Gods Laws and ordinances to
their own natural reason, which neither allows, nor likes the
spiritualnesse, nor strictness of Gods Commandments: such men do give
dispensations to themselves for carnal moderation, or omission of duties: as
Naaman the Syrian did, 2 King. 5.18. pleasing themselves therein; so long as
their own wit can coin them excuses, evasions, and pretenses, that they may
prefer their own will and ways, before Gods wisdom and Laws.

3. Contrariety of nature.
Thirdly, because men's own natural dispositions and course of life, are
contrary to the virtues commanded: therefore, in favor of their old man of
sin, that reigns in them; they forbear to do what may cross or hurt the
same: Compatison.
as the natural mother that would not have her own child divided, 1 King.
3.26. the law of sin within them, prevailing against the Law of God and his
Spirit: neglect of duties and virtues ever attends upon their opposite contrary
master-raigning sins.

4. Prosit and pleasure.
Fourthly, because that the observation of the affirmative Commandments does
more cross a man's profit and pleasure, and brings him under more opposition
and hatred of the world, than the keeping of the negative Commandments does;
he, therefore, is the more apt, and inclined to omit the duties of the
affirmative, as more troublesome to observe, because, they do include the
observation of the negative; and are more subject to the censure of men, being
more sensibly discernable than the negative: and does make a greater distance
and difference from the world, than bare omission of evil: because, doing of
moral good puts a man into a remoter extreme from worldlings and unconverted
persons, than only not doing evil.

. 8. Of grace dying by man's neglect.
4. Neglect of cherishing grace.
The fourth omission, whereby a man deprives himself of eternal life; is
neglect to cherish and foment the graces of Gods Spirit, begun to be wrought
in him by the means; but lets them die, before Christ be fully formed in him;
The reason.
because, he does not constantly and conscionably use the means, to perfect
them both in their nature and degrees; neither does improve and exercise the
talent and gifts that he has; but suffers them to perish, in languishing
idleness: nor does he endeavor to approve himself to God in all sincerity
and holiness, according to the utmost of his power; nor yet encourages
himself to aspire after perfection; by the consideration and hope of
everlasting glory: we should be careful and industrious that we lose not the
things that we have wrought, 2 Ioh. 8. For, those only that hold out unto the
end, shall be saved Mat. 24.13.
: by neglect and sloth, that life of grace languishes and dies; which we might
seem to have; and might be, in some degrees and motions of the Spirit, begun.

Uses.
The uses of this point of doctrine touching this degree of self-soule-murder
by omission of the means of life, are diverse.

. 9. The harm of omission of duty.
1. Omission deprives men of life.
First, to inform our judgment, we may see that by this neglect and
omission, a man may cut off himself from spiritual life; and be, in this
degree, a self-murderer of his own soul. Want of grace deprives a man of
happiness: as the Virgins want of oil Mat. 22.12.
; and the man's want of his wedding garment, excluded them from the presence of
the Bridegroom and 25.12.
.

It is not enough that a man be not an ill man, by sins of commission against
the negative Commandments of God; except he be also a good man, by his
conformity to GODS affirmative Commands. For, it is requisite, that as a man
would, not only not be damned in hell, but would also be glorified in heaven;
that he be not only careful to avoid the sins, that may subject him to the
former; but also, that he do embrace the virtues, and do the duties, whereby
he may be fitted for, and advanced to the latter: and as a man is made capable
of virtue and glory, so should he not only labor to be clear of vice; but
also to be endowed with virtue and holiness.

Negative righteousness.
Negative righteousness, in abstinence from sin, (whereof bruits and
inanimates are free,) is an improper and lame righteousness; which is next to
a non ens; so long as it is not accompanied with virtue. Omission of good
duties is a more general means of destruction, in exclusion from life
eternal, than commission of evil. for, many do die before they are able to
do actually any evil, and many others have been civil harmless men; (as
the Philosophers) and yet perished. For, except our righteousness do exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no case enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5.20.
.

And again, commission of evil is ever accompanied with omission of the
contrary good; but omission of good is not always so accompanied with
commission of evil; as we see in Infants: the greatest loss and mischief,
that can betide us, in our deprivation of life and happiness; which consists
in the fruition of God that is infinitely good; and is lost by want and
omission of good; for, without holiness none shall see God.

Punishment of damage greater, than of feeling.
The loss of eternal life is poena damni, the punishment of damage, which is
far greater than the punishment of feeling, and smart; (although it be not
so to man's seeming:) therefore, Cain complained that he was cast out from Gods
presence Genesis 4.4.
: because, the objects do so far differ, as finite and infinite: and the
glorified in Heaven shall be more affected with that happiness that they shall
possess; than the damned in hell can be, for that sensible misery, that they
shall suffer: both, in respect of the differing degrees, and also of the
natures of the things: but, punishment of damage, and privation of life and
happiness proceeds from want and omission of good, whereof we are to beware.

. 10. Of endeavor after spiritual life, and of the lets thereof.
2.
The second use is, to stir us up to endeavor after life spiritual, both to
get and keep it; by the conscionable use of the means thereof: For, as God
gives not this life, without our using of appointed means: so, these means
are within the reach of our power; and none do perish, but such as are wanting
to themselves therein. For, no man perishes, or is saved by an absolute decree
of God, without respect to his own courses, in the accomplishment thereof: as,
Act. 13.48. it is said, that as many as were ordained to life, believed.

By a man's constant carfulness, in the use of the means, and walking in the
ways of salvation, it is apparent, that he is appointed to life, as the
Apostle tells us, 1 These. 1.4. Knowing your election: for, our Gospel came
unto you in power etc. this life is worth the laboring for; if we do our
parts for a thing of that price, we may have assurance and comfort of it,
against the servile fear of the contrary death.

Letts.
The lets and hindrances of this endeavor, and the causes of this omission,
whereby men deprive themselves of this spiritual life, are specially three.

1. Perverted judgment.
First, a perverted judgment, and stupid understanding, undervaluing the worth
of that life, as not so excellent, and necessary as it is; it being not subject
to our present natural senses, nor regarded by the world.

2. Mis-placed affections.
Secondly, the preferment of the world, in the profits and pleasures thereof,
before it; in place or degree; after which, ungodly men do more eagerly hunt,
and therein have more content; because, they have the same in present
possession, and it agrees best with their estate and disposition: insomuch that
it may be said of such men, that it is better to be their bodies than their
souls; as the Emperor said of Herod, Macrobius.
that it was better being his hog, than his Son, because he killed his Son, but
spared, and fatted his hogs.

3. Presumption.
Thirdly, groundless presumption, that either he has that life already; or,
that he has time enough to get it long afterward; or, that it may be easily
had without means, or at least without so much ado; makes a man to omit
endeavoring after it in due time, in use of the means: and so he misses that
life.

. 11. Of spiritual self-murder by subjection to death, through commission of
evil.
The second degree of self-soul-murder.
The second, degree of self-soul-murder is subjection to spiritual
destruction, in damnation and everlasting misery: whereof man himself is the
efficient meritorious cause, by his own activity in committing, and wilfully
doing those sins, for which death and destruction is threatened Ezekiel. 18.4.
, and is assuredly inflicted upon the impenitent perseverers therein. For, as
by a man's omission of his duty he deprives himself of life; so by his
commission of sins he subjects himself to the contrary death: the former
being as terminus a quo, the term from which men move, the latter as, terminus
ad quem, the term to which they move: both which are inseparably united in the
same person; in whom, thereby, this spiritual self-murder is consummate, to
the highest perfection, or degree of it; whereby it properly may be called
self-soule-murder.

. 12. Of the means of destruction, by breaking the Law.
By sins of commission.
The deadly means, whereby men kill their own souls, and subject the same to
eternal positive destruction, are the sins that they wilfully commit, and
continue in; in such kinds and degrees, and manner, as cannot consist in them
with grace and salvation: and are of two sorts.

1. Against the Law of negative commands.
First, such as be against the prime law of Nature, by transgressing the
negative Commandments of God; whereby the transgressors do subject
themselves to that punishment, which is called poena sensus, or punishment of
smart, or damnation in hell. For, by sin entered death, Rom 5.12. Rev. 21.8.
Prove. 19 16.

The properties of soul-murdring sins.
The properties of the course and sins of Commission, whereby a man becomes
guilty of self-murder of his soul, are four.

1. They are gross.
Although the nature of all sins be mortal, deserves death, and disposes a
man for it, yet those that be of the grossest kinds, and in the highest degrees
of exorbitancy, such as Hosea speaks of, cap. 4.2. are specially said to be
mortal, for their extreme contrariety that they have to God and his justice;
their inconsistency with grace; and for their apting and disposing of those to
destruction, that live in them; so that, by committing such sins men do cast
their own souls into the gulf of perdition.

2. Wilful.
Secondly, when they that commit those sins, or any of them, do willingly
do the same; and live in them, against the light and checks of their own
consciences; as our Savior charges the Pharisees, John 9.41. then are they
self-condemned; and do wittingly destroy their own souls without excuse of
ignorance, or of want of power to have avoided the same: seeing, as there is,
in some, natural notions of the Law in the mind, such as the Gentiles have,
Romans 2.14. So likewise, all men have some remainder of power to forbear
sins, in their grossest kinds and degrees; if they were not wanting to
themselves: and therefore, as all men, specially the wicked within the Church,
shall be judged by the Law; so they shall have nothing to plead, to excuse why
they should not be damned, for their gross transgressing of it.

3. Obstinate.
Thirdly, when men commit those sins, with eagerness and delight, from and
upon advised judgment, and wilful resolution; with contentment in the acting
of them, and defending, or excusing them, when they are done; as did Saul, 1 Samuel 13.12. and do fall to opposing, censuring, and condemning the contrary
course of virtue and godliness, in the persons that do practice the same;
whom, therefore, they hate and persecute 1 These. 2.15.
: such persons are in a course of destroying their own souls, by setting
themselves, with a high hand, against God; provoking him to his face, to fall
upon them for revenge.

4. Presevered in.
Fourthly, by this course of sinning, a man murders his own soul, when he
goes on, and incorrigibly perseveres therein, passing from evil to worse;
hardening his own heart, against all reproves, and amendment; storming
against, and abusing all the means of his recovery, to his deeper plunging in
wickedness, and destruction; for, although he would willingly miss hell, and
be rid of the guilt of his sin, that troubles his conscience sometime; yet,
the corruption, and practice thereof he loves and entertaines: which is sweet
in his mouth, and which he hides under his tongue, as Zophar says Job. 20.12.
: as upon persevering in well doing attends eternal life; so unto them that
are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey, and continue in
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath is their portion; and tribulation and
anguish shall be upon every soul of man, that does evil, Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9.10.

. 13. Of the causes of men's adventure upon sinful courses.
Reasons of men's so living.
The reasons, why men do so desperately venture upon such deadly courses, and
continue in them, to the destruction of their own souls, are specially two.

1. Seeming good.
First, because the same seems good to them; in regard of the blindness of
their minds 2 Pet. 1.9.
, that cannot truly discern things that differ; and in regard of their
unregenerated affections, which do sympathize and comply best with such
courses; and because they are self-deceived, by a seeming goodness of profit,
or present pleasure in them; which they prefer before true moral goodness;
and therewithal do rest and content themselves, in the ignorance and want of
better comforts: but a wise man will beware of self-deceit; by trusting to his
own opinion, or sense; considering that there is a way that seems right to a
man; but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove. 14.12.

2. Want of faith.
The second cause of man's boldness, in adventuring to run an unlawful course
with the peril of the damnation of his soul; is want of true faith to believe
the threatenings of God in his word against the same; or, at the least, they
suppose that the judgments will not be so bad and intolerable, as is given out;
or, they hope they shall escpe them; or, they comfort themselves with conceit
of their fellows company; and do imagine God to be all mercy, and no justice:
the reason hereof is, both their not discerning, nor regarding of the
spiritual judgments of God upon them; which are the greatest and worst, and
such as they see not sensibly; and also, because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily; therefore, the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. the flourishing of men in their
own ill condition hardens them, and staggers the godly Psalm. 73.12, 13.
.

. 14. Of spiritual self-murder, by sinning against the Gospel.
The second kind of sins of commission are against the Gospel.
The second kind of soul-killing courses, are sins committed against the
Gospel; which is the only remedy given for transgressors of the Law, that when
they are condemned for their disobedience to the Law, they may be saved by
their obedience to the Gospel; without which they cannot but perish.

This Evangelicall obedience differs from legal obedience, in four points.

1. Obedience of the Gospel differs from obedience of the Law. Done by Christ's
power.
First, whereas legal obedience is originally required to be done by a man's
own power and strength; Evangelicall obedience is to be done by us, through
the power of Christ and his Spirit working in us, and by us; inabling us above
the power of nature.

2. Acceptable with infirmity.
Secondly, no obedience of the Law is acceptable to God from those doing it, as
under the Law, for justification by their works; except the doers thereof be
pure from inherent corruption, and do their actions in their highest degree of
moral perfection, without any defect therein: but, for the obedience of the
Gospel, it is accepted by God, from the hands of sinful men, as perfect, if
it be in truth and sincerity, although accompanied with many involuntary
defects, in our believing and repenting.

3. It includes legal obedience.
Thirdly, perfect legal obedience, yea any obedience of the Law, as legal,
whose performance respects justification; excludes Evangelicall obedience; with
which, in that sense, it cannot consist: seeing, justification both by works
and faith, both by the Law and Gospel, are incompatible, as the Apostle
proves, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. But, Evangelicall obedience includes legal
obedience, as inferior and subordinate to it: for, there is an Evangelicall
use of the Law under the Gospel, both, for preparation to the believing of it;
and also, for sanctification of life ordered thereby, by assistance of power
from Christ; for manifestation of the truth of Gods grace in us; to the works
whereof, although imperfect, a reward is due.

4. It respects salvation by another.
Fourthly, the obedience of the Law, by it self considered, respects salvation
by way of moral works in our selves, but the Gospel respects the same, by way
of application of merit from another, to wit, from Jesus Christ: the Law
cannot cure nor excuse the transgressions committed against the Gospel; but
the Gospel can heal, and deliver us from the sins and judgments of the
Law, whatsoever they have been: and therefore it is, that the transgressors
against the Gospel, are in far more danger of destruction thereby, than by
their sins against the Law.

. 15. Of Infidelity.
Sins against the Gospel.
Of these soul-killing transgressions against the Gospel there are four
branches.

1. Infidelity.
First, positive unbelief, or infidelity, when a man will not beeleve savingly
in Christ, to have him to be both his Savior and Lord: neither believes truly
the Gospel, in its full latitude and contents, although literally he knows
the same, but holds and believes deceitful errors, defending the same, and
applauding himself therein: and therefore, seeing that now there is no
salvation but by true faith in Christ, those that will not so believe,
according to the Gospel must needs perish Job. 3.18.


1.Causes of infidelity.
The chief causes of this infidelity, are, First, an innated habit to believe
error, before the truth.

2.
Secondly, our carnal reason, deceitful fancies, and humane presumptions,
upon false principles, overswaying our faith, contrary to the word of God,
whereby men turn aside to their own crooked ways, and perish (as it were) in
the gainsaying of Corah Psalm. 125.5. Cure.
. For prevention of this infidelity, I conclude with the Apostle, take heed
brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God Heb. 3.12.
.

. 16. Of Impenitency.
2. Impenitency.
The second kind of sins against the Gospel, whereby men kill their own
souls, is final impenitency; when they neither care, nor endeavor to repent
for their sins past; nor to reform their lives, for time to come; but go on
in their sins, out of love, or carelessness of them: remorse for sins, in
respect of the punishment of them, is not true repentance, if it be not
specially for the offense of God by them, and if a man be sorrowful for some
gross sins, committed by him, and do restrain his practice therefrom, it
is not sound repentance, so long as he is not grieved for his sins of
omission; nor makes conscience to do his duty, in keeping the affirmative
Commandments of God. Of the danger of this course of impenitency the Apostle
Paul gives his censure, in these words: But after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgments of God, Romans 2.5. Cure.
To prevent this impenitency, we must beware of custom in sin, and of
slighting our spiritual estates.

. 17. Of the sin against the Holy Ghost.
3. The sin against the Holy Ghost.
The third branch of the sins against the Gospel, whereby a man kills his
own soul, is the sin against the Holy Ghost: which consists in hating, and
opposing the known saving truth of the Gospel Mat. 12.31.
, and is called a sin unto death, 1 Ioh. 5.16. from which there is no
recovery; not only because it is ever accompanied with final impenitency;
but, specially, for that the nature of that sin is so directly against the
means of salvation, that thereby a man cuts himself utterly off from it; and
deprives himself of the suffrages and prayers of the Church 1 Ioh. 5.16.
: every sin disposes a man less or more to this sin; which is the
transcendency of all sins; and therefore, that all men may fear, and not
presume upon any sinful course, God has set bounds to his mercy, how far,
in what cases, and to whom he will show the same, and in what cases, and to
whom not. It behooves all men, as they would escape damnation, to beware of
this sin; which at last often causes men to lay violent hands upon
themselves, and to end their lives in desperation. The sins near approaching
to it, are those that men do wilfully, with a high hand, commit, and stand in;
with hatred and persecuting of the contrary virtuous courses in others. Cure.
To avoid this sin against the Holy Ghost, we must be careful that we
sin not presumptuously; nor hate goodness, and good people.

Things observable in it.
It is (by way of enlargement) further to be observed, that this sin against
the Holy Ghost is both incident only to persons enlightened, with certain
knowledge of Christ and the Gospel, Heb. 6.4.
by the Spirits illumination; and are endowed with some competent measure of
Evangelicall graces, by the power and work of the Holy Ghost: and also, that
the nature of it consists in an obstinate malicious opposition of Jesus Christ
and his merits, and of the Gospel, and of Evangelicall grace and goodness;
against divine light and convincing illumination of the Holy Ghost, in those
that do it; who, in their very act of their opposition of Evangelicall truth,
and the professors and obeyers thereof, do the same, with malicious refisting
the very motion, working, and persuasion of the Spirit within them to the
contrary, at that very instant.

Observe.
Many more do now, in the time of the Gospel, commit this sin against the
Holy Ghost, How many now do commit it.
than could do it in the time of the Law: and, many now do come so near unto
it, that they fall into the desperate estate of impenitencie, and of a
reprobate sense; in regard of the clearenesse, and abundance of the light of
the Gospel; contrary to which, and to their own conscience, they run with
greediness to all excess of wickedness and profaneness; with hatred and
opposition of goodness; and of the power of the Gospel; and of those, in that
respect, that are godly. Note.
None that are afraid they have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost;
or, are troubled about it; or, grieved for it, can (in that case,) commit it;
neither have committed it: because, this sin is done with the whole consent
of will, and sway of affections in a total Apostasy, with impenitency, and
unreconcileable hatred, and persecution of the truth of the Gospel, and of the
professors thereof.

. 18. Of Apostasy.
Final Apostasy.
Fourthly, the soul murdering sins, committed against the Gospel, are,
apostasy, from the profession, or power of it; occasioned by an evil heart of
unbelief, by the profits, honors, pleasures, or examples and temptations of
the world; in those that are hypocrites and unsound: as were Demas 2 Timothy 4 10.
, and Simon Magus Act. 8.21.
: and by renouncing of God and the Gospel, by compact, explicit or implicit,
with Satan; as Witches and Magitians do; resigning their souls to him, and to
eternal destruction. Where it is to be observed, that Apostates (in Gods just
judgment) not only run into all excess of impiety and profaneness; but,
do also become most bitter haters, and persecuters of the profession and
professors; which formerly they seemed to embrace; being not content to perish
themselves, but also are grieved that any should be saved, and stand fast in
the truth. Apostates are hardly ever recovered, and their damnation is greater;
because, they fall from a higher pitch than other men; and against more means
of knowledge, and reluctance; whereby they are self-condemned; and often, at
last, end their days in despair: graduall apostasy, or relecting in the power
and ways of godliness, is incident to the godly, and recoverable, as we see
Revel. 2.5. and therefore, is not comprenended in this rank of
soul-killing-apostacy, which is not fallen into at once, but by degrees. To
persevere in the truth, we must labor to be sound in the faith, and to love,
and delight in the truth, above all things.

The difference of sins.
Although, it is certain that all sins are damnable for nature, in regard of
their contrariety to God and his Law; and are also of a condemning property, in
respect of their merit of due punishment of damnation: For, the soul that sins
shall dye: Ezekiel. 18.4. yet, all sins are not alike, (as the Stoics affirm:)
but, some are more mischievous, and more repugnant, than others, to God
himself, and to our salvation, and to the good of others; and are more
incompatible with justice, and charity, than others are: as Idolatry, perjury,
etc.

. 19. Of the malignity of the sins against the Gospel, above those committed
against the Law.
Sinues against the Gospel worse than against the Law.
The sins that are done immediately against the Gospel, are more dangerous
and worse than those that are committed immediately against the Law, whereof I
will give three reasons.

Reasons. 1.
First, for their nature; they are of a higher strain than the sins of the
Law, as the Gospel is more eminent, than the Law, which is intimated, Heb.
10.28, 29.

2.
Secondly, these sins against the Gospel are done, with more opposition
against more abundant means and grace, by those that now live in the Church,
than the sins of the Law: as Paul manifests to us, 2 Cor. 3.8.

3.
Thirdly, the sins against the Gospel are committed with far more
inevitable destruction, than the sins against the Law: for, if a man do
sin against the Law he has the Gospel as a City of refuge to flee to, to
save him from the killing and damnation of the Law: but if a man do sin (as
aforesaid) against the Gospel, there remains no further means, or hope of
safety, but a fearful expectation of eternal destruction, by his own wilful
procurement; murdering his own soul.

Observe.
From the consideration of the aforesaid sins of Commission, against the Law
and the Gospel; with their deadly effects, we may observe,

1. Sin costs dear.
First, that there is nothing that costs so dear as sin: it self is a thing
of naught, but wonderfully dear to buy and possess: and therefore before we
meddle with it, we should consider the price of it; whether we be willing to
die eternally for it; otherwise abstain from it.

2. To have our wills brings destruction.
Secondly, we may see, that we cannot have our own wills in sinful courses,
but with the destruction of our souls: our folly is seen in undoing our
selves by our own works and ways; so that a man's course of sinning, and
following of his lusts, is indeed but a course of Gods heavy spiritual
judgments upon him; wherein he is rather to be pitied, as miserable; than to
be envyed as formidable: God will have his will in man's destruction; when man
will not let God have his will in his Commandments.

. 20. The improvement of the knowledge of spiritual self-murder.
Uses.
The Uses of the knowledge of the aforesaid spiritual self-murder are specially
Four.

1. Sin is a course of self-murder.
First, It serves to inform our judgment, what to think and esteem of the
sinful and careless courses of many, that live wilfully and impenitently
transgressing both Law and Gospel: namely, that the same is a vile course of
self-murder of their own souls; for, by those courses only, men do perish:
and in those courses none escape destruction as one says, Picol.
Vitium est non ens, and recessus ab ente, and vivus interitus ipsius esse: and
virtus est vita ipsius esse. Vice is a non-ens, and a departure from entity,
and a living destruction of being it self: whereas virtue is the life of
being. For, although such men intend not directly to destroy their own souls;
but to indulgere genio, and live in self-content and pleasure; yet the courses
that they directly intend and prosecute, being such as, of themselves, destroy
the soul, which thing they know and are warned of, they are no less
self-murderers of their souls, than they that (intending to prevent, or ease
themselves of some present evil,) do cut their own throats; by a lesser evil
(as they think) preventing a greater: and therefore, such are infamous
self-murderers; and cannot at the day of judgment be excused therefrom, by
charging the blame of their destruction upon any others: And, Numb. 13.36.
especially such persons as live under the light and profession of the Gospel,
in such sinful courses and transgressions, are most guilty; and shall be most
deeply damned in hell; having least to plead in excuse for themselves; and
therefore our Savior says that it shall be easier at the day of judgment,
for Tire and Sidon, than for such. Mat. 11.22.

Use 2. Spiritual self-murder is most heinous and damnable. The soul killed.
The second use of the point is, to show us that this spiritual self-murder,
is far greater and worser, than men ordinarily think it to be, which is
apparent in three respects.

First, In regard of the thing killed; which in spiritual self-murder, is the
soul of man, that is much more excellent than the body; both for the nature of
it, that cannot be valued with earthly things; and also for the use thereof
rational, and spiritual, whereby man excells all other earthly creatures:
and, by the murdering thereof, he dejects himself, in state beneath them all,
in misery and contemptiblenesse.

2. The body with the soul killed.
Secondly, for that they that kill their own souls, do consequently thereby
also kill their own bodies; because the body partakes in estate with the soul
Rev. 20.15.
, and so are both cast into hell: Mat. 10.28. the nobler part draws the other
into identity of condition.

3. The quality of this kind of self-murder.
Thirdly, it is the worst of murders, in regard of the quality of the death it
self: this murder of the soul is spiritual and eternal, not only depriving
a man's self of spiritual good: but also subjecting him to all misery of sense
and smart; that the idevill himself, the capital enemy of mankind cannot do,
nor desire worse to man, than (in this case) he does to himself. Murder of the
body, although it be vile and odious; yet, of it self it is but a privation
from temporary good, leaving the body without sense or feeling of evil, and at
the last day the body shall be raised again to life, in the union of it with
its own soul, and therefore of all self-murderers the self-soul-murderer
should be most miserable.

Us 3. Endeavor to be saved, and preserved from soul-destruction.
The third use is, that as all men by natural instinct do desire to be saved,
and to escape hell and damnation, we should be careful to use the means, and
to walk in the way, whereby we may attain to life, and avoid destruction:
for both are diversely entailed unto, and depend upon several contrary courses,
and appertain to men of contrary lives and qualifications, without the which
they cannot have the same. Although that many men do divide the end from the
means, supposing that, notwithstanding their unregenerate estate, and wicked
lives, they shall escape destruction; and that, although they neither love, nor
practice goodness, they shall be saved and do well enough: and so flattering
and self-beguiling themselves in their own courses, they run securely, and
precipitate themselves into perdition: and therefore, I conclude with Solomon,
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eye lids look straight before
thee: ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established: turn
not to the right hand nor to the lest: remove thy foot from evil. Prove. 4.25.


Use 4. Our courses in this life foreshew our estates what they shall be in the
world to come.
The fourth use is, to direct us how we may rightly judge of our selves, and of
our spiritual estates, and future ends, by the courses that we take. If the
same be deadly ways of sin that we do embrace and persist in, then must we
die: and as those courses are of our own voluntary choice, so cannot we blame
any, but cry out of our selves and our own ways, as did the Prophet, Woe unto
us that we have sinned. Lament. 5.16. that so in time we may labor to prevent
our destruction by speedy repentance.

Again, if our ways and state be good, and such as life is promised unto, we
may have assurance and comfort: that upon our perseverance, we shall have
happiness and life eternal.

So that we need not plead uncertainty and ignorance of whether we are going
to heaven or hell; or whether in the state or course we live in, we shall be
saved, or damned; seeing that the Scripture makes it manifest what shall be the
reward and event of every man; according to the state and course he lives and
dies in: that we need neither put off the knowledge, nor the blame, or cause of
whether we shall be saved or damned, upon our praedestination; when we do
determine the same in the accomplishment thereof, by our own courses.

CHAP. 9. Of bodily self-murder in special.
. 1. How bodily self-murder is defined and differenced.
NOw we are to prosecute the second branch of self-murder; which is called
bodily self-murder; and is thus defined.

Bodily self-murder is the killing of a man's own body, in destroying of his
natural life; by himself, his own voluntary means, or procurement.

This kind of self-murder is differenced from spiritual self-murder, by two
things. First, by the object that is killed; in this the soul and spiritual
life is destroyed: in that, the body or man's natural life is undone.

Secondly, they differ in the means and manner of killing of them; the soul,
or spiritual life is slain, by spiritual and moral means; the body, by
natural, or bodily self-willed ways.

. 2. Of Man's body and its works.
Touching the body of man, in this case, we are to consider three things.

1. Considerations.
First, that it is an essential part, and not only an integrall part,
constituting the person of man; without which he cannot be a man, personally
considered: and therefore, by killing of his body, he destroys his person,
that it ceases from being, or subsisting in this world.

2.
Secondly, the body of man is the organ or instrument, whereby the soul works
organically: and therefore, he that kills his own body destroys all those
works, that the soul was to work in it; and which it cannot do, without it.

The souls moral works in the body. 1.
The moral organicall works of man's soul in the body, are of three sorts.
First, such as immediately intend, and concern the advancement of the glory of
God, in this life; where, the living, and not the dead, do praise him.

2.
Secondly, such works as are serviceable for the moral and spiritual good of
the person himself; which is to be attained and procured by life; before we
can come to enjoy it by death.

3.
Thirdly, such works as promore the good of the Church and Commonwealth; of
both which every Christian is a member; and can, only by his life, and not
after death, benefit the same: so that, by killing himself, a man wrongs God,
himself, the Church and Commonwealth; in bereaving them of that service and
good, which they all might have by his life.

3. Consideration.
The third thing here considerable in man's body is, that it, with the soul,
makes the person; and so, in that respect, is the subject, or seat of Gods
Image, and therefore, a man, in killing of his own body, not only dishonours,
but also, in a sort, does what in him lies, to kill God himself; as he is
similitudinarily in him and incurres the horrible crime of Laesae majestatis
divinae; or treason against the sacred Majesty of God.

Observe. The body suffers by, and for the soul.
So then, the body, which is the souls instrument, or servant; and is no way
culpable, or nocent, but by partnership with, and inserviceablenesse to the
soul, is ill rewarded, and indignely suffers, by its own master, abusing it
to sin, and subjecting it to misery and punishment: who is not content to
wear it out; but, after his own lust, breaks and spoils it; whereof he
cannot turn one hair to be white, or black: he spares his soul, in its
sins, which he should mortify; and, in a sinful course, kills his body,
which he should spare.

Natural life is both a blessing of it self; and also is a means of blessing
God and others, in this world; and whereby we may attain to everlasting
blessedness hereafter: Life is unsure.
of all which, a man deprives himself, by thus killing of himself: which
cannot be done, but against the light and reluctancie of nature in all men;
whereby, the actors declare themselves to be unnatural and barbarou monsters.
Natural life that is a tenant at will in man, is most uncertain, and soon
thrust out at doors; when it is not secure from him that owes it. Man is
unworthy of this life, that is no more thankful for it, neither more values
it, nor makes better use of it; but after his wastefull expense of it, in
sinful courses, desperately destroys it.

God in his Word, never appointed, nor commended any means for a man to kill
himself by; because, where God appoints not the end, he appoints not the
means to attain it; yet, man wants not means to do it, by perverting his
power, and skill to that end; and abusing other things, contrary to the use for
which God made them, when he purposes to do such an act; so, abusing both
himself, and all other things, to his own ruin.

The body is passive.
The body is but a passive subject, in respect of the soul, to whose power and
will it is obnoxious: and therefore, it is the more subject to suffer; and it
is the more inexcusable sin, to misuse it; seeing, it neither deserves to be
ill entreated at his hand, that owes it; nor yet has it power to resist, or
defend it self, against the invasions of him, to whom it is committed to
preserve it. In this bodily self-murder not only does the soul turn enemy to
the body; but it, moreover, makes an unnatural mutiny against, and amongst
the members; raising, by faction, a party for it self; so causing the hand to
stab the body, and the parts to be instruments to undo the whole: and thus, by
intestine opposition, a man subverts and pulls down upon his own head the
tabernacle of his own body; (as Samson did the house wherein he was) whereby
he crushes and undoeth himself ordinarily, in body and soul.

. 3. Of the degrees of self-murder and pronenesse of men to it.
The degrees of self-murder.
This self-murder of the body is either inchoate, and begun, only in purposes,
and courses tending to the effecting thereof in time; if it be not seasonably
prevented: or else it is consummate, in the full accomplishment thereof. No man
falls into the highest extremities of evil, but by degrees; the least whereof
makes way for, and draws on the greatest.

Causes of pronenesse to self. bodily murder.
The causes why men often are prone to the self-murdering of their bodies, are
two.

1.
First, the meannesse of it, in comparison of the soul, for nature and
durance; it being but earthly and frail; whereby it must naturally die. 2.
Secondly, in regard that by it the soul is subjected to manifold sufferings,
here in this life, and is hindered from that ease and advancement, that freed
out of the body, it might have.

Answer to 1.
But, touching the first, it should make us the more tender over it, chary to
use it; and to consider that, by self-murderously destroying our bodies, we do
contaminate and defile our souls; whereby we make them far more vile, than
any carrion can be: seeing, sin is the only excrement and moral defilement,
for which God detests and abhorres men as loathsome.

Answer to 2.
For answer to the second, it is to be observed, that, by self-murder of the
body, a man is so far from bettering of himself; that thereby he deprives
himself of happiness; and subjects himself to that woeful misety; which,
otherwise, living he might escape: and therefore, our bodies, and natural
lives are to be respected and cherished; not only, for their worth; but also,
for their use; for which God has given them to us. So that we are not to force a
divorce of those things, that God has coupled so near together; nor to thrust
away, or reject that which God requires us not then, and that way to lay down.

CHAP. 10. Of the kinds of bodily self-murder.
. 1. Direct and indirect self-murder defined.
1. Direct self-murder.
THe kinds of bodily self-murder, are two: Direct and Indirect. Self-murder is
not such a general, as in the Schools is called Genus univocum, so predicated
of them both, as equally communicating it self to both those species, or
specialls under it; but is genus analogum ab uno; or commune genus (...); or
(...). for that the same does properly and primarily belong to direct
self-murder.

Direct bodily self-murder is the killing of a man's body or natural life by
himself, or his own means, advisedly, wittingly, and willingly, intending and
effecting his own death.

2. Indirect self-murder.
Indirect self-murder of the body is, when a man advisedly, wittingly, and
willingly intends, and does that, which he knows may be of it self, the means
of the destruction of his natural life: Although he does not purposely intend
to kill himself thereby. Or, it is the killing of a man's own body, by
unlawful, either moral, or natural means of his own using, without
intending of his death thereby.

. 2. Of the differences between direct and indirect self-murder.
1. They differ in their ends.
The proper differences between direct and indirect self-murderers, consists
specially in three things.

First, in the ends, directly and immediately intended by the self-murderers of
both kinds, in their several acts: the end that is immediately intended in
direct self-murder, is death it self of their bodies that kill themselves;
although not for it self, but in respect of some benefit conceited to be had
thereby; which is their ultimate end, whereunto death is in the murderers
intention, subordinate: as for a man to kill himself, that he may be out of
trouble.

The end that in indirect self-murder is immediately aimed at, is the
attainment of some good, really or apparent in, or by the means that an
indirect self-murderer does use; without any respect, or expectation of death
thereupon ensuing: as in surfeiting by drunkenness, or gluttony.

2. In their means.
Secondly, they differ in the means that are used by them, for accomplishing
those ends; in direct self-murder, the means abused to that effect and end,
are not proper of themselves, nor by Gods appointment; but are perverted by him
that kills himself thereby; as knives, or the like: for God never appointed
means for any man lawfully to use for effecting that which he would never have
men to do: a direct self-murderer uses not the means for any pleasure he has
in them; but for the consequent effects that he intends by them.

In indirect self-murder, the means and course used are such, as do properly
kill in the end; if that they be persisted in, as drunkenness, and the like:
although they have in them a show of present good, which gives the users of
them a kind of delight and contentment in them; whereof they shall be
disappointed; when, in the end, they shall, in stead thereof, find death;
which they least expected, and most abhorred; and would resist the same, if it
were inferred, or offered to them by others.

3. In the good aimed at.
Thirdly, direct and indirect self-murder do differ in the good that is aimed
at by them; and in the time wherein they look to enjoy it. A direct
self-murderer does fancy his good intended by him, in his act of self-murder,
not to be in the means that he uses to kill himself; but in, or by death; in
his freedom from evil, or enjoying of good: the time of his reaping of which
benefit he conceives to be, after that he is dead and gone.

An indirect self-murderer conceits the good that he aims at, by his course,
to be, and rest in the very means themselves that he uses; therein expecting
the present enjoyment thereof, before, and not after his death; the
cogitations, and inflicting whereof he abhorres, although he do prosecute
with eager delight, the courses that do hasten and bring his death.

. 3. How indirect self-murder is greater, in some respects, than direct.
Which of them is the greater sin?
It is demanded, whether direct, or indirect self-murder be the greater sin?
Answer. In some respects, Indirect self-murder.
I answer, if we consider the freeness of the will, with less inforcement,
and with more delight, prosecuting those deadly courses of indirect
self-murder; there can be, in that respect less said to excuse it; than for
direct self-murder. 1. For freeness of willing.
An indirect self-murderer is at last, (in respect of the mortal means he
uses, and persists in, until the effect be accomplished,) as sure of death,
which he abhorres; as a direct self-murderer is of the same, that he desires,
and endeavors for, and longs after.

2. Obstinatenesse.
Again, an indirect self-murderer is more hardly diverted from his unlawful
dangerous course, than, at first, a direct self-murderer. Because, this man may
be sooner convinced of the vileness of his purposed fact; in excuse whereof he
has so little to say; and also, the danger of it is more apparent, and
ghastfull to the mind, that advisedly in cold blood considers of it.

The other is taken up, with looking upon the present contentment in the means
that he uses; not considering death and danger, thereupon attending and
ensuing; but self-deceives himself, with excuses, and colorable pretenses;
and so does wink (as it were) that he may not see the blow of death, that he is
giving himself, with his own hands.

Of direct self murder the cause, or occasion is ordinarily from
coffeehouse, and sorrow; but, of Indirect self murder the cause commonly is
pleasure and delight; Delores serre sacilius est, quam ^^voluptatibus absunere:
Arist. 3 Eth. c. 12.
of these two motives, pleasure is the strongest; and their motion most
violent, and indivertible, that are led by it; because, it moves with nature,
and not against it; and has will in men more propense that way; which by
grief is rather forced, than seconded.

. 4. How absolutely direct self-murder is the greatest.
Direct self-murder is the greater sin, and why.
Notwithstanding, Direct self-murder is the far more grievous sin, in three
respects.

1. End intended.
First, in respect of the direct intention of the will; and of its immediate
object of murder of a man's self: whereby, it partakes, more properly and
fully, of the nature of self-murder, than indirect self-murder does. For, what
is under a common Genus, or general, directly partakes more of the nature of
that Genus, than that which is under it but by reduction; or indirectly. So
then, although direct, and indirect self-murder be both self-murder;
Etiamsiaeque, non tamen aequaliter.
yet they are not equal self-murder; but the former is the greater.

2. The consequences of their acts.
Secondly, for the consequences of the acts of them both, direct self-murder
brings more certain, and sudden inevitable destruction, than indirect; which
in this latter may better be prevented, by having time of repentance, than it
can be in the former; and death in this is an accidental effect, besides the
intention of the agent, and nature of the means; which in the former is perse,
and of the nature of the action so purposely ordered to that end.

3. Company of other sins.
Thirdly, direct self-murder has more, and greater sins complicated in it,
than indirect has, both by extension, in kinds, and number, against God,
others, and our selves; and also for intension, in degrees; by reason of
circumstances of the party doing the same, against the light and reluctancie of
nature, with direct intention to kill himself.

. 5. Of the degrees of sin, and how to escape the greatest, and its end.
Uses.
The uses of this doctrine, of the distinction of self-murder into direct and
indirect; and of the differences between them; are specially two.

1. Degrees of sin.
First, to teach us that, there are differences and degrees in the same kinds
of sins; some being more grievous, than other some. So that although we be
not guilty of sin in the same degree; yet we may be in the same kind; as
appears by the Jews convicted in their consciences, of uncleanness; although
they were not taken in the act; as the Woman was, John 8.9.

How to escape great sins.
And therefore, to escape falling into the highest degrees of sin, we should
be careful to avoid, and to be free of the same general kinds of sin;
both as they are unformed and confused, in original corruption; as in their
seminall Chaos; and also, as they are formed in their distinct habits; so
improperly called, because, after the manner of habits, they either are in the
place of true habits, or unite themselves in, and with them; that they may both
brook one common name: and so we should labor to be clear of sin; both
habitually, and actually.

Observe.
We should not be conceited, and bless our selves so much, because we are
not fallen into the fowlest degrees of sin; as we should be humble, and
penitently confess our guiltiness in the kinds thereof; the difference
herein being between us and others, but in magis and minus, in greater and
lesser: where the least degree makes way, and disposes us for the greatest; and
makes us liable to the same kind of punishment, although not to the same
measure of it.

The same end several ways attained.
The second use serves to instruct us that men do come to the same dismal
ends, as Saul and others did, by several courses, being guilty of their own
deaths in diverse manners; as men may come into the same prison, at and by
several doors. Comparison.
For, although a man can draw a right, or straight line betwixt the same points
but one way; yet he may draw crooked lines many ways, and they all be
terminated in the same points.

Therefore, as a man would beware of any evil end, so should he shun all the
courses, that may lead, or bring him to it. For, it is no benefit to a man in
misery to consider, how, and by what sinful course he came thither; so long
as he is in that woeful state. We see many men come and end their days
together, upon the same Gallows, but by several courses, and differing
crimes; some for petty treason; some for wilful murder; some for burglary;
some for petty larceny; and yet, to him that is hanged for the lesser offense,
it is small ease and comfort, because he suffers not for a greater; so long as
it is for any that he dies.

CHAP. II. Of Indirect self-murder of the body.
. 1. Why Indirect self-murder is first treated of.
Indirect self-murder is handled first:
ALthough that by logical method, I should treat first of Direct self-murder;
because, that which is directly under a Genus, or general head, should be
handled before that, which is but indirectly under it, for the neerenesse
thereof unto the same; and for the light that it may afford, for the better
understanding of the other: yet, for all that, I will here begin with indirect
self-murder for three causes.

Reasons. 1. Imitation of nature.
First, because I will herein imitate nature, which proceeds from things less
perfect, tothings more perfect: because perfection is her ultimate end.
Indirect self-murder is less perfect self-murder than direct self-murder;
because, the Genus of self-murder agrees more properly, and primarily to direct
self-murder, than to indirect.

2. Precedence in execution.
Secondly, indirect self-murder is ordinarily, both the way, and the cause of
direct self-murder: and therefore, may be fitly treated of first; the rather
because, direct self-murder never goes before indirect; but, this goes often
before, and without that.

3. End intended.
Thirdly, because my intention is to insist specially upon direct self-murder,
and by means of it only do I speak of indirect self-murder, therefore, I
purpose first to dispatch it, as an accessory to the other; which I principally
intend, as my last end in this treatise, therewithal to conclude the same.

. 2. Of Indirect self-murder by omission.
How indirect self-murder is performed.
Having showed what indirect self-murder is, and how it is differenced from
direct self-murder, I will now declare how men do fall into the same; which is
done two ways. First, by omission. Secondly, by commission.

1. By omission.
By omission a man may indirectly murder himself, being the deficient cause of
the preservation of his life; two ways: either in a physical natural manner;
or in a moral meritorious course.

. 3. Of indirect self-murder, by omission physically wrought.
Ways how. 1. Physically, diverse ways.
First physically, and after a natural manner, a man may indirectly murder
himself, diverse ways: as

1. Neglect of food.
First, a man may indirectly murder himself, by way of omission; if out of
sullenness, grief, or nigardize; or by undiscreet punishment, of his body, he
shall stubbornly and foolishly refuse to eat, or drink; in that measure, or
kind that is requisite for his preservation, by abstinency, and sparing,
either starving himself to death; or breeding in himself and contracting that
which kills him: somewhat like hereunto was the practice of Ahab, 1 King. 21.4.
who because Naboth would not let him have his vineyard, heavy and displeased,
laid him down upon his bed; and turned away his face, and would eat no bread:
1 Timothy 5.23.
the contrary whereof Paul commanded Timothy.

A Caveat.
Yet, to avoid this danger, men may not Gormandize, or excessively pamper
themselves, indulgendo Genio; but may, and ought at set times to fast; both for
civil, and divine ends; with respect to the good both of soul and body.

2. Contempt of Physic.
Secondly, in this kind of omission, a man may indirectly murder himself; by
wilful contempt of the lawful use of Physic, or Surgery; either to cure,
or prevent apparent mortal diseases or griefs; or, when he will not be
ordered, by the wholesome direction of the skillful in their calling; or, does
not depend upon God, for a blessing upon the means; who, by his overruling
providence, directs the course, and blesses the means.

A Caveat.
Yet, men must herein be careful that they slavishly enthrall not themselves
to the means; nor anxiously perplexe themselves, if they cannot have them; or,
that the success answers not their expectation: because, the Lord disposes
things so, as he also may effect his work and will, often by crossing ours.

Neglect of prevention of dangers.
Thirdly, a man may incur indirect self-murder, by regardlesnesse of
preserving himself against mortal dangers; from without himself; as, in not
seeking to God for reconciliation, by humiliation, and repentance; in some
imminent judgments that threaten from God our destruction; that we may be
preserved either from them, or in them: Or as, when we are in danger of
invasion by enemies, for a man then regardlesly to shut his eyes from
foreseeing the same, that it may suddenly surprise him; or, that he should not
prepare himself, and do his utmost endeavors in his own defense, to save his
life; if by resisting it may be done; or otherwise to provide for himself by
flight; or other prudent diversion, or preventing of the evil; that he may not
carelessly suffer his life to be lost. So then, the cowardice of men in
extremities by Sea or land, that will not do their utmost endeavors, for
their own preservation; as likewise the griplenesse of those that to spare
their goods, endanger the loss of their lives, for want of military furniture
and means to make opposition; are much to be blamed for this course of
indirect self-murder.

A caveat.
But yet, touching this point, men should be wary that they neither be so
careful to preserve their lives, that they should spare to venture them where
they ought; and may comfortably spend and lay them down: nor yet, have their
eyes and confidence so upon earthly means, of humane strength and provision;
that they should forget, or neglect to seek to God, and to depend upon him,
for safety and victorious success.

4. Not avoiding dangerous persons and places.
Fourthly, of indirect self-murder a man may be guilty, by not avoiding and
fleeing from persons and places destinated to destruction; which are under a
curse; or, in a course of mortal judgments; when we are not necessarily tied
by duty, or calling, to commerce and be with them: as is apparent by Lots
forsaking of Sodom; and by the command of Moses to the Israelites, Genesis 19.
Numb. 17.26.
to depart from the tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; and by that divine
commandment, charging all the godly to come out of Babylon; that they might
not be partakers of her sins; and that they might not receive of her plagues.
Rev. 18.4.


And therefore, such as out of unwarrantable presumption, or carnal security,
avoid not persons, and places infected with the pestilence; or subjected to
perdition; when their presence is unnecessary, and not to be justified, and
pernicious to themselves; they must be cast upon the indictment of indirect
self-murder; if by the aforesaid means they do miscary.

. 4. Of indirect self-murder by omission morally wrought.
2. Morally.
By way of deficiency, or omission of indirect self-murder, a man may be guilty
by a moral meritorious default; two ways:

1. By neglect of good life.
First, by his wilful neglect or contempt to live and walk in the ways of
godliness, and obedience to gods affirmative commandments; whereunto the
promises of life and protection are annexed Gal. 3.12.
, and which we may certainly expect; so long as we keep our selves within
compass of moral obedience to the Law and Gospel; and within the limits and
precincts of our special callings; so that if therein, or therefore, we should
lose our lives, we shall be free of the imputation of self-murder any way, in
that respect.

2. Neglect of prayer, etc.
Secondly, in meritorious moral manner, a man may miscary, and be indirectly
guilty of his own death; by wilful omission and neglect of commending himself
in constant and ordinary prayer to God; for divine preservation and safety of
his life, against all evils and dangers, which may hurt him; and over which,
and over him, God has a sovereign power and command. Unbelief.
And also, by his unbelief, and not trusting in God in all estates, for
preservation; under whose wings he may securely rest, a man may be justly
deserted, and given over to perish and sink; as Peter when he doubted, was in
danger of drowning. Mat. 14.30, 31


Whence it proceeds.
This neglect of thus depending upon God, arises either from self-confidence
in man's own power and means; whereupon he rests as secure: or else, from
Atheistical conceits of the providence of God; as if he were regardlesse of
humane affairs, and that all things did fall out by chance and fortune;
because they do see all things in this world fall out alike to all men: which
being more exactly considered, manifests rather the free and sovereign
powerful providence of God overruling all things.

A caveat.
Yet, this divine preservation, by faith and prayer to God, excludes not, but
includes the conscionable use of lawful means, and walking in appointed
courses; without which we can expect safety no more, than Paul and his company
could, if they did let the mariners forsake the Ship: Acts 27.31.
if a man by the aforesaid neglect of prayer and dependence upon God, do not
perish; it is Gods special work, reserving him either for repentance and
amendment of his life; or for some worse end, and heavier judgment.

Observe. Neglect of means is tempting of God.
From this degree of indirect self-murder, by omission of means, we may
observe that when God gives means of life; if we use them not to that end, we
tempt God, to follow our own wills; while we will not follow his: and if we
use the means, with trusting in them, then we make gods of the means; and
therefore, in that respect, it is just with God to disappoint us of our
expectation, and to condemn us of indirect self-murder, upon our miscarying,
in not using the means.

For, all means, as they are means, have relation to the end; why, and
whereunto they are appointed: and so, in their use to that end consists their
perfection; without which they were useless and needless: and therefore, by
the omission of the use of the means of life, which men would enjoy, they
either tempt God to do things otherwise than he has ordained; or else, they
do show themselves regardlesse of God, preferring their own wills above his,
expecting to have their own purposes without him; whereby many men deceive
themselves.

. 5. A question resolved about standers mute at trial.
About mutes refusing to undergo the ordinary legal trial for their lives.
To this branch of indirect self-murder by omission belongs the case about
mutes, who are persons standing legally indicted and arraigned for some capital
crimes, that do wilfully and obstinately decline and refuse either to confess
themselves guilty of the same, or to submit themselves to be tried by God and
the Country; notwithstanding that they certainly know that for their stubborn
mutenesse, they shall in fearful manner be pressed to death; in which
respect they are indirect self-murderers; although that they are thereunto
moved especially by four seeming reasons.

Their reasons. 1.
First, because that by that way they would save their estates, (if they have
any) from being confiscate to the King, that their heirs may enjoy the same.

2.
Secondly, that so they may escape the death that is most ignominious in their
eyes, and infamous in the world to their memories, friends, and posterities,
whereunto they foresee they should be subject, if so be they should undergo an
ordinary trial.

3.
Thirdly, that it may not be said that they suffered and dyed for so odious and
shameful crimes and facts as they are accused of, and indicted for.

4.
Fourthly, that they may not be cast, condemned, or suffer by the means,
wills, and hands of such prosecutors, witnesses, Jury, or Indges as they take
to be their capital enemies; they choose to die by that course of their own
election wherein their adversaries can least (as they think) have their will
of them.

They should die, and why.
But whatever be their reasons of standing mute in that case, it is most just
that therefore they should be put to death in most terrible and ignominious
manner; for two reasons.

1.
First, because of the intolerable wrong that thereby they do to authority
and justice; tending to the overthrow of the same, by refusing to subject their
lives to the trial and judgment thereof; and by their deaths (as it may be
truly interpreted) depriving their highest Sovereigns on earth both of the
commendation of Just, and also of opportunity of showing mercy, and giving
pardon to delinquents: and so not submitting to the judicature, they actually
declare themselves to be rebellious outlawes, for which they are justly to die.

2.
Secondly, be cause such persons, by declining so just a way of trial by God
and their Peers, do (in just construction) declare themselves to be guilty
of the facts and crimes whereof they are indicted; and for which they ought to
die, but seek to cross the law in the proper kinds of punishment due for the
same.

And that they are guilty of their own deaths by a gross course of indirect
self-murder, is evident by four reasons. Mutes are self-murderers.


Reasons. 1.
First, because such an one wilfully and obstinately reiects that lawful and
ordinary course of trial, whereby it is possible that he might escape with his
life; either by not being found guilty; or else by replevin, or pardon from the
execution; and chooses that illegal course of standing mute, whereby, and for
which he certainly knows he shall die: and as certain it is that so dying,
he is an indirect self-murderer; in regard that he casts away his life wilfully
by that course, which was in his own power most lawfully to have avoided.

2.
Secondly, by choice of that course of standing mute, when he is called to a
lawful trial, he dies not only for that contumacy against authority and law;
but also thereby he unnaturally witnesses, and gives verdict against himself
to be guilty of the original fact or crime for which he is indicted, and ought
to die if it can be proved and found against him; which thing he (by his
mutenesse), doing, in that respect he justly perishes by his own means, and
is indirectly a self murderer: for no innocent would decline so just and
lawful a trial, by God and his Peers, when he knows that by so refusing he
shall surely die.

3.
Thirdly, it is apparent that such a body is indirectly a self-murderer;
because of the moral nature of their course of standing mute; which is most
wicked and unlawful, both by Gods law and man's: For, by the law of God and
nature, every man is bound to plead and do the best he can by all lawful
means to prolong, or preserve his life; but standers mute in case of trial
upon their lives, do not so, but utterly neglect the use of lawful means to
prolong, or save their lives; and therefore are of this kind of self-murderers.

By man's law, for a person arraigned to stand mute, is most unlawful, because
it crosses the execution of Justice, and is justly punished by a most terrible
kind of death, by pressing. Man has not an allowed choice given him by law,
either to submit to trial, or to be mute, as he shall please: for if the
choice were lawful, why then should he be punished for doing that which he
may lawfully choose, which could not be done by the magistrate without great
injustice?

4.
Fourthly, that such mutes are indirect self-murderers, is evident by the
voluntary disposition: of their wills in the free choice of that mortal
course, and by the proper nature of their death, and by the meritorious cause
and reason of it; all proceeding from themselves in active manner. Whereas,
touching their deaths, and course of inflicting thereof, they should passively
and obediently submit to God and lawful authority to live, or die as they
please, where no lawful choice is given in mortal courses, there no man can
choose that which is unlawful without being an indirect self-murderer, as it
is in this case.

Answer to their motives.
The motives whereupon any persons do stand mute, refusing to be tried in an
ordinary lawful manner, are altogether insufficient to justify their practice.

For answer to the first, it is certain that we should do nothing that is
unlawful to save our worldly estates for our heirs: but this course is
unlawful; Ergo.

To be more careful to provide for the safety of their worldly goods, than of
their souls, is wretchedness and desperate folly; which all those do which
by unlawful means would preserve their estates. Such mutes are so far from
being worthy of having their estates preserved by this course, that therefore
they should the rather lose them, and themselves be the more cruelly and
ignominiously entreated, for being guilty of two horrible crimes; first, that
whereof they are indicted, and for which they refuse to answer to be legally
tried; the second is their contumacious rejecting of all just and legal
courses of trial, and active obedient subjection to authority, requiring their
submission.

Touching their second and third motives of standing mute, with respect only
to the matter of their worldly credit, the same is mere folly; because by this
course they do far more discredit and make themselves infamous; in regard
that ipso facto they make themselves guilty of a double crime; both of that
whereof they are indicted, and also of contumacy against authority and law; and
the death of pressing that they suffer, is the just reward of their obstinate
mutenesse, besides all their other demerits: it is chiefly the moral manner of
dying that is comfortable and honorable, wherein such mutes are wanting.

Their fourth motive, which is from fear, proud impaciencie of suffering
uniustly, or inimically by others, in the course of ordinary legal trial, is
most vain: for why should we wrong our selves, that we may escape being
wronged, or insulted over by others? this was the practice of Saul, to kill
himself that he might prevent being insulted over and mocked by the
uncircumcised Philistims: the matter of the greatest triumph to our enemies
over us, is to give them a victory by our own hands, both over our bodies and
minds; as such mutes do, to their eternal destruction.

Such mutes are not only guilty of their own deaths; but also, by that course
they subject themselves to everlasting damnation both in soul and body: both
because they die impenitently and wilfully in a sinful way of their own
obstinate procurement and choice: and also do cast away their souls in
departing this world in uncharitable manner, without either confession or
clearing of themselves in lawful manner, of the crimes for which they are
indicted and arraigned: and so perish as outlaws against both God and humane
authority; whose fact is equivalent to direct self-murder, by wittingly and
willingly doing that unlawful act, which they know will inevitably subject
them to death, without hope of escape.

. 6. About malefactors arraigned for crimes; how they are to answer to the
question Guilty or not guilty.
Question 2.
A second question considerable about the foresaid subject is touching
malefactors, indicted and arraigned at the bar of Justice, before a lawful
magistrate, to be tried upon their lives for some capital crimes that they
have done; as petty treason, burglary, murder, or the like, touching their
lives; whether, when they hold up their hands at the bar, and are in legal
manner asked the question whether they be guilty, or not guilty of such a fact
whereof they are indicted; and which indeed they themselves know they have done:
whether (I say) are they bound in conscience, and may they answer affirmatively
that they are guilty: without any danger of being indirectly guilty of
self-murder?

Answer. They that confess themselves to be guilty are indirect self-murderers.
For resolution of this question I answer, that when a man is accused of such a
capital crime, and is therefore brought to a legal trial, whereunto he is
subjected for finding, or not finding him to be guilty of that fact, upon the
verdict of which enquiry, Law and Authority is satisfied, and determines their
proceeding with the party; for him, upon that question, whether he be guilty,
or not guilty; before the trial, to confess himself to be guilty; so, by his
own only witness and verdict casting himself upon the loss of his life,
he may in a strict construction, and in some sort be accounted culpable of
indirect self-murder.

Exception.
Except it be in case to save innocents, from suffering wrongfully, for his
fault, or that it be for greater good of the State, of the Church, or of his
own Soul; when the fact can no otherwise be known, or proved against him,
but by his own confession.

Touching a voluntary and full confession after conviction and condemnation I
know none that is not of opinion, that it is necessary for the salvation of the
malefactors soul, although his body do perish as Achan did, Joshua 7.20.

That such an affirmative answer of guilty, to that question, makes the
answerer, I say in some sort, indirectly guilty of self-murder (although they
are not the worst men, morally considered, that do so;) I will make it plain.

Reasons. 1.
First, a malefactor, by such an affirmative answer, anticipates, and deprives
himself of that legal trial, whereby it were possible for him to have
escaped, and not to have been found guilty of that capital fact, for which he
is indicted; and therefore, by dying upon his own only confession, witness
and verdict; which he needed not to have done, he is guilty of indirect
self-murder.

Now, for a man that has, in danger of life, lawful choice of two ways; the
one most certainly mortal, the other more doubtfully deadly; if he choose,
and perish by the former, he is indirectly a self murderer; because, he
willingly rejected the latter and safer, whereby he might have lived: thus it
is in this case of answering guilty, before the trial.

2.
Secondly, it is a natural axiom, that no man is bound to betray himself:
Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum; quisque tenetur defendere seipsum. Vnusquisque
praesupponitur esse bonus, donec probetur esse malus.
and that every one is tied to defend himself. A Traitor (says D. Kellet
Miscel. li. 1. p. 164.) may without sin plead not guilty; that is, not proved
guilty at your bar; where, every one is presupposed to be good, until he is
proved to be bad. I am not guilty so far, that I am bound to accuse my self:
and this is (says he) the allowed general acceptance of that usance.

For further manifestation hereof, it is to be considered, that the question
and answer is made in a humane civil Court, wherein he is demanded, not
whether in Conscience, but whether in Law he be guilty; whereby he is bound to
confess no more against his life, than can be legally proved against him;
specially seeing he answers not upon oath, or adjuration; which binds the
examinate, or prisoner at the bar, in conscience, upon obligation of
religion, to depose the truth concerning himself, known only to that
deponent; and according to whose own testimony he is to be acquitted. or
condemned; Of answering upon oath about crimes concerning a man's self.
but, this being most unreasonable, to make a man witness, Jurie, and Judge in
his own cause; about and for things secret, to bring him to public judicature
and censure, it is not in use among us.

The seeming contrary practice in this Kingdom, is (as I take it) only in
Courts of Conscience, having more spiritual power; to be used specially for
the good of men's souls, without bloodshedding, or danger of their lives; who
are not required upon oath to depose of criminal matters concerning
themselves; but where there are first promoters and accusers offering to prove
the same: in which case, for the better informing and resolving of the Court,
from the conscience of the accused; in favor of whom, it is originally
allowed, from the supreme governor and Judge of that Judicature, that he may
answer his knowledge upon his oath to the articles of his accusation; not with
legal intention, by that course, to make him unnaturally to accuse or condemn
himself, where none others can, or are about to do the same; but for answer
in his own defense touching the things that he is accused of; thereby, either
to make his innocence to appear, if he be blameless; or otherwise, by his
own confession of his faults, for the good of the Church, and his souls
health to discover the danger, and show his ingenuity that he may repent,
amend, and find favor.

Objection 1.
It may be objected, that such a malefactor is bound, in this case, to answer,
according to his own conscience and knowledge, that he is guilty: because, if
he answer not guilty, when he is indeed guilty, he lies: which is unlawful for
him to do.

Answer 1.
To this I reply; first, that the malefactors answer is to be made according to
the intention of the Law, and of the Judge that moves the question: Cont. Ma^c.
o^. lib. 4. Justa and digna praescriptio est in omni quaestione, ad propositum
interrogationis pertinere debere sensum respensionis. aliud consulenti, aliud
re spondere, dementis est. Sensus respo^sionis non est ad aliud dirigendus qu
im ad proposaum interrogationis.
according as Tertullian says: it is a just and worthy rule, that in every
question the answer should be applied to the same sense and purpose, to which
the interrogation is made.

To answer of one thing, when he is asked another, is the part of a mad man.

Agaeine, the sense of the answer is not to be directed to any other thing,
than that which was propounded in the interrogation.

Now, the Judge propounding, according to Law, this question to the prisoner at
the bar, art thou guilty, or not guilty of this felony, or the like; intends
not that he should answer, from his only conscience, guilty; which is
unnatural and suspicious, for him to give witness and virdict against
himself, to the taking away of his own life; but that he should answer not
guilty, in law, at the bar whereof he stands arraigned, that so, for finding
of him guilty of that whereof he is indicted, he may legally be put upon the
trial of God and the Country.

For the question being propounded in a disjunctive proposition, art thou
guilty, or art thou not guilty? both gives a free choice which of them to
answer, and also puts in mind, and points rather to the latter, as more
natural and equal, than to insist upon the former.

It is a free and lawful election offered, in mercy and favor to the
prisoner, from the King by the Judge, for the indicted person to choose which
he will; whether voluntarily to confess the fact, or rather to put himself
upon the trial of God and the Country for the same.

His negative answer of not guilty, is but his choice and embracing of the
latter trial; which is most agreeable to nature, to the Law, and the Kings
favor and mercy, in this case; which he can no otherwise have, but by first
pleading to the indictment, not guilty; And so, his answer and plea of not
guilty is no lie, although he have done the fact, whereof he pleads he is not
guilty, and for trial thereof puts himself upon God and the Country.

Objection 2.
If it be again objected that seeing the Law that makes this disjunctive
question, accepts of the prisoners affirmative answer; and thereupon condemns
and executes him; (as David did with the Amalckite, upon his confession that he
had slain Saul, 2 Samuel 1.16.) it seems to be lawful and requisite for all
malefactors to answer to the question affirmatively; touching the things that
in conscience they are guilty of.

Answer.
I answer, it is lawful and fit for Magistrates to use many means to wind out
the truth of facts from delinquents, which malefactors are not bound, upon such
questions or inquisition, to reveal against their own lives: in regard, that
every one severally is to order their practice and course, according to the
rules proper and pertinent to their own conditions and callings.

The Law indeed accepts of the malefactors answer of, Guilty; and accordingly
proceeds to condemn and execute him; because, by his confession, giving
testimony and verdict against himself, he cuts of, prevents and excludes
himself from trial by others, whereby he might be either cleared, or
condemned; in regard, that it is justly supposed that none other can know a man
and his actions so well as himself does: and therefore, the Law for ease,
certainty, and other politic respects, does permit and accept of such an
affirmative answer, but neither commands, nor commends it: because, the Law
takes notice of things, and censures them politically, and not theologically
considered.

Objection 3.
Thirdly, it may perhaps be here replied, that when a man (besides his own
knowledge of his capital fact) has, upon examination before a Justice,
confessed the fact under his hand, which is produced against him at the Trial,
how can he plead negatively to the indictment, Not guilty, without lying either
in the former, or in the latter; seeing of co^tradictio^s of necessity one must
be false?

Answer.
I answer, that for such an one to answer at the Bar, Not guilty, is not a
lie, nor properly a contradiction to his former confession; or to his own
knowledge; neither is that negative plea any concealment of the truth, from
being then and there known, by such lawful means, as by Law, and the Judge,
is intended for discovery of the same, which is by other evidence than a man's
own confession.

For clearing of the truth whereof, it is to be observed that the question made
to him touching his fact, is propounded to him, and he charged with the fact,
in his Indictment, in such a nature and form of Law terms, as it may be he
properly understands not; as whether he be guilty of that treason, felony,
burglary, or the like? in which respect, or Law notion, put upon his fact, his
life is questioned, and in danger to be taken away. And therefore when the
question requires an answer touching his fact, as it is vested in that form,
or Law term and notion, he lies not, nor contradicts himself in answering
negatively, Not guilty.

For, although he knows, and has elsewhere confessed himself to be guilty
of the fact, materially considered in the substance of it; yet he may be
ignorant (as most men are) whether that fact of his, formally considered, is,
or may be found to be treason, felony, burglary, or the like, as by the
indictment it is charged upon him; and in which respect he is to suffer death
for it, if he do answer affirmatively. And although he should certainly know
that his fact were such, in construction and terms of Law, as, by his
Indictment, the same is charged upon him; yet is he not to answer
affirmatively: because, not he, but the present impannelled Jury, are the
competent and lawful Judges to find, or not to find it to be such, in that
form, and Law quality.

And therefore, he is bound in conscience to answer negatively, Not guilty of
such a fact under that form, or term and Law notion; whereby, and wherefore
his life, in that respect, may be taken away.

And so, by pleading not guilty, he lies not, nor contradicts himself; but
thereby takes the allowed benefit of putting it to a legal trial, whether his
fact shall be found against him in that sense and form, as, in those Law
terms, he is charged with the same in his indictment; and in which respect
only he can be put to death for it; which course if he should not use of
answering Not guilty; but that he should stand mute, or answer affirmatively
Guilty, he should be indirectly a self-murderer: as has been showed.

Repli.
But then, it may be further replied, when such a malefactor shall (after his
pleading to the Indictment, not guilty,) be publicly examined by the Judge
about his fact, considered in the substance of it, without the vesture of such
terms, or Law notions put upon it; how can he answer negatively, against his
conscience, and former confession before a Justice.

Answer.
I answer, first, the Judges questions to such an one, at public trial, (after
his negative plea to the bill of Indictment,) are ministered in favor of the
party arraigned; both that he may, upon better advisement, traverse his former
confession, by his negative answer, contrary to the which confession he is
allowed at the bar to plead not guilty. And also, that he may not be cast,
or condemned, upon any evidence, or verdit of others against him; before he be
heard answer for himself, what he can say for the negative in his own
defense, against the affirmative evidence, or sentence produced against him:
where it is to be considered that, the primary intention and expectation of the
Judge in his questions at trial is, that, by the prisoners answers, he may
the better decerne the truth, or falsehood of the evidence of others against
him, and how himself may proceed in accepting of the verdit, and in giving
judgment according to justice, and not thereby to wring affirmative answers
from the arraigned, against their own lives; when others cannot touch them;
which is contrary to the Law of nature, and of God.

Secondly, it is always to be observed by every malefactor that in his answers
he do not, to save his life make any lie, neither directly, nor yet by
equivocation, or mental reservation: and also, that he do not so confess the
truth against his own life, that he should thereby make himself guilty of
indirect self-murder.

Both which evils he may avoid by the medium or middle course, either of
traverse, and demurrer delaying and putting off the Judge and Jury from
himself, to inform themselves by other evidences than his own: or else by
silence (after his general negative plea of not guilty,) replying nothing to
such questions, as the answers thereof may entangle him, either in a lie, or in
indirect self-murder, after which manner of answering nothing, our blessed
Savior behaved himself before Pilate, John 19.9.

Although that such silence, or not answering directly may be construed to be
an acknowledgement of the fact, that he is indicted for; yet thereby he shall
not be active, but only passive in being found guilty, and so condemned to
die; whereby he shall be free of indirect self-murder, in that respect.

The confession of a malefactor, upon examination before a Justice, when the
same is against his own life, may be construed to have been either rashly
and unwarrantably done by the Examinate; against which therefore he is allowed
at his Trial to plead not guilty: or else that he did the same upon some
motives and reasons of conscience, for the good and salvation of his soul:
which are things properly belonging to another Court.

And therefore, in humane Courts of Assize, the questions and answers (in this
case) reach not so far as to rack, or discover the conscience of a man, to
the taking away of his own life, by his own confession, which the Law of
nature and of God binds a man to preserve.

Although a capital malefactor is bound in conscience not to lie in his
answers, yet he is not bound to reveal all the truth he knows against
himself; specially where he is not tied by some special divine bond so to
do.

A negative answer at trial is as strong to save a man, as his former
affirmative in confession before a Justice can be to condemn him; except
either he publicly at his trial acknowledge the same; or that there be some
other proof, or evidence against him.

And therefore I conclude, that it is not necessary in conscience that
whatsoever truth such a man (in this case) has once confessed, that he should
every where, and at all times, upon interrogatories to be answered at will,
confess the same with peril of his life; but that he may be silent, or
forbear to answer otherwise than he is bound by the laws of the Court where
he answers.

For, if another be bound to keep close a man's confession made to him of his
secret faults, that man is not compellable to disclose the same of himself,
specially against his own life; when he cannot do the same without being
guilty of indirect self-murder; as in this case I have showed by the rules of
divinity and right reason, for resolving of weak consciences in this point; not
intermedling to argue and determine the same by the rules of the Common Law of
this Kingdom, which is impertinent to my profession, and beyond my
understanding; and therefore I leave that work to the learned of that most
Honorable profession; to whose cognizance this subject (legally considered)
does appertain.

. 7. Of indirect self-murder by commission.
The second degree of indirect self-murder is by commission, in diverse branches.
The second means of indirect self-murder is by a course of commission, or of
doing things, unlawfully tending to bring a man to his death; which is a degree
grosser than the former, and consists in diverse branches.

1.Abuse of lawful things.
First, by abusing lawful things, in transgressing due moderation in their
use; for time, measure, and manner; falling into extremes, either of defect,
or of excess, or of unseasonablenesse: which is done two ways. 1.As meat,
drink, etc.
First, in things both respecting the body, and in the acts about them: as in
eating to gluttony, and drinking to drunkenness; using labor and recreations
to surfeiting: and also in things respecting the mind; as in the
overstraining, and surcharging of the thoughts, fancy, and understanding;
2.Distemperature of the mind.
in the immoderate distemperature of the affections, and passions of the mind,
suffocating or wasting the spirits by excess of choler, grief, fretfulnesse,
and the like; which being let loose, and extended beyond the banks of their
due moderation, do often prove mortal, and means of indirect self-murder,
when they are willingly and indulgently entertained, and given way to: It is a
hard thing for a man to use means, and not to abuse them; which causes many a
man's table to become a snare to him, and a trap Psalm. 69.22.
, and shortens his time upon earth.

2. Self-mutilation
Secondly, indirectly, a man may be guilty of self-murder, by needless
mutilating of himself, and cutting off any of his members, (as Origin did) to
the hurt and danger of his life; which, by the preservation of such a member,
might have been in more safety; for, life's perfection is in the perfection of
the whole body. Notwithstanding, for the safety of the whole, a man may
lawfully and necessarily cut off a member; which cannot be preserved without
manifest danger of thereby losing his life; but, neither to punish a sin past,
nor to prevent a sin to come, may a man destroy or cut off any of his members,
whereby he may be less able to do the offices and duties for which God has
given him the same; seeing that both for chastisement, and prevention of sin,
God has appointed other moral means, which we are to use, and therein to
depend upon God for the success; for not in man's forced disability to act sin,
but in the renovation of the heart consists true sanctification: Note.
that of pulling out the right eye, and of cutting off the right hand, Mat.
5.29, 30. is meant of moral mortification, whereby those members are made
useless, and as if they were not, to any unlawful use.

. 8. Of Indirect self-murder of commission by unwarrantable practice of
Physic, etc.
3. Unwarrantable practice of Physic.
Thirdly, a man may be guilty of indirect self-murder, by practicing of
Physic, or Surgery unskilfully, immoderately, or dangerously upon himself;
either above his strength, or knowledge; killing himself by his unwarrantable
endeavors to cure himself: or else, by leaving those that they know to be
skillful, careful, and have lawful calling to practice; to put themselves
into their hands, whom they neither know to have skill, nor calling to
undertake such cures; or, are such as be desperate attempters, with small
regard of men's lives in their practice: if a man know the same, and does
wilfully choose and commit himself, specially in difficult cases, into the
hands of such, he can look for no good success, and must be self-guilty of the
mortal effects thereupon following: but of this see more in the abuses of
taking of Physic, Chap. 4.. 6.

. 9. Of indirect self-murder by unthriftinesse, etc.
4. Unthriftiness.
Fourthly, this indirect self-murder is committed by wilful unthriftinesse and
prodigality, whereby a man provides not, but mispends the means of his
livelihood, and so subjects himself and his to the peril of famine, Deuteronomy.
2.19. Prove. 27.27.
contrary to the light of nature, and Scripture.

A Caveat.
Yet we are herein to be wary that for prevention of want of livelihood; we
fall not into covetousness, and carking cares; or that we follow the world
with neglect of better things; or that we should spare more than is fitting;
and shut up the bowels of compassion, with the overthrow of liberality, and
works of charity and piety.

. 10. Of indirect self-murder of commission wrought by desperate hazard in 6.
Cases.
5. Desperate hazard.
Fifthly, indirect self-murder is committed by those that cast themselves into
desperate hazard of loss of their lives; by undiscreetly and rashly venturing
into deadly dangers; without lawful calling, and above their strength to
escape: where there is no necessity for greater good of others, or gods glory
requiring the same: which falls out specially in six cases.

The first Case, of Braves and Gallants.
Case 1. Concerning Braves.
First, when any do out of a bravery, and gallantry of spirit, go needlessly
with a charge of money, or of men's persons, or errands; either in the night,
through a place haunted and beset with murderous robbers; or, at any time
through known ambushments, and strong troops of enemies, above the passengers
strength to resist, or escape; whereby, if they fall, they are guilty of this
indirect self-murder.

Concerning purchase and rescue.
Case 2.
Secondly, when any do, out of overgreat affection to worldly goods, make
desperate attempts, with the apparent peril of their lives, either to get
goods; either by violent taking them from others, as thieves and spoilers do;
or, by labor in their callings above^ that which with their health they are
able to endure: or else, by their desperate adventuring to save, or recover
their goods out of fire, or water; or from, and out of the hands of their
enemies; with the casting away of their own lives; above all means and
strength that in this case they have to save them; in such undertakings beyond
all warrantable calling: Exception.
within neither of these two cases are we to restrain, or bound the
divine-heroicke enterprises of such as by supernatural instinct, or power, do
undertake transcendent enterprises, above the allowance of ordinary rules: as
David to kill Goliath 1 Samuel 17.32.
, and Jonathan and his Armor-bearer to invade a whole Garrison of the
Philistims 1 Samuel 14.6.
. Such men must have both a calling, by divine inward instinct, motion, and
qualification; and also, a strong well grounded faith, in assurance of Gods
assistance: as the Scripture tells us, how such, through faith subdued
Kingdoms, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the Aliens: Heb, 11.33,
34.

Concerning some soldiers.
Case 3.
Thirdly, when self-conceited, wilful, foole-hardy men will fight against
their enemies, upon desperate disadvantages; and imminent peril of death; when
they are neither forced to it by unavoidable necessity; nor are warranted by
command of such superiors as either have absolute power over them of life and
death; or can assure them, or give them the victory, Numb. 14.40. Vsque ad
finem.
(as God often did to the Israelites, fighting by his command, or approbation
upon strange disadvantages) yea, when they cannot probably come off with the
safety of their lives; then that is a course of indirect self-murder.

Concerning Mariners.
Case 4.
The fourth Case is of those that trade by Sea, who often run into mortal
and desperate adventures, out of eagerness to make their voyages; either
putting to Sea in such weather, and seasons as is like to endanger all; or
putting for the Port, upon desperate hazards of miscarying by storms, sands,
or rocks, or running presumptuously into the danger of Pirates; or other
mortal engagement by Sea, either through wilful negligence, or through self-
confidence of skill, or power more than they have, so tempting God.

Observe.
The true occasion of which miscariages of men by Sea, is often given by
Merchants upon the Land; who praise and respect men for fortunate and valiant
according to the success, -- careat successibus opto, Quisquisab eventu facta
probanda putat.
and the event of their courses, without respect to the due rules of the
managing the same; which makes many a man come short home, by adventuring to
please their Merchants, contrary to the rules of art and wisdom.

Note.
In this case I would advise men, rather to look to do what they may
warrantably justify; and may therein have peace in their consciences, although
the success answer not their desire; than to endeavor contrary to wisdom and
art, to please their owners and Merchants by such courses of desperate and
unwarrantable adventures: as (if they or their charge miscary therein,) will
over-cloud them with just blame and ignominy, and will bereave them of that
comfort in their consciences, which should cheer and uphold them under their
crosses; a course of accidental good success, and a course of direct ill
success, are not so to be compared together; that for the former a man should
venture upon the latter; with the guilt of self-murder to be imputed to him, if
therein he do perish.

Concerning Duells.
Case 5.
The fifth Case of desperate adventure, is of those that undertake Duells; or
do give, or accept challenges of single combats, upon their own private
motion, for private revenge; or for supposed maintenance of impeached honor;
who, if they perish in the attempt, or by means of the conslict, are guilty of
more than indirect self-murder: because, that course so unwarrantably, and
needlefly undertaken, is commonly where the wronged may have better redress,
with less adventure of life; Duellers what they b.
and those Duellers, or single combattants do, by such challenges, show
themselves to be lawless contemners of authority; whose allowance they have
not (as they ought) for such a trial by battle to make the same just; but by
usurpation they make themselves Kings, (in contempt and prejudice of lawful
authority) in erecting a tribunal for Justice, of their own making, in their
own case; where themselves alone are Parties, Jury, Witness, Judge and
Sheriff: whereas it is the prerogative of Kings to make war and peace, and
independently to execute justice under God.

It also argues in them, both great folly, and impotency of mind, so lightly
to adventure or give away their lives; a price so far exceeding the worth of
the purchase that they contend for, and which they may have decided far
better, without any such desperate danger; and also it proclaims their
pusillanimity and weakness, in that they cannot bear crosses and injuries.
And finally, it makes their cause apparently unjust; when they pass by, or
neglect a peaceable trial by equal justice and reason; and do put it to be
decided by bodily strength, and chance of war; in a course more beseeming
beasts than men. It seems that such men do account themselves and their lives
little worth, and that they are weary of living; who so rashly expose the same
by thrasonicall provocations and darings, to be taken away and destroyed in
such a manner; wherein, having abandoned the command of reason, they become
beasts; and becoming slaves to their vilest passions of fury, madness,
cruelty, and the like. (whereby they are overcome, who would in that course
overcome others) Duellers degenerate into incarnate devils: And while they
thus contend to gain or maintain reputation of Honor and Valor by this most
dishonorable and base brutish course of impetuous self-revenge by Duells; they
justly lose that for which they contend, and otherwise might have had.

Concerning desperate attempts upon daring and wagering.
Case 6.
The sixth case of desperate hazard and adventure, whereby men may indirectly
be self-murderers, 1. About daring.
is in the point of provocation by others, for proof of their courage and
valor, challenging them to dare to attempt the effecting of some deadly
enterprise beyond all warrantable calling, or lawful means safely and
lawfully to accomplish the same: as, for a man needlessly to conflict with a
Lion, to run over rocks; to provoke, or assault Adversaries too potent for him
to resist, or offend, with safety of his life; or, upon such daring to do some
capital act or mischief, whereby he is most like to perish; and not thereby
without just imputation to himself of guiltiness of his own death, in regard
of the unlawfulness of that his course, wherein he cannot warrantably look
for any blessing, or protection from God: neither do such unjustifiable
daring-practises argue any true fortitude and valor, but only bewraie
temerarious audaciousnesse; which is, in excess, contrary to fortitude:
because, true valor is seen in courageously undertaking and accomplishing
dangerous performances upon advised reason, by lawful courses, to just and
necessary ends; but rash audaciousnesse in daring to do unwarrantable attempts
is manifest, by the unreasonablenesse and unnecessarinesse thereof, undertaken
upon unadvised passion, and foole-hardy presumption; with arrogance in the
manner of accomplishing, and folly in the end of it.

A truly valorous man manifests his fortitude by his unconquerablenesse upon
any provocation of darring, to do any thing that is not fit and warrantable
for him to undertake upon good grounds and reason; that if he be crossed, or
perish in atchieving it, he may have honor and peace, and no way be guilty of
his own death: So that, although daring audaciousnesse exceeds true fortitude
in unwarrantably adventuring beyond it; yet it comes short of valorous
fortitude in the grounds, and manner of enterprising, and of consequent effects
and honor of it.

A valorous man is his own master, in disposing of himself and his actions
about dangerous enterprises, according to his own mind, sound reason, and
advised resolution. Whereas, an audacious man is but as a servant to others, by
whose will and daring provocations he orders himself and his actions, as they
list, at their pleasure, and for their service; that he must needs do
whatsoever desperate attempts they will dare him to do, even to the peril of
the loss of his life, without any lawful reason and calling.

2. Wagering.
To this case also belongs desperate undertakings with danger of life upon
wagers; as for a man, either upon a naked contract for a certain sum, or
upon assumpsit of ten for one, or the like, to be paid to him when he shall
have performed some desperate hazardous enterprise agreed upon, for him in that
consideration only to undertake and attempt the same with the danger of the
loss of his life: as to walk under the water; to cross the Ocean in a
Wherry: in a few days to go backward, or blindfold a long journey in a
dangerous way, or some such unreasonable, needless, dangerous, mad, and idle
vainglorious prancks, with adventure and loss of life; whereby such are
indirectly self-murderers; and those that lay such wagers with them, are
accessory to their death, thereby hireing and provoking them to a mortal
course of self-destruction. For, such a course is no warrantable way and
calling of Gods appointment, thereby to adventure, or get goods; and therefore,
no blessing can be therein, nor thereby expected; it is a needless tempting of
God to commit themselves to such a mortal course which they may well avoid,
and can look for no protection in it, nor comfort of the action wherein they
perish; being guilty of their own death therein. Such desperate enterprises,
upon wagering; whereby a man may lose his life, proceed either from
covetousness, to be rich; or from necessity, to live: but by unlawful means
never destinated of God to that end, neither of them can comfortably be
expected nor endeavored: it seems that such men either value their lives to
be little worth, or apprehend their present condition to be most miserable;
that they prefer the uncertain attaining of a little lucre and worldly goods
before them, and had rather die than live as they are; and therefore go to
seek up death, where they can find him, to make an end of their days, by this
desperate and last shift that they do use, when otherwise they cannot live.
That man is near driven, that cannot subsist but by courses of selferuine: and
he is very destitute of good parts and of virtuous actions, that despaires of
better fame and repute in the world; than he can procure by such needless
vain undertakings and accomplishments; which are but the pastime of fools,
and the ludibrie and scorn of the wise, and uncomfortable vanity and sin of
the performers.

. 11. Of indirect self-murder committed by covenant and society with persons
destinate to destruction.
6 Branch of indirect self-murder by commission.
The sixth branch of indirect self-murder by commission, is, by wilful
contracting. and keeping society with those, that are under a curse, and
apparent danger of destruction; whereby all such are most probably like to
share with them, that have near communion with them; which falls out specially
in three cases.

Case 1. Of leagues.
First, when a man unwarrantably enters a league, or bond of near amity and
society with persons, Princes, or States worthy of, and (as it were) marked out
to destruction: as Iehoram did contract and keep with Ahaziah 2 King. 9.27.
, whereby he involved and inwrapped himself into the same ruin with him.
Which bars not conclusions for commerce of trade; and also, for intercourse
of correspondency with them, at such a distance and degree, whereby hurt from
them may be avoided, and use made of them for warrantable advantage; as the
Scripture requires, that we should have peace with all men, if it be possible
Heb. 12.14.
.

Case 2.Concerning war.
The second case of indirect self-murdring society is, when a man takes up
arms, or puts himself into military service, or joins with others in war,
offensive, or defensive; either to hinder, or oppress equity and truth; or, in
opposition of Gods Church, to prejudice, or oppress the Gospel and true
religion; by this latter fighting against and provoking God; and by the former,
irritating mankind justly to destroy such, as go about to overthrow Gods
Kingdom, and humane justice, on earth; without which the world cannot subsist;
in which course of Combination, or society, whosoever perishes is guilty of
indirect self-murder, by death of his own unwarrantable procurement.

Although war be lawful, yet it is a violent course of justice, the
decision whereof is hereby cast upon the omnipotent Lord God, for him to
determine the same, as he pleases, by victory, or vanquishment. And therefore,
none should dare voluntarily to engage himself, in that course, upon his life,
where he knows that just and powerful Judge to be party for the truth
against him; lest he perish by this indirect self-murder; whereas, to be safe
therefrom, we should ever be party on Gods side.

Cross event of war.
That the event falls out contrary, so that the Abetters in a good cause do
often fall, and the propugners of an evil do prosper; it comes to pass by
Gods special wise providence, for three causes.

Reasons. 1.
First, to chastise some sins, or to exercise some virtues in the vanquished.

2.
Secondly, to make men more loath to fall to war and bloodshed, upon
presumption of their strength and cause, but rather, with some loss, to make
peaceable composition.

3.
Thirdly, that God may show and exercise his absolute sovereignty over the
world; disposing humane things as he pleases, in the demolishing and
translating of Empyres and dominion, by the ruins of one making way for the
building of another; that it may be apparent, that by him Kings Reign; and
that as many Principalities and Empires are raised, and stand upon the
foundation of invasion, latrocinies, rapines, and blood; so shall they answer
for the same, and be shaken to pieces, by a divine hand of Justice; as we may
see expressed by the dashing of the Image to pieces, by that small stone out of
the divine hand of God, Daniel 2.33.

Case 3. Presuming into infectious places and company.
The third case of indirect self-murdering society is, when men do wilfully
presume, without necessity, or warrantable calling, into deadly infectious
places and companies; wherein, or by which means if they miscarry or perish,
they are guilty of their own death, in a higher degree of indirect
self-murder; as also, are those that do, without a warrantable calling, put
themselves into such places, or employments, as do procure or hasten their
deaths.

. 12. Of indirect self-murder by doing that, which naturally procures that
which kills the doer.
7. Branch.
Seventhly, if a man do, willingly and wittingly, any such unlawful act, as
proves the cause, or occasion of that, which by Gods providence in just
judgment, kills him, or takes away his life; he indirectly murders himself:
as a drunken man, that falls into a ditch or a pit, and is drowned; breaks his
neck off his horse; dies by surfeits, or the like: he is in this degree, guilty
of his own death: for the cause of the cause is the cause of the effect: Causa
causae est causa causati.
such a man's precedent unlawful course, or disposition, is so far from
excusing the consequent effect; that in a sort it doubles his sin: a man that
kills another, when he is drunk, is not excused; but hanged when he is sober.

. 13. Of indirect self-murder by doing of capital crimes against humane Laws
and authority.
8. Branch. Capital crimes.
Eighthly, men do commit indirect self-murder, by their breaking out into
capital courses and crimes; in transgressing and violating capital good
humane Laws, the penalty whereof is death, whereby they bring themselves under
the sword of Justice, thereby to lose their lives; as do Traitors, and
rebellious persons against the King, State, or Kingdom: spoylers of other men's
lives, or goods; as murderers, Pirates, Robbers, and the like: which is a thing
both just and expedient in reason, that for preserving and upholding of the
whole body public; or the more noble parts thereof, inferior and rotten
members should suffer amputation; who, by their own vile practices, have
subjected themselves to the penal censure of death: by their misdeserving
courses, being indirectly self-murderers; their blood being upon themselves,
and not upon the Magistrate, by whose hands they justly fall, as is apparent;
Levit. 20.9. where the blood of him that was put to death, for cursing his
Father, is said to be upon himself: and 2 Samuel 1.16. touching him that David
killed, for saying that he had slain Saul, he said that his blood was upon
his head: as also, 1 King. 2.32, 37. touching Ioab, for his murder; and Sbimei,
for his railing; it is said that their blood was upon their own heads; for
that they were the wilful meritorious cause, although not the immediate
instruments of their own deaths.

And so thus, all men that die by the merits of their own actions, morally, or
civilly considered, are murderers of their own natural lives and bodies, as
man may truly be said to be the overthrower of the salvation of his own soul,
by the merits of his own sins.

. 14. Of indirect self-murder by wilful transgression of Gods Laws.
9. Branch. Transgression against Gods Law.
Ninthly, men indirectly murder their own bodies, by wilfully and impenitently
walking in a course of transgression of Gods Law; in such kinds and degrees, as
are accompanied with fearful threatenings of death and destruction, to be
inflicted, not only upon the souls, but also upon the bodies of such
transgressors, by fearful judgments, even in this life, as we see it was
done to Pharaoh: which is performed two ways.

1. Kills after a natural manner.
First, in a physical, or natural manner, by the very nature and act of some
sins themselves immediately wasting; filling the body with diseases, and at
last killing it: as, by drunkenness and gluttony, distempring and surfeiting
the body; according as Solomon says, that to those that tarry long at the
Wine, and that do go to seek mixed Wine, is woe, sorrow, contentious babbling,
wounds without cause, and redness of the eyes, Prove. 23.29.30.

Also, by whoredom, and bodily uncleanness, the strength is wasted, as the
Apostle shows how such do sin against their own bodies, 1 Cor. 6.18. and
Solomon tells us that the house of a strange woman inclines to death, Prove.
2.18. and by her, a man's flesh and body is consumed, Prove. 5.11. and, the
adultresse hunteth after the precious life.

Of Passions.
And also, by the immoderatenesse of the passions of the mind, in giving way
and liberty to them, to break out, and have dominion over us; whereby the vital
spirits are suffocated, or wasted: as, by excess of choler, fretfulnes or
grief, or the like; extinguishing the life of man; as, a fire is put out, by
oppressing it with water; or, by wastefully burning up suddenly the fuel of
the maintenance of it: therefore, it is needful, that we suffer no commotion
to be raised in our passions and affections, but upon just cause and ground,
and that then therein we do keep due moderation, by the command of reason;
Note.
and by the possessing and taking of them up, with divine and heavenly objects
and employment; about things concerning a better life: it is a very dangerous,
and costly contentment that a man has, by giving immoderate scope to his
unruly affections and passions; with the consumption of his own life thereby,
in this course of indirect self-murder.

2. A moral meritorious manner of self-killing.
Secondly, men by their self-willed sinful courses, are indirect
self-murderers of their bodies efficiently; in a moral manner, and by way of
merit, according to the justice of God, threatening and punishing disobedient
profaneness and wickedness from heaven; not only inwrapping transgressors
into public general judgments with others; but also, by inflicting
particular personal destruction upon them; as God did upon Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram Numb. 16.38.
, and upon some, for their unworthy and profane receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, did die 1 Cor. 11.30.
, by their own meritorious procurement: and, we are taught in the Proverbs,
Prove. 1.8 31, 32.
that sinners do lay wait for their own blood, and, eat the fruit of their
own way: and that the turning away of the simple shall slay him. In the
Prophet Ezekiel, Robbers, adulterers, and usurers, Ezekiel. 18.13.
are threatened with death; and there it is said, that their blood shall be upon
their own heads; which intimates that they are guilty of their own deaths. And
again, secure persons, not repenting after admonition, are threatened with
death; and that their blood shall be upon their own heads. Ezekiel. 33.4, 5.
Yea, all the damned in hell, whose bodies with their souls shall be subject
to the second death by means of their own sins; are, and shall be guilty of
their own deaths, both of soul and body; and so are self-murderers also of
their bodies, at least indirectly.

In Adam, and by his first sin, all men naturally are self-murderers.
Moreover Adam, and all mankind in him lapsed, are indirectly self-murderers,
by merit of that first transgression; for, and through which, death entered into
the world: according to the testimony of the Apostle; who says, that by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned. Romans 5.12. So that no man can blame any for his
death, in regard of original merit and desert, but himself. Now, that this
death of our selves, may not be imputed to our selves, that we should stand
guilty before God of this indirect self-murder; we must labor to get our
pardon from God in Christ, for the comfort of our consciences, and for our
security from the avenger of blood, upon our reconciliation with our God; and
be careful that we live not wilfully and impenitently in any known sin;
without which care, all stand guilty before God of this sin of self-murder,
and shall suffer for it.

Observe. The world is full of self-murderers.
From hence we may observe, that there are many more self-murderers than the
world takes notice of, or that do think themselves to be such; yea, the world
is full of them; whose sins are more heinous than they conceive, and
specially against themselves most pernicious: and therefore, it is no marvel
that one man endeavors the ruin and destruction of another; when we see how
desperately and eagerly they do the same against themselves: For, who can
expect better respect and usage from any man, than he gives to himself; or is
in him to perform? Some difference there is in the affection and intention of
betternesse to himself; but his real performances are to himself worst.

Thus having declared what indirect self-murder is, and how it is diversely
procured and committed; now I will show certain exempt cases; which, although
in the materiality of the facts they differ not from indirect self-murder; yet,
in the formality of their acting, are much discrepant.

. 15. Of certain exempt Cases.
Exempt cases.
Three cases there are, wherein men are warrantably to expose their bodies to
the apparent danger of death; without peril of self-murder, or just blame of
guiltiness of their own deaths.

1. By calling.
First, when a man has a lawful calling, general, or particular; which,
without danger of loss of his life, in discharging thereof, he cannot execute;
then is he to adventure his life, that he may do his duty, (which otherwise
cannot be performed) committing himself to Gods protection, and disposal. As
Peter did in coming down out of the Ship to walk upon the Sea, when Christ
commanded him Mat. 14.29.
: and as Sampson, in execution of his office of Judge against his enemies,
pulled down the house, whereby he with them did perish, Judges 16.
Pacchtarius ad Januarium. In fine obitus sui sub Martyrii passione -- David a
Mauden in praeceptum 6. discurs. decim.
and is commended among the faithful: Heb. 11.32. whom Bacchiarius, an ancient
Author, calls a Martyr: of which David a Mauden gives the reason -- quia illae
quae ad Martyrium requiruntur conditiones in ipso reperiuntur: the things
requisite for Martyrdom were found in him, being a person reconciled to God;
and dying for Gods glory, and in defense of the truth, and by a warrantable
calling of divine instinct, and supernatural ability. And we see, that when
God did call Moses to come up into the mount, there to die; he obeyed, and went
willingly and wittingly unto his own death. Deuteronomy. 34.

By this rule, soldiers and servants taking wages, or otherwise bound to fight
for their lives, or at the command of their superiors, are bound (as Mauden
says) ex justitia, by the law of justice, to expose their lives to death, in
discharge of their duty; to obey and protect their superiors.

Reasons of encouragement.
The reasons of encouragement to undertake such mortal adventures, are
specially two. First, our knowledge and assurance that God, whom herein we are
to respect and obey, originally, or secondarily commanding us, will either
protect us in our ways and undertakings; or will so dispose of us, as shall be
best for us; with comfort, and honor, in, and after our death: Knowledge.
in which respect, both Plato pro Socrate; and also Aristotle affirm, that
honest a mors turpi vitae est praeferenda: An honorable death is to be
preferred before a shameful life.

2. Benefit of death.
Secondly, the fear of the loss of our lives should be no remora, or
hinderance to our dutiful performances: because our deaths in this manner, may
be the medium, or means to the end, that is better than our lives: We see,
that if a thing destinated to a certain end, do at any time cross or hinder
the attaining of that end; in that respect it is to be deemed evil, and to be
rejected: as our Savior commands, that if our eye cause us to offend, then
pull it out; and in like case to cut off our hand, or foot. Mat. 5.30. which
is done by mortification and grace, making them as useless to any scandalous
courses, as if they were cut off in semblable manner, as men throw away their
armor to save their lives by slight in a hot pursuit of their enemies, and as
men at Sea throw their goods into the water to save themselves.

. 16. A particular question about soldiers flying, resolved.
Ab^ut soldiers, a case of conscience. Question.
A question may be here moved, whether it be in conscience lawful for any
soldier, out of fear of death, upon his own apprehensions, to flee and run
away to save his life, before a signal, command, or example be given him by
his Commander so to do?

Answer. Soldiers are to stand.
I answer, for the fact it is true, nothing is more frequently done in war,
than so to run away in disorderly manner; because fear bereaves men of their
use and command of reason; and also self-love makes every man more careful of
his own particular, than of the public; things that are nearest do most
affect; extremities of dangers convert all a man's thoughts, to think how then
to preserve himself. But, for the moral lawfulness of that course it
appears not to me; yea rather, I conceive that although present death stood
ready before them to swallow them up; they are not to turn their backs, to
leave their stations, and run away without due crder, signal, or example of
their Commanders. Because such desertion of their Commanders and fellows in
distress, is a betraying of them into their enemies hands. Again, the
greatest destruction and ruin of an Army, comes by disorderly flight, wherein
every man is objected to the enemies execution: Whereas, by resolution and
courageous resisting to death, many victories are gotten, with the preservation
of the body of an Army. Finally, if the public do miscary, our particular
cannot be safe; but those that escape may (in regard of their after-miseries)
wish that they had fallen in the army, by the sword of their enemies.

We are bound to attribute so much to the wisdom, and valor of our
Commanders; that they will not cast away the lives of their men, but upon
apparent possibilities of victory or preservation, by opposition; although we
see it not. Helps so to do. 1. Faith.
The helps to enable us to this high courage of performing of duty, are two:
First, Faith; both for the goodness of our estate in Christ to Godward; whereby
we may be assured of everlasting life and glory, when we die: and also, for the
lawfulness of our calling and employment in that service, wherein death
attaches us; that we may as comfortably there end our days, as if we dyed upon
our beds; being persuaded of our future happy condition; and that our death in
that manner is more useful to men, and more acceptable to God, than our lives.

2. Resolution.
Secondly, undaunted resolution to be obedient in doing our duties; considering
that obedience is better than sacrifice, although in doing thereof we do
perish. For, for to enjoy virtue and union with God, (which confists in
obedience to Gods will,) is better than life without them.

. 17. The second exempt case about venturing of life, which is upon urgent
necessity.
The second Case, Necessity: in three points.
1. Uncertain death, for certain good.
The second Case wherein we may wittingly and willingly, without danger of
self-murder, adventure the loss of our lives, is a present, urgent, and
unavoidable necessity, for a certain greater more eligible good: which falls
out in three points. First, not only when with an uncertain danger of our own
lives, we seek to redeem the certain destruction of our neighbors; as to
cast our selves into the water, being skillful to swim, to save him from
assured drowning, who has no other means of safety: or, to cast our selves
into desperate dangers for rescue of our wives, children, or friends, from out
of the fire; or out of the hands of our enemies; as did Abraham for Lot Genesis
14.14.
, and David for his wives 1 Samuel 30.
; or to minister to the necessities of our sick household, that they perish not
in neglect; we ought to venture our lives with them in their infectious
diseases. But further also, to save another from certainly perishing, sometimes
men may object themselves to certain death; Certain death for Superiors.
as if the person be a public Magistrate, or Prince, or evidently of more use
and worth in Church or Commonwealth than our selves, we may exchange our
selves to pass for him, as the Scripture intimates, with commendation; that
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. Romans 6.7. and the
peoples esteem of David was, that he was worth ten thousand of them; and
therefore, would not let him adventure himself; where, if half of them should
die, the enemies would not care for them. 2 Samuel 18.3. this respect and
preferment of eminency and virtue is not only from love of themselves, but also
from love of that public body, to which those persons by their lives may be
beneficial.

For a friend.
Also, a man may, for preservation of his dear friend, put himself upon
assured death; as our Savior implies, by way of commending the same; when he
says, Greater love has no man than this, Ambros. lib. 3. officiarum c. 12. de
duobus Pythagoraeis. Virgil. -- me me adsum qui seei, in me converene serrwn.
that a man lay down his life for his friends. Therefore, this degree of love
he may have, and was practiced by diverse, as between Nisus and Euryalus,
Damon and Pythias, Pylades and Orestes.

Object.
The thing that may seem to withstand the lawfulness of this practice, is
that general rule of loving our neighbors as our selves, and not otherwise.
Answ.
But this is easily answered; first, by the right understanding of the rule; as
our selves; which notes, not the degree or measure of our love; 1. It is
required that our love be sincere.
for then must we love all men alike, if the rule of the measure be one: for,
quae convenient in uno tertio, convenient inter se: they that agree in any one
third thing, do agree within themselves: but, that we are to love all men
alike, is absurd, and against the practice of our Savior Christ, who loved
John above the rest of the Apostles; then [as our selves] notes the sincerity
of our love: for as the Apostle tells us; No man ever yet hated his own flesh,
Ephesians. 5.29. So then, here is commanded first, that we should love our
neighbors; secondly, that for the quality of this love, it should be in truth;
and as we would that others should love us: which does not exclude such a
superlative degree of love, as may express it self by a man's dying for his
friend; as if it were an unlawful excess.

2. To dye for a friend may be self-love, and lawful.
Secondly, this doubt may be resolved, by the true interpretation of such a
man's act: because, in that degree of love so expressed for his friend, he loves
himself, both by the consummation and earthly perfection of the virtue of
friendship in him; which in some sort beatifies the subject wherein it is; and
also thereby he gains to himself the honor to be counted more worthy of a
friend, than a friend was of him: Amicus est after ego.
and lovers are said to live rather in those that they do love, than in
themselves; so that without such friends their lives would be but a languishing
dying. With me in this point, accords Cardinal Folet upon Idem ibid.
John 15.13. and David a Mauden in his tenth discourse upon the sixth
Commandment, is peremptory; and says, that Id non facit ex amore vitae
alterius -- sed ex amore virtutis amicitiae, and ad ahorum exemplum: quod dum
sacit, se plus qua^ amicum diligit.
Certum est licitum esse vitam suam certo periculo exponere, pro servanda
amicivita temporali, ex motivo honestatis and amicitiae: quandoquidem honestas
virtutis majus bonum sit, quam vita propria corporalis: It is certain that it
is lawful for a man to expose his life to certain danger, for to preserve the
temporal life of his friend, upon the motive of honesty and friendship; seeing
the honesty of virtue is a greater good, than his own corporal life.

From hence he says, Licitum esse aiunt Doctores amico peste laboranti
inservire, cum aequi certo per culo mertis, and in communi naufragio takulam
so^io cedere; unde si duo amici simul naufragium secissent, usque residua eset
tal ula, cu jus subsidio alteruter ex illis tantum po Yet salvari, posset
quidem alter ea non uti, ut sibi came amicus assumeret, cujus saluti consultum
crpit. in kee tamen eventu cavendum est, ne quis per positivam aliquam actionem
direct neci suae ecoperetur; hoc enimillici^^n est. Disetus. 10. in praecept.
6. numer. 3.5. Ema: Sa: in vocabulo vita.
that the Doctors affirm that it is lawful to do service to a friend that is
sick of the pestilence, with equally certain danger of death; and in a common
shipwreck to yield a board to a fellow companion: as if two friends have
suffered shipwreck together, and that there were a board remaining to them; by
the help whereof only one of them could be saved; the one of them may forbear
to make use of the same, that his friend, whose safety he desires, may take it
to himself. Notwithstanding, in this case heed must be taken that no man do
directly, by any positive action cooperate to his own death: for, that is
unlawful. Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms affirms as much.

. 18. Of the second point, which is concerning certain death for certain more
public good.
The second point.
The second point concerning present urgent necessity, wherein a man may
adventure the loss of his life for a greater good, without any danger of
self-murder, is when by the loss of one, or of a few lives, many more are
preserved: Certain death for greater pub. like good.
for, bonum commune est praeferendum proprio: the public good is to be
preferred before our own private; which argues the greater charity for
extension of it abroad: and as we are not made every one for himself only;
but for the good one of another: So should we endeavor the same by life and
death: as the Apostle commands that we should not look every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. Phil. 2.4.

In the public good, the good of every particular is comprehended; and
therefore, the members, severally considered, are to expose themselves to
suffer for the good and preservation of the Whole. Thomas of Aquine says well,
that Charitas communia propriis anteponit: Tho: 2.2. quaest. 26. arlic. 4. ad 3.
Charity preferres the public before the private: In this also David a Mauden
is clear, when he says, in his aforenamed discourse: Laudabiliter facit, qui
pro bono publico se periculo exponit: Sicut enim in naturalibus pars una
corporis, recte periculo exponitur pro servando toto corpore; ita and in
politicis, particulare Reipub. membrum pro servanda tota Republica: That man
does commendably, that exposes himself to danger for the public good: as even
in natural things, one part of the body is rightly exposed to save the whole
body; so also in things politic, a particular member of the common wealth is
to be exposed for to save the whole. And therefore the Prophet David upon this
ground, accompanied with a special instinct and motion of the Spirit, for the
general good of his nation, undertook with the peril of his life; a
dangerous combat against the Giant Goliath. 1 Samuel 17.
Caiaphas did tell a truth, when he said, that it was better that one man
should die for the people, than that the whole Nation should perish. John 11.50.
Eleazar is commended, Qui se in mortem dedit, ut populum suum liberaret: Who
gave himself, that he might deliver his people, says Mauden. Examples of this
practice are frequent among the Heathen, and by them celebrated with great
praise: As Codrus the Athenian King, (if I be not mistaken) who thrust himself
into death among his enemies, that he might procure victory to his people,
according to the Oracle. Also of Curtius the Roman it is said; that Se pro
Republica praecipitavit in hiatum terrae: for preservation of the commonwealth
he did throw himself into a gulf of the earth: But of this kind many might
be alleged. Upon this ground it is, that the keeping of a Pass; the
defending of a Town, or Fort, or the making of a Stand to check the pursuing
enemy, may be committed to a few, against an unresistable multitude of enemies:
which charge and service those few are not to decline, nor disert and quitt;
although they do foresee that in that service they must all die upon the
place; when it is apparent, that by the loss of the lives of those few, after
that brave manner, the lives of many others are preserved, with a more general
public good of that body and State whereof they are members: So Sampsonlike,
doing more good by their thus dying, than they ever did, or could, by otherwise
living.

. 19. Of certain questions resolved.
Questions 1. About a manflayer, for whose sake his friends are pursued to
death.
To this point belongs the decision of diverse questions. As, first, if a man
have killed another, and escaped; for revenge whereof the kindred and friends
of the slain, in their pursuit of the manslayer for justice, do fall upon his
kindred and friends that favor or entertain him; whereby may follow the
effusion of much innocent blood, where there is not sufficient power and
authority to order and protect men against such outrages; then is such a
manslayer bound in conscience to put himself between his friends and such
harm, and to offer himself a sacrifice to appease wrath; and to prevent a
more general bloodshed, mortality, and deadly feud; Whereby, for his sake,
many of his dearest friends might perish. It is better that one should die for
preserving of many, than that many should die for preserving one of no more
worth and use than any one of the other: which is apparent by Ioabs demand in
his pursuit of Sheba, at Abel of Bethmaachah, requiring him to be delivered up
to him, upon promise that he would depart from the City; which was done
accordingly. 2 Samuel 20.21.


. 20. About a man under deadly displeasure of Superiors.
Question 2.
Secondly, if a man be fallen so far under the displeasure of his Prince, or
State, (although unjustly, and undeservedly) that they pursue him with that
eagerness to death, that for his sake and life, a storm of destruction is
like to light upon, and consume his dearest and nearest friends; then ought he,
for their safety, to put himself into the hands of implacable authority; to
be thereby heaved, as Jonas Jonah 2.15.
, into the high grown sea of Superiors displeasure; that the same may cease
from the raging thereof. Which practice and care seems to have been used by
our Savior Christ, when he said if you seek me, let these go their way John
18.8.
: to make a party, if he were able to resist; were to make an innocent man
guilty of rebellion, and the means of more general ruin.

An objection.
If it be replied, that self-love is against this course; and that the
preservation of justice is to be preferred above many men's lives; and that such
yielding does condemn the sufferer, as guilty, and encourages the persecutors
in their injustice:

Answer. 1. About love.
I answer, that the love of the whole, or more general body, or principaller
parts thereof, is to be preferred before the love of any particular, or
inferior member of the body; as is cleared by what is spoken already.

2. About Justice.
To the second I reply; that, of justice in general, it is true, that it is to
be preferred before the bodies and lives of many men; 1. In general.
because, neither trade, humane society, nor the world can consist without it:
and therefore it is, that, for maintenance thereof, Kingdom is justly armed
against Kingdom; to reduce, and keep those to justice, that, otherwise
transgressing the same, would confound all in tyranny, or anarchy.

2. In particular.
But, the case is not so in particular execution of justice, about every
individual person; when, by seeking, or preserving of Justice in particulars,
we open a way for greater injustice; using a medicine worse than the disease.
But our Savior Christ fully cleares this point, in the fifth of Matthew, when he
says, Ye have heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth: but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but, whosoever
shall smite thee on the right Cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any
man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also:
and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain Mat. 5.38,
39, 40.41.
. For, no man is so far bound to contend for justice, in his own particular,
but that he may, upon good reasons forbear, or dispense with his own right;
whereby he incurres only an evil of damage, and not of sin.

3. Of yielding to suffer.
Thirdly, this yielding is not a making of the innocent sufferer to be guilty;
nor of the nocent wrong doer to be just; or more obstinately to persist in his
unjust courses; no more than the not applying of medicines to the disease
called No li me tangere, does foment it, when the meddling with it, would inrage
it and make it worse. This course of yielding to suffer wrongs, makes way and
place for passive obedience; and for God, the great and righteous Judge of the
world, to do justice, even upon the highest; and to work his own glorious
works, with redress of all such evils, as neither by right nor might can be
by man reformed: in which course of suffering wrong, we have the Martyrs for
examples to follow.

. 21. Touching the voluntary appearance of Felons at liberty upon bail, to
free their bail.
Third question. Touching the voluntary appearing of Fellons to receive justice.
A third question reducible to this point is, whether a man that, for some
capital crime, is under bond of his own promise; or upon some penal sum of
money; or upon bond of a friend for him, of body for body, for his personal
appearing at the Assizes; ought thereupon to appear, when he certainly
foresees that there he shall be cast, and die: as put the case it be for
battery, or wounding of a man mortally; who dies thereupon, after such bond
given.

Answer. When they ought.
I answer, if the bond for his appearance be his own promise, he ought in
conscience to appear; because, Gods Word and Law binds us to keep our
promises; if the same be not to do sin; although the same may be damageable
to us Psalm. 15.
; but if so be that his bond for appearance, be a penal sum of money, only
by sureties; then, all that a man has, he will give for his life: so that, in
this case, I see not that he is bound in conscience to appear, where he
foresees his own death; when the Magistrate has accepted a penal sum for
fiduciary caution, in stead of his personal imprisonment, or other assurance
for his appearance; and so may shift himself, for his safety, to some place,
as a City of refuge, to keep himself from the hands of the avenger of blood.
When again they ought.
But, if he be at liberty, upon his friends bond, of body for body, for
appearance, then ought he in conscience to appear, although he certainly
foresee that there he shall die; that he may free his friend, by his means,
and for his sake, so engaged; both, in respect of the Law of friendship; and in
regard of the cause, that is not his friends, but his own, that by his means,
and for him, an innocent man do not perish: which were his grievous sin.

. 22. What a guilty person ought to do to free the innocent.
Fourth question. Concerning an innocent man's suffering by misprision or error,
in stead of the nocent: and what the guilty ought in that case to do.
A fourth question that belongs to this point, may be this; if a burglary or
a murder be committed, and an innocent man be attached, arraigned, found
guilty, and, upon presumptions, be condemned for it to die, the true fellon not
being known; as it fell out, where a certain young man, a Suitor to a Maid,
was taken, cast, and condemned to death, and suffered for the murder, and death
of that maid, with whom he was late in company, after the rest of the family
were in bed, and she the next morning found murdered; which fact was done by a
Villain that was hid about the house; and not by the young man-suiter, as the
Fellon afterward confessed. Whether is not the true actor of such a fact bound
in conscience to discover himself and confess; that he may save the life of
an innocent, that for his sin he may not die?

Answer.The nocent ought to discover himself.
I answer, that he is bound in conscience so to do: for, otherwise he is
guilty, both by his fact, and silence, of the death of such an innocent man so
suffering, whom he might and ought to rescue; now, it is certain, that no man
is to do, or omit that which, by the doing, or omission thereof, either
multiplies, or aggravates his sin; to his own worse, and eternal
condemnation: And how.
again, he is bound not to suffer other men to sin, either by rashness, or
malice, in the witnesses or jurie, when it is in his power to prevent it, by
true information; as, in this case he may: yet, I think he is to do it, with
as great circumspection, for safety of his own life, as he can; being sure
that he leave not the truth undiscovered; nor suffer the innocent to perish,
through his fear or neglect.

. 23. About a man's voluntary revealing to the Magistrate, his own secret
capital crimes.
Fifth question.
A fifth question, hitherto belonging to be resolved, is; if a man have
committed a capital crime, as murder, Polygamy, or the like, which was done so
long ago, or so far off, or so secretly that none knows, or will accuse him
thereof; About secret capital crimes.
and is so troubled in conscience about it, that upon his private confession to
Divines thereof, and their counsel and consolations ministered to him, he has
no rest nor comfort; but in revenge upon himself, is strongly tempted to
destroy himself, by his own hands; and cannot prevail against his
resolutions of doing it; whether then is he to accuse himself of the crime,
and to put himself into the hands of Justice to suffer for it.

Answer. When and how the delinquent is to reveal his crimes, that are
capital.
In this case, I think, such an one ought so to do: both for the easing of his
conscience, that no otherwise can have rest; that thereupon others may be
afraid to venture upon sin, with presumption of secrecy; when they shall see
the force of conscience compelling men to blaze their own crimes and shame.
And also, for preventing of self-murder, by submission to the sword of Justice,
and to the mercy of the Magistrate; who perhaps will hardly, in such a case,
condemn a man, upon his own indictment and witness; where there is no other
that does the same; and when the act seems to be unreasonable, that any man
should seek his death; where none accuses: and if he were, in this case,
condemned, it is most like that the supreme Magistrate would save such a one by
pardon, or replevin; for the usefulness of his life in time to come: for, the
sword of Justice cuts men off, not only for punishment of mischief done; but
also specially for prevention of evil to come.

The bar removed.
The bar, that may hinder such a man from taking this course, may be the
fear of immortal shame and disgrace, that he thinks he should never be able
to endure, if he should live, and the Magistrate not put him to death, after
this public accusation of himself. But to that it is easily answered, that
the comfort, and ease of the conscience would be such, upon that course, and
the opinion and respect of the godly and wise, concerning him; that all that
feared shame and disgrace would vanish in the air, and he be the better
approved.

. 24. A sixth question, about burning or sinking of a Ship in sea fight.
A Sea case.
For conclusion of this point, I will propound a sea case: to wit, whether it
be lawful for a Captain, or Master of a Ship, being overcharched with enemies
in a Sea fight, rather to fire, or sink his Ship, with himself and his company
to perish in her, than to yield and be at the mercy of his enemies? Touching a
Sea fight.


Answer. Touching Ships Royal. When to sustain until the ship be burnt or
sunk without danger of self-murder.
I answer, if the Ship do belong to the King, and is in service for the State,
and committed to her Commanders with charge rather to burn, or sink her, than
to yield: then are they to follow their Commission in obedience to their
Superiors: always being careful that they neither directly burn nor sink
the ship, with themselves in her; but as the same may be done by the invading
enemies, or accidentally by themselves in their own defense; as by blowing up
the Ship, with intention to destroy their enemies: although they do see that
they cannot do the same, without the death of themselves thereby; as Sampson
did.

When a man himself may burn or sink his own ship without danger of
self-murder. A proviso.
Furthermore, such a Commander may himself burn, or sink such a Ship so
committed to him, when he is no longer able to keep her out of his enemies
hands; for that, he is to deprive the enemies of all the strength he can:
provided that he, and the remnant of his Company, do forsake her, and shift for
their lives otherwise; as they best can; that they may not be guilty of
selfe-murder.

But, if a Captain, or Master have Command of such a Ship, without such
peremptory charge; then is he no further bound in conscience touching yielding,
keeping, sinking, or burning of her, in such a desperate case; than such a
Captain, or Master that Commands at, or by his own discretion; according to
the Laws, and Customs of the Sea, the determination whereof is touched in the
next.

Touching a Merchant man when to sustain until she be burnt, or sunk without
danger of self-murder.
But, if so be that the Ship be a merchant-man, and is commanded by her
Captain, or Master at his own discretion, according to the Laws and Customs
of the Sea; if so be that he be so oppressed in fight with his enemies, that he
is not able to make longer resistance, or to escape; and shall certainly
foreknow, that, if he, his Ship, and Company do fall into the hands of their
enemies, their adversaries will thereby be so encouraged and strengthened, that
the Nation, or State, to which such a ship did belong, shall suffer much more
harm, and damage, by the employment of her, her Company, and goods against the
same; than if so be that such a Ship should have perished in the Sea, with all
her company and goods: or, if so be that such a Commander do foresee, that his
yielding will bring him, and his men, to a captivity, or death more tedious,
than what by resistance they can suffer; then ought such a Commander to choose
the best of the two evils of damage, and rather die in resisting, enduring the
Ship to be sunk, or fired by his enemies; or to do it himself, A proviso.
always being careful, in such a case, for preservation of their lives, as
long as they can, by quitting her, and shifting as they can in the Sea, at the
mercy of their enemies, and of the waters; when Gods providence unevitably
casts them into their hands. In such a desperate pinch, to blow up the Ship,
whereby they foresee that themselves also must perish; is no more unlawful,
than Sampsons pulling down the house upon his enemies and himself, so long as
their intention is not to kill themselves, but their enemies, in their own
just defense; which (in this case) they cannot do without killing themselves
accidentally. But, if there be not so great danger and loss like to ensue, by
their enemies taking such a Ship, as by perishing in resisting; then is such a
Commander to yield, that he may not be guilty of indirect self-murder: as has
been said about fighting beyond our warrant, or upon desperate disadvantages,
and that he may save himself and his Company, for further service of God, his
Country, and friends. When to yield.


. 25. Of adventuring about saving of souls.
The third point, saving of souls.
The third point concerning the second case, about present urgent necessity,
wherein a man may adventure the loss of his life for a greater good, without
any danger of self-murder; is, when the necessity, and opportunity of saving
men's souls requires the adventuring of the loss of a man's natural life to
do it; which may fall out in two Cases.

Case 1. Of adventuring to infectious persons.
First, if a man be sick of some pestilent infectious mortal disease; and
labors not only under the fear, and pangs of death; But also lies oppressed
with the horror of a troubled conscience, like to be swallowed up in utter
despair; languishing and longing for means and comfort of salvation; then may
the Minister, within whose charge such a one is; or, in his default some other,
either Minister, or private Christian; upon outward calling from the party, or
by Gods providence inviting him; finding withal an inward motion and
inclination of the spirit to take the opportunity to save a soul; then (I say)
may one of these adventure into such infectious places, and to such infected
persons, out of love and zeal to save a soul in danger of perishing: so they
endanger no other lives than their own, by so adventuring.

1. Grounds of adventuring.
The grounds of which adventure are; first, confidence of Gods protection in
that warrantable pious employment, so far as God sees good.

2.
Secondly, comfort, that (if in that service a man do die) he had a lawful
calling; and his adventure was for saving that which is better than many lives,
and for which the dear Son of God did die upon the cross.

A Caveat.
Yet, men are herein to be observant, that they tempt not God by their rash
presumption, or self-confidence, needlessly, or beyond their due bounds,
thrusting themselves into such dangers; but that they do use as great caution,
and as good preservatives as they can; with carnest prayer to God, to give him
success and safety; that if they do die by means of such dangerous
enterprises, their conscience may not justly accuse them, that they were
wilfully negligent of their own lives; and so thereby accessory to their own
deaths.

Case 2. Of adventuring among heathens to preach the Gospel.
Secondly, in such times, and places where the public preaching of the truth
necessary to salvation is wholly wanting; or powerfully suppressed; and gross
ignorance, or damnable error, and heresies prevails; as among the heathens,
and gross Idolaters; then, and there is any Christian man, that has a
warrantable calling and opportunity to teach others the truth, and to warn
them of errors, although they cannot do the same without danger of persecution
and death; this course we find warranted not only by the practice of the
Apostles; who ceased not to preach Christ, both publicly, and from house to
house, although they were otherwise charged, and therefore threatened and
persecuted to death: Acts 20.20.
But even others more private Christians did so, as Aquila and Priscilla, and
those that were scattered from Jerusalem: Acts 5.28, 29. Acts 18.16. Acts 8.4.
whose labors God greatly blessed, to the advancement of the Church: Of such
examples Ecclesiastical histories are full, in times of the primitive
persecutions; as Theodoret reports hist. lib. 1. cap. 23. of two young men
called Aedesius and Frumentius, who while they were lay men did teach among the
Indians. Quoniam in vero Dei cultu educatierant mercatores, qui eo commeabant,
cohortati sunt, ut in unum congregati divina ministeria obirent.


And of Christian Merchants Socrates affirms, that they did instruct some of
the Indians in the principles of religion; Christiani illi quosdam ex Indis
fidei principiis instituentes.
also Theodoret makes mention hist. l. 1. c. 24. of a certain captive
Christian woman, who did convert the nation of the Iberians to the Faith:
Mulier quaedam capta in bello, Iberes ad veritatem traduxit.
with whose report consents Sozomen, lib. 2. cap. 6. speaking of the conversion
of the Iberians, he says, that the fame was, that that Nation did leave their
ancient religion, upon the persuasion of a captive woman. Fama est hanc
Iberiam, suasu mulicris Christianae captivae patriam and avitam religionem
deseruise.


And Socrates speaking of the King and Queen of Iberia converted by the woman,
he says that both the King and Queen did preach Christ; He to the men, and
She to the women: Vtrique Christu^ praedicant: Rex viris: Regina mulieribus.
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Colos. 3.16.
Extraordinary things and accidents, are not bounded and regulated by ordinary
rules: and so much does God himself require us to do in many places, that the
souls of our brethren may not perish for lack of his saving truth, which all
are bound to maintain.

. 26. Of adventuring for salvation and religion.
The third general case. About religion
The third general case, wherein men may expose their lives to death without
any danger of indirect self-murder, is in the cause of religion; for
maintenance of the truth; for advancing of Gods glory; and for the conversion,
and confirmation of others, both in profession and practice; although the same
should cost us our lives: as we see was done by Daniel and his three
companions. Daniel 6.10. and 3.17.
Whereunto we are bound by that love, that we owe both to God, and our
Neighbor. According to which, David a Mauden says well, David a Maupraecept.
6. discurs. 10.
that Ex charitate tenetur quis fidem profiteri cum periculo vitae, quando
honor Dei id exigit, aut externa confessio necessaria est ad aliquorum
conversionem ad fidem, vel in eadem vacillantium confirmationem; seu quando
credit minus firmos in fide, eam facile vel bonorum temporalium amore, vel
vitae conservandae causae negaturos: that is, A man is bound by charity to
profess his faith with danger of his life, when the glory of God requires the
same, or when our outward confession is necessary, for the conversion of some
to the faith; or to confirm those that waver in it, or when a man believes
that the weak in faith will easily out of love of temporal goods, or to
preserve their lives, deny the faith. This adventuring of our lives for
religion, consists of four points or members.

. 27. Of the first case or point, which is about defense of religion.
Members of it. 1.
First, in the defense of the truth and religion, both by speaking and writing
for it; when the same is reproached, impugned, Defense of the truth.
and slandered, with endeavoring to overthrow it; although that such a course
of patrociny were capital to the undertakers: for which, we have a luculent
warrant and example, in the practice of Hester in the like case; Hest. 4.14, 16.
and in the practice of Justin Martyr against the Heathen, upon no less
danger; yet, herein it were to be wished, that men would rather content
themselves to prove and commend what they hold to be the truth, and fit for
godly edifying, than for to multiply unprofitable controversies, and to
alienate affections; by bitter disgraceful imputations, and railing
confutations of the errors of others.

And also we are to defend the truth and religion, by objecting our selves with
peril of our lives, to resist by force and arms, the unjust invasion of
hostility; endeavoring to root out the professors of the same, only for the
truths sake, when the enemies do endeavor quite to extirpate the truth of
God: Note.
Although that force and arms, in hostile invasion, is not to be used to
propagate and spread the truth, and to reform errors and abuses in religion;
which is to be done by teaching and persuasions, to draw, and not to force the
conscience about divine things.

Moderation of war for religion.
Yet, in just defense a man may oppose himself with force and arms against
foreign, or usurping, unjust invaders, that violently would thrust him out of
his possession of the truth; because the course taken against him is most
tyrannically unjust, in usurping to domineere over men's consciences, which are
subject only to God: and if for spreading of religion, and rooting out of
errors, it were lawful to make hostile invasion; then might the whole world be
in a flaming fire of war; every nation and people one against another;
according as they differ in opinions and customs about religion; seeing that
every one thinks his own religion best, and condemns, and dislikes all
others. And again, of all the goods a man has, true religion is the chief,
and does most nearly concern him, to keep it above his life; and it is the
choicest and most necessary thing that he can provide, preserve, and commend to
his posterity: So that, if there be any thing of worth in this world, for which
he ought to contend to death, Jud. 3.
it must be the true religion; that, through his neglect or fearfulness, he
suffer it not violently by force of foreign arms to be oppressed, and himself
and his to be tyrannically thrust out of his just possession of it; without
which to be, were better not to be; when, therefore, he shall be forcibly
inthralled and subjected to that, which he is persuaded is erroneous and
heretical, and the bane of his soul.

. 28. About the public confession, or profession of the truth.
The second member about confession of the truth. 1.
The second member of the case, wherein a man ought to expose his life to
death, in cause of religion; is in point of confession of the Gospel and true
religion, with danger of our lives for the same: which is to be done, both
when we are called to declare our faith and opinion about the truth; so that
then we are neither to dissemble nor deny it; but are commanded to make
profession of it. 1 Pet. 3.15. as was practiced by John the Baptist, John 1.20.
and so by all the blessed Martyrs.

2.
And also, when we do see that our concealment of our profession may
prejudice the truth, dishonor God, strengthen and confirm the adversaries; or
may discourage and offend the weak Christians, whereby they may droope, or
fall; then, no fear of death should cause a man to forbear to declare
himself in point of religion; lest that of our Savior Christ be verified upon
him, He that loves his life sholl lose it. John 12.25.
Whereas contrariwise, He that hates his life in this world, (or as it is in
Matthew, Ioseth it for Christ's sake Mat. 10.39.
) shall keep it unto life eternal.

By failing in this point, many a man standers himself, causing the people of
God to think worse of him than he is indeed; and deprives himself of much
honor, and comfort that he might have, by exposing himself to all hazzards,
for Gods cause; to whom, that in the fifth of the Judges, concerning Ruben, may
be applied; that for the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of
heart: why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the
flocks? Judges 5.15, 16.23.18.
And again, that concerning Meroz; Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the
Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
help of the Lord against the mighty. Whereas contrariwise, in the same cause,
it is said with commendation, Zebulon and Napthalie were a people that
jeoparded their lives unto death.

. 29. Touching not omission of necessary duties commanded of God in any peril
of life for the same.
The third member is about omission of duty.
The third member of the ease, wherein a man ought to expose his life to death
in cause of religion, is, when he is charged and bidden by any humane command,
or authority, upon threatening pain of death, to forbear doing of that which
God commands him to do; whether the same be personal duties of general
obedience to Gods laws, that are proper to all men; or official, respecting
some conditions of men in their special places and relations; as officers and
the like, if they have the same in charge immediately from God, without
dispensation; 1. Personal.
then, a man is not upon any humane prohibition to omit doing of such duties;
which he is bound by immediate authority from God to perform; Dan. 6.10.
as honoring of our parents, and all the other affirmatives of Gods moral
Commandments; which no man can release or dispense withal, to discharge a man
before God, for his omission of them.

2. Official.
Also, for official duties, which are so proper to men's particular places and
relations wherein they are; that without performance of those duties, these
relations and places would be marred; a man is not to omit them upon any
threatening and danger, so long as he stands in such relation, or place; 1. Of
divine institution.
because, both the places and duties belonging to them, are of divine, and not
humane ordination and dependence; as the places and duties of parents,
children, husbands, wives, masters, servants, magistrates, subjects, etc. who
are not upon any humane command, or danger, to omit their duties to those, to
whom they owe them upon divine bond; which is so plain, that it is professed
of the Pope, that he cannot, nor will not absolve subjects from their
allegiance, and obedience due to their Princes; Bellar. in dialogismo adversus
Borclaium, c. 31.
but only from obedience to such as by heresy, contumacy, or the like, are
fallen from their places of Kingly authority which they had; being unworthy of
it, and of the duties and respects due to the same.

2. Of humane institution.
But it is to be observed, that for those places and their duties, which are
wholly of humane ordination; as offices of State or Commonwealth, they are to
be executed or suspended by the superior authority; although our endeavors
are not to concur in it, mainly and clearly to cross the moral rules of
equity and religion.

Also, for callings that are fundamentally of divine ordination; the manner of
execution whereof depends upon the rules of Gods direction in his Word: as is
the Ministry of the Gospel; so long as the persons that exercise that
function, have their calling thereunto by men who are the Church of God; by the
same power they may be discharged and put out of place; or, while they are in
it, be suspended from liberty of exercising their public office and ministry:
for the same power that makes, may unmake; and the affirmative Commandments of
God do not bind ad semper, to the doing of them always; Of obedience to
suspension, and deprivation.
specially when the intermission only, or restraint of exercise of those duties
is intended by the deprivers, or suspenders; so long as there is sufficient
provision by others to perform the same without so great da^nge to the Church,
as might arise to the same, by the Ministers doing of the duties of his
calling, contrary to the said authority: then such a deprivation, or
suspension, Exception against suspension and deprivation of ministers by the
Church of Rome.
(although it were unjust) is to be obeyed; and for a man in that case, to
suffer for his disobedience to the same, he can have no comfort nor just
encouragement; except such restraint were so general, that there were not men
enough in places to discharge the duties of that function; without which a true
Church cannot subsist; so as therein, and by the doctrine thereof, men may be
saved: then, in that case of extreme necessity, such a deprived or suspended
Minister, by the rule of charity, which warrants laymen to help to uphold the
truth and Church, is bound to do the duties of his calling, notwithstanding
any such former restraint, or danger of disobedience to it: because, the power
of the Church is but ministerial; under, and according to God; rather
declarative, than Sovereign; therefore, what she does, ties not men here on
earth to obey it, to the destruction, but to the edification of the Church, or
at least to prevent a greater mischief; And also, because the true Church may
do no such acts of deprivation, or suspension, whereby to intend or effect the
destruction of the Church; and therefore (in that case) transgressing of such
restraints is no disobedience to the Church, but rather an obeying the intent
of the same; as in times of persecution we have plentiful examples, specially
of the Church of the Jews against the Christians.

A Caveat.
Yet, herein is to be observed, that such performance of duties in that case,
after restraint, be done in mecke patient manner, without tumults or forcible
opposition of authority; submitting with passive obedience, where they cannot
lawfully perform active.

This extends not to warrant any schism, or heresy, that esteem themselves
only to be the true Church; as did the Donatists and others; to oppose (out of
fear of their own ruin) the proceedings and restraints of the more
Orthodoxe, and general body of a sound Church, (whose authority does
preponderate and oversway her apostating members) so long as by the doctrine
publicly taught in her, men may be saved, and built up.

. 30. Against commission of evil upon any humane command, or threats.
Fourth member about commission of evil upon humane command.
The fourth member of the case, wherein a man ought to expose his life to
death, in causes concerning religion; is, when a man is desired, commanded, or
threatened to do any sin forbidden by Gods word; that then he do it not,
although he therefore do die; as Joseph's practice manifests in resisting his
whorish mistress, Genesis 39.12.
and the three children, that would not upon the Kings command worship the
golden Image to save their lives, Daniel 3.18. Because it is better for us to
die, than deliberately and wilfully to sin against God: as the woman with her
seven sons did choose, 2 Match. 7. according to S. Augustines judgment, who
says, that if it be propounded to a man, Vt aut mali aliquid faciat, aut mali
aliquid patiatur, eligat non facere mala, quam non pati mala, Epist. 204.
that either he should do some evil, or suffer some calamity; then let him
choose rather not to do evil, than not to suffer evil.

Observe. How we are to abhor sin.
For, we are ever to do that which may most nearly unite us to God our chief
good; and to shun what may divide us from him; which nothing can do but our
sins; specially those that consist in the transgression of the negative
Commandments, and are most opposite to God, and incompatible with him; and
therefore those laws do bind ad semper, to the always observing of them;
and cannot be dispensed withal, seeing God is unchangeable. The evil of sin
should be more terrible to us than death it self; not only for that it is the
cause of death, and imbitters it; but also because it deprives us of a greater
good, of our spiritual life, that far exceeds the natural. The beatificall
object that sin deprives us of, is the infinite blessed God, from whom to be
separated is worse than death it self; and in that respect, rather than we
should sin, we should choose to suffer death, which is a glorious kind of
Martyrdom, and a means of advancement to happiness, for the power and
practice of the truth laying down our lives; which is a more undoubted sign
of grace and salvation, than is the suffering of many, for holding the truth in
opinion and profession. We should choose rather not to be, than not to be
happy; for, the original, and end of our being is better than our being it
self; in regard that our happiness is not of, and in our selves; but in and
from another, who is both our beginning and end.

. 31. Of the kinds of sins of commission to be avoided.
Evils of sin to be avoided.
These sinful evils, that we ought thus carefully to avoid and forbear to
death, are of two sorts.

1. Against the law of nature.
First, those that be directly and absolutely forbidden by the Law of nature,
as fundamentally unlawful, at all times, and in all cases, for the contrariety
that they have against the nature of God, and against the inbred principles of
reason and conscience: of which no question can be made, but that we are
always utterly to shun them, notwithstanding any humane command, or
inforcement that may be to the contrary: because, no human power can dissolve
the obligation of those ingrafted Commandments of God, and nature, Innata Lex.
Romans 2.15.
that we may be discharged in conscience from keeping of them, which would
overthrow both divinity and humanity: neither can any free us from the
punishment of the transgression of them; both because, equity and Law requires
that, the soul that sins, shall die; and, also for that, there is no power
matchable with Gods, and natures, to protect, or free us, by force from their
vengeance.

2. Against the positive Law of God.
Secondly, the sins that we are to shun, and not wittingly and willingly to
do, upon any threats, or worldly danger, or for any profit, are those that are
forbidden by the positive Law and revealed will of God; the violating whereof
does wrong the sovereignty and honor of God; who is the absolute and only
independent King of all the world; and his will the supreme unerring rule of
our obedience throughout our lives; our transgression whereof is a breach of
that loyalty, and due subjection, which we owe to that our highest Lord. To
whese positive Law conformity is more properly obedience to God, than
conformity to the Law of nature is, by it self considered. Because, the ground
of our conformity to the Law of nature, is natural inclination and Reason,
equally binding Heathens as well as Christians. But, the ground of our
conformity to the positive Law of God, is principally the sovereign Authority
and Will of God himself; which kind of obedience is that which is properly of
the Church and her members to God; and proceeds from faith, love, fear, etc.
Evangelicall, or Thelogicall graces.

From which obedience to God no wight can absolve, or excuse us, that we may
lawfully and safely subject our selves to fear, to please, or to obey any
other, in opposition, or contraty to him and his will.

Reasons. 1.
Because, there is none above God, whose will may be preferred, or equalled to
his, to whom all is subordinate, in nature, state and employment.

2.
Neither is any man Lord over the Conscience, either to bind, or discharge it,
contrary to the Law, or will of God, that we should dare, upon any motive of
humane will profit, or penalty, wilfully to transgress the same.

3.
God is our ultimate, or last end, that we are to aim at; that we may both
enjoy, and please him, in whom consists our happiness.

4.
All promises of blessings are made to the doers of Gods will; and all
threatenings of judgments to the transgressors of the same Romans 2. v. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10.
: which reward no humane power can hinder, or frustate. And therefore, we
cannot dispense with our selves, upon any humane pretense or motive, to do any
thing contrary to Gods word and positive Law; although for not transgressing
the same we should incur death.

. 32. Of indifferent things, how they become sinful.
Indifferents accidentally evil.
But, in subject o indifferente, in things that are of themselves but
indifferent (whose use is neither directly nor absolutely commanded nor
forbidden by Gods word, as are kinds of meat, drink, apparel, and the like,
and for which we ought not to command to death) the using, or not using of them
becomes sinful only accidentally, either by reason of external
circumstances, about the action, or omission of them; or of some erroneous
qualities in the agents, or omitters; and not from the intrinsecall nature of
the things, or moral disposition of the action, or omission absolutely
considered, without respect of circumstances and Law. The individual acts of
things indifferent, are not indifferent when they are done.
For touching the use of indifferent things, only man's individual voluntary
actions about them, specially proceeding from deliberate judgment, are morally
either good or evil; well done or ill done; because, they are accompanied, and
endowed with such actionall circumstances, as do so affect and qualify them,
that they are no more indifferent; Not Physically.
either Physically to be done, or not done; ( for, Vnumquodque dum est,
necessario est, Every thing when it is, it is necessarily, and then cannot be
otherwise than it is;) Nor morally.
or morally, because, if the same were otherwise than it is, it must
necessarily be either better or worse than it is. For, no action can stand
equally morally affected with differing circumstances; and at the same time, to
be done, Tho. prima secundae, quaest. 18. artic. 9. Cum enim rationis sit
ordinare, actus a ratione deliberativa procedens, si non sit ad debitu^ fine^
ordinatus; ex hoc ipso repugnat rationi, et habet rationem mali; si vero
ordinetur ad debitu^ fine^, convenit ad eum ordine rationis unde habet rationem
beni. Ex Filliucio To. 2. p. 3. Patet actiones humanas, quatenus a ratiene, and
volu^tate diriguntur, dici morales, hoc est dignas laud velvituperatione, ex
Arist. Ethic. c. 13. actio homini propria est voluntaria, and libera and
adeodigna laud aut vituperatione. Tho. 1.2. q. 1. art. 1. Azor. l. 1. c. 1.
or not to be done, cannot be equally morally indifferent. For, Thomas Aquinas
says, That it falls out that an action may be indifferent, secundum speciem,
in the general kind of it: qui tamen est bonus vel malus in individuo
consideratus, which notwithstanding is either good or evil, considered in its
individual subject and act. Whereof he gives the reason, quia actus moralis
non solum habet bonitatem ex objecto, a quo habet speciem; sed etiam ex
circumstantijs: because, a moral action has its goodness, not only from its
object, by which it is specified for kind, but also from circumstances; of
which every individual act of necessity has some, whereby it is drawn to be
good or bad, Ad minus ex part intentionis finis, at least in respect of the
end intended: And therefore, he concludes properly, necesse est omnem actum
hominis a deliberativa ratione procedentem in individuo consideratum, bonum
esse vel malum: it is of necessity, that every act of man proceeding from
deliberate reason, and considered in its individual performance and subject,
is good or evil: For, seeing the will of man rightly ordered is subject to
right reason and divine Law, then all actions proceeding from it, as it is so
guided in all performances, are morally good or bad: and as all things are
destinated to an ultimate end of Gods glory, and to other particular
subordinate ends of effecting any good; so is their use subject to
proportionable rules and Laws, for ordering the same thereby, that they may
attain their end intended: and in that respect, when they are done; they are
morally either well or ill done, according to that proportion, or disproportion
that their use then has to their due ends and rules; and to be a fit and
effectual means of accomplishing the same: or contrariewise.

Conclusion.
So now, we have seen how that, for to prevent suffering, and death, we are
not wittingly and willingly to do evil of sin (in any case) specially, or any
thing directly against Gods Law. And therefore, do conclude with David a
Mauden, touching the aforesaid three general cases; wherein a man suffering to
death is exempted from indirect self-murder, pro bono publico fide, religione
Catholica, alijsque de causis bonis and honestis vitam propriam periculo
expouere, non solum laudabile, sed etiam interdum necessarium est: For a man to
expose his own life to danger for the public good; for his faith, for the
true religion, and for other good and honest causes; it is not only
commendable, but also sometimes necessary.

. 33. Of the properties of an indirect selfe-murderer.
An indirect self-murderer has two bad properties.

The first property. Folly.
First, he is foolish in advisedly and wilfully using mortal means, and
fatal to himself; and yet thinks not thereby to die, but to live more
happily; as Eve, in eating of the forbidden fruit, that was the means of
death, did conceit to attain thereby to a more excellent life, as if a man
should look to gather grapes of thorns; and good and comfort of deadly
courses. From unbeleefe.
Which proceeds from the stupid unbeleefe of man, who would rather make God a
liar, than he will be diverted from his desperate courses, or will believe
more, than he comprehends, or conceives, by his senses, being as the horse or
mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be kept in with bit and
bridle: as the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 32.9.

The second property, Wicked.
Secondly, an indirect self-murderer is wicked; for, knowing both his course,
and the event thereof to be evil, opposite both to the will of God, and to
his own future good, he does wilfully continue in, and prosecute it still,
which is damnable impiety.

The ground of it self-content.
Which flows from the self-contentment, that men take in their own sinful
ways; and from their misconstruction and abuse of the long patience of God,
not executing his threatened judgments speedily upon such as themselves are
Eccles. 8.11.
: which takes away from them all remorse for their evil courses, and all care
of reformation to be better.

. 34. Observations from indirect self-murder.
Uses.
The uses of the former doctrine about indirect self-murder, are specially
three.

1. Men self-deceived.
First, it serves for our instruction; that we may see that many men are
deceived in their self-pleasing courses; whereby they promise to themselves
much comfort and good; but indeed reap death and destruction, by their own
means and procurements: according to the Proverb, There is a way which seems
right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death Prove. 14 12.
: as is apparent, by the course of our first parents Adam and Eve: destroying
themselves, and us in them, by following their own wits and wills, without
obedience to their Maker.

Causes of self-deceit.
The true causes of this deceit and error of man in this point, are four.

1. Unbelief.
First unbelief of Gods threatenings, while men trust to lying vanities, upon
groundless presumptions, and erroneous carnal principles, and
misinformations, and misconstructions; willing to be persuaded, and to believe
that which stands best with their liking and sinful condition; so corrupting
their understanding to give a false verdict against the truth of God, to their
own destruction.

2. Self-conceit.
Secondly, men are self-beguiled, by self-conceit of the goodness of their
unsound estates, and by being taken up with contentment in the present seeming
good of their self-pleasing sinful courses: for that they did never thoroughly
see, and apprehend the miserable badnesse of their own wretched estates, nor
did truly see, and taste the excellency and sweetness of a better.

3. Prosperity of the wicked.
Thirdly, men are here self-deceived, by resting upon the present visible
dealing of God with many as bad, or worse than themselves, whom they see still
to prosper in their ill courses: Because judgment is not speedily executed,
therefore their hearts are set to do evil; being persuaded that it shall be
as well with them, as others of their own rank, that they see flourish and
do well enough, as they think.

4. Shifting the blame.
Fourthly, men deceive themselves, by shifting off the blame of their ill
course, from themselves, to other concurring, or accessory causes of their
evil ways; as Adam did to Eve: as if they were freed by the temptations or
partnership of others with them in evil. But the condemnation of accessaries
does condemn, and not clear the principals.

Predestination is blameless.
But, they that to clear, or encourage themselves in their naughty courses,
shift off the blame thereof to Gods Predestination, are impudently impious; by
both making God the author of sin, and also by traducing his justice, for
unjustly punishing them; that, by their own verdict, are blameless: But God
Predestinates no man to an end, without respect of means, whose use is within
the compass of a man's power, and wherein he himself is a voluntary agent; so
that predestination offers no force to any man's will: and therefore a man
living in a sinful course, of his own choosing and liking, cannot blame God,
or his Predestination; seeing that God both gives him sufficient means, and
invitation to come out of that sinful state. Observe. Men self-binded.
So men that run into evil courses, are by their own means darkened in
their judgments, and do wilfully put out their own eyes of their
understandings, that they may fearelesly go on to their own ruin, in their
own ways of destruction. Who is so blind as he that will not see?

Deceived.
Many men's estates are found by themselves, in the end, to be far worse, and
more desperate than they expected; and this also many come not to see until it
is too late, and past all hope of amendment, or recovery; which by carfulness
and good heed taking in time, might have been prevented.

Use 2. Consideration of our courses.
The second use is for admonition; that we do well consider our courses what
they be, and whither they tend; that we may not dare to venture upon that,
which may make us accessory to our own destruction: It is dishonorable and
uncomfortable for a man to suffer by his own deservings, or procurement. And
therefore, we are to observe how the Apostle Peter advises us, That none of us
do suffer as an evil doer, 1 Pet 4 15.

Repent and reform.
If we be entered upon an unwarrantable course, then are we to break off, and
to make have to return by true repentance, and to walk in the way that leads
to life. And therefore, I conclude with the Prophet, Cast away from you all
your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart,
and a new spirit; for why will ye die o house of Israel? For, I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn
your selves, and live ye. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.

That we may do so, we must beware of self-conceitednesse and obstinacy, in
our own self-willed ways; and be careful to listen to good counsel, and
advertisement; and to consider the latter end, and not the present contentment,
and faining flattery of evil courses.

Use 3. Men sin against themselves.
The third use is an intimation; to show unto those that do desperately or
carelessly venture upon courses tending to their own self-destruction; that
they are not only guilty of sins against God, and their Neighbors
immediately; but even also against themselves, in self-murder, a crime of the
vilest nature; for which they shall be arraigned before God, and suffer; their
own wrongs being revenged upon themselves, and their own unjust and unnatural
suffering at their own hands, being punished upon themselves by the hand of
God.

Observe 1. Ill courses are most harmfull to the doers of them.
Where it is observable, that man being both the wrong-doer, and wrong-sufferer
in the same act by himself, does justly suffer by the hand of God, for
wronging his creature, and for breaking his Law, in man's self-respect, and
usage of himself. The consideration of which terrible end of such courses,
redounding to the destruction of the doers, should affright men from them.

Observe 2.
Where it is also remarkable, that a man cannot wrong God or others, but by
ruinating himself therewithal; and so all ill courses do prove a punishment
to the doers of them: and therefore, if there were any true love in such
persons to themselves, they would abandon all such courses as tend to the ruin
and perdition of the entertainers, or proceeders in the same.

CHAP. 12. Of direct bodily self-murder.
. 1. What it is.
Now it follows that we treat of direct self-murder; and first, show what it
is: Direct bodily self-murder is an advised, witting and willing intention, and
effectual endeavor of a man, by his own hands, or means, to take away or
destroy his own life, whereby he does indeed kill himself.

In which description we are to observe two things: First, the general, and
then the specificall nature of direct self-murder.

General nature of it.
Touching the genericall, or general nature of direct self-murder, which is as
the matter of it; 1. A moral act.
we are to consider, first, that it is a moral act proceeding from man's will;
and therefore is good, or bad; and so we are to be the more careful how we
do purpose, or perform it.

2. The object of it, Life.
Secondly, we are to observe touching that action, the object thereof, about
which it is exercised: and that is the natural life of man, who has no such
other precious worldly thing: and therefore, we should be very wary how we
venture to deal therewith.

3. The subject of it, Man's self.
Thirdly, the subject of this action is a man's self; by whom, and upon whom
the same is done; and so is both the active and passive subject of the same
act; and so it does nearly concern a man, that he may well consider, both
what he does, and suffers in that case; seeing he may be guilty of a double
blame, if he does both do, and suffer that which he ought not by his own
hands.

4. The end of it, To destroy.
Fourthly, the end of this action is remarkable; that it is not to cherish and
preserve, but to destroy and take away a man's own life: It is the end that
makes or marres even a good action, and increases the maliciousness of an
evil. And therefore it concerns us much, in all our actions, to consider well
their ends, whether the same be good or evil.

The specificall nature of it.
The specificall nature of direct self-murder, is that which is the true form
of it; whereby it is properly and directly self-murder. This specificall nature
of it is remota and proxima, remote and next.

Remote.
The remote nature of direct self-murder consists in two things.

1. Restraint of the act it self.
First, in the restraint, or limitation of the act of killing, for agent and
patient; for choice and application of the means to a man's own self; who
thereby reflects and returns upon himself, in an act of the greatest
hostility and cruelty that can be in the world, to destroy himself and his
own life, by his own means; so becoming his own Burrio and executioner.

2. The Agent, understanding what he does.
Secondly, the remote nature of direct self-murder consists in the disposition
of the agent, both in his understanding, and will; in respect of his
understanding, the actour of it does the same advisedly, and wittingly.

Advisedly.
Advisedly he does it; when after premeditation in his mind of killing of
himself, and after approbation of the fact in his judgment, he resolves upon
his unwarrantable motives to do it; and devises and plots the means and
manner how to do it, after deliberation, and conflict with himself between
oppofite reasons: and when withal the understanding works and prevails upon
the will, to draw the same to concur in the resolution to do it, and to
command and employ the body in consent with both the understanding and the
will, to execute their pleasure to its own destruction, as is manifest in the
practice of Ahitophel 2 Samuel 17.23.
and Judas. Mat. 27.5.
Then it is an advised act, done by a man in such advised manner, and so cannot
be excused by ignorance, or inconsiderate haste; but is done with the fullest
careere of moral motion, and with the greatest engagement of the whole man, in
an action of the highest nature of self-mischiefe.

Note.
The vilest actions are often done upon greatest advisement, and deliberation;
which makes them the worse, and more odious. Man's wisdom is madness when he
is left to himself; and a depraved judgment perverts the will, and leads a
man into many vile practices; seeing the will follows the last determination
of the practical understanding. If the light of understanding that is in man
be darkness, how great then is that darkness?

Wittingly.
Wittingly, a man does take away his own life, when at the very time of doing
the act, he knows both that he is doing such an act, materially considered;
and also, that the same act, for the nature and form of it, tends directly to
his own destruction, and is wicked and unlawful to be done, and yet for all
that does not desist; whereby man that is a rational creature, able to judge
of his own actions, is self-condemned in his own conscience, while he is
about, and in doing the act it self.

Willingly.
The disposition of the agent, or actour in direct self-murder in respect of his
will, is that he does it willingly; as to bang, or stab, or poison himself, or
the like. For violence or inforcement cannot be done to the will, in its act of
willing, which necessarily must be free; either absolutely, or conditionally.

Willingness.
This willingness in a man to kill himself, is twofold.

1. Antecedent. Ahitophel accessit sobrius ad perdendm scips^^, ut Caesar ad
perdendam Rempub:
First, that which is antecedent before the fact; whereby he wills not only
that he were dead; but also wills that such a murderous act should be done by
himself, upon himself, to take away his own life; which by a contrary act,
and change of his will might be prevented; as it is said of Ahitophel, that he
came sober to destroy himself, as Caesar came sober to ruinate the common
wealth.

Concomitant.
Secondly, he has a willingness concomitant at the act doing; so that when it
is in his power to suspend his act, and not to do it, yet he wills and does it
indeed: which is so much the more grievous, by how much the more it has of
wilfulness; as will is both the original fountain of sin, and is so
essential to it, that absolutely against, or without man's will he has no
actual sin, neither can have any.

The proximate or nearest nature of direct self-murder.
The next, or nearest specificall nature of direct self-murder consists of two
subordinate branches.

1. Man's intention.
First, in the immediate intention of a men; which is to kill himself, and
does conclude the joint act therein both of his judgment and will; because
such an intention is grounded upon, and proceeds from advisement and
deliberation, and does also respect the fact that he minds to do, sub ratione
finis; under consideration of an end; and so, in his judgment, good: and
therefore it includes his will, desiring and endeavoring that it may be done;
and so to him such a fact falls not out by acdident, or unexpected, or not
intended; but it is the thing he aims at.

2. The bodies employment.
The second branch of the nearest specificall nature of direct self murder is,
the actual employment of the body and the strength thereof, upon direction of
the understanding, and command of the will, fully to accomplish his intention,
and effect the killing of a man's self by his own hands, or means, whereby it
is perfected and consummated, with self-perdition, in a wicked conspiracy of
self-destruction, by soul and body against themselves. Observe Abuse of power,
and of obedience.
Wherein is to be observed and condemned both the wretched abuse of the
authority and power of man's understanding and will, directing and commanding
the inferior faculties and body to do that which tends directly to
destruction both of their parts, and-whole: and also we may see herein a
pattern of unwarrantable obedience; in the bodies yielding to do that which
is unlawful, and ruinates it self; the superiority of the understanding
derstanding and will frees not the body from blame; for then why should it
suffer with the soul for that act? But the sin is the greater, by how much the
further it extends to involve partisans, or accessaries, and makes many guilty
of the same crime; who are to be condemned, not only for the fact done by them,
but also for violating the rights and duties of their places, in unlawfully
commanding, and obeying in that which is evil, contrary to an higher rule.

. 2. Of the imaginary good conceited to be in self-murder.
Object. Excl cannot be an end.
It may be objected, that for a man advisedly, wittingly, and willingly to
propound to himself, and to aim at that for his end, that is his destruction,
is against nature; because the end is, or ought ever to be the perfection of
the thing that desires it, and endeavors to have it; and good only is
desirable, and to be sought after; which may content us in the enjoying
thereof: and therefore, the conclusion may seem to be good, that no man can
advisedly, wittingly, and willingly purpose and endeavor to kill himself.

Answ. Death is not the ultimate cad.
Whereunto may be answered; although death be the immediate end intended, and
sought in direct self-murder; yet it is not the ultimate, or last end; neither,
is it sought for at any time for it self, but accidentally, and for another
thing, which is good; for obtaining whereof, a self-murderer would use that as
a means. Comparison.
As Physic is immediately desired and taken, not for it self; but for health
thereby, which is the patients ultimate end in taking of medicines: and
therefore, one says, Mors ut malum non estoptabilis, nec optatur per se, sed
gratia alterius: Death, as it is an evil thing, is not desirable; neither is
it of it self desired, but in respect of some other thing; and so is desired
per consequutionem, and non per se; by consequution, and not of it self; for,
death is never desired by a natural appetite, as opposite to that appetite or
desire that follows reason, either right or depraved: because nature is
materiatum quid, some materiated thing belonging to the person, in respect both
of matter and form, soul and body, so long as they are united; and therefore
ever desired the good and preservation of the person, in that union.

The imaginary good of self-murder.
The good ultimately intended, and conceited to be obtained by self-murder, is
twofold.

1. Freedom from evil.
First, freedom from greater evil felt, or feared; real, or but imaginary;
which in a self-murderers opinion is no other way avoidable: and they despair
to be able to bear it; (measuring themselves by themselves) so as if they
cannot shake off the yoke, then will they violently dissolve themselves.

Causes. 1. Conceited badnesse of estate.
The true causes hereof, are first, the self-murderers conceit, that his
present, or feared condition is worse than any other that can betide him; or
that he can shift into by death.

2. Want of means.
Secondly, his want of having, or foreseeing means of prevention, or
deliverance from the evils that he despaires to be able to bear; causes him to
fall upon this wicked damnable course of ridding himself from them.

3. Impatience.
Thirdly, disobedient impatiency, that will not let a man in all things submit
to be ordered by God; and an evil heart of unbelief, that hinders him from
trusting and depending upon God, for supportation and deliverance.

Note. 1. By means of his reason man suffers.
Man, by means of his understanding and reason, is subject to many more
miseries and troubles, than any brute beasts; because he fancies many
imaginary calamities to himself, from possibilities in reason, that do as
much sometimes affect and trouble the mind, as if they were real, although
they never be insticted.

And present troubles men do aggravate in their esteem and opinion, for
measure and extent, beyond that which they are in truth and sense, so making
them needlessly the more importable.

2. By means of memory.
And troubles, future and past, man, by his imagination, makes present, by
help of his memory and fear, overcharging himself with the burden of more,
than ever God did lay upon him at once.

Spiritual afflictions.
And finally, in his mind he is capable, by means of reason, of manifold
spiritual afflictions, far exceeding those that are upon the body, and where
of no irrational creature is capable.

Imagination.
And yet, of all these troubles, the greatest part is imaginary, of man's own
needless, and voluntary contracting, by means of his abused reason, and do
work most real and desperate effects, even to self murder.

Although that self-murder be no fit, or appropriated means to preserve, or
deliver a man from misery, or troubles, yet, a self-murderer does use it;
deeming, according to the Philosophers, that a lesser evil, compared with a
worse, obtaines the place of good; and is to be desired for good, Arist, ad
Nicom. lib. 5. c. 6. Picol grad. pol. Minus malum comparatu- cum detertore
obtinet lotie boni, and pro bono optabile est.
which is only to be understood of the evil of punishment, and not of the
evil of sin: for, for to avoid all punishment we are to do no sin; which to
do, were a greater punishment, and would draw punishment more abundantly upon
the doers of the same: in evils of sin there is no choice, or lawful
election, where all is forbidden.

2. Advancement to good.
The second imaginary good, conceited to be had by self-murder, is the
advancement of a man's self thereby to more good, or to a better estate than he
has at present; either to an estate really better, as to absolute good in
heavenly happiness; or to fancied, or comparative good, in comparison of
greater evil, in the self-murderers apprehension, that he may be in an estate
less miserable, (as he thinks) than that is which he feels or fears: which
in that respect he esteems to be better than the present.

In these regards self-murderers are willing to exchange their lives by death;
but of evil properly there comes no good. For, men gather not grapes of
thorns, neither will any expect it, that is not spiritually mad.

Oh miserable state of life that is more tedious to a man than death!

A blessing may become a judgment.
Thus the greatest earthly blessing may become, in man's sense and opinion, a
grievous judgment: For, God can make a man a terror to himself, and to all his
friends; so that in that respect, he may brook the name of Magor Missabib, as
did Pashur, Ier. 20.3, 4. when a man leaves God, or is left of him, who is the
blessed object and fountain of all true contentment and solid comfort.

Observe. The misery of the damned in hell.
Whereby, we may see in part the miserable state of the damned in hell, whose
living there is a second death, far exceeding the first in misery; there is a
death of dissolution, and a death of torment; the former brings the subject to
an end, the latter brings the subject of it to all miseries: they that are in
this latter shall wish for the former, and shall not find it; whereby we may
in some sort see two things:

1. For measure.
First, the measure of hells misery upon a man in it; being even as if a man,
in his perfect strength and senses, were struggling, and in the very pinch, and
agony of the last and fiercest act of death, laboring under the unspeakeable
horror, and unsupportable, and untolerable pain of it, and in kind and degree
much more; as a man, in that death of hell, shall be made more capable, and
spiritually sensible of misery, than he is here; and whereas, here a man can
die but by one mortal pain, there shall the damned be under all pains and
mortal miseries in their extremities, to the utmost measure and degree, that
those damned wretches are capable of, with exact spiritual sense and feeling
of the same; besides their woe, for want of that infinite happiness in heaven,
whereof they are deprived.

2. The durance of v.
Secondly, we may see here, the everlastingnesse and endless continuance of
that death in hell, which shall be as long as the damned shall have being,
which shall be ever; that they may be capable of suffering, to the utmost of
their capacity; so that, their being gives neither ease nor comfort; but they
shall ever be in the same extremity of death, for evermore; without any
relaxation, or abatement; which fills them with utter desperation, and
unexpressible woe. Note.
For, they have all that can make any creature miserable, viz. in hell, they
have both life and death; by their living there, they are capable of, and do
suffer the punishment of sensible misery; and by that death, they have
punishment of damage, in deprivation of all comfortable good; and so,
whatsoever we can be, in the absence of good, and in presence of evil, they
have the same.

. 3. Concerning the wills object, and faultiness.
Object of the will is good.
That we may surther understand how a man can will his own death, we are to
observe that the will never chooses to do a thing sub ratione mali, as it is
evil; but wills a thing that is either in itself good, or apparently such in
our apprehension; or else, it chooses a thing that in itself is evil, but is
comparatively good, in respect of another evil, which in our judgment or
sense is greater or worser: and so no man chooses death for it self, but in
respect of some conceited good imagined to be had by it, and not otherwise: or,
to have a lesser evil for a greater, by that exchange: as Saul, who, that he
might escape the mocking of the heathen, killed himself 1 Samuel 31.4.
: so that, no man is absolutely willing, in the act of selfmurder, but
conditionally; because, he uses it not for itself, but as a means for a
further end and good.

The kinds of good.
Will has ever good for the object of it: but of this good there is a double
triplicity: First, bonum animi, corporis and fortune: Good of the mind, of the
body, and of wealth and preferment. Secondly, there is Bonum utile, jucundum
and honestum: Good profitable, pleasant, and honest: Of these goods, the will
does not ever respect bonum honestum, or morale, virtuous or moral good, but
often makes choice of profit, or pleasure, as the greater good, before the
other: and still bonum, or good, is the object of the will.

Note.
From hence it is evident, that the error of the will is not all, nor ever from
the misinformation of the judgment, but that the will is in it self very
fanlty, in three respects.

Wills faultines. 1. It obeyes not the sound understanding.
First, in that it does not ever listen unto, nor obey the true and good
directions of the understanding, but rejects them, or inclines against them,
according to that old saying, Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor: I see
and approve better things, but follow the worser, the bounds of the
understanding and will are not of equal extent.

2. It submns to the affections.
Secondly, the fault of the will is, that it submits it self to receive
information, and direction from the affections, passions, and senses, following
the same without reasons precedent trial and approbation, whereby it inverts
the course of nature, rebels against its Sovereign, and subjects its self to
her servants, and labors so to enthrall the understanding to the same.

3. Corrupted by innated pravity
Thridly, will is corrupted by innated pravity, whereby it is more inclinable
to erroneous directions, than to true; readier to move to vice, than to virtue;
and by means of that pravity, either inbred in it self, or acquired, by
impressions from inferior faculties and senses, it labors to deceive and
corrupt the mind and understanding, that the same may determine and give
direction according to wills own disposition; whereby it comes to pass, that
the will ever follows the last determination of the practical understanding,
and yet is not, therefore, blameless; For, sin is vitium suppositi, the vice
of the person; and therefore, is in all the parts and faculties of the same,
especially in the will, which is the primus motor, the first mover in all
practical actions, which are sinful, but as they are voluntary.

The motions of man's will are very diverse, and often contrary. Will variable.
For, although will in man is answerable to instinct in irrational creatures;
and to natural inclinations in insensibles; yet it moves much more variously,
both, as man is compounded of many more various things; whereof every one
conferres to his motion natural and moral; according to its nature: and also,
as man and his will is passively affected, and wrought upon, by motives within
and without, and as his reason directs, and persuades variously, according to
occasions, whereupon it follows, Note.
that man is the most uncertain, and unstable creature in the world, most
restless, and tossed, as the Sea, with tempests and storms in his will,
distracting him in his resolutions, and performances: una eurusque notusque
ruunt, creberque procellis Affricus, as the East, the South, and West winds of
contrary thoughts, making their incursions at once upon him, whereby, he is
sometime driven, and cast away upon the deadly rock of direct self-murder, with
the furious impetuosity of his own self-perverted judgment, will, and
affections.

. 4. Observations from the knowledge of direct self-murder.
Uses.
The uses of this knowledge of direct bodily-self-murder, what it is; are
specially three.

1. Information or judgment.
First, it serves to inform our understanding, in two points.

1. Horriblenesse of self-murder. Degrees of it.
First, touching the execrable horriblenesse of the fact of this self-murder:
which is seen in three degrees.

1.
First, in that it is an unjust taking away of the life of a man, contrary to
Gods Commandment, Genesis 9.5. and to the sixth Commandment of the Law, which
makes it to be murder.

2.
Secondly, in that it is the so taking away of a man's own life, which is most
near and dear to him, which makes the fact to be self-murder, and is directly
opposite to the Law of nature.

3.
Thirdly, in that it is a fact done by a man's self upon himself, advisedly,
wittingly and willingly, which makes it to be direct self-murder, intended to
the highest degree of that kind; being complicated with, and compounded of
many pernicious ingredients, raising it to the highest pitch of poysonfull
disposition: The greatness of self-murder.
which both aggravates the sin of self-murder, to a transcendency of wretched
badnesse, and also shows the horrible malice and cunning of Satan, that was a
murderer from the beginning Ioh. 8.44.
, in endeavoring man's destruction by man's self, in such a damnable manner and
degree of finning, as the devil himself, without man's own help, cannot
possibly effect, both to the destruction of Gods Image in him, and also to the
certain damnation of the self murderers soul, which by that fact, the devil
labors to gain to himself, to make man partner with him in his torments; and
out of malice against God, to disgraoe and deface his Image.

2. Man's perverseness.
The second point, wherein the former doctrine serves to inform our
understanding, is concerning the perverseness of the nature of man, and the
excessive exorbitancy of his courses; whereby he is subject, and breaks out to
kill himself; which practice of self-murder all other creatures do abhor,
by the instinct of nature: and so we see, that the most noble creatures are
obnoxious and subject to commit the greatest errors, by their abuse of their
most eminent parts; where oby they do abase and deject themselves into a
miserable estate, as far beneath other creatures, by violating the Law of
nature, as ever God had advanced them above them; as is apparent, by the fall
of the devils: for, the grievousnesse of sin is to be measured, not only by
the matter, and act of it, but also, by the quality of the doers of it, and by
the circumstances of doing thereof.

Use 2. How to behave our selves to our selves.
The second use is, to admonish us, that we are not only to be careful, how
we behave our selves, in things concerning God, and our neighbors; but also
how we behave our selves toward our selves, and in our own affairs and
goods: because, our love to our selves, is the rule of our love to our
neighbors; whom we are to love, as our selves Levit. 19.18.
, and to whom we are to do, as we would be done to by them Mat. 7.12.
: and therefore, it behooves the rule to be straight; otherwise, all things
measured by it must be crooked: and so from him that carelessly fails toward
himself, no right performances can be done by him to any other: qui sibi ne
quam, cui bonus? to whom can he be good, that is naught to himself?

Use 3. A man is to fear, and watch himself.
And therefore, seeing we often prove our own greatest enemies, and do as
much evil to our selves, as the devil himself can desire, and more than he
by himself, or by any other means, is able to effect, or bring to pass upon
us; it is requisite and needful that we be afraid of our selves, and that
we neither trust our selves, nor trust to ourselves; but that we be careful,
and do watch over ourselves, neither giving way to our own opinions, nor
purposes, before we do examine them and find them conformable to the truth:
all things are to be suspected that come from an Enemy. Timeo Danaos and dona
ferentes: and a man has no such dangerous enemy to himself as himself,
because of his neerenesse to himself, of his advantages of prevailing against
himself, and of his deceitful cunning to beguile himself; so exercising all
hostility and mischief upon himself, under pretense and color of love and
friendship to himself, he is self-betrayed, and self-destroyed.

Use 3. To discern things that differ.
The third use of the former doctrine of self-murder is, that thereby we may
discriminate, and know diverse cases that are very like this self-murder, and
yet properly are not direct self-murder; nor the doers thereof thereby
perishing, self-murderers: the which exempt cases are of four sorts.

. 5. Of certain exempt cases. Exempt cases.

1. Men without reason, are not self-murderers.
The first is, when a man, destitute of understanding, or of the use of reason,
kills himself, as a child without discretion, a natural fool, a mad man in
his mad fits, one in his sleep; or in such sits or sickness as is accompanied
with a delirium or phrensey, as, in a calenture; the same is not in them
properly self-murder: Reasons why.
because, understanding in them is desicient, or passively depraved, and not
actively and wilfully done by themselves: so that they cannot judge morally,
nor sometimes naturally, of their own actions; neither are able rightly to
direct them, in a state of that impotency of understanding: neither is such an
act in such persons to be deemed willing, or an act of the will, so long as
reason is wanting, without which it is not possible for a man's will rationally
to move.

And therefore, in such prancks, and mad acts, the will whereby they are done,
is but brutus impetus, abrute motion or violence, which motion is not from the
understanding so much, as from accidents, making a man not to be himself: and
such a man in doing such an act, whereby he kills himself, intends not the
same upon knowledge, to the end to kill himself; and therefore, neither in the
Courts of earth, nor heaven, are such persons condemned as self murderers, for
killing themselves, because, they are not properly so much agents, as
sufferers; both in the act doing; and also in the effect, or death thereupon
ensuing.

Case 2. About self-killing ignorantly
The second exempt case herein is, when a man kills himself ignorantly, not
knowing what he does; or not knowing the mortal nature of the means, whereby
he does it. As he that eats poison, the nature whereof he knows not; or when
a man does kill himself out of a rash precipitancy, and sudden unpremeditate
pang, and fit of forcible passion, or temptation, tempestuously raised by
others; making violent impressions upon him, suppressing reason, and
captivating the will to do that, which otherwise he abhorres; and for which,
in the Court of heaven, he is not properly a direct self-murderer; because such
a fact before God, is but a kind of chancemedly; when it proceeds not out of
advised judgment and will; but that the doer thereof is therein quoad
principium motus, for the original of his motion in that act, more passive
than active; Comparison.
as a Ship that may be overset in a storm, and as persons possessed by
unclean spirits; that by their means did cast themselves into the fire, and
water Mark 9.22.
; wherein, if they had perished, they had not been self-murderers, when they
were not in their own power; nor was it an act of their own free judgment
and will.

Case 3. Killing by mischance.
The third case is, when a man kills himself by mischance, or misadventure, in
his doing of an act of lawful employment, without any intent to take away his
own life. As a man in his attempt to save another out of the fire, or water,
is by his act drowned, or burnt to death himself; or if a man be killed by the
breaking of a piece of his own shooting off at another mark, or the like:
This is an act of God in his special providence, taking away the life of a
man, Exodus 21.13. and is not an act of self-murder; because the actors end and
intention is not to kill himself, but to do a lawful duty; neither does that
act of his, in regard of that mortal effect of it, proceed from his judgment
and will, but to him is merely casual, and contrary to his expectation and
desire; and so in that respect he is merely passive, and so formaliter, and in
truth not a self-murderer.

Case 4. Self-killing in discharge of ones calling.
The fourth exempt case is, when a man in discharge of his calling, does
wittingly, and willingly such an act, whereby he knows he must die; as did
Samson, of whom Augustine says, that Spiritus latenter hoc jusserat, the
spirit did secretly command it; in this case such an one is not a direct
self-murderer; because he intends not primarily his own death, but the
discharge of his necessary duty, otherwise not feasible. And this death is not
from an act of his own mere judgment and will, but from Gods; in obedience
whereunto he lays down his life.

Case 5. About phrenticks.
The fifth exempt case is, of phrentick persons, of whom when it shall happen
any to kill himself in his fit of frenzy, he cannot justly be said to be a
direct self-murderer; (nor yet an indirect self-murderer, where his frenzy is
not contracted by his own fault) because of his defect of the use of his
understanding in his act of self-killing, whereof then he knows not the moral
nature, neither properly can he be said to be a voluntary agent therein;
because then he has not a will determined by any act of the practical
understanding; but does it only by a bruit passion, or unreasonable internal
impulsion, equivalent to inforcement, from negation, or their faultlesse defect
of power of sufficient opposition: which is evident by that which they are
habitually to the contrary, manifested when they have any Lucide intervalls; or
when they were, or are in their sound minds, always abhorring such a fact. Of
this see more, Cap. 15.. 22. and Cap. 18.. 2.

CHAP. 13. Of direct self-murderers.
. 1. Practice and habit gives denomination.
One act of selfmurder gives denomination to those that do it, and why.
A Self-murderer has denomination from his fact of self-murder; whereby it
stains him with an ill and odious name: although a man properly is not to be
named from one single act, but from an habitual disposition, and continued
practice; yet here one act gives the name, because it proceeds from that which
is in a man by way of habit; and is an act that in regard of the extinguishment
of its subject, can be done but once by one body; but if they should live
again in the same state, yet upon the same motives and disposition would
again and again do the same; as we see by the practice of those that after
restraint, or disappointment of effecting their purpose therein, do not cease
still to attempt the same until it be done, and therefore such a fact is
equivalent to a constant practice: if any body be impatient and ashamed of the
imputation of the name of any notorious vice, then should he be most careful
to avoid the thing, in respect whereof, the same is due unto him: Observe
He that has the principal must have the appurtenances, the name of any crime
must go with the thing to which it belongs; the odious repute of the name
shows the vileness of the vice, which is far more to be abhorred than the
nickname of, or from it. Comparison.
But, men are commonly like witless children, more afraid of shadows than
substance; as children are gastered with mentioning of Goblins and bugheares;
so many men are startled with the disgraceful names of vice imputed unto them,
who are not at all afraid of the vices which they entertain, and for which
the names of the same are due to them, who do deserve to brook the name of
the master whom they serve, and of the trade which they practice. Why should
any man serve such a master, or exercise such a trade whereof he is ashamed,
and would not brook their names?

That some men do murder themselves is apparent.
. 2. How it is by Scripture apparent that many men do murder themselves.
That many do murder and destroy themselves by their acting of that horrible
unnatural fact and sin upon their own bodies, is apparent three ways.

1. By the Scriptures.
First, by the Scriptures of the old and new Testament; in the old Testament we
read of Saul, and of his armor-bearer, that they killed themselves. 1 Samuel
31. Of Abimelech that did the same by his own command. Judges 9.54. Also of
Ahitophel, that he hanged himself. 2 Samuel 17.23. Of Zimri, that he burnt
himself to death. 1 King. 16.18.

In the new Testament we read of Judas, that, though he were one of Christ's
disciples, hanged himself. Mat. 27.5.

Which intimates,
That the Scripture witnesses so much, it intimates to us three things.

1. The certainty of such facts.
First, it evidences to us the certainty of such facts; because the Scripture
is infallibly true, as well in matter of history as of doctrine: It records them
not for imitation, but for condemnation: which is plain, if we consider how
ungratious the persons were that did it; the manner of the Scriptures
propounding, and relating of the same, with dislike of it; and the doctrine
elsewhere in Gods word, and sound reason condemning of it.

2. The antiquity of self-murder.
Secondly, the Scriptures recording of such facts, shows the antiquity of this
vile sin; which does not justify, but demonstrate the inveterate
maliciousness of it, rooted and strengthened by age; whose continuation from
age to age brings forth every year new crops.

3. It falls out in the Church.
Thirdly, it manifests that even this horrible sin has fallen out, and still
does fall out in the Church of God, among the visible members thereof, and by
professors of the truth.

Observe.
Which points out unto us, that what sins soever fall out elsewhere, may, and
do fall out sometimes within the visible Church. 1 Cor. 10.13.


It is not therefore to be said, that the doctrine, or profession of the truth
is the cause of the same, or of any such horrible facts breaking out in the
Church, where the Gospel is professed and practiced: The truth is blameless.
neither is the Word, nor Gods worship, nor true Professors to be upbraided,
nor condemned for such things, as are not by them caused, nor approved; but are
condemned, reproved, and punished.

Horible crimes fall out in the Church. Causes.
The causes why such horrible facts fall out sometimes in the Church, among
professors; are two.

1. The devils. malice.
First, the raging malice of the devil, specially against the Church, and
Professors of the truth; whereby he endeavors two things: 1. To scandal the
truth.
First, to scandalize and disgrace the truth, that so he may keep off others
from embraceing of it, incense them against it, and harden them in their own
wicked self-pleasing ways. Woe to the world because of offenses. Mat. 18.7.


2. To blemish the Church.
Secondly, he endeavors thereby to blemish the Church, and to disturb the
comfort and growth of godly professors, and to sift and try them to fall; that
by such reproachful crimes God may be dishonored.

2. Rage of man's corruption upon opposition.
The second cause of those notorious facts within the Church, is the rage of
man's corruption, when it prevails, and gets head and vent against the damme
and opposition of grace and truth, restraining and mortifying of it; which then
is irritated and rages the more furiously, when it gets advantage, and breaks
out; Comparison.
as waters fed with continual springs, when they overswell the banks that shut
them up, do impetuously and unresistably bear all down before them, where
they break out.

Why gross sins are most offensive in professors.
Sinful and gross wicked facts breaking out in the Church, and among
professors of religion, are more scandalous, and more condemned, because they
reproach religion, and subject the truth to blasphemy.

. 3. Self-murderers are apparent by history.
The second way of discovery of self-murderers. Histories. 1. Heathen.
The second way whereby it is seen that diverse persous do murder themselves,
is humane histories, both Heathen and Christian, Civil, and Ecclesiastical,
which are full of such woeful examples: as Livie tells us of Lucretia; others
of Cleopatra, Cato Vticensis, Empedocles, Cleombrotus, Ostorius, Pomponius
Atticus, Tullius Marcellinus, Cleanthes, Dido, and many others; and Baldovin
reports, that Inter Turcas Barbaresque gentes Indiaesunt qui se in gratiam
suorum dominorum a muris aut turribus praecipitant, in signum summae
submissionis and observantiae: Among the Turks and barbarous nations of the
Indies, there are some that in favor of their masters, do throw themselves
headlong from walls and towers, in sign of the highest submission and respect.

Heathens did murder themselves.
But, it may seem very strange that Heathens in whom nature was so prevalent
with humane reason, should kill themselves, having so little hope of a better
life, and all their comfort bounded within this present world.

Reasons.
That they did it is apparent, whereof three reasons may be assigned.

1. Want of grace in Christ.
First, their want of grace and faith in Christ to comfort and content their
minds, and to strengthen and enable them patiently to suffer adversities; and
their want of wills to be in every state and thing obedient to God; who leaving
them to themselves, they sunk under the power of their own temptations. So
wretched is man's state out of Christ.

2.
Secondly, many Heathens killed themselves out of an affectation of honor and
immortality; either by fame on earth; or by happiness in a better place after
death, whereof some of them had an obscure glimpse; to which, they knew no
better speedier way, than by this kind of death; which proceeded from their
ignorance of a better course, to bring them to what they desired; and from want
of foresight of destruction in the end of that means which they used. So
unhappy a thing it is to be without divine direction.

3. Freedom from evils.
Thirdly, of the Heathens that knew no better good than what they had in this
world; and aimed at no higher end in all their proceedings, than their own
good; diverse of them being in calamitous conditions, without hope of other
freedom, and under despair of ability to endure as was fit; by this course of
self-murder labored to free themselves from these evils, after which they
looked for no more. This is the wisdom of flesh and blood, of corrupt nature
and carnal reason, such as was taught by the Stoics, who were the best moral
Philosophers among the heathen.

Observe They thought self-murder to be lawful.
Where we are to observe, that it is no wonder that such did fall into such
notorious enormities, so long as they thought the same lawful and fit to be
done; and wanted both that illumination in the truth, and also the power of
grace in Christ; which now God has bestowed upon Christians.

But, it is more to be marvelled at, that Christians, who have means of more
abundant knowledge and grace, should dare willingly to run into the same
flagitious and capital courses of the Heathen; being Christians in profession,
but heathens in manners and practice. Whereas the consideration of the parties
murdering themselves being Heathens, should deter Christians from such vile
facts, that they may not be worse than heathens in their practice, from whom
they are so far divided in profession.

Self-murdering Christians are heathens.
But Christians that kill themselves upon the same reasons that the heathen
do, do thereby declare, that in this point they have nothing of Christians,
but the name, and otherwise are heathens; and in that respect are justly to be
debarred Christian burial.

2. Ecclesiastical histories.
We also find the like examples in Ecclesiastical and Christian histories;
as in Eusebius his history, lib. 8. cap. 6. Where he says, Quo tempore fama
est viros and mulieres etiam divina and inexplicabili alacritate sua sponte in
rogum insiluisse: In the which time (of persecution) the fame is, that both men
and women did of their own accord leap into the fire, with divine and
unutterable cheerfulness: and Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 3. de virginibus.
and others, do note diverse professors to have done the like; as Pelagia,
Apollonia, and many others. Observe.
Which shows to us, that as all mankind are sprung from the same root, and
are infected with the same disease; so are we all liable to commit the same
sins, if the Lord do not renew and keep us. All are sick of the same disease
So that we need not so much to think it strange, a member of the visible
Church kills himself; as to admire the gracious goodness of God in keeping of
us, that very many do not the same, in regard both of our own wicked natural
disposition, and outward temptations; whereby what betydes men, may betyde all
men in the same case.

Observe. To depend upon God.
Here we are to observe, that those examples of self-murder, recorded within
the Church, are not registered for imitation, but for caution; that all
Christians may be stirred up the more carefully to cleave to God, and thank him
for their preservation, even from this horrible act of self-murder, whereinto
many professing Christianity have fallen.

. 4. Self-murderers known by experience.
The third way of discovery of self-murderers, Experience.
Thirdly, that many do murder themselves, it is clear by woeful experience in
all places and ages; notwithstanding, that they may be terrified from the same,
both by the fearful examples of manifold wreckes of that kind; and also by
the doctrine of the truth condemning that vile practice; besides manifold other
restraints, and ignominious censures of that odious course: against all which,
such breakings out do show the continued rage and power of Satan against
Mankind; and manifest man's madness and perverseness still in all places,
furiously running upon this most horrible and dismal sin. Hurt of
self-murder.
Whereby men do most ignominiously shut up the period of their lives, with the
loss of their good names, and with the destruction of their souls for ever;
depriving their posterity of their estates, and uncomfortably overshadowing
them with the shameful disgrace, and ill example of their execrable fact of
self-murder.

Uses.
The uses of this point are specially two.

1. To be observant of occurrences.
First, it serves to teach us to be observant of the daily occurrences that
fall out from time to time; that thereby we may grow, by sense in
experimental knowledge, both of facts done, and also of the nature and causes
of the same; whereby we may be wise, not only for to direct our own course
aright; but also may be able prudently to advise others, and to give a right
estimate of things that fall out, and make a holy use of them. So that the
longer we live, and the world stands, we should be the wiser and better, in
regard of the helps that we have to know Gods will; both by his Word and
works, that we may not be carelessly secure of the most heinous crimes: Note.
but, without grace and Gods protection, neither doctrine, nor example is
sufficient to withstand men's impetuous wilful running upon destruction.

The lamentable spectacles of manifold executions, for murders, and robberies;
we may think might affright all men from committing the like crimes, which we
see it does not. Comparison.
So as the multitude of Shipwracks terrifies not men from going to Sea, neither
do examples of frequent miscariages, by self-murder, prevail with graceless
men, to hinder them from the like facts; Self-murderers not deterred from the
fact.
who do thereby rather harden themselves to attempt and perpetrate the same.

Use 2. Beware of self-muder.
The second use of this point is, to admonish us to abhor, and beware of this
odious sin of self-murder, which runs through all times, and sorts of people:
although we may seem to be out of danger of it, in regard of the present
distance and opposition between us and it, yet are we not to be over-secure.
For, the sins which at first we seem to loath, afterward by degrees, through
negligence, or venturing upon the causes and occasions thereof, men do
embrace, and commit; as we see by the example of Hazael, 2 Kings 8.13.

Motions of self-murder most hardly shaken off.
And of all sins, even the motions, and settled purposes of self-murder, are
most hardly shaken off; because all unnatural and hideous sins breaking
impetuously through the strongest hedges and pales of opposition, and
outragiously overflowing the banks of all resistance, both of nature and
grace, have nothing left of sufficient force to withstand them, but that they
rage in that high and transcendent degree without shame or restraint, as they
list: Note.
the most gross and unnatural sins are ever done by desperately wicked men,
with the least remorse of conscience, and with the greatest shamelessenesse and
obstinacy of will, and indivertiblenesse of endeavors.

The use of examples.
Touching the use of the examples of self-murderers, Augustine says well, Non
quaerimus utrum factum, sed utrum faciendum. Sana ratio exemplis anteponenda
est: We enquire not whether self-murder has been done, but whether it ought
to have been done. Sound reason is to be preferred before examples.

CHAP. 14. Of the usual means and furtherances of self-murdering.
. 1. Of the means of self-murdering.
1. Means.
ABout the fact of Self-murder, we are to consider the means thereunto used;
and the application, and method thereof, by self-murderers.

None lawful for that use.
Means there are none proper, of lawful ordination, for to do evil; because
that, the same ought not at all to be done: but, man either abuses good, or
devises ill means of his own invention, to do naughtiness and mischief
withal.

Means abused.
The means abused by self-murderers to kill themselves, are of two sorts.

1. Good.
First, such as be destinated and appropriated by God for the good, and
preservation of man's life: as, water, fire, swords are, and the like; which a
self-murderer perverts, to drown, burn, stab himself to death, etc.

2. Evil.
The second kind of means of self-murder be those, that be evil and sinful;
in themselves fitter to destroy, than to save; such as, eating, and drinking of
poison; throwing ones self over rocks, (as did the Circumcellians.) or, out of
windows; or, from off high places and turrets, with intent to kill themselves;
as the devil would have had our Savior Christ to have done Mat. 4.6.
; going unwarrantably into the mouth of destruction, with purpose to be slain,
commanding others to do it; as Abimelech did, Judge. 9.54 hanging ones self,
as Judas, and Ahitophel did; fretting, or starving ones self purposely to
death, as Pomponius Atticus did; or, in mortal sickness, or wounds, rejecting
the helps of cure by Physic, or other means; and disordering ones self
purposely, that they may thereby die, and the like: so that, for this vile act
men are enabled by all the furniture and power of hell, and what their own wit
can invent or abuse for that end.

Observe. It is hard to do good: easy to do evil.
From hence we may observe; First, that whereas, when we are to do good, we
are hardly drawn to it, and do excuse our backwardness, by pretense of
disability, and want of means; and by alleging of impediments and letts, as
Moses did Exodus 4.10, 13.
: the sluggard pretends that a Lion is in the way Prove. 26.13.
: But, when we are about to do evil, we make no such objections, but find
abundance of helps, with opportunities, and great frowardness, and readiness
to do the same.

Causes 1. Man's disposition.
The causes hereof are specially two; First, internal, in man's own will, and
disposition, far more prone to evil, than to good: where will and inclination
are to a thing, they will find means.

Causes 2. The devil, and evils easiness.
Secondly, there is an external cause hereof; to wit, the devil, who does
powerfully instigate, and help to do mischief, according to men's tempers, and
the outward occasion: and the work of doing evil is far more easy, than of
doing good; because of the entitie that is in goodness, and the non entity
that is in evil; goodness is an effect of power, and evil is more properly
an effect of impotency: to pull down is more easy than to build up; to err,
than to go aright.

Observe. 2. Self-murderers are guilty of abuse of Gods Creatures.
Secondly, we may here observe, that he that is a self-murderer is guilty, not
only of the vile act of self-murder, but also of the abuse of Gods good
creatures, and of his own abilities, in perverting the same to that unnatural
end, contrary to Gods ordination, whereby they are, in this respect, subject to
vanity Romans 8.20.
: so that, a self-murderer, erects a counterwork of creation, and use of things
against God, while he gives being to self-murder, against both nature and
religion; so setting up his own works of evil, against Gods that are good;
and disposing of Gods good works, to his own vile ends, contrary to Gods will
and ordination: Note.
whereby it is apparent, that such wicked persons are factiously-rebellious
against God, and disturbers of the peace and tranquillity of all the frame of
nature and grace, contrary to the Laws and ordinances of God. Sin is in the
world, as pestilentiall humors in the body, which disorder and endanger all
where they are.

. 2. Of the application of the means of self-killing.
2. Application.
For application of the aforesaid means to the wicked act of self-murder;
there are three things considerable.

In it 3. things considerable. 1. Predestination and determination of the end.
First, the self-murderers premeditation, and determination of the end, which
is his own death to be effected by himself; so setting limits to his own
days, as if he were his own absolute Master; and that he were so unhappy,
that his life were worse than death, which death all other creatures do
abhor; and that he were so desperate and forlorn, for want of present mercy,
or future hope; and that he were so forsaken of all, that he can find none to
rid him out of his life and misery, but that he must kill himself; so
hastening himself, by a most woeful exchange, into a far greater misery, by
so doing, than ever it was possible for him to suffer in this world, by living,
although that therein he should live for ever, under the most exquisite
torments, that here he can be capable of.

2. Election of means.
The second thing considerable, in the application of the means to the acting
of self-murder, is the election and choice of the particular means to effect
the same: all self-murderers do not choose to die, by the same means; For,
then the way of so dying would be unvariably one and the same, in them all.

Wherein a self-murderer observes three things.
In election of means to kill himself, a self-murderer observes specially
three things.

1. Such as best agree with his temper.
First, he is careful to make choice of such means, as do best fit, and agree
with his natural temper and sex; and are least formidable, and terrible to
his fancy, or sense, in the execution, such as are familiar to him by daily
use; or such as in his judgment, or sense, are least horrible, or painful; as
Cleopatra, that chose to kill her self by Aspes, making her die sleeping.

2. Such as be readiest.
Secondly, a self-murderer makes choice of such means to kill himself, that
are readiest at hand, and easiest for him to have, according to his sex,
calling, occasions, or employment.

3. Most certain to effect death.
Thirdly, he chooses to use those means, which, in his opinion, are most
certain to effect that end, most easily, speedily, and unperceivedly from the
knowledge of others, that he may not be crossed of his design and aim, nor be
long in pain.

Observe. 1. It is easy to do evil.
Here we may observe, that there is variety, and choice of means, to do any
one evil, or sin: which shows with what facility and ease we may sin, and
perish; and with what difficulty and hardness we may do good, and be saved;
which cannot be done by such multiplicity of means, and ways: a right line
can be drawn but one way, and the truth is simple, and not manifold.

2. The folly and madness of self-murderers.
Secondly, here appears the folly and madness of those, that are so
circumspect and careful about choice of the means, whereby they would die,
and are so regardlesse of the moral manner how they die, and of their
consequent condition, that will follow upon such a death: Observe.
every gross and notorious sin is ever committed with a spice of madness
accompanying the same; because, it is done against the dictat of sound reason,
and of true religion; and therefore, such men are so frequently in the Proverbs
called fools; in respect not only of the thing they do, but also in regard,
both of the reasons of their proceedings, and also of the fruit and end of
their courses: touching whom it may be said, that they have sown the wind, and
they shall reap the whirle wind, as says the Prophet Hosea 8.7.
.

. 3. Of the method of self-murderers.
The method and manner of execution of self-murder.
The method and manner, that a self-murderer observes in execution of
self-murder, consists in three branches.

1. He observes opportunities.
First, he watches and hunts after all opportunities; and affects retired
solitariness, that he may without hinderance kill himself.

2. Secrecy.
Secondly, he affects secrecy, and expedition to accomplish that vile act;
upon performing whereof all his endeavors and power being bent; and being
deserted and left of God, and his good Angels; and the devil instigating and
helping him; and all means fitly concurring for that execution, the
self-murderers success, and achievement herein is quick and great, beyond
expectation: except the Lord be minded here to punish such an one with pain,
as well as in the life to come.

3. Obstinacy.
Thirdly, a self-murderer is constant, or rather obstinate, in his resolution
and endeavors to kill himself, contrary to all good counsel, letts, and
impediments objected to hinder him from the same; in so much, that if such
self-murderers, at any time, be crossed of their opportunities, and
disappointed in their attempts of killing themselves; or, that they be
hindered, or do but hurt, and not forthwith kill themselves; they are sorry for
their disappointment, and do continue more desperately their resolutions, and
endeavors, until it be done by them: the medicine does here irritate the
disease, which is a deplored and desperate case: so that they must perish, if
the Lord God do not mercifully step in to pull them, by repentance, out of that
fire of destruction; or, by some other overruling means prevent it, that by
living they may be saved.

Observe. It is dangerous to give way to Satan, in this point, wherein he is
hardly resisted.
Here we may learn how dangerous and pernicious a thing it is to give way to
Satan, or to our own exorbitant thoughts, in this or in any such ill, or
unnatural motions to sin; For, by entertainment thereof, we are taught from
hell to be pregnant, ingenious, industrious, diligent, and obstinately
desperate to commit the same; in the mean time, being restless until it be
done: the execution, or performance whereof is most hardly prevented, where the
doing of it is peremptorily resolved, and all our endeavors set to accomplish
it; the reasons hereof are two.

Reason 1. Against knowledge and resistance.
First, in regard that it is concluded, and resolved upon, and attempted with
the overthrow, or contempt of so great knowledge, and resistance, natural and
divine; against which when such purposes prevail, there is nothing left to
withstand the performing of the same; but that such outrageous corruption,
having broken over the banks that impaled it, may rage and range, without
resistance, as it list.

Reason 2. The danger of self-murder not known by experience.
Secondly, the performance of self-murder, resolved upon, is hardly prevented;
because, the true danger and evil thereof, in the full extent, and latitude
thereof, is not known by experience to the living; for, of those that die so
by their own hands, none do return to tell tales how it fares with them
afterward: except we credit the report of Virgill, who affirms from Aeneas
his observation, in his fained descent into hell, who there did see
self-murderers in a very low region, and miserable estate; that would now full
gladly endure poverty, and all hard travel, and miseries in this world, so as
they might be in it again, out of their present miseries.

Virgil. -- Quam vellent aethere in alto,
Nunc and pauperiem, and duros perferre labores!
Self-murder is such an act, as a man can do but once in all, because it
concludes and finishes his life; so as he can have no more time either to get
experimental knowledge of it, what it is; or yet to be able by repentance, to
reform it; seeing it is not in man's power to quicken, and give himself life
again, that he may use it better than he has done. And therefore in this
respect self-murder is the most dangerous and worst sin that a man can
commit: for after other sins, how heinous soever, a man may have time, and
means of repentance and salvation; but after this he can have none.

CHAP. 15. The self-murderers motives to kill themselves.
. 1. Men by abused reason sin worst.
The noblest creatures fail most.
ALthough that the crime of self-murder be naturally most horrible; yet men only
of all creatures do venture upon it, and do it: the noblest creatures are
subject to commit the foulest errors, as men and Angels; and of men, the
enlightened only can sin that mortal sin against the holy Ghost: for, they
that are able to do most good, by perverting of their abilities, are able to
do most mischief. David in that respect was more afraid of Ahitophel 2 Samuel
15.31.
than of all the rest that were against him.

Reason abused
But, that man may do this horrible fact of self murder more boldly and
securely, without being overruled by the check of his conscience; he abuses
his reason to encourage him to do that, the ugliness, and unnaturalness
whereof might otherwise deter and astonish him from it.

For, all such gross facts, condemned by the light of nature, and apparent
reason, man does veil and mask under specious pretexts, before he dares
venture to enterprise the doing of them in cold blood; and likewise he obscures
the contrary virtuous courses, by aspersions of titles, and names of disgrace;
laboring, if it were possible, to make virtue vice, and vice virtue;
condemning the generation of the righteous, and justifying the wicked; turning
hell into heaven, and heaven into hell: because the majesty and glory of the
truth is such, that none dares to look it on the open face, and revile and
smite it; but, as they first attire and mask it under the habit and name of
vice; as the wicked Jews did first blindfold our blessed Savior, and then
stroke him on the face. Luke 22.64.


So far does man abuse his reason, whereby he excells beasts; that thereby
he does make himself worse than the worst of beasts, of whom none will kill
themselves in any case.

No reason for self-murder.
For a man to murder himself there is no reason indeed: for although he does
it not but (as he thinks) upon good reason; yet, this reason of his is
neither from the nature of that action, as if it were in it self a lawful
duty to be done; nor yet is it reason elicite, or drawn out from inbred
principles and motives in nature, or from other light acquire by the truth of
God: because there can be no good reason against the Word and Law of God, who
is the Lord of nature. For reason is never repugnant, or contradictory to it
self; neither is any thing opposite to reason in any thing, but in
unreasonablenesse; as nothing is opposite to truth, but error.

And for nature in man, it cannot naturally yield any reason from it self, why
it should destroy it self, because it is monstrous that one should be two; and
that division should be in unity, and that instead of good, it should attract
to it self evil.

But all the pretense of reason that a self-murderer can have to kill himself,
is only from external motives, which are without a man's self; whereupon, and
from whence self-murderers do impertinently conclude, and endeavor to kill
themselves.

No true cause of evil.
But there is no true cause or reason why any man should do evil; no not for
the greatest good, should we do the least sin: because there is no evil so
great as is sin; in respect both of the nature thereof, whereby it is most
contrary to God, who is the greatest and chiefest good; and also, in regard of
the merits and effects thereof; procuring and imbittering all evil to those
that sin. For of evil properly comes nothing but evil; as of naught and
naught comes nothing but naught; the effect cannot exceed in goodness the
nature and virtue of its cause.

. 2. Of motives in general to self-murder, there can be none warrantably
sufficient.
External motives to self-murder.
Neither is there indeed any external motive sufficient of it self, to induce
and persuade a man to kill himself, by any true reason that can be in, or from
the motive to do such an act, without respect of a conceit of good ensuing
upon the act of self murder, to the self-murderer.

But, in regard that these motives work not upon all to do that act of
self-murder; it is from the disposition, and qualities of the persons that are
therewith affected, and wrought upon to do the same, and not properly from the
motives themselves: for then all men, by the same motives, should do the same
act of self-murder.

Diverse.
The motives are diverse that do diversely move diverse persons to kill
themselves: for, all self-murderers do not kill themselves upon the same
occasions; some are not affected with one motive, that are affected with
another to do that fact. Arguments how weak and strong.
For, arguments are weak, or strong to several persons, as they are of deep
or shallow judgment; or, as they stand differently affected, and possessed
with prejudices suitable to their humors, designs, and ends: Whereby to some,
weak arguments are strong, and strong are weak; and by few are they
apprehended according to their due worth; which is the cause of much
unreconcileable opposition, and division in the world, and of the building of
weighty conclusions upon weak premises and foundations, and of indivertible
resolutions and practices, founded more upon passionate wilfulness, than upon
judicious reasons: Comparison.
as we see about the objects of bodily sight, the which is represented, and
conceived by us to be according to the disposition of the medium, or mean; and
of the organ or eye whereby we see them.

Note.
Which shows how needful it is for matter of reason and judgment, that we
look upon the same as it is, without all distemperature, and prejudices in our
minds.

. 3. Concerning perverted Judgment, by Laws and Custom.
These external motives of self-murder I will, for memory, and method, reduce
into eight ranks.

The first motive to self-murder, is error of judgment.
The first whereof is error of judgment; when men think, and believe, upon
deceitful grounds, that they ought, or may lawfully kill themselves, either
absolutely when they list; or in some cases, when they see it requisite in
regard of some circumstances.

Grounds of it:
The unsound grounds of this perverted judgment are four.

1. Laws and Customs.
First, Laws and Customs in some places seeming to require and warrant people
in some cases to kill themselves. As among the Heathens and Indians; In India.
where by custom or law, servants and wives, in testimony of love to their
Masters and Husbands, were wont to cast themselves into the fire to be burnt,
with the corpse of their dead masters and husbands: but the true cause of that
Law was, to restrain the frequent poisoning of masters and husbands, by their
servants and wives; and that law and custom was practiced to avoid suspicion,
and ignominy that they lived in, if they did not so kill themselves. Plutarch
reports of the Virgins of Lemnos, In Lemnos.
that customarily they hanged themselves, upon no other known cause, but
custom; and from that vile practice could not be restrained, until the same
was punished by drawing of their bodies naked through the streets, after that
they were dead; by sensible ignominy reforming a bad and odious custom. Also
among the Turks, In Turkey.
servants in testimony of their obedience, at their living masters command do
throw themselves over rocks, or into rivers, or the like; as Baldwin Lib. 3.
cap. 4. Cas. 13. circa melancholicos.
the Casuist reports: but it is most like that they do it to prevent a greater
misery if they should disobey. But, they that did so were thought to do well,
and were therefore commended; and the parties themselves did verily think,
that either they did but their duties, or that which was best for them to do;
which if they did not, then were they evil thought of, and evil entreated.

The prevailing of laws and customs against nature.
Thus far do law and custom prevail against the light of nature among the
Heathen; because they knew no higher rule to examine and try their laws by,
and therefore submit to humane ordinances absolutely, be they good or bad.

Custom, which is another nature, makes it familiar, and to seem lawful,
and commendable in the judgment of sense, that in the judgment of right
reason is most abominable. Custom is a tyrant, captivating both judement and
practice to her lore; because, what by general practice seems to have the
approbation of all, is deemed best, and most reasonable, for peaceable
conformity both in opinion, and practice; from which to be singular, is odious.

The judgment of the learned has the force of a Law.
That also which in this case obtains the force of a law, is the judgment of
the learned, and the practice of persons in esteem, commended by posterity for
the same. As among the Philosophers, the Stoics did in some cases both direct,
commend, and practice self-murder; which historians and Poets magnify, in
their high praises of Lucretia, Cato, and others for the same. The high esteem
of the persons of men of that opinion, and of the practisers of that act; and
ambition of like praises, for the like thing; has forcibly driven many men,
contrary to their own mind, to cast themselves away, upon this infernal rock.

The error of this ground.
The deceitfulness of this ground is, that it is merely humane, against
divinity, and that more is attributed to it, and built upon it than it can
bear. It is contrary to religion and reason.
For, all laws, customs, opinions, and practices of men are to be regulated
and ordered by sound reason, according to Gods word; and are subordinate to the
same, and thereby to be tried and examined: Note.
So that no law, or custom; no opinions, or practice of any men is to be
embraced, and obeyed; when the same is manifestly impious, or against Gods Law,
and right reason. As we see by the practice of the Apostles, Acts 4.19. For
that (in such cases) in conforming to man, we cannot be excused before God, for
transgressing his will. An inferior has no power over the right of his
superior, to dispense therewith.

Observe to examine.
In judgment of discretion therefore, customs, laws, opinions, and practices
of men are to be examined by reason and Gods word. Try all things, follow that
which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. because whatsoever is humane, may be, as it is
humane, erroneous; proceeding from men subject to be deceived, and err.

Caveat against vain praise.
To conclude this point, I would entreat all men, specially Scholars, and men
of sublimated brave spirits, to beware of the encomiasticall discourses of
heathen authors; either encouraging to self-murder, or commending
self-murderers: that neither the poison of that opinion, nor the example of
that vile practice, in eminent and famous persons, may insensibly corrupt and
seduce us to dare to enterprise the like upon our selves: Observe.
for, by the praise of self-murderers, and by amorous discourses, the heathen
writers have done much hurt in the Christian Church; besides the example and
dregs of their Idolatry, from which the Christian world is not yet well
purged: but among us, where there is no law, nor approved custom, doctrine,
nor practice of self-murdering; we are not in like danger, as heathens, to err
in our judgments upon this ground; seeing we have sufficient means of
knowledge, and restraint to the contrary.

. 4. Of misunderstood Scripture perverting the Judgment; and the remedy
thereof.
The second ground of errors in judgments is misunderstood Scripture.
The second ground of a deceived judgment in this point, is misunderstanding
of the Scriptures. As our Savior told the Sadduces, That they did err not
knowing the Scriptures. Mat. 22.29.


Whereof we have Origin for an example; who gelt himself upon his
misconceiving the speech of our Savior, saying, There be Eunuchs which have
made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heave^s sake, Mat. 19.12.

Martinius Christiana pietas, lib. 2 de remicidio.
Professor at Breme in Germany, tells of those that he calls Patriciani, (who
held that the substance of man's flesh was made not by God, but by the devil,)
that they held it lawful to kill themselves, to be rid of their bodies; from
which they supposed that all sin did come.

Baldwin Cas. lib. 3. c. 4. Cas. 13. circa melanchelicos.
the Casuist speaks of a certain Hermit, that threw himself into a well, to
drown himself, out of the abundance of his devotion that he had to mortify
himself; upon the mistake of the meaning of Col. 3.5. in like manner did Baals
priests, in the heat of their devotion, cut themselves. 1 Kings 18.

Gloriae sibi putibant, si seipsos ex petris praecipitarent; in ignem
conjicerent, vel alia ratione nee^ traderent.
The Circumcellions among the Donatistss did count it an honor to them, if they
did throw down themselves off rocks, cast themselves into the fire, or by any
other means kill themselves.

Augustine speaking of them in his book of heresies, written to Quo-vult-Deus;
says, that in a mad cruelty they did not spare themselves; for they used to
kill themselves by diverse kinds of deaths; chiefly by water, fire, and
throwing themselves down headlong from high places Non sibi insana feritate
parce^do; nam per mortes varias, maxim praecipitiorum and aquarum, and ignium
seipsos necare consueveru^t.
: their grounds of so doing were abused Scripture. Such as, that the flesh is
to be mortified; and he that hates his life shall find it.

Augustine says, that there were specially two vile and usual deaths of them
who do kill themselves; the halter, and steep headlong places: Self-murder
both Judas and the Donatists have learned from the same master. Indas to do it
by the halter; the Donatists by steep headlong places. Duae sunt maxim viles
atque usitatae mortes eorum qui seipsos interimunt; laqueus and praecipitium;
spontaneas mortes ab uno magistro utrique didicerunt; Judas laqueum, Donatistae
praeipitium.


Causes of misunderstanding Scripture.
The causes, or means of misunderstanding the Scripture, are specially three.

1. Falls teachers, and undiscreete
First, false teachers, who under pretense of their learning and authority,
seduce and beguile the simple, by specious pretexts, obtruding error for truth,
or intermingling falsehood with verity, or obscuring or corrupting the truth
from the simplicity thereof. And also, undiscreet teachers are a means to men
of misunderstanding the Scriptures, by their neglect, or transgressing the
true genuine scope and meaning of their texts, in their preaching, diffused
into the latitude of common places, multiplied according to the number of the
words.

Metamorphosed preaching.
And likewise, those teachers that express the truth in terms, and phrases
proper to heretics, or schismatics, (teaching things wherein we differ from
them in sense and meaning) do not only make themselves to be suspected of
error; but also they open a way for entertainment of errors from others. And
also they that do disguise the ancient truth, into new fangled habit of method
and expressions; (whereby, it may seem to be some other more transcendent
thing, than it is, and do with curiosity, dangerously mince and mar the
truth, contrary to that which is warrantably revealed, whereby the way to peace
is rather lost than found:) they unsetle men from their former faith about the
truth, and incline them to embrace erroneous innovations, about opinions,
whereby their judgments are misinformed, or made doubtful what to hold, or
stick to, being shaken by this course; which is suitable to the practice of some
ore-curious Schoolmen, who did degenerate from the plain simplicity of the
Fathers, The Schoolmen.
in handling and publishing of the truth, which those Sophisters corrupted and
perverted, by such foraine Philosophical terms and perplexed distinctions,
and method, as both obscured and did wear out of use, and respect, the plain
ancient truth; and also, laid grounds, and gave occasions for, and raised
manifold errors, which filled the Church with contention, schisms and
heresies, which overthrew peace, sincerity, and the power of godliness.

2. Shallow capacities.
Secondly, we are often deceived by the weakness of our own intellectuals,
and shallow capacities, as were the Capernaits about eating of Christ's body
John 6.52.
: when we limit and interpret the Scriptures, according to our reason and
sense, and not by themselves, as we ought; with the help of the means in the
Church, that God has given us.

3. Headstrong affections.
Thirdly, our misunderstanding of the Scripture proceeds from the strength of
our headstrong affections, self-willed resolutions, and from our ambition after
vain glory; whereby we wring and wrest the sense and meaning of the
Scriptures, to make them favor, and speak what we fancy and hold: So not
taking the sense contained in the Scripture; but imposing our sense upon the
Scripture, as best pleases us, to maintain our own opinions, or to purchase
the vain glory of extraordinary learning among shallow braind or prejudicate
persons, whom nothing pleases, but that which is strange, or new, or suits and
agrees with their humors and ends.

Note.
The higher that this ground of error of judgment is, the more obstinate are
the resolutions that are built upon the same: Because, such conclusions are, to
the deceived, matters of conscience, founded (as they think) upon divine
authority; far above the countermand of any humane reason, or argument and
testimony of truth; diffenting from their tenets and opinions.

Observe. Abused Scripture harmefull.
From hence we may observe, that, although God has graciously given us his
holy Scriptures, to be the powerful means of life Romans 1.16.
, yet many men do abuse, and make the same the means of their own
destruction; as Peter speaks of the unlearned and unstable, who did wrest the
Episties of Paul, as they did also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction 2 Pet. 3.16.
: and so the Commandment that was ordained to life, is found to be unto death
to them, Romans 7.10. as the Gospel, that is the savor of life to life to those
that are saved, is the savor of death to death to those that perish 2 Cor.
2.16.
. Nothing does so much hurt, when it is abused, as that which may do most good,
when it is rightly used.

There is no heresy, or practice, or opinion so vile in the Christian world,
that pretends not, and abuses not Scripture, or something in it, or from it, in
defense or excuse of the same; and, upon that ground chiefly, prevails upon
men's consciences, and holds them captivated in their errors, and ill courses:
and so men do turn the sweetest Manna into the bitterest gall of Aspes, to
their own perdition. Compatison.
As a man by managing a sword by its handle, may defend himself thereby; so,
by taking, and using it by the point, or edges, mischiefs himself by the
same. Therefore, we need take heed how we use the sword of the Word.

Prevention of this error, by not following the letter against the true meaning
of the Scripture.
For prevention of error of judgment, from this ground of abused Scripture,
we are to be careful, that we be not moved with the letter of the Scripture,
without its proper sense agreeable to the truth; contrary to which, the abused
letter of the Scripture is no warrant for us to believe, or do any thing; as
we see by our Savior Christ's reply to Satan, who, Mat 4.6.
in tempting of him, alleged Scriptures, after his manner, to persuade him to
do evil.

Observe.
Our faith and practice should be founded upon sound knowledge; otherwise, all
our building will fall, that is reared up upon a rotten foundation; and we
shall commit two faults at once, one in error of our judgment, another in our
unwarrantable practice, according to the same.

Rules or means of knowledge of the Scripture.
Therefore, that we may not wrest the Scripture from its true sense, to our
meaning that we shall please to give it; or that we should take it in a
carnal, or gross sense contrary to its own interpretation, we are to observe
four rules, or helps, that we may rightly understand the Scripture.

1. Humility.
First, it is needful that we be endowed with humility of spirit, that denying
our own selves and carnal reason, we may submit to take such sense and
meaning of the Scripture, as it of it self affords, with the assistance of the
helps of the Church; and not to impose upon it any sense of our own making;
or, to wrythe, or wrest it to favor our conceits, or purposes: but that,
laying aside all ambition of overruling the Scripture, to force it to
patronize and countenance any new fangled humorous opinions, or old errors of
ours, for our vain ostentation or sinful profit; we are humbly to conform
all our opinions and courses to the Scriptures, and not to bring the Scriptures
into subjection to our opinions and practice: God will guide the meek in
judgment: and the meek will he teach his ways, says David, Psalm. 25.9.

2. Holiness.
The second means, whereby we may be able rightly to understand the
Scriptures; is holiness of heart and conversation, as our Savior tells us,
that if any man will do his will, he shall know of his doctrine, whether it be
of God, John 7.17. For, as the Philosopher says, Every evil body is an
ignorant, Omnis malus est ignorans. Arist. Ethic. l. 3.
and persons prepossessed with error and vice, labor to interpret all
Scripture in favor of the same. Whereas, godly people endowed with a new
divine nature, as Peter tells us 2 Pet. 1.4.
, are thereby inclined so to expound the Scripture, as best agrees with the
truth, and grace of God in them, who are divinely illightned, whereby they are
able to try things that differ (...).
, Phil. 1.10. When others are blind, and cannot see a far off, 2 Pet. 1.9.

3. Prayer.
The third means, to help us rightly to understand the Scriptures, is Prayer
to God; that he would both reveal, and manifest to us his truth; and also,
would give us grace rightly to conceive it in our minds and hearts, as the
Prophet David prays, Teach me good judgment, and knowledge, Psalm. 119.66. that
so we may be taught of God (...). 1 These. 4.9.
. For, the matter of the Scripture is, in many points, so supernatural and
high; and we so dull and gross in conceiving such truths, that as flesh and
blood cannot reveal them to us; neither can the natural man receive the
things of the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 2 14.
, without divine help, procured by prayer.

4. The Spirit of God.
The fourth means of rightly understanding the Scripture is, the Spirit of
God, in and by our use of hearing, and reading, and conferring; illightning our
minds, and persuading our consciences of the truth, according to the promise
of our Savior touching the holy Spirit, whom he said he would send, and that
when this Spirit of truth is come, he would guide us into all truth, which he
manifests to us by a twofold light. Twofold light of the Spirit.


1. In the Word.
First, that which accompanies the Word and truth it self, whereby it makes it
self conspicuous to all that have eyes to see it, Comparison.
even as the Sun manifests it self, by its own light and splendor, to the
world.

2. In our minds.
The second kind of light, whereby the Spirit manifests the truth of the
Scripture to us, is that light, that he endowes our minds withal; whereby we
are enabled, and made capable to see and apprehend the former light of truth in
the Word: Compatison.
as a blind man, that can see nothing, before that he has both an inward
faculty of sight restored to him, and also an external light to make the
object visible. So then, none can truly, nor fully understand the truth of the
Scriptures, but by the same Spirit that gave them. For, as the Apostle says,
The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 2.11.15
: and therefore, it is said, that the spiritual man discerns all things: by
this Spirit, a man's judgment is conformable to the truth contained in the
Scriptures, and sound doctrine of the Church.

Touching the mistake and abuse of Scripture, for the vile fact of self-murder,
Augustine gives this admonition: Take heed to thy self, that it may not slily
creep upon thee, to have a mind to kill thy self; by so understanding these
words of Scripture; That thou ought to hate thy life, in this world. For,
from thence some malignant and perverse men, and most cruel and wretched
murderers against themselves, do throw themselves into the fire, do choke
themselves in the waters, and by headlong downfalls do crush themselves, and
perish Videne tibi subrepat, ut teipsum velis interimere, sic intelligendo;
quod debes odisse in hoc mundo animam tuam: hine enim quidam maligni and
perversi homines and in seipsos crudeliores, etc. August. Tract. in Joan. 51.
.

Our Savior Christ told Peter, that others should gird, and carry him whither
he would not John 21.18.
; whereby he intimates, that Peter should not will to gird and destroy
himself.

Also, the same Augustine calls such self-murderers the devils martyrs, when he
answers to Petilian the Donatist, Confessores illi vestri, quando seipsos
praecipita^t, cui dicant Martyrium? uto um Chrisio qui talia suggerentem
diabolum repulit, an potius ipsi diabolo qui talia Christo suggessit? Non
veneramur nomine Martyrum eos, qui sibi collum ligaverunt. August. contra lit.
Pe^il. l. 2. c. 49.
saying, These your confessors, when they throw themselves headlong from steep
places, to whom do they conserate martyrdom? whether do they it to Christ,
who rejected the devil when he suggested the doing of such things? or do they
it not rather to the devil himself; who did suggest to Christ such things for
him to do? We do not honor those by the name of Martyrs, who have hanged
themselves.

The Scripture, rightly understood, is the best promptuary, and antidote
against self murder, both by means of the light of it, showing us the
unlawfulness and vileness of that fact, and also by the power thereof, or of
the Spirit therein, dissuading, and vehemently withdrawing of us therefrom: to
whose advice and motions so long as we obediently listen, we are safe from
self-murder.

. 5. Of misconstrued decree and destiny, to the perverting of judgment.
The third ground of a deceived judgment, Conceit of decree and destiny.
The third ground of a deceived judgment, which occasions self-murder, is the
self murderers strong apprehension that it is the unalterable deeree of God,
and his own unevitable fortune for him so to die, by his own hands; as
Tertullian speaks of some: which conceit arises from two originals. Dinumerant
in semetipsos mentis malae impetus, vel fato vel astris imputant. Tertul.
Apolog. c. 1. Original of it.


1. Impostures.
First, from the oracles or impostures of Magitians and fortune tellers, that
declare to those who unwarrantably seek to them for knowledge and resolution
of future contingent things, specially touching their death, that so they shall
die and perish. Which is the just reward of such unlawful curiosity, that so
they may thereby be punished; either by doing of the deed, or by continual
torment of fear that they shall do it. Note.
God never conceales any thing from us, but that, whereof the ignorance is
better for us, than the knowledge.

It was curiosity after this kind of knowledge, that made Eve willing to learn
of the devil, being her schoolmaster Genesis 3.5, 6.
, that, whereby she was a means to undo her self, and all mankind. We see,
by the practice of Saul in killing himself, how dangerous a thing it is to
advise with witches 1 Samuel 28.7.
, soothsayers, magitians, Astrologers, or any of that black rabble: upon
affectation of curious and secret knowledge, from those persons, a man shall
but play the Gnat about the candle, delighting in the light thereof, until it
be at last burnt up with the heat thereof: Observe.
as many a man may grieve that he has so little knowledge of profitable
things; so many may grieve that they have so much unprofitable, and needless
knowledge. People are ignorant of necessary things, Necessaria n^scimus, quia
non necesseria discimus.
because they bend their minds so much to know unnecessary things: but was it
ever known that the devil did give advice that was good, both for matter and
end!

2. Conceit that it is Gods decree.
The second original of the strong conceit of self-murder in the mind, is
deep impressions in the thoughts of man, that it is the unalterable, and
unresistable decree of God, that he must kill himself: which proceeds from
satan's cunning suggestions, slily darting in, and fomenting the same
persuasion: and withal, where the self-murderers thoughts and mind are ever
taken up with, and running upon the same, and are under such continual
powerful temptations to kill himself, that he thinks he cannot resist, then
falls he to resolve, and to endeavor to do it; as being persuaded that it is
his fatal destiny so to die. And therefore, what such think must be done at
last, they deem it best to do it as soon as they can; both that they may be
out of the torment of the thoughts of it; and also, may finish out of the way,
what is Gods will that they must do: as Judas did, who went quickly to betray
his Master Ioh. 13.27.30.
They think that they sin not.
. Men of this persuasion and practice do think, that if they do that only,
which is agreeable to Gods decree, and secret will, they are blameless; but
they are in a greater error. Their error.


Reasons. 1. Absurdity of it.
For first, by that argument, no man in the world should be culpable of any sin
for any thing that he does, how flagitious soever it were; and so both God and
man should be blameable for unjust dealing, in punishing any man for any thing
that he does; be it murder, treason, theft, or any like thing; and in vain
were all laws, divine and humane, requiring the doing of that good, or
forbidding that evil; if justly a man may not be rewarded for the former, nor
condemned for the latter.

Observe.
For, there is nothing that possibly can fall out, or come to pass contrary to
Gods eternal decree, in regard both of Gods prescience and foreknowledge of
all things; and also in respect of his power, and wise providence; from, and by
which is the whole motion of all creatures, and their ability in all manner of
actions. Which is further apparent by the testimony of the Apostles, in their
confession to God, saying, Of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
Counsel determined before to be done Acts 4.27, 28.
. Will any man therefore say, that neither Judas, nor any of those were
blameable for betraying and putting our blessed Savior so cruelly and
spitefully to death?

If Gods decrees were sufficient to warrant men to do evil; then, either
there could be no sin in the world, whatsoever men do; or else, God must be
the author of sin, and the only sinner; which is a thing most blasphemous to
think.

2. Ignorance.
The second reason that manifests the error of those who think themselves
warranted to do whatsoever God has decreed, is both their ignorance of what
God has decreed; (which for the most part he keeps so seeret, that it is not
certainly known, but by the event and effect what it is; and in this case the
Scripture says, that the secret things belong unto the Lord our God, Deuteronomy.
29.29.
but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for
ever; that we may do all the words of this Law.) Gods secret will is the rule
of his own actions.
And also, it is their ignorance of the use of Gods decree, which is properly
his own will whereby, and according to which, he in wise and in sovereign
manner orders all things according to his own good pleasure. But it is not
that which he would have always to be our will, and according to which we
should order our wills and practice; for which he has given us his revealed
word and law; which is to be, in all practical things, the measure of our
wills and ways. Gods revealed will is the rule of our actions.
And therefore, so long as Gods word forbids self-murder, we are not to dare,
upon pretense of destiny, or Gods decree, to entertain thoughts to attempt it.
Gods secret decrees contain no formal commandments to us what we should do;
nor put any real influxe to incline us to sin, nor subject us to compulsory
necessity of sinning, contrary to our own wills, or to the means, and
Commandments that we have against the same.

Observe.
So then, it is certain that our fulfilling of the secret will and decree of
God by our wretched courses, and the accidental good that may come to others
thereby, cannot excuse us from damnation, for running a course contrary to the
revealed will of Gods Commandments, and to the means whereby we are to order
our practice in obedience to God.

No man is saved for fulfilling the will of Gods decree, which no man can
overthrow.
It is not in the power of the most wretched and malicious men in the world to
cross, but must fulfill the secret decree of God, neither is any man commended
or saved for fulfilling that decree which no man can disappoint: But all men
are commended, or condemned for those courses and means which they use,
according as the same is commanded or forbidden in the Word; whereby the
several decrees of God for man's salvation, or destruction, are voluntarily
accomplished by men themselves.

Note. Man's care should be to live well.
Man's only care in all estates, should be to live well, in conformity to Gods
revealed will and word; not being solicitous so much for our deaths, which
after a good life can never be ill. We serve not such a master as will not be
careful of our good; in which regard, worthy is that speech of dying S.
Ambrose recorded by Paulinus in his life, Non ita inter vos vixi, ut pudcat me
vivere; nec timco mori, quoniam Dominum benum habenus.
I have not so lived in the world, that I am ashamed to live; neither am I
afraid to die, because we have a good Lord.

Where we have no commandment we should be passive about our deaths.
Although that God is active, and works in all things about us, and that we
are to cooperate with him in all things where he gives us a commandment to
work; yet in those works of God, where we have no commandment of his to
work with him; as in and about our deaths, there we are only to be passive.

Observe.
Three things we are to observe from this point of deceit of the judgment.

1. Men are strong to believe errors.
First, we may here see, that people that are weakest in faith, and most
diffident to believe Gods word, and saving truth, upon the credit and authority
of God himself; are often strongest and most consident in belief of errors
upon any seeming ground; as Solomon says, The simple believes every word
Prove. 14.15.
; The reason hereof is plain; because such persons are overswayed by
prejudices, and strength of passion so far, that they rather suspect and
reject Gods sacred and infallible truth, than their own fancies, and Satan's
suggestions. Note.
When men leave the truth, they become both superstitious, and vainly
credulous.

They therefore that believe God, and in God, are freed from many errors, and
much needless fear.

2. Disobedients to God, are forward to obey the devil.
Secondly, we may from hence observe, that many persons that are most
disobedient to Gods laws, by keeping whereof they might live; are most forward
to obey Satan and their own lusts, to their own destruction. For a man cannot
serve both these contrary masters at once. Mat. 6.24.
Such people like well to have God to be their friend, but they care not for
having him to be their master, but would live as they list; but when they
forsake him, they are unhappy in their choice; when they can serve none other
but to their own ruin.

3. Men to excuse themselves blame God.
Thirdly, from hence we may see, that many men are willing to do evil, but
are loath to bear the burden of the blame thereof: and therefore they turn it
upon God, and would make him a party with them against himself; in breaking of
his own laws.

Men that would not have their courses framed by the right rule of Gods truth,
labor to frame all reason and divinity by their own crooked fancies and
courses; whereby they do, as far as they can, deturb, and cast down God
from his throne, and advance themselves unto the same, by their perverting the
order established by him; and by making themselves gods, to live by their own
wills, as the supreme rule of all their actions. Which shows to us, how
needful it is for us to labor for self-denial, and that we may resigne^ our
selves wholly to God, to be ordered and disposed wholly by him in all things
as he pleases; which is the only means of our preservation from sin and
damnation.

. 6. Of conceited good by self-murder, perverting the judgment.
The fourth ground of error in judgment, is conceit of benefit.
The fourth, and last ground of a mistaken understanding. which causes or
occasions self-murder, is both the conceit of good that comes by that fact, and
also ignorance of the illness of that action. Apprehension of the presence of
God, and of absence of evil, persuades the mind of the lawfulness of the
thing, and makes the conscience bold to undertake the performance of it.

Good conceived. Cap. 12. 2.
Of the goodness that a self-murderer conceives to be in killing of himself,
I have spoken already in the explication of the definition of self-murder.

How apparent good affects the understanding.
Touching which, I will only now observe how bonum, or good, that properly is
the object of the will, or of the soul, in its elections and actions, can
affect the understanding; when it is but apparent good, and contrary to truth.

1. By the wills working upon it from the senses.
To clear this, it is to be marked; first, that the will receiving impressions
from the senses, does often (by ascending) work upon the understanding, and
draws it; as formerly we have heard.

2. Goodness and truth are equally the object of the understanding.
Secondly, whereas bonum and verum, good and truth, in a metaphy sicall notion,
are the same, and convertible, confineable to no one Category; (as neither are
any of the properties or attributes of the Godbead) they are likewise equally
the object of the understanding, as of the will: which in the soul, do not
differ essentially; but are only the diverse powers, offices, and works of the
same soul, about its-severall objects; which do give the occasion of the
distinction of those things which in themselves are one: and so where ever
bonum, good, is presented to the mind; there also it offers it self to the
same, as verum, true. Whereby the understanding is deceived, when the object
thereof is not that which it is supposed by it to be; which makes a man no
less bold to do it, than if it were indeed true.

Of self-murder the illness unknown, incourages a man to commit it.
The ignorance of the illness of this sin of self-murder incourages men to
commit it; when they do not judge of it by the moral rules whereby it is
forbidden and censured. The thing that hides the vileness of sin from sinners,
is even the sin it self, As the Apostle Peter speaks of such, That they are
blind, and cannot see afar off 2 Pet. 1.9.
. What blindes men. 1. Sin.
Men are first blinded that they may the more boldly sin; as Samson was, that
he might be led about to grind. 2. Consequent of sin.
There is a subsequent blindness that follows upon sinning, whereby the oftener
that sin is committed, the less evil it seems to be to the doers thereof; in
respect both of the sinfulness and punishment thereof; in which regard, the
Prophet says, that Ephraim was like a silly dove, Hosea 7.11. And Augustine
affirms, that darkness follows those that transgress the Law Obumbratio
sequitar cos qui legem transgrediuntur.
. The former ignorance proceeds from love and affection to sin; the latter
from the habit and custom of sinning. The ignorance of the illness of the
sin of self-murder proceeds from it self; which in the motions and
resolutions of it, blindes the understanding two ways. Self-murder blindes the
mind.


1. Privatively.
First privatively, by drawing away of the mind from advised and serious
consideration of the truth about that sin, whereby the vileness of it might be
seen: and by declining the thoughts from all arguments, reasons, and censures,
whereby a man may be kept from doing of it; So that when he comes to the act,
he sees nothing, or but little to hinder him from doing of it.

2. Positively.
Secondly, this sin blindes the understanding positively; both by setting the
mind aworke, as it presents it self to it, to wrest the Scripture, and to
find out reasons that may make the fact eligible; as Eve did about eating of
the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.6. And also it makes the will, by the command that
it has got over it, to labor upon the understanding, to coin arguments to
justify the evil fact of self murder, against future reproach and punishment;
which vile and odious crime it is now in consultation to do.

Thus does it labor upon the understanding, as Balak did upon Balaam, that by
change of his stations he might find a place to curse Gods people Numb. 23.
. Observe.
It is the property of the greatest and most wilful sinners, to labor to
seem to be least guilty, and pretend the most excuses to justify themselves;
as did Saul 1 Samuel 15.20, 21.
, Simeon and Levi Gen 34 31.
; and the harlot in the Proverbs Prove. 30 20.
: If hypocrite-like they cannot hide their sins, then they labor to defend
them; making, if it were possible, vice to be virtue, and virtue to be vice.
Note. Men self blinded.


Thus do men blind themselves by wilfulness in ill courses; and also God in
just judgment does the same, by giving those over that will not entertain the
truth with the love of it, to be deluded with error and folly; and to believe
it; as the Apostle shows, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. and as God commanded the Prophet to
preach to the people, that they should hear, but not understand Esaias 6.9.
. Whereupon, such men are wise in their own eyes, and do think their own
ways best.

If the judgment be subdued to the sin, then men do run unresistably to
the fact. But all such reasons are nothing but error, that are used to prove an
error; which at last, upon these delusions, the mind conceits to be a truth:
Note.
the truth is in some sort hidden to those that perish.

Observe.
We are here to observe two things for our instruction in this point.

1. Ignorance makes way for destruction.
First, that ignorance and error opens the way to destruction, when men are
loath to know the true nature of their sins, the judgments due to them, and
to take notice of the means whereby they both may be prevented.

2. Our care to obey the truth.
Secondly, our care should be to know, and obey the truth, by the help of the
Word, and directions of approved teachers; that we may not be self-deceived,
through the neglect of means of knowledge; which makes our sins the greater.

Not to be self-conceited.
And therefore we are to observe, that we be not self-conceited of our own
wit, and opinions, that we should trust to the same, specially in our passions.
And we are also to be careful that we affect not odd strains, nor adventure
to do great things, upon new and weakly grounded opinions; which is, as if a
man at Sea upon life and death, should dare to ride out a storm by a weak
halsser, or small roape; the which, if it break, will lay him dead on shore.
Comparison.
Therefore in matters of such importance upon life and death, men should open
themselves to, and advise with those that are godly and wise; both about what
they are to do; and also upon what grounds and reasons, that they may not be
deceived.

Note.
But this is remarkable, that ever the worse the thing is that is to be done,
and the weaker the reasons of doing of the same are, the lother the doers
thereof are to reveal the same; lest they should be crossed of their purpose,
or shamed for their weakness and enterprise so disclosed.

. 7. Concerning afflictions upon the body, occasioning self-murder.
Second general motive of self-murder. Calamities.
The second general motive occasioning self-murder, is immoderate affectation
of freedom from evil of punishment that sinful man is liable unto; for
bearing of which, he has neither comfort, nor strength, as he apprehends.

The sorts of them.
These evils are, either real and true, or but fancied and conceited; and are
either present, or feared; and are such as a self-murderer despaires, either to
be able of himself to bear, or that God will uphold him in them, or will
deliver him from them: and therefore he resolves not to endure them; but out
of obstinacy of mind and will, purposes to remove himself by self-murder,
from that which he cannot remove from himself. As we see in part by the
pettish humor of Jonah, Ion. 4.8.

Three sorts of them.
These evils whereby men take occasion to kill themselves, are of three sorts.

1. Upon the body
First, they are those that are upon their bodies; which do also much affect
their souls; because of their near union together; whereby they do make one
person, and do so sympathise together, that what is proper to the one nature
in matter of action, or passion, is deemed to be common to the other, in
regard of the unity of the person consisting of them both: Whereupon it is,
that the sufferings of the body do drive the soul into strange passions and
undertakings, on the bodies behalf.

Evils upon the body are threefold.
These evils upon the body occasioning self-murder, are of three kinds.

1. Inbred diseases
First, they are inbred diseases, and torments of continual grievous
painfulnesse; being in the judgment of sense importable; both for intensive
greatness, and also for extensive multitude, Non est vivere, sed valere vita.
or unintermitted continuance: as may be the gout, stone, strangury, racking
aches, furious fevers, incurable gangreenes, and the like desperately raging,
or noisome diseases; Better eye out, than always aching.
from which to be rid, as from an irksome, long, and painful death, many do
make choice to kill themselves; dispatching that by a voluntary short death,
which they see will otherwise cost them a tedious and long death. As did
Pomponius Atticus, Tullius Marcellinus, and other like, starve themselves to
death, thereby to cure such desperate griefs.

2. Inflicted torments.
Secondly, the evils upon the body that often occasion self-murder, are,
either sense of inflicted torments, or of ignominy by man; greater, and more
shameful than they can, or will endure: Or else they are such, as they
horribly fear shall be inflicted upon them if they do live, and are strongly
persuaded that they shall not be able to endure the fame; but that they shall,
if they live, disgrace both themselves and their cause, by their sinking under
the burden or by their unseemly manner of behavior in their troubles; and
therefore diverse, to prevent the latter, and to be delivered out of the former,
have murderously killed themselves:

As Josephus reports of Eleazar and his companions, Joseph de bello Judaico
lib. 7. cap. 28.
who killed themselves that they might not be punished by the Romans, but
might escape from their tyranny; that their wives might die undefiled, and
their children not taste of servile captivity. Alleging (but unjustly) that
it was misery to live, and not to die: because death freeth our souls from
prison unto their most pure and proper place, where never after they shall be
touched with calamities.

Upon which motive it was, that the Stoic Seneca said; that for our ready
dispatch, every vein of our body, is a way to liberty Quarr cunque venam
nostri corporis esse viam ad libertatem.
; meaning, by bleeding to death: and upon this reason it was that Saul killed
himself 1 Samuel 31.4.
; and whereupon also the Iaylor would have done the like Acts 16 27.
; so far does the forerunners and fear of death prevail with some, that the
same makes them to cast themselves headlong into that, which they would most
shun. Note.


3. Want of necessaries for the body.
Thirdly, the evils on the body, whereupon some people do precipitate
themselves into the jaws of self-murder, are want of necessaries of
livelihood, being without means, or hope of supply thereof; whereby they, and
theirs depending upon them, are pinched with famishing hunger, starved with
piercing cold, vexed with intolerable oppression and neglect, that makes a wise
man mad, Eccles. 7.7.

Which fills them with painful smart, for their own particular; oppresses
them with sorrow and grief, to behold the miseries, and to hear the ruefull
complaints, and lamentations of those they dearly love, as of their Wives,
Children, and nearest friends, walking as living and forlorn ghosts upon the
earth: which possesses them with comfortless and hopeless desperation,
especially when they consider what plenty they have had; and what others their
inferiors still have; whose bowels of compassion they find shut up against
them and theirs.

An image of which estate we may see in the Lamentations of Jeremy Iam. 2 11,
14.
, Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is powered
upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the
children and the sucklings swouned in the streets of the City; they say to
their Mothers, where is corn and wine? When they swouned, as the wounded in
the streets of the City, when their soul was powered out in their mothers
bosom: the tongue of the sucking child, cleaving to the roof of his mouth for
thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them Chap.
2.20.
: By which necessity it came to pass, that women did eat their fruit, and
children of a span long: the hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own
children, they were their meat, in the destruction of the daughter of my
people Cap. 4.10.
: according both to the threatenings of the breach of the Law Deuteronomy. 28.53.
, and also to practice in besieged towns 2 King. 6.29.
.

In which regard it is said, that they that be slain with the sword, are
better than they that be slain with hunger Lam. 4.9.
.

Therefore, diverse persons, that they may prevent what they, or theirs may
uncomfortably do, or suffer, in such felt, or feared distress, do, with
their own hands, kill their Wives, or Children, and then themselves; that they
may not feel, or behold a greater evil upon them, as they suppose; the death,
that they cannot endure to see, or suffer inflicted by other means, they
unnaturally and wickedly, out of cruel mercy, inflict themselves. Note.
So hard a thing it is to endure to see a cruel act done, over it is for ones
self to do it; evils are ever more discernable by, and terrible to us, when
they are in others, than in our selves.

. 8. Of crosses upon man's outward estate, occasioning self-murder.
2. Calamities upon men's external good things.
The second kind of evils, that give men occasion to murder themselves, are
those that are upon men's outward worldy estates: when either, having been
rich, or well to live, they fall to decay, and go backward: 1. Upon their
estates.
or when, having means, and carefully toyling, and using their endeavors to
live, and grow in the world, they are incountred with crosses and losses, or
their goods are imbesiled, or wasted, by wife, husband, children or servants;
that still they go behind-hand, and run into debt; having neither means, nor
hopes, to live, and keep their charge, in fashion, as they would, and were
wont; nor yet, to pay every man his own: or, when some rich man, by the fall
of the price of corn, or failing of his croppe, is disappointed of his
gaped-for gain; the former, because, he cannot be but poor, as he would not;
and the latter, because, he cannot be rich, so as he would; Note.
both of them resolve to kill themselves, to help themselves by a mad kind of
remedy: the one, because he cannot have as much as he would, takes a course to
lose all that he has: the other, because he has so little, takes a way to
have nothing at all: and both of them cast away their lives, for that, which
should be but their servant.

The true causes of self-murder upon crosses in estate. 1. Covetousnes.
The true ground and causes of this wicked practice, is both excessive
covetousness, and high esteem and love of the world, which some do make
their god, and prize it above their lives: 2. Pride.
and also pride of heart; whereby some will not stoop, to be content with that
estate, that God would have them to be in; and therefore, because they cannot
be, and live in state as they would, they will not live at all; but rather
destroy themselves; and so, by going about thus to free themselves from their
present, or feared estate, that they dislike, they madly cast themselves into a
worse: Note.
so bad is our exchange, when we forsake the will of God to follow our own.

. 9. Of dishonor causing self-murder.
2. Calamities upon their honors.
Secondly, the calamities which are upon that which externally belongs to men:
which occasions men to murder themselves, are those disasters that concern
their worldly honors; as, disappointment of their expected dignities, and high
respects and favor with eminent personages: or, the degrading and displacing
of them, from their preferments, and honorable degrees of advancement with
Princes, or people: or, the over-clouding of them with the contempt, and
disdain of those of whose favor they are ambitious; and when with all,
dejected from their aspiring greatness, or hopes, they shall see their
inferiors, and enemies exalted and preferred before them; as Haman did see
Mordecai: then are their thoughts and resolutions impatiently set to kill
themselves, as not able to live in such an eclypse of honor. The true cause of
self murder upon this motive. Ambition.
Of this, vain ambition is the only cause; as it was in Ahitophel, and Zimri;
but, o how vain and wretched is that man, whose happiness is not in himself,
but in other unstable creatures; that, by change of their favor, can every
hour make him miserable, when they list! And, o how weak and frail are they,
whom a frown, a harsh speech, or one remove in Courtly favor, can kill, or
cause them to kill themselves! Who would think that these men were in their
right wits, or cared for any honor; who, by self-murder, make themselves
everlastingly miserable and infamous in the highest degree of ignominy, even to
the overshadowing and disgracing of their innocent posterity? Man's ambition to
be higher than God would have him, brings him to shame.

. 10. Of disasters upon friends, occasioning self-murder.
3. Calamities upon their friends.
Thirdly, the evils that are upon that, which externally belongs to men,
whereby diverse times some are occasioned to murder themselves, are those that
concern their nearest, and dearest friends, as their wives, children, kindred,
masters, familiars, and the like: and that falls out in two cases. In two cases.


1. By suffering, or doing evil.
First, when such friends either do, or suffer some woeful or shameful
things, while they do live; which makes them, in their opinion that love them,
miserable, as are the flagitious lives, and practices of wife, children,
kindred, or the like; or, their ignominious and cruel sufferings, redounding
to the extreme grief, or disgrace of those, to whom they so nearly belong;
which they cannot, nor will not endure, but do kill themselves, that they may
not live to see it, or hear of the same.

2. By being bereaved of them.
Secondly, when such friends do die, or are taken away from them; whereby they
think themselves miserable, in the loss of their company, and of the benefit
that they had by them: and therefore, they are so affected, that, in the former
case, they will not abide to live in this world with them; nor in the latter
case, will live in this world without them; but will needs kill themselves, in
the former case, to be rid from them; and in the latter, that they may not be
without them. Observe.
So that, such men's friends may seem, in these two differing respects, to make
them miserable, the one by their presence, and the other by their absence: and
so, the cause of their comfort, is made the means of their woe, by their own
folly; who will live, not by the life that is in themselves, but by that, which
is in others: and do set their hearts more on such friends, than on God, in so
much that if they cannot enjoy their friends, as they desire, they will not
enjoy themselves; as Saul's Armor-bearer, who killed himself that he might
not outlive his Master 1 Samuel 31.5.
.

. 11. Of trouble of conscience, occasioning self-murder.
3. Inward upon the mind.
The third kind of evil, whereupon men take occasion to kill themselves, is
that which is upon their minds, as in the immediate subject thereof, which the
nearer it is, the more intollerably it does affect: all other sufferings being
as whippings upon the coats, but this as upon the naked skin; and more
intolerable than death, which some men choose, and voluntarily inflict, with
their own hands, upon themselves, that thereby they may be freed from the
trouble of their minds.

This trouble of the mind is of four sorts. Four sorts of troubles of mind.


1. Trouble of conscience for sin.
First, extreme grief of mind and trouble of conscience, in respect of sin:
which, by the guiltiness thereof, and by the terror of the expected punishment
thereof; distresses, and overcharges the wounded conscience, when withal a man
apprehends himself to be wholly destitute of true grace, and deserted and
forsaken of God; given over to a reprobate sense; whereby he cannot rest, but
is comfortless, and at last, is swallowed up of utter desperation; living as
if he were continually in hell, sensibly seeling, as he thinks, the flames and
tortures of the damned, in his conscience: For ease out of which estate, men
many times kill themselves, hoping to mend themselves by change; although it
be but, as skipping out of the drying pan into the fire.

Grounds of this trouble of mind.
The grounds of which perplexities of the mind, about sin, are three.

1. Greatness of sin and its punishment.
First, a man's through apprehension of the greatness and deformity of his
sin, and of the fearful judgments due to him for the same: which affrights
the conscience, and drives it to run into any course, to hide it self from
the same.

2. Emptiness of grace, etc.
Secondly, the souls emptiness of repentance, and grace; and the possession
and dominion that noisome lusts, disorderly affections, and fearful
temptations have of the same, whereby, it seems to be a cage of unclean
spirits, from which when a man can no other ways be rid, then resolves he to
kill himself, to free himself from that horror of mind, that he is not able
to endure.

3. Conceit of time of grace to be past.
Thirdly, when the soul conceives that its time of grace is past, and that it
is too late to repent, and get grace; against which when men find themselves
hardened and shut up; then, falling under desperation, they resolve to destroy
their own lives; that seeing they have no hope that they shall be better by
living, they may not thereby make their estates worse, by what they may endure,
both in this life, and in the life to come.

Observe. 1. Men deceived by sin.
We may here observe how men are deceived by sin, which promises, at first,
all contentment and happiness to the clients and entertainers thereof; but, in
conclusion, paies them with destruction, and shuts up their days, and life,
with a tragical conclusion. Note.
None are more faithful drudges to any Master, than sinners are to sin; and
none are so ill rewarded by their Masters, for their service, as they.

2. No case of conscience from our selves.
Again, from hence it is remarkable, that so long as men, in distress of
conscience for their sin, look not out off, or beyond themselves, for ease
and comfort, they cannot but sink under their own burden. For, our blessed
Savior directs us to a better course, in this case, when he says, Come unto
me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest Mat.
11.28.
.

. 12. Of coffeehouse of mind.
Ths second sort of trouble of mind is discontentme^t.
The second sort of the troubles of mind, which occasions self-murder, is men's
excessive coffeehouse; for being crossed, or disappointed of their desires,
or wills; in which respect it was that Jeremy did wish his own death Ier. 10.17.
, at least, was weary of his life.

1. Grounds of it.
This coffeehouse of mind arises from two causes. First, from want of that
good, true or seeming, which we desire, or expect. 2. Kinds of coffeehouse.
Secondly, from suffering of that evil which we would not.

This coffeehouse of mind is twofold.

1. From disappointment of men's passions and affections
First, that which arises from the crossing, or disappointment of the will of
men's affections and lusts;.
as those that immoderately affect and love to have and enjoy others of the
other sex, and are deeply overset in carnal, or conjugall love, which is an
unruly passion, and being disappointed, occasions people therefore to kill
themselves: a wife kills her self because her husband crosses her will; that
either he will not do as she would have him; or that he will not let her have
her will to go, and do as she list; or is displeased with her match: which
proceeds from hatred to her husband, whom she envies the enjoying of her, and
so I might instance in many like particulars: but it is most unreasonable, that
because a body cannot have their love or will, that therefore such an one sold
revenge the same upon himself, by an act of the greatest hatred and hostility
in the world: and that one should rather choose to kill himself, than to live
after a repulse in suite of love; or to see another brook what they impotently
affected to enjoy.

The second kind of disco^tentment crossing the will of reason in three
particulars.
Secondly, coffeehouse of mind is that which proceeds from the crossing, or
frustrating of the will of sound and natural reason, in three particulars.

1. Concerning a man's self. Justice.
First, in things concerning a man's self; as if he cannot have equity and
justice done him; he in coffeehouse therefore kills himself: or as a
child, because his parents will not give him fit maintenance, as they are
able, nor dispose of him or her, as they might and ought, murders himself.

2. Concerning a man's family.
Secondly, in things concerning a man's family or friends; as Rebeccah was weary
of her life, because of her daughters in law Gen 27.46.
; and as if parents should, for their being crossed of their wills in and about
their children, kill themselves.

3. Concerning Church or Commonwealth. Qui non poterat serre dominatum
Caesaris. Filli.
Thirdly, in things concerning the general body of Church or Commonwealth,
whereof a man is a member; as if for the ill government or miscariage of
either, or of both of them, he should kill himself, as did Cato Viicen. sis.
But all this may be uneffectuall to move a man, or woman to kill themselves,
if they would deny their own wills, and submit themselves wholly to Gods; who
suffers, and orders all these evils, and brings good out of them. And if they
would consider that not by dying, but by living, things are reformed; and by
self-murder disorders are increased; and judgments provoked and deserved; and
not prevented nor amended.

. 13. Of shame and confusion.
Third kind of troubles of mind. Shame.
The third kind of troubles of mind that sometimes occasions self-murder, is
shame and confusion; either for what a man has ignominiously done, or
suffered; or is certainly like to do or suffer; whereby he falls under
contempt, scorn, and importable disgrace with those whose respect he
overvalues: and so apprehending himself to be dejected, and used more
indignly and unworthily than he thinks he has deserved, or can endure, he
resolves to kill himself, to free him from the same; or at least from the
sense of it. As did Lucretia, who having been ravished by Tarquinius stabd her
self to avoid the shame of it: of whom Augustine says, Faediinse co^missi
sceleris aegra atque impatiens se peremit, turpitudmis aliaenae in se commissae
Romana mulier laudis avida, ne putaretur libenter passa.
that being sick and impatient of the villainy committed against her, she killed
her self: The Roman Lady ambitious of praise, was ashamed of another man's
filthiness committed against her, and therefore, that she might not be thought
to have willingly suffered that abuse, she destroyed her self. And Ovid says
of her; that, Succubuit famae victa puella metu.
The Damsel fell overcome with fear of shame.


Also Curtius makes mention in his ninth book, of one Dioxippus of Athens;
that when he was falsely accused to have stolen a cup from Alexanders table,
he was so ashamed to be so disgraced by the imputation of theft, that he
presently went out and hanged himself, for to prevent or get out of
insupportable confusion and ignominy: So intolerable a thing is shame to some,
specially of the noblest natures; that they think the same worse than death;
and that they had rather not to be, than to live in shame, it confounds the
judgment, and drives into desperate shifts and praectises to be rid of it:
Effects of shame.
shame will both make a man do evil and sin; when the contrary goodness and
virtuous courses procure contempt and disgrace with men; and also it is a
punishment of sin in the end Romans 6.21.
, upon which it does ever attend, as true honor does upon well doing Romans 2.7.
: according as Job says, That the baters of God shall be clothed with shame,
Job 8. ult. and the Psalmist imprecates shame upon his enemies, as one of the
greatest judgments: Psalm. 35.4.26. Of earthly creatures only man is capable of
glory, and of all blessings, glory is counted the chief, wherein also man does
analogically partake with God. Man only capable of shame.
So contrarily no earthly creature but man, is capable of shame, or greatly
affected withal, whereunto he is subject in regard of his understanding and
reason; and of all punishments, this shame is the greatest, which immediately
affects the soul in a high degree, for being abased either by our own
practices, or in the esteem or usage of others.

Kinds of shame. 1. Good shame.
There are two kinds of shame; first, that which is good and godly; and is
both that which goes before sin, and restraines men from daring to do evil;
and also that which follows after sin, whereby they are driven, or moved to
repentance for their sins past, whereof they are ashamed Romans 6.21.
. So that to be shameless and impudent, opens the way for such to rush into
any wickedness, and hardens their hearts from repentance. Note.


2. Ungodly shame
Secondly, there is an ungodly and wicked shame: 1. ashamed to do good.
and that is first, when a man is ashamed to do good, or to reform his life;
which falls out when goodness is in common disgrace with the world, which he
labors to please and to curry favor withal; or when wickedness is
habituated in him by a long continued practice; and he is a stranger to virtue
and goodness: he is then ashamed to attempt to do that which to him is
strange, and at which he is unskilful, and for which he fears he shall be
mocked by his former companions. He is a weak man whom a puff of a wind,
disgraceful words and flouts, keeps or beats back from goodness: and yet
there is nothing generally more powerful with most people to effect the same,
than this hobgoblin of worldly disgrace.

2. Shame of confusion.
Secondly, wicked shame is that, which is the shame of confusion, proper to the
wicked, and is their portion in hell; whereby they are swallowed up of
desperation, and which makes them seek and endeavor their own utter
destruction, sometimes in this life by self-murder: and ever in hell, wishing
and desiring that they were quite extinct; raging with, and against themselves,
for being the meritorious cause of that their own damnation: so that besides
all other torments, themselves are against themselves. Observe.
Here we may observe how men are liable and subject to shame for evil, and
that shame is one of the greatest punishments that can betide man, and is a
most forcible motive to good, or evil. Evil brings shame.
Therefore our care should be to keep it within its due bounds, by fearing to
sin, or to continue in sin, but that we do always walk in warrantable
courses: to be shamefully entreated for well-doing, is most honorable 2 Thessalonians.
2. Job 31.35, 36.
, and matter of rejoicing.

That shame should move a man to kill himself, is a mad and unreasonable
practice; because it is the way to bring a man into far greater shame, and
everlasting and unrecoverable disgrace: Self-murder cannot cure shame.
and so to think to free himself from shame, by running into a course of
greater shame; is, as if a man to cure his headache should knock out his
brains.

. 14. Of fear occasioning self-murder.
Fourth kind of the minds trouble.
The fourth kind of the minds trouble, that may occasion self-murder, is
servile and excessive fear; Fear. Occasioned, 1.
wherewith a man may be surprised and possessed, either from the present evils
that he suffers, which he conceives are beyond his strength to bear, and out
of which he sees no means of delivery, to be freed so soon as he would, but
by killing himself: 2.
or else, from apprehension of inevitable miseries; that as he foresees in
their causes, will fall upon himself, or upon his; which he conceives he is
not able to avoid, nor yet to bear with any comfort: and therefore, to escape
what fear has made more certain and terrible by fancy, than it is in it
self, self-murder is often resolved upon, as the back-doore of evasion. Note.
Panicke fear makes men flee before their own shadows, and at the noise of
their enemies, as did the Araemites, or Syrians. Kings 7.6, 7.
If men would absolutely submit in all things to Gods will, and trust in his
promises and power, they might be secure in all estates.

But, when they are guided by their own wisdom and wills, then are they most
in danger of miscarying: and when as they think to sail by their own
compass most securely, then do they run into the greatest dangers.

Observe. How fear makes bold.
It is observable here how fear, (the mother of cowardice) makes men daring and
bold, wittingly and willingly to run into the jaws of far more horrible
dangers and mischiefs, than those be, from which fear makes them to flee; as,
for a man, or a woman to dare to kill themselves, that never durst in anger
draw blood of any other body; and that those, who out of fear, least others
should abuse their bodies, would, to prevent the same, kill themselves; as we
read of many in the histories of the Church.

Note.
And so, men taking their own ways, without advising with God, run into the
mischief that they would shun; which shows that man's wisdom is folly, and
his courses without God, madness.

. 15. Of the true causes of self-murder in afflictions.
The true causes of self-murder upon this motive of man's sufferings.
Although these things in this second general motive do commonly bear the
blame of self-murder in this case; because they are most sensible and apparent:
yet there are other four: things more secret and latent, which are indeed the
true causes of the same.

1. Unbelief.
The first cause is, man's unbelief; whereby he neither believes in God; from
whom, and by whom he might have power in Christ to stand fast in all estates:
nor yet does he firmly believe and credit God in the Scriptures, to entertain
and cleave to the direction of his Word, and to rest upon his promises, and to
be persuaded of the gracious intent and nature of Gods dealing with his in
afflictions, and of the blessed end thereof: Remedy. Our eyes to God.
but, as by faith we live, so by unbelief we die; Iehosaphats drooping heart
in his distress, was revived and upheld when his eyes were toward God, and
he depended upon him. Peter when he doubted, he sunk. O you self murderers of
little faith, why do you doubt in your troubles? why do you not (as David)
rebuke your own souls, and say every one of you: Why art thou cast down o my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Psalm. 42.11.


2. Impatiency.
The second true cause of self-murder, upon the motive of evil of punishment,
or calamities of affliction, is unruly impatiency, and pusillanimity; when a
man apprehends himself to be overburdened with miseries, beyond the means that
he sees of deliverance out of the same, and beyond the strength that he has in
himself, with any comfort to bear it, conceiving his afflictions to be
excessive above his strength, or deserving; or, that they are all from God in
his wrath; which because he thinks he cannot bear, nor shake them off, he
labors to rid himself from by killing himself.

The hurt of impatiency.
Impatiency makes all evils the more intolerable to be borne; because it
hinders the mind from submitting to the burden, and troubles it, by seeking
subterfuges of evasion, or opportunities to shake off the yoke.

Who be most impatient.
To impatiency some are more strongly inclined than others; either by natural
temper of excessive choler; or else by the deep apprehension of understanding
and sense of the objects of coffeehouse; whereunto melancholic persons are
most incident.

Remedies of impatiency.
In this case, to help men against this impatiency, they should consider:

1.
First, that they have no good, but great hurt thereby; both to their bodies,
and their minds.

2.
Secondly, their afflictions come from God, and are ordered by him, who is our
wise, powerful, and loving father for our good.

3.
Thirdly, the same is the portion of others that are better than we, and do
endure more than we do.

4.
Fourthly, our sufferings are less than our deservings.

5.
Fifthly, God turns them to be blessings to his own people, they are
momentany and light: wherein God assists those that in them trust in him, that
they may comfortably above humane strength bear the same.

6.
Sixthly, in the end they shall be recompensed with a far greater and
eternal weight of glory 2 Cor. 4.17.
. So that a man shall lose no more by his passive, than by his active
obedience; yea, his gain and reward shall be greater; as is the honor of
Martyrs above Confessors.

3. Pride.
The third true cause of self-murder, upon afflictions, is stubborn Pride;
that will not let a man in whom it is, buckle to be willingly in that estate of
adversity, wherein God would have him to be: Est factum hominum superborum and
pusill^nimorum mortem sibi inserentium. David a Mauden.
but will rather make him venture breaking of the mast, than to let him lower
his sails in a storm.

This pride proceeds from an over-weining conceit, either of our own worth,
for deservings; or of our own wisdom, for intelligence and prudence; whereby
we conceive that the estate that we would have is more due and fit for us, than
that wherein we are: Whence pride proceeds.
Whereupon we prefer our own wills before Gods; and accordingly to have our
wills, we are apt to use the means of our own fond devising, how unlawful
soever they be; even to self-murder.

Remedies against pride. 1. Knowledge of a man's self.
The best remedy against this pride is, first, a through knowledge by the Word,
of a man's self; how unworthy and unsufficient he is; and the apprehension of
Gods merciful affection and dealing toward him; having his eye cast ever upon
the promises of God to support him.

2. Self-denial.
Secondly, pride is overthrown by man's self-denial; when he does in all
things so far resign himself to God; that he denies his own wisdom, will,
and ways; submitting himself to be disposed of by Gods will, and obediently
conforming himself thereunto, as David did, 2 Samuel 15.26. God resists the
proud, and exalts the humble.

4..Pusillanimity
The fourth cause of self-murder upon crosses and afflictions, is
pusillanimity, or weakness of mind; whereby some are not able to endure to
live to brook, or suffer some kind of wrongs done to them indeed, or as they
conceive: as husbands and wives under extremity of Iealonsie, or certainty of
knowledge, that their conjugall consorts do give their loves, and make their
bodies common to others. And as passionate suitors, and persons deeply
inamoured, and over-ingaged in their affections to those, whom they ambitiously
and over-eagerly seek or presume to enjoy: who see, or conceit themselves to
be repudiated, neglected, or forsaken by their wel-beleved; after past
promises, or strong hopes, or immoderate desires of enjoying them; of both
which sorts of people diverse do choose rather to die by their own hands, than
that they will endure to live rejected, and to see others to enjoy that, which
they would as their lives possess alone to themselves.

Unreasonableness of the fact of self-murder in this case.
But, this is most unreasonable and impious, that any one, for another bodies
fault, should do a worse themselves; and that he, or she, in recompense of
such a wrong done to them, should do themselves a far greater injury in their
own unrecoverable self-destruction: passion prevailing makes mad; and
weakness makes men do the greatest acts of impotency. If we in Christ enjoy
our good God, and if withal we possess the peace of our consciences in
well-doing, and be our selves taken up about heavenly things, and holy
employments; then is it not in the hand of any creature to make us miserable,
or weary of our lives; the comfort whereof depends not upon any earthly wight:
our repudiating, desertion, and wrong by those here on earth, that should least
fail us, should make us cleave the more close to God, and to live here as
possessing none of these things, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. that for our want of
them, or suffering by them, we may care the less, considering what little
assurance we have of them at any time, which at all times are accompanied with
dislikes.

. 16. Of afflictions unwarrantablenesse to kill ones self.
Insufficiency of this motive of crosses for a man to kill himself. 1.
Afflictions are not simply evil.
The insufficiency of this ground of affliction to warrant any man to murder
himself, is apparent, by four things. First, by the consideration of the
nature of the things that men by self-murder would rid themselves from, which
are afflictions; and therefore in that respect not properly evil, much less
so bad as self-murder, which is the course men take to free themselves from the
former: It is certainly madness for any body, wittingly and willingly, to
cast themselves into a greater evil, that they may free themselves from a
lesser.

For a man to get out of trouble by making a stolen escape, Non enim poena
vitatur furtiva discessiene, sed crescit.
he increases his deserved punishment: we must not break prison, but wait
Gods leisure.

2. Death is worse than afflictions.
Secondly, if a man consider what he parts from, namely, his life, to be
freed from troubles; he may see the folly of such a course of self-murder, upon
this motive. For, the goods of nature, and of the world, Donum vilae majus est
ijs ommbus: Filli.
are far inferior to a man's self, and to the worth of his life; because, in
them consists not a man's chief happiness; and therefore, for the same should
not a man kill himself. The Philosopher says that Poverty is not horrible, or
to be feared, neither death, neither any thing at all besides sin Arist.
asserit nec paupertatem esse horribilem, aut pertinvescendam, nec mortem, nec
omn no quicquam praeter culpam.
.

Therefore, why should a man kill himself for that, whereof he should not be
afraid? and why should he make so bad an exchange, in giving away his life for
ease from that, which cannot, by its presence, make miserable: and for to
precipitate himself into endless misery?

3. A self-murderer is deceived.
Thirdly, if a self-murderer did consider how he is deceived, in his
expectation of being eased, or delivered from troubles, by killing himself,
Vltimu^ malorum hujus vitae, and maxim terri^ile est mors; et iccireo infer
sibi morte^, ad alias hujus vitae misertas evadendas, est majus malum assumere
ad minoris mass vita^ienem. Tho. 2.2. q. 64. Art. 5.
when thereby he casts himself into infinite greater miseries, he might see
what little force this motive has in it to work, and justify this effect:
Seeing, life is more proper and effectual, than such a death, to procure
happiness. Although that self-murder be a quick way of dispatch, and of
putting out all feeling of bodily pain, it is not therefore better, when the
exchange is for the worse; ease and expedition in doing self-murder is no
argument of commendation; seeing evil of sin is most easily performed, as the
Apostle shows Romans 7.21. Heb. 12.1. Because, it is not an act of power, but of
impotency.

Peter Martyr wonders at the Stoics, that place happy life in virtue; and do
hold that adversity is not evil, that they should, to free themselves from
troubles, kill themselves; and says, What kind of happiness is that, which
death does perfect? if life be happy, then should we labor to abide therein:
what happiness is that which may be overcome by those things that are not
evil Quaenam est foelicitas quae morte est perficienda? Si vita est beata, in
ea est manendum: quae est faelicitas quaevinci potest ab ijs quae non sunt mala?
? For persecution, our Savior bids us flee from it, or patiently to endure it;
and no where allows that we should kill ourselves to prevent, or escape it:
our blessed Savior, although he were to lay down his life, yet would not kill
himself, for accomplishment of that work, that necessarily was to be done.

Ludovicus Vives cites out of Plutarch, and he out of Menander, That it is not
the part of a good and valiant man to say, I will not suffer this, but to say,
I will not do this Non est boni et fortis viri dicere he non patiar, sed hoc
nonfacia^.
.

4. He resists Gods will.
Fourthly, he that kills himself, for to free himself thereby out of troubles
and afflictions; resists the will of God, by shaking off that burden, which God
has laid upon him to bear, during his good pleasure, to which all are
subject. And thereunto the Son of God submitted himself, when he said to
Peter, The cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it John 18.11.
? And therefore, we are bound, in this case, to fulfill the will of God, by
passive obedience, when we cannot do the contrary without offending God,
neither did the Saints of God use self-murder, to free themselves out of
troubles; whereof we have neither precept, nor commendable example.

. 17. Of certain uses about afflicted persons.
Observe.
The uses or observations observable from this motive generally considered, are
two.

Afflicted persons are doubly burdened.
First, we are here to observe, that persons in trouble and adversity are under
a double burden; both of their afflictions, which they suffer, and also of
strong temptations; whereby thereupon Satan assaults them: both which the
persons in distress do commonly aggravate; so making their estates more
tedious and unsupportable, than otherwise they would be; Note.
in which condition men should beware of hard uncharitable conclusions against
themselves; Beware of censuring.
either in censuring themselves to be reprobates, forsaken of God, or the like:
or in determining rashly of, or against themselves, what they will do with
themselves, or to themselves in that case; otherwise than they have warrant
from God. Beware of concealment.
Again, in that estate, they should take heed of over-close concealment of
their troubles, from those that may advise, and help them to bear their
burdens: concealed grief is most dangerous to sink a man; but vent gives ease,
and procures help.

Finally, of persons in adversity others are to be observant, how they do; and
to be helpful to them, by their countenance, counsel? and aid of assistance,
from themselves, and by their intercession, from others: that so, that may be
easily borne, that is borne by many. Be observant and helpful.


2. How men are to order themselves in afflictions.
The second use, or observation from the point is, that people in distress do
fit themselves, and so order their course and behavior, as is most pertinent,
and best becoming their present estate, that they may not be overcome by it.

1.
First, by their care to live by faith Habak. 2.4.
, and not by sense: and that they may ride by the anchor of hope, cast upward
within the veil Heb. 6.19.
.

2.
Secondly, by humbly submitting themselves under the mighty hand of God, with
passive obedience; rather cutting our masts of self-will, and pride by the
board, than to hazard being over-set, by a high sail, in the storm of
troubles.

3.
Thirdly, they should labor to possess themselves in patience; that they may
stand fast, and overcome by suffering.

4.
Fourthly, they should endeavor to be cheerful under the cross.

5.
Fifthly, they should not be careful of future events, so long as they walk in
a good course, but commend themselves by prayer to God, Phil. 4.6. Mat. 6.25.
and rest confidently upon him, being employed and taken up with meditation of
the gracious promises and dealing of God toward those that depend upon him. By
neglect of which course the Devil prevails much against people in that
estate; even sometimes to self-murder.

. 18. Concerning anger and revenge.
The third general motive of self-murder. Anger and revenge.
The third general motive of self-murder is the rage of Anger, and the
unsatiable desire of revenge: which are most furious passions, that most
spoil, and are least subject to the command of reason, or religion; and can
most hardly be suppressed, or kept within any due compass: which, when they
cannot ease themselves, by vent upon others, will reflect upon the subject
wherein they are, to destroy the same.

Kinds of it.
This anger and revenge is of two sorts.

1. Against a man's self.
First, that which is directly against a man's own self: and that is either,
for what he has done; or else, for what he presently is. Sometimes men fall
into that degree of anger and revenge against themselves, for what they are, or
have done, or been, that nothing will content them, Propter peccata admissa:
For sins done.
but murdring of themselves; as, for some heinous crime, or flagitious course
of life; whereby they find themselves, upon sight and sense hereof, subjected
either to importable shame and punishment; or to intolerable grief of
conscience: as those, that are guilty of some horrible capital crimes done
against their consciences, such as wilful murder, spiteful blasphemy against
God, and the like; in regard of the former, we see how Indas hanged himself:
and the more secret that such crimes have been kept, and secure from the
stroke of humane justice; the more is man armed and bent with self-murder to
destroy himself, whom divine justice will not suffer to live.

Viciousness of nature and wicked motions.
Again, for the present, when a man labors in a continual conflict against
the execrable viciousness of his nature, and against the horrible motions of
his mind and inclinations of his heart, with much uncomfortable molestation
and trouble, without hope of overcomming the same, finding the same more and
more to prevail against him; so that he concludes; that, if he do live, he
shall be quite overcome by it, and carried headlong to all evil, to his greater
shame, and eternal ruin; which that he may prevent, or be revenged upon his
wretched flesh and corruption; out of his furious zeal, he by the instigation
of Satan, murders himself: and so upon pretense of destroying sin, he
destroys himself, in and by the most horrible sin of self-murder.

He esie.
Touching this killing of a man's self in grief and revenge, for his sins
committed, Alphonsus a Castro adversus haereses, de Martyrio haeresi secunda;
Haeresis est quae docet cos quise pro peccatointerimunt delore Martyrs
numupari, pro co quod pu^un^in se, quod dolent commisesse.
says it is an heresy, which teaches that those that kill themselves for
their sin, ought to be called Martyrs; because, they do punish in
themselves that, for which they grieve that they have committed it. The Author
of which heresy he says was Petilian the Donatist, against whom St. Augustine
wrote: which name of heresy it may well brook, if we consider the damnable
danger of it, specially accompanied with obstinacy in opinion, against the
judgment and advice of the Church.

Than to be counted an heretic nothing was more odious; because, the same
excludes a man both from the Communion and privileges of the Church on earth,
and also from the fruition of glory in Heaven: to which for punishment,
self-murder is equivalent; and if in any case, it be held obstinately in
opinion to be lawful, it is directly and formally an heresy: because, the
contrary is, according to truth, determined by the Church, as a point
concerning salvation.

Twofold revenge upon oxes self for sin.
There is a twofold revenge upon ones self, for sin: a good and a bad.

1. Good. In three things.
The good is that whereof the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 7.11. Behold what
revenge; which flows from grief for offending God: and consists in three
things.

1. Mortifying humiliation.
First, godly revenge upon ones self, for their sins, is in our chastising
of our selves, and afflicting of our souls before God, in penitent manner, in
mortifying humiliation; subduing our bodies by discipline, abstinence, etc.
whereby, through Christ both the guilt, and love of sin is extinguished in
us; and also the power of the corruption of it is killed.

2. Curbing our lusts.
Secondly, it is in the restraining and curbing of our own lusts and wills, to
subdue them wholly to the will of God; which cannot be done without both much
trouble and pains, and dislike to the old man of nature.

Cutting off the means of sin.
And also, it is in the stinting, or depriving of our selves of the use of
those things, by which the flesh has, or does take occasion to sin against
God: as, delights and pleasures, or things above necessity, when we abuse
them, which is as to pluck out the right eye, or to cut off the right hand.

3. Strictness.
Thirdly, it is in a more strict tasking of our selves to religious
observances, to holy duties, and good life; and to opportunities, and offices
of doing good to ourselves and others: so cutting our selves short of that
liberty, whereby we are apt to break out to dishonor God; and so bringing
our selves under the yoke of more severe spiritual subjection and discipline
to God, we shall subdue and mortify our old man of sin: in which three
points lies the revenge here allowed.

The second kind of revenge upon ones self. Bad.
The second kind of revenge upon ones self for sin, is that which is bad:
and it is either a wilful debiliating of ones self to good; or killing of
ones self, for his sin, by excessve grief: against which we have already
spoken, in some sort: or else this revenge is in laying violent hands upon ones
self purposely to mutilate, or kill himself, out of indignation for his sin.

Causes.
The causes hereof are specially two.

1. Desperation
First, desperation, in regard of the horriblenesse and grievousnesse of the
sins, whereof a man is guilty,.
and by which he is confounded in his conscience: and for that, withal he
conceives and persuades himself that God will never be merciful to him to
pardon him.

2. Ease of conscience.
Secondly, affectation and endeavor to ease ones troubled and restless
conscience, for some unnatural cruelties, and crying crimes; by satisfaction
of Justice, according to his demerits; makes himself to destroy himself: but of
this case we have spoken before.

The saul inesse of this revenge.
This revenge upon ones self in this manner, upon this cause, is many ways
faulty.

1.
First, because, of the opinion of expiation of sin thereby, which nothing
can do away, or can quiet the conscience, but only the blood of our blessed
Savior Christ.

2.
Secondly, because sin cannot be done away by sin, and such as is worse than
the former; no more than fire can be quenched by addition of more fire to it:
the punishment of sin belongs to God and his Vicegerents, whose laws are
violated.

3.
Thirdly, no man is a competent judge over himself, in this case, either to
clear, or to condemn himself. Non est quis id^neus judex inse, in propria
causa, Nemo halet in se authoritate, est non sit seipso superior. Filli.
Because, it is impossible that he should be both Superior and inferior to
himself; or that he should not be partially inclined in his affection to
himself, either in love or hatred.

4.
Fourthly, not by killing our selves, which deprives us of the necessary time
of repentance; but by repentance, and faith in Christ, our past sins are to
be done away, how grievous soever they be: Sibi adimit necessariu^
poeniste^tiae sepus. Tho. 2.2. q. 64. Art 5.
by living according to the will of God, and not by dying by our own hands;
our sins are reformed, and God glorified. God says, that he wills not the
death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18. why then should we will it?

5. For peace of con cience, what is to be done in this case.
Fifthly, for peace of conscience, in that case, God has appointed other
means: as

1.
First, humiliation and repentance before God.

2.
Secondly, confession to godly Ministers, for advice and comfort.

3.
Thirdly, if the former will not do, then are we to put our selves to open
shame for private faults, by public penance in the Church; or to put our
selves into the hands of the Magistrates, to suffer for our crimes, by the
civil sword.

Second kind of revenge. Against others.
The second kind of revenge is intended against others,by ones killing of
himself: when he is implacably offended by others, from whom he can neither
have satisfaction, nor reformation of his grievances; and when his death by his
own hands may redound to the hurt, or disgrace, as he thinks, of those that
have wronged him. Who in this respect are most subject to self-murder.
Which practice of self-murder, upon this motive, is most incident to persons
of the weakest sex, and worst disposition and condition; such as be women, and
servants, and men sympathizing with them in qualities; as a Wife that, because
she cannot have her will of, or with her Husband, kills her self, to the
intent to disgrace him, with the reproach of being the occasion of that fact;
to grieve and vex him, and to deprive him of all benefit and comfort that he
might have by her life, and to hurt him by all the evil, that can betide him
by her death.

The unreasonablenesse of the practice.
Which is a mad course, for one to pull out both their own eyes, to the end
that another may lose one of his: Such persons do die in implacable malice,
and are certainly damned by their own act and manner of concluding their life.

A good revenge.
There is a good and lawful revenge to be exercised upon those that wroug us;
which is in killing that evil in them, whereby they offend God and us; by
instructing and reforming them, by holy admonitions and example; and also in
killing their enmity, with preservation of their persons, by our love and good
dealing toward them; making them our friends, both in affection and behavior;
whereby our enemies are destroyed, and our selves benefited.

Touching killing a man's self in revenge for his sins, S. Augustine says,
that We affirm that no man ought for his sins past to kill himself; Hoc
asserimus -- neminem propter sua peccata praeterita, propter que magis ^ac vita
opus est, ut possit poeniteudo sanari, cum fructuosam agere possumus
poenite^^^^ apud Deum. Jude sacium merito detestamur, cum se liqueo suspendit,
seeleratae illi^s traditionis auxisse potius quam expiasse commissum: quoniam
Dei miscricerdiam desperando exi^^abiliter, penitus nullum sibi salubris
poenitentiae locum reliquit, suae mertis reus sinivil ^ane vitam, quia, licet
propter suum scelus, alio seclere suo eccisus est.
for which he has rather need of his life, that by repentance they may be
healed: And condemns the same, when we may by living perform profitable
repentance before God: And further says, that we do justly abhor the fact
of Judas, seeing when he hanged himself, he did rather increase, than expiate
the fact of his flagitious treason; because damnably despairing of the mercy of
God, he left no place of saving repentance to himself; he ended this life
being guilty of his own death; for although he was flaine for his own vile
fact, yet it was by another vile fact of his own. And so it is apparent, that
for sin past, or for revenge, no man can murder himself warrantably.

. 19. Concerning prevention of sin to come.
The fourth general motive to self-murder: Prevention of sin.
The fourth general motive of men to self-murder, is prevention of sin to
come; which a man conceives will inevitably be effected to Gods dishonor, and
his own disgrace, if he do still live; and may by his death be prevented: and
therefore does he hasten and inflict the same with his own hands.

Those sins for which he would kill himself to prevent them, are of two sorts.

1. The sins of others.
First, they are the sins of others, for which a man would kill himself;
either that he may not see them to his grief, or that he may not be the
object, or subject of other men's committing of them. As those women that to
avoid ravishment, and of being deflowred, did kill themselves. Of whom
Eusebius makes mention in his history, book 8. cap. 12. and also Ambrose in
his third book of Virgins; and Augustine in his first book of the City of
God. Also Hierome writing to Gerontia, makes mention of the wife of Hasdrubal,
who took her children in her hands, and did throw her self headlong into the
fire, that she might not suffer ravishment. Hasdrubalis uxer apprehensis
utraque manu liberis insubvectiu^ se praecipitavit incendium, ne pudicitiae
damna sentiret.


This motive is insufficient.
That this is a very insufficient motive for a man to kill himself, Augustine
makes manifest, de Civit. lib. 1. c. 17. when he says, aliena non sunt nostra
peccata, other men's sins are not ours. Virtue and sin is properly in the
heart, out of which they flow, and are not in the body without the minds
consent; where we are but the passive object, and involuntary sufferers; and
therefore, such sin is not ours, but the agents thereof, except the sufferer
do yield consent to it. Nisi quis consentiat, noninquinatur corpus nisi de
conscusu mentis. Dict. Luciae.


If God, that hates sin much more than we can, and can easily restrain or
destroy sinners, does notwithstanding endure with much long suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction Rom 9.22. Non debet in se committere
crimen maximum, ut vitet minus crimen alienum. Tho. 2.2. q. 64. art. 5.
; Why should not we suffer what we cannot amend, leaving the same to God the
righteous Judge? We must not labor to prevent another man's sin, by doing a
worse of our own: For so we shall fall into that, with destruction to our
selves, which we oppose in others. We may comfortably believe, that if we do
what we can to resist the yielding to another man's sin, God will either keep
us from consenting, or will graciously pardon it. After that by prayer, advise,
resistance and flight, we have done what we can that the same may not be
committed.

2. A man's own sins.
The second sort of sins, for prevention whereof some people would kill
themselves, are a man's own sins, that he is confident he shall do, to his
own great shame and hurt, to Gods great dishonor, and to the disgrace of his
friends and cause, if he do live.

His grounds of fear that he shall do them.
Which he conceives will unavoidably come to pass, in regard of his extreme
inward frailty, or prevalent vicious inclination of his own heart, and of
outward force of attempts and temptations; wherewith he is persuaded he shall
be powerfully assaulted, beyond all ability that he has to withstand the same;
and therefore, to prevent such a fall, he resolves to kill himself, and so
destroys himself wilfully by a most certain and damnable sin, to prevent
an uncertain and lesser sin; as it is written of Apolonia, who did cast her
self into the fire, and so killed her self, that she might not be forced to
worship Idols.

Chemnitius reports out of Lira, that there were Hebrews, that did teach that
it was not only lawful, but that it was also meritorious for a man to kill
himself, in two cases.

1. No in contemptu^ Dei vita ludi^^io habeatur.
First, that his life may not be a scorn, to the contempt of God.

2. Si timeas ne magnitudine tormentorum deficias.
Secondly, if a man should be afraid lest he should fall away from the truth,
through the greatness of his torments. To which S. Augustine writing against
Gaudentius lib. 2. cap. 12. adds a third from the Donatists; to wit, fear of
falling away in persecution, because of the infirmity of the flesh.

Insufficiency of this motive. Reasons.
The weakness and insufficiency of this motive, for any body thereupon to kill
themselves, is apparent by five reasons.

1. Future evil is but contingent
First, the motive is from uncertain future things; which as they are in Gods
power to dispose as he lists, so are we to leave them to him; and not for
preventing thereof, to attempt any thing certainly evil without divine
warrant; whereby we may hasten what we fear, or something worse.

2. Self-killing is no lawful means, but others to prevent sin.
Secondly, God never appointed self-murder to be used for this, or any other
end: but for remedy, has appointed us to walk unvariably and constantly in
the way and course appointed by him, and to rely upon his promises, 1 Cor.
10.13. Who will not suffer us to be tempted above our power: God shows his
power in our weakness. 2 Cor. 1.2, 9.

3. Self-murder is evil.
Thirdly, we must not do evil that good may come Romans 3.8.
: self-murder is evil, and therefore for no good is to be done. If we would
die to avoid sin, why should we so hainously sin, whereby we may die for ever,
with perpetual ignominy? Ac si dicat, jam nunc peccemus, ne postea forte
peccemus; jam nunc perpetremus homicidium, ne postea forte incidamus in
Adulterium. Nonne si tantum damnatur iniquitas, ut in innocentia, sed potius
peccata eligantur; satius est incertum profuturo adulterium; quam certu^ de
praesenti homicidiu^? nonne satius est flagitium committere, quod poenitendo
sanetur, qua^ tale facinus; ubi locus salubris poenitentiae non relinquitur.
Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 1. cap. 25.


4.
Fourthly, if to prevent sins any man might lawfully kill himself, then all
men and women in the world might kill themselves: because, so long as we live
we do sin; and are liable to gross falls many times. But if all might upon
that reason kill themselves, if their heart would serve them, then all mankind
might presently be extinct, and the Church of God on earth be abolished; and so
the continuance and number of the same should depend upon the will of men
themselves, rather than upon the will of God: which were a thing most absurd
and impious.

5.
Fifthly, to prevent sin, we are commanded to fear God, and to walk with him
in all our ways; for no man falls into any gross evil that observes that
course; seeing sin is a transgression of the law: and therefore, by
transgressing of the law cannot be avoided, but is run into, and increased.

Observe. Evil is not to be done to accomplish goodness.
From hence we are to observe, that no holy end or effect is to be accomplished
by ill or unlawful means. For God, that destinates the end, is all-sufficient
to give good means, and to make them powerful to perform what he would have
to be done; that we need not go to be beholding to the devil for his help
to do Gods work, about which he and his wicked means are never employed but
they spoil it. And therefore, as the work we do is good, and as we would
have good come of it; we must be careful to use only good means, that we may
look for a blessing from God upon them.

Actions are not good only from intention
Again, we must not measure and judge an action to be good, only by the good
end and intention of the doers thereof in their act of doing the same: for Saul
offered sacrifice 1 Samuel 13.12.
, and Paul persecuted the Church Acts 22.4.
; both of them with a good intention; and yet for all that their actions were
evil. Because, to make an action good, there are many other things necessary
than the good intention of the doers of it: it is sufficient to make an action
morally evil, if it be defective in any thing requisite for to make it good;
but to be good it must be every way perfect.

. 20. Concerning ambition.
The fifth general motive, Ambition.
The fifth general motive of self-murderers to kill themselves, is Ambition;
either to keep, or get a greater good by killing themselves, than they can have
or enjoy by living any longer, as they think; which profitable exchange makes
them think it both lawful and expedient to kill themselves. This good is of
two kinds, whereof man is ambitious to death, and for which some kill
themselves.

Kinds of good aimed at by ambition. 1. Glory and praise.
First, it is worldly glory and praise, which they think to purchase to
themselves, Ethnicitanquam insignem fortitudine^ celebraru^t.
by the very acting and doing of self-murder, touching which, the heathen has
commended such for their fortitude; specially when they did it to preserve
their personal liberties, from falling under subjection to their enemies, as
did Cato: to whom I may apply that of Brutus, that it was the love of his
country, and excessive ambition of praise that made him to kill himself.

Amor patriae, laudumque immensa cupido. And when they did the same, lest they
should either suffer, or do any thing, as they thought, more disgraceful.
Vainglory, and popular praise is so powerful a motive, that for the same it
is said that Empedocles killed himself.

2. A better life after death.
The second good, for ambition whereof, some kill themselves that they may
hasten to attain the same, Ad assequendam gloriam aeternam
is another and better life after death; as did Cleombrotus, who upon reading
in Plato of another more happy life after this, which cannot be attained but
by death, did precipitate himself into the mouth of death; and so killed
himself, as Cicero in the first book of his Tusculan questions makes report.

In such esteem was that life even with natural men, that they did willingly
run into death, that they might enjoy that whereof they had but a small
glimpse, and little assurance. Which may condemn many Christians, who have
greater knowledge, and better evidences for the same, and do so lightly regard
it, that for it they will not forsake their pleasures and lusts, nor will do
duties of easier performance according to Gods appointment, to have it. Men
would willingly be saved and go to heaven, but by their own ways and courses,
and not by Gods; although their own be more tedious and chargeable than his;
so far is man wedded to his self-will, and so ready to do what himself
devises.

Note. Men are more deceived in the means, than in the ends.
Men are not so much deceived in the ends that they project to themselves;
(which commonly are good, but especially the last) as they are self-beguiled in
the means and ways that they use of their self-devising and pleasing, to
attain their ends: whereupon it comes to pass, that so many are frustrated of
their desires and expectatation. For good ends, which be morally and
beatifically such, are never got but by good means of Gods own appointment;
whereabouts man is to deny his own will, and only to follow Gods; who never
disappoints us thereby of good success, according to our hearts desire in the
attainement of our last end.

Insufficiency of the former motive touching the first branch.
The insufficiency of the former motive of praise and fortitude, justly to
cause a man to kill himself, is apparent by that which Augustine says of
Cato, that it was not fortitude, but a softness that made him kill himself,
because he was not able to bear adversity Non fortitudo, sed mollities; non
potuit serre res adversas.
; and did it out of impatiency at Caesar's empire; but being impatiently
self-willed, would not submit to Gods providence: he says, his fact was great,
but not good Magnum potius sactum quam been, Fortiterille facit qui miser esse
potest; Seen. Epist. 59. Imbecillis est and ignavus qui propter dolorem
moritur. Arist. 3. Nicomach. cap. 7. Molles sunt qui amoris gratia vel
paupertatis sibi mortem consciseunt: non posse pati, non est vera fortitudo,
sed magis quaedam mollities animi, non valentis mala poenalia sustinere: Tho.
2.2. q. 64. art. 5.
: and further affirms, that it is pufillanimity not to be able to suffer;
which is a thing whereunto the weakest, as women, are most apt; both for want
of strength to endure to suffer; and also for want of wisdom to make choice of
that which indeed is best for them; for as the Philosopher says, no man kills
himself, nisi depravata ratione and Arist. Eth. lib. 3. cap. 8.
, but by depravation of his reason; and so is (as it were) a mad man, that is
worse than a beast.

Praise is got by well-doing.
The true way and means for a man to gain true honor and praise, is
well-doing, according to the will and commandments of God, (as the Apostle
says) Glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good Romans 2.10.
; which extends it self to all eternity; in the presence, and with the
commendation of God, his holy angels, and of all Gods people: whereas, of evil
doing there comes nothing but shame, and confusion eternal: for even to be
commended by vain and wicked persons for doing good, casts some suspicion, or
aspersion upon the commended; much more is it disgraceful to be praised by
such for evil doing; which is the matter of man's shame; and therefore upon
that motive not to be done.

About the second branch, the insufficiency of the motive from a better life
kill ones self.
For the second branch of the aforesaid motive: viz. about a better life, the
insufficiency thereof to make a man undertake to kill himself, thereby the
sooner to come to eternity, is evident by four particulars.

1. Self-murder is not the way to heaven.
First, self-murder being a most grievous sin, it cannot be the way to heaven
and life; but to hell and death. The Saints of God that did most long for this
eternal life of happiness, and to whom their natural lives were not dear,
for them to spend them to attain it; did not therefore kill themselves to have
it, which they knew was the way to lose it Reos suae mortis melior post mortem
vita non suscipit. August.
, as we see by the practice of the Apo: Paul, who although he had a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which he deemed to be best Phil. 1.23.
, yet would he not kill himself, upon pretense the sooner to have his desire;
Who, if that had been a way to it, would not have omitted it. Also old Simeon,
having seen Christ, and being desirous to be translated into a better life,
did not kill himself to effect it; but said, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace Luke 2.29.
. If self-killing were a lawful means the sooner to have life eternal, why
should not all Gods dearest servants have used it; who were to omit no lawful
course to advance themselves to that estate?

We are to wait Gods apponted time for heaven.
Secondly, we are to wait our appointed time of God, and not to stint, or cut
it short, as we list; as we see was the practice of Job, who said, All the
days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come Job. 14.14.
; we are not our own Masters, and therefore, may not leave our stations when
we list.

3. We are to do all our service before we have the reward.
Thirdly, we should not affect and fly upon the reward, before that we have
done all the service for the same appointed us of God; in the spending of our
lives to that period determined by him; our day must be at an end, before we
can receive our penny, Mat. 20.8. the which day we must not precipitate, by
making the light of our lives to set at noone, or before its due time, by a
self-murdring hand: He that believes makes not haste; the promises are attained
by patient waiting, which is a part of our obedience best pleasing to God;
delay brings increase of glory.

4. Eternal life is here begun.
Fourthly, we have a certain, and comfortable enjoying of eternal life begun
here in this world, by grace, in faith, holy life, and communion with God: as
the Apostle tells us, that the Kingdom of God is in righteousness, peace, and
joy of the holy Ghost Romans 14.17.
: without which in this life, we shall never inherit the Kingdom of God in
the life to come; and if we have this, in this life, then may we well wait
for the accomplishment of it in the life to come; when we have such possession,
assurance and comfort of it here.

Observe. Hope of advancement abused to evil.
Here we may observe, that Satan will abuse the hope of advancement, to make
man venture upon the doing of my sin; as he did Eve: by this bait, more
mischief has been done, and more souls hooked into hell, than by any one
other means in the world. Note.
And hereby it is that ambitious men, and persons of parts, and of aspiring
spirits, do most frequently perish.

The present estate of the godly is best for that present.
We are to consider that, the present estate wherein we are, by Gods
appointment and will, is the estate of our best advancement for the present;
beyond which, for us, by our self-willed courses, to transgress, is but the
way for us to come down and catch a fall.

. 21. Of the motions of the Devil, to self-murder.
The sixth general motive to self-murder. Impulsus diaboli. The instigation of
the devil.
The sixth general motive, whereupon self-murderers do kill themselves, is the
strong impulse, powerful motions, and command of the Devil, who is himself a
murderer, and also moves man to practice it; both upon others, and upon
himself; thereby to dishonor God, in the destruction of his Image, and in the
contempt and breach of his Law: and that by the same he may destroy mankind,
overthrow the works of God, and fill the world with confusion: he attempted it
against Christ himself Mat. 4.
; he caused the Swine to drown themselves Mat. 8.
; he endeavored to have made the possessed child to have killed it self. Mar.
9.22.

Whence the devil has his power.
That the devil has such power sometime over man, proceeds from the leave and
permission of God, without which he can do nothing: and also it is from his
spiritual nature, whereby he is naturally superior to man, and can strangely
affect him; that he so far prevails over him sometimes, that he can make
him kill himself.

How thereby self-murder is effected.
This infernal command, or powerful inclination of self-murder is given, or
wrought by Satan two ways.

1. In visible apparition.
First, in some visible apparition of the devil, speaking to, and persuading a
man to kill himself. 2. Outwardly.
Which he does either outwardly in some bodily shape, as he spoke to Eve, and
to our Savior Christ: 1. Inwardly.
or else inwardly to the fancy, whereby a man thinks that he hears, or sees
the devil, or some other, that can be none else but he, bidding, or
persuading him to stab himself, or to fling himself into the water; or out of
a window, or the like, to kill himself thereby.

Persons haunted. 1. Wicked.
The persons thus haunted by Satan, are either notorious wretches, mancipated
to the devils service, and guilty of horrible crying crimes; 2. Melancholic.
or else they are persons extremely melancholic, fearful, or discontented,
whose tempers, and imaginations give the devil advantage this way to work
upon them.

2. Satan's powerful motions in the mind.
Secondly, the devil does powerfully move a man to kill himself, in manner
equivalent to a commandment, by internal suggestions, and raising of such
inward powerful motions of self-killing in the mind, as can hardly be put
out, or withstood: in regard of the deep and firm impression of them in man,
and of the intimate entertainment and commanding possession that they have in
him, by means of his corruption conspiring with Satan, to man's own
destruction.

Satan's grounds of working to prevail.
The grounds that Satan works upon, after this manner, to prevail with man to
kill himself, are three.

1. The advantage of all other motives.
First, he takes advantage of all other motives to self-murder, both furthering
and powerfully intending all occasions to that effect; perverting the
judgment, and kindling pride, or impatiencie, as is apparent by his dealing
with Job, whose afflictions he both procured, and poisoned, with the leaven of
his intermingled malitiousnesse.

He injects resolutions of self-killing.
And also, he works and injects into the minds of men, upon those cross
occasions, such self-killing resolutions, as puts them upon that vile act; in a
man's sufferings and distractions the devil is most busy to work his own
ends thereby, who subtly intermingles himself in all storms of troubles,
against man.

2. Profaneness and idleness.
The second ground, whereby Satan prevails with man to kill himself, is man's
wretched profaneness and idleness: for, a heart empty of goodness, and
filled with wickedness, is a fit receptacle for Satan, especially when such an
one is not taken up with holy thoughts, and with good and warrantable
employment, in some calling, then is there room, and fit time, for the devil
to cast in his fiery temptations, to take possession of such a man, and
forcibly to incline him to what horrible evils he list, even to
self-destruction.

3. Peoples fit temper and disposition.
The third ground whereupon Satan overswaies men to kill themselves, is the
special temper and disposition of people, whereby they are, in differing
manner, capable of several impressions; 1. Natural.
this disposition or temper is either natural, as melancholic, fearful,
proud, ambitious, or the like; which kind of persons are naturally aptest to
resolve upon, and attempt dismal acts of self-murder, upon the devils
suggestion, in the fits and pangs of their distemperature.

2. Moral.
Or else, the temper most capable to receive the impressions of self-murder
from Satan, is moral: as in people surcharged with the bondage and horror of
their sins; and with the fear of the punishment due for them: which the
devil aggravates to such a man, to drive him to desperation; and obscures, or
overshadowes the grace and mercy of God from him; and so perplexes a distressed
conscience with conceit of unpardonablenesse of his sins, from apprehension of
the excessive greatness of the same; of the kind of them, as if they were
against the holy Ghost, and from conceit that either the time of grace to him
is past; or that God will never pardon him, although he should seek to him for
forgiveness: then such an one resolves, by the devils persuasion, to kill
himself, that he may prevent the making of his estate worse, than presently it
is, and to ease himself of the present distress of conscience that he is in.

How these motions be known to be from Satan.
That we may know whether this self-murderous impulsion, and strong motion be
from the devil, we are to observe three things.

1. By natures and reasons abhorring of them.
First, if the motion of self-murder, so raised, or injected be such; as upon
the first sight thereof, nature in a man abhorres it, and reason and grace
withstands, with a continual strife and conflict against it; then the same is
of Satan.

2. When they are from some secret impelling power.
Secondly, if the forciblenesse of the motion to self-murder, for effecting the
act, be not so much, from the apparent occasious, as from secret impelling
power, then, the same is from Satan; because, the thing whereunto a man is
moved is evil, and therefore, cannot be from God, or any good principle.

Satan's deceitful craft.
That the devil may make a man to murder himself, he both hides the ugliness
of the sin, and the greatness of the danger; and also, he makes a false
representation of great, or pleasing good by it to man, more than he can have
by living.

Insufficiency of this motive from Satan to kill ones self.
The insufficiency of this motive from Satan, to warrant a man to kill himself,
is apparent by two things.

1. Believe him not.
First, we ought neither to believe the devil who is a liar, nor to obey him;
but to resist him, and give him no place Jam. 4.7. Ephesians. 4 27.
. For, God is our Lord whom we are to respect, and not Satan: and whatsoever
motions do come from the devil, we are the more to abhor them, because they
come from him.

2. Contrary to reason and religion.
Secondly, such a vile motion is contrary to right reason, and Gods will; both,
because it flows originally from Satan; and also is grounded, neither upon
reason nor religion, but upon fond conceits and self-will: a reasonable man,
and Christian, should do nothing advisedly, neither warrantably can do any
thing, but according to sound reason and religion.

Observe. Men are in danger by the Devil.
We are to observe, from this general motive of self-murder, the danger that
men are in by the devil, who endeavors the destruction both of soul and
body: and of the body he desires the overthrow specially by a man's own
hands: because, thereby he also ruinates the soul, in its horrible act of
transgression by self-murder; which is the thing that he specially aims at.

And therefore, we need to observe diligently the Apostle Peter's direction, to
be sober and vigilant, because our adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour 1 Pet. 5 8.
. Note.
And also, we should be careful to cleave to God by faith, in believing in
him through Christ, and to depend always upon him by prayer, who is the
preserver of men: and so we shall be safe, walking in the ways of Gods
appointment, and adbering to the direction of his word.

. 22. Of Frenzy occasioning self-killing.
The seventh general motive of self-murder. Frenzy.
The seventh motive occasioning self-killing, is phrentick distemperatures; 1.
Voluntary. Ira furor brevis est.
which are either voluntarily contracted and entertained, as in violent
passions of love, anger, and the like; whereby some kill themselves: 2.
Involuntary.
or else they are involuntary, and such as a man is but passively affected
with, and subject to; whereby a man being deprived of the use of reason, does
most unreasonable actions, as to kill himself, or his dearest friends; led
only by a brute passion, without reason, or understanding.

Kinds of it. 1. Natural.
This involuntary phrentick distemperature is either natural, or spiritual.

1. Fools.
Natural, is first in persons from their birth, wanting the use of reason, and
disposed to mad prancks, by a depraved disposition, or deficiency; as fools,
having instead of reason a spice of frenzy, when passion is provoked in them,
not sticking to do themselves mischief.

2. Mad men.
Secondly, it is in mad men and lunaticks, who are inclined to do unreasonable
harmefull acts, without any respect of good to themselves, in that which they
do.

3. Melancholic persons.
Thirdly, it is in extreme melancholic persons, who are possessed with
direful apprehensions, and oppressed with uncomfortable sadness, and are
driven into fearful resolutions, sometimes of self-murder: upon deep
impressions in them of heavy things and terrible, flowing from their own
fancies, and strong imaginations, which often, never comes to pass.

2. Spiritual.
The distemperature of spiritual frenzy in a man, which occasions
self-murder, is that which deprives a man of the use of spiritual reason and
divinity, that he has in him, and inclines him to do acts contrary to grace
and natural reason.

The grounds of spiritual frenzy.
This kind of distemperature arises from two grounds especially.

1. Abused judgment.
First, from an abused or perverted judgment, either upon mistaken principles,
from conceit of the motion of Gods Spirit; or by over-clouding of a man's mind,
by mad error, raging passions, furious preposterous zeal; and by the foggie
mists of misprisions and horrors, overspreading man's understanding and
conscience, whereby a man becomes spiritually phrentick; which is a kind of
learning that makes mad Act. 26.24.
. All wilful sin is a spice of spiritual, or moral madness, Note.
in which respect David confessed of himself, that he was as a beast before
God Psalm. 73.22.
.

2. Distress of conscience.
The second cause of spiritual frenzy, that occasions self-murder, is
inextricable perplexity of distress of conscience, proceeding from want of all
sensible feeling of grace, of the favor of God, of comfort, or hope, and from
apprehension of Gods heavy displeasure, and of fearful subjection to
eternal damnation and misery: in which estate a man has not the use of those
parts of understanding and grace, which he has in him; but is like a ship in a
storm driven, without command of sails, or rudder, to destruction.

Some kind of frenzy excuses not, and some does excuse a self-killer, from
the imputation of self-murder.
This motive, although it be powerful sometimes to the effecting of
self-killing, warrants not an act done both against reason and religion: where
the foresaid frenzy is by default contracted, or, in the time of the lucide
intervals thereof, if a man do kill himself, he is directly and formally a
self-murderer.

Observe. Frenzy is calamitous, and to be prayed against.
We are to observe from hence, how dangerous and calamitous a thing it is to be
subject to such phrentick distempers: and therefore, we are to labor and pray
for a sound mind, and that we may be able wisely to use those parts of
understanding and religion that we have for our own good, and the good of
others; that having our right wits and senses, we may not do those prankes, or
so live as may prove that we are fitter for Bedlam, or to be begged for fools,
than to be reputed reasonable or wise men.

. 23. Of examples of self-murder.
The last general motive to self-murder. Examples.
The eighth and last general motive, whereupon self-murderers do kill
themselves, is frequent examples both of heathens and Christians, who have done
the same, and are celebrated, and famous in histories, of whom we neither see,
nor hear of further evil befallen them. It is certain, that examples of
commendable persons, and such as we love, is a strong motive to draw men to the
like practice.

Note.
But it is to be observed, that they are neither the best men, nor the wisest,
that are led by examples, as by their supreme rule, without respect of more
warrantable direction and reason: but of this see more afterward, Cap. 17.. 7.
arg. 17. and cap. 18.. 4.

Josephus reports how Eleazar by this motive encouraged himself and others to
kill themselves: De bello Judaico lib. 7. cap. 28.
in these words. Let us see the example of the wiser sort (as he calls them)
of the Indians, who (he said) being just men, did tolerate this life as a
necessary office of nature for a certain time, though against their wills; yet
did they hasten to unloose the soul bound in this mortal body, though not
urged thereunto by any calamity, or necessity; but only for desire of
immortality.

But this motive from examples of self-murder is unsufficient to warrant the
same, because they are contrary to sound reason and religion, against which no
example is to be followed: and such examples are the practice not of the best,
but of the worst disposed of men, who are not to be imitated, specially in that
which is evil; and none are warrantably commended in histories, nor famous in
the Church, because, and in respect that they killed themselves, but for some
precedent virtues, and pious disposition in their lives. For all men who are
guided in their judgment by sound reason and divine truth, do thereby verily
think and believe, that the damnable act of self-murder does bring the
committers thereof into the woeful and fearful estate of eternal perdition
in the world to come.

Thus far I have labored to discover the motives abused to self-murder, and
have showed the insufficiency of them.

Observe.
Where we may observe, how men encourage themselves, and pretend reason for all
their wicked and unreasonable courses, and how weak and unwarrantable their
grounds and excuses are for the same; which, like smoke or a shadow, vanishes
in the trial of impartial truth; and so leaves the sinner stripped naked from
his shifts, and subjected to just judgment of condemnation at the last.

CHAP. 16. The introducement and entrance into self-murderer.
. 1. Of the persons subject to self-murder.
WE are now to proceed to the introduction and beginning of self-murder, in
the act thereof; about which we are to consider two things.

1. Persons subject to self-murder.
First, the persons that are most subject, upon the former grounds, to
temptations and acts of self-murder, are specially of four sorts.

1. Melancholicke people.
First, melancholy people; because they are most cogitabundi and tristes,
given to musing and sadness, on whom Satan works most; and they are most
subject to coffeehouse, and apt thereupon to entertain impressions and
resolutions of self-murder. So that natural temper makes much for the passive
capacity of some virtues and vices, more than others.

2. People under spiritual temptations.
Secondly, the persons most subject to these fits of self-murder, are
Christians under great spiritual temptations, upon their want of apprehension
of the presence of grace, and favor of God; and upon the sense of the horror
of their own raging corruptions and lusts, in the seeming prevailing thereof
against their opposition, without hope of ability to subdue them, or to have
them pardoned. And upon conceiving that their crosses, when the same are great,
are in wrath from God, without any hope of forgiveness or freedom; which
swallows them up in despair: temptations incline men contrary to their own
tempers.

3. Proud ambitious persons.
Thirdly, the parties most subject to self-murder, are high-minded and
ambitious persons, impatient of disgrace and crosses; as was Ahitophel, and all
such as place their chief happiness in earthly things; whereof when they are
disappointed, they grow into that degree of coffeehouse, that they will not
outlive their expectation of earthly things, but will rather kill themselves,
than endure such a cross and disappointment in that which they most highly
value.

4. Wicked persons.
Fourthly, those that are most subject to fall into this self-murder, are
people that are most obnoxious to a wicked and flagitious course of life,
embraced and impenitently lived in; contrary both to the means they have, and
also to the light and reluctance of their own consciences; with such affection
of love to, and zeal for evil, and hatred and opposition of goodness and all
good people; that they overpitch themselves so far beyond recovery, that when
they are thoroughly awaked, and do seriously consider, discern and feel the
woefulness of their estates; being under the desperate sense and importable
horror of their sins and judgments due for the same; then are they in
danger to conclude their wretched days by self-murder.

Observe. To know our tempers, and watch our selves.
Therefore, people should well consider their own tempers and states, with the
several dangers that attend upon the same; and are to be wise to fortify
themselves, where they are weakest; and so wisely to demean and behave
themselves, that they neither entertain, nor give way to any thing in
themselves that may bring them to destruction; but by faith and good works to
walk with God, whereby they may be sure to live for ever.

. 2. Of the entrance into self-murder.
2. Entrances into self-murder.
The second thing considerable in the acting of self-murder, is the first
entrances, degrees or approaches into it, which are specially four.

1. Crying capital crimes. Parricide proceeds.
First, grievous capital crying sins of blood; as murder, known, or secret,
parricide, which is killing of parents, children, wives, or husbands: 1. From
love of them that are killed.
which flows either from exuberancy of carnal affection to them whom they
kill, whereby they take occasion to kill them, by prevention, to free them from
miseries; or to have them with them out of this world; being by their own
hands about to rid themselves out of this life.

2. From hatred of them.
Or else it proceeds from unnatural, or monstrous hatred to them, for wrong
sustained by them, for keeping some good from them; 3. From love of some other
things.
or for the supposed evil they may bring upon them: as whores that kill their
infants to avoid shame and punishment; children that kill their aged parents
to come to their estates; mothers in law that kill their children in law, to
derive estates to their own; widows that kill their children to ease
themselves of charge, and to prefer themselves by marriage. These persons, as
they kill their own souls by such vile sins; so are they justly given over of
God in recompense of their own ways, to destroy their own bodies by their
own self-murdering hands.

2. Desperation.
The second degree of entrance, or approach into self-murder, is desperation of
pardon of sins, or of freedom from calamities; which rather than some will
endure, they will kill themselves; seeing no other way of easing themselves and
their minds, whereof some resemblance may be seen in Jobs Wifes counsel to
her Husband, Job 2.9. expounded.
advising him in his extremity to curse God and die, that is, that he would
take a course to be rid out of his miseries; either by blasphemy provoking God
to kill him; or by dispatching himself with his own hands, after that he had
blessed God, in making peace with him for the safety of his soul.

3 Entertainment of self-murderous motions.
Thirdly, a further degree of entrance into self-murder, is the advised
entertainment of temptations and motions for a man to kill himself,
voluntarily suffering the same to seize upon him, with some liking thereof;
searching and pleading reasons, and examples to beguile himself; whereby he
may think it lawful, or lesse-evill in that case to kill himself: and begins
to plot the manner how he may best accomplish it, with a fluttering wavering
resolution to do it.

4. Impatient desire of death.
The fourth degree of entrance into self-murder, is the impatient wishing and
desiring of death, and a lothing and wearisomnesse of life; which so far
prevails upon some, that their whole study and endeavors are how to get out
of their lives, and to dispatch themselves by their own hands, rather than to
live here.

A question concerning desire of death.
It is here a pertinent question, whether it be at all lawful to desire that we
were dead?

Answer.
For resolution whereof, it is to be considered that there are two sorts of
desires of death; the one is holy, the other is sinful.

1 A holy desire of death. How it is holy.
A holy desire of death is that, which desires not to be unclothed, but to be
clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. the things that make this desire to be holy are
two.

1 By subordination to Gods will.
First, when it is conditional and moderate, with respect and subordination to
the good will of God, being content to live if God will have it so; and while
we are in this life, such holy desires of our dissolution from hence, do not
hinder, but further all such performances as tend to the glorifying of God, and
to the edification of our selves and others.

2 In the motives thereof.
Secondly, the holiness of the desire of death consists in the motives
thereof; the which are two.

1
The first, is to be with Christ; that we may enjoy God in him, to our full
happiness. Philip. 1.23.

The second is, that we may be wholly freed from sinning against God, and may
be beatifically perfect; in having the fullness of that, whereof we now have the
first fruits, as the Apostle professes touching himself; that he did forget
those things that are behind, and did reach forth to those that are before,
and did press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus Phil. 3.13, 14.
: yet, for to be translated no man is purposely to do any thing to hasten his
death; nor to omit any thing due for preservation of his life; or to be more
negligent in doing the things which are pertinent for him to do in this life.

Unlawful desires of death.
A sinful desire of death consists in three things.

First, in absolutely desiring it, according to our own wills, how, and when
to die; with using means as we list to effect it, neglecting the preservation
of life, and well employment of the same in doing all those duties, for which
God does give it to us.

2
Secondly, when our desire of dying is from lothing of life, and envying the
benefit of it to ones self, for Gods glory, and the good of others; which we
postpone and subject to our own self-wills.

3.
Thirdly, when our eager desire of the same, is more for freedom from some
temporary evils 1 Kings 19.4. Job. 3.3. Jer. 20.14. Rev 6.16.
; than for to enjoy spiritual and eternal good: which ought not to be,
because God is as much, if not more glorified, and our selves and others truly
benefited by our passive obedience, as by our active: Note.
for, by the former God has his will more than by the latter.

Our chief care should be for the happy estate of our souls, and of both
soul and body for evermore. Non pro vitandis naturae vel fortunae malis; sed
pro vitando malo animi, and ossequendo potiore bono.
And therefore, as one says. We may not desire death, to shun and escape
the evils of nature or fortune; but to avoid the evil of the soul, and to
obtain a more excellent good.

An objection out of Mark 14.21.
An objection may here be made from Mark. 14.21. where it is said, That it had
been good that Judas had never been borne; therefore it may seem to be lawful
for such to wish and hasten death; that what was good it had not been, may (as
soon as may be) be brought to not being.

Answ. The goodness of being.
Hereunto I answer, for a man to be, (although miserable) absolutely
considered, is better than not to be at all; because God does nothing in
vain, and but what is good that it should be: also being is better than not
being, in regard of the nearer proximity thereof to God. Not to be is negative
of all goodness, Non entis nullae sunt affectiones: A non-ens bath no positive
properties: whereas, being is good, and capable of good; ens and bonum,
metaphysically considered, are reciprocal.

It is not good, with the goodness of profit for some men in particular that
they are, or be; in regard of their own private wretched estate, and of the
evils that their being subjects them unto, and makes them capable of.

Yet it is good, in respect of the Universe, consisting of contraries, and
benefited by the same; and for the further manifestation of the glory of God;
and because it is his will that such men should be.

The public and more eminent good preponderates to give denomination, against
the more private and lesser evil.

Note.
It is by man's own fault, abusing his esse and being, that he is miserable;
both by deprivation of good, and also by subjection to wretchedness: esse or
being is good to those that use it well, and is evil only accidentally to
those that abuse it.

. 3. Of the signs of self-murder.
Signs of self-murder.
The signs of self-murder, are specially four.

1. Solitariness.
First, the unwoonted affectation of solitariness by persons disposed and fit
for self-murder, upon some of the precedent motives, whereby they estrange
themselves from all company and means, whereby they might be comforted and
upheld; and do give the greater advantages and entertainment to self-murderous
motions and temptations, raised or injected by the devil; or elaborated and
wrought out by a discontented self-musing mind.

2. Sign of self-murder. Neglect of duties and regardlesnesse.
The second forerunning note of self murder is a strange and sudden neglect of
necessary duties of a man's calling, civil and divine, and a regardlessenesse
of those persons, and things in the world that he most affected; having his
thoughts and mental discourses and determinations employed about murdering of
himself; so as neither his discourses about religion, or his civil affairs,
nor his performances in, or about either of them, is so discreet, as it was
wont to be; but as of things that he does not mind; or whereabouts he is with
some other thoughts and resolutions disturbed.

3. Sign of self-murder. Strange behavior.
The third sign foregoing self-murder, is a strange change in outward
behavior, with ghastly looks, wild frights and slaights, nestling and
restless behavior, a mindlessenesse and close dumpishnesse, both in company
and in good employments; a distracted countenance and carriage; speaking and
talking to, and with themselves, in their solitary places and dumps; reasoning
and resolving with themselves about that fact, and their motives to it, in a
perplexed disturbed manner, with the like.

4. Sign of self-murder. Speeches and actions.
The fourth precedent note of self-murder, is the speeches and actions of such
persons immediately before the fact: which are some words of threatening or
foretelling something that may import so much; as that his friends shall not
have him long to trouble them; or he will very shortly be rid out of all these
troubles; or he desires the absence, or sends away those that he thinks may
hinder him; or he moves questions of that nature; he provides himself of
means to do it; seeks opportunities, he pretends many excuses to be here,
or there, to do this, or that, whereby he thinks he may be able to do that vile
fact upon himself: and sometime he is taken attempting to do it; which is a
sufficient warning what he will do, if it be not seasonably prevented.

Note. Practices of self-murder comes by fits.
It is to be observed, that self-murder comes ague-like, by fits, and that none,
or very few do fall into that horrible sin to accomplish it upon themselves,
but by degrees. For, no man at an instant falls into the fowlest crimes in the
highest degree; but by means, from step to step, as he is able to overcome the
opposition of reason and grace, that stands in his way. So then, suddenly trust
not him, that once advisedly attempts to kill himself, although he seem to
repent, and promise fair never to do it, when either he himself gave over the
attempt for the present, or was prevented by others.

Note.
For, except the cause thereof be soundly cured, and he confirmed, in length
of time, against the temptation, it will more furiously recoyle upon him; and
he, when he thinks he is secure of others from interrupting of him, will do
that indeed, which before he did but attempt for a trial and an essay: so
subtle and indivertible is man to destroy himself, with whom the devil has
prevailed so far, fully to resolve upon the fact.

CHAP. 17. Arguments against self-murder, proving the same to be utterly
unlawful.
. 1. Self-murder is contrary to Religion.
First it is against religion, and how.
THat no Men or Women should murder themselves, but that they should abhor the
same, is many ways apparent; because, it is unlawful by religion, most
harmefull in effect, and contrary to reason.

1. Against Gods Law.
First, that by religion, it is unlawful for people to kill themselves, is
manifest by five particulars.

First, it is forbidden by the Law of God, in the sixth Commandment, Thou shall
not kill; Non accides: nullus nec ipse utique cui praecipitur, intelligitur
exceptus, Tho.
which prohibits murder of man in general; and that we should kill none,
except it be in our own necessary defense; or, by publik authority, of Laws
and Magistrates, to take away a malefactor, in punishment of his sin past, and
to prevent mischief by him to others, for time to come. For, as Augustine
says, Every one that, without authority of lawful power, kills a man, is a
murderer Omnis qui sine ulla legitimae potestatis authoritate homine^ occidit
homicida est. Aug. Epist. 61.
, and if otherwise we may not by the Law of God kill any man, then we may not
kill our selves: because, as the same Father says, He that kills himself,
kills no other thing, in so doing, but a man Neque qui se occidit aliud occidit
qua^ homine^. Idem de Civ. D. l. 1. c. 20.
For, we are men, and all the individuals are comprehended in, and under their
general.

Again, Genesis 9.5. God says, That at the hand of man he will require man's
blood, even at a man's own hand; that is, a man's own blood at his own hand,
if he kill himself, as Peter Martyr interprets it.

And if, by the Word of God, it had been lawful for a man to kill himself,
then would not the Apostle Paul have cried out to the Iaylor, that was about to
kill himself, That he should do himself no harm Act. 16.28.
: for, why should he have let him from doing a lawful thing, or have called
it a doing of himself harm, in any moral consideration?

Self-murder is against love the sum of the Law.
Furthermore, self-murder is an odious fact, contrary to the general sum of
the Law; which is love, and justice: it is against that love, that we owe to
God, in respect whereof we are to keep his Law, and to affect to enjoy him:
and it is against that love, wherewith we ought to love our selves; and
whereby we should endeavor our own welfare and happiness; and according to
which we should love our neighbors. Who can expect better measure at a man's
hand, than he performs to himself? if the rule be not straight, all that is
measured by it must be crooked: the Apostle delivers it as an axiom, no man
yet ever hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. and again, he condemns those
that, under pretense of will worship, did not spare their own bodies (...).
, Col. 2.23. Self-murder is also contrary to the love that we owe to our
neighbors, by depriving them thereby both of our selves, and of all the good
and comfort that they might have by our lives.

Self-murder is against the general justice of the Law.
It is likewise against the general justice of the Law, which requires that
we should give to every man his due. For, self-murder deprives God, our
neighbors and our selves of their rights: God of obedience and glory, Romans
13.7.
by our lives: and our neighbors, and our selves of that benefit that both
should have by our living.

Question. About Superiors.
Here a question may be moved; whether a Magistrate, that has no superior
over him on earth, and is guilty of a capital crime, or crimes, may justly in
punishment of himself therefore, put himself to death, or cause others to do
it: and whether a capital malefactor, whose heinous offense falls not under
man's cognizance; or being known, is neglected to be punished, as privy murder,
or blasphemy in the highest degree against God; may not, in this case, or where
he is a subject to none other man, kill himself, or cause another to do it, in
execution of justice?

Answer.
I answer, to the first branch of the question, with Thomas Aquinas, negatively;
because, he cannot be his own capital Judge, in his own cause Sccu^dasccuda.
q. 64. Art 5. Nullus est Judex sui ipsius.
; and so, Magistrates, that have no earthly superior over them, are liable to
be punished only by God; either immediately, as was Herod Act. 12.23.
, or mediatly, by extraordinary means of Gods raising up; as was Belthazzar by
Darius Dan. 5.30, 31.
. A Magistrate may not kill himself, nor may be slain by his people. 2 Samuel
11. and 12.
Magistrates are under the same moral Laws, in equal strictness and extent,
as any other men; for, before God there is no respect of persons; and
therefore, a Magistrate, can no more lawfully kill himself, than a private man
can kill himself: as we see in King David, who neither did put himself, nor
was put to death by others for his adultery and murder.

Reasons. 1.
Finally, for no crime can a Magistrate, in any case, kill himself; because,
he is not his own, but the Commonwealths; and therefore, cannot dispose of
himself in that respect, as he list: 2.
neither has the body punitive power of jurisdiction over its head: 3.
neither is he to be valued and esteemed simply as an individual man; who,
as David was, may be worth thousands; and therefore, for crimes punishable in
their particular subjects by death, is not to be put to death by his people,
nor yet to kill himself; whose loss that way may bring far more damage,
than such an execution of Justice upon him can do good, in such a tomerarious
manner. Magistrates neglect, and secret capital crimes belong not to any to
redress by death upon themselves.
For answer to the second branch, I refer the reader to that which is said
before, touching insufficiency of the third general motive to self-murder; And
further add, that things secret belong to God; and the Magistrates omissions,
and aberrations belong to God, and not to private men, from private motion, in
authoritative manner to amend. Such a man, if to punish himself he kill
himself, cannot do it, but either as a Magistrate; or as a private man: then
in neither respects can he do it, as we have heard: and therefore, he cannot
lawfully do it at all.

A Case. About persons condemned to death: what they may do to prevent or
hasten it.
I would here further determine a case, which is this: Suppose a man be
condemned, ignominiously to die; may he poison, or famish, or bleed himself to
death; may he stab himself, hang himself, cut his own throat, break his
neck, or cast himself off the ladder, leap into the water, or fire, either to
hasten his death, that he is adjudged to, or to prevent it, specially when it
is undeserved?

Answer. They may not kill themselves although commanded to do it.
although the Judge should command him to do the same, he ought not to do
it,I answer, that, much less may he do it of his own accord: Reasons. 1.
because, it is against the Law of God, and of nature, for one to kill
himself; 2.
and is an act of self-condemnation, as if, in his own opinion he were neither
worthy, nor fit to live, nor yet to die, in a warrantable manner, by the hand
of justice: 3.
the lengthning of life is a blessing to be embraced, for the good that thereby
we may do, or get: 4.
to prevent justice, in the execution thereof, does wrong it, by invading and
usurping the right thereof, with injury to the Commonwealth, by a self-willed
cutting off the members thereof, in such a disorderly course, as opens a way to
overthrow the same: death is an act of suffering, and not of agency, of him
that is to die; 5.
self-murder is a more shameful and uncomfortable death, than any other that a
man can suffer: 6.
and it is not the death inflicted by others; but, the cause thereof in our
selves, that makes it honorable, or disgraceful, according to the deserts of
our lives. If a man be undeservedly condemned to die, it is the more honorable
and comfortable for him to suffer 1 Pet. 3.14, 17. and c. 4. v. 15, 16.
and he needs be the more careful that he may not hurt or blemish himself,
by his manner of dying, otherwise than becomes a good Christian: although he
be innocent in that special thing, for which he is adjudged to die; What men
are to consider in suffering innocently.
yet he is to consider that he may be guilty of some other particulars justly
deserving death; and in that respect is patiently to acknowledge and submit to
the stroke of divine Justice, finding out, and punishing his sins: or else,
that God wisely so orders things that he shall so die, only for trial of his
passive obedience; and for the glorifying of God, both in the cause, and manner
of his death, which he is to suffer well, and for well doing.

How a condemned person is to submit to die.
Yet notwithstanding, a person condemned to die, and in the hands of the
executioners, is not to strive, oppose, or withstand them in doing execution
upon him: but he may, and ought, upon their command, so to dispose and order
himself, as he may be fit, and way by him may be made, for them to do their
office in executing of him: as, for him quietly to submit to be led to the
place of execution, and there to be ordered by them, as they please; for him
patiently to receive his death by their hands: to open his mouth to receive
poison of their giving to him; as our Savior did the vinegar that was given
him upon the Cross, John 19.29, 30. to lay bare his neck to the blow; submit
his neck to the haltar, to embrace the fire, entertain applied combustible
matter, for dispatch of himself: provided always, that the same be not first
kindled, or applied mortally by his own means: the truth thereof is apparent,
by that which our blessed Savior fortold Peter, that he should stretch forth
his hands, and another should gird him: signifying by what death he should
glorify God Ioh. 21.18, 19.


Reasons. 1.
The reason hereof is evident; because, a person condemned to death is no more
his own, but the son of death, in the hand of authority, to be disposed of,
as the same pleases; 2.
with safety of divine right: and the minister of Justice, that gives the last
and fatal blow, is he that properly kills the man, and not the man himself,
by his active and passive submission to receive the same; 3.
that he may obediently in charity and peace, leave this world; and patiently
resign his soul to God, in hope of entering upon a more happy life, in
exchange for this.

. 2. How self-murder is against God himself.
2. Self-murder it is against God himself.
The second particular, whereby it is apparent that by religion a man may not
kill himself, is because, it is a most heinous crime against God himself
immediately, in four several respects.

In what respects. 1. It defaces Gods Image.
First, self-murder destroys and defaces the Image of God Gen 9.6.
; in the most express form thereof that is in any humane creature, and in the
nearest proximity and possession thereof in him, that kills himself.

It is treason, indignly to abuse, or demolish the Kings Image; much more is it
treason against the King of heaven and earth, to deface, or unworthily to
entreat his sacred Image; specially for them to do it, to whom the
entertainment, preservation, and honorable usage of the same is committed.

2. It wrongs Gods sovereign authority.
Secondly, self-murder is peccant and injurious against Gods sovereign
authority, who is absolute Lord of our persons, and of our lives, and
therefore, we have no power, but from him, and according to his Word, to
dispose of ourselves; seeing that we are not our own Superiors, supreme, nor
subordinate, which is impossible: for, then one must be two; or else, one must
be both superior and inferior to it self, at the same instant, and in the
same case, and respect; than which, what is more absurd to think, and
impossible to be?

Comparison.
If a private man should violently take a malefactor, that is worthy of death,
from the Kings bar of Judgment, and upon his own will and authority put him
to death, it would justly be deemed an audacious unlawful act, and worthy of
exemplary punishment; both for usurping the authority that belongs not to him,
by thrusting of the King out of his place and jurisdiction: and also, for
depriving of the King of opportunity of showing mercy, or executing justice,
according to his regal power. So likewise may we judge of a self-murderer,
that takes himself from the bar of God, to dispose of himself as he list,
to the wrong of Gods sovereign authority.

3. Self-murder wrongs Gods goodness.
Thirdly, self-murder, or wilful self-killing, which are both one, is against
Gods goodness, whereby he gives us our lives, with means of their
preservation; which is a most excellent blessing in it self; and for the good
that thereby we may do: and therefore, one says well, that Life is a certain
gift, Vita est quodda^ donu^ divinitus homini attributum, and ejus potestati
subjectum, qui oc cidit, and vivere sacit.
given to man from above, and is subject to his power, who kills and makes
alive; who is only God, as the Scripture tells us Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6.
; and therefore, for a man prodigally to waste, or destroy this life of his, he
not only does an unlawful act, but also slights and contemnes Gods special
goodness to him: The most grievous sins are committed against Gods goodness.
which is more damnable than to sin against his other properties; because, in
this consists all our happiness, and thereby God gains most glory; and for
despising whereof the Apostle gives a most bitter reproof; Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness? etc. Romans 2.4.

4. Self-murder wrongs Gods providence.
Fourthly, self-murder is a course against the providence, and established
government of God in the world, about mankind; which it does disturb by
determining the time, how long; and the manner, after what fashion we should
die, or live; according to our own wills, without any dependence upon, or
respect to the will of God; A self-murderer is an Atherst.
which necessarily imports, that a self-murderer is either an Atheist, holding
that there is no God at all; or that God takes no care of the world, nor of
men, to order them, or dispose of them; but keeps himself only within the
circuit of the Heavens: than which, what can be more contrary to the reason of
a good man?

Or rebel against God.
Or else, by his practice, he proclaims himself a rebel against God, to whom
he will not be subject, nor be disposed according to his Word; but like a
devil sets himself in opposition against God, to his own everlasting
destruction.

. 3. How self-murder is against nature.
3. Self-murder is against nature.
The third particular that makes it apparent that self-murder is unlawful, by
the rules of religion, is because it is against nature it self, and against
that natural affection and propensnesse, whereby it endeavors to preserve and
cherish it self; and to withstand and repel all that is destructive of it,
and inimicall to it: Religion requites the observation of the law of nature.
that religion requires the observation of the law of nature, is manifest;
because religion and natures law are not repugnant, but differ in extent and
degrees of perfection; the law of nature being more universal, and less
divinely perfect. The Scripture it self commends the keeping, and condemns the
transgressing of the law of nature. In which respect the Apostle blames the
Gentiles, that knowing God by nature, they did not glorify him as God Romans
1.21.
. And again, he commends them for doing by nature the things contained in the
Law Romans 2.14, 15.
; and which naturally was written in their hearts. He blames the Incestuous
Corinthian for doing a sin so heinous; as is not so much as named amongst the
Gentiles 1 Cor. 5.1.
.

And further, he condemns men's wearing of long hair contrary to the law of
nature; when he says, Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man
have long hair it is a shame unto him 1 Cor. 11.14.
?

Thomas Aquinas says Quod aliquis scipsum occidat, est contra inelinationem
naturalem, and contra charitatem.
that for any man to kill himself is against natural inclination and charity.

The devil knew that man naturally will give all he has for his life, Job
2.4. the soul and body of a man do naturally affect to be united together;
because of the unity of the person that consists of them both personally joined
together; by whose dissolution it is destroyed.

The soul and body are neither of them perfect without the other, and therefore
affect to be united together.
And the soul and body are so made one for another, that they are not, nor can
be perfect the one without the other, neither with natural nor beatificall
perfection; for beside a partial perfection, there is that full perfection
that is of the whole, and in the whole. The soul does not willingly leave the
body, but with respect of advancement of the person, whereof it is the soul,
by entering upon possession of that partial perfection whereof it is capable,
and the whole for measure and degree, is due to the person constituted of soul
and body: and for which union and adeption of perfect glory of the person, there
shall be a resurrection of the body at the last day: (...)
and therefore is the body in the mean time called Nephesh Psalm. 16.10.
by the Hebrews. And God is said by our Savior himself speaking of the dead,
to be the God of the living Mat. 22.32.
; whose bodies although they were dead, yet themselves are said to be alive in
regard of their living souls, who cannot be personally considered, but in
their union together, that by death cannot be dissolved; in Gods consideration
of us, and in respect of the natural inclination of each man's proper soul and
body, the one to the other for their full perfection: and in regard of the
resurrection, when they shall be united everlastingly to live together;
between which time and the day of our death, there is no sensible distance of
time to us, nor length of time with God.

. 4. How self-murder is injurious to mankind.
4. Self-murder wrongs mankind.
The fourth particular that makes it evident that self-murder is condemned by
religion; is because it is injurious to mankind, and to the commonwealth,
whereof the self-murderer is a member; who, by that fact of killing himself,
hurts humane society by such heinous disorders, and pernicious examples for
others to follow to their destruction; and by the unrecoverable damage and
loss of its members, and of the good that the same might have by their lives.
For as Thomas says, Every man is a part of a Commonalty, and he that kills
himself does an injury to that Commonalty Quilibet homo est pars comunitaetis,
and qui scipsum intersicit injuriam sacit Communitati.


Examples.
The commendable examples, and practice of the godly, has ever been opposite
to self-murder, as well as their opinion, and have had a care to preserve their
lives, not only for their own good, but also for the good of others who had an
interest in them: as is manifest by the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.24, 25. and 2.17.
Who seeing his life to be needful for the Philippians, was willing to abide
and continue with them, For the furtherance and joy of their faith; and did joy
and rejoice to be offered upon the sacrifice and service of the same.

It is hurtful to the commonwealth.
If self-murder were not unlawful, even in respect of the wrong thereby done to
the commonwealth; why should David have commanded to take away the life of the
young man the Amalekite, that did help Saul to kill himself; whom David asked,
How he was not afraid to stretch forth his hand to destroy the Lords
anointed? and so caused to put him to death; not simply for unjustly killing
an innocent man; but specially in consideration of killing of the King, the
head of the land, which by his death was wronged, and was a dangerous president
to pass unpunished.

5. How self-murder wrongs man's self doing it.
5. It wrongs a man's self, and how.
The fifth particular demonstrating how unlawful self-murder is by religion,
is the sin and wrong which the self-murderer does thereby to himself; in three
special respects.

1. It overthrowes faith and love in a man.
First, in regard of the principal saving graces of God in man, which are
faith and love: self-murder is against faith and trust in God, and overthrowes
the same by desperation; that neither in adversity can a person that is
resolved to kill himself, have any true comfort, nor any hope of life
eternal, by a course that he knows is the way to damnation.

Touching love, we have heard before how it cannot consist with self-murder,
they being contrary. For, as one says, Quisque debet plus amare seipsum quam
proximum. Filliue.
Every one ought to love himself more than his neighbor: For, the neerenesse
of our selves to our selves, and for the perfection that should be in the rule
or measure whereby we are to love others.

2 It marres our duty.
Secondly, in regard of our duty; which is not to dispose of, or do that which
is not in our power, nor within our authority, such as to kill ones self is.
For, when a man kills himself, he either kills an innocent, and so in that
respect grievously sins; or else, he kills a malefactor, and then he sins
that does it without lawful authority to warrant his action; which no man has
to kill himself, but express command to the contrary.

3. It destroys our persons.
Thirdly, self-murder is much against our selves; both by the destruction of
our persons in this world; and by running of our selves into everlasting
damnation in the world to come, by such a damnable and wicked practice; whereby
we are sinners against our own souls.

. 6. How self-murder is most harmefull.
Self-murder is most harmfull.
Now it follows to be showed how self-murder is most harmefull and
damageable; which may be seen in four particulars.

1. To Gods glory
First, it is hurtful to the glory and honor of God; who is thereby
dishonored, not only by the transgression of his Law; but also by the wrong
that thereby is done to the Sovereign authority, and to the image of God.

2. To the Church and commonwealth.
Secondly, it is hurtful to the Church and Commonwealth, by bereaving the
same unjustly of their members; and by drawing down Gods judgments upon them,
for such damnable facts committed within the same.

3. To friends and posterity.
Thirdly, it is harmefull to a man's friends and posterity; both in
overshadowing their credit and honor by the dark and disgraceful cloud of
such a fact, and over-lading them with troubles, grief and shame for the same:
And also by depriving them of that earthly estate and means, whereby otherwise
they might have been helpful to them, for their livelihood or advancement.

4. To a man's self.
Fourthly, self-murder is harmefull to a man's self; both by depriving him of
life; and also by subjecting him to misery, with loss of happiness and good
name. Jerome says in the name of God, I receive not such souls as have come
out of their bodies against my will Non recipio tales animas quae me nolente
exierunt e corpore. Hierom. ad Marcellam de obitu Blesellae.
: and the Philosophers that did kill themselves, he calls them Martyrs of
foolish philosophy Martyrs stultae philosophiae.
. Virgil places self-murderers in the third circle or region of hell.

-- qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu --
Self-murderers are fools and mad men.
For a man wittingly and willingly to do that, which of it self is wholly
morally evil, and whereof nothing but evil and mischief redounds to others,
and to the doers thereof especially, is extreme folly and madness. And
therefore self murder, being a thing of that kind; those that kill themselves
do thereby proclaim themselves to be damnable fools, or mad men, or worse;
and so in regard of the damage thereof, self-murder is to be abhorred of all.

. 7. How reason condemns self-murder.
Self-murder is against reason.
It remains, that it be demonstrated by reason, that self-murder is wicked and
unlawful; and that no man may kill himself upon any pretense, whereof the
reasons are many; some whereof I will here subjoyne.

1. It is evil.
First, that which is every way evil is not to be done; but to kill ones self
is every way evil; 1 Cor. 15.26.
peccantly and penally; naturally and morally. The Apostle calls death an
enemy, it is threatened by God as a punishment for sin: it is privative of life;
and therefore opposite to God, who is life, and a pure act of eternal living.
Life is promised as a blessing, and in that respect to be desired and embraced;
It makes us by our vital being, conformable to the first being, and capable of
happiness. The degrees of the creatures being.
And the higher that any thing is raised upon the foundation of being, the
liker it is to God: as vegetables do more resemble God than inanimates, that
have but simple being; and sensitives more than vegetables; and rational
creatures, as men, approach nearer to God than sensitives; and intellectual
creatures, or spiritual intelligences, as Angels, are nearer to God, than
rational creatures on earth; and those that are of the longest lives resemble
the ancient of days most: So that to live long in an estate of nearest
proximity to God every man should affect, whereunto self-murder is contrary.

2. Self-murder is against faith.
Secondly, whatsoever we do, morally considered, should be an act of faith
and obedience: but self-murder cannot be an act of faith and obedience; both
because Gods word is against it; and also for that it proceeds from
desperation, and man's domineering self will; which is contrary to faith and
holy obedience.

3. It is not to be desired to be done by others, nor to others.
Thirdly, what a man may neither naturally, nor morally desire, nor endeavor
that another should do to him, nor he to another, that may not he do to
himself; because we ought to do, as we would be done to, which is the sum
of the Law and the Prophets Mat. 7.12.
: our judgment and practice should agree.

But no man rightly disposed in his wits, may, nor can advisedly desire, or
endeavor that another should kill him; or that he should kill another
undeservedly, and upon private motion: the latter is literally forbidden by the
sixth Commandment: and against the former, nature, and religion bids, and
arms a man to defend himself, for preservation of his life. Nature rightly
disposed erres not in, and about its proper object, seeing it is a proper judge
of things properly belonging to it, and is from God, and not contrary to his
Word. And therefore a man may not kill himself contrary to the dictate of
nature.

4. It makes him unlike to God. How self-murder makes a man unlike to God.
Fourthly, no man may do that which makes him most unlike to God; for the
Creator and creature must hold proportion together; and our happiness stands
in our likeness to him, and communion with him, 1 John 3.2. But for a man to
kill himself makes him most unlike to God, both by his sin, and also by the
effect of his fact. For, for a man by his own hands to make himself not to be,
is contrary to him, who has his being and living of himself, and does
everlastingly live, he being naturally the fountain of life: and his living
and essence are reciprocal, or convertible, and is absolutely immortal; and
so, the more that any preserves their lives, and the longer they live, the
liker they are to God; and the more that they are impotently passive, and the
sooner they cease to be, the unliker they are to God.

The being and living of creatures, is the ground of all other blessings
wherewith they are, or can be endowed; therefore no man should kill himself,
when death deprives him of so much good.

5. Life is a blessing.
Fifthly, we should most carefully keep the greatest natural blessing that
God bestows upon us, which is our life, and be thankful to God for it;
because it is the first blessing, and the ground of all the rest that God
bestows upon us; and therefore we ought most to abhor self-murder, because
it is most contrary to life.

6. Self murder most harmfull to a man's self, should cause us to avoid it.
Sixthly, no man should do that whereby he does himself the greatest harm:
for, all things naturally move for, and toward their own perfection; and
where hurt cannot be avoided, we are ever to choose the least of two evils of
punishment.

But, to kill our selves does us the greatest harm, both naturally and
morally; because it makes us guilty of most heinous sin; and subjects us to
most fearful judgments for the same; and thereby a man destroys his own
person, that is better than all the accidents about the same, when the subject
and adjuncts are contra-distinguished.

Aristotle says, that death is the last of terrible things, and the greatest
evil of the body Vltimum terribilium and corporis maximum malum.
; and therefore is most to be abhorred, specially from a man's own hands.

7. Death is not subjects to man's free will.
Seventhly, man may not determine and order things as he list, which are not
left and subjected to his freewill; but dying, or departing out of this life is
not left, or subjected to the freewill and lawful power of man himself, to die
when, and as he list; no more than it is subjected to his freewill to make
himself alive again when he is dead. For, for to kill and make alive,
belongs to Gods royal prerogative Transitus de hac vita ad aliam non subjacet
libero hominis arbitrio. Thom. Aqumas. 1 Samuel 2 6.
: but as man is only passive in the latter, for his animation; so should he be
in the former, that he may not wrong his preservation.

8. Avoid self-murder as contrary to nature.
Eighthly, no man may do that which is most contrary to pure nature;
Naturaliter quaelibet res seipsam amat and conservat.
for, as Aquinas says, Every thing naturally loves and preserves it self.

But to kill ones self, is most contrary to pure nature; for as Aristotle,
lib. 2. de anima, says, generation is a work most agreeable to nature, and
therefore death is most contrary to nature, which it does destroy; and to
inflict it upon a man's self by his own hand, is monstrous cruelty.

Augustine bids us to consider how great a good thing life is, for (says he)
it is better to be, and to be miserable, than not to be at all; therefore, both
those that are happy, and those that we miserable, do desire to be Consdera
quantum bonum est vita; non mesius est esse, and miserum esse, quam non esse;
propterea and beati, and miseri appetunt esse. August. l. de lib. arb.
.

9. It is condemned by men and their laws.
Ninthly, no man is to do that which all wise and good men, and humane and
ecclesiastical laws do condemn: but all these do condemn self-murder, and
self-murderers. The Athenians would not suffer a self-murderer to be buried in
their territories.

Plato in Phoedone says, that when our souls are given us to keep, we must
not thrust them out of doors.

It is an ill recompense, when a man has abused his soul all his life time to
sin, at last by a self-murdering hand forcibly to expel it, as incestuous Amon
served his sister Tamar in most ignominious manner 2 Samuel 13.17.
.

Philolaus the Pythagorean, speaking against self murder, was wont to say (as
he is cited by Plato and Tullie in his Tusculan questions, and others) Divide
not the tree, or ship in the way, or while it is in the voyage, Ne dividas in
via lignum.
for so it must of necessity perish: that is, that we should not part soul and
body before their due time, and happy arrival at their last port appointed of
God.

Jerome upon Jonas says, that it is not our duty to snatch death to our
selves, but patiently to bear it Non est nos^ii morte arripere, sed oblata
patienter far. Decret. 2. pars causa 23. c. 11.
when it comes: Which sentence is so memorable, that it is inserted into the
Canon Law.

The Canons that bear the name of the Apostles, do call those that geld
themselves homicides; self murderers are worse; and therefore homicides in the
highest degree.

The first Council of Bracara in Spain, about the time of the Pope Honorius
the first, did decree, that for those that do kill themselves, either by
weapon, or by poison, or by casting themselves from high places, or by hanging,
or by any other manner of violence, there should be no commemoration made of
them in the oblation,.i. of prayer, or sacrament; neither should their bodies
be conveyed to burial with psalms and solemnity Placurt qui sibi ipsis, aut
perfer^^^ aut per venenit, aut per praecipitiu^; aut suspendium; aut quoli^et
medo violentiae, inferunt morte^: nulla pro illis in oblatione comemoratio
fictineque cum psalmis ad sepulturam cadevera enum deducantur.
: but they are excluded from Christian burial; which also is assumed and
established in the Canon law Decret secunda part. causa 23. c. 12.
seeing self-murderers do wilfully deprive the living of their company, it is
just that the living should deprive them of all honor of solemnity, and place
of burial; holding them in detestation, so as not to have communion with them
after death in any thing, that were not willing to continue their communion
with the living in this world: and so by that act, they die cut off from the
Church, as excommunicate ipso facto, never to be absolved.

Reasons of the confiscation of the goods of self-murderers.
The Civil and Common Law confiscates the estates of self-murderers, specially
for three reasons.

1. For terror.
First, for terror to the living, that they may not attempt the like.

2. For punishine^t.
Secondly, for punishment of them in their posterity, who are deprived of their
estates; and so the sins of the Parents are visited upon their children
without injustice; because, the children are both of their parents natural
substance, and also part of their civil; that so affection to their posterity
may restrain them from killing themselves.

3. For recompense to the State.
Thirdly, the worldly estate of self-murderers is to be seized upon, by the
State of the Kingdom, for recompense to the Commonwealth, for depriving the
same of a member; and is a deodand to God, being as Jericho was, an execrated
thing; because it belonged to such a person, and therefore accursed, and not to
be enjoyed from him, but from God the true original owner thereof, to whom, by
that vile fact, they are forfaite.

10. Self-murder excludes man from amendment.
Tenthly, what a man has not power to make, or to amend, after it is once ill
done, and shall be found to be evil and inconvenient, that he ought not to do:
because, by doing thereof, he excludes himself from all possibility and means
of recovering his loss; as, from the privation to the habit naturally there is
no return A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus.
: but when a man has killed himself, he cannot make himself alive again,
that he may amend the errors of his course; and therefore expedient it is for
him to keep his life as long as he can, when he has it.

11. It crosses a man's last arm.
Eleventhly, no man is to do that, which may cross his last aeyme and end,
which is his salvation; but, for a man to kill himself, crosses him in this
end, and deprives him of attaining the same: because, thereby he termines and
finishes his life with, and in an act of most damnable sin; and also deprives
himself of all means of reformation and salvation in time to come.

12. Self-murder is condemned by similies.
Twelfthly, self murder is condemned by Macrobius and Picolomineus under
similies: as, a servant may not kill himself; because, he is not sui juris,
his own. 1.
So, we being Gods servants, not only (as they say) by creation, and
subordination in place and duty, but also, by covenant and redemption, we may
not kill our selves.

2.
No man may dispose as he list of other men's goods, although he be usis
fructuarius of them for a time, having the property of them for his profitable
use, with reservation and preservation of the substance of them: we are such;
and therefore, have not such sovereign and absolute right and authority over
our selves, that we may kill our selves; seeing we are bound as Gods tenants,
to the upholding and reparations of our selves, as much as we can.

3.
A man committed to prison, by lawful and just authority, although unjustly,
may not make an escape, by breaking of ward, to prevent punishment; because,
thereby he condemns and makes himself a transgressor, and worthy of
punishment: neither are we to rid our selves out of this life of troubles, into
which God has put us, until he shall again himself call us out, and free
us; as Paul and Silas would not come out of prison, until the Magistrates
brought them out, that had put them in Act. 16.37, 39
.

4.
Plato says, that as we may not kill another man's servant, in regard that
thereby we wrong his Master; and as Soldiers may not forsake their stations
and places, without order from their Commander Injussa imperatoris deserere
stationem.
; so may no man kill himself, seeing thereby he wrongs God, that is his
Master; and forsakes the place and condition that God his Commander has set
him in, there to serve him, as a Soldier in this world, during his good
pleasure 1 Timothy 1.18.
.

August. de. C.D. lib. 1. c. 20.
Augustine says, that as he is a false witness as well, and rather more, that
wittingly deposes salsely against himself; so he that kills himself is a
murderer, as much and more, then if he killed another man. 5.
Parricide, as to kill Wife, Husband, or children, is odious; but self-murder
is worse, because it is nearest a man's self, and most against the rule.

13. It is the grossest murder.
Thirteenthly, we are specially bound to shun the most grossa and worst facts
and sins; for that, if we do them, we are most inexcusable, and culpable,
and justly damned: beeause, they are most against conscience, they being most
within the light of man's understanding, whereby the conscience being convinced,
it inexcusably condemns the doers of them; which also are most within the
power of man to resist, and against which he has most helps; and therefore the
doing of them imports more wilfulness, than frailty, or want of power in those
that do the same.

But self-murder is a sin of this kind: because, it is the grossast and most
odious sort of murder that can be, and therefore most to be shunned.

14. It makes a bad exchange.
Fourteenthly, we are advisedly to make no exchange, that may be for the worse;
but, a man by killing himself, makes an exchange for the worse: because, he
gives his life in exchange for death; or, at the best, for freedom from
worldly troubles and coffeehouse; which is a price far above the worth of
the purchase; and God never allowed of this kind of truckage, nor appointed
self-murder to be the means of any good; but thereby men cast themselves into
greater misery and destruction, than otherwise they should ever have been
subject to.

15. It puts man into a bad estate to die in.
Fifteenthly, every man should strive to be in such an estate of favor with
God, and to be found of him so doing, when he dies, as may be allowable before
God, and most comfortable to a man's self. Blessed is that servant whom his
Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing Math. 24.46.
. But a self-murderer, in his act of killing of himself, can neither have any
comfort that he is in the estate of Gods favor; nor that his act is allowable
before him; whose law thereby he transgresses with a high hand, concluding his
last gasp with an act of horrible sin; having his soul in the passing
thereof out of his body, filled with disordered passions and perturbations, of
discontent, grief, hatred, fear, diverted upon unlawful objects and acts;
and filled with horror, and environed with devils: and so, by self-murder the
soul is most diverted from God, and infected; when the same should be most
nearly converted to God, and be best fitted and perfited for him at death;
that, by the hands of the blessed Angels, it may be carried into heaven and
eternal happiness.

16. Man has not authority to kill himself.
Sixteenthly, a man is to do no more than he has lawful right and power to
do, lest he make himself a transgressor: but man's power over himself is not
supreme, but as a usu-fructuarie, he has dominium utile, profitable dominion
of himself, being bound by God his highest Lord, not to commit waste upon
himself. Comparison.
As man's dominion over the earth is not supreme, for the Lord is King, the
earth may be glad of it; but only to take the profit of it, and not to destroy
it; the creatures he may kill for to enjoy a better use of them.

But the best use that a man can have of himself, is by his life, and not by
his death; and therefore, he is to avoid self-murder, because it deprives a man
of that use of himself, for which God has given a man to himself.

Comparison.
As the wife has not power of her own body, to dispose thereof as she list,
in regard of that interest and propriety that her husband has over her; so
cannot man do with himself what he pleases, in regard that we are the members
of Christ his body and spouse Ephesians. 5.23, 24
, and therefore are subject to him.

The object of man's will.
Man is Lord of his natural and moral actions, because, they are the subjects
of his will; and therefore, he is culpable and punishable, if they be not well
ordered: and so to the doing only of that, which he may well do, he is to be
willing; and therefore to kill himself he should not be willing; because, he
cannot well do it, which is against the Law both of God, and of nature.

17. The examples of self-murder are wicked.
Seventeenthly, the quality and esteem of the persons that kill themselves,
may demonstrate the odiousness of that fact in any: for, generally they are
wicked persons, and their names execrable in the Church; such as were Saul,
Ahitophel, Zimrs, Judas, and the like. And therefore, as a man would not be
ranked with them, nor be subject to their infamy in this world, nor would
partake with them in their estate of misery and damnation in the world to come,
so he should be most careful that he have no communion with them in their ill
courses and wretched practices in this world; specially that he may not shut up
his life with them in the same damnable manner of self murder. For any godly
persons that have killed themselves, whose names are under a charitable censure
of commendation, it was done by them; either out of blameless ignorance of the
moral form of the fact; or else by special motion of the holy Spirit
warranting them to do what they did Ex ignorantia intalpata, vel motu spectait
Spiritus sancti.
: and are charitably excused or commended, not for their fact of killing
themselves, but for their precedent good lives, and for their heavenly
mindedness, and holy dispositions, which apparently they had; for which they
did, and when they did, out of their weakness, that unlawful fact:
extraordinary and exempt cases, which stand upon some special and transcendent
circumstances, are not to be made rules and precedents, nor to be imitated,
for, and in ordinary practice; none can dispense, or make exceptions, but he
that has power over the Law, which is the rule of our lives, who is God alone.

18. The verdit of nature in the creatures condemns self-murder.
Eighteenthly, self-murder is abominated and condemned by the general verdite
of the fury of all the creatures, inanimate and irrational; whose universal
practice, for self-preservation, utterly condemns all self-murderers, upon
natures evidence against them.

We see how the Hare flees before the Hound, and uses many natural slights
and stratagems to escape the danger. So does the Partridge to avoid the talons
of the Falcon; yea a worm trod upon, turns again.

The like is observable also in senseless creatures, we see every element
fleeing from its contrary, to the place of the conservation of it self.

Yea, even also in man himself, it is apparent how nature abhorres and shuns
self-murder, where we see how by natural instinct, in sudden perils, when a
man has leisure to think of avoiding of them; as, when a blow is suddenly and
unexspectedly reached at a man, the hand, naturally, and of it self, will
instantly object it self, to save life: which demonstrates that for a man to
turn his hands against himself to kill himself, is unnatural and monstrous.

19. Man's own indowments condemns self-murder.
Lastly, those indowments, abilities, and means, that man has naturally to
preserve himself and his life, utterly condemns his self-killing, as impious
and monstrous.

For, first, he is endowed with self-love; every man naturally is a friend to
himself; says the Philosopher (...).
; whereby every man may have a desire to preserve himself.

Secondly, man is endowed with fear of whatsoever may hurt or destroy him.
Fear is (...) a certain preservative, whereby men labor to preserve
themselves.

Thirdly, man is qualified and furnished with understanding and memory, which
gives knowledge and experience, whence flows the moral habit of prudence, by
which man is enabled both to foresee, and to prevent dangers, and to be Judge
and Master of his own actions, for his own good and preservation; so that a
man cannot kill himself without being self-condemned, in the doing of the act,
contrary to natural instinct, to reason, and to all the indowments and means
that he has to the contrary; and must perish without all plea of excuse.

I will conclude the arguments against self-murder, with the grave and most
serious judgment and determination of Josephus, dissuading his Contrymen
from the same; De bello Iudaico. lib. 3. cap. 14.
when they were most desperately and instantly urging the doing thereof; to
whom he said as follows.

Wherefore, o my friends, (quoth he) are we become murderers of our selves?
Wherefore do we make war between things so united, as are the soul and the
body? If the Romans (our adversaries) think good to spare their enemies,
should not we think it good likewise to spare our own selves? -- it is mere
folly to do that to our own selves, for which we sight against our enemies. --

He is not only to be judged a coward, who refuses to die, when need
requires; but aelso he that will die when no need urges. --

Shall we make that certain to our selves, that we fear at our enemies
bands?

You will say it is the part of him that is valiant to kill himself: nay
truly, it is the part of a very coward. For, I think him to be a timorous
seaman, who perceiving a tempest coming, before it fall, sinketh the ship
wherein he is.

Moreover, it is against the Law of nature, and the nature of all creatures to
kill themselves; and thereby we should commit a heinous crime against God:
there is no living creature that of his own seeking would willingly die: for,
every one feels in himself the strong and forcible law of nature, whereby
they desire to live: and for this cause we judge them for our enemies, that
seek to take it from us; and do punish them that do take it indeed. And do
you think it is not a greater contempt of God for a man to despise his gift?
For, we of him received our first being, and from him let us expect our
ending. The body is mortal, framed of corruptible matter; but our souls are
immortal, and there is a little part of God placed in our bodies. If any one
abuses that which another man puts him in trust with, presently we think
him a perfidious and wicked man: and shall we think, that if we cast away out
of our bodies that which God has put us in trust withal and placed in the
same, that he shall not know of it, whom we have so abused? we hold those
slaves worthy to be punished, that run away from bad masters: and shall not we
then be held for impious, who flee from so good a master as God is? do you not
know that they who according to the Law of nature depart out of this life, and
render that to God, which they received of him, when he who gave it requires
it, shall leave behind them a perpetual name to their posterity and family?

And that unto those souls who are obedient to their Creator when he calls
them, he gives a holy and sacred mansion in heaven? and that they who wrought
their own death, go into dark hell? and that God punishes this their offense
upon all their posterity?

Hence it is that God is displeased therewith, and it is forbidden by our most
wise Law giver. For, if any amongst us kill themselves, it is decreed that till
the Sun go down they shall be unburyed; yet we hold it lawful to bury our
enemies. Other nations cause their right hands to be cut off, who have killed
themselves; Judging that as the soul thereby was made a stranger to the body,
even so by that fact was the hand made a stranger unto it. Thus far Josephus.

. 8. Of certain uses.
The uses, or observations from all these arguments, proving the unlawfulness
of self-murder, are three.

First, hereby we may see the bainousnesse and damnablenesse of self-murder.
For, the more laws that any sin transgresses, the greater it is; and the more
directly, and in the higher degrees it violates those laws; and the more and
eminenter the persons be that it wrongs, and the more and greater the reasons
be, that are against it, the more grievous it is.

Self-murder transgresses the laws of God, of nature and of men: it is against
them in their most prime and literal sense; so smiting justice spightfully on
the face of it: it is against God, and against men; it is against all public
bodies of society, and against every private person: it is against heaven, and
against earth; it empties these to fill hell: in so much that well it may be a
question, or rather a certain conclusion, that not any who has true grace,
can in its full formality, commit this sin; neither any that does so
perpetrate this sin can be saved.

2. Self-murderers do sin most grievously.
Secondly, from the consideration of that which is said against self-murder, it
is to be observed, that they that kill themselves wittingly and willingly, do
sin thereby against a great light and strength of arguments to the contrary,
whereby they are self-convinced in their consciences, that it is a grievous
sin; and are self-condemned, upon their resolution to do it: and therefore,
they must have a great and horrible conflict within themselves before they do
it; that they may first overcome and remove the many and strong obstacles, that
stand in their way to hinder them; that they may blindfold themselves from
sight of the truth, and may subdue their wills and faculties, against all
reason, to be obedient to do it. Whereby, a self-murderer is guilty and
damnable, not only for his horrible fact of self-murder, simply considered;
but, also, for his holding of the truth in unrighteousness: Romans 1.18.
opposing, checking and withstanding the graces and work of God in him, and by
others, which tend to, and labor for his preservation: and for his abusing and
perverting of Gods ordinances, and blessings, to his own destruction: so that
in spite of heaven and earth, he will not be saved: but in a high and
uncontrouleable manner will domineere; to overruled all things according to his
own peevish self-will, to his own wicked ends and ruin, that safety may not
save him: having heaven and earth; God and Angels; men and himself against
himself.

3. To take heed of self-murder.
Thirdly, we are here to observe, how much it concerns all men to take beed;
and be ware of self-murder. For, we being reasonable creatures and Christians,
it concerns us that we do nothing contrary to reason and religion; but that
we do advise with, and frame all our courses according to the same: that,
being in qualification, men, and in profession Christians; we may not, in
degenerate manner, be in our practice worse than brute beasts, or incarnate
devils; who will not be divided against themselves, or destroy themselves.
Math. 12.26.


Now, we see that there is no one point that has more reason and religion
against it, than self-murder has; and therefore, one might think that there is
no fear that any Christian creature should be in danger of it: but alas, the
devil labors to make men break their necks over the highest rocks; that so
they may be unrecoverable; when they shall have climbed and past over so many
obstacles and lets of arguments; and over the top of them all have cast
themselves headlong into the gulf of self-murder. And man, that is a rational
creature, having transgressed and rejected the direction and command of reason
and religion, is subject to break out into the most damnable exorbitances, and
unbounded excesses; having nothing left to stay him from coming into most
horrible extremities: and therefore, to be preserved from self-murder, it is
requisite to keep our selves, and our courses within the compass of sound
reason and true religion. Note.
For, such sins as are done against the greatest reason and power of
resistance; and upon the least temptation, and those that are more from
self-will, than from frailty and want of power; are nearest to the sin of
the devil; and makes men likest to him, in quality, state, and damnation.

CHAP. 18. Whether all self-murderers be damned everlastingly, with the Devil
in hell.
. 1. Of the extent of self-murder to the souls hurt.
Circumspection in determining.
INdetermining of this question, about the final estate of salvation, or
damnation of self-murderers, we must deal warily: that we may neither dash
our selves against the rock of extremity, rigorous uncharitablonesse, in
adjudging all to damnation, whereof we may find some at the last day to be
inheritours of heaven: and contrariwise, that we may not, by an excess of
charity, extenuate that horrible sin, or excuse the doers thereof; whereby
we may adjudge those to heaven, which are firebrarnds of hell; and may
encourage others to do the like fact; or at least to make men less to regard,
or to abhor and beware of it.

Self-murder does prejudice the soul most.
I will begin and show, that the execrable fact of detestable self-murder
concerns not only the body, the life and substance whereof it destroys; but
also it specially, in a higher nature, touches the soul; both in polluting of
it with a most shameful and odious sin: and also, by thrusting of it out off
its bodily habitation and condition; wherein it was placed, and enjoyed
peaceable possession by God himself; and where it might do good; and get
grace and salvation; most wretchedly and desperately expelling it to its
unavoydable place of the darkest hell and everlasting destruction.

It respects not only this life present, whereof, and of all blessings and
comforts in this world it utterly deprives the man that commits it: but also,
it far more nearly concerns a man's future and eternal estate in the world
to come; wherein a self-murderer debarres himself from all beatificall
happiness, and subjects himself to everlasting misery, by that woeful
exchange.

Observe. Whereof men should be most careful.
And therefore, are all men that have any care of the good and comfort of their
souls, or of their eternal future happiness in the world to come, to abandon
all thoughts of self-murder; that consideration of present things may not wholly
possess and take them up from minding and intending the spiritual good of
their souls, and the future felicity of a better life: but that they may order
all their ways and actions so, as the same may not prejudice, but advantage
the good of their souls; and advance them to, and in the estate of glory.

Self-murderers regard not their souks.
But, it seems by the practice of self-murder, that self-murderers either
think that they have no souls; but are as irrational brutes: of whom death
ends all; or else, that they undervalue their souls, as things naught worth:
and are regardlesse of their future estate in the world to come; as if neither
of them were worth their care and respect; that for the same they should frame
their course, and order their practice and otherwise than they list themselves:
and in that respect are wilful mad Atheists.

What they should consider
If self-murderers do conceive that they have souls, that are superstites
remaining after their death; and believe that there is a life of happiness, or
misery to come after this; then should they be mindful of the same; and
consider what shall become of their poor souls, and what their state shall
be, if they do kill and rid themselves out of this life and world; and whether
salvation, or damnation is the portion of self-murderers.

. 2. That all that kill themselves are not properly Self-murderers, nor in
their estate of damnation.
All self-killers are not properly self-murderers.
About determining this great question, concerning the sinall estate of
self-murderers, whether they be all damned in hell; or any of them saved in
heaven; we are first to consider that all that fall by their own hands, or
means are not self-murderers; as has been formerly showed in diverse exempt
cases in the chapter of direct bodily self-murder; Chap. 12.. 5.
to which I refer the reader. For, although all self-murderers are
self-killers, yet all self-killers are not self-murderers: they are not terms
convertible, or reciprocal; because, although they may agree, and be the same
in themateriall part, or substance of the action; They differ formally.
yet they do differ in their form and nature of Anomy, or sinfulness: which
does vary and alter the kind, that it is not the same properly with the
other; and so, it is not simply subject to the same effects, and Consequences
thereof.

Whereupon, not only by the verdict of divine reason; but even also by the
Courts of humane Judicature, about feloes de so, such are acquitted, as are
expressed, Chap. 12.. 5. In the exempt cases.

As if a Child kill it self, that has not attained to age of discretion, or
to use of reason; or, if a man, or woman kill himself, that is an Ideote, or
natural fool; or is mad, constantly, or in a fit of Lunacie; or of a Fever;
or Calenture; or in a fit of Frenzy (how ever involuntarily contracted;) or
by mischance; no Court of equity, or Justice, in advised well informed
proceeding, will condemn such an one for a self murderer; and accordingly so
dispose of his body, and goods, as of self-murderers.

For, for them to exempt such from the number and censures of self-murderers,
their reason is good, because, it is most inbumane and unreasonable so
ignominiously to condemn and censure persons for self-murderers; whose case
deserves pity and commiseration, for their lamentable suffering; both in their
death, and also in that evil of calamity, which is the cause of it; against,
or (at least) without the free consent of their wills; and therefore, to punish
a fact neither of their proper effecting, nor advised approving, by addition of
more misery, were most unjust.

Hereupon it necessarily follows, that the persons justly acquitted and
exempted from the number and censure of self-murderers, by the verdict and
Judgment of men; as such to whom usually the Church grants communion of
Christian burial, with other privileges of holy Church, after their death;
cannot in charity be denied by it, the happiness of salvation.

. 3. That proper and direct self-murderers are all reprobates, and without the
state of grace.
All self-murderers are damned.
The proper subject of this question about salvation, are not the persons
aforesaid, salling by their own hands, in the foresaid cases; who are not
properly self-murderers: But those only that out of deliberate Judgment, do
advisedly, wittingly and willingly kill themselves; contrary to the means and
power, that they have to the contrary; if they list to use the same, as they
might; of these I say and do peremptorily conclude, that they all, and every
of them that so murder themselves; are certainly, and infallibly damned soul
and body for evermore without redemption; which I will pregnantly prove by five
strong and undeniable arguments, and reasons.

Reasons. 1. None in the state of salvation can be properly a self-murderer.
First, because none do, nor can so murder themselves but unregenerated and
reprobate persons; who dying in that estate cannot possibly be saved.

For, both the transcendent greatness of that sin of self murder, in it
self, and perfect form considered, and in all the circumstances thereof, for
manner of doing of it; And also, the full measure of the wills exorbitancy in a
plenary consent, and the indivertible endeavors of the mind, and all the
powers and faculties of these self murderers presumptuously to do this vile
execrable act, against all resistance and helps to the contrary; is such as
cannot be incident to any godly body that shall be saved.

Of the regenerated preserved.
Because, in those that are truly adopted of God; both the power of sin,
formally considered, in that degree of Anomie and excess of enormity, is, by
saving grace, and the Spirits working in them, broken, and bridled; that they
cannot break out into the same so extremely, as others do.

And also, their wills are brought under such conformity to the rule and
command of God, and of his spirit; and all their powers, faculties, and
dispositions, are in some measure, so-inclined to goodness, and divine
obedience; that they can never transgress into any odious gross sin, without
far more reluctance, opposition, and hinderance in themselves against it; from
light of Judgment, divine restraint; and from antipathy of renewed
inclination, than can be in any that is wicked, or unconverted; who running in
an unregenerate estate, with such a full Careere sometimes upon the rock of
self-murder; do therein outstrip others so far, that they overshoote
themselves beyond all bounds of salvation; and are all certainly damned, even
in the judgment of men here on earth; who have no better esteem of them, but
as of damned Reprobates, who by their own means and procurement, perish for
ever, not only by and for the odious act of murdering themselves; but together
with that, for their former wicked impenitent life, and are not saved;
principally for their unbelief: as our Savior Christ says, He that believes
not, is condemned already Ioh. 3.18.
.

. 4. Of the examples of self-murderers in Scripture.
2. Reason. Proving that all self-murderers are damned.
The second argument, proving that all proper self-murderers are damned; is,
the examples of those recorded in the Scriptures, who did murder themselves:
as, Saul, Ahitophel, Zimri, Judas etc. that were all reprobates and damned
persons. Examples.
For, the Scripture speaks not only of their fact of self-murder,with
condemning and detesting of the same; but also, it so describes the persons
themselves that do it, that it makes it apparent that they are damned, and
gives instance in none other that did it, but reprobately damned wretches.

So that, by induction of particular self-murderers in Scripture, who were all
reprobates and damned, we may safely conclude, that no self-murderer is, or can
be saved; seeing there can no Authentic instance be given of any such, that
ever was saved. And therefore, we should not be conformable to those in their
damnable practice, with whom we would not communicate in their last and final
estate of everlasting damnation: but of this see more, cap. 15.. 23. cap. 17..
7. argument 17.

. 5. Self-murder is a sin transcendent beyond Law and mercy.
3. Reason. Proving that all self-murderers are damned.
The third reason and ground, whereupon it is evident, that no self-murderer
can be saved, but are all damned, is the very nature of this horrible sin of
self-murder it self, taken in the full latitude thereof, in manner and form
of the greatest anomie and enormity of it, The excessive heinousness of that
sin.
which neither can here consist with true grace, in those that so perpetrate
it, nor will permit any that so do it to enter into Heaven, in regard of the
heinousness of it, whereby it is without the pale and verge of mercy to be
showed to any that commit it.

Reason.
The reason whereof is this; by the Gospel, God offers mercy, upon repentance,
to those only, that transgress against the Law of natural reason, and of the
positive Commandments of God, in those kinds and degrees of sins, the
highest and most grievous whereof exceeds not, nor transcends the utmost limits
and bounds of that, which humane reason properly, and Gods Law expressly forbids
and condemns, and whereof instances may be given, that some in that estate, or
in one parallel to it, have repented and been saved.

The Laws given to man have bounds.
Because, (to restrain man's presumption in evil) mercy is intended and
offered to penitent men, for sins contained within certain bounds, and
limits, and not extended to insinitnesse of excess, or malignity, with
overthrow either of the universal Law of nature, or of the Law whereby God is,
subsists, and acts his works: which would import that there must be neither
God, nor Creature.

These limits of man's pardonable sins, are those laws of reason, or of Divine
imposition, which are proportionable, and reciprocally proper for men, binding
them only to keep them; (as every kind of creatures are bound by their own
proper laws; and the universe by the laws that binds the whole and all its
parts;) beyond or above the height of enormitie forbidden directly by them, for
men to transgress; they wrong and overthrow what they can, the very being and
happiness both of the Creature and Creator; in which excess of iniquity,
beyond the highest kinds and degrees directly forbidden in the Law, there is no
salvation to be had: because, in that case, men are without and beyond the
highest express extent of the laws proper to men; for breaches whereof, mercy
may be had by the Gospel.

For sins beyond the Law, no mercy.
For, the Gospel and Law have respect thus far one to another, for their
bounds and extent, that the virtue and benefit of the Gospel extends only to
save those penitents, that are in danger to perish, by sins directly under,
and within the compass of the law proper to man: but, if man do sin
transcendently-presumptiously, and properly against more universal, or higher
Laws, that concerns the being of God, or of the whole frame of the creation;
the violating whereof natural instinct, and divine horror may make us
abominate; there is no comfort of the Gospel, nor salvation to such, as is
apparent in the devils; into whose qualities, and order such men do degenerate,
by their transcendent sins, beyond the list of those, for which mercy may be
had by the Gospel, which respects pardon of sins, limited only within
compass of that Law, which is properly given to man; and requires a modified
justice, suitable to the power man had at first to perform duty.

Self-murder, is a transcendent sin, beyond Law.
Now, self-murder properly so called, is such an extracategorian and
transcendent sin, beyond or above the law of reason, or of divine imposition
proper to man, that it violates the frame of the Creation and the Majesty of
God himself, (as well as his Law,) in endeavoring the destruction of both;
from which horrible fact, both natural instinct, and divine horror might
restrain a man; if he had not put off humanity.

The sin of self-murder is forbidden by Gods Law: Thou shall do us murder.
Whereunto it belongs only by reduction and Analogy, or proportion that it has
to murder, and not properly, but is a namelesse sin, properly belonging to a
more universal and higher Law, that concerns God himself, and the frame of
the Creation: the transcendency of which sin puts the doers thereof, without
the pale of mercy.

. 6. Self-murderers want true repentance.
4. Reason. Proving that all proper self-murderers are damned.
The fourth reason and argument, whereupon it is evident, that all proper
self-murderers, in that transcendent extent and form, spoken of before, cannot
be saved, but are all damned; is their want of true repentance for their
sins: without which there can be no salvation.

They want true repentance.
That they want true repentance, and all other subsequent saving graces, neither
in that estate can have the same, is thus apparent; if they have repentance, it
must be either habitual and implicit in their disposition; or actual and
explicit in expressions and deeds; or in both.

But, if it be neither way in them, then it cannot be in them at all, but it is
neither way in them, ergo.

1. Habitual repentance.
First, habitual repentance they cannot have; because, it is a penitent
disposition, that must be either infused by the holy Spirit; or acquired and
purchased, by frequent acts and practice of repentance: but, neither does the
holy Ghost indow such with the habitual disposition of true repentante;
because, it is an Evangelicall grace whereof sinners of that transcendencie
beyond the Law are not capable; and where it is, it is accompanied with the
body of other saving graces, which all such persons do want: nor yet have they
got habitual repentance, by their long and constant practice thereof; seeing
such do always live impenitent wretches in their sins, without godly remorse
and new life.

2. Actual repentance.
Secondly, for such persons actually and indeed to repent soundly, and to life,
at, or in their act of this transcendent self-murder, they cannot; in regard
that either they want time to do it, if it were possible for them to repent;
or, they want rather a heart savingly to repent; which requires both a divine
principle within them, whereby they may be able to do it, and also some blessed
means of Gods ordination, to exuscitate and stir up that power into act: the
former a self-murderer has not; for the latter, God never ordained vile
self-murder to be a means of a self-murderers repentance; neither attends such
men's leisure, to give them repentance, when they list; who would not repent at
his call.

By the transcendency of their sin, these self-murderers over-set themselves,
beyond the pitch of recovery. And if any such should happen to have time,
between his vile act and his expiration, his sorrow for such an extraordinary
and odious fact cannot be true saving repentance: because, repentance in such
extremities, and also late, where there is no time to try, and give proof of
the soundness of it, is forced, and rarely true, and also repentance for one
gross fact, or for a few, is not sound, nor sufficient for salvation; where a
man stands guilty and impenitent for abundance of other finnes and corruptions,
whereof he ought to repent, as well as of the other. And when and where was it
ever known certainly, that any such transcendent self-murderer did savingly
repent, although he had time between the blow and his departure?

And therefore, as no proper and transcendent self-murderer does, or can truly
repent, so can he not be saved, but is damned, by and upon accomplishment of
that enormious and odious fact.

. 7. The Churches Judgment of self-murderers.
5. Reason. That all self-murderers are damned. By the Judgment of the Church.
The fifth and last argument, that makes it apparent that no proper
self-murderer is saved, is the ancient and constantly continued Judgment of
the Church touching the final estate of such persons, which is expressed by
her order and practice, in excluding them from the privileges of Christian
burial, as has been formerly said Chap. 17.. 7. Argument 9.
; that she will neither permit, nor allow that their bodies shall be brought to
the grave with Christian solemnity; as, with ringing of Bells, or singing of
Psalms, or the like: nor that they shall be interred or buried in consecrate
ground or Christian burial, Pecreti secunda pars. causa. 23. quaest. 5. c. 12.
Vlacuit.
in common with the bodies of those, all whose souls the Church hopes, in
charity, are saved in Heaven: neither at their burial, (where ever it be else)
will the Church suffer any prayers, or reading of Scriptures to be used, Quise
laqueo pertmunt, aut ense recant, wanifestum si seclus borum sit, nobiscum non
tumulentur. Rarmundus.
as may intimate to others any comfort, or hope of their salvation.

Their wills she makes void, as of persons that, having cast away their souls,
have nothing left, nor power to dispose of any thing, she deemes it
unreasonable for such to have their wills stand, who do, in so high a degree,
withstand and counterveen the will of God.

Barring them from Christian burial.
Neither, at any time after their burial, will the Church allow, or permit
that any commemoration shall be made of the names of any such, in the suffrages
or solemnities of her divine service, (as anciently the manner was to deal
with those, of whose salvation she did not despair.)

That by this omission it might be manifest, how she abhorred self-murderers,
and their vile practice, and that their names might be extinct, and rot, whose
souls she conceived were damned: she would not have them remembered, or
registered by her to their honor, that were so dead; or to the comfort of the
living, either in regard of the fact, or in respect of the final estate of the
persons, whose names she conceives are razed out of the book of life.

For, if so be that the Church did, in charity, conceive that the souls of
any proper self-murderers had communion after death, in place, state and
blessedness, with the souls of those that are saved; why then should she, or
could she justly exciude the bodies of those self-murderers from communion, in
Christian burial, with the bodies of the godly, and heirs of salvation?

And, if the Church had any hope of the salvation of self-murderers, why should
she deny the use of those means of solemnities, of reading of Scripture, of
saying godly prayers, and of making honorable commemorations of their names in
public divine assemblies and service, whereby the Church her self might be
comforted, and also the disconsolate friends of such parties might be cheered,
touching the goodness of the final estate of such self murderers?

Why should the Church deny any of her common privileges to any that she
conceives to inherit the privilege of enjoying the kingdom of Heaven? it
cannot be done, only for terror to the living, that they may not dare to do the
like; because, the Church, the pillar and ground of truth 1 Timothy 3.15.
, will not do so much wrong and injustice to the dead, to effect any good; for
doing whereof she has other, and those warrantable means sufficient; yea,
even the Roman Church leaves no place of hope for self-murderers, so much as in
purgatory; but abandons them all to hell without redemption, by all which the
Church makes it manifest, that it is her Judgment that none such are saved;
but are all damned: whose very external goods are judged, by the Church and
Commonwealth, to be execrable; and, in that respect, are made a deodand.

And therefore, upon all the foresaid reasons, and arguments, I conclude that
no proper self-murderer, in manner aforesaid, can be saved, but are all damned.

. 8. Of certain uses.
Observe.
From what has been said, touching the final estate of proper
self-murderers, we may observe, for our use; 1.
first, that none but reprobates and damned persons do break out into this
transcendent, direct and proper self-murder: so that, it is proper only for
reprobates and damned persons to do it, in the perfect height, and greatest
enormity of it; and is not incident to any good body that shall be saved, to do
it, in that manner.

2.
Secondly, the consideration of the final damnable estate of those
self-murderers, in respect of that fact, may make self-murder odious and
formidable to all people; lest by their venturing and approaching near to the
brinks of that desperate gulf, they should fall in; to the everlasting
destruction both of soul and body: which shows the desperate madness of
those, that wilfully ruinate themselves for ever, in this manner, by
self-murder.

. 9. Certain objections answered; and first touching the nature of self-murder.
Objections.
There remains now certain objections to be answered, which may be made in
favor of proper self-murderers, for their salvation, which are especially
three.

The first of them may be pretended to be taken from the nature of self-murder,
alleging that the same is not so heinous a sin, but that the doers thereof
may be saved.

1. From the nature of self-murder.
First, because, if we consider sins as they are committed against the
Gospel, only the sin against the holy Ghost is called a sin unto death 1 John 5.16.
, which never shall be pardoned Mat. 12.31.
. Self-murder is not that sin, and therefore may seem to be pardonable, and
the doers thereof saved.

2.
Again, if we do consider the sins committed directly against the Law, there
is none of them desperately unpardonable; because they all, and every of them
may, upon repentance, be cured by the Gospel, which is of equal extent to the
Law, to be able to repleave and save all that the Law condemns.

And of the sins committed against the Law, some (as spiteful blasphemy
against the Majesty of God, and the like;) may in the true nature of them seem
to be more heinous than self-murder; both, in regard of their more direct and
malignant opposition against God: and also for their greater distance in nature
from pardon.

Answ. 1. The sin against the holy Ghost.
To this objection, that caries with it a countenance of probability: I answer,
first, touching the argument taken from the sin against the holy Ghost, it is
to be considered that, that sin is unpardonable, and they damned that do it,
only in respect of that desperate opposition, whereby the committers of it do
spitefully oppose and reject Christ and his Gospel, the very only means
whereby they can be saved; so that there remains no further, or other way, or
help for salvation; and also because, that sin is ever infallibly accompanied
with final impenitency; which always makes a man incapable of grace and
salvation, which none can have but true penitents.

How self-murder is equivale^t to the sin against the holy Ghost.
Self-murder has that in it, which is in the sin against the holy Ghost, in
respect whereof it damnes, and is unpardonable; which is both final
impenitency, in regard that a self-murderer, by that sin in the perfection of
the anomie of it, does so indispose himself, and shuts up and ends his life
by, and in such a horrible transgression, that he cannot possibly repent, nor
consequently be saved. And also, equivalent and answerable to that spiteful
rejection of Christ, his grace, and Gospel, in the sin against the holy Ghost,
by the living; there is in self-murder the cutting off of one self (by his
own hands in this death,) from grace and salvation, to be gotten only in, and
by life.

So that, in these respects, self-murder is as certainly damnable, and the
doers thereof reprobated, as is the sin against the holy Ghost, and the
committers thereof. For, although of the sin against the holy Ghost it be
precisely said, that it shall never be forgiven, and that the committers
thereof are certainly damned; yet, it is neither said, nor is true that none,
but sinners against the holy Ghost, have their sins not forgiven to them, and
are damned, seeing the contrary is abundantly certain; and the wicked quality,
and impenitent disposition of some persons, so depraved and vitiated by their
sins, makes the same to be in them unpardonable; which brings them to the same
final state with sinners against the holy Ghost; it matters little for a man's
comfort, that is to be put to death, whether he be hanged for felony, or for
burglarie, seeing for either of them his death is the same.

2. Self-murder a transcendent great sin.
Secondly, I answer touching the comparison made between self-murder and other
sins, committed against the Law, that self-murder is a greater sin, than any
that can be directly and properly committed against and within any precept of
the Law, for which the committers of the same may have grounded hope of
forgiveness; because, self-murder is a transcendent sin, as has been
showed in the third reason; transcedents are ever larger and greater than
subordinates; and it is a sin condemnable by more, and stronger reasons and
arguments, than any other sin committed against and within the compass of
the Law: as the same is more grievously injurious to more objects, and
transgresses more Laws, natural, divine, and humane; and therefore, it must
needs be the greater sin.

Also the estimate of the greatness and unpardonablenesse of sins as they
are in offenders, is not wholly to be made by consideration of their abstract
nature; but specially the same is to be made by the quality and disposition of
the committers of them, whose personal and actionall circumstances in doing of
the^, much aggravats, or extenuats the same. For, pardon, or not pardon of sins
depends more upon the penitencie, or impenitency of the offenders, than upon
the nature of their sins; absolutely and abstractly considered, the fact of self
murder is such a sin, as no man penitently disposed can commit, and it cuts
him (that does it) off finally from all repentance, and consequently from
salvation.

Self-murder most dangerous for a man's soul.
Of all sins against the Law, self-murder is most dangerous and pernicious
for a man's soul, to bring it to damnation: both because, it excludes all care,
and means of a man's salvation, which if a self-murderer did regard, he would
not venture in the last period of his life, upon a course so contrary to it;
and also, it puts the self-murderer into such an estate and disposition of
sinfulness and averseness from God and his will, in pursuing of his own
wicked lust, that he is not, nor can be capable of grace, nor is in the way of
salvation, whereunto self-murder is most contrary, by his last act of horrible
sin, in the closure of his life.

And therefore, it is apparent that, for any thing in this objection alleged,
there is nothing from the nature of the sin of self-murder, properly so called,
that can give any comfort of salvation to self-murderers, or can warrant us to
hold probably, and in the judgment of charity, that they are not all
(generally considered) utterly damned.

. 10. Touching Examples of self-killers.
2. Object. Is from examples.
The second objection, that may be made, in favor of the salvation of
self-murderers, is taken from examples of Sampson, Pelagia, and many others
that in the Primitive Church killed themselves, and are acknowledged to be
saved. Therefore, it may seem probable that some self-murderers may be saved.

Answers. 1. That Sampson is no self-murderer.
To this objection I answer, first, touching Sampson, that he was no
self-murderer directly; nor, in that point of so dying, indirectly; the reasons
whereof are evident.

Reasons. 1.
First, because his intention, will and endeavors were not directly, or
primarily, but only accidentally to kill himself; but, in all the aforesaid
respects, he was wholly bent to destroy his enemies the Philistims; which he
could not do, but with, and by the death of himself: which is apparent by the
story, Judge. 16.28.

2.
Secondly, he was a Judge of the people of Israel, to free and avenge them of
their enemies the Philistims; and therefore, by virtue of his office, was
warranted to destroy them, as he should be able; in which execution, although
he perished through his own voluntary act, according to his own certain
foreknowledge; he could not be a self-murderer; from which sin his office and
calling of God to that work freed him.

3.
Thirdly, for that act, and last work of Sampson, whereby himself died; God
called him to it, that then and there he might so do it, both by his
providence, giving him such an opportunity against his enemies so assembled,
as he could never have the like again; and also, by the extraordinary
supernatural assistance of the Spirit of God that came upon him, Spiritus
latenter hoc jusserat. Decreti secunda pars, causa. 23. c. 9. si non licet.
and strengthened him to do the deed: which it never does for any wicked act;
which is rather the work of the devil. Whereby it is manifest that Sampsons
act was not self-murder.

4.
That Sampsons act was warrantable, and no fact of self-murder, is evident, by
his intending, and going about it in subordination to God, and his will,
manifested by his Spirits assistance, and obtained by lawful and pious prayer,
which no self-murderer does; who prefer their own wills above Gods; in
satisfying whereof, they cannot comfortably pray for Gods assistance to do the
deed, which in their own consciences they know is unlawful and wicked; and
therefore, were horrible to entreat him to be an actor of the same with them.

5.
Fifthly, this last act of Sampson is spoken of in the history of it, Judge.
16.30. with commendation; when it is said that the dead which he slew at his
death, were more than they which he slew in his life: and Heb. 11.32. himself
is honored among the faithful, as being one of them: whereas the facts of
self-murder, and the persons of self-murderers are never spoken of, but with
aspersion of blame and disgrace; and therefore, Sampson is no self-murderer.

6.
Sixthly, things may be done lawfully in a type of figure upon divine instinct,
or ordination; which otherwise were unlawful to be done: as, a Certain man of
the sons of the Prophets, said unto his neighbor, in the word of the Lord,
smite me, I pray thee: and the man refused to smite him: then said he unto him,
because thou have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon as thou art
departed from me, a Lion shall slay thee: and as soon as he was departed from
him, a Lion found him, and slew him. Then he found another man, and said, smite
me, I pray thee; and the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him, 1
King. 20.35, 36, 37. Which act otherwise had been unlawful; that here, done
upon divine command, and for a type, or figure, was good.

Sampsons manner of so dying was a type or figure of Christ; who by his death
slew more, than in his life: and therefore, in this respect, it was lawful,
and he no self-murderer.

2. About Pelagia and others, not self-murderers.
Secondly, I answer, touching Pelagia, and others in the Primitive Church, who
killed themselves to avoid, either doing of sin themselves, or suffering sin to
be done upon them, that they were charitably thought of, and favorably
censured; because of their precedent pious godly life, and of their good
intention, although the act were wicked; and are excused, 1. By allegation of
their ignorance of the moral nature, and of the danger of the fact to their
souls: 2. And by the sudden invasion and surprisall of them, by violence of
their unadvised passions: which can be no president for ordinary practice,
either to warrant the fact to be lawful, or to comfort the persons doing it
with expectation of the like event, and safety. But of this see more cap. 12 5.
and cap. 15.. 23. and cap. 17.. 7. argument 17. and supra 4.

Whereby it appears evidently that those, and such persons were not proper
self-murderers, and so not of that number, and rank of self-killers, that are,
certainly, and finally, excluded from salvation. And so, this objection is of
no force against the former conclusion of the damnation of all proper and
transcendent self-murderers; because, the instances given are insufficient, and
impertinent to make proof, or to give any comfort and hope of salvation to any
proper self-murderer, in regard that the same are of another kind; for,
although, by falling by their own hands, or means, they were self-killers;
yet they were not proper and direct self-murderers; seeing these two are not
always convertible, and of equal extent, as has been showed.

. 11. About antecedent Prayer and repentance for pardon of sins to come.
3. Object. From men's preparation to Godward, before they murder themselves.
The third objection, that may be alleged in favor of the salvation of
self-murderers, is that a self-murderer purposing, and resolved to murder
himself; may, before the fact make his peace with God, by humiliation and
repentance for all his sins past, and in particular for his heinous sin of
self murder to come; praying instantly to God to forgive him both the
guiltiness and punishment of that vile fact, that he is bent suddenly to do;
and beseeching him, through Christ and his merits, to receive him into mercy,
and to save his soul; for the same, casting himself upon, and believing in
Christ. And so, thereupon dispatches and murders himself, by his own means,
or hands; hoping and expecting to be saved: whereby, and in which case, such an
one seems to die in a good mind, in peace with God, and in charity with all
the world; and in an estare sure enough of heaven for his soul, and of
perfection of salvation for both, at the resurrection, and great day of
Judgment.

Answer. A self-murderer cannot make peace with God.
To this objection, I answer, that no man can make, or be at peace with God;
when and so long as he wilfully intends and persists in such a sinful course,
or practice, as offends, enrages, and makes God his implacable enemy, in that
case: such is the state of an indivertibly-resolved self-murderer; and
therefore, it is impossible that, so long as he is in that mind to murder
himself, he can make, or be at peace with God; whom, by his vile sin, he
inrages against him, so that he cannot die that way, but in vengeance from God;
both thereby punishing his former sins, and also thus dispatching him away to
hell.

Antecedent prayer and repentance for self-murder is uneffectuall.
Neither can any man truly repent before hand, for that gross sin, which he
is purposed, and fully bent to do afterward; notwithstanding that he knows the
same to be directly contrary to Gods will, and to his own salvation. Neither
can any man's precedent prayer be effectual with God, for to obtain pardon of
a vile enormious sin, that he desperately and unresistably intends to perpetrate
against the will of God; which I will manifest by three strong reasons.

Reasons. 1. Such prayer condemns the self-murderer.
First, Repentance, and Prayer to God for pardon of the vile sin of
self-murder, that a man purposes to do; does manifest, it is in him, not a
sin of infirmity, but a most presumptuous sin, which he does so advisedly,
deliberatly, wittingly, and willingly go about: and therefore, in that case, is
far from true repentance, and has no ground for him to dare to come before
God, to pray for such a thing, neither can he hope to be heard in such a
prayer, which helps only to condemn him, if he do the sin: because, thereby
he witnesses and testifies against himself, that such an act of self-murder is
wicked and sinful, and that he does advisedly and presumptuously intend, and
do it; and therefore, for his doing of it, may most justly and certainly look
to be damned.

And again, by such an antecedent prayer, repentance and pretended
reconciliation to God, such a self-murderer does but beg of God leave, that he
may securely sin, in that horrible manner, and fact, without fear, or check
of conscience, or touch of punishment: which is to desire, that God would be
unjust; by showing mercy, contrary to his nature and truth, to presumptuous
sinners, in their act of so sinning: and so by that kind of humiliation, and
prayer to God, for favor in their purpose and act of self-murder, they make
God a party accessory to their sin, and to be sinful, by his assistance of
them in their vile practice.

Such persons abhor not the sin, but the punishment; and would have heaven
by their own way, contrary to Gods; which cannot be.

2. Such prayer is not of faith.
The second reason, proving the unlawfulness, and uneffectualnesse of the
antecedent repentance, and prayer of self-murderers, for pardon for the sin,
that they purpose to commit, is; because, such a prayer cannot be of faith,
whereby they sue to God for a pardon ante factum before the deed be done; which
is nothing else but the grant of a dispensation for them to sin, in most vile
manner, which is most unlawful to be desired; for which there is no warrant,
and it is most impossible for God to grant; because, thereby he must not only
dispense with the punishment of the fact, contrary to his justice: but also he
must approve of the deed to be done, as lawful; contrary to his nature, and
will. For, both the allowance of the fact, and also exemption from punishment
are comprehended in a dispensation.

But, God can neither lie, by showing mercy contrary to his truth, nor yet can
approve any sin, so as it should be no sin in the doer, and act of it: which is
a contradiction. True repentance lies specially in abhorring, forsaking and
reforming of sin; both for the habit, and for the act of it; which, in this
case, a self-murderer does not; and therefore, does not repent, neither of his
other former sins, nor of this; for the same reason of repenting for the one,
is for the other.

3. It is unwarrantable.
The third reason of the vainesse of such repentance and prayer, made by
self-murderers, is; because, the same wants all warrant: For, repentance can be
only of sins committed and past, or present, and not of sins to come; whereof
a man (in that respect) cannot be guilty; because, a thing to come is yet a non
ens, or nothing; it is not certain it shall be: and all sins for time to come
should be utterly resolved against, and withstood, with prayer to God for
grace, that we may never be able to do them.

Pardon of sins is craved by prayer, and granted by God, only for sins
committed; and not before they be done: for, pardon follows upon repentance;
which is properly of sins done, and not of sins purposed to be done. True
repentance changes, both a man's ill purposes and practice; contrary to the
course and disposition of such a self-murderer, whose repentance and prayer
tends to encourage him more boldly to sin; by a most vile fact of
self-murder: he cleaves to the sin, and practices it; the punishment whereof
he would avoid, which are individual companions.

It is a strange madness for a self-murderer to conceit, or presume, that God,
upon his prayer proceeding out of a wicked mind, and from an ill intent, will
grant him his request and will, for the salvation of his soul, when as he will
not yield to the will of God, who forbids the horrible sin of self-murder.

Note.
Touching such self-murderers believing, hoping, and casting themselves upon
Christ for salvation; I grant, they may have desires of salvation; but it is
only to be had in Gods way, and therefore, they cannot have it in their own.
True faith and hope they cannot have; because, the same cannot consist with
such reigning and advised presumptuous sins; neither have they any ground to
believe, or hope that any, in that case, can be saved.

To cast themselves upon Christ for salvation I deny not; as the foolish
Virgins that knocked to be let in; but Christ will be Savior to none, that
will not submit to him for to be their King; to be ordered by him, in all
things.

Although multitudes come and cast themselves upon Christ for salvation by him,
yet he receives, and saves none but such as come first to him, in all
humility and obedience, to be cured of their sins, and to be ruled by his
Laws.

Presumption.
The hope and expectation of the salvation of such self-murdering persons when
they die; is but groundless presumption, in regard that their abuse of
religious practices of prayer and the like, and wretched dallying with God, in
so wicked a mind, and to so vile an end, does aggravate their sin, and makes
them much more culpable and subject to eternal damnation, than if they had
forborne the same: the expectation and desire of the wicked, and hope of the
hypocrites shall perish Prove. 10.28. Job. 8.13. Psalm 112.10.
.

They that do to themselves an act of the greatest hatred and hostility in the
world, in murdering themselves, cannot properly be in charity with others; God,
or men.

And to die in peace, and in a good mind they cannot, whose minds at their
last gasp, are perturbed, troubled, and set upon a most horrible vile act of
self-murder; attended upon with all horror from Heaven and hell, to their
everlasting confusion.

So then it is apparent, for ought that can be said in favor, or hope of the
salvation of any proper self-murderer; that there is no probability of the
salvation of any of them, but that they are all damned; according to the former
conclusion.

And therefore, we are to beware that, upon no pretense, we approach near to
that sin, which brings to so certain and eternal destruction.

CHAP. 19. Antidotes for prevention of self-murder.
. 1. What we are to do of our selves, to prevent self-murder.
The kinds of Antidotes. three.
IT follows now that we consider the Antidotes and means whereby self-murder
may be prevented: which are of three sorts.

First, that which we are to use in private by our selves.

Secondly, those that we are to use jointly with others.

Thirdly, those that are to be used by others, about those that are under the
strong temptations of self-murder.

1. Means by our selves to preve^t self-murder.
The means that we are to use by our selves, whereby we may prevent
self-murder are specially eight.

1. To be in state of grace.
First, to prevent the prevailing temptations of self-murder, we should be
careful of our spiritual and moral estates, that the same be good: both, by
being in the state of grace and favor of God, by faith in Christ, whereby we
may have comfort, in the forgiveness of our sins, Psalm. 32.1.
and in assurance of Gods promises, 1 Cor. 3.22. Romans 8.28. and may have supply
of all necessary strength against all execrable temptations, by our depending
upon God in Christ, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we
are able to bear.

Holy lives.
And also, our care for our moral estate, that the same may be good, should
be, that our lives and conversations be holy, in complete obedience to Gods
Word: and that, for the sins that trouble our consciences, we should in true
repentance labor to get the pardon of them; Repentance.
resolving and striving against all sin and iniquity for time to come, whereof
self-murder is one, and so it will be detestable to us, as we are regenerated.

By this course, we shall not only cut off the occasions of self-murder, such
as the horror of conscience, and matter of sin; but shall also be accomplished
with all needful strength against that evil; besides that, hereby we shall
be in an estate more specially privileged from self-murder; and out of which a
man can have no security, no not against himself, from this fact.

2. Indowment of virtues. 1. Humility.
Secondly, to prevent self-murder, we should labor for humility and
self-denial, which our Savior commended to his Disciples, Mark. 9.35. and
Mark. 8.34. For, pride, in over-valuing our selves, and self-will, in
headstrongness in our own way, do often bring men to self-murder.

2. Contentme^t.
We should also endeavor to be content and cheerful in our present estates
Romans 5.3.
, whatsoever the same be, so long as we are in Christ: 1 Timothy 6.6.
these virtues are so contrary to the temptations of self-murder, and do so
indispose the subjects, wherein they are, to such a fact, that they utterly
exclude self-murder.

How to get these virtues.
The way for a man to attain these virtues, is

1. Consideration of Gods wisdom and goodness.
First, the serious consideration of the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God;
whereby we may know that his will in all things is the best; both, for the
rightnesse and goodness thereof to us, in all his dealings with, and
concerning us; to whom, we know, all things work together for good while we
serve him. Romans 8.28.


2. Our estates better than our deserts.
Secondly, we are to consider that our estates and troubles, what ever they
be, are much better, than we do deserve, which we cannot amend, but make much
worse by self-murder.

3. Others better suffer more.
Thirdly, we are to cast our eyes upon many others, who are far better than
we; and do patiently suffer much worse, and heavier things than we do, at
the hands of God, in this world.

4. God our Father orders all things.
Fourthly, we are to observe in all the matters of our coffeehouse, that
the same is wholly ordered by our loving Father; without whose providence a
hair cannot fall from our heads; who moderates our afflictions and crosses,
how great and how long they shall be; gives strength to bear them; grace to
profit by them; and directs them all to an happy end.

5. The end of our troubles good.
Fifthly, we are to consider the end of all our crosses and troubles; both that
which God intends and propounds; and also that which we, by patient waiting
for, shall at last obtain: which is (in those that fear God) ever glory to
God, and increase of happiness to our selves, as the Apostle Paul tells us, 2
Cor. 4.17. and also St. James tells us of Job, Iam. 5.11.

Note.
Therefore, in all troubles, we must be careful that we fix not our eyes upon
their beginnings and present countenance; lest we despair, or faint; but that
we look through them, to the comfortable fruit and end thereof; which will
contentedly uphold our hearts in hope; as did our Savior. Heb. 12.2.

3. live by faith. Habakuk 2 4.
Thirdly, to prevent self-murder, we must be careful to live by faith in all
estates; after that we are first thereby spiritually made alive in Christ.

4. Withstand temptations and fear.
Fourthly, to prevent self-murder, when we are under the temptations of it, we
must not yield too much to them; or be negligent and faint-hearted to resist,
or shake them off: as those do, who give too much way to the fear of killing
themselves; which they manifest diverse ways, as 1. Inforbearing lawful use of
weapons, or knives. 2. Shunning to go upon lawful calling, into solitary
retired places; over waters, bridges, upon battlements of houses; or near
steep down places; when they have motions of self-murder in their minds, 3.
Shunning to be alone, or in dark places.

Fear entertained is harmfull.
These entertained fears of self-murder do much encourage and advantage the
devil against us, and do hurt our selves; seeing that what evil men do
strongly conceit, and fear they shall do, they cannot be quiet until they
fall upon attempting the doing of it indeed.

And therefore, we must remember to resist the devil that he may fly from us
Iam. 4 7.
: at first, we should despise and outface the temptations of self-murder, that
we may expel the fear of it; which by resistance and (...), does often
vanish away.

But, if so be that the temptations of it do prevalle, to some kind of
resolution to kill ones self; then are such to avoid all the means and
opportunities, whereby they may accomplish that wicked design: and to use all
the helps they can against it. Note.


5. Good imploiment.
Fifthly, to prevent self-murder, we should be constantly and diligently
employed in holy and civil exercises of our callings, that we may ever be
found in Gods way, and well employed: as Jerome advises his Friend, that he
should always be doing some good work, Facito aliquid operis, ut tesemper
inveuiat diabolus occupatum. Hieron: ad Rusticum.
that the devil, when he comes upon us, may always find us well occupied. And
that we may not be weary with any one exercise; or that the devil should
intermingle his temptations with it; it is good for those, that are under
temptations of this kind, to shift their exercises often, that Satan may never
find us within his verge of idleness, or bad employment; Note.
whereby he may seat upon us, Inveni in meo.
or challenge us, for that he found us within his walk, or precincts.

Give not way to horrible motions.
If we be in prayer, reading, meditation; or any other lawful necessary
employment; we must beware that we give not way to horrible motions of the
devil, persuading us to kill our selves; so that thereupon we should break
off our exercises, or neglect the duties of our callings; to pore and muse
upon, or to be taken up with such motions; which are better defeated by our
abhorring and contemning of them, and by our proceeding in the pursuit of the
duties of religion, and our callings, from one thing to another, whereby we
may banish those motions of self-murder; cast them off, and out of sight, which
cannot consist with such good thoughts and imploiments.

6. Fasting and prayer.
Sixthly, that we may prevent self-murder, when we are in conflict with the
temptations thereof, we are to fast and pray against it: for the motions
thereof are like to that kind of unclean spirits, that are not cast out, but by
fasting and prayer Mark 9 29.
. Note.
The more unnatural and horrible that any evil motions are, the more hardly
are they ejected, when they have possession of a man: because of the greatness
and violence of their strength; and of the weakness and subjection of that
which should withstand, or expel them; that now the same must be done by a
more powerful and immediate hand of God, when man is insufficient.

Application of the word against temptations.
Also, application must be made of the Word of God against such temptations of
self-murder, by well considering the precepts, promises, and threatenings of the
Scripture; whereby the fear of offending God, and of the damnation of our
souls may powerfully restrain us, from any such wicked act; when we consider
the extreme and unrecoverable evils of it, far exceeding any good, or profit
that can be had thereby.

7. Right ordering of our thoughts.
Seventhly, for antidotes against self-murder, we should carefully consider
what we would say, out of advised Judgment to another, in that case, laboring
under strong temptations to kill himself; and desiring our counsel and help
what to do therein. Would any sober, or reasonable man persuade such an one to
yield to the temptation, and kill himself? As we would say to another in that
case.
or would he not rather dissuade him, by all the arguments and reasons he
could, from doing of it? for, if he may persuade one man to kill himself, then
why may he not likewise persuade all men, in the same case, to do the like?

A man under temptations of self-murder, should urge upon himself the same
conclusion, not to kill himself; forced and backed by the same reasons and
arguments, that he does upon another in the like case; by which application to
himself, he may well resolve, and fortify himself against all such
temptations and intentions of self-murder.

Note.
And again, we should consider, what we would, or could reply to another man;
if any such should persuade us to kill our selves, upon those reasons and
arguments; whereupon our temptations are grounded, that move us to self-murder.
And so, we should apply the same to answer our own self-murdering motives and
motions: whereby we should smother and destroy the first conceptions of a
monstrous brood.

To make self-murder vile in our eyes.
And finally, we should upon every motion of self-murder, think and consider of
all the things and reasons, that we can, to make that fact vile and odious in
our eyes; and to terrify us from daring to resolve to do it; and withal we
should not entertain, but reject the least thought of any thing, that may
arise in our minds; or be otherwise suggested to incline us; or be a protence,
or starting hole to encourage us to do such a vile fact, or any other evil,
contrary to Gods sacred word. By which ordering of our thoughts, the
resolutions of self-murder would be utterly excluded and dashed.

8. Confession.
Eighthly, the last antidote that a man alone by himself can use, to prevent
self-murder is, when all his other private endeavors prove uneffectuall, (or
rather in the first place, when he feels his soul troubled) and not able to
overcome his temptations of self-murder; which by secrecy and concealment of
them, do still more and more grow upon him, and prevail; that he is in great
danger to be overcome by them, and to yield to kill himself: then is he to
open his estate, and confess the same to others, who can and may help him;
according to the Apostles commandment, Iam. 5.16. For, both the work is
easily done, and the burden lightly borne, that has the help of many hands:
and also vent of the mind, by confession, does often give ease to an oppressed
heart; and upon discovery, the devil many times gets him gone; and his
temptations vanish; Comparison.
as thieves, that dare not harbor where they are revealed; and the Country is
up, by a hubbub raised in pursuit of them; and as the foggie vapoures, that are
dissolved and scattered by the heat of the Sun risen, and shining upon them.

. 2. Caveats and observations about confession.
Caveats about confession.
Touching this confession, in this case four things as Caveats are to be
carefully observed; that men under such temptations may have good by this
course.

1. Caveat.
First, they are to be circumspect and wary whom they choose to open their
state, and confess themselves to.

That they be not people undiscreet; or of weak Judgments, and little
experience in such cases of conscience; Not to undiscreet.
Whereby such an afflicted person shall have no benefit by them; but, both he
and they perhaps much hurt, by such Physicians of no value; who may be infected
themselves with that man's disease which they cannot cure: as were the Egyptian
Magicians.

Not to blabs.
Neither must such a man make choice of blabs of their tongues; whose knowledge
of secrets is but fuel of common scandal and offense. To whom to confess. 1.
To his own Minister.
But of all persons that a man in this case should open and confess his state
unto; he should specially make choice of his own Minister, because, he is
nearest in relation and duty to him; as a Father to his Child; he knows best,
for understanding and experience, how to discern his grief; and how to speak
fitly, and seasonably to his comfort: from whom help and consolation may be
better expected, and come with more authority and sweetness, than from
another; in regard of his office, and parts; being one of a thousand, Job.
33.23. The words of whose mouth God creates to be a comfort Esaias. 57.19.
. The promise for effecting such a work is specially made to the Ministers of
Gods word; when our Savior says, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them Ioh. 20.23.
, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven Mat. 16.19.
. Thus God is pleased specially to grace his own ordinances and servants, by
powerful effecting that by them, which ordinarily he will not do without them.

2. To a godly private Christian.
For want of such a Minister to confess to; then a man in this case may lay
open his state to some other reverend Divine, or to some other private, godly,
wise, faithful Christian, one, or more; according to the direction of the
Apostle James; for, although such have less learning and authority than
Ministers; yet they may have more experience, in that case; and the Lord may,
for his own glory, manifest his power by weak means; when the same are used
without contempt, or neglect of better.

The properties of those to whom we are to confess.
The qualities of the parties, to whom a man under pressure of such temptations
is to confess, and open his estate, are diverse.

1. Godly humble minded men.
First, that they be godly humble minded men, who have themselves been
exercised under afflictions and temptations; wherein they have well quit
themselves, in a victorious manner; whereby we may the more confidently open
our state to them; and comfortably expect to be comforted by them, with the
same comfort, wherewith themselves were comforted and upheld 2 Cor. 1.4.
.

2. Assured friends and experimented.
Secondly, those private men that, in this case, we are to confess to, should
be both assured friends to us; as Jonathan was to David, if it be possible; and
also tried men, in like cases and employment, approved by good success that
way with others.

3. Wise and reserved.
Thirdly, such as, in this case, we are to make our spiritual Physicians,
should be advised, grave, soberspirited persons, and reserved from needlessly
divulging men's secrets to others: whereof they give assurance, by their
confessing to the afflicted, like, or worse things of their own, with
discovery of the means, and manner of their recovery: which gives some comfort
to the distressed, that they may belong to God, and may recover, as well as
such.

2. Caveat. What to confess.
The second caveat, in the case of confession under temptations of self-murder,
is, touching what the afflicted is to confess: which is

1.
First, the fact that he is tempted to do.

2.
Secondly, the motives and arguments whereupon he is moved to the same.

3.
Thirdly, he is to discover how far the temptation has prevailed with him,
in the entertainment thereof, and in his purposes and attempts to effect
self-murder.

How to confess for manner. 1. Freely.
And withal, he is to make his confession freely, whereby he may show his
confidence in the party, to whom he makes it.

2. Plainly.
And also, he is to do it plainly, that he may be thoroughly understood.

3. Fully.
And to make it fully, that he may reserve nothing undiscovered, that may
hinder the perfect cure of his grief, and may afterward break out in more
violent manner to effect the deed: as some that confess a little by
peece-meales; whereupon finding some ease, they suppressing the worst of their
estates, are thereby overthrown, after that they have thought themselves quite
escaped and safe. Note.
So dangerous are the recoyles and reverses of those aguish fits of
self-murder, when the dregs of that pestilent disease have not been well purged
out.

3. Caveat. To observe the right end and use or confession.
The third caveat in this confession is, the observing of the right end and use
of it; which is, that those that are under such temptations may be helped
against the same, and be preserved from that vile fact of self-murder; both, by
such reasons and persuasions as may settle their judgments, and resolve their
hearts against the same; and also, by the effectual prayers of such godly
friends, that they may be assisted and freed, by Gods gracious goodness and
power, against, and from such vile temptations, and horrible conclusions of
self-murder against themselves.

Note.
The minding, and intending of the end of our course, that we take, will
incline us unto, and hasten and facilitate the accomplishment of the same, in
the happy achievement of our desired preservation and cure.

4. Caveat. Removeall of impediments.
The fourth caveat observable about this confession is, that those that are
under such temptations of self-murder, do strive to remove the impediments in
themselves, that may hinder the benefit that may be had by this confession, in
this case: which are two.

1. Prejudicate opinions.
First, prejudicate opinions against the judgment, and reasons of others
dissuading the afflicted from the fact; and confuting their motives and
arguments. For, when the pretensed reasons and motives of self-murder have, in
temptations, made such deep impressions upon men's minds; and have got such
entertainment and liking in their hearts; that the same is predominant above
all other means and arguments to the contrary.

Then, by the help of depraved fancy and affection, all sound reasons, that
cross that humor, are slighted; and the contrary are magnified. And
therefore, in this case, we should labor to see the weight and worth of the
reasons, and counsel of others; and endeavor to entertain, and be guided by
the same.

2. Stiffnesse of resolution to kill ones self.
The second let to be removed is, stiffnesse of purpose, and resolution of
committing self-murder. Which unnatural and wicked conclusion is many times
obstinately held, without respect of, and against all good premises, or
arguments. For, commonly the more unnatural and unreasonable that any opinion
and resolution is, it is the more backed with obstinacy: and therefore, men
under temptations of self-murder should, not only passively submit to be
wrought upon, and to be drawn from their wicked conclusion, by the help of
others; but should also endeavor to convert their resolutions in, and by the
course this way taken. For, there is no moral conversion, or change, neither
can be, against a man's will; or without his will concurring to effect the
same; but that a man must be active in the same.

Benefits of confession. 1. Mutual engagement.
The benefits of this confession are great; first mutual engagement of
Christians one to another thereby; in their trust, affection, and help; which
increases comfort and love; 2. Communion of graces. Gal 6.2.
secondly, thereby the graces and experience of all the members of the Church,
are communicated and improved to the common use and good one of another: and so
the stronger helps to bear the burdens of the weaker.

Satan hinders confession.
The devil labors to keep men in these temptations of self-murder, from
disclosing the same, as has been showed; that so, the same by concealment
prevailing against them, they may in the end certainly perish. His motives. 1.
Fear of shame.
The motives he uses to effect it, are first fear of shame and disgrace with
men, if they should know it, which such persons cannot endure; as they suppose:
it is certain that the more vile, and unreasonable that any opinion and
practice is, the more loath and ashamed are men to discover the same, in regard
of shame and punishment. But, if it be a disgrace and shame to be known to be
tainted with such temptations, how much more shameful is it willingly to
harbor them, and to be overcome by them to kill themselves? Note.
When, upon confession, such afflicted persons shall understand from others,
that such temptations are incident to many that are godly, the shame of the
same will vanish; not only by knowledge of the commonnesse of them; but
specially because in such temptations men are rather sufferers than agents;
which is manifest by our sorrowful confessing of them, and striving against
them.

2. Self-murderers desire to have their will.
The second motive, that Satan uses to make men to conceal these temptations
is, that the tempted may have their will to accomplish their designs, in
killing themselves, without interruption, or hinderance: there is nothing that
a man so affects, as not to be orossed in his will; and by that it is that the
devil prevails; our care therefore should be to have our wills subordinate to
Gods, and freed out of the power of the devil; and that we be not self-willed,
to prosecute an ill course.

3. Suspicion of all men, that he dates not trust them.
The third motive, whereby Satan works upon a man, under these temptations, to
conceal them; is misprision and suspicion of all men; that he knows none that
he dares trust, or trouble so far; or that is able to do him any good:
conceiting that they are not so trusty, nor well offected to him; nor so humbly
compassionate toward him; nor sufficient to help him; and therefore, he will
not communicate his grief to them.

Observe.
From whence we may observe, that as a man grows into inimicall and unnatural
resolutions against himself; so he grows into strangeness, and alienation in
heart and conversation, from all mankind. Self-murderers grow strange to men.
The more indisposed that any under self-murdering temptations, is to discover
his estate by confession to others; and the longer that he deferres it by
concealment, the more dangerous is his estate, and the more incurable:
therefore, men in that case, should shake off that loathnesse; and against all
these obstacles, use confession; the means appointed of God, in such
difficulties and distress, for certain help.

. 3. Of the means to be used with others against temptations to self-murder.
The second kind of Antidotes are with others.
The second sort of Antidotes and means to be used for prevention of
self-murder, is the course that they, that labor under such temptations, are
to take jointly with others: which is either privately with a few, or publicly
with the Church.

1. With a few. To advise, and pray.
First, with a few, (to whom by confession such a party so afflicted has
discovered his estate, as has been said,) he is both to advise by conference,
for settling his judgment, resolving and comforting his conscience; and for
right ordering of his practice: and also, to use fasting and prayer together
with such friends in private; whereby he may get power from God to overcome the
temptation, and to be freed from danger of the fact.

For, we have a promise, that where there are two or three assembled together
in Christ's name, there he will be in the midst of them, and will grant them
whatsoever they shall ask in his name Mat. 18.19, 20.
.

Note. The care of friends to the tempted.
The care of private friends, so far interessed by confession in this case,
should be, not only to advise, and pray for those that are under these
temptations, in company with them: but also to pray for them by themselves: and
toward such they should show themselves pitiful, and compassionate, about
their estate; such persons distemper is better allayed palpando quam pulsando,
by gentleness, than by rigor: they should often deal with them, and question
them about their success against their temptations: for, what cannot be
effected at once, repetition may work; and the victory be got, and the cure be
accomplished; sudden cures are commonly unsound: and to leave them over-soone
argues too much neglect of them; and also the disease is not fully discovered,
when they suppose the same is healed. Note.


How self-murder is best prevented by removal of the motives to it.
Self-murder is prevented, not so much by arguments against the fact; which
disswades from the conclusion; as by the discovery and removal of the motives
and causes, whereupon they are tempted to do the same: Comparison.
as diseases are cured by removing of the causes, rather than of their
symptoms: and practical conclusions are overthrown by solid confutation of
the premises and arguments, upon which they do depend; in logical discourse,
conclusions are neither properly the matter of denial, nor of confutation, so
long as the premises, and reasons, whereupon the same stands, are passed by, as
allowed, or granted.

2. With the Church.
Secondly, when as the temptations of self-murder still prevail against all
the former means; then it remains for the tempted to flee unto, and to make
use of the more public helps and assistance of the Church: which (as a tender
Mother) both compassionatly pities her distressed Children; and also by her
counsel and comfort to them, and by her intercession and prayers to God with,
and for them; is ever ready, as well in her public assemblies, as in private
to relieve and succor all those that resort to her for the same: which from,
and by her means is more certainly and comfortably to be expected, and to be
had, than by any other course; as the public Church is more prevalent with
God, than private Christians; and the promises of God more ample to her for
regard and audience, than to her particular members.

. 4. Of the course that others without the tempted are to take to save him.
3. By others powerful restraint.
The third sort of Antidotes, or preservatives against self-murder is, when
after the use of all the foresaid means, the temptation of self-murder still
continues and prevails in a party resolved to kill himself; and seeking and
attempting all the means that he can to do it: then all others are to be
careful;

1. Required of God by Prayer.
First, not to cease to pray to God instantly for him, that he would keep him
and deliver him by his overruling providence, hindering the execution, and
turning his will.

2. Be observant of the tempted.
Secondly, men should be observant of such persons; 1. To spy out the causes.
both to fish and spy out the outmost hidden lurking undiscovered causes
thereof, that the same may be removed, that hinders the cure; 2. To watch him
that he do it not.
and also, to watch him, against all oppertunities and means, whereby he may
accomplish his act of self-murder.

3. Humane forcible restraint.
Thirdly, they are to use outward forcible restraint to such an one, as to a
mad man; shutting him up, and keeping means of self-destruction from him; as
much as may be. The putting by of the violent attempts and passions of
self-murder, which comes by fits, ague-like, not only restraines the act for
the time being, but may also counter-check and abate the rage of it, that by
degrees it may be prevailed against, and assuaged; Comparison.
as agues, many times, are cured accidentally, by very impertinent modicines,
putting by the fits.

Observe. None are self-murdered but by their own fault.
From that which has been said, touching the Antidotes for self-murder, we
may observe that it is a man's own fault if he perish by self-murder, in
neglect of using the means against it. Comparison.
For, as there are medicines for all diseases; so are there means of
preservation against all sins too, how great soever they be, to prevent them:
and, these means are within the reach of a man's power to use.

Note. The benefits of recovery from the temptations of self-murder.
If a man once deeply plunged into these temptations of self-murder, do
christianly overcome the same, and be soundly recovered; he has thereby a good
pledge never to be so tried again; and has a pawn and evidence of victory
against other sins, if he do his best against them.

Use of it.
And also, for this deliverance, such a one is bound to be ever exceeding
thankful to God.

Upon the cure, dangers.
Upon preservation and freedom out of these temptations of self-murder, a man
is to take heed of two great dangers.

1. Security, etc.
First, security, self-confidence and presumption, whereby those corruptions
and sins may closely grow upon him, that may bring him into as dangerous a
condition for his salvation; as we see how Hezechia after his recovery out of
his mortal sickness, fell into other sins, (as he manifested, by his
oftentation to the messengers of Babylon, in boastingly-shewing them his
treasure and strength) all which cost him dear. 2 King 20.13.


2. Unprofitable life to goodness.
The second danger to be avoided, after such a recovery, is unprofitable
living; when such a man spends not the life that God has given him, in
special manner, to Gods glory, to the good of others, and to his own
salvation; which is the maine end why God gives us our lives; and for the
attainement thereof, if we spend them not, it were better for us not to live.

Observe.
The various states, and great dangers that God carries man through are very
remarkable: and Gods work therein is gracious and wonderful; for which we
should ever praise his glorious and blessed name, with constant dependence
upon, and dutiful obsequiousness to him, in all our life, and ways: which
God grant we may do. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Table of the material Contents of this Treatise, directing
to the Page where the same is contained, or begun.
A ABsurdity. Page 204 Abuse of power. Page 162 Abuse of lawful things
procures indirect self-murder. Page 109 Abused Scripture most harmefull. Page
198 Act: How one act of self-murder gives denomination to the doers. Page 175
Actions are good not only from intention. Page 241 Adam: In Adam all are
self-murderers. Page 124 Advancement: Hope of advancement abused to evil. Page
245 Adventuring: Of man's adventuring upon sinful courses, the causes. Page 69
Of adventuring for saving of souls, and for Religion. Page 141. 143.
Adversity: Persons in adversity, how to be observed and helped. Page 231
Advise: To advise the tempted. Page 323 Advisedly a self-murderer kills
himself. Page 160 Afflictions spiritual. Page 164 Afflictions not simply
evil. Page 228 Of afflictions occasioning self-murder. Page 211. etc. In
afflictions, how men should order themselves. Page 231 Afflicted persons doubly
burdened. ibid. Affections: Headstrong affections, and ambition are causes of
misunderstanding the Scripture. Page 197 Ambition cause of self-murder. Page
216 241 Amorous discourses, how hurtful Page 195 Anger the cause of
self-murder. Page 232 Anger against a man's self, for his sins. Page 234
Antidotes for self-murder. Page 311 Antiquity of self-murder. Page 177
Apostasy: Of final apostasy. Page 75 Apparent: How it is apparent that men
murder themselves. Page 176. 178. 181 Apparent good affects the understanding.
Page 208 Appearing of fellons voluntarily at Assizes. Page 135 Application of
the means of self-killing. Page 185 Application of the Word against
temptations. Page 315 Arguments against self-murder. Page 262 274 How arguments
are deemed weak or strong. Page 191 Ashamed to do good. Page 222 Authority man
has not to kill himself. Page 281

B Badnesse: Conceited badnesse of estate cause of self-murder. Page 164 Bail
for Fellons how by them to be freed. Page 135 Being: Goodness of being. Page
259 Behavior: Godly behavior sign of spiritual life. Page 39 Ghastly
behavior a sign of subsequent self-murder. Page 260 Believe: To believe
errors men are strong. Page 206 Benefit: the benefit of well spending our
lives. Page 19 Benefit of death encourages against dangers. Page 126 The
benefits of recovery from temptations of self-murder. Page 325 Beware of self
murder. Page 182 Blame: Men blame God, to excuse themselves. Page 207 Blessing:
A blessing may become a judgment. Page 166 Blindes: What blindes men. Page 209
Body: of man's body, and its works. 81 with its threefold consideration. ib. How
the body suffers by, and for the soul. Page 82 The bodies employment in
murdring it self. Page 162 Braves: Of Braves. Page 112 Publishing: Of
publishing the Gospel amongst Heathens. Page 142 Burning: Of burning of a Ship
in fight, by her own Master, or company. Page 138

C Calamities: The diverse sorts of calamities. Page 211 Calling: Killing ones
self in discharge of calling is not self-murder. Page 174 Capacity: Shallow
capacity is cause of misunderstanding the Scripture. Page 197 Capitall-crimes
against human laws procuring death. Page 121 Capitall-crimes how a man is to
reveal against himself. Page 137 How capitall-crimes make way for
self-murder. Page 256 Care: Man's care of his natural and spiritual life. Page
4 Man's care ought to be most for his spiritual life. Page 42 Our care to be
preserved from soule-destruction. Page 79 Man's care to live well. Page 206 Our
care to know and obey the truth. Page 210 Careful: of what men should be most
careful. Page 289 Carnal reason dislikes of strict obedience. Page 62 Cases
of leagnes and society of war, of infectious places, or company. Page 102 119
Six cases of desperate hazard. Page 112 Three exempt cases. Page 125. 127.
143. Two cases. Page 141 Four cases of adventuring life for Religion and
salvation. Page 143, 144, 145, 146. 149 Of five exempt cases. Page 172 Caveat:
A caveat against vain praise of self-murderers. Page 194 Cause: there is no
true cause of sinful evil. Page 191 The true causes of self-murder, upon the
occasion of afflictions. Page 225 Censuring: of censuring beware Page 231
Certainty: Of the certainty that many men murder themselves. Page 176
Cheerfulness a preservative of natural life. Page 13 Christians murdering
themselves are most blameable. Page 179 Self-murdering Christians are indeed
worse than Heathens. Page 180 Church: In the Church self-murder falls out. Page
177 To the Church self-murder is hurtful. Page 273 The Churches judgment of
self-murderers. Page 297 Commission of evil how to be avoided. Page 149 Of
Commonplace Preaching. Page 196 Commonwealth: The Commonwealth is wronged by
self-murder. Page 271 Condemned persons may not kill themselves. Page 265 How a
condemned person is to submit to take his inflicted death. Page 266
Concealment: Of concealment of troubles beware. Page 231 Conference:
Christian conference and company how useful. Page 29 Confession: Of confession
to prevent self-murder, with the Caveats, benefits, and hindrances of it. Page
316 unto page. 323 Of confession of truth, with danger of life, for the same.
Page 145 Confiscation: Of confiscation of the goods of self-murderers. Page 278
Conscience: A troubled conscience an occasion of self-killing. Page 217 For
case of conscience, troubled about crimes, what is to be done. Page 137 Ease of
conscience is not from our selves. Page 219 About ease of conscience by ill
means. Page 235 For peace of conscience what is to be done. Page 236
Distressed conscience cause of spiritual frenzy. Page 251 Consider: What men
should consider. Page 289 Consideration of our courses. Page 157 Contemners of
the means of life. Page 61 Contentment good against self-murder. Page 312
Conversion: Of man's conversion. Page 30 Covenant: Of covenant with persons
destinate to destruction. Page 119 Course: Our moral course in this life
fore-shewes our future estate. Page 79 Ill courses are harmfull. Page 158
Covetousness cause of self-murder. Page 215 Council of Bracara against
self-murder. Page 277 Creatures: The most noble creatures fail most. Page 189
The degrees of the creatures being. Page 274 The creatures by nature condemn
self-murder. Page 283 Custom: Some customs cause of error in judgment. Page
192 Custom in India and Lemnos. Page 193 Of custom contrary to reason and
Religion. Page 194 Customs ought to be examined whether they be wicked. ibid.

D Damneds misery in hell. Page 166 Danger: Prevention of dangers neglected,
cause of self-murder. Page 92 Danger of self-murder how not known. Page 188
Dangers upon delivery from temptations of self-murder. Page 325 Dangerous
undertakings how to be shunned. Page 17 Dangerous persons and places are
occasions of indirect self-murder. Page 93 It is dangerous to give way to
Satan. Page 188 Darings: Deadly attempts upon darings self-murderous. Page 116
Deadly things to be resisted. Page 16 Death is a thing of great importance.
Page 1 Of death in murder. Page 48 Benefit of death encourages. Page 126
Uncertain death for certain public good. Page 128 Certain death for
Superiors and friends. Page 129 Certain death for certain and greater
public good. Page 131 Death is not the ultimate end of self-murder. Page 163
Touching our deaths we are only to be passive. Page 206 Death worse than
affliction. Page 229 Death is not subjected by God to man's free will. Page 276
Deceived: Many men are deceived in their estates. Page 155 Men are more
deceived in the means, than in the end. Page 143 Discern: How to discern
things that differ. Page 172 Destiny: How conceit of destiny perverts
judgment. Page 201 Decrees: Man's ignorance of Gods decree. Page 204 No man is
saved for fulfilling the will of Gods decree. Page 205 The will of Gods decree
none can overthrow. ibid. Defense: In defense of Religion what is to be done.
Page 144 Deficiency of man in Adam, and in himself to be saved. Page 59. unto
66. Degrees: Of the degrees of sin. Page 89 Denomination is given from habit
and practice. Page 175 Deodands: How self-murderers goods be deodands. Page
278. 299 Desire of death, lawful, and unlawful. Page 257 Desperation cause of
wicked revenge of sin upon ones self. Page 235 Desperation a degree of
entrance into self-murder. Page 256 Destroy: To destroy is the effect and end
of self-murder. Page 160 Destruction: For destruction way is made by ignorance.
Page 210 Die: To die in, what estate is bad. Page 281 Difference of sins. Page
76 Difference between direct and indirect self-murder. Page 85 Direct bodily
self-murder defined. Page 84 How direct bodily self-murder is greater than
indirect. Page 88 Direct bodily self-murder, what it is in the nature of it.
Page 159 Of direct self-murderers. Page 175 Direct self-murder is a moral and
mortal act. Page 159 Disappointment of men's passions and affections. Page 219
Coffeehouse, cause of self-murder. ibid. Disease: Of the same disease all
are sick. Page 180 Inbred diseases occasioning self-murder Page 212
Disposition: Man's disposition is cause of easiness to do evil. Page 184
Distrust: We ought to distrust our selves. Page 57 Devil: The devils malice
against the truth and Church by self-murder. Page 177 The devil hinders good,
and furthers evil. Page 184 Who be forward to obey the devil. Page 206 Of
the devils motions, cause of self-murder. Page 246 Whence the devil has his
power. ibid What persons the devil haunts most, and how he tempts. Page 247
Duels: The unlawfulness of duels. Page 114 Duty of divine commands is not to
be omitted. Page 146 Of the kinds of duties. Page 147 Of neglect of duties.
Page 260 Man's duty marred by self-murder. Page 272

E Election: Of election of means to self-murder. Page 185 End: The same end
several ways attained. Page 89 Our last end crossed by self-murder. Page 279
Error in judgment. Page 192 Error of understanding the Scripture, how to be
prevented. Page 199 Men's error about decree and destiny. Page 204 Men are
strong to believe errors, Page 206 Estate: Of calamities upon men's estates.
Page 214 The present estate of the godly is then best for them, Page 245 Evil:
How, and why evil cleaves to good. Page 3 How by doing evil men mis-spend
their lives. Page 19 Evil of commission how to be avoided. Page 150 Evils of
sin determinate, by laws of God and nature. Page 151 Evil cannot be an end.
Page 163 From evils to be freed, Heathens murdered themselves. Page 179 It is
easy to do evil. Page 184. 186 Of evil of sin there is no proper cause.
Page 191 Evil of sin brings shame. Page 223 Future evil is but contingent.
Page 240 Evil not to be done to accomplish good. Page 241 Examples: By
examples self-murderers not deterred. Page 282 Use of examples, not to be
rules. ibid. Examples occasion of self-murder, they should not be wise-mens
rules. Page 252 The examples of self-murder, all bad. Page 282 By examples of
self-murderers, they are all damned that murder themselves. Page 293 From
examples, the objection of self-murderers answered. Page 303 Exchange: A bad
exchange. Page 280 Execution of self-murder. Page 187 Executioners of
destruction God wants not. Page 56 Exercise of spiritual life preserves it.
Page 40 Experience discovers self-murderers. Page 181 By experience, the evil
of self-murder is not known in this world. Page 188

F Faith: Want of faith is cause of disobedience. Page 70 Faith is a help for
courage. Page 128 Faith overthrown by self-murder. Page 272 Faith is against
self-murder. Page 274 Fasting and prayer, helps to prevent self-murder. Page
315 Fear: A man should fear himself. Page 171 Of fear occasioning
self-murder. Page 224 How fear makes bold. ibid. Fear of sin to come how it
occasions self-murder. Page 237 Fear, how hurtful. Page 314 Fellons: When
fellons are voluntarily to appear at Assizes. Page 135 Fits of self-murder.
Page 261 Folly of self-murderers. Page 186 Food a preservative of natural
life. Page 12 Food neglected cause of self-murder. Page 91 Fools: Of natural
fools killing themselves. Page 250 Fortune Tellers, cause of self-murder. Page
202 Freedom from evil is the conceited good in self-murder. Page 164 Friends,
when, and how one may die for them. Page 129 How calamities upon friends may be
cause of self-murder. Page 216 How to friends and posterity self-murder is
hurtful. Page 273 What care friends of the tempted to self-murder should have
of him. Page 323

G Gallants desperately adventuring. Page 112 General nature of direct
self-murder. Page 159 Glory the end of ambition. Page 242 God converts man by
the Gospel. Page 30 Why God converts by means. Page 31 To depend upon God.
Page 180 Gods secret will is the measure of his own actions; and his revealed
will is the rule of ours. Page 205 How men blame God. Page 207 Self-murder is
against God himself, and how. Page 267 Gods glory wronged by self-murder. Page
272 Godly life is a sign of spiritual life. Page 38 Good: A good-conscience
is a ground of choerefulnesse. Page 13 Good life neglected, how it is cause of
indirect self-murder. Page 94 For public good one may die. Page 131 The
imaginary good of self-murder. Page 164 Good is the object of the will. Page
167 The kinds of good. Page 168 How to do good is hard. Page 184 Of good shame.
Page 222 Benefit of good employment. Page 314 Goods of self-murderers
confiscate, and why. Page 278 Goodness: The Goodness of being. Page 259 Both
goodness and truth are the objects of the understanding. Page 208 Gospel: The
Gospel how published to all mankind. Page 24 How the gospel works spiritual
life. Page 30 Of the malignity of the sins against the Gospel. Page 76 About
publishing the Gospel, how to adventure. Page 142 Grace: Of grace habitual
and actual Page 35 How grace dies by man's negligence. 63 How to cherish it.
ibid. Of emptiness of grace. Page 218 Conceit that the time of grace is past.
ibid. The use of being in the state of grace. Page 311 What want of grace
wrought in the heathen. Page 178 Grounds of deceived judgment Page 192. 195.
207. Guilty: About answering at Assizes Guilty or not Guilty. Page 100 To save
the guiltless what the guilty is to do. Page 136

H Habit gives denomination. Page 175 Heinousness of self-murder. Page 286.
294 Harmefulnesse of self-murder. Page 272 Hazard: Of desperate hazard, and
cases thereof. Page 112 Heathen histories manifesting self-murderers. Page 178
Why Heathens murder themselves. ibid. Some heathens thought self-murder in some
cases to be lawful. Page 178 Heaven: To heaven, self-murder is not the way.
Page 244 For heaven we are to wait Gods time. Page 245 Heresy: How
self-murder is Heresy. Page 233 Hieroms opinion against self-murder. Page 277
History: How by histories self-murderers are discovered. Page 178 Holy Ghost:
Of the sin against the Holy Ghost. Page 73. 301 Holy life is good against
self-murder. Page 312 Holiness is a good means to understand the Scriptures.
Page 200 Honor: How affectation of honor caused Heathens to kill themselves.
Page 179 Calamities upon honor occasioning self-murder. Page 215 Hope a
preservative of spiritual life. Page 41 Humility a means better to understand
the Scripture. Page 199 Humility is a good preservative against self-murder.
Page 312 Hurt: The hurt of self-murder. Page 181 288

J Jdlenesse: Of idleness, and how men mis-spend their lives therein. Page 20
Idleness the devils advantage. Page 247 Ignorants killing themselves are not
self-murderers. Page 173 Ignorance: Man's ignorance of Gods decree. Page 204
Ignorance makes way for destruction. Page 210 Illness of self-murder unknown,
incourages to it. Page 208 Image of God defaced by self-murder. Page 267
Imagination: by means of imagination man suffers. Page 164 Impatiency, the
cause of self-murder. Page 164. 225 Impenitency, a sin against the Gospel.
Page 72 Impertinent: Doing things impertinent, is mis-spending of life. Page 19
Employment: The benefit of good employment. Page 314 Jmpostures of Magitians.
Page 202 Indifferent: Of things indifferent, how they become sinful. Page 152
Indirect bodily self-murder defined. 84. How the same (in some respects) is a
greater sin than direct self-murder. 87. Of indirect self-murder of the body.
91. Why the same is treated of in the first place. Page 90 Of indirect
self-murder by omission. 91 Physically wrought. ibid. How morally wrought. 94.
Of indirect self-murder by commission 109. By entering covenant and society.
118. By doing that which naturally kills the doer. 121. By doing capital
crimes against humane laws. 121. By transgressing of Gods Laws. Page 122 The
properties of indirect self-murderers. Page 154 Indowments of man do condemn
murder. Page 283 Infectious: Of presuming into infectious places, or company.
Page 120 About infectious persons, in some cases, adventuring. Page 141
Infidelity its causes and cure. Page 72 Innocents suffering by some mistake.
Page 136 Insufficiency: Afflictions insufficiency to cause a man to kill
himself. Page 228 Intention: Of man's intention to kill himself. Page 160
Intention only makes not actions good. Page 241 Invasion is to be resisted.
Page 17 Josephus his judgment and opposition against self-murder. Page 284
Judgment perverted. Page 192 How the judgment of the learned obtaines the
force of a Law. Page 194 How judgment abused is cause of spiritual frenzy.
Page 251 Justice: Concerning Justice. 34. and how self-murder is against it.
Page 263

K Killing: Wilful killing of ones self comprehends murder in it. Page 47
Knowledge incourages. Page 126 Of knowledge of the Scriptures, the rules. Page
199 Knowledge of a man's self needful to cure his pride. Page 227

L Law: The transgression of Gods Laws how dangerous. Page 112 Sin against the
Law of nature, and of God to be avoided. Page 150, 151. Some Laws cause error
in judgment. Page 192 What humane Laws ought to be obeyed, or not obeyed.
Page 194 Self-murder is against Gods Law, and how. Page 262 The Law of nature
is to be observed. Page 269 Laws of men condemn self-murder. Page 277 Laws
given to men are bounded. Page 294 Lawful self-killing. Page 54 Upon lawful
calling how to adventure life. Page 125 Leagues: Of Leagues. Page 119 Letter:
The Letter of the Scripture is not to be followed contrary to the true meaning.
Page 199 Lets of endeavor after spiritual life. Page 66 Life is a thing of
great importance. Page 1 Of the kinds of the life of man. Page 4 How man's life
may be lost. 43. and how taken away. Page 45 Life unsure 82. It is the object
of self-murder. Page 159 Life eternal is here begun. Page 245 Life temporary
is a blessing. Page 275 Light of the Spirit twofold. Page 200 Live: Man's care
to live well. Page 206 To live by faith. Page 313 Love: Of love, and to love
our neighbors as our selves, expounded. Page 129 Love is destroyed by
self-murder. Page 272 Lusts: Curbing of our lusts is a good revenge upon our
selves, for our sins. Page 234

M Mad men killing themselves. Page 250 Madness of self-murderers. Page 186
Magistrate: A Sovereign Magistrate, for no crime may slay himself, nor be
slain by his subjects. Page 264 Man only is subject to self-murder. Page 6 Man
how subject to death. Page 45 Man in greatest danger. Page 56 Man's care to live
well. Page 206 Man only is capable of shame. Page 222 Mans-self wronged by
self-murder. Page 271. 273 Mankind: To mankind self-murder injurious. Page
270 Manner: The manner of executing self-murder. Page 187 Manslayer: What a
manslayer is to do to save his friends pursued to death for his fact. Page 133
Mariners: Concerning mariners. Page 113 Means to be used for spiritual life.
Page 28 Of means of conversion, why appointed of God. Page 31 Means of
preservation of spiritual life. Page 39 Means weakening and quickening zeal.
Page 41 Means of loss of life. Page 44 The means of the destruction of
spiritual life. Page 45 The means of self-murder. Page 183. 185 Means for
knowledge of the Scripture. Page 199 Means of sin cut off. Page 234 Means to
prevent self-murder. Page 311 Means against Satan's motions to self-murder.
Page 250 Melancholic persons killing themselves. Page 250 Melancholic people
in danger of self-murder, and why. Page 254 Memory: How by means of his memory
man suffers. Page 165 Men self-blinded. Page 209 Merchant: Of merchant men.
Page 139 Mind: how the minds distemperarature procures indirect self-murder.
Page 110 The minds calamities. Page 217 Ministry of the word, and its use.
Page 29 Mischance: Of killing ones self by mischance. Page 173 Mis-spend: How
men mis-spend their lives. Page 19 Moderation of war for Religion. Page 144
Mortifying humiliation a good revenge upon ones self. Page 234 Motions of
self-murder to be abhorred. 18. They are most hardly shaken off. Page 182
Motions of the devil causing self-murder. 246. How known to be from him.
Page 248 Of motions of self-murder entertained. 257. Horrible motions to be
withstood. Page 314 Motives to self-murder c. 15. throughout. Page 191 Murder:
In murder things observable. 48. murders vileness. 49. what it destroys.
ibid. Whence murder comes. 51. What kind of act it is; how man is restrained
from it. 52. How murder is not to be desired to be done upon us. Page 274
Murderers of others murder themselves by the same act. Page 53 Mutes: Of
standers mute at Trial, refusing to answer legally. Page 96 Mutilation of body
procuring self-murder. Page 110

N Natures opposition to true obedience. Page 63 Nature is against self-murder.
Page 269 283 Natural: How natural life is known 6. wherein man's natural life
consists. 8. The sweetness of it; the loss of it painful and horrible. 9 How
it is dear and precious; the degrees of it 10. How it is well spent and ill
spent. 19. How it is taken away. Page 44 Necessity: Urgent necessity may make
men adventurous of their lives. Page 128 Necessaries: The want of necessaries
for the body. Page 213 Neglect of outward means of life. Page 60 Neglect of
the power of the means of spiritual life. Page 60. Neglect of means is
tempting of God. Page 95 Of neglect of duties. Page 260 Negative
righteousness. Page 65 Nocent, or criminal persons how, and when to discover
themselves. Page 137

O Obedience: Of actual obedience, the grounds. 36. the kinds Evangelicall and
Legal. Page 61 Want of obedience, and reasons of it Page 62 How the obedience
of the Gospel differs from the obedience of the Law. Page 71 Of obedience and
disobedience to unjust suspension and deprivation. Page 148 Of unlawful
obedience. Page 162 Obey: Disobedients to God, forward to obey the devil. Page
206 Our care to obey the truth. Page 210 Observe: What self-murderers observe.
Page 187 Observant: To be observant of occurrences. Page 181 Observations from
indirect self-murder. Page 155 Obstinate: Self-murderers are obstinate. Page
187 Old Man: Our old man of sin we should kill, and how done. Page 54 Omission:
A fourefold omission of duty. 60. Of sins of omission. Page 62 Omission
deprives man of life eternal. Page 64 By omission, how indirect self-murder is
committed. Page 91 Of the not omission of necessary duties, upon peril of
life. Page 146 Opportunity self-murderers observe. Page 187 Oracles occasioning
self-murder. Page 202 Over-charging ones self in doing good. Page 21 Outward
blessings are a ground of cheerfulness. Page 14

P Parricide; and whence it proceeds. Page 256 Passions: To contrary passions
all earthly things are subject Page 3. Immoderate passions kill. Page 123 Of
passions disappointed. Page 219 Patient suffering for Gods truth. Page 38
Pelagia: That Pelagia, and such others that killed themselves, were not
self-murderers. Page 205 Perishing: That all perishing souls are
self-murdered. Page 57 Perseverance upholds spiritual life. Page 41 Person:
Where the person of a man is after his death. Page 50 Our persons destroyed by
self-murder. Page 272 Perverseness of man. Page 170 Perverted judgment
hinders spiritual life. 66. and occasions self-murder. Page 192 Philolaus his
opinion against self-murder. Page 277 Frenzy, the cause sometime of
self-killing. Page 250 Spiritual frenzy whence it arises. Page 251
Phrenticks in their fits killing themselves. Page 174 Physic and how it is to
be used. Page 14 92. 111 Platoes opinion against self-murder. Page 279 Pleasure
and profit hinder obedience Page 63 Practice: Of unwarrantable practice of
Physic and Surgery. Page 111 Practice gives denomination. Page 175 Praise:
Of vain praise of self-murderers. 194. and of praise more largely. Page 242
Prayer a preservative of life. 12. the neglect of it how hurtful. Page 94
Prayer is a help to know the Scripture. 200. Of a self-murderers antecedent
prayer before the fact. Page 206 Of prayer to prevent self murder. Page 315.
323, 324 Preaching: Of Commonplace and metamorphozed preaching Page 196
Predestination blameless of man's destruction Page 156 Preferment: How
preferment hinders spiritual life. Page 66 Premeditation of self-murder. Page
185 Presumption: Of presumption. Page 67. 310 Prevent: To prevent self-murder.
Page 311 Prevention of sin occasioning self-murder. Page 237 Prevention of
error. Page 199 Pride, cause of self-murder. Page 215. 226 Prodigality cause of
self-murder. Page 111 Professors: How in professors, gross sins are most
offensive. Page 178 Promises: Gods promises cherish spiritual life. Page 41
Properties of self-murdring sins. Page 68 Prosperity of the wicked ground of
self-deceit. Page 156 Proud ambitious persons in danger of self-murder. Page
255 Providence: Gods providence how wronged by self-murder. Page 268 Punishment
of damage is worse than of smart. Page 65 Purchase: Of desperate purchase. Page
112 Pusillanimity the cause of self murder in affliction. Page 227

Q Questions: Six questions resolved. Page 133 135, 136, 137, 138.
R Reason: Man by means of his reason suffers. 164. Man wanting the use of
reason, no self-murderer. Page 172 Reason abused to self-murder. Page 189
Reason condemns self-murder. Page 273 Regardlesness: Of regardlesness. Page
260 Regenerated: The regenerated preserved from self-murder. Page 291 Religion:
For religion to adventure life 143. The defense of religion. 144 Self-murder is
contrary to religion. 262. Religion requires the observation of the Law of
nature. Page 269 Repent: To repent. Page 157 Repentance: True repentance
self-murderers have not. 296. 306. The use of it against self-murder. Page 312
Reskue: Of desperate reskue. Page 112 Restraint: Of forcible restraint of
self-murderers. Page 325 Resolution a help to obedience. Page 128 What
resolution is hardly altered. Page 188 Resolutions of self-killing injected by
Satan. Page 246 Revealing: Of revealing a man's own capital faults. Page 137
Revenge, good and bad. Page 232 Rules for understanding the Scripture. Page 199

S Salvation: In state of salvation none can be properly a self-murderer. Page
292 Sampson proved no self-murderer. Page 303 Sanctification: How
sanctification is wrought in us by the holy Spirit. 32. 35. the degrees of it.
ibid. Satan: To give any way to Satan is dangerous. 188. Of his powerful
motions in the mind. Page 247 Saved: No man is saved for fulfilling the will of
Gods decree. Page 205 Saving: For saving of souls to adventure life. Page 141
Scripture mis-understood perverts judgment. 195. the causes of
misunderstanding of it. Page 196. Abused Scripture harmefull. Page 198 How
rightly to understand it. Page 199 It is apparent by the Scripture that men
murder themselves. Page 176 Sea Fight: Of a sea fight. Page 138 Secrecy: The
reason of affectation of secrecy about self-murder. Page 211 Secret: When a man
is to reveal his secret capital crimes to the Magistrate. Page 137
Seeming-good is cause of disobedience. Page 70 Self: Man's self is subject to
self-murder. 159. How self should behave himself to self. Page 171
Self-blinded: How man is self-blinded. Page 155 Self-conceit a ground of
self-deceit. Page 156 Not to be self-conceited. Page 210 Self-content in
indirect self-murder. Page 155 Self-deceived, and causes of self-deceit. Page
156 Self-denial is cure of pride. Page 227 Self-killing: To self-killing who
are most subject. Page 236 Self-killing is no lawful means to prevent sin.
Page 240 Self-killers: What self-killers be not self-murderers. Page 172. 290
Self-murder described what it is. 2 How known by life. 2. it is horrible,
comprehends in it murder. 47. the degrees of it; why slighted. Page 83 Of
bodily self-murder the kinds. 84 defined and differenced. Page 85 How
self-murder is horrible and great. 162. It falls our in the Church; and is most
blameable in Christians. Page 176. 180. The means and way of self-murder. 183.
Motives of it. 189 how it is heresy. 233. it is proved unlawful. Page 262 How
self-murder extends to the soul to hurt it. 288. it is a transcendent sin, and
how. 295. 302. It is equivalent to the sin against the holy Ghost. Page 301
Self-murders antidotes. 311. and how best prevented. Page 323 Self-murderers
many, 124, how known by Scripture, history, and experience. 178. 181. their
folly. 186. their secrecy. 187. they are deceived. 229 their goods confiscate.
278. how they sin most grievously. 286. they are Atheists. 278. they regard not
their souls. 288. they are all damned. 291. they want faith and true
repentance. 296. they are debarred from Christian burial, and why. 287. their
antecedent prayer and repentance is vain; and they cannot be at peace with
God. Page 306 Service: Our service must be done before we receive our reward.
Page 245 Shame: Of shame causing self-murder, the kinds of shame. Page 221
Shortness of life a motive to spend it well. Page 19 Similies: By similies
self-murder condemned. Page 279 Sins of commission against negative
commandments subjects to death 67 Of sins against the Gospel, 70. 77. sin
costs dear. 77. men sin against themselves 158. how to prevent sin, men murder
themselves. 237. sin blinds. 208. men sinning think they sin not. 203. the
worst sins are committed against Gods goodness. 268 Some sins beyond Law and
mercy. Page 294 Sinning is a course of self-murder. Page 77 Sinking, or burning
a ship in fight Page 138 Society with persons destinate to destruction. Page
118 Solitariness of self-murderers. Page 259 Soul. The souls double act in
man. 7 its works in the body. Page 81 The souls relation to its own, body.
Page 270 Soule-murder how it is self-murder. 57 the degrees of it. Page 58
Soule-murdering sins. Page 68 Soldiers: About soldiers. Page 112. 127
Speeches: Manner of speeches of self-murderers. Page 260 Spend: How to spend
our lives well. Page 18 Spirit: Of the Spirits operation quickening us. 29. how
it manifests its power in the means. 32. the evidences of its work. 34. the
degrees of its working. 35. its work in us about obedience 36. how it is a
means in us to know the Scripture. Page 200 Spiritual life what it is. 21.
the acts of it. ibid. degrees of it 22. who may have it, and how it is lost 24
the nature and excellency of it. 26. the continuance and effects of it. ibid.
how to obtain it. 8. 66. the signs of it. 37 how preserved 39. and to be
preferred, 39. ibid. how it is destroyed. Page 45 Spirituall-self-murder
defined and differenced 58. how done by omission. 59. by commission. ^7. by
sinning against the Gospel. 70. by sinning against the Law. 68. spiritual
self-murder most damnable. Page 78 Strictness in religious observances Page 234
Superiors: For ^uperiors men should choose to die 29 Of their displeasure to
be appeased, and how. Page 133

T Teachers: False Teachers cause of misunderstanding the Scriptures. Page 196
Temper of people, Satan observes, to tempt them. Page 248 Our own tempers we
should know. Page 255 Temptations: People under spiritual temptations are in
danger of self-murder. Page 254 Temptations of self-murder to be withstood Page
313 Thoughts: Man's thoughts heavenly a sign of spiritual life. Page 38 Our
thoughts to be rightly ordered Page 315 Torments inflicted occasion of
self-murder. Page 212 Transgression: How transgression of Gods Law kills Page
122 Trouble of conscience, and grounds thereof. Page 218 Truth to be confessed.
145. it is blameless. 177. we should know and obey it Page 210 Times badnesse
a motive to spend our lives well. Page 19 Conceit that time of grace is past,
how harmefull. Page 218

V Venturing life, and in what cases. Page 125 Virtues: Of virtues good against
self-murder. Page 312 Unbelief: Of unbeleefe, and whence it proceeds 94. it is
a property of a self-murderer. Page 155 It is a ground of self-deceit. Page
156 How it causes self-murder. Page 225 Understandings object is both goodness
and truth. Page 208 Ungodly shame. Page 2^2 Unreasonableness of self-murder.
Page 228 Vnthriftiness, as it tends to self-murder. Page 111

W Wagering: Upon wagering, desperate attempts. Page 116 Want of means of
prevention of evil occasions self-murder. Page 164 Wants occasioning
self-murder Page 213 War: Of war, and of the doubtful event of it. Page 119
120 Of war for Religion. Page 144 Watch: Man should watch himself Page 171
Wicked: A self-murderer is wicked. Page 155 Wicked are subject to self-murder.
Page 255 Will is the proper subject of conversion. 31. our wills cost us dear.
77 The wills object is good; its faultiness. 168. variableness. 169 Of Gods
secret will, and the use of it. 203. how our wills move from our senses. 208
will of reason crossed 220 the subject of man's will. Page 276 Wittingly: That a
self-murderer wittingly and willingly kills himself Page 161 Word: The Word of
God is a means of spiritual life. Page 29 The use of the Word for obedience.
Page 37

Y Yielding: Of yielding to suffer. Page 135 When a ship in fight is to be
yielded up to the enemies. Page 140

Z Zeal: How zeal preserves spiritual life. Page 40 How Zeal is weakened
and quickened. Page 41

The faults of the Press thus amend.
Page 21. l. 1. r. man's life. p. 26. l. 31. City. The p. 39 l. 23. r. so a man
p. 40. margin, r. weakeners of zeal. p. 41. l. 2 r. ill examples. and l. 3.
r. from the prevailing. ibid. l. 13. Antiperistasis. p. 44. In the margin
against 2. set, First, of the body. ibid. l. 19 r. the taking away. p. 45. l.
5. r. Courses. ibid l. 7. r. are guilty p. 51. In the margin against l. 17.
set down, Secondly, from the Devil. p. 64. after l. 14. and before the uses,
insert 9. p. 65. l. 34. After theword, things; add, proper to their estates.
p. 72 l. 27. crooked wayesb. p. 88 l. 11. r. is directly under a common Genus
or general, partakes p. 94. l. 5. omission, p. 123 l. 32. r. and some, p. 126.
l. 33. r. cut off; p. 130. l. 19. r. Tollet. p 138. l ult r. overcharged. p.
142 l. 13. r. opportunity, to teach p. 147. l. 33. the will of superrour ib. l.
34. r. concur, if it plainly ibid. l. 35. dele to p. 152. l 25. r. subjecto
p. 153. l 29. for properly, r. peremptorily p. 162. l. 12. for conclude r.
include p. 172. l. 6. for four r. five p. 184. l. 13. r. forwardness p. 197.
l. 14. for ore r. over p. 204. l. 1. for greater r. great p. 207. l. 29. for
God r. Good p. 235. l. 2. r. debilitating p. 261. l. 23. for Essay r. Assay. p.
272. l. 10. For the p. 283. l. 7. for fury r. Jury.

PErlegi hac Opus cui Titulus [Lifes preservative against Self-killing] in quo
non reperio quite quam sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus
publica cum utilitate imprimi queat.

October. 29. 1636. Gulielm. Haywood RR. P. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Cap. Domest.


