THE ROYAL PASSING BELL: OR, DAVID'S SVMMONS to the GRAVE. A Sermon preached
(lately) in the Parish Church of Orchard-Portman in SOMMERSET. At the Funeral
of the most hopeful, and truely-noble, Sr. HVGH PORTMAN, Baronet; the great
loss and sorrow both of his Name and Country. By HVMPHREY SYDENHAM, Master of
Arts, late Fellow of Wadham College in OXFORD.

Qui virtutem alterius publicarivult, virtuti laborat, non gloria. ANT. SEN.
LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for Nathaniel Butter. An. Dom. 1630.

TO MY DESERVEDLY honored, JOHN HELE, of Wembury, Esquire; the great hope of
his NAME, and expectation of his COUNTRY.
SIR;
THis flies not to you for perusal barely, and survey, but for protection; I
want not a a Reader, but a Vindicator; such a one, as can as well justify
Jnnocence, as shrine it: an Agent remarked, no less for Goodness, than for
Power. And, in this my Appeal to Worth and Justice, J sincerely wish, that,
whilst I awake your Charity, I pull not on you Envy, or Dishonor; it is not my
intention, but my fear. For, amongst other my weak endeavors which have
formerly advanced me to the undeserved applause of many. This had the
Happiness to displease, and I think it not my wound, but my Glory. Impartial
discourses are equally blunt, and honest; and tho sometimes, they have their
relish and farewell in distaste, yet that is their Crown, and not their Fate.
Howeuer, an affected Stoicisme I ever loathed, and not only as a Stoicisme,
but as affected. There is nothing so open to contempt and laughter, as a
composed sullenness. It Is true, a native roughnes and austeritie of language,
I have pupill'd from my youth, That Is mine own, J confess, but I dote not on
it; my Child but I lull it not; and therefore, if it sometimes prove wayward,
and offensive, Nature praevaricates, and not will. I was never yet guilty of a
premeditated trespass on men's Names, or Honors; J have neither so much time
for rancour, nor disposition; or had I both, I should have here strangled them
for his dear memory, to whom I owed, not only my services, but my self. He
was nobly your Associate, (my honored Sir) and (for J must still boast in the
livery) my Master; nay, my Patron; and, what is higher yet, my friend, my
unshaken friend. These have so engaged me both in Civil and Religious bonds,
that should I labor to dissolve either by any Real affront, or discourtesie
to his Tribe, I were neither morrall man, nor Christian; and yet, lo, I am
more than both, a Divine; but, a saucie one ('it is rumored) and a Cruel; a
sordid also, and Contemptuous; and, (O my impossible guilt! my unjust
calamity!) a false one, and unthankful. Such Liueries I can wear with as
much patience as the the former, tho not triumph; and yet these, again are not
my Cross, but my Laurel; I grow green in the opinion of mine own innocence,
tho wither, perhaps, in the Respects of others; who, if they were not so hot as
to ravish words unnaturally, and force them from the honest intentions of the
Speaker, they should find, I am a Leuite, still, and not a Libeller; and, what
I preached, was not an Inuectiue, but a Sermon. Me thinks, it is neither
Charity, nor Judgment in a hearer, to wrest Divinity to the disuantage of his
own honor; 'twas n'ere my Custom to rub harshly, on particulars; my
reproves were, as they should be, of sins, and not of Persons; and those
too, ran generally, which no Circumstances can reduce to paticulars, but where
the Parties are either preiudicate, or guilty; And, if any such I met with (as
I hope I did not) let them learn to reform, and not to censure; and thank
him for his homespun aduertisements, who was rather a Remembrancer of their
errors, than a Judge. This is the way to reseue their honor, and my innocence;
which, as it has been ever taught to magnify worth in others; so, to presume
on yours, that, when you have read impartially this sad piece of mine, you will
say that I have been a faithful Servant to my dead friend, and yours, whose
noble respects to me, I have found to survive in you; whom, for many solid and
material favors, I am captived to observe, whilst I am

Yours most thankfully devoted, HVM. SYDENHAM.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Lord Howard, Baron of Escrick, my very
Honorable good LORD.
SIR,
WHen you were pleased, the other year, to admit me your Chaplain, I had
intended, and prepared my paraemetiall oblations to your Lordship, from the
Pulpit; But I was, then, prevented by a sudden, and severe sickness, which
has, hitherto, disabled me to tender you any thing that way. Now, because I
would not be obnoxious to a double mis-conceit, I present you this piece from
the Press, that your Lordship may read, and so remember the record, both of
my devotions, and endeauours. I heartily wish I were so completely recouer'd
for attendance, that I might as well speak, as write my labors; and then
(perhaps) I should better satisfy your Lordship, then in this common kind;
which has made many of my Profession (and may me) ridiculous. But I fear my
infirmities, and therefore, as I must beg the honorable charity of your
Patience, so of your Protection also. For as I was, at first, a suitor for your
service, (In which I have cause to glory) both for the greatness and
goodness of your self, and name) so I am, still for the graces of it: and do
hope, that when you have made a fuller enquiry, who I am, and where I have
spent my time, and talent; your Lordship will not disdain to own, and honor
me with your succeding favors. In a word (my noble Lord) I shall not forget
what you have made me, nor the duty enioyn'd me by it: I will pray for you,
for your Lady, for your little Ones, and for the growth, and continuance of the
house begun in you; and what else is required in a religious observance, you
shall surely find in the faith and loyalty of

Your Lordships humble servant, Hum. Sydenham.

The several Texts, and names of the Sermons herein contained.
I. The Royal Passing Bell: or David's Summons to the Grave.

The Text. PSALM. 32.6. Thou have made my days as a span-long, and mine Age is
nothing before thee; Surely, every man, in his best state is altogether vanity.

II. The Rich man's Warning Piece.

The Text. PSALM. 62.10. If Riches increase, set not thy heart upon them.

III. Waters of Marah and Meribah, or the sower of Bitterness, and Strife,
Sweetened and Allayed.

The Text. ROM 12.1. I beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, to offer
up your Bodies, a living Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable to God which is your
reasonable service.

THE ROYAL PASSING BELL: OR, DAVID'S SVMMONS to the GRAVE.
TEXT. Psalm. 39. v. 6. Thou have made my days as a span-long and mine Age is
as nothing before thee; surely, every man, in his best state, is altogether
vanity.


THE Text is a sad Story of man's frailty here; And it is a Prophet's, and a
King's; a King, as mighty in Religion, as in valor; one that knew as well how
to tune his sorrows, as his triumphs, and had often warbled sweetly to them
both, and sung many a dainty Antheme in his Israel; so that, here wants
neither eloquence, nor state; nothing that may persuade an auditorie, or awe
it. I need not beg then either your patience or attention; the one is
enioyn'd you from a Prophet, the other from a King; a good Prophet, and a King,
David, the King, and the Prophet after Gods own heart; whose words here are
are as Compact, as they are powerful, so ioynted and knit together in one
piece (a piece so uniform, and exact) that should I disranke or sunder them, I
must either deface this beauty, or destroy it. I take them then as I first
found them in their rich pyle and fabric; whereln I have observed three
stories or ascents.

Days in the first; and these days measured, and in that measure, resembled
Instar pugilli; as a span-length; and this length, punctnall, and prefixed, not
alterable by any power of man; for in posuisti, thou have made it so.

these Days, are an Age; and this Age; weighed and compared, falls light in the
scale, tanquam nihil, as nothing; not absolutely nothing, but comparatively,
Ante te, before thee.

Days, and this Age, are man's; not man's in his Autumn, or declination, but
in his best state; and man thus in his best state is but vanity; no
peice-meale vanity; but omnimoda vanitas, altogether vanity; man is
altogether vanity; man is so; not man in particular, this man, only; not I,
David, the Prophet, or the King; but vniuersus homo, every man; as well the
Beggar as the King, or the Prophet; all mand-kinde; every man; every man, in
his best state, is altogether vanity.

Thus I have showed you the front of the Text, and what it promise's in the
rooms within; if not so fully as you expect, or desire, please you to take a
review; and then you may see, more at large; Days, in the first part; these
days, proportioned; who did it: and how: and all this in a Tu posuisti, thou
have made them; and thou have so made them that they are as a span-long; there
I begin. Thou have make my days as a span-long.

A span-long.
TO weigh the misery of things transitory, Pars prima.
with the glory of others more permanent and solid, is the most exact way to
judge of either; the life of opposites is in Comparing them, when the good
seem better; and the bad worse. Our Prophet therefore, in a deep speculation
of the Almighty, and the frail rarities of his creatures here below, looking
up at length to the beauty of the Celestial host, Sun, moon, and stars,
brings up man unto to them; not to rival their perfection, but to question
his; and, after some stand, and pause, in steed of Comparison, makes an
enquiry; a double one; first, what man is? and then, what is the son of man?
in his eighth Psalm, the fourth verse.

Here is Homo, and filius hominis, and both, in the text, have their energia,
and weight of emphasis. The word enosc, or enosh, translated, man, sign fles
miserum and calamitosum hominem (says Musculus) a man of calamity, and
sorrow; Musc. in Psalm. 8.4.
and '^^ giu^n to all men as a remembrance of their mortality; so Psalm. 9.20.
Let the Heathens know that they be Enose, men, mortal men. Moreover, son of
man, has in the root. Adam; vt primae originis admoneamur, Musc. ibid.
to mind us of our carnal pedigree; and that our source and offspring is but
Adamah, and so all mankind, earthie. And therefore some translations,
following closely the tracke of the original, Aynsworth. Psalm. 8.4.
read thus; what is sorry man that thou remembrest him, and the son of Adam,
that thou visitest him? not what is man, that rare creature endued with
wisdom, and understanding, the Almightie's Masterpiece, the Image of his
maker, and model of the universe? But, what is Enose? what is Adam? What, the
son of calamity and sorrow? the son of earth and frailite? what is he? nay
what is he not? what not of calamity and earth? insomuch that the patient man,
under the groan and sense of humane imperfections, and the daily bruise of his
manifold affliction, is driven to his expostulation also, with a quid est
homo,? what is man? Job. 7.17. where we meet again with the word Enosc,
misellus homo, wretched man; and not nakedly the word, but a particle joined
with it, not mah, Bolduc. in Cap. Job. 17.
but mi, (as Bolducus observes) non quis, sed quid quaerere intendens, as if
the enquiry looked not to the person, but his condition; not, who is man? but
what he is? knowing that man is not only the concrete, miserable; but, the very
abstract misery it self; such a misery as may be an example, and president of
all others. And, if we but observe the criticismes and curiosities of
expositours upon the word man, they are neither impertinent nor fruitless; for
we shall never meet it through the whole current of sacred Story without some
descant and paraphrase from the Hebrew. To particular in that of Esaias, where
(in one text) words of opposite signification mask under a single antithesis,
as in the fifth of that Prophecy, Bolduc. in cap. 4. Job. 17.
Incuruabitur homo, and humiliabitur vir, man shall be brought down, and man
shall be humbled. Homo, there, is in the original, Adam, quod nomen
infirmitatis est, a name of crazines and languishment. Vir, Ise, or Ish,
Heroem, magnumque importans, which inuolues something of eminence, and renown;
and so our new translation gives it, Esa. 5.
the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled;
so that let man be of what condition or estate soever, he shall not be long
in it, without a bringing down, or an humbling. If he be Isc, mighty in
possession and name; humiliabitur, he shall be humbled; if he be Adam, of course
and popular condition, and so humble already, yet he must be lower,
incuruabitur, he shall be brought down; brought down and humbled with a
witness, ad infernum, says the Text, even unto Hell. Aperit infernus os suum,
the 16. verse of that Chapter. Esa. 5 16.
But Hell is the misety of another Age; our Text has little to do with that,
and so this place makes not for our purpose; but, the word Sheol will befriend
us here, and make this infernum, a grave, too, and thither we are humbled every
day; and then we ask no more Quis? or quid est homo? who, or what is man? but,
Vbi homo? where is man? Job. 14.10.
for so the pensive man interrogates; man wastes away, and gives up the
ghost, and where is he? Job. 14.10. where is he? fuit, non vixit, he was here
but now, but he is gone; gone from his Caluary to his Golgotha; his gall and
vinegar in his late agony (the bitter Cross of his body) to his sepulcher
(here) he wed out of the rock; He was buried in a vault.
his bed ready made for him in the dark, where he lie's down, and rises not,
till this fuit has put on a resurrexit, this mortality, a resurrection. And,
seeing he is now gone, let us no more ask, Quis? aut vbi? who, or where man
is? but once more, quid est what he is? or rather, what his Age is? or (if you
please) what his days in that age? and then the text will answer by way of
similitude and resemblance, Instar pugilli, as a span-long. A short time (no
doubt) that is inch't out, or singred by the span; other things remark't in
holy story, have their dimensions lin'dout by the farhome, or the cubit, or the
foot, at least; nothing that I remember, by this frail measure, but the life
of man; a thing so fragile and momentany, that there was nothing to express
it, but a span; a word so tumbled by Expositours, that they are somewhat driven
to the plundge, to give the original of it a proper signification in a second
language, and therefore some translations have it instar pugilli; or, ad
mensuram pugillorum, a little handful; so Felix, and Musculus; others ad
mensuram quatuor digitorum, or palmi minoris longitudinem; the breadth of four
fingers, or small inches; so Pagnine, and Tigurina; and near these, Iunius and
Mollerus palmares posuisti dies thou have made my days as a hand-breath. The
word of the Septuagint, is (...), which the vulgar Latin read's mensurabiles;
and Hierome, Vide Musculum in Psalm 39.6.
Breues something that is measurable, and therefore, short. For, though the age
of man, in holy writ, weare's sometimes the attribute of days; sometimes, of
months; sometimes, of years; yet these days, and months, and years are not
without their frail Epithets of, vani, or, breues, or the like; so Job is said
to possess many months; but they are menses vanitatis, months of vanity,
Job. 7.2. and not only months, but years also; but these years are anni
pancissimi; or breues anni, few years, and short Job. 16.12. Howeuer, suppose
these years were multiplied, and lengthned somewhat in their span, yet they
are short still, because numbered. Pineda in Job 16.22.
And therefore the Latin version here, breues annos, the Hebrew reads annos
numerari; and the Septuagint, annos dinumeratos, years to be numbered, or
years already numbered, and not only numbered, but prefixed; and not prefixed
barely, but circumscribed; circumscribed by the finger of the Almighty; and
that in a narrow circuit, this span-long; so Job says, man's days are
determined, and his months are with thee; thou have appointed his bounds that
he cannot pass, Job 14.5. Insomuch that days, Bolducus in cap. 16. Job. v.
23. Pined. ibid.
or months determined are but short; and short days and months, the Hebrews
call dies numeri, and menses numeri; days, and months of number quia pauci,
and numerabiles (says Pineda) because they are numerable, and therefore few.
Neither are days only, and months, and years so styled, but the men of those
days, and months, and years; so in the twelfth of Ezekiel, Ezech. 12. v. 16,
17.
the Prophet speaking of the desolation of the Jews, says, that God will
scatter them amongst the Nations, and disperse them in their Country, but
would leave of them homines paucos a gladio, and a fame, some few of them, that
is, homines numeri, some few that he had selected and numbered, these he would
reserve from the sword, the pestilence and the famine, that they might declare
all their abominations amongst the Heathens, whether they came, that they
might know that he is the Lord their God.

Thus, measure, or number, of times, or seasons, in what proportion soever,
presuppose a kind of rottenness and instabilitie; so our months are numbered,
and our days measured, Pineda in cap. 14. Job. v. 5.
Job 14.5. that is, short. The Latin word there, is praecisi, (according to
Tremeluis) decurtati, others; curtailed and contracted; from the original,
Charats; which signitieth, acuere, or, praescindere; to sharpen, or cut off.
So, the lostie Prophet, assuring to a remnant of Israel, their safctie form the
Assirians, tell's them of a consummatio praecisa, in the midst of the Land. A
consumption decreed, Esaias 10.22.
the English saye's, but that rendering is to narrow, and will not bear up with
the latitude of the original, and therefore not, a consumption; for, that
linger's too much; but rather, a consummation; a precise one; such a one as
argues both a certainty, and quickness in the doing; so quick and certain,
as if it were done, 'ere it began; and, acted, as soon as prophesied; so Joel
also call's the valley of Iehosophat, Pin. in cap. 4. Job.
vallis concisionis; multitudes, multitudes in the valley of concision; that
is, vallis abreuiationis; or, vallis praecisionis; the valley of abreuiation,
or cutting off; because that the vast multitude of people there met, should be
rarifi'd, and lessened; Joel 3.14.
and only a few number of the Just selected. In like sort, the days of man,
here, may be called dies concisionis, or dies praecisi, because they are
abreuiated maimed, cut off, determined, and straightned to a prescript time; a
strict measure; this span-long, which man can neither diminish, nor dilate in
his own power; but he is pent up, here, in his narrow Royalty; his frail
enclosure, where his days are spanned out, his pillars pitched; his non vltra
limited; his circuits bounded; and tu posuisti terminos, and thou (O God) have
appointed those bounds, and tu posuisti dies, and thou have made those days;
so made them, that thou have measured them; measured them, exactly; by a span;
a narrow span, which he shall neither fall short of, nor exceed, no not one
tittle or punctum of it; not the breadth of the smallest hair, or atome; no,
not the rare-spun gothsimere; or any other extenuated or imaginary thinness
whatsoever. For tu constituisti, and, tu posuisti, thou have appointed, and
thou have made it so: Job. 14.5. Psalm 33. 6
and whatsoever is thy appointment, is thy Law; a Law not to be corrupted, or
minced, or disanull'd, either by equivocation, or partiality, or rigor, or
any other iuggling or imposture of flesh and blood. There is none (says Job)
that can deliver out of thy hand. Statuta eius fecisti, and non praeteribit,
Job 10.7. Lat. Interp. in 10. cap. Job. v. 20.21. Prou. 8. v. 24.
thou have appointed man his bounds that he cannot pass, statutes which he
cannot violate certain channels and banks in thy decrees, which he cannot
possibly exceed. And as thou have established the clouds, and strengthened the
fountains of the deep, bound up the floods from ouerflowing, and given them
thy command that they shall not pass, but placed the sand as a wall about them
by a perpetual Decree; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, Ier. 5.22.
yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not swell over; so
all those tossing; and swellings of flesh and blood the surges and billows
rising in the tempests of our life, Job. 38.10, 11.
have their cliffes and shoares, and strict limits, and God has done to them,
as to the great deep, brake up for them his decreed place, and set bars and
doors, and said, hither you shall come, no further; here shall your proud
waves stay: for tu posuisti dies, thou have made our days, and those days but
a span-long and tu constituisti terminos, thou have appointed our bounds, and
those bounds we shall not pass. Pineda in cap. 14. Job.
And therefore the afflicted man seeme's to complain of the Almighty, that
he had environed him, terminis suis, with his bounds; that is, praeceptis suo,
and statutis, with his precepts, and his statute; such orecep saud statutes, as
he cannot abrogate; so in the eight of the Proverbs 29. the Wiseman speaking of
the mighty providence of God in ruling and ordering the vast deep, says
Iegem ponebat aquis, he gave the waters a law, or a decree, that they should
not pass his command, and yet the singer of Israel call's this very law, a
bound, thou have set a bound that they cannot pass, Psalm. 104 9 so that, that
terminus, or bound was a law to them; and this lex, or decree, a bound to us;
and neither this bound, nor law, to be ouer-past; and therefore we find it once
again spoken of in the 148. Psalm, and there is a non praeteribit, to it; it
shall not pass away, pass away? No, not one jot, or tittle of it. Heaven and
earth shall first pass away, before one jot or tittle, either of Gods Word or
Law, his posuit, or his constituit, his bound, or his span-long, which are a
law to him; a law irreuocable, both in matters of life, and death. And
therefore this necessity of fate, Saint Paul expresses, by the name of a law,
with a statutum est, and a semel statutum est, it is appointed to man to die,
and it is once appointed. Statutum est there is the law, or the decree, and the
semel once, says, that this law is firm, constant, inviolable; for God
speake's once, and he speake's but once, Pinedain cap. Job.
vt iterato pracepto opus non sit, says Pineda, that we should not expect any
iteration or doubling of his command. And therefore in the seventeenth of the
Acts, we have, though not this statutum est, the law punctually set down, yet
we have the statuta tempora, the times prefixed for the execution of that law;
so the text, God has made of one blood all the nations of men, and has
determined the times before appointed and the bounds of their habitation, which
they cannot pass, the six and twentieth verse of that Chapter. And least we
should think times determined to be no law, our death, which is a thing
determined, and to a time determined, is called, a Testament, or, a Law.
Remember that death will not be long, in coming, and that the Covenant or Law
of the grave, is not showed unto thee. Ecclus 14.12.

So that this business of death and the grave, is a law certain, and prefixed,
both for the time and manner, and that beyond all possibility of alteration;
and therefore whether we style it a decree, or a statute, or a law, or a
testament, or a bound, Pin. ibid.
or this span-long, Semper dicis aliquid quod praeteriri non poterit, says the
Jesuit, there is something inuolu'd that is both constant and inviolable;
whose rampires, and walls, and bulwarks, thou shall never scale nor dig
through; for it is the Almighties Citadell and strong fort, so garrisoned and
intrencht by his eternal power, and wisdom; the doors and gates of it so
barrocade'd, and blockt-vp against all invasions of flesh and blood, that no
earthly stratagem, no temporal assault, no humane policy, shall ever raze or
demolish; but it stand's vnshooke, against all tempests; firm, against all
batteries; solid, against all underminings; so that if the floods rise, and the
winds blow, and the waves beat, they shall never stagger it.

Seeing then there is a Statutum est past upon all mankind, that it must once
die (and that statute is not rough, though it be sometimes unpleasing, to die
once, so we die no more, for a double death is our due, though not our pay)
and knowing that there are precise bounds, and limits, and span-longs to flesh
and blood, beyond which it cannot pass, and these bounds, and spans, and
limits have the Inscription of Gods unalterable Decree, with the authority of
his stamp and seal, his posuit, and his constituit, let us take up the prayer
here of our Psalmist. Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Lord make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, what it is; the
number, what it is? and est, and non est, says Saint Augustine.

The measure of our days you have had in an exact proportion, in this
span-long; but the number of them, Aug ibid.
is both secret, and uncertain: it is and it is not, truly. Nec esse possumus
dicere, quod non stat, nec non esse, quod venit, and transit, saye's the
father, we cannot properly say that that is which remaynes not, nor that is
not, which comes and goes. Days past, and future, are as no days. Yesterday,
was; and to morrow, will be; and so, now, are not; and of such things as are
not, there is no number, today, only, is man's; and this not long his,
neither; for it is going; or if it did not go, it is but one day, and of that,
there is no number, neither; so that the total here, aut non est, aut quasi
est, is either no number at all, or, Aug. vt supra.
as it were, a number. Sum up all the minutes and hours thou can, and
those, truly, and thine own; thou shall make up but one day, and that day
(wholly) not thine own neither. Let Us begin from the first dawne, or hour of
it; where is that hour, says the father? it is gone, where is the second then?
perchance thou will say that is gone too; but, the third (doubtless) thou
enioy'st; that is thine own; Aug. ibid.
be it so; and yet si tertiam dabis, non diem, sed horam dabis. Do thou
talk then of number, that have but a day, or of a day, that have but one
hour? an hour? not that neither, not that very hour thou think thou
enioy'st; for, if some part of it be now past, and another as yet remaining;
and of that which is past thou can not dispose, because it is not now; nor,
of that which remaynes, because it is not yet, what can thou give of this
hour? or if thou give, what is it of thine own thou give? the Father is at
a stand, here; and in steed of a resolution put's a quaere. Cui committam hoc
verbum, vt dicam, Est? what shall I do with the word. Est (says he?) it is
but one syllable, and one moment, and three letters in that syllable, and
moment. We cannot come to the second, but by the first, nor to the third, but
by the second; and then quid mihi de hac vna syllaba dabis? and tenes dies, qui
vnam syllabam non tenes? do we talk of years, and months, and days, and
hours, when we cannot give an account of one syllable? not of one letter of
it? Away then with this vain credulity, this fond assurance of our settled
plantation here below; momentis transuolantibus cuncta rapiuntur, all things
are snatched away in moments; moments that have wings, and no seete; momentis
transuolantibus, moments that fly away, as if they were afraid of mortality,
or loath to assist it. And yet, behold, our tents here are not so thinnly
built, but they will endure the blasts (or breathings rather) of a few days, a
few days (indeed) that are spann'd-out; and when these are gone, Lord, what
are we? surely, even as nothing; as nothing before thee: so the Prophet in the
words following Mine Age is as nothing before thee.

Mine Age is as nothing before thee.
Mine Age, etc. Justinian reads it vitamea; Pars secunda. auum meum. vulg. lat:
Jun. and Trem. Musc. in Psalm. 39. Aynsworth. in Psalm. 39. 1. Cor. 7.31.
Pagnine, tempus meum, my life, and my time; the two Fathers, Hierome and
Augustine (following the Greek) substantia mea my substance; the Caldee (not
much unlike) Corpus meam, my body; but, the Hebrew word, Cheled, signifies, the
World, Psalm. 17.14. used here, for man's life or Age, or time in the world; so
that, as the fashion of this greater world passes away, says the Apostle, so
does the body and substance of the lesser; insomuch that this whole pilgrimage
on earth, is but as nothing (most translations reading here vt nihil, or
tanquam nihil) and though some be so merciful in their rendrings, Aeuum meum
eoram te est, ac sinon essot. Musc. Aeuum meum ac si nibil esset ante te,
Molcrus.
as to make man's Age a something, yet that has but an Est, acsi non esset: or
else an Ac, with a si nibil esset: so that I find little difference in the
readings, the one making man's age as nothing; the other, a something, as if it
were not. But suppose it were a something, indeed, such an age as had a
stabilitie both of days and years, and these not spann'd so narrowly, but
they might climb up to the miracle of a thousand years, yet this huge mass
of time is little better then the tanquam nihil in the Text, as nothing before
thee, such a nothing, as is resembled to the decursion and sticklenes of one
day, not a day present, but already spent, A yesterday, Psalm. 90.4.
a yesterday that is past. A thousand years in thy eyes are but as yesterday
that is past, or as a wacth in the night. Psalm. 90.4.

Had our Prophet resembled it to a day, such a day as we enjoy; this day, or,
one hour of this day; or one minute of this hour; or, one moment, or ictus of
that minute, we might have presupposed some stabilitie, though short-breathd,
and panting, in the course of man's age; but, to a day, a day languish't, and
consumed; to yesterday, to yesterday expird; how does it whisper our frailty?
how our transitorinesse? not such a frailty, and transitorinesse, as shall
hereafter fade and wither, but a rotten transitorinesse, a putrisied frailty; a
yesterdayes frailty and transitorinesse; a yesterday that is worme-eaten and
dustie; a yesterday that is past. The natural man then looked not home to the
brittlenesse of our constitution, when he styled Man a creature of a day;
(...). Arist. Job. 8.9.
nor the righteous man, when he clothed him with an hesterni sumus, we are
but as yester day, Job 8.9. but, the man after Gods own heart (whose knowledge
was as pure as his integrity) he displayes him at the full, when he makes his
Age, a season obsolete; Psalm. 90.4.
a Calender out of date; a yesterday that is past.

And therefore in a deep contemplation of our mortality (bottoming and
sounding (as it were) all humane wretchedness) he opens the fleetnesse of his
age by a nihil, here, a nihil (I confess) with a tanquam to it, Mine Age is as
nothing before thee: as nothing (indeed) before thee; thy Omnipotency, thy
Infiniteness; before these, as nothing. For, if a thousand years to thee be
but as yester day, must be nothing to thy thousand; thy thousand thousands;
thy myriades of thousands, thy eternity; thy euerlastingnesse. And therefore,
my Age, or, my substance, is a tanquam nihil ante te, Ante te, qui vides hoc
(Saint Augustine eccho's) and cum hoc video, ante te video, ante te homines non
video. I confess, that it is nothing that I am, in respect of him; that is,
ante te domine, ante te; vbi oculi tui sunt, non vbi oculi humani sunt; Aug. in
Psalm.
so the Father warble's. To a blemished or a deluded eye (and such a one is a
mortal eye) my age may be something; a something of some few dimensions, a
span-long, and yet this is but a tanquam nihil, a tanquam nihil, unto man, too;
as nothing before him: but to thee; to thy eyes (which are brighter then those
beams, which dazzle mine) those eyes, substantia mea, pure nihil; no tanquam,
there; mine age is nothing; purely nothing, there. Nothing? why? vniuersa
vanitas omnis homo, every man is vanity; such a vanity as is stol'n-by; or else,
now going; as, yester day; or, as a watch in the night. And, these have their
tanquam nihil, too; are as nothing before thee; so truly nothing, that they
make not up an Age, or a day, but some few hours; enough to make up the watch
of a night; no more. But suppose this tanquam nihil beaten out to the
perfection of an Age; and that age, threescore and teu: this, trodden on to an
hundred; that trebledvp to Nestors; and his, to Methusalah's; yet all these
would not make up our number of a thousand; and so, in God's eyes, would be
less then a day; then a day that is past. Than a day? one night; nay, one
poor watch in that night; a watch of some three houres-space, that is all. For
the Jews divided their day into twelve hours, and subdivided their night into
four watches, and every watch, three hours. 1. Evening. 2. Midnight. 3.
Cock-crowing 4. Dawne. Mare. 13.35. Math. 14.13.
A goodly monarchhie, of flesh and blood; a spacious; souerainty (no doubt)
both in power and time; a Reign of some three hours; three hours of a night
too, not of a day; as though the time of our sway, and scepter, here, were
attended merely with obscurity and dullness, a scene of heaviness and
slumber, such as are incident to this watch in the night. And, indeed, what is
our life, but a very Watch? and the the time of it, but as the night season?
wherein, by reason of the darkness that mantles, and o'respreads it, we
grope in vncertenties and errors: the light we have of things is but weak
and borrowed; a glimmering, or twinkling only, no true light; and, rather a
conceit, and apprehension of what we seem to see, then an exactken or
knowledge of what we should.

Moreover, in this watch of ours, we are apt to nod, and forget; forget, not
only that we are here at Sentinel; who set us here; and the short time we
are at it, our three boures; but the strict charge of our Commander, and the
danger of surprizall and defeat, by the invasion of our powerful Adversary.
But, night and frailty (as what is our age but these?) are beauie-ey'd, and
drowzie; and then, our three hours, are (perchance) no more a watch, but a
dream; And what is our age but a dream too? a dream of some three hours;
and that is a long one (you will say) but, howeuer long, it is but a dream; and,
as a dream, not long neither. But did I say, man's Age was a dream? nay,
rather, man, in that Age, Tob 20.8.
a dream. He flies away, as a dream, and is chased as a vision in the
night. Job. 20.8. So that, now, here is a dream in a dream, Ezechiels vision;
a wheel in a wheel, this turne's in that, and yet, but one vision, one
dream; or, if there be disparitie any where, it is in man; and he, the vainer
dream of the two.

Our life (you know) has been called a shadow; and not only a shadow, but a
vain shadow, in which man is said to walk; He walks in a vain shadow, in
the seventh verse of this Psalm; And not only walke's in it, but dreame's in
it; so dreame's in it, that he is of it, too; and therefore the Heathen call's
him vmbrae somnium, (...). Pindar.
the dream of a shadow; and what is that, but the shadow of a shadow? for
there is nothing so truly a shadow, as a dream, in which (oftentimes) there
are strange objects presented to the fantasy, whereof in nature, and true
being, there is not so much, as a resemblance, no, not a shadow; and yet, even
these so captive and shackle the whole man, that (according to the variety of
species offered) they take us, either with delight, or horror; sometimes
commanding our sigh, our groan, our tear; sometime, our elevation of spirits;
our applause, our laughter; even then, when our out ward senses seem fettered
and chain'd-vp in the bands of sleep; and all this was but the Fisher-man's
dream in Theoeritus, whose Golden Booty vanished with his dream, and he
awak's at length to himself, and his old wants gulled with an apparition and
shadow of that substance, of which he now find's there was neither shadow, nor
substance, truly, but, a dream of both.

Again, Dreams are the true Hieroglyphics of our mortal state, in which the
whole passages of our life, are either prophesied, or acted; and that, much to
the complexion, or quality of humors in him that dreameth. Sometimes, they
are ambitious; and then we think we are upon the tops of hills, or mountains;
now on Basan, then, on Libanus; where (for our pride and loftiness) we are
called Oaks, and Cedars; sometimes they are more humble, and dejected, and
then we grouell in bottomes, and in valleys; where, for our low estate, we
are called shrubs and hysop; sometimes they are presumptuous, and then we are
at the fall of a steep Cliffe, or Rock; sometimes, they are desperate, and
then we are at the quick-sand, or the gulf; sometimes, they are vainglorious,
and then we are at the battlement, or pinnacle of the Temple; sometimes they
are pusillanimous and fearful; and then we are at the roaring, or swallowing
of the great deep; sometimes they insinuate a kind of auspice and blessed
abundance, and then we tumble in Arabian spices, gold of Ophir, Indian
Diamonds; but this (for the most part) is a very dream, such a one, as our
fantasy tell's us, in our dream, is a dream indeed; sometimes again, they
are Ominous, and then ghastly apparitions, and fearful shreekes startle and
affright us; Galbas halter, or knife, or poison, or some other Engine of blood
and death more horrid; lastly, sometimes they are fatal, and then we dream
that we have feet of clay; walk in a Caemeterium, or a Golgotha, tread amongst
tombs, or dead men's bones, stumble at a Coffin, or (perchance) a green meadow,
and that (they say) is an infallible praediction of mortality; I know not
whether a meadow be, I am sure grass, or a flower is; or, if not a prediction,
at least, an emblem. All flesh is grass, Esaias 40 6.
and the beauty thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers, and
the flower fades, Esaias 40.6.

Mark, the substance of flesh and blood (here) is but grass, such grass as
withers, and the beauty of that substance, as a flower, such a flower, as is
open to all tempests, a flower of the field: and that flower of the field which
fades too. Here is nothing but withering, and fading, no time of flourishing,
as if man were a piece merely of declination, and wasted before he grew. And
yet lo, he grows, and he flourishes too, but it is for a day only; a day?
nay. the first part of that day, the morning; so says our Psalmist. Psalm. 90.6.
In the morning be flourishes, and grows up, Psalm. 90.6. That Is well; here
is man, and the glory of man; he grows, and he flourishes; and all this is
in the morning; But what follows this morning, and this growth, and this
flourishing? surely, a ripeness, a sickle, and a harvest; an evening, a
cutting-downe, and a withering. In the evening he is cut down, and withers,
the same verse, of the same Psalm.

But, has all slesh and blood (the grass here mentioned) a time of growing up
'ere it be cut down? a flourishing before it wither's? we read of grass,
that wither's before it grows; before it grows up, up to any ripeness, or
perfection; and this the Psalmist call's grass on the house top, Psalm. 129.6,
7. Psalm. 119.6, 7.
So thinly grown, that the mower, fills not his hand, nor he that binds up
fheaues, his bosom. Oh, that the Top of a house, the maine beam, and rafters
of a Family, the chief buttresse, and pillar of a name, should be so barren,
the fruit of it so soon fade, when those that are nearer earth, take better
root. But lo; He grew so thinly up, that there is not so much left of him,
as to fill a hand, not to make up this span-long, in the text, no not this
tanquam nibil; He withered before he grew-vp; we had him only in the morning,
in the blooming of youth, when the Damask and the Lilly daunc'd in the cheek:
Before his noone, he is reapt away, and his sheafe bound-vp, and now he is
gone, gone like the day you heard of, the yesterday, or the watch, or the
shadow, or the dream, or the grass, or the frail flower, nothing remaining,
but the memory, that He was; And why? Vniuersa vanitas omnis home; surely, man
is vanity; every man is vanity; every man, in his best state is vanity;
every man, in his best state, is altogether vanity. So the words run in the
next part. Every man in his best state is altogether vanity.

Every man in his, Parstertia.
etc.
THe translations (here) run diversely; so do the faucies on them. Vniuersa
vanitas omnis homo; August. Musculus. Mollerus. Iun. Trem. in locuin.
so, Saint Augustine; omnis vanitas vniuersus homo; so Musculus; mera vanitas
omnis homo; so Mollerus; and omnimoda vanitas omnis homo; so, Iunius and
Tremelius. Every Translation is double-strung, and harp's altogether on the
plural. The Prophet says not, I am vain, or man is vain, or, man is
vanity; nor that men are vain, or vanity; but the whole series, Aynsworth in
Psalm. 39.
and descent come within the chorus; Every man is vanity; nay, every man is
every vanity; all mankind, all manner of vanity; so the Root, All Adam, all
Hebeb, all mankind, all vanity. There is nothing within the round of this
little world, the whole circuit of flesh and blood, (whosoever, whatsoever, or
how great soever) but it is vain, Bolduc. in cap. 11. Ioh. v. 11.
vanity, all vanity. And therefore some Commentators (perusing that of the
eleventh of Job, verse. 11. God knows vain man) read it nouit Deus hominum
vanitatem, God knows the vanity of men: or, as others, more nimbly, nouit
Deus homines vanitatis; God knows the men of vanity. So, Saint Augustine,
paraphrasing on that of the Preacher, Eccles. 1. Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. will not read the words, Aug. lib de vera Religione cap. 21.
Vanitas vanitatum, but vanitas vanitantium, as if men made the vanity, and
not vanity the men, so. Neque frustra additum est vanitantium, (says the
Father,) quia si vanitantes detrahas, non eritcorpus vanitas, sed in suo
genere, quamuis extremam pulchritudinem, sine vllo errore remonstrabit, in his
Book, de ver a Religione, cap. 21. And, indeed, we too much iniure and
disparage, not only the times we live in, but also, those of our Predecessors,
crying out on the vanity of either, when the Stoyicke tells us, hominum sunt
ista, Sen. Epist. 56.
non temporum; the vanity is in the man, and not in the Age; or, if it were
there, and the vanity of all creatures within it, man would ingrosse it all;
so, the same Saint Augustine, expounding the Apostles, Aug. in cap. 8. To. cap.
53.
vanitati subiecta est creatura, the creature is subject unto vanity, Romans 8.
First, put's all vanity into the creature, and then; all creatures into man,
and that without the least calumny, or, injustice (so he professes) omnem
creaturam in ipso homine, sine vlla calumnia cogitemus, in his tract upon the
Romans, cap. 13. And, indeed, it was just, that he who had the glory of all
creatures, whilst he stood clothed in his integrity, should have all their
frailty, too, when he was disrobed; and so it fell out at length; that he
that was the occasion of all vanity, man, was all vanity himself. Verse 4.
There was a time, when he was but like unto it, Man is like unto vanity,
Psalm. 144. now He is vanity it self, it is his essential, and proper
quality; not in part, or resemblance only, but, altogether vanity; man is
altogether vanity. And what is that? Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Totum hoc quod transit vanitas dicitur. Every transitorinesse is a vanity;
That which reside's not, we call vain, because it vanishes; so does a vapor,
we say, or a smoke, and man is both; and therefore a vanity, and a vanity;
or, (if you please) once more, a vanity of vanities; for that which the
Septuagint read's so in their (...); Hierome, and others would have read (...),
vapor fumi, and, aurea tenuis, the vapor of a smoke, or, a thin air;
Hebel, a soon vanishing vapor, as the breath of ones mouth, or nostrils; so
Viues note's upon the Father, in his twentieth, De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 3. It Is
true then, whatsoever vanishes, we call vanity; and man, that vanished
vanity; insomuch that he seeme's to be a frail creature, indeed; some what
less then vanity, or beyond it. Psalm 109.23.
And therefore our Prophet does not only compare him to a shadow (which must as
a shadow vanish) but to that shadow, when it declineth, Psalm. 109.23. and it
seems this is not enough neither, and therefore, Psalm 102.12.
Psalm. 102.12. Dies mei similes vmbrae declinatae; I am gone ae a shadow
declined. He is gone, and declined, not declining, as if his passage were
rather coniectur'd then discerned. And therefore, in Scripture, we seldom
find man's Age resembled to a shadow, but there is a fugit with it, fugit
velut vmbra. Job. Job 14.12.
14.12. He sties as a shadow; flie's with a nimble wing; so nimbly, that
sometimes He outdoe's the acuteness of our sight; I be held him (says David)
and he was gone, Psalm 37.37.
I sought him, and he was no where to be found; so also, dies nostri, quasi
vmbrae super terram, 1. Chron. 29.15.
and nulla est mora, 1. Chron. 29.15. Our days are as a shadow upon earth, and
there is no stay; they pass along; nay, they fly; fly so swiftly, that they
are gone, when we think them going, like a gasping coal, which in one Act,
glare's, and dye's; or the rude salutations of fire and powder, which but meet,
and part; touch, and consume. And, indeed (if we but observe) a shadow is not
so proper a resemblance of our life, as of our death; or, rather, something
between both. It Is an unequal mixture of light and darkness; or rather, a
light mask't, or vayl'd-vp in darkness, so that, the greater part must be
obscurity; and that resemble's death; what remayne's of light, is screen'd and
intercepted, and so look's but dimly toward life. Every shadow is an
imperfect night, and every night, a metaphorical death. Sleep and Death have
been long since called two sisters; and Night, the mother of them both.
Moreover, as every shadow is an imperfect night, so every life is an imperfect
death. The greater the shadow is, the nearer unto night, and so is the life
protract'd, unto death. And therefore our Prophet knowing that his earthly Tent
was a little wind-shooke, and obnoxious to daily ruin, will have his age
emblem'd by a shadow that is declined, ad occasum vergens, In Psalm. 102.12. and
109.23.
and in tenebras euanescens, says Muscuius; hastening to darkness, and the
night, and that night, death. When the Sun is in the Meridian, and the beams
of it perpendicular to our bodies, shadows change not suddenly, but when it
begin's to decline to the fall, every moment, almost, they vary; and therefore
his days are velut vmbrainclinata, seu serotina, Museul. ibid.
as an evening shadow which decline's with the Sun, and so set's. For, though
shadows appear larger, when the Sun is near the fall, yet that greatness
is not fatre from vanishing; vanity (I should say) the vanity in the text
(here) man; whose honors and triumphs, at the height, and, in his best state,
are but as shadows at noone; and his days, but as shadows near the set;
nay, not so hopeful, for they return again with the Sun; but man once set,
rises not, till the Sun and Heavens shall be no more. Job. 14.12. And twere
well that only the time of man's life were vanity, but his actions in that time
are a wilder vanity then the other. The Poets signified so much, when they set
in combustion all Greece and Asia for a gaudie Apple; and all Troy and Greece,
for a fair Curtizan; two dainty trifles to cause such bloody agitations in
States and Empires. What, but vanity could have proiected it? What but this,
omnimoda vanitas, put it in execution? But, who knows not, that most things
arrive mankind, as they seem, not as they are? As we please to fancy them,
not as they prove in their own nature? And so we are fooled out of the truth,
and realtie of things, by a vain apprehension of what they are not; showing
one thing in the rind, an external appearance, another, in the core and
internal essence; Sophistications, Impostures, Lies. And therefore the Prophet
complains on the sons of men, that they loved Vanity, and followed after
lies, Psalm. 4.9. not only because all worldly allurements yield no true
contentation, and felicity, but because (in very deed) they tend either to
equivocation, or falsehood; a deceivable falsehood (so the word Cozab
signifie's) which is such a lie, Aynesworth. in Psalm. 4.9.
as deceiue's men's expectations; and therefore that which in the twelfth
Psalm, verse 3. We translate deceitful lips, according to the Hebrew, is
false vanity, or vain falsehood, the word Shau noting both vanity of words,
and deeds, and sometimes that which is false too. Here upon the Prophet Agur
amongst other petitions he preferred to his God, his principal desire was,
that he would remove from him, vanity and lies, Pro. 30.8. And commonly they
go hand in hand; for, whatsoever is vain must be false too; Insomuch that under
the word vanity, a lie passes srequently in Scripture, or, Vide Pineda and
Boldnc. in cap. 11. Job 11.
at least in the Expositions on it: so in the eleventh of Job, what the vulgar
read's, hominum vanitatem, vanity of men, Pagnine call's homines mendaces, and
Caietan, homines falsitatis, lying men, or, men of falsehood; Pagn. Vatab.
Caiet. in cap. 11. Job. 11.
and Vatablus, (unwilling, as it seems, to sunder vanity from the lie)
translate's both ways, Nouit Deus quam vani, and ne quam homines. God knows
how vain and false men are; And therefore in the 62. Psalm. 10. the Latin has
it, Mendaces homines in stateris, men are lies in the balance; the English,
thus, men are vanity in the balance. And, indeed, the whole race of mankind
come's within the verge of these two words; if they be of cheap and humble
condition, they are called Vanity; if, of a more climing, high, and noble
estate, a lie. Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are alye,
Psalm. 62.9. Aynsworth in Psalm. 62.9.
A lie, or a vanity? nay, lighter then both; so that if they were laid in
balances together, they would mount up, says the text; In balances to mount
up, they together are lighter then vanity; intimating, Psalm. 62.10.
that if all men were put together in one balance, and this vanity and lie,
in another, the balances would mount up, and the frailty in man's side. A
pretty piece of aeyre, and leuitie, that vanity should weigh-downe; or, alie;
childhood, or wantonness, or folly, or ignorance, are not so light; nay, not
the leuitie of all these, woman.

The Locust, or the Grasshopper (creatures of emptiness and fear) are no
greater slaves of the wind then he. He is tossed to and froas the Grasshopper,
and driven away as the Locust, Aug. Iun. and Trem. Psalm. 30. In imagine non in
vmbra.
Psalm. 109.23. Thus, his whole life is but a tossing, or a driving (types of
instabilitie, and trouble) and these in a vain way too; so our Psalmist, here;
He walke's in a vain Image (as if his life were rather suppositious, and
imaginary, then a life indeed) and in this, he is at no peace, but he
disquieteth himself in vain, or, (as some read it) in vanity does he make a
stir; And what is the issue of this vain tumult? He beapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them, in the seventh verse of this Psalm. Of all
earthly vanities this is the most superlatiue; the omuimoda vanitas in the
Text, Aug. de Temp. 49. in cap. 3.
is not so vain as this. Conturbaris, o homo (says Augustine) Vane
conturbaris; quare? thesaurizas; cui? nescis. A rare providence (no doubt) to
treasure up, I know not what, for I know not whom. The Scripture scarce
afford's a fleeting at tribute to flesh and blood, but Riches have a share in
it. Men are called vanities, so are Riches, shadows, so are Riches; nothing,
so are Riches. Hark, Mammonist, here is a vanity, as well of Riches, Aug.
ibid.
as of men, and both these a shadow, and a nothing. But suppose those riches
firm, and solid; what then? Non infructuose conturbaris, sed vane conturbaris,
(says the Father) perchance the trouble is not so fruitless; but, it is as
vain; vain? Why? Thou know not who shall gather them; and, if thou know
not that, why do thou heap them up? or, if thou do, tell me, for whom?
thy self? dare thou say so, that art to die? thy issue, then? dare thou
say so of those that shall? Magna pietas! thesaurizat pater filijs; imo, magna
vanitas, thesaurizat moriturus, morituris; the Father, still, in his nine and
fortieth Sermon, de Tompore.

But grant thy heaps enlarged; thy fortunes, prosperous; thy loins,
fruitful, yet there is a moth and gangreene haunt's that estate that is
purchased with too much solicitude, the heir of it, (oftentime) subject to a
fit of improuidence, or luxury, or pride, or folly, or else, that common fever
of lust, and riot; or (perchance) the palsy of a die, shake's out his
posterity into misery, and want; and then Ille fluenao perdidit, quod tu
laborando congregasti; Aug. vt supra.
what before was a dropsy, is now grown to a consumption, thy baser avarice,
to a reproachful penury; and what thou have long fed on, with the bread of
carfulness, is at last brought to the bread of sarrow, to the lean cheek,
the hollow eyes, and the clean teeth; and he that was before the object of
thy wretchedness, and poor anxietie, is now, He that by usury and unjust gain
increases his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the
poor. Prou. 28.18. Vide Eccles. 2.26. Psalm. 127.
of another man's Charity, and remorse; and then thou will acknowledge this
vane conturbaris, too, that thou have disquieted thy self in vain, and to no
purpose heaped up riches, since thou know not who has gathered them. But,
suppose thy issue, both hopeful, and provident, such a one as will not only
preserve thy treasure, but inhaunce it; yet oftentimes his vine is barren, and
there are no Olive plants about his table; God does shut up the womb, or so
emasculate his loins, that either the fruit of it is abortiue, or none at all;
or, if he have any (as Bildad said unto Job) the first borne of death shall
devour his strength, Job. 18.13, 14.
and bring him to the King of terrors, Eccles 5.4. Job 33.34. Job 15.33. Vide
Eccles 4.8
he shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine and cast off his flower as the
Olive; and then the vane conturbaris comes here also; He has disquieted
himself in vain, and heaped up riches, and knowe's not who shall gather them.
Thus, Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it;
Psalm. 127.2.
Children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward; others may plant, and water, but be giue's the increase; and where he
giue's them as blessings (as oftentimes he does) they are as arrows in the
hand of the strong man, Psalm. 127.4.5.
and happy is he that has his quiver full: but when they are given otherwise
(as they are sometimes) as the whip and sword of a declining house then they
are as arrows in the hand of the Almighty; arrows that are sharp, and keen,
shot from a deadly hand, and a bow of steel; arrows that stick fast, Job 7.
and pierce the very joints and the marrow; the venom whereof drinks up the
spirits, the spirits of a Name and Family, when the light of it shall be put
out, Job 18 5.
and the sparkle of his fire shine no more. Who knowe's not that God does often
scourge the sin of the Father in the children? and, for the foul The crimes
here mencion'd, were Avarice, Oppression, Sacrilege; which (spoken only in
communi, and as a positive truth in Divinity) the misprision, or prejudice of
some did wire-draw and restrain too personally; and brought-home that to
particular Families, which was intended only ingenerall, and at large. And
therefore, if there be any bosom so guilty, as to eutertaine them otherwise,
I am sorry for the Application: the Author is innocent.
obliquities of the Predecessor, set's a rot upon the whole Posterity, when
the name shall moulder with the Body, and the Fortunes with the name; so that
the curse against the wicked man, runn's double; first, against his fortunes;
they shall dry up as a river, and shall vannish with noise like a great thunder
in vain; next on his Issue; they shall not bring forth branches, but are as
unclean roots upon a hard rock. Eccles. 40.13, 15. Here is a vane
conturbaris, indeed; and not barely so, but, an infructuose conturbaris, also;
not only a vain anxietie, but a fruitless; for, here is neither a
thesaurizas, nor a congregabis; no Riches left that were heapt up; or (if there
be) none to gather them.

Thus, they that sow vanity shall reap the wind; not a wind that shall lull
and whistle them, but a wind that driue's and scatter's; scatters them, as the
chafe from the face of the whole earth. And though they grow mighty in
possession, or name; so mighty, that in height they reach the very cloud's,
yet God shall persecute them with his tempest, Psalm. 18.12.
and make them afraid with his storm; at his presence, these clouds shall be
removed; and then, hailestones, and coals of fire. Or, though they aspire not
so high, but climb the mountains only (though some mountains (they say)
kiss the clouds, too) yet, tangit montes, and fumigabunt, God shall touch
those mountains, and they shall smoke; and as they smoke, vanish, and
vanishing, confess Tusolus altissimus super omnem terram. Thou, O Lord, art
above those mountains, and not only above them, but all the World beside.

And I could wish that my words were altogether at random here; and looked not
collaterally, both to the text and the occasion. Who see's not (and let me not
be thought rough, or uncharitable, in that I say, who see's not) that in latter
ages the Almightie's Besome has been here; and, in the circuit of a few
years, swept away many brave Worthies of the name; and not only his Besome,
but his Axe too, lopt off many a hopeful twig, and glorious branch; and now of
late, struck at the The Root (howeuer) is still green; and I wish heartily
that it may grow-vp, and bud, and branch, to the flourishing and perpetuity of
the Name; though some have barkt at my integrity, making my words here, a
churlish prophecy, of the extirpation of it, and sinall doom. But such
snatlers and closebiters of men's honors, I mustproclaime ignorant, or unjust,
or both; for, either they understood not what I spoke, or, if they did, were
injurious in their application. Hoc tu Roman caueto.
Stem, of the Family; and at a blow hewe'd down, one of the goodliest Cedars
in all our Libanus. The very stones and walls speak so much; those untimely
Blackes, and these sorrows. And yet (me thinke's) our sorrows are not as they
should be; our Firre-trees howl not that their Cedar is fallen, neither are
our Harpes (as yet) hung upon the willowes; but we can sing an Epithalamium,
when we should be sighing of an Elegy, as if our proiects could befoole the
Almighties, and 'twere in our power to raise or establish a name, when God
seeme's to threaten the pulling down. But (O thou altogether vanity) look up
to the Hills above, and to the Heavens above them; and there, to the maker of
them both; who sit's in his great watchtower, and obserue's all the passages
of the sons of men; and not only obserue's them, but laugh's them to scorn;
and, childing our presumptuous and vain designs, bidd's us look back to the
text here; where we may read the story of our wretchedness, and so
acknowledge, at length with our Prophet, that, Thou, O God, have made our days
as a span-long, and that our Age is as nothing before thee; and surely every
man in his best slate is altogether vanity.

I have done now with the text, and should begin with the occasion of it; the
death of our Honorable Friend; but I was commanded only for a Sermon, not for
a Panegyricke, that (I suppose) you might have had (here) in a more keen and
accurate discourse; mine (I confess) like my griefs, heavy, and bedewed.
True sorrow is more hearty, then Rhetorical; and not so fit for applause, as
for a groan. Your sauning eloquence playe's to much with the tongue, and
leaue's the inward man unsearched; but, my bosom is engaged here, and not my
lips; and that is too full to be emptied in this span-long of an Auditorie; the
world shall have it in an impartial Anniuersarie: or, should I vent my
respects, here I could be only your Remembrancer, not, your Informer.

The Country was not so much a stranger to his worth, but must acknowledge this
truth with me; that he was not guilty of any peculiar sin, either of
greatness, or of youth; no lofty-ones, of arrogance or scorn; no
grinding-ones, of cruelty or oppression; no flaming-ones, of riot, or of lust;
no base-ones of anxiety, or solicitude; no lewdones, of profanation or
debauchment; no biting-ones, of rancour, or detraction; no creepingones, of
Insinuation, or popularitie; no painted-ones, of ceremony, or hypocrisy; but
all his Actions went by the line, and the square, as if his life had been an
exact Epitome both of morality, and Religion. There was nothing mortal about
him, but his Body, and that was too frail a cabbonet for those rich eminences
to lodge in, Plin: Paneg.
so that, as Pliny told his Traian mortalitas magis finita est, quam vita his
life was not terminated, but his mortality; Goodness and virtue (which were
his being) have a kind of Divinity in them; and so, not mortal. Bonus a Deo
differt tantum tempore, says the Stoicke, Sen. Ep. 73.
Between God and a good man, there is no distinction but in time; nor in that
neither, if he mean (as it seeme's he does) a titularie God, Idem Ibid.
not an essential; for, nulla sine Deo men's bona, there is no good mind
without a God in it: and that is the reason (I think) great men were first
called Gods; for, greatness presupposes some raritie and perfection in it, and
where that is, there is a kind of God head. And, if it were ever in greatness,
it was here; whether you take greatness for the name, or for the spirit; not,
that he was either haughty or supercilious, but of a temper, truly generous,
and heroicke, and (what is above either) truly Christian. A fast friend, and a
noble brother, A munificent and open-handed Master; and (what I know, and
therefore speak, and speak that you should know, and so imitate) an
uncorrupted Patron; no firebrand in his Country, nor Meteor in his Church; a
flash, and falfe-blaze in Religion, he was so far from approving, that he
loathed; neither was he so benighted in his intellectuals, as to be led up and
down in a perverse ignorance and darkness, by an Ignis fatuus; your vocal
purity, and tongue devotion, and furious zeal, even when he was no more a
dying man, but a Saint (and the words of dying Saints are Oraculous to me) he
both censured and disclaimd; wishing the walls of our Jerusalem built up
stronger in Unity and Peace; and, a more temperate and discreet silence amongst
the wayward Hot-spurres of our Spiritual Mother. And, indeed, this Clamorous
Sanctity, this affected dress of holiness, without, is not the right dress.
Prou. 30.12.
There is a generation (says the Prophet) that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet is not washed from their filthiness; the ragge, or the menstruous
cloute, not so loathsome as some of these. Our bodies (you know) are called the
Temples of the Holy Ghost; our heart, the Altar of that Temple; true devotion,
the fire of that Altar; sighs, and groans, and sobs, the sacrifice for that
fire; These cast-vp the acceptable odor; these, only these, the sweet incense
in the nostrils of the Almighty. The Hecatombe, and outward pomp of
sacrifice, has too much of the beast in it, the many-headed beast, the
multitude; that, within, is of the spirit; and that of the spirit, is the true
Child's of God; And this our noble friend had, without gloss or varnish, his
life a recollected Christianity; his sickness, a penitent humiliation; and
his death, an vnbattered assurance of his richer estate in glory; Insomuch,
that I knew not, whether I might envy, or admire, that God had bestowed such a
plentiful mortification, on a Secular condition, and left Divinity, so
barren. No Viper in his bosom; nor Vulture at his heart; no convulsion or
gripe of Conscience; no pang of the inward man (so he confessed to me) for the
reigue of any darling sin. And (indeed) his private meditations, groans,
soliloquies, pensive eleuations of eyes, and spirit, rapture's full of
sublimitie, and contemplation (such as the heart could only eiaculate, and not
the tongue) undaunted resolutions and defiance of death, and all her terrors,
spoke him glorisied, before he died. And thus, having made a full peace with
God, and with the world, he sang his Nunc dimittis, and made a willing
surrender of his Soul into the hands of his Redeemer; where he has now his
Palm and white Robe, his Penny of true happiness, and Crown of ever lasting
glory; to which God bring us, with him, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Gloria in Excelsis Deo.
FINIS.

