VIRGINIA. A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE-CHAPPEL, IN THE presence of many,
Honorable and Worshipful, the Adventurers and Planters for VIRGINIA. 25.
April. 1609. PVBLISHED FOR THE BENEFIT AND USE OF THE COLONY, PLANTED, And to
be Planted there, and for the Advancement of their CHRISTIAN Purpose.

By WILLIAM SYMONDS, Preacher at Saint SAVIORS in Southwarke.

IVDE. 22. 23. Have compassion of some, in putting of difference:

And other save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

LONDON Printed by I. WINDET, for ELEAZAR EDGAR, and William Welby, and are to
be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Windmill. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AND WORTHY ADVANCERS OF THE STANDART of CHRIST, among the
GENTILES, the Adventurers for the Plantation of VIRGINIA, W. S. prays that
Nations may bless them, and be blessed by them.
Right Noble and worthy,
SVCH as do praise the worthies, do cloth them with the robes of others that
have gone before them in virtues of like nature. A thing which I cannot do of
your Plantation, seeing neither Testament (that I can find) does afford us a
Parallel in men of like quality. That great, and golden SENTENCE, The seed
of the woman, shall Gene. 3. 15*
break the Serpents head, (the only subject of all ages) with a part of the
wisdom that is folded therein, hitherto has beautified the world with
admirable and pleasant varieties; more rich and delightful then all the
ornaments of Princes palaces, or the Curtains of Solomon. Here may we see the
Flood, the burning of Sodom; the drown^ng of Pharoh: the subduing of the
Cananites by David and his sons; the breaking of Monarchies into chafe: the
Dan. 2. 35.
surprising and conquering of great Nations, Ephe. 6. 17.
by Fishermen, with the sword of the spirit; the stamping of the Dragon (the
Heathen Empire) into pee^es by Constantine; Eusebius. de vita Constantini.
the desolation, and nakedness of Antichrist, now ready to be cast into the
fire. Manifest demonstrations of the Serpents bruised head. But here is not
all. These things were done in a corner, in comparison of that which is in
hand, and remains to be accomplished at the last judgment. Long since the
Gospel of Christ did ride forth conquering that he might overcome. Reave. 6.
and. 19.
And NOW, the hosts that are in heaven do follow him on white horses. Now the
Isai. 52. 10.
Lord has made bare his holy arm, in the sight Revel. 19. 12.
of ^ll the Gentiles; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our God. NOW many Mighty Kings have set their Crowns upon the head of Christ.
The valiant soldier says, The shields of the world belong to Psalm. 47. 9.
God. The true Nobility, have upon their horse bridles, Holiness to the Lord.
And Zach. 14. 20.
now the wise and industrious Merchant, does hold the riches of the Gentiles
too base a freight for his ships. He tradeth Isai. 60. 9.
for his wisdom, that said: Surely the Isles wait for me (says the Lord) and
the ships of the Ocean most especially: namely to carry the Gospel abroad.
The people in multitudes, like strong thundrings, do say Hallelu-iah* And who
is wanting in this Revel. 19. 6.
blessed expedition? Surely, not any tribe, Praise ye the Lord, -- for the
people that offered Judge. 5. 2.
themselves so willingly. For who can withdraw himself from concurrence in so
good an action: especially, when he shall but read, or hear, that one sentence
which Deborah did sing: Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord curse the
inhabitants thereof: Judge. 5. 23.
because they came not forth to help the Lord.

This land, was of old time, offered to our Kings. Our late Sovereign Q.
Elizabeth (whose story has no peer among Princes of her sex) being a pure
Virgin, found it, set foot in it, and called it Virginia. Our most sacred
Sovereign, in whom is the spirit of his great Ancestor, ^onstantin the
pacifier of the world, and planter of the Gospel Eusebius. de vita Constantin.
in places most remote, desires to present this land a pure Virgin to Christ.
Such as do manage the expedition, are careful to carry thither no Traitors,
nor Papists that depend on the Great Whore. Lord finish this good work thou
have begun; and marry this land, a pure Virgin to thy kingly son Christ
Jesus; so shall thy name be magnified: and we shall have a Virgin or Maiden
Britain, a comfortable addition to our Great Britain.

And now Right Worthy, if any ask an account of my vocation, to write and
Preach thus much; I answer: that although I could not satisfy their request
that would have me go; yet I could not omit to show my zeal to the glory of
God. If they ask account of my Dedication, I answer, your virtue has exacted
it. If any man list to be curious, or contentious, we have no such custom,
nor the Churches of God. Hold on your blessed course, and you shall receive
blessings of Christ. Blessed be the Lord God; even the Psalm. 72. 18. 19.
God of Israel, which only works great wonders, and has put these blessed
thoughts into your Christian hearts, And blessed be his glorious name for ever,
and let all the earth be filled with his glory, Amen, Amen.

Fours most heartily affected in the cause of Virginia, WILLIAM SIMONDS.

VIRGINEA BRITANNIA. A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE CHAPEL, IN THE presence of
many the Adventurers, and Planters for VIRGINIA.
GENESIS 12. 1. 2. 3. For the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto the land that
I will show thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and will bless thee, and make thy
name great, and thou shall be a blessing.

I will bless them also that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and
in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.


THis Book of Genesis contains the story of the Creation and Plantation of
heaven and earth, with convenient inhabitants. The heaven has Angels, the sky
stars, the air fowls, the water fishes, the earth (furnished with plants
and herbs, and beasts) was provided for man a while to inhabit, who after
was to be received into glory, like unto the Angels. Matthew. 22. 30.
Hereupon the Lord (who by his great decree, set down by his whole Trinity,
had determined that man should rule among the creatures) did make man, both
male and female, After his own image, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
that is, Jesus Christ; and gave them this blessing, Bring forth fruit and
multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue Genesis 1. 26. ^7. 28.
it, etc. And howsoever this precept might seem to find interruption by the
sin of man, that had incurred the curse to die the death: yet we see that God
Genesis 2. 17 and 3. 3. Isai. 45. 23. Genesis 9. 1, 2.
would not, for any thing, alter his oath and word, that was gone out of his
mouth; for unto Noah he revived this precept after the flood.

But as all the commandments of God do find rebellion against them: so has
this most specially; insomuch that the whole earth conspired to make open
insurrection against it, by building of a City, Genesis 11. 1.
and Town, the better to continue together. For the subduing of which
rebellion, The Lord came down, Genesis 11. 7
and confounded their languages, and scattered them abroad: Not only to the
overthrow of their ambition, who sought a great name; but also to deprive them
of his spiritual grace of salvation, one being not able to understand the
other: And so of the sons of Noah, were the Nations divided after the Genesis
^0. 32.
flood.

Among whom the blessed line of Shem is not Gen 11. 10.
only plentifully remembered; but also commended, as obedient unto that first
and great Law of God: For Terah, the father of Abram, with his family, are
reported to be found in a Land not theirs, that they might fill the earth.

The reason why Terah, and his family removed, The context.
is recorded in these three verses; and, in a word, is the calling of Abram by
the Lord to remove. In the story whereof, are these two points: First the the
vocation of Abram, in these three verses, and then his obedience unto this
heavenly calling, in the fourth verse. His vocation has first the commandment
of the Lord, and then the reasons and arguments, by which God does induce him
thereunto. The commandment is to take a journey; in which we must consider the
places from whence, and whither Go out of
he was to go. The place from whence, is not described Cosmographically, but
Morally, containing three important reasons, in all good sort, to rest him
where he was. The first is his Country, Thy Country.
which was pleasant, and fruitful: The second his kindred, which was holy and
blessed: The third, his fathers house, which was loving and rich. Hence must
he go, and leave them all behind, if they would not go with him. The place
whither he must go is also very generally noted out: Namely, the place which
God would show him: a place utterly To the place which I shall show thee.
unknown unto him, so that from thence he had no argument, to quicken him to
that voyage.

The arguments which the Lord does use to persuade Arguments from promises.
Abram, to this journey are all taken from the promises of God; a stronger
reason then the very sweetness of Paradise could be unto a faithful man. These
promises do partly concern Abram himself, partly those among whom he shall
live. For himself the Lord does promise four things: First tha^, whereas
himself was childlesse, He would make 1. A great Nation.
of him a great nation. A thing which the builders of Babel drifted but were
disappointed of by the judgment 2. Bless thee.
of God. The second promise is, that God will bless him, by giving him the
good things of this present world, and that which is to come: A thing which the
builders of Babel lost, by transgressing Gods commandment of replenishing the
earth. 3. A great name.
The third thing is, that the Lord will make him a great name, with much
honor, and good report; which the confounded builders of Babel sought, and
missed, because of their sin. The fourth promise 4. A blessing.
is, that he shall be a blessing: That is, such a one as men shall be the
better where he comes; and so think themselves, seeing that through him, as
through a golden Pipe, the Lord will bestow his blessings upon his family, and
others among whom he lives.

The arguments that concern other men, are of two sorts; the one is their
Temporal estate; the other their Spiritual. Concerning the Temporal estate
of those amongst whom he lives, God will dispose of, as they dispose
themselves toward Abram: For the Lord will bless them, and cause them 1.
Bless them that bless thee.
to prosper, that seek the blessing and prosperity of Abram. And again, if
they stand otherwise affected toward Abram, then will the Lord also set his
face 2. Curse them that curse thee.
against them, in these words: And I will curse them that curse thee: So that
nothing they have shall prosper, until they be gracious and favorable to
Abram. That which concerns their Spiritual estate, is, indeed an argument
to a faithful man, stronger then chains of Adamant; Namely, that by this
means, the people all abroad shall receive the grace of salvation. 3. All
Nations blessed.
The thing he promises is salvation by the Gospel, in this word, I will
bless. The means, is Abram and his seed JESUS CHRIST: in these words in
thee. The persons, to receive benefit by him, are infinite; even all the
families of Noah, by whom the nations of all the earth were divided; In these
words, And in thee, shall all the families of the earth be blessed. This is
the sense of these three verses: In which are very many excellent things to be
observed, but we will only insist upon those, which are proper to our
occasion, etc.

DOCTRINES.
jo. Abraham called.
THE Lord called Abraham to go into another Country. There is no doubt, but
that there is a double manner of calling; the one ordinary, by some known
precept of the word of God: the other Mat 1. 20. Number. 12. 6.
extraordinary when as by dream, or by vision, God requires any duty to be
done. Now if it be demanded how Abraham was called, to go into another
Country: the answer is, both ordinarily and extraordinarily. It was a known
rule of the word of God, concluded, and pronounced before the Creation, and
often repeated afterward, that man should spread abroad, etc. and inhabit the
earth, and fill it. Hitherto belongs that, which God said; Let us make man in
our image, and let them rule over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowls of
the Genesis 1. 26.
Heaven, and over the Beasts, and over ALL the earth. Then must he replenish
the earth, else can he not rule over ALL. To the same effect is that spoken of
Adam, after his fall, that God sent him forth of the Genes. 3. 23.
Garden of Eden to till the earth: so that the fall of Adam did not, in the
least thing, cause the Lord to alter his first decree. So to Noah after the
flood; Genesis 9. 2, 7.
Bring forth fruit, and multiply, grow plentifully in the earth, and increase
therein, and replenish the earth. By all this it does appear, that God did
call Abraham abroad, by a general Vocation. But when he is called to a
certain place, and under certain conditions, it is also plain, that withal,
he had a special and extraordinary calling, either by dream or by vision, or
by some such extraordinary mean, which (til the Canon of the Scripture came
fully in) was to be obeyed as the written word of God. Yet still we must
remember that this special calling was subject to the general law of
replenishing the earth. For although God called him to one land; yet to uphold
the general rule, God often laid a necessity upon him to spread further: for
in this Chapter, by reason of a famine, he was constreined to soiourne Gen 12.
10. etc
in Egypt: God did also tell him before hand, that his seed should be a
stranger, in a land that is not Genesis 15. 13.
theirs, four hundred years. It is true, that the Jews did hold themselves
so confined to their own land, that they were as loath to forgo their
inheritance, as from the Sacrament of their salvation: witness ^. King. 21. 3.
be Naboth, that answered the King; The Lord keep me from giving the
inheritance of my fathers unto thee. And yet, when God would have it so, as
when there was famine, Elimelech and his Family R^th. 1. 1. 2.
go to soiourne among the Gentiles. In time of war David took his father
and mother, and carried 1. Sam. 2^. 3.
them to soiourne with the King of Moab. And Act. ^. 5.
when as we read that there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews of every nation
under heaven; it is plain, that the Jews did spread abroad, not only to
soiourne for a time, and then to come again; but to Act. 22. 3.
inhabit and replenish the whole earth. Paul was also a Jew, borne in Cilicia,
even in a Roman Colonie.

The reason why God will have his to fill the 1. Reason. To know Gods works*
earth is, because the Lord would have his works to be known. Now in diverse
Countries God has his diverse works, of herbs, and trees, and beasts, and
fishes, and fowls, and serpents, etc. which (if the people of God come not
there) cannot praise the Psalm. 145. 10. ^1.
Creator. When David says, All thy works praise thee, O God, and thy Saints
bless thee; they show the glory of thy kingdom, and speak of thy power: the
implication is manifest, that his Saints must be witnesses of all his works,
in all Climates; for else they cannot II.
bless him in all his works. Another reason is, Spreading of knowledge.
that one that has the knowledge of the fear of God, should communicate it to
others: Hereupon Psalm. 67. 1. 2.
is it that David does teach us to pray thus; Have mercy on us Lord, and
bless us, and cause thy face to shine among us, Selah. Mark this, that he
bids us pray, God be merciful unto us; The means how, is this: That they
may know thy way upon earth, and thy saving health among all nations; whereby
he does imply, that God has withheld some mercy from us, til all nations have
the means of salvation. This was Exodus, 11. 9.
a cause why God sent Abraham's posterity into Egypt, that by their means
Pharaoh, whose heart was big, and would not acknowledge God, might be
constrained to fall down, and say, I have sinned against Exodus 10. 16.
the Lord. The cause also of the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, in the
secret providence of God, was, that the Monarkes of the world, who thought
Dan. 4. 20. 21. 17. 29.
there was no God could come near them in greatness, might be as beasts before
God, acknowledging, that it is God, that gives Kingdoms to whom he will. And
when the Lord had caused his people to return, and to build their City and
Temple; yet would not God fore-slowe the enforcing of his precept, Fill the
earth. For whereas, by reason of his promise, he could not send the people
abroad till Christ came, to make his glory known, he brought upon them Gog and
Magog, with their numbersome Ezekiel. 38. 16. 23
Armies: The reason is, that the Heathen may know the Lord: I will be
magnified, and sanctified, and known in the eyes of many Nations. Then here
must we know, that what inducement Abraham had, to go USE. I.
out of his Country, by a general calling, the same does bind all his
sons, according to the faith, to go likewise abroad, when God does not
otherwise call them to some special affairs: How ever, still they must have a
longing, and a liking to spread the Gospel abroad. And that this point may be
evidently convicted unto us, Christ our Savior has, according to his infinite
wisdom, revived the old law, of filling the earth, in a most excellent
manner: Go teach (says he) all nations, and baptize them in the Matthew. 28. 19.
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Gave he this Commandment
to his Apostles only? have not also the labors of godly Preachers, which they
have spread over the face of the whole earth, been bestowed by the power of
this Commandment? And though the words, as they lie, do bind the Ministers
of the Word, to endeavor the propagation of the Gospel, with all their power;
yet not only them: For we read, that poor Tent-makers and others, have done
much good in spreading the Acts 18. 3. 26.
Gospel, according to their vocations: they also satisfying II.
thus much of Christ's precept. Neither can there be any doubt, but that the
Lord that called Abraham into another Country, does also by the same holy
hand, call you to go and carry the Gospel to a Nation that never heard of
Christ. The Prophet Zachary, speaking of the days of the Gospel, does show,
that it is a good Vocation for men to go abroad, when the number of the
children of God do exceed; his words are these: Thus says the Lord of
hosts, my cities shall yet be broken with plenty, the Lord shall yet comfort
Zion. Unto Zach. 1. 17.
whom agrees the Prophet Isatah: The children of Isa. 49. 20.
thy barrenness shall say again, in thine ears, the place is too strait for
me, give me place, that I may dwell. Wherefore seeing that, thanks be to God,
we are thronged with multitude; the Lord of hosts himself has given us the
calling of his children to Objection. Not to enter other Princes Territories.
seek for room, and place to dwell in. And here might we have proceeded to
the next point, were it not for one scruple, which some, that think themselves
to be very wise, do cast in our way; which is this in effect. The country,
they say, is possessed by owners, that rule, and govern it in their own
right: then with what conscience, and equity can we offer to thrust them, by
violence, out of their inheritances? 1. Answer. Conquest lawful.
For answer to this objection: first it is plain, that the obiecter supposes
it not lawful to invade the territories of other princes, by force of sword.
This proposition I confess I never was willing to examine, considering my
vocation is private. And if Sigismund, the Emperor, said well, CARRION.
that he merueiled every man avoided all labors and difficulties, but only to
rule, which is the most difficult of all other labors; then to give sentence
of that, which in ruling is the most weighty, namely, wars, which are done
with the greatest counsel, must needs be a labor too heavy for a private
man's shoulders. And because my self am but weak eyed in so great a mystery;
Come forth ye great Princes, and Monarkes, of Assyria, Persia, Media, Greece
and Rome, with your grauest counselors, and answer for your facts, in
conquering and subduing nations. For your stories, that were wont to be read
with singular admiration of your fortitude, your wisdom, your magnificence,
and your great justice, are now araigned, and must be found guilty, that
through your sides, an action, of truer honor, then ever you attempted, may
be wounded. Your strong title of the sword, heretofore magnified by
Historians, Politicians, and Ciuilians, is to our obiecter, but a spiders web,
or the hatching of a Cockatrice his egg. But whatsoever the rest can say for
their own defense, the Lord himself does say thus much for Cyrus: Thus says
Isay 45. 1. 2. 3. 4
the Lord unto Cyrus, his anointed: whose right hand I have holden to subdue
nations before him: therefore will I weaken the loins of Kings, and open the
doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before thee, and
make the crooked straight: I will break the brazen doors, and burst the iron
bars. And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and the things hid in
secret places; that thou may know, that I am the Lord, which call thee by thy
name, even the God of Israel. For Jacob my servants sake, and Iraell mine
elect, I will even call thee by thy name, and name thee, though thou have not
known me. Then who can blame Cyrus, and keep himself from blaspheming the
almighty. Nay, that which is more to be trembled at, we must also to summon
up, and call to the bar, the most holy worthies of the Scripture: and see if
man, or God, has any thing to be said for them, why they should not be
condemned as iniust, cruel, and bloody. O Jacob, thy blessed bow and sword,
with the fruit whereof thou blessedst thy son Joseph, the staff of Gene. 48.
22.
thy gray head, and feeble knees, must be broken and burnt: and thou must be
condemned for thy unlawful conquest. Worthy Ioshuah, and most worthy David,
with thy cloud of worthies, who hanged up so many shields in the house of God,
and who sweetly sings, that God was his fortitude and buckler, Psalm. 1^. 2.
Josh. 10. ^4.
must incur the note of injustice. Ioshuah, where is thy virtue, to set thy
feet upon the necks of princes, in their own kingdoms, and call of the
meanest of the people to be thy partners in that indignity? David, how vvilt
thou answer for the blood thy sword has shed? which thou vvast wont to
praise, There is none to it. Nay thou glory of men, 1. Sam. ^1* 9.
and true type of Christ, King Solomon, whose wisdom was like unto the
wisdom of God: teach us to say somevvhat in thy defense. (For one grain of
thy wisdom is of more worth then a talent of their leaden wits, that we are
constrained to answer.) Give an account of his innocence that said unto thee:
Girde thee with thy sword upon thy Psalm. 45. ^. 4* 5
thigh, O thou most mighty, -- Thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things, - The people shall fall under thee. Thy father, the son of Ishai,
made a sinful prayer for thee (as our obiecters blaspheme) when he said, thou
should so enlarge thy borders, that Thy dominion Psalm. 72. 8*
should be from sea to sea, and from the river to the end of the land. He
would have thee too rigid, when he says, That thine enemies should lick the
dust. Sure I am persuaded that at the only naming of so mighty Monarchs,
and holy conquerors, our obiecters out of their modesty will with some
distinction qualify their proposition, and say that it is not lavvfull, by
force to invade the Territories of other Princes, that are in quiet possession,
in some sort, and in some cases. I know that the devil himself, with all his
distinctions, that ever he made, which are recorded in scripture, or which he
left in hell, in his cabinet of Abstruse Studies, (locked safe, till he found
out the Jesuits his trusty secretaries to keep them:) I say none of them all
can arm a subject against his prince without sin. But he that will set open
his school in the fantastical shop of his addle imagination, (for he will be
hissed out of the Universities) and take upon him to nurture princes, as
petties: telling them that they must not make offensive wars, if it were to
gain the whole world to Christ, shall never be bidders of guests to the
marriage Matthew. 22. ^. Luke 14. 23.
of the kings son, who are required to compel them to come in. And if I
might be so bold, I would feign ask one question of these obiecters, that come
dropping out of some Anabaptists Spicery: whether (if it be unlawful to
conquer) the crown sit well on the head of our most sacred sovereign? (
whose days be as the days of heaven O Lord) For by this objection they show,
that had they power to untwist that, which in so many ages has been well
spunne, they would write him crownelesse, as far as he has his title from
the conqueror. 2. No wrong to bring in the Gospel. Matthew. 7. 5.


O but God forbid, says the obiecter, that we should do any wrong at all, no
not to the devil. The rule of Christ is excellent; Cast out the beam of thine
own eye, so shall thou see clearly, to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye.
If you will needs be casting stones, Let him begin first, that is without
sin. But John 8. 7.
to the point: our obiecter would not whip a child to teach him learning and
virtue, for fear of doing wrong. What wrong I pray you did the Apostles in
going about to alter the laws of nations, even against the express
commandment of the princes, and to set up the throne of Christ. If your mouth
be so foul, to charge them with wrong, as the Gentiles Tertu. Apol. con^ra
Gentes.
did, we have more need to provide you a medicine for a cankred mouth, and a
stinking breath, then to make you any answer at all.

O but, in entering of other countries, there must 3. No blood meant to be shed.
needs be much lamentable effusion of blood. Certainly our obiecter was
hatched of some popish egg; and it may be in a IESVITS vault, where they feed
themselves fat, with tormenting innocents. Why is there no remedy, but as soon
as we come See-white. The way to the Church.
on land, like Wolves, and Lions, and Tygres, long famished, we must tear in
pieces, murder, and torment the natural inhabitants, with cruelties never
read, nor heard of before? must we needs burn millions of them, and cast
millions into the sea? must we bait them with dogs, that shall eat up the
mothers with their children? let such be the practices of the devil, of
Abaddon the son of perdition, of Antichrist and his fry, that is of purple
Rome. As for the professors of the Gospel, they know with Gene. 47. ^. Only a
soiourning. ^udg. ^5. 3. Wars only defensive.
Jacob and his posterity, to say to Pharaoh, To soiourne in the land are we
come; for thy servants have no pasture, etc. They can with Sampson live
peaceably with the Philistims, till they be constrained by injustice, to stand
upon their defense. They can instruct Gene. 41. 25. 38
the barbarous princes, as Joseph did Pharaoh and his Senators; and as Daniel
did Nabuchad-nezer, Dan. 4. 16.
etc. And if these obiecters had any brains in their head, but those which are
sick, they could easily find a difference between a bloody invasion, and the
planting of a peaceable Colony, in a waste Only the Planting of a Peaceable
Colonie.
country, where the people do live but like Dear in herds, and (no not in
this stouping age, of the gray headed world, full of years and experience) have
not as yet attained unto the first modesty that was Gene. 3. 7,
in Adam, that knew he was naked, where they know no God but the devil, nor
sacrifice, but to offer their men and children unto Moloch. Can it be a sin
in Philip, to join himself to an Ethiopian charet? Acts 8. ^9.
Is only now the ancient planting of Colonies, so highly praised among the
Romans, and all other nations, so vile and odious among us, that what is, and
has been a virtue in all others, must be sin in us? And if our obiecter be
descended of the Noble Saxons blood, Let him take heed lest while he cast a
stone at us, he wounds his father, that first brought him in his loins from
foreign parts into this happy Isle. But assuring my self that these
obiecters speak that they think not, because they think that they should not,
and if the terms of the persons were changed, would praise other nations for
that, which they dislike in us: I leave them to tremble before his glorious
eyes, that all things are naked and bare unto, and my self will pass to
enforce the rest of our Text upon the consciences of such, which I hope to be
the sons of Abraham according to promise.

ABram must get him out, from his country, his kindred, ijo. His Country. Acts
72.
and his fathers house. His Country was called Mesopotamia, the sweetest, and
most fruitful soil that was in the world* For it lies between the two great
rivers Euphrates and Tygris, which served not, Pli^. Not. Hist.
as other rivers do in other places, to bring fatnes into the country: but to
sweep away the ranknes, and foison of the earth, lest with the lustiness of
the ground, the fruit of the earth should rot, or be choked, or run up to weed.

His kindred was every way of the best, and noblest His kindred.
stock of the sons of Noah; namely the families of Gene. 9. 26.
Shem, of whom God said, Blessed be the God of Shem. So blessed were his tents,
to wit the houses and families of his posterity, that, as of the most happy
thing, it is said; God persuade Iapheth, and his posterity 27.
(of which we are a part) to dwell in the tents of Shem. It seems then a
matter of as great a peril, to leave that kindred, as to leave the church,
and so salvation it self. So says Peter to Christ: To whom John 6. 68.
shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life.

His fathers house was worthy for him to have His fathers house.
continued in. For though some interpreters think, that he was commanded to
remove, because his Fathers house was idolatrous, it is not so, It is true
indeed, that they were idolaters, because Iosuah does say, to the children of
Israel: your fathers dwelt be yond the flood in old time, Terah the Father
Abraham, Josh. 24. 2.
and the Father of Nachor, and served other Gods. But what of this? Sure it was
more through ignorance of the law, then through rebellion and rage. For when as
Terah perceived, that God was with his son, he left all, without bidding, to
go with his son, and had rather put himself in the tents of his son, then
want the blessing of God. Hereby it appears, that they were a very loving
people, one to the other, and soft hearted to obey, when the Lord did command.
His father also was very wealthy, having many possessions, much cattle, a
numbersome and great family of servants, All which is nothing obscurely implied
in that which was spoken of Abram: Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver
and Gene. 13. 2. Gene. 14. 14.
in gold: and that when Abram heard that his brother was taken, he armed of
them that were borne and brought up in his house, three hundred and eighteen.
For it was not likely but that this wealth, and multitude, came to him from his
Father, yet all these must he forsake, and get him from them, unless they
would follow him and his fortunes (as they say) which they might if they would.
Otherwise if none would go with him, but that he must be alone; yet must he
still follovv the commandment of his God, that says, Get thee out from among
them.

The reason is given by Christ, that also called 1. Reason. The commandment is
of price, and must be obeyed. Matthew. 10. 37.
sons from their fathers, owners from their houses, and lands: brethren from
their brethren: fathers, from their children: and husbands from their vviues,
as he says. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me.
The commandment of God is the kingdom of heaven. It is a treasure hid in the
field, a Matthew. 13. 44. Psalm. 119. 72. 127.
pearl of great price, which, if he has the heart of a man, that finds,
he will s^ll a^l that he has, and buy it. Here then we see that, where
God gives a USE. Go when God calls.
due vocation to spread abroad and inhabit the earth, neither the love of the
country, be it never so fruitful; the love of kindred, be they never so
noble and holy; the love of a man's fathers house, be the family never so kind,
so rich, so numbersome: no nor the largenes of possession ought to be any
impediment to keep us from obedience. Indeed it is true, that if any thing
could afford a man a sufficient excuse to defer obedience unto Gods
commandment, of this kind, it may be easily found in one of these branches.
But what Christ says to his followers, is to be repeated here: Christ says
to one follow me, Luke 9. 5^* 60.
and the same said, Lord suffer me first to go and bury my father* but Christ
endures no delay, for he presently subioineth a second commandment, Go thou
61. 62.
and preach the kingdom of God: Then another said, I will follow thee Lord;
but let me first go, and bid them farewell, which are at mine house: And Jesus
said, No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is apt to
the kingdom of God: Then the commandment of God must needs be obeyed,
whosoever else be neglected.

I am not ignorant, that many are not willing to Reason of not going answered.
1. England, not like Mesopotamia.
go abroad and spread the gospel, in this most honorable and christian
voyage of the Plantation of Virginia. Their reasons are diverse according to
their wits. One says, England is a sweet country. True indeed, and the God
of glory be blessed, that whereas the country was as wild a forest, but
nothing so fruitful, as Virginia, and the people in their nakedness did arm
themselves in a coat armor of Woad, fetching Com. C^soris.
their Curets and Polderns, from a painters shop: by the civil care of
conquerers and planters it is is now become a very paradise in comparison of
Kindred not like Abrams.
that it was. But how sweet soever it be, I am sure, it cannot compare with
Me^^potamia, where Abram dwelt. O but, says another, my kinidred would not be
forsaken. Kindred? what kindred? Surely thy kindred is hardly so honorable and
blessed, as the kindred of Abram was. And for any thing that I can see, since
ATHEISTS and PAPISTS, have gotten out of their serpents holes, and conuersed
with men, they have sowed such cockell among our wheat, that in many places a
man is in no such peril to be cheated and cosoned, if not murdered and
poisoned, as among his own kindred that are affected that way. Some few, and
those very few, are not willing to leave their fathers house, where any thing
may be hoped for after the death of their parents: but for the most part, the
world perceives that except it be to join in a deadly feude, or some piece
of excellent villainy, the English Proverb is true, The farther from kin,
the nearer to friends. But look seriously into the land, and see whether there
be not just cause, if not a necessity to seek abroad. The people Causes to
seek abroad.
blessed be God, do swarm in the land, as young bees in a hiue in June;
insomuch that there is very hardly room for one man to live by another. The
mightier like old strong bees thrust the weaker, as younger, out of their
hiues: Lords of Manors convert towneships, in which were a hundredth or two
hundredth communicants, to a shepherd and his dog. The true laboring
husbandman, that susteineth the prince by the plow, who was wont to feed many
poor, to set many people on work, and pay twice as much subsidy and
fifteenes to the king, for his proportion of earth, as his Landlord did for
ten times as much; that was wont to furnish the church with Saints, the
musters with able persons to fight for their sovereign, is now in many places
turned labourer, and can hardly escape the statute of rogues and vagrants. The
gentleman has gotten most of the tillage in his hand; he has rotten sheep to
sell at Michaelmas: his summer fed oxen at Easter: asking no better price for
hay, then his beasts, to keep that till spring, that they got at grass: by
these means he can keep his corn til the people sterue, alvvaies provided
that the poor husbandmen which are left, and the clothier must buy their seed,
and wool at such a rate, that shall wear them out in a very few years. And
were it not, that the honest and christian merchant does often help, who
puts all his estate upon the providence of God, which they call venturing,
to bring corn into the land, for which he has many a bitter curse of the
cursed cornmongers, we should find an extreme famine in the midst of our
greatest plenty. The rich shopkeeper has the good honest poor labourer at
such advantage, that he can grind his facewhen he pleases. The poor metal
man works his bones out, and swelteth himself in the fire, yet for all his
labor, having charge of wife and children, he can hardly keep himself from
the alms box. Always provided that his masters to whom he works, will give
never a penny toward his living; but they can tell of their own knowledge,
that if the poor man were a good husband, he might live well: for he receives
much money in the year at their hands, very near four pence for every six
penny worth of work. The thoughtfull poor woman, that has her small children
standing at her knee, and hanging on her breast; she works with her needle
and labors with her fingers, her candle goes not out by night, she is often
deluding the bitterness of her life with sweet songs, that she sings to a
heavy heart. Sometimes she sings: Have mercy on me Lord, sometimes Help
Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay: sometimes Judge and revenge
my cause O Lord: and many such like: which when a man of understanding does
hear; he does with pity praise God, that has given such means to mock
hunger with, and to give patience. I warrant you her songs want no passion; she
never says, O Lord, but a salt tear droppeth from her sorrowful head, a
deep sigh breaths as a furnace from her aching heart, that weepeth with the
head for company, with tears of sweetest blood. And when all the week is
ended, she can hardly earne salt for her water gruell to feed on upon the
Sunday. Many such svveets are in England, which I know not how better to
interpret then to say the strong old bees do beat out the younger, to
swarm and hiue themselves elsewhere. Take the opportunity, good honest
laborers which indeed bring all the honey to the hiue, God may so bless you,
that the proverb may be true of you, that A May swarm, is worth a kings
ransom.

THE place whither Abram must go, is to the land iijo.
which the Lord will set himsee. A commandment fit for God, to persuade by no
arguments taken from the sweetness and fruitfulness of the place. Thus does the
Apostle to the Hebrews, render this place, By faith Abraham, when he was
called, obeyed God, Heb. 11. 8.
to go into a place, which afterward he should receive for inheritance, and
he went out, not knowing whither he went. The like commandment did the Lord
give to the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt: For they must not
choose their own way, but follow the cloudie pillar that led them. For at the
commandment of the Lord, they pitched, and at the Numb. 9. 23.
commandment of the Lord, they iourneyed, keeping the watch of the Lord, at
the commandment of the Lord. They iourneyed, sometimes where the waters were
bitter, sometimes where there was no water, sometimes where the place was full
of fiery Serpents, yet could they not be their own chusers, but must follow,
where the Lord went before. For Romans 11. 34.
God in his ways can endure no counselor. He will be the shepherd, we the
sheep of his pasture, 1. Reason. Contented to be Gods creatures.
He will be the potter, we must content our selves with the condition of the
potters vessel: wherefore we are bound, if God command, to follow him, though
blindfold. Again, the Lord does not tell II.
him whither he shall go, to keep him in suspense, that the obedience of
faith may the more effectually appear. For if the Lord had enticed him by
arguments taken from the opportunity and sweetness of the place: how should
it be known, whether he went by the power of the promise of God, or by some
carnal inducement? We know the devil says to God of Job, Does Job fear God
for naught, have Job 1. 9. 10.
thou not made a hedge about him and about his house? And we also know what
Christ says to them that followed Job 6. 26.
him. Ye seek me not, because ye saw the miracle^, that is, for any respect
they had to his Godhead, but because ye ate of the loaves and were filled.

From which imputation the Lord would free his servant Abraham, whom he
purposed to make the Father of the faithful, and give him for an example to
all posterity. So dealt the Lord in the wilderness with the children of
Israel: he let them see no possibility to live in the world, but sustained
them by extraordinary miracle, giving them Manna and Qua^les, that they might
follow the steps of their father Abraham: and know, that man lives not by
Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, does
man live. Then here we see, where USE.
God does command,, he is to be obeyed, without asking of any questions;
Abraham must go to a land he knows not whither, because God will have it
so. He must not say, A Lion may be in the Prou. 26. 13.
street, lest he find A Serpent bite him at home, as he leans on the wall.
How much more, when the land is discovered, to be as much better then the
place in which we live, as the land of Canaan, was better then the roaring
wilderness, ought we to be vvilling to go, vvhither God calls? The
children of Numb. 14. 7. 8.
Israel had word by their spies. The land which we walked through to search
it, is a very good land. If the Lord love us, he will bring us to this land,
and give it us, which is a land that flows with milk and ^oni^. Thence they
brought a bunch of grapes, and loaded Numb. 13. 24. Deuteronomy. ^. 24,
two men as they carried it on a bar upon their shoulders: Sure if such
motives as these could not make them ready to run to the place, it appeared
that they had neither the fear of God, that would not be persuaded by him;
nor the wits of reasonable men, that will not respect their own benefit.
What shall we say then to our people, which have in them so little edge to
follovv their own thrift. The land, by the constant report of all that have
seen it, is a good land, with the fruitfulness whereof, and pleasure of the
Climate, the plenty of Fish and Foul, England, our mistress, cannot compare,
no not when she is in her greatest pride. It is said of the land of Canaan,
that Isaac sowed in that land, and Gene. 26. 12.
found in the same year, an hundred fold, by estimation: and the text adds,
And so the Lord blessed him. But here is greater matter then so: For, if I
count aright, this land gives five hundred fold at one harvest. For the ears
of Wheat, which I have seen, are ten in square, and fifty long: and yet
they say, that commonly this return is little better then the third part,
every stalk bearing, ordinarily three such ears of Wheat. As for the
opportunity of the place, I leave it to the grave Politician: and for the
commodities, let the industrious Merchant speak: but for food and raiment,
here is enough to be had, for the labor of mastring and subduing the soil.
The children of Israel that were in the wilderness, ready to perish, if God
vvithdrew his miraculous hand, like a stiffenec^ed people as they were, refused
to go, fell into a mutiny, and made a commotion, upon the news that the Land
had fenced cities, and Number. 13. 29.
walled towns exceeding great. And because there were the sons of Anak:
mighty ^^nts that were armed in Brass, and their spear like a Weauers cloth
beam. For they forgot the God that brought them out of Egypt, and that made the
raging waves of the sea to stand in heaps, and take the office of strong
walls, that they might easily march through upon dry land. They forgot that
God was the creator of the mountains, whereof one of the least, is stronger
then all the sons of Anak. They forgot that God puts away all the ungodly
of the earth like dross. But we should be worse then mad, to be discouraged
by any such imaginations of this place. There are but poor Arbors for Castles,
base and homely sheds for vvalled towns. A Mat is their strongest Portcullis,
a naked breast their Target of best proof: an arrow of reed, on which is no
iron, their most fearful vveapon of offense, here is no fear of nine
hundredth iron charets. Their God is the enemy Judge. ^. ^3. ^. ^et. ^. 8.
of mankind that seeks whom he may devour. A murderer from the beginning,
that lab^ureth o^n 8. 44.
the destruction of those that serve him most devoutly. Here that Scripture
has a full accomplishment; In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants
(...).
of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them shall be is David, that slew
his ten thousand: And the house (...). 7.
of David as Gods, as the Angel of the Lord before them, that destroyed the
most puissant Army of the Assyrians, that came against Jerusalem. Wherefore
^^ay. ^7. 3^.
seeing we are contented, when the King does press us out to war, to go we
know not whither, nor under whom, and can propose no thing unto us but to fight
with a mighty enemy: Let us be cheerful to go to the place, that God
will show us to possess in peace and plenty, a Land more like the garden of
Eden: which the Lord planted, then any part else of all the earth.

THE Lord does promise to enrich him with many iiijo. Deuteronomy. 281. Leuit. 26. 3.
blessings, if he be obedient to his calling. An example of that sweet
sanction of the law, when the Lord does allure men to keep it, by the
abundance of his blessings. In this place, the Lord does promise unto Abraham,
four most excellent mercies, of all men of understanding most earnestly
desired. The first thing he promises unto him, is, that The A great Nation.
Lord will make him a great Nation. A thing which in the beginning of the
Plantation of the world, by all men, was principally desired, with the
greatest longing. Out of this desire, arose the taking of many Mal. 2. 15.
vviues, whereas God did make but one. Hence also rose a reproach unto the
barren, though the Lord had shut up the womb. This appears by Leah, who said
when she bare a son, Now therefore my Gene 29. 32. 1. ^^m. 1. 6.
husband will ^oue me. And again, Now will my husband keep me company,
because I have borne him three sons. It appears also by the story of
Hannah, of whom it is said, her adversary vexed her sore, which was her
husbands other wife, for she vpbraided her, because the Lord had made her
barren. It appears also, that even to the time of the Gospel, it was a
reproach to a woman if she were barren, as Elizabeth said when she conceived
with child. Thus has the Luke 1. 26.
Lord dealt with me, in the days when he looked on me, to take from me my
rebuke among men. Yea it was in those days a speech, Cursed be the barren
that bears not, and the breasts that give not suck. No marvel then, if it
were an argument very powerful to persuade Abraham to go under this
condition: Especially when Abraham was full of years, elder Gene. 12. 4.
then his father was, when he begat him. And also Gene. 18. 11.
his wife was well stricken in years, in so much, that it ceased to be with her
after the manner of women. And to let it appear that he was exceedingly
affected with a desire to multiply and increase, when God came to him and
comforted him, Thus, Fear Gene. 15. 1. 2.
not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding great reward; he makes
this answer to God: What will thou give me (for the Text does say he was
exceeding rich) seeing I go childlesse: As if he had said, that he preferred
the blessing of multiplication before all the world beside. Now here does
God promise him, upon his obedience, not only to give Gene* 17. ^0.
him a child, or that he shall beget twelve princes, as it is said of Ismael;
but he will make him a great Nation; a Nation, that, not man, but God calls
Great: that is, exceeding great. For imprinting of which Gene* 1^. ^6. Gene.
^^. 5. Heb. ^^. 12.
promise in the heart of Abraham, he calls him to see the innumerable stars
of the sky, the infinite sands by the sea, and the motes of the dust of the
earth, which he will make fit comparisons to express the greatness of this
nation. Then seeing, Answer to the Objection of being extinguished.
whatsoever was promised to Abraham; is also promised to all that are of his
faith and obedience; here is an answer to such, as object they are loath to go
from home; because they know not what shall become of them. For if they once
get into an other Country, they think there is an end of them, and all
theirs. This the Lord answers; Not so, but obey the commandment, And God
will open the barren womb, and make her to dwell with a family, Psalm 113. 9.
and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise the Lord. Jacob thus prayseth
God, with my s^affe came I over Gene* 32. 10.
this Jorden, and now have I gotten two bands.

The second thing which the Lord does promise God will bless him.
unto Abram, is, that He will bless him, Him I say and the nation that shall
come of him. What is meant by this blessing the Patriarch Isake does, in part,
make plain, when he disposes of this blessing to Jacob which his Father
Abram had of God, and left to him. His words are these. God give thee of the
dew of heaven, Gene. 27. 28.
and the fatnes of the earth, and plenty of wheat and wine, Let people be thy
servants; and nations bow unto thee, be thou Lord over thy brethren, and let
thy mothers children honor thee. In sum he blesses him with plenty and
authority. Howbeit these things were but a part of the blessing; the
remainder of this blessing which indeed is most excellent, conteyneth the
substance, vvherof those temporal blessings were but the type and shadovv,
and as it were the Sacraments. When Moses does say, My doctrine Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall still as the dew, as the
showers upon the herbs, and as the great rain upon the grass. It is plain
that the dew is but the type of the word of God and his gracious spirit,
that does accompanye it, as all the promises which were delivered in a
temporal Phrase had a spiritual sense, To which purpose is that in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, By faith Abraham abode in the Heb. 11. 9 10. 16
land of promise, as in a strange countreye, for he looked for a City having a
foundation, whose builder and maker is God, that is an heavenly one, In this
blessing then are there all good things, having the promise of 1. Tim. 4. 8.
the life present, and of that which is to come, for this is the profit, is got
by godliness. So when the children of Israel Exodus 12. 35.
came out of Egypt they came forth rich, with silver and gold; and with
great substance, as the Gene. 15. 14.
Lord had shevved unto Abram before. But that was Deuteronomy. 18. ^ 5.
not all, for the Lord sent his angel to accompany them, raised them up
Prophets of their brethren, erected Number. 11. 26 27 1. Cor. 10. 4. Answer to
the Objection of loosing the blessing of God.
his tabernacle among them, yea says saint Paul They drank of the spiritual
rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.

And here is an answer to a second obiecton, of such as will not go abroad,
for fear of loosing the blessing of God, diverse are the difficulties into
which a man is cast when he lives among barbarous people. Sure he cannot
have the blessing of God* that is mingled among the heathen. He must lose the
preaching of the word of God, and the purity of the Sacraments, thus is he
undone in body and soul. To this the Lord replieth, that to him that does
wilfully with the breach of Gods commandment run into tentation, the Lord does
bring upon him the curse that David forewarneth his son of, If thou 1. Chron.
28. 9.
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. But if a man leave his Country
at Gods commandment, the blessing of the Lord shall ever wait upon him to
feed his body and sanctify his soul. The truth is; that none do so shine
in piety as those that fear God and are out of their Country. We never read
of such a blessing of men, with constancy and deliverance, in their own
Country, as we find of some abroad. Where did Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago,
stand Dan. ^1. 25.
for their faith and were delivered out of the fiery Oven into which they were
cast, because they would not offend God, but among the Babilonians? Where Dan.
6. 16.
did Daniel show his constancy in prayer, and found deliverance from the Lions
den, but among the Gentiles? Stand fast then in the Faith, and you shall see
the blessings of God redoubled upon you more, being in a strange Contry, then
you were able to discern at home.

The third blessing upon Abraham, is, that God A great name.
will make him a great name. This is a blessing of that kind, as men are
exceedingly ambitious of. No marvel, when God and man does commend it unto
the world, as a thing of price; A good name, Eccles. 7. 3. Prou. 22. 1.
( says Solomon) is better th^n a costly ointment, and is to b^e chosen above
great riches. Hereupon the Scripture has recorded good men; and the Epistle to
the Hebrews gives the reason of it, which it renders Heb. 11. 39. 1. Chron.
11.
thus, All these, through faith, obtained a good report. So is David registered
for a worthy, and so are all his worthies recorded by the holy Ghost, to
stir up other ages to imitate their virtues, that they may inherit their
praises, For praise for virtue is a blessed thing, which Christ himself
delighted in, His fame was spread abroad throughout all the land: and of the
fame of the Apostles and such as preached Psalm. 19. ^. Romans 10. 18.
the word of God, David says, which also S. Paul does cite and thus render to
their praise. Their sound went out through all the earth; and their words into
the ends of the world. This swift flying and loud sounding fame, does the Lord
promise shall be spread abroad of Abram, if he will obey God and forsake his
country. A thing which proved true: for all the rest of the Scriptures, to the
end of the Bible has this only subject, namely the praise of Abram. It is
certain that a godly man has never that great name at home, as abroad. Christ
says truly in the Particular of a Prophet, which is also true of every
virtuous man, A Prophet is not without honor* save in Matthew. 13. 57.
his own Country, and in his own house. And so here is Answer to the
Objection. of loss of memory.
an answer to a third objection, which some do make: What should a man do
abroad? A man would willingly keep the poor reputation and respect he has.
If I go out of my Country, I shall be but swallowed up among strangers, my
memory will be sooner rotten abroad, though I live; then if I were long laid
in my grave at home. The Lord answers this objection thus. Fear not Abram, I
will be thine exceeding great reward, I will by thee do so great things in
a strange place, that thy name shall be remembered, as my name, which I will put
upon thee. Sure it is very true, that many a man, while he staieth at home,
lives in obscurity, as in the darkest night, though his virtues and worth
deserve better respect. For at home what can be a man's regard, where there be
millions of his rank, though not better deserving, yet better favored. Get
abroad where virtue is skant, and there, by the advancing of thy wisdom and
virtue, thou shall be more eminent and famous in a year, then at home half
of thy rank shall be all their days: hidden virtue is neglected, but abroad
it is magnified, At home be thou a right good man, thou can not be seen,
for thou art either ouertopt, or so many ways equalled, that thou art like
Gold in Salomons time, which 1. King. 10. 27.
was esteemed no better then stones, or like Cedars that were but like vvild
fig trees. Thy way then to make the world ring of thy virtue, to thy praise
among the good, and to the terror of those that are evil, is to go abroad
when God calls thee.

The fourth blessing is that he shall be A blessing. This speech has relation
to the esteem that other A blessing.
men give; For so do we often read the phrase in the Scripture, where it
ever does import so good a reputation among others, that they hold themselves
blessed for his company. In that sense the prophet Isaiah uses the word in
this sentence: In Isai. 19. 24.
that day shall Israel be a third with Egypt and Ashur, even a blessing in the
mids of the land. And the Prophet Zachary thus, It shall come to pass, that
as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and Zach. 8. 13*
house of Israel, so will I deliver you, and ye shall be a blessing. But the
speech has more in it then so; namely that whereas, The time of ignorance God
regarded not: but that he bestowed those blessing upon Acts 17. 30.
the barbarons people, by the hand of that general providence whereby he
makes his Sun to shine Matthew. 5. 45*
on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust: now the
Lord shall bestow all his blessings upon the land through Abram: as if the
Olive trees of Gods graces did drop through him, as through a golden pipe, upon
them. A great blessing to Abram Zach. 4. 12.
who herein should be a type of Christ. For as of his fullnes all receive, so
of Abram, the nations should receive grace for grace. And so here is an answer
Answer of being abhorred.
to a fourth objection of them that say, what should a man do out of his
country? He shall be but a hissing and a gasing stock, and a curse to those
among whom he is a stranger. Besides if he will have any good, he must seek
for pearls in a dunghill, he must lick his honey off from the thorn, and
work his butter out of the fire. Unto this objection the Lord answers; Abram
fear not, for none of these things shall befall. For on the contrary I will
incline the heart of thy strangers so to respect thee, that they shall hold
thee to be the only blessing that ever came among them, because thou shall
very sensibly bring many blessings unto them. When Isack the son of Abram,
came to Abimelech, though Gene. 26. 2^.
the Philistines envied him for his wealth: yet Abimelech the King came to him
with his friends and captains of his army, and said, We have certainly
seen that the Lord is with thee: and we thought, let there now be an oath
between us, and let us make a covenant with thee, Thou now the blessed of the
Lord, do this. Pharaoh, Gene. ^1. 38. and 40.
King of Egypt, said to his servants of Joseph, can we find such a man as this,
in whom is the spirit of God. He said also to Joseph, Thou shall be over mine
house, and at thy word shall all my people be armed. Thus Abraham was known
to be a blessing. Now what the Lord promised to Abraham, was also promised to
al those ^om. 4. 2^.
that are of the same faith and obedience with him. Then this blessing, of
being a blessing, belongs vnthose which at Gods commandment do Get them out
of their Country. When a man of worth is among many men of like worth, he is
accounted rather a curse then a blessing, such is the corruption of flesh and
blood, infected with envy and with pride. If any good come to any land by
reason of any good man, yet is there such wrestling for the garland, that he
that has the most friends, will set the better leg before, and not only get
the thanks that is due to another; but also, as Jacob got the start of Esau, in
virtue, so will Esau trip up the heels of Jacob by his power, if God keep him
not. Nay Esau must be acknowledged to have an Angels face, for winking at his
brother; that windeth himself out of his company as cleanly as he can. But
when a man comes abroad, where the word of God and his fear is precious,
then every virtue of worth shall have this Respond of the Idiots and
Barbarians, out of question 1. Cor. 14. 25.
God is in these men. Then can there no blessing fall extraordinarily, but all
men know for whose sake it is, namely for such as God has made a blessing.

Out of these arguments, by which God enticed USE I.
Abram to go out of his Country, such as go to a Christian Plantation may
gather many blessed lessons. Marry not with Infidels.
God will make him a great nation. Then must Abrams posterity keep them to
themselves. They may not marry nor give in marriage to the heathen, that are
uncircumcised. And this is so plain, that out of this foundation arose the law
of marriage a-among themselves. The breaking of this rule, may break the neck
of all good success of this voyage, whereas by keeping the fear of God, the
Planters in short time, by the blessing of God, may grow into a nation
formidable to all the enemies of Christ, and be the praise of that part of the
world, for so strong a hand to be joined with the people here that fear God.

Another thing also is to be marked out of this II. A great Nation Gods
blessing.
place, mamelie, that to grow into a great nation is a very great blessing of
God. Then are they but Atheists, that hold a great family of children to be a
heavy and sore charge: and they blaspheme they know not what, that wish God
had their children, for they could spare them well enough. But especially the
son of perdition, that body of Popery is by this Text made abominable, that
once wrote to the Lords of the Counsel of this Land, that Popery would much
profit the Land, because by the single life of Priests and Nuns, and Monks,
and Friars, the Commonwealth should not be so charged with multitude of
children. They fitly say, not charged; but they say not, that less children
shall be gotten. For when as one fishponde, a thousand Par. Vrsperg.
years ago, could affoorde more then six thousand infants heads, so long
before the abstruse studies* came from hell into the hands of Jesuits, what
shall we think of these latter days? But to rake no further into that
stinking kennell, I must tell them to their teeth, that when they say the
kingdom is better for the smallnes of the number of the subjects, or is not
the better for being a great nation, that they do like their father the
devil, give God the lie.

Whereas God does promise to bless him in III.
his Journey, as he did indeed, giving him the gift Bless his Journey.
of a Prophet to teach, of a Priest to pray, of a King to rule, of plenty in
his Temporal estate, and Joy in seeing Christ the Savior of his soul; here
may John 8. 56.
such as transplant at Gods commandment, be assured of that promse of God, I
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee; but as God says to Ioshuah, as I was
with Moses so will I be with thee: so God says to Josh 1. 5.
them, as I was with Abraham, so will I be with you. I will bless you, to wit,
with the blessings of this life and of the kingdom of heaven.

But further if you will have Abrams blessing, you IIII.
must do your diligence to walk in those ways, by which the Lord does give
his blessings. You must not with Idleness, enforce God to work miracles of
mercy on the wilfully sinful. You must be diligent to hear the word of God*
reverent in believing and receiving of it, fruitful in the Christian practice
of it, that the blessing of God may come upon you. God can raise children unto
Abraham of Matthew. 3. 9.
the very stones, and cast you away if you cast him off.

In that the Lord does promise Abraham to make V.
him a great Name, know that it is a blessed thing to A good Name
be well spoken of. This will God bring upon the obedient. But if you disobey,
you will but make the ears of them to tingle, that hear of you. And as we are
in continual expectation of some honorable effect, if you continue in the
faith: so will you bring a confusion upon your selves, and a shame upon your
Nation, if you stick not fast to God, and his blessed commandments.

And lastly, whereas God does promise, that Abram VI.
shall be a blessing, you must know it your duty Ephe. 5. 15. 16.
to walk wisely toward those that are without, redeeming the time, because
the days are evil. The days are evil indeed, in that continent.

Then how tender ought your care to be, to gain the reputation of a blessing
among this people. Let them see, that he that came before, was but Satan whom
they themselves do serve, that had transformed 2. Cor 11. 13. 1^
himself into an Angel of light; and that they were Satan's ministers, that
transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ. But walk you honestly as
in the day, Romans 13. 11. atth. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify you father which is in heaven. While we have time, let v do good to
all men; yet give Gal 6. 10. ^phe. 4. 27.
no place to the devil. So the blessing of God shall be upon us, and we shall
be a blessing wheresoever we go. And still remember that, as the devils
children will needs be a curse, so the sons of Abraham will always labor to
be a sweet blessing, where ever they come. And these were the arguments that
concerned Abraham and his people, we must now proceed also to speak of such
arguments that concerned others.

THE Lord does deal wonderfully with him in respect Vo.
of others, When he is departed from his own Country. For first the Lord will
bless them that bless him. To bless, in this place, is by word and deed to
seek the prosperity of any. The Lord then does promise to make all his
blessings go before them, that do, in any manner, make their blessings go
before his servants. To this purpose is it, which the Prophet David has, Pray
for the peace of ^sal. 1^2. 6.
Jerusalem, Let them prosper that love thee. And that of Christ. He that
receives a Prophet, in the name of ^att. 10. 41. 42
a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous
man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive the reward of a righteous
man. And whosoever shall give to one of these little ones, to drink, a cup of
cold water only, in the name of a Disciple. Verily I say unto you, he shall
not loose his reward. Upon this blessing of God was it that David said to his
son Solomon. Show kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the 1. King. 2. 7.
Gileadite, - for so they came to me, when I fled from Absalom thy brother. And
as the Lord does bless them that love his children, with his blessings of this
life, so does he bless them at last with the kingdom of heaven. For thus does
our Savior Christ give his sentence; Come ye blessed of my father, take the
inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning Matthew. 25. 34.
of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Which afterward
he does thus explain, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it to
one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it to me. But here we must
understand, that when he says, I will bless them that bless thee, the word
thee, did not signify personal Abraham; but Abraham and all his posterity,
which were in his loins, and were to be that great Nation, that the Lord
promised to make of him. And this, the Fox Balam knew very Number. 24 5. ^.
well, when speaking of Jacob, and the habitation of Israel, He cites this
Text: Blessed is he that blesses Gen^. 3^. ^^. and 39 23.
thee. Laban was blessed for Jacobs sake, and the keeper of the prison, with
his whole charge, was blessed because of Joseph. The midwiues, that did spare
Exodus 1. ^7. 20. 21.
the children of the Israclites, and did not kill them, according to the
commandment of Pharaoh the king, were also blessed: which the Scripture does
thus record, God therefore prospered the widows. And again, And because the
widows feared God, therefore he made them house* Rahab also, that harbored
and hid the Lords spies, found the blessing that Ioshuah o^. ^. 14. and 6. 25.
^at. 1. 5.
saved her, and her fathers household, and all that she had, and she dwelt in
Israel, as it seems, married to Salmon* and so also from her came Christ.

To curse, in this place, does signify all kind of afflictions: Deuteronomy. 28.
Leuit. ^6.
as appears by the law of God. And so the meaning is, that the Lord will
spend all his plagues upon such as do bring any affliction upon Abraham, yea
the Lord will revenge them in his wrath. So says the Lord Jesus Christ, He
that shall Mat. 18. 6.
offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better for him,
that a millstone were hanged about his neck: and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea. Let Pharaoh tell how well he sped for taking Abraham's wife
into his house, The Text says, The Lord plagued Pharaoh with great plagues;
because of Sarai Abraham's Genesis 12 15. 12. Genesis 20. 3. 18. Ge. 19. 5. 12. 24.
Exodus 1. etc.
wife. Let Abimelech tell, how much better he faired for the like pranke. But
S^dom will never be forgotten, that would abuse strangers. And Egypt is hanged
up a table, in all men's eyes, to let them see, that the Lord has innumerable
fearful plagues, to spend upon them that will deal craftily, and cruelly
with his people; and not suffer them to serve the Lord. The reason hereof is,
that God, to Reason, communion with God. Genesis 17. 7.
him that receives his covenant, does bind himself to be his God, and the God
of his seed. And thus the Prophet Zachary bringing forth God expressing his
meaning to be, that there is so strickt an Union, between God and his people,
that what is done to his servants, he takes as done to himself; His words be
these, He that touches you, touches the apple Zach. 2. 8.
of mine eye. To this purpose is that of our Savior Christ, He that receives
you, receives me: and he that Matthew. 10.
receives me, receives him that sent me. And again, He that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises Luke 10. 16.
me, despises him that sent me. And now, seeing the respect of blessing or
cursing, which falls upon Abraham and his posterity, does fall upon God,
then consider what God says for himself. Them that honor 1. Sam. 2. 30.
me, I will honor: and they that despise me, shall be despised. And this does
David acknowledge in God, With the godly, thou will show thy self godly: with
the Psalm. 18. 25. 26
upright, thou will show thy self upright: with the pure, thou will show thy
self pure: and with the froward, thou will show thy self froward.

It is then to be observed, that godly men, that USE. I.
fear God, where ever they go by Gods vocation, Godly men find friends.
they shall find friends, and such as shall bless them. He made those that led
them away captine to pity them. Joseph, and Daniel found more honor abroad,
then their Princes had at home. Ester and Mordecai, found more favor at
Shusan, then many of their better found at Jerusalem. He that raised up those
godly men friends abroad, will also provide for you abroad, if ye continue his
faithful servants, as Abram did. And further, here we see, that such as love
II.
Gods people shall prosper; though they be but heathen. The friends of godly
men prosper.
This may give warrantie unto our conscience, to accept of favor and
blessings, even of the Gentiles: and also to hold a league and concurrence,
even with the well affected Heathen, that God has stirred up, to be the means
of his Blessings unto us. So is it said to Abram, When he had occasion to
rescue his brother Lot from Chedor-Laome^, Genesis ^4. 1^.
Then came one that escaped, and told Abram the Ebrew, which dwelt in the
plain of Mamre, the Amorite, brother to Eshcol, and brother to Aner, which
were confederate with Abram. And also we may secure our selves, in the
association of such; that God will not kill us for their sakes: but on the
contrary, God will bless them for our sakes.

Again, this text does teach us thus much, that III.
in a strange Country, we must look for enemies; They ^^st look for enemies.
even cursing enemies, under whose tongues is the poison of Aspes, and whose
right hand is a right hand of iniquity. Balaam, that had a witches tongue Josh
^3 2^. Number. 22. 6.
in his head, was sent for to curse Israel, by Balak, that knew he had a
pestilent tongue. The seed of the devil Gen 3. 15.
will be spighting and biting, do what a man can. This our Savior foretells
to his holy Apostles, John 16. 33.
In the world you shall have trouble. A thing which if the children of Israel
had known as they ought, they would never have refused to enter the land which
God commanded them to possess: because there were cursing and killing enemies,
no better then Canibals. Be not then discouraged, though you light on enemies:
for that did God foretell unto Abram, that he and his seed must find. Rather
be strong, and of good courage: because the Lord is with you; and with them,
but an arm of flesh.

Lastly, our text does tell us, that he will curse IIII.
them that curse Abram, This the witch Balaam knew Their enemies shall be
cursed.
that if any would open his mouth to curse the people of God, he should be
cursed himself: for the curse should return unto him, as Water into his Psalm.
109. 17.
bowels, and oil into his bones. And generally, they shall come unto shame and
confusion, as many as have evil will at Ziion. Here then is a warrant that
where godly men are constrained to encounter with cursers, such as are the
Priests of the Gentiles; it is Gods ordinance to bring a curse upon them, and
to kill them: as the children of Israel did Balam. Josh* 13. 22.
Here is also a promise, that, if we keep our selves to Abrams faith and
obedience, God will bring a curse upon all our enemies. The Prophet Zachary
has many excellent speeches, to express this by: The Lord, says he, will
make Jerusalem a cup of poison, Zach. 12. ^. etc.
unto all the people in the siege of Jerusalem. Jerusalem shall be a heavy
stone for all people: all that lift at it, shall be torn; though all the earth
be gathered together against it. Again, the princes of Judah shall be as coals
of fire among wood, and like the firebrand in the sheafe, and they shall
devour all people round about, on the right hand, and on the left. These
things spoke the Prophet of these victorious days of the Gospel. I hope out
of these words thus generally delivered, every true hearted Protestant, can
frame out an answer unto the objection, that is thought much to impeach this
Plantation in VIRGINIA. The peril, say the obiecters, is great by the Papists
that shall come on the back of us. What Papists do you fear? the Princes?
Sure, such as are in aliance with our Nation, will think other thoughts, and
take better advice. But as for the popish Church, an unruly beast, exempt from
all good government, Civil and Divine, only adoring him, that has exalted
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, it may be they,
like the daughters of Salomons horsleaches, will cry, Give, give, more blood,
and yet more bloo^. From. 3^. 14. 15.
And yet, a man would think, they were glutted before this time of day, For in
her may be found the blood ^eue. 1^. 24*
of the Prophets and of the Saints, and of ALL that were sl^ine upon the earth.
But you will say, now they be so well fleshed, they will have more blood. To
this first our text answers in general, never fear them: they come to curse
with Bell, Book and Candle, and the Devil and all: but remember this, God
will cu^se them that curse Abram. But say you, they are such terrible beasts,
as that the professors of the Gospel must needs be afraid of them. Indeed
their peril was great, while their Inchauntments were in Reave. 18. 23.
force. Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, till the Exodus 9. 11.
Plague of the Scab fell upon them, and then they were able to stand before
Moses no longer. So they Reave. 16. ^.
iuggled, and did many strange tricks, and much mischief, till the Plague of
the Scab light upon them at Naples, more then an hundred year ago: but since,
though their industry has been nothing inferior to the devils, that came from
compassing of the earth, Job 1. ^.
to and fro; yet they may cast a woeful account: For they find in the total^,
how many Kingdoms they have lost, and do daily lose; how many battles they
have fought, in all which to the Protestants, as the Cananites, would prove to
the Isralites in Calebs Numb. 1^. 9.
judgment, so have they been, even Bread for us. Ask what is become of those
imperial armies, that went into Boeme, against the Hussites, in the time of
Sigismund the Emperor: and know, what is become of their Armor: whether it
armed not the Hussites that wanted? Ask what is become of the many ships
that came into the Narrow seas in the year 1588? I am sure much of their
Ordinance furnished the Netherlanders. Will they come to you? Sure GOD that
made Israel rich of the spoils of Egypt, can by his providence make them
furnish you with ships, with Munition, with Victual, with money: let this be
your hope. But fear not their fears. Babylon, says the Angel, is fallen;
Reave. 14. and 18
never to rise again: sing Hallelu-iah, and you shall see her smoke ascend
for evermore. No, no, they Reave. 19. 3.
shall prevail no more, for their madness is made evident. 1. Tim. 3. 8.
They have another chare to do, I hope, will make them scratch where it
itcheth not. Think ye that it is possible for Princes, whose treasure is
exhausted, and honor impeached, by their inchaunments, not to require
satisfaction for these wrongs? and, to that purpose, pull all their Mammon from
under their Altars? I am persuaded, the Armor they have in the roufes of their
Churches, will one day help to arm a company of good fellows, that will come
to Church, it may be under pretense of hearing a Mass, but will depart with
good luggage, of silver and gold, and pearl, and such like, that is there
ready gathered to their hands. Wherefore fear God, and of all others, there
lies the least fear to be looked for from them. The only peril is in
offending God, and taking of Papists in to your company: if once they come
creeping into your houses, then look for mischief: if treason or poison be
of any force: know them all to be very Assasines, of all men to be abhorred.
But hope in God that he, that has sent you abroad, will also send you such
governors, as will cast out the leaven out of your houses: to whom I need say
little, because I know they need not be nurtured by me.

IN Abram shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Vj^.
By Abram, is meant, as before, Abraham, as in his loins are many nations. For
that which is here spoken of Abram, is also spoken of Jacob, in this manner.
In thee, and in thy seed, shall all the families of the earth be blessed. It is
true that in Abraham and his Genesis 28. 14.
Children, were many men blessed: as appears in the Scripture, where they
have drawn many strangers to serve God. Howbeit the principal blessing is
ascribed to Christ, who by excellency is called Thy seed; as S. Paul does
very notably observe, when he says, He says not, and to thy seeds, as
speaking Gal. 3. 16.
of many, but, And to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ. By the families of
the earth are understood all those nations, which arose from the families of
the sons of Noah, after their generations among their Genesis ^^. 3^.
people; for out of these were the nations divided in the earth after the
flood: and that which is here rendered families, afterward is called Nations in
the speech of the Lord of Abraham, All the nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him. S. Paul renders it thus, in thee shall Genesis ^8. ^8. and 22. 18.
all the Gentiles be blessed. By blessing in this place, seeing Gal. 3. 8.
the seed is Christ, and the word, Thee, did so far point out Abraham, as it
had relation to Christ in his loins, of force it must signify that
blessedness, which Christ does bring unto men. Which the Angel and a multitude
of heavenly soldiers, do comprehend in their sweet song of praising God, when
they said. Glory be to God on high, and Peace on earth, Luke 2. 14*
and toward men good will. Then the speech, all put together, is this, that
Abr^ham must get him out of his Country: that he may begin that, which God, by
him and his seed, will accomplish in due time: namely that all nations may
embrace the gospel of Christ unto their salvation. An excellent argument, and
of singular force, to persuade not only Abram, but all his Children according
to the faith, to fly, if it were possible, over the mountains, about so great
an errand. O with what Comfort may a man come before the Lord, with this
account of his talent. Behold I am here, and the children which God has given
me. It would never grieve S Paul to go from Cilicia, to present a Church at
Corinth, a pure Virgin to Christ. 2. Cor* 11* 2* Objection. The last judgment
at hand.


But stay, says one, you run too fast without good ground: you seem to
incline to the Millenaries, or such as look for the gospel to be spread over
all the world. You must know that is done many a fair year ago, that we
need not look for a new Revolution of that. It were safer to tremble at the
last judgment, whose trumpet is ever sounding in our ears: Arise from the
dead and come to judgment. To this I answer that no preiudicate opinion is a
just Answer.
condemnation to the truth, nor any doctrine out of Books that are Apocripha,
can make a wise man depart from a doctrine of the Canonical Scriptures. It is
true that Gregory's credit was wont to be great ^r^g. lib. Dialo.
in the times that men knew no better, who confidently affirmed the judgment
to be at hand; but besides the confutation of a thousand years, which have
bin since he so affirmed, the pregnant and clear Scripture confounds the
proud conjecture of him and his followers. And this does also appear by the
Apostasy of some Papists that in their books Maluenda de Antichristo.
lately Printed at Rome, have departed from the sentence of so great a Pope,
and grave Doctor of the Church, telling us plainly that the gospel must be
preached universally through the world before the last Judgment. But neither
by their authority, nor arguments, but by the force of such Texts as cannot be
deluded, do I affirm, That all the Nations of the world shall be blessed in
Christ. They that mince and pare this Text, that they make it as sore as the
Shechamits Gene. 34. 25. Psalm. 19. 3. Romans 10. 18.
were with their circumcision, say, that, take away the ouerlashing hyperbole,
and, Their sound is gone out into all the world, will serve the turn. A simple
blessing God knows and little differs from The savor of death unto death.
If they receive you not, ^ Cor. 3. 16.
(says Christ,) shake off the dust of your feet. Truly, I say unto yon, it
shall be easier for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment,
then for that City, att^. 10. 14.
howsoever they heard the sound of the word of God. This stumbling block,
few wise men will say was this Blessedness promised to Abram.

The Jews hunt counter as fast on the other side, For when as, in the second
Psalm, they read of their Messtas, that he shall have the heathen for his
inheritance, and the utter most parts of the earth for his possession: Psalm. 2.
8. 9.
that he shall crush them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces
like a potters vessel, they affirm, that all the world must be subdued by
force and violence unto Messiah, An opinion that prevailed much in the time of
Christ, as appears not only by diverse others, but also by the Apostles, who
encountered our Savior Christ thus, before his ascension. Lord will thou at this
time restore the kingdom Acts 1. 6.
to Israel. But they also make but an uncomfortable blessing of this blessedness
of Abraham. The phrase is plain, that in Abraham all the families of the earth
shall be blessed. A blessedness then must the Gentiles trust to receive from
Abraham. Particuly these things are delivered in the Scripture, which, I
think, no distinctions of hyperbole, nor spiritually, nor at the last
judgment, can delude, which are the ordinary refuges of them that, out of
prejudice, would feign put by the truth.

Daniell has it thus, A stone was cut without hands, Dan. 2. 35.
and smote the image upon the feet, and brake them in pieces. Then was the
iron, the clay the brass, the silver, and gold broken together, and became
like chafe of the summer flowers, and the wind carried them away, that no
place was found for them: and the stone, that smot^ the image, became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth.

Here, first, we plainly see, that Christ must destroy the Monarchs that they
be not found. And so much of this speech does S. Paul interpret thus plainly.
That Christ shall put down all rule, and all authority, ^. G^r, 15. 2^. 25.
2^.
and power. For he must reign, till he ha^h put all his enemies, under his
seete: the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, The other part of
Daniels speech, David does thus express in the Psalm. Thou Lord Psalm. 8^. 6.
shall inherit all nations. And this point the Prophet Zachary does render
thus. The Lord shall be King over all the earth, In that day there shall be
one Lord, and his name shall be one: so that no other God shall be Zach. 14.
19.
named in all the world. But lest any should understand this point of the last
judgment, and so place earth in heaven; Daniell shows how the Lord shall be
king, his words are these. The kingdom and dominion, and greatness of his
kingdom under the whole Dan. 7. 27.
heaven shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, and alpowers shall serve and obey him. But what shall
he abolish kings, and bring all to a Popularity? no such matter, God is the
author of order; and not of confusion. The ^ Cor. 14. 33 ^euel. 1^. 15.
kingdoms of this world shall be our Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall
reign for evermore, by Kings converted to the Gospel. For godly Kings do si^
1 Chr^. 30. 23 Psa* ^3. and 97. and 99.
on the throne of the Lord, and by them the Lord reigns The beginning of this
alteration Isaiah expresses thus. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and
Queens shall be thy nurses: they shall worship thee with their faces Isa^. 49.
23.
toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet. But least any man
should say, it may be some* but what is that to the rest? David answers
thus, The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents. The Psalm.
7^. 10. 11.
Kings of Sheba, and Seba, shall bring gifts, yea All Psalm. 47. 6.
Kings shall worship him, All nations shall serve him. And again, The Lord is
high and terrible: A great King over all the earth. And again in the same
Psalm. God is King over all the earth, sing praise^, whosoever has
understanding. God reigns over the heathen etc. If any do yet think that they
shall serve him as the Kings did Iosuah, when he set his feet on their necks:
Josh. 10. 24.
the blessed scripture says no. For the Psalm has it thus. All Kings of the
earth shall praise thee, O Lord, for Psalm. 138. 4.
they have heard the words of thy mouth. A thing which they will not do at the
resurrection; when going to hell thy shall say: When saw we thee an hungered, or
a Mat. 25. 45.
thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick or in prison etc? And as the
scripture is very particular in setting down the state of the kings, how they
shall stand affected to the Gospel, so does it of the people. First Psalm. 97.
6.
David says All the people shall see thy glory. But that is not sufficient,
wherefore S. John, in the Revelation goes farther thus. All nations shall come
and worship Revel. 15. 5. Isai. 45. 23.
before thee, O Lord. Isaiah has it thus,, I have sworn by my self, and the
word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return: that
every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. Phil. 2.
9. 10.
Which Saint Paul expresses thus. God has exalted Christ Jesus and given him
a name above all names: that at the name of Jesus* should every knee bow, and
that every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord, unto the glory of God
the Father. Malachie yet goes further Mala* 1. 11.
thus: From the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, My name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto thy
name, and Psalm. 17. 9.
a pure offering. The Psalm says also, The princes of the people are gathered
unto the people of the God of Abraham. To conclude this point the Prophet
Isaiah says From month to month, and from Saboth, to Saboth, Isai. 66. 2^.
shall all flesh come to worship me; says the Lord.

The sum is, what blessing any Nation had by Christ, must be Communicated to
all Nations: the office of his Prophecy to teach the ignorant; the office of
his Priesthood, to give remission of sins to the sinful: the office of his
kingdom, by word, and Sacraments, and spirit, to rule the inordinate: that
such as are dead in trespasses, may be made to sit together Ephe. 2. 1. etc.
in heavenly places. For there is no difference between the Jew, and the
Grecian. For he that is Lord over Romans 10. 12.
all, is rich unto all, that call upon him. For it well beseems the glory of
God to triumph over his Reasons from Gods attributes.
enemies: and the Wisdom of God (after the world has had plentiful
experience of the craft of the devil, and wicked men of all sorts) to exalte
the Gospel, the wisdom of God: As also his Power to be declared, when all
his enemies had showed their force; and his Mercy to his Saints, after so great
exercises of patience; and his justice, to show his judgments, in condemning
those that have spoken proud words, and done wicked deeds, to his servants. But
especially to his Glory, in exalting his son, and crowning him with Glory,
and Worship, that we may see that, which yet we see not: All things be put in
subjection unto him. It is true that many H^b. 2. 8*
objections are made against this doctrine, out of such places as this. When
the son of man comes, Luke 18. 8.
shall he find faith on the earth? And of Antichrist, whom 2. These. 2. 8.
the Lord shall abolish, by the brightness of his coming. But partly, for
want of Grammar learning, to know the meaning of the word Come, and partly for
want of Logic, to lay out those places to their due times: those Scriptures,
and many more, are racked by such men out of their ioints: which rightly
understood, have a clean other sense, then that for which they are alleged:
which neither this time nor place will give me leave to dispute. Wherefore
standing to our own first ground, learn first to be sparing in USE.
abridging the glory of God; which made the world, Be sparing in shor^ning the
glory of God.
that his Son might rule over all. For howsoever, for some good causes, God
would not make himself glorious at the first, but would seem to hide the glory
of God in the passion of his Son, and affliction of his Saints; and
permitting Antichrist to clime to his height, that those that are perfect may
be known: yet questionless, Christ must sit at the Psalm. 110. ^. 1. Cor. 15.
right hand of his Father, till all his enemies be made his footestoole, and
then shall come from thence to judge the quick and the dead.

Again, if it be Gods purpose, that the Gospel II.
shall be preached through the world for a witness, then ought ministers to
be careful and willing to spread it abroad, in such good services as this,
that is intended. Sure it is great shame unto us, of the ministry, that can
be better content, to sit, and rest us here idle* then undergo so good a
work. Our pretense of zeal, is clear discovered to be but hypocrisy, when
we rather choose to mind unprofitable questions at home, then gaining souls
abroad. It is a singular sin for men to be overcome with evil, it is a shame
that the Jesuits and Friars, that accompany every ship, should be so diligent
to destroy souls, and we not seek the tender lambs, nor bind up that which
is broken.

But go on courageously, and notwithstanding the snorting idleness of the
ministry, suspect not the 2 King. 5. 2.
blessing of God. A captive girl, brought Naman to the Prophet. A captive
woman, was the means of converting Iberia, now called Georgia. Eedesius, and
Ruffinus Eccle. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. 10. 1. Cor. 1.
Frumentius* two captive youths, were the means of bringing the gospel into
India. God makes the weak things of the world confound the mighty, and
gets himself praise by the mouth of Babes and sucklings. Be cheerful then,
and the Lord of all glory, glorify his name by your happy spreading of the
gospel, to your commendation, and his glory, that is Lord of all things, to
whom be power and dominion for ever. Hallelu-iah.

FINIS.

