A DEFENSE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, WORSHIP, AND MINISTRY, used in the
Christian Churches separated from Antichrist: Against the challenges, cavils
and contradiction of M. Smyth: in his book entitled The differences of the
Churches of the Separation. Hereunto are annexed a few observations upon some
of M. Smythes Censures; in his answer made to M. Bernard. By Henry Ainsworth,
teacher of the English exiled Church in AMSTERDAM.

Imprinted at Amsterdam by Giles Thorp in the year 1609.

The chief things handled in this treatise.
OF worship. page 5. etc.

The Jews worship scanned. page 11. etc.

Prophesying or preaching; whither it be worship. page 16. etc.

Singing of Psalms, page 21.

Of scripture, or books in general. page 22.

Of the original scriptures. page 24. etc.

The handwriting of ordinances, Coloss. 2. page 28.

Whither Christ, Luke 4. ended the law of reading. p. 31.

Whither reading be the ministratio^ of the letter. 2 Cor. 3. page 32.

Of the law and gospel given in books and tongues. p. 37.

Of the commandments to read the scriptures. p. 39. 41. etc.

Of translations of holy scripture. page 45. etc.

Of the 72. Interpreters in Israel; and whether they sinned in translating the
Bible. page 51. etc.

Arguments against the use of translations in Gods worship, answered. page 57.
etc.

Arguments for the use of translations* etc. mainteyned. p. 69. etc.

Of the Hellenists, or Jews that ^pake Greek. p. 73. etc.

Of the Ministry and Eldership. page 88. etc.

Reasons against 3. sorts of Elders, refuted. page 89. etc.

Reasons for 3. sorts of Elders, defended. page 97. etc.

Of the Treasury page 114.

Observations upon M. Smythes censures, against Church* government by the
Eldership, page 118. etc.

IT is true of an haeretik which Solomon says in parable, Prove. 9. 13.
a foolish woman is troublesome: experience hereof we have in this adversary
whom I deal against. For he not content to manifest with mouth, nor to write
with pen, nor to print in publik once, his own follyand shame, with calling
upon us to Differen. Preface.
justific our proceedings or repent of them; does in an other book the second
time Parall. p. 105.
require an answer, and fretting in himself that we passed over his vanity
with silence, he bids us battle with the third alarm in his book The
character of the beast, lately published. Wherein, (to show how near he is
allied to those which say, Rev. 13. 4*
who is like unto the Beast, who is able to war with him?) he Charact. in the
epist.
requires, nay charge, yea challenges us (as he says) to the defense of
our errors vawnting moreover against us, that we are guilty in our consciences
of our disabilitie to defend them, and therefore subtly draw back and pretend
excuses; triumphing also over us, as they that hitherto in craftines have
withdrawn from the combat, in the matter of the translation, worship and
presbytery.

Thus has he lifted up Psalm. 75. 5
his horn on high, and spoken with a stif neck; as if even the mighty were
Job. 41. 16.
afraid of his majesty, and for fear fainted in themselves. In regard of which
insolency; all men I think may see, it is now time, if ever, to take up shield
and sword against him, and hew his horns that so have pushed the flock of
Christ, whereof not long since he professed himself to be a member with us:
though now having left the truth to follow leasing, he makes open war with the
saints. And whereas among other 2 Pet. 2. 18.
swelling words of vanity, he says, Charact. epistle.
Lo we protest against them to have a false worship of reading books: we
protest against them to have a false government of a triformed Presbytery; we
protest against them to have a false Ministry of Doctors or Teachers, etc. I
have taken in hand to set forth our just defense, in these particulars, and to
show the frawd and malignitie of this boaster: leaving the other point about
the constitution of our Church in baptising of infants, to others that have
already begun to convince his heresy therein. And this which I have undertaken
is rather for others (who may be troubled with his writings) then for his own
sake, who yields small hope of good, seeing he proceeds so fast in evil; and
out of a Prove. 28. 25.
proud heart has stirred up strife. Wherein also such has been his ficklenes,
as Psalm. 5. 9.
no constancis is in his mouth. For (not to speak of Princip. etc. Differ. etc.
Charact of the Beast.
three sundry books wherein he has showed himself of 3. several religions,) in
this one book which J deal against, he says and unsayeth and contrarieth his
own grounds for to shift and hide his blasphemies, that little needed him so
earnestly to have caled for an other man's sword to pierce the bowels of his
error; when his own hand fights against himself, and the spear which he
tosseth, turns into his heart. I had much rather have followed more comfortable
meditations, in the peaceable practice of the truth; the^ thus to co^te^d with
those that seek strife, and that fight against the faith which themsevles once
professed; having found such by experience, to be above others, most malignant
enemies: but truth oppugned, may not be for saken; and Mat. 7. 15.
wolves that would ravin, must be beaten from the fold, least the sheep be
devoured or scattered. Now therefore I being to encounter this false Prophet,
do humble my self under the good hand of God whose power is made perfect in
man's infirmity; whose mercy susteyneth in violence of the enemy; whose truth
is a shield and buckler. He bless these my labors unto his people; that Psalm.
107. 42.
the righteous may see and rejoice, and all iniquity may stop her mouth.

Amen.
A DEFENSE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES AND WORSHIP OF God, used in the Christian
Churches of the Separation: against the calumnies of M. Smyth.
THe book entitled The differences of the Churches of the separation, which we
are challenged by the Author to answer: carries in the very name thereof, a
delusion of the Reader. For if he look for plain differences, what they
affirm and we deny; he shall not find them expressed: if he take the
differences to be implied, as that whatsoever Mast. Smyth affirms we deney,
and what he deneyeth we affirm; then is the Reader much abused, and we
injured; who hold in that book, truth and error to be unequally mixed. Seeing
then neither expressly nor implicitly the Reader can see the Differences: what
are they but delusions?

The many questions which he asks in the end, containing the sum of al his
book, manifest the Authors frawd: for if he know and dare say wherein we differ,
what need he desire our direct answer? It became him to refute, and not for to
fish with hooks of demands, wherein we would differ from him.

There was one only difference between M. Smyth and us, when first he began to
quarrel; though since he have increast them, and increases daily, with deadly
feud and open opposition, as al men may see.

That difference was this. He with his followers breaking off communion with
us, charged us with synn for using our English Bibles in the worship of God;
and he thought that the teachers should bring the originals the Hebrew and
Greek, and out of them translate by voice. His principal reason against our
translated scripture was this. No Apocrypha writing, but only the Canonical
scriptures, are to be used in the Church, in time of Gods worship. Every
written translation is an Apocrypha * This is the third of his four general
arguments, which he offered to our Church in writing, at the second days publik
co^fere^ce
writing, and is not canonical scripture. Therefore every written translation is
unlawful in the Church in time of Gods worship. Why he counted every
translation apocrypha, and what he meant thereby, appears by these words of
his In the reason annexed to his second general Arg. Difference etc. page 12.
a written translation (says he) or interpretation is as well and as much an
human writing, as an homily or prayer, written and read. The like impiety he
has also printed in his book, saying A translation being the work of a men's
wit and learning, is as much and as truly an humane writing, as the Apocrypha
(so commonly called) writings are, and seeing it has not the allowance of holy
men inspired, but is of an hidden authority, it may be justly called Apocrypha
etc. And therefore not to be brought into the worship of God to be read.

That this point of the translation was the only difference, as it is known to
all that then heard his publik protestation; so his words in writing show it. In
a reason annexed to the 1. general argument.
Translations written (says he) are not refreyned in the case of scandal, for
we desired that they might be refreined for our sakes, that we might keep
communion, and it would not be yielded.

So if we would have laid aside our translated Bibles, communion (they say)
should have been kept with us.

Now for the true differences on our part, at that time and still, they are
thus. We agree with M. Smyth herein, that Only canonical scripture is to be
used in Gods worship; and that no apocryphal writing is to be used in Gods
worship. But we disagree and deney, that every written translation is an
Apocryphal writing; affirming that the Scriptures in English and other
languages, rightly translated out of the Originals, are Canonical; and so to be
read in the Church in the worship of God.

After much time spent about this controversy, he manifested other
differences, touching the ministry and treasury; and soon after published
this book of Differences: wherein, having his latter thoughts (as he thought)
better then his former, he Difference etc. in the preface.
retracted a former book of Principles etc, and al other his writings, so far
forth as they were overthwarted by this his last book. He also acknowledged the
in the same preface.
ancient brethren of the separation (as he calls us) are to be honored, that
they have reduced the Church, to the true primitive and Apostolik constitution,
which consists in these three things, 1 The true matter, which are Saints
only, 2 The true form, which is the uniting of them together in the covenant.
3 The true property, which is a communion in all the holy things, and the power
of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the mainteyning of that communion. To this
blessed work of the Lord wherein those ancient brethren have labored, I know
not (says he) what may more be added, I think rather there can nothing be
added. And was he now settled in his course? nothing less, for the strange
woman's Prou. 5. 6*
paths are moveable, they cannot be known. Soon after this God stroke him with
blindness, that he could no longer find the door of the Church, out of which he
was gone by schism, and which he had assaulted with error. Our entering in by
the covenant of God with Genesis 17.
Abraham to the faithful and their seed, has been as a brazen wall,
whereagainst he has runn himself, to his utter ruin, if God in mercy raise
him not up. And now as a man benumbed in mind, he cries out against us,
contrary to his former faith and confession; Charact. of the beast in the Epist.
Lo, we protest against them (says he) to be a false Church, falsely
constituted in the baptising of infants, and their own unbaptised estate. And
again, We protest against them, that seeing their constitution is false;
therefore there is no one ordinance of the Lord true among them. Thus Pro. 20. 1.
wine shows it self in M. Smyth to be a mocker, and strong drink to be
raging: whiles he having drunk Pro. 4. 17.
the wine of violence proclaymeth open war, against Gods everlasting covenant.

The defense of which grace, being already in the hands of two worthy soldiers
of Christ, Mr Clifton whom he has printed against, and Mr Robinson, whom he
next threatens: I leave unto them; not doubting but God their strength, will
Ps. 144. 1
teach their hands, to fight, and their fingers to battle, in so good a cause
against this enemy. But because he still urges his former quarrels of the
scriptures and Ministry: I purpose with Gods grace to set against him in
these; desiring the Lord my Rock, to Psalm. 18. ^2.
gird me with strength, and to make my way entyre.

Touching the first, namely, the use of translated scriptures in the worship of
God: M. Smyth thus summeth up the difference, in the forefront of his book.

1. We hold (says he) that the worship of the new testament properly so
called, is spiritual, proceeding originally from the heart: and that* reading
out of a book ( though a lawful ecclesiastical action,) is no part of
spiritual worship: but rather the invention of the man of syn, it being
substituted for a part of spiritual worship. 2. We hold that seeing prophesying
is a part of spiritual worship: therefore in time of prophesying it is
unlawful to have the book as a help before the eye. 3. We hold that seeing
singing a Psalm is a part of spiritual worship; therefore it is unlawful, to
have the book before the ey, in time of singing a Psalm.
Here first let the reader observe, that the mayn and true difference which was
between M. Smyth and us, about the translation, is not mentioned: but is
brought in after, as by the way, in ha^dling these matters; and other points
never controverted between us, are made heads of the differences. In which
doing, M. Smyth has graced the very portch of his building, with imposture and
frawd.

2. In saying, of himself and his brethren, We hold etc. he gives the reader
to understand, (unless he meant to delude him,) that they whom he deals
against, hold the contrary: whereas he neither does, nor is able to produce any
proof hereof against us; neither (I dare say) can he tell what we hold, of these
points. Thus secondeth he his fraud with injury; and makes these two, as
Iachin and Boaz, the pillars for to bewtifie the temple of his book.

Now because his whole battle against the translated Scriptures, is chiefly out
of this bulwark of spiritual worship, wherein he has entrenched himself, and
flies thereto at al assayes, when other shifts fail him: I will begin with it,
as himself also does, and come to Translations anon.

OF WORSHIP.
Whereas the word Worship is diversely used, sometime more largely, sometime more
straightly; by reason whereof it has not at al times a like proper
signification: M. Smyth spying this, (as by his limitation of properly so
called may appear;) takes advantage to himself for to bolster out his former
blasphemies, and to deal against us for Idolaters, and the holy Bible for an
idol; under the aequivocatio^ or double meaning of this word worship;
restreyning it where he should not, and enlarging it where he ought not. And
though he treats of this thing at large, handling the fountain, the helps,
the essence or nature, with the parts and kinds of worship: yet the diverse use
of the word which was needful first to be showed, (if he meant not to deceiv,)
he has quite omitted; that, therefore I will first manifest. The homonymie
cleared


Worship, in our English tongue, and as it is used to express the original
scriptures, is diversely taken. Sometime largely, as when it expresses the Greek
word latreuo; as Philip. 3, 3. we are the circumcision which latreuontes.
worship God in the spirit: and Act. 24, 14. so latreuo.
worship I the God of my fathers. And thus both the English and Greek answers
to the Hebrew ghnabad, which properly signifies to serve, Exodus 3, 12. Deuteronomy.
10, 12, 2 Samuel 15, 8.

Also when it expresses the Greek word sebomai; as Act. 18, 13. to sebesthai.
worship God contrary to the law; and Act. 18, 7, Iustus a sebomeno^^.
worshipper of God. And so both it and the Greek answer to the Hebrew jare;
which properly signifies to fear or reverence, as Mat. 15, 9. in vain they
sebontai.
worship me; for that which in Hebrew is, their fear toward me Isa 29, 13. So
Job. 1. 9. Ion. 1. 9.
Job. and Jonas, as the Hebrew says, feared, as the Greek translateth,
Worshipped God. Also when it interprets the Greek word threskeuo, as Col. 2,
18. the Worshipping of Angels; and verse. 23. in will worship; or voluntary
religion. Thus worship is largely used, for the fear and service of God, or
any religious action.

More strictly and properly, worship is used to English the Greek word
proskuneo; as Mat. 2. 2. We are come to proskunesai.
worship him; and Rev. 11. 16. they prosekunesan.
worshipped God; Rev. 13. 4. they prosekunesan.
worshipped the Dragon, etc. And so both it and the Greek word, do express
the Hebrew hishtachavah, which properly signifies to bow down or prostrate
ones self. Exodus 20. 5.

Thus the worship of God generally, comprehends the performing of all duties
required in the first Deuteronomy. 5. 6 -- 15.
table of the Law: specially and properly, to worship is to bow down and
supplicate unto God.

The meaning of the word being thus distinguished; let us now see how M. Smyth
does deal in the point. He, where he Differe^c. page 18.
professes to handle the nature or essence of spiritual worship, and the
essential causes and kinds thereof, shows these things in two particulars;
first in the essential causes; 2. in the proper kinds or parts of the worship
of the N. testament.

The essential causes are matter and form. The matter of Gods worship (says
he) is the holy scriptures, which conteyneth the word of God or the Gospel,
the subject whereof is Christ Jesus: The form or sowl that quickens it, is
the spirit Col. 3. 16. with Ephe. 5. 18. 19. 20.

Then he illustrateth this, by the ceremonial worship of the old testament.
And the matter of that he makes to be beasts, incense, oil, fat, corn, wine,
and the like creatures whereof the sacrifices etc. were made, with all the
actions thereto perteyning. Mark 9. 49. with Levit. 2. 11 13. and 9. 24 1 Cor.
5. 6* 8.


The form he says appeared in 4. things; 1. honey, and 2. leven which must be
absent for the most part; and 3. fire and 4. salt which must always be
present. Then for the kinds of spiritual worship, he says they are praying,
prophefying, and singing Psalms. Psalm. 50. 14 -- 17. 1 Cor. 11. 4. and 14. 15.
17. 26. Iam. 5. 13. Rev. 19. 10.

I will not here stand to scan the good order which M. Smyth has used in
handling the nature and essence of worship, whiles omitting the efficient
causes, objects and ends, which properly perteyne to the discourse of actions:
he insisteth upon matter and form which he calls essential causes: so
taking that which is more improper, and difficult. But seeing he has chosen
this way, I will follow him therein.

And first I observe, how he intending to shut out the reading of the
scriptures from spiritual worship; yet makes the scriptures to be the matter
of worship: now how the matter of a thing, should be shut out and unlawful to
be there, it requires some skill to know. Secondly, the scriptures being (as
he says) the matter, and the spirit the form of this action of worship;
(though properly the spirit is the Act. 2. 4 and 11. 28.
efficient cause;) it would be known why M. Smyth in an other place says that
Differe^c. page 1.
actions of administering the Church or kingdom of Christ, are not actions of
spiritual worship properly so called, making those actions to be admonition,
examination, excommunication, pacification, absolution etc. are not these to
have the matter of the scriptures, and form of the spirit, as well as prophecy
which the Apostle says, is a speaking 1 Cor. 14. 3.
to edifying to exhortation and to comfort? Are we not as well bound to the
scriptures in admonishing, as in exhorting and must not the same spirit give
life unto both?

Let Paul himself be our example: he teaches that 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
the whole scripture is profitable, as for doctrine so for elenchon.
rebuke or conviction, and for correction; and he in practice, rebuking and
opposing against Elymas, saying, Act. 13. 10.
O full of all subtilty and of all mischief, child of the Divil etc. did this by
the holy spirit, whereof he is noted then to be verse. 9.
full. In preaching to the men of Antiochia, he admonished them Act. 13. 40. 41.
by the word of the prophet Abakuk: in preaching to the Jews in Rome, he
rebuked them Act. 28. 25. -- 28.
by the word of the prophet Esaias; And Peter in his Sermon at Jerusalem
pacified their pricked consciences, by the promise of God, to them and to their
children; Acts 2. 37. 39. So the word and spirit were matter and form of their
rebukes, admonitions, pacifications, etc. even as of their other doctrines and
exhortations, and therefore by Mr Sm. own grounds, were spiritual worship; and
so his first plot where he made page 1.
actions of opposition, difference, plea and strife, not to be actions of
spiritual worship; is a wagmire wherinto this his conceit of prophecy or
preaching to be spiritual worship, is sunk, and by it overthrown. And sure the
Prophets and Apostles and Christ himself never observed this new coined
difference, for Isa. 1. etc. Jer. 2. etc. Mat. 5. and 6. and 7. etc. Act. 7 and
13. etc.
they in their prophesying or preaching of the word, did intermixe rebukes with
comforts, admonitions with exhortations, and opposed against syn and sinners
usually in their sermons, as the whole history of the Bible shows. Now by Mr
Smyths divinity they worshipped not God, when they spoke by way of opposition,
difference, plea or strife, in their doctrine; but when they spoke to edifying
exhortation or comfort; this was the worship of God properly so called. If this
distinction be not true, then M. Sm. is a deceiver, properly so called; who to
make things serve his heretical humor and hide his blasphemies against our
reading of the holy scriptures in the Church, has dug thus deep to find a
pit whereinto to fell the righteous; though himself by Gods judgment be fallen
into the same.

And here, by the way I will briefly note M. Smyths method in contriving of
his book for the advantage of his cause. The three offices of Christ, in
prophecy preisthood and Kingdom; he reduces unto two, 1. kingdom and 2.
preisthood; Differenc. p, 27.
comprehending prophecy under the preisthood as a branch of it. Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
Rev. 1. 6. with 1 Cor. 14. 31. Act. 2. 17. 18.

Whereas by the same ground of Deuteronomy. 33. 10. he might have made the kingdom
also a branch of the preisthood; for the Priests were to teach Iaakob Gods
judgments and Israel his law, as well in cases of Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. 11. 12.
controversy plea and strife, (which M. Smyth makes actions of administering
the Kingdom;) as in other doctrines of exhortation and comfort. But I find in
the scripture that Moses (not Aaron the Priest,) is made a figure of Christ
Act. 3. 22 -- 26.
as a Prophet; and Prophets there were many in Israel of other tribes then
Levi: seeing then Moses and the Prophets carried types of Christ's prophecy;
Aaron and the Priests, of his priesthood; David and the kings, of his kingdom;
I would not now confound the priesthood and prophecy in Christ, any otherwise
then the priesthood and kingdom; but keep a like distinction in them al; and
as in Christ the head, so in the Church his body. Again as in heavenly order
the 1. manifestatio^ of man's syn and misery by the law, of his justice and
happiness by the gospel; also the 2. work of man's redemption by sacrifice; and 3
the conservation of this grace wrought for the Church, against al enemies; are
three distinct things, one following another: so Christ in his administration
observed this order and distinction; first, Mat. 5. etc. unto Mat. 26.
teaching the Church as a Prophet, above three years; then Mat. 26. and 27.
offering up himself as a Priest and sacrifice to his father for his Church; and
lastly rising and Luke 24. 51.
ascending into heaven to the right hand of God, there to Psalm. 110. 1. with 1
Cor. 15. 24. 25.
reign as king until al his enemies be made his footstool. Now M. Smyth makes
prophecy one with the Priesthood, because he would have these two to be Gods
worship: and the kingdom he speaks of first; and excludes all the actions of
it from Gods worship. Whereas the Gospel is called Mat. 13. 19.
the word of the kingdom; and Christ when he preached (or prophesied) is said
to Luke 4. 43
preach the kingdom of God; and the doctrines which he taught, were the Luk 8.
10
secrets of the kingdom; and the Apostles in their sermons Act. 20. 25. and 28.
23.
preached, expounded and testified the kingdom of God. Wherefore they be deep
waters which M. Sm. has found; that the actions of administering the kingdom
should not be worship: and yet the preaching of the gospel, or prophesying,
shall be worship, and that in the highest degree, properly so called. If he
followed not fansy in these things, rather then sound judgment; let the
prudent judge.

Like vanity he shows in this, that having made the scriptures to be the
matter of our worship now, he makethnot them to be the matter also of Gods
worship in Israel, but beasts, incense, oil, fat, etc. and the form of our
worship to be the spirit, but the form of theirs to appear in honey, leven,
fire and salt. What, had not they the Deuteronomy 31. 9
written word of God, for a ground of their religious actions, as well as we
have the Joh. 20. 31
written word? had not they Nehem. 9 20.
the good spirit of God to instruct them, as we have? had they not Nehem. 9. 3.
4. 5. etc* 1 Samuel* 10. 5. 6.
praying prophesying, singing etc. by the spirit, as we? How is it then, that
this man makes the matter and form of Gods worship in Israel, to consist in
such carnal things? There is a depth of abomination herein, which is the
ground of his anabaptising heresy. For whereas The Apostle magnifieth the Romans
3. 1. 2. 3. and 9, 4, 5. and 11. 1, 17. 18. etc.
Jewish Church, above the Gentiles in many respects: this proud Gentile
disgraceth them extremely, saying Charact. of the beast p. 16.
that their Ministry worship and government was carnal; that faith and
repentance was not required to the matter, that is, the people of that Church,
but only a carnal holiness; with many such like vituperies, which out of his
carnal heart he utters against them.

But for their worship which we have in hand, let him show if he can, what one
thing we have which they had not before us. He makes the parts of our worship
to be three, praying, prophesying, singing; all these they had, and uttered
them by the spirit, as the scriptures every where manifest: and though they had
many carnal rites with these, as sacrifices, incense, etc. yet was not their
worship carnal: for we have also some carnal rites, as washing with water in
baptism, the eating of bread and wine in the Lords supper; have we therefore a
carnal baptism, a carnal supper? if not, neither had they a carnal worship,
though carnal rites were adjoined unto their worship. But as God whom they
worshipped was a spirit, so worshipped they him in spirit, and with faith,
exspecting that promise which God made unto them of salvation by Christ; as
Paul testified of the whole body of that Church; that Act. 26. 7.
the twelve tribes instantly serving (or worshipping) day and night, hoped to
come unto it: showing further, that the gentiles are of the same, or Sussoma
Ephe. 3. 6.
one joint body with them; fellow-heyres, and partakers of the promise in
Christ.

M. S. having showed (as he thought) the matter and form of the Jews worship,
infers upon it thus. Differe^c. page 19
Hence it follows (says he) that the worship that begins in the book or
translation comes not originally from the spirit, but from the letter or
ceremony, and so is not properly of the new Testament, but of the old, 2 Cor.
3. 6.

If this follows, upon the former description of their worship and ours, I
think it comes a great way behind, that few will be able to see it. For, did the
matter of their worship, the beasts, incense, oil, etc. proceed out of the
book? or did the form seen in fire and salt, come from the book, any otherweise
then our praying, preaching, and ministering of the sacraments does or must
do. Did they look on a book when they kindled fire on the altar, or cast salt
on the sacrifice? if not, how follows this halting inference?

That the worship performed in reading the scriptures proceeds originally
from the spirit, even from God, whose spirit is in his word, and who has
commanded it to be read: and that such reading is not the ministry of the
letter spoken of, 2 Cor. 3, 6. shall through Gods grace, anon be proved; in
handling the second point, of the scriptures.

Here next follows to be considered Mr Smythes allegories and opening the
worship of the new testament, by the type in the old.

Their Differ. page, 20, 21
Church, Ministry, worship, government, etc. as he says, were all literal
and ceremonial. Their litterall or typical worship, was performed in two
places, 1. the holy place, 2. or the court. The worship in the holy place,
typed (says he) most properly the worship of the new Testament, which was
typed by the holy place, Rev. 11. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Heb. 8. 2. and 9. 11. 1
Pet. 2. 5. The worship of the tabernacle or holy place, consisted of 3. parts,
1. that which perteyned to the brazen altar, 2. that which was performed at the
golden altar, 3. that which concerned the table of show bread, Exodus 37. and
38. with Exodus 29, 38. and 30. 7. 8. 34 -- 38. Levit. 24. 1. -- 9. At the
brazen altar were offered sacrifices propitiatory and eucharisticall,
signifying, prayer, thanksgiving, prophecy. At the golden altar was perfume,
signifying prayer, thanksgiving, preaching the gospel. Upon the table of show
bread was the candlestik, and 12. loves with incense. The candlestik signified
the Church; shining by doctrine, etc. The show bread, signified the 12. tribes
or Church, present before the Lord, fed with Christ etc.

As the holy place with the altar and Priests, did properly signify (says he)
the Church, Worship, and Saints, Rev. 11. 1, 1 Pet. 2. 5. under the new
testament: so the court without the holy place whither all the people came, and
the typical service performed there, did signify the confused assemblies of
antichristian persecutors, and their ceremonial worship, Rev. 11. 2. which the
spirit in that place caleth gentiles or hethen in these respects.

The parts of typical service performed in the court, were reading and musik,
wherein the Levites were chief agents; though the priests also and any of the
people might read and sing. The scriptures read and tunea musically, are
prophesies, prayers, thanksgivings.

In this discourse God would let the Reader see, how M. Smyth is given over to
blindness of heart, in judging spiritual things: by that blyndnes which is in him
in discerning carnal things, and which are set before al men's eyes.

For, to make the legal shadows serve his fancy, he places the brazen altar
in the holy place or tabernacle with the golden altar, table and candlestik:
whereas the scripture shows it was set in the courtyard of the tabernacle
Exodus 40. 6. 28. 29.
before the door, and that a good distance off, having the Laver ver. 30. 32
between the tabernacle and it, in which the priests did wash when they went
into the tabernacle. And to this place at the door of the tabernacle, did Exodus
29 42. 43. Lev 1, 3. and 8. 3. 4.
the people assemble, and it was Lev. 6. 16 26.
holy. If M. Sm. saw not this in the scripture, yet reason might have taught
him not to make a chimney of the Lords tabernacle covered and hanged with
imbroidered curtayns. The boards of the tabernacle were but Exo. 26. 15. 16.
ten cubits high, (the brazen altar being Exo. 27. 1
three cubits; the and 40. 19.
tent and coverings were spread over them on hie, and a vayl ver. 28.
hanged at the door. Upon the altar was a fire Lev. 6. 12 13.
always kept burning, and here whole sheep and oxen were burned to ashes, many
at once, sometime 2 Chro. 1. 3. 5. 6.
a thousand. Can any reasonable man now think, that this was within the
tabernacle, which was so low and little a place? would the Lord have the
curtayns to be Exodus 26. 1. 29.
embrodered with cherubims, the boards to be covered with gold, that al might
be dight with smoke and swoot; and continually in danger to be set on fire? yet
M. Smyth will needs have it there, because he thought it would fit his turn
well. With like discretion he places the candlestik upon the table, though
Moses plainly tells, that it (being very great, of a Exo. 25. 39.
talent of gold, about 160 pound weight,) was Exo. 40. 22 -- 24.
set on the south side of the tabernacle, and the table with show bread on the
north. But his eye sight failed not so much in the shadow, as his heart was
blinded in the shadowed thing. For he makes the 1 tabernacle, 2 altar, and 3
Priests, to signify the 1 Church, 2 worship, and 3 saints under the new
testament: the 1. court of the tabernacle, he will have to signify the
assemblies of Antichrist; the 2 Israelites there assembling, to signify the
antichristian persecutors: 3 the typical service in the court, as reading the
scriptures, and singing them with musik; to signify the ceremonial worship of
antichristians. For none but antichristians (as he thinks) do read the
scriptures in their worship. Behold unto what great impiety he abuses the
word of God. The body of the Church of Israel, the Exo. 4. 22
son and first born of the Lord, his Ps. 135. 4
chosen and chief treasure, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 7.
precious unto him above al peoples of the earth, on whom he set his love,
Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
riding upon the heavens for their help, and on the clouds in his glory; a
people verse.. 29.
blessed and saved by the Lord, the shield of their help and sword of their
glory: this people he makes to signify the antichristian persecutors, hated
of God, children of the Divil, for whose overthrow and confusion Christ Revel.
19. 11 -- 21.
rides on the heavens in his glory with a garment dipped in blood, and a sword
for to slay them, and fill all the fowls of the aier with their flesh.

The worship and service commanded by God unto his people, and his good word to
instruct them, by which he caled them Lev. 17. 2 4 -- 7.
from the service of Divils: this false prophet makes to signify the service
of antichristian idolaters, which Rev. 9, 20
worship Divils.

Thd Lords Lev. 6. 16.
holy courts, wherein they that dwelt were Ps. 65. 4.
blessed, for which the sowles of the Saints Psalm. 84. 2. 10.
longed and fainted, counting one day there better then a thousand otherwhere:
is now made to signify the Synagogue of Satan, and place where the Divil
dwells.

So then the Israel of God which according to his will worshipped and served him
2 Chro. 29. 27 -- 29
with song and sacrifice; the prophets, priests, Levites, yea Christ himself
and his Apostles, which often went thither to worship God and teach the people;
these al were figures and significatio^s of antichristian persecutors;
excepting the priests only whom M, Smyth of his courtesy, makes figures of
Christians, when they did their service in the holy place. By this
interpretation, when Zachary the priest was Luke 1. 9. 10. etc.
in the temple burning incense, and the whole multitude of the people were
without in prayer, waiting for his coming out to Number. 6. 23. Lev. 9. 22.
bless them: he and his service, signified Christians and their worship of
God; they with their prayers, signified antichristians and their worship of the
Divil. Yea God himself is highly blasphemed by this wretched exposition: for
seeing by types and figures he taught his people how for to serve him, and led
the^ by earthly signs to heavenly things signified; how can it be said or
thought without blasphemy, that the publik worship of the whole congregation
appointed by God himself, did signify hellish things, and antichristian
idolatries?

But what may we think induced M. Sm. to this impiety? Even Satan deceived him
by one place of scripture which he page 21.
cites in his book; viz. Rev. 11. 2. where John was willed in a vision, to
castout the court which is without the temple, and not measure it, for it is
given to the gentiles. Hence does M. Smyth gather that the Israelites which
were wont to worship in the courts of the Lord, did signify the gentiles, that
is the Antichristians, and consequently the court must betoke^ Antichrists
Church, and the worship Antichrists worship. Thus one dark scripture is alleged
to overthrow the clear doctrine that shines throughout all the prophets. Yet
even this place it self might have taught him better. For first the
commandment to Rev. 11. 1.
measure the temple, altar, and worshipers, signified the restoring or
repayring of Gods Church and people, after some destruction and desolation; as
the like visions showed Ezekiel. 40. 3. 5. Zach. 2. 1. 2.
to Ezekiel and Zachary, after the destruction of Solomon's temple, do
manifest. Secondly, whereas the court and the holy city was not mesured here by
John; as before by Ezekiel. 40. 47. and 48. 30. Zach. 2, 2.
the other prophets, they were, and as afterward Rev. 21. 15.
John did see: it may teach us, that as yet there was not a full restoration of
Gods Church and worship, from the defection of Antichrist.

Thirdly in that the court is here said to Rev. 11. 2
be given to the gentiles, and the holy city should be trodden under foot of
them, and a time limited how long, two and forty months: this argues that
the court was not made, nor the city builded for them: but by Gods permission,
for the chastisement of men, was given unto them for a season, during which
time his two witnesses should prophecy against them. And thus it is said of
the figure the first temple and city, Jer. 12. 7.
I have given the dearly beloved of my sowl, into the hands of her enemies. So
al Judah Ier. 20. 4.
was given into the hand of the king of Babel: and Isa. 63. 18
Esaias complayneth how the adversaries had trodden down Gods sanctuary, as
here Rev. 11. 2
they tread down the holy city. And if the court of the temple must needs
signify Antichrists court, because it was given to the gentiles; then must the
holy city, (by which name Neh^m. 11. 1. Isa, 48, 2. and 52 1, Mat. 4. 5.
Jerusalem is often alled): signify also Antichrists city and Church, because
it was trodden down of the same gentiles; but all the Prophets Psalm: 51. 18.
and 87. and 122. Isa: 60, Revel: 21.
show that it signified the Church of God.

Finally, if M. S. would have interpreted scripture by scripture and not by his
own fancy, he might have seen a figure of those gentiles, Rev. 11. set forth
by the Psalmist, Psalm. 79 1.
O God the Gentiles are come into thy inheritance, thine holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem heaps. Where by Gentiles are not meant the
Israelites, but Babylonians or other hethen persecutors: and the very name
Gentiles Rev. 11. whereby Antichristians are called, should have taught him to
look for their type, not in the Church of Israel, but in their adversaries; as
Antichrists Church is called Rev. 17
Babylon, and Christ's Rev. 21
Jerusalem. And as the gentiles of old, exposed Psalm. 79. 2.
the dead bodies of Gods saints, unburied, to the beasts and birds: so these
gentiles Rev. 11. 9
here, having killed the Lords witnesses, would not suffer their carkesses to
be put in graves. But M. Smythes base account of Israel to be but a carnal
people, brought him to this dotage; to make them in their assemblies and
worship, to be figures of Antichristian persecutors. This being thus cleared;
the reader may taste, how unsavory and bitter M. Smythes wormwood is, who to
abolish the reading of Gods word out of his worship and service; would make the
reading of it in the Church of Israel, to signify it should be read in the
Churches of Antichrist, but not of Christ.

Having handled thus the essential causes, of Gods worship, with the types in
Israel; next follow the parts and kinds of the same, which M. Sm. says are 1.
praying, 2. prophesying, 3 and singing psalms. Psalm. 50. 14. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 4.
and 14. 15 -- 17. 26. Iam. 5. 13. Rev. 19. 10.

Worship, properly so called, whereof he would seem to entreat: is not so large
as here he makes it: and if he mean worship in general, it is more large then
these three particulars do express.

Worship strictly taken, for that which in Greek is proskunesis, betokens a
prostrating or supplicating unto God: and is in scripture applied and annexed
unto prayer, Exodus 34. 8. 9. unto thanksgiving, Genesis 24. 26. 27. unto offerings
and sacrifices, (after whichit was performed,) 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. with 2 Chro.
29. 29. unto the bringing of first fruits, with acknowledgement of Gods
goodness, Deuteronomy. 26. 2 -- 10. unto confession praising and blessing of God;
Nehem. 9. 3. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. Job. 1. 20. 21. and sometimes it
is set down absolutely, where these or some of them, are to be understood.
Act. 8. 27. Exodus 4. 31. Wherefore it is truly and properly applied unto all
manner supplication or calling on the name of God. But that it may fitly be
applied unto prophesying, no scriptures that I know of, manifest; neither will
the nature of the action bear it.

Prophesying (to speak properly of it, as is meet in such controversies,) is
one of the extraordinary gifts of God unto his Church by his spirit; as we have
example in Israel, Number. 11. 25. 26. as was foretold by Joel to be at Christ's
coming, Joel 2. 28. 29. and as was fulfilled upon the Apostles and members of
the primitive Churches. Act. 2. 4. -- 17. and 19. 2. -- 6. 1 Cor. 14. Now why
M. Sm. should choose out this one gift, and neglect all others (except singing
a Psalm:) and make it above the rest, properly worship, I cannot tell. If he
use it for that which generally is called the preaching of the word, it is not
fit in this place, where propriety is by himself pleaded for, and should in
deed be used. He might have seen in the same 14. to the Corinthes, fowr ways
of teaching noted by the Apostle, verse. 6. either by revelation, or by
knowledge, or by prophecy, or by doctrine; and examples of these fowr, in the
Christians practice: For Paul spoke of revelations to the Church of Corinth, 2
Cor. 12. 1. 2. etc. and John by revelation, to the Churches in Asia. Rev. 1. 1.
2. 4. 9. 10. etc. and by knowledge the same man spoke to the Church in
general, when he reported that which they had seen, heard, handled and known
to be true; Ioh. 19. 35. 1 Ioh. 1. 1. 3. and Peter does the like; 2. Pet. 1.
17. 18. by prophecy, when by secret instinct of the spirit, they were moved to
speak something which tended to the edifying exhortation and comfort of the
Church, 1. Cor. 14. 3. 29. 30. 31. Act. 19. 6. by doctrine, when they scanned
the scriptures and gathered doctrines, and exhortations from them, Heb. 4. 3.
4. 7. and 7. 1. 2. etc. Romans 4. 3. 4. etc. Luke 4. 17. 18 -- 21.

And this latter is the surest way and safest now for the Church, when by the
scriptures they are taught the will of God: the other extraordinary and
miraculous gifts being ceased. Therefore the Evangelists and ordinary ministers
of churches are not exhorted to prophecy, but to feed, preach, read, teach,
exhort comfort etc. Act. 20, 28. etc. 1 Pet. 5, 1, 2, etc. 1 Timothy 4, 13 -- 16.
2 Timothy: 4, 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1, 9. though prophecy was not to be despised, 1
These. 5, 20. Even as the Priests and Levites in the Law, were not appointed
ordinarily to prophecy but to Deuteronomy. 3^. 10.
teach, which they did by Neh. 8. 7. 8.
reading and expounding the scriptures: and prophecy was Eze. 1. 3. Ier. 1. 1.
2.
extraordinary to them or any other of what tribe so ever. Although therefore
the preaching of the word now among us, may be called prophesying, for the like
use and effects in the church: yet have we not that proper gift or exercise,
any more then of tongues: which we attayn by ordinary labor and stvdie, they
had without study. Act. 2, 4. and 19, 6.

But however M. Sm. takes the word, I deney prophesying to be worship properly
so called: and will consider his reasons, which are two, 1. praying and
prophesying are joined together ( page 19.
says he) as parts of worship, 1 Cor. 11, 4. and men must be uncovered at both
of them. Again, 2. Prophesying and Psalms are coupled together for the same
purpose. 1. Cor. 14. 26.

The first reason is insufficient, for in 1 Cor, 11, 4, praying and prophesying
are joined indeed together, but not as parts of worship properly so caled, that
is of the gloss, not of the text. The thing there spoken of concerns al
ecclesiastical actions: and two differing each from other are named, to imply
all the rest. For Paul speaks of the habit of men and women, which became
them to have in all publik meetings: which was, that women should be veiled,
men unveiled on their heads: and this not only because of the worship of God:
but also 1 Cor. 11. 10.
because of the Angels, which are not to be worshipped; and because of the man,
ver. 7.
whose glory the woman is: yea because of ver. 14. 15.
nature it self, which by giving women long hayr, teaches them thereby, that
their heads should be covered. And by the man verse. 4.
having on (or over) the head, is not meant the having of a hat, cap, or bonnet
upon his head, for that was lawful even in Gods worship, the Priests having
Exodus 28. 40. Ezekiel. 44. 18.
bonnets upon their heads, by Gods appointment; and to this day, the Eastern
countries put not off their bonnets or tucks when they pray or worship. But it
was the having of a covering or veil (called by the Apostle peribolaion and
catacalumma,) which was a sign of verse. 4. 8.
dishonor and subjection, unmeet for men which were principal in the
assembly, and carried Gods verse. 7.
image and glory upon them; but meet for women, which were inferior to men,
both by verse. 9.
creation and otherweise, and therefore were to have verse. 10.
power upon their head, that is, a veil, signifying the power and authority
which men had above them, as in all places, so chiefly in the church assemblies,
where women might 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12.
not speak, for the same cause. And that it was a shame and dishonor for men
to have their heads covered, appears by other scriptures; as Ier. 14. 4. the
ploughmen were ashamed they covered their heads. So David and his men in their
sorrow and affliction 2 Samuel 15 30.
had their heads covered; and Haman Est. 6. 12
in his mourning covered his head; where the Greek has the very phrase ( kata
kephales) which The Apostle 1 Cor. 11. 4.
here uses. And that among the Greeks also, (such as the Corinthians were) the
like custom was for men to cover their heads in dishonor, reproach, and grief;
Plutar. in vita Demosthenis.
humane histories do record. But bonnets or miters on the head, were a sign
Exo. 28. 40. Zach. 3. 5.
of honor: even as with us, the masters wear hats, when servants stand
bareheaded. Whereas therefore the Apostle wills women to be veiled or covered,
it is not only for the worship of God properly so caled, but because of Gods
worship in general, yea because of reverence and submission to men and Angels.
So it follows not, because men must be unveiled at prayer and at prophecy,
therefore these two actions are of one and the same nature: for they might not
be veiled in the Church at al; unless perhaps in extraordinary time of
mourning and sorrow, they covered their heads, as I have showed examples in
Israel.

The other reason from 1 Cor. 14, 26. where prophesying and psalms are coupled
together (as M, Smyth says) for the same purpose; is more weak and less to
the purpose. For prophecy is not named there; but if it had been named, it
would not have proved it worship properly, any more then tongues, revelations,
interpretation, doctrine, which there are named, be parts or kinds of worship.
And if because things are named together we must therefore count them of the
same nature, then 1 Cor. 13. 13.
faith, hope, and love coupled together, and many other things in other
scriptures, must be esteemed the same: which is vanity to affirm. Yea in this
1 Cor, 14
very chapter, Mr. Smyth might have learned the contrary; for it is said v.
24, 25.
if al prophecy, and one that believes not come in, he is rebuked of al etc.
and so he will fall down on his face and worship God, and say plainly that God is
in you indeed. where Paul shows a difference between prophecy and worship, as
in name so in gesture, by faling down, whereas at prophecy they ver. 30.
sat. And if men should kneel or prostrate themselves at the ministry of the
word and sacraments, it were liker idolatry then seemly behavior in the
church: but at worship properly so caled, kneeling, bowing, falling down etc,
are the most fit gestures: so as one is put sometime for another, as when
Matthew says the leper Mat. 8, 2.
worshipped Christ, Luke recording the same says, Luke 5, 12.
he fell on his face and besought him. And how often throughout the scriptures
is bowing and falling down joined with worship? So in Israel, at the ministry
of the word, the people Neh. 8. 5, 6, and 9, 3
stood up; but at the worship of the Lord they bowed down. Moreover worship
being directed unto God himself, (for he that boweth, kneeleth, prays etc.
does these things unto God, as by the Angel it is commanded Rev. 19, 10.
worship God:) and prophecy being directed unto men, (as Paul says 1 Cor. 14
3.
he that prophesyeth speaks unto men;) also the next end of worship, being
the glory of God (Ex. 23, 14 -- 17. with Ioh. 12, 20. Act. 8, 27.) but the next
end of prophecy being the edifying exhortation and comfort 1 Cor. 14 3.
of the church, these things may teach us that prophecy is not worship
properly so caled, that is proskunesis: but only in a general sense, as
latreia or sebasis, even as reading the scriptures (which is for men's edifying,
exhortation and comfort as prophecy is) and al other like ecclesiastical
actions. And this word latreuo, Paul Romans 1, 9.
applies to himself, in his preaching of the gospel; of whom we may learn
what manner of worship prophecy is.

Whereas therefore M. Smyth has accused us of idolatry, for reading the
scriptures in the church (wherein we do but that God commanded, in that
manner and to that end) and the man himself calls and esteems prophecy to
be worship in the proper sense: he is taken in the snare which he set for the
righteous; and if any be idolaters for such things, himself is one and
principal. Or, how ever it be for that, all men may see how he has sought to
abuse us by his aequivocation, and to shroud himself in a conceited fancy.

Yet one thing more I will observe touching the sacraments, which M. Sm.
speaks not of in this place; but elsewhere in that book says thus; Differ. p.
^.
The publishing of the covenant of grace, and the putting to of the seals: is
only one concrete action or part of worship: for the publishing of the
covenant gives being to the seals: otherweise, breaking bread and baptising
are but putting of seals to a blank. Here first I note by the way, how M. S.
acknowledges the Lords supper and baptism to be seals of the covenant of
grace; (as in Page 23.
another place also he calls them;) yet now being put to his shifts for
defense of his anabaptisme, he is driven thus to say, Charact. of the beast
page 26.
I deney that baptism is the seal of the covenant of the new testament. Thus
the windy clowd carries himself to and fro, and rather then he will forgo his
error, he will contradict that which before he had well written; though it may
be also confirmed by the testimony of the holy ghost, who calls cir cumcision
(the figure Col. 2. 11. 12.
of our baptism,) a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4, 11. But, to
the point in hand, if the publishing of the covenant, and the putting to of the
seal as baptising with water; breaking, giving, taking, eating of bread etc. be
one concrete, that is, one joint action or part of worship (as I grant it is,
taking worship generally:) why is not the reading and expounding or preaching
of the word, also one conjoined action and part of worship: especially seeing
they were joined together in Israel, as Nehem. 8. 8. They read in the book of
the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense etc. If the Priests and Levits
then whose office was to Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
teach Iaakob Gods judgments and Israel his law; did thus teach with reading:
and if it be true that The Apostle says, Act. 15. 21.
Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, he being read in
the synagogues every Sabbath: and if Christ himself first Luke 4. 16 17 -- 21.
read the text of scripture and after that preached from it: have we not as
good ground to say that reading and preaching is one joint action and part of
worship, as preaching and baptising? But it was Satan's policy to disgrace the
reading of Gods book, and seek to thrust it quite out of the worship of God;
that men might prophecy (as now they use to speak,) out of their hearts; and
honor that as Gods proper worship; and so the serpents word if it were mixed
with the Lords, might the more easily be unespied, the scriptures being
absent. But God has joined his Isa. 59. 21
word together with his spirit: that his people should not be deceived by such
as Mic. 2. 11 1 King. 22. 24.
walk in the spirit, and ly falsely.

Singing of Psalms. M. Sm. will have to be the third part of worship; because
praying and singing Psalms are put together ( Page 19.
says he) in the same sense, (that is, as parts of worship.) 1 Cor. 14. 15 17.
Iam. 5. 13. Act. 16. 25. And prophesying and psalms are coupled together for
the same purpose. 1 Cor. 14. 26.

Here again M. S. omitteth the needful distinction of Psalms and singing of
them. For some Psalms are written in the Bible, as canonical scripture, given
to the Church for to be read, expounded, and sung: which M. S. himself
grants, even of the translation, saying, Page 17.
It may be read in the Church and sung in tunes. And this singing is with
harmony of voices. An other kind of Psalm there is, which one man utters in
the Church, and others hear him: of which sort the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14.
26. when ye come together, as every one of you has a Psalm, or has doctrine,
or has a tongue, or has a revelation, or has interpretation, let all things
be done to edifying. This kind is far inferior to the other, as being uttered
by men subject to err as well in singing as in teaching, and it is to be tried
by the psalms in scripture, and other authentik books. This was an
extraordinary gift as strange tongues and the like. Yet M. S. loving to handle
things confusedly, that his error might less appear, speaks here of singing
Psalms as of one sort, and nature. Again, that he might make all serve his own
fancy, he describes singing of Psalms to be Page 20.
the showing of our thanksgiving to God, by the manifestation of the spirit,
Philip. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 14, 15 -- 17. Whereas we find in the scripture many Psalms
directly penned for Psalm. 1. and 49. and 78. and 91. etc.
doctrine and instruction to the Church, as othersome are for thanksgiving to
God: yea matter of all sorts, history of things past, prophecy of things to
come, rebuke, threatening, comfort, lamentation, and what not, is mixed in songs
of the scripture, and why such Psalms might not by the spirit be suggested to
Christians in Paul's time, (as well as thanksgivings,) I know not any reason at
all. So that his reasons of prayer and song mentioned together, are
insufficient to prove them both of one nature properly; as before is noted of
prophecy: rather we are to distinguish praying, singing, prophesying, as three
several gifts and works of the spirit: and all of them Gods worship and
service in the Church according to their several kinds and nature. But it
seems strange unto me, that M. Sm. should now both allow of the scriptures to
be sung in tunes in the Church; and also make the singing by gift of the
spirit, a part of Gods proper worship in the new testament; and yet he and his
disciples to use neither of these in their assemblies. If it be an ordinary
part of worship, why perform they it not, but quarrel with us, who accounting
it an extraordinary gift now ceased, do content our selves with joint
harmonious singing of the Psalms of holy scripture, to the instruction and
comfort of our hearts, and praise of our God. Separating our selves (as the holy
Ghost 1 Timothy 6. 4. 5.
wills us) from such as dote about questions and strife of words, whereof
comes envy, contention, and many other evils.

OF THE SCRIPTVRES.
HAving ended the point of worship, with the nature and parts of it: it
remains now to see, how this thing is applied by M. S. against reading of the
scriptures. And first in the general touching all manner writings, he says
that Differen. page 4.
books or writings are in the nature of pictures or images, and therefore in the
nature of ceremonies, and so by conseque^t reading in a book is ceremonial.

If M. Sm. can prove books and images to be both of a nature, and both alike
ceremonies: he may be a Proctour for the Pope, who has brought images into the
Church, for lay men's books. And if the book be to him that reads, of the
nature that an image is to him that gazeth: who would not plead for them both
alike, to be used or rejected? But what if an other would come and say, that
words or speeches are in the nature of trumpets or bells; and therefore in the
nature of ceremonies; and so by consequent as the Number. 10 2.
silver trumpets; and Exodus 28. 33-35.
golden bells in the Law were ceremonies, and ended by Christ: so speaking or
preaching of the word is likeweise ceremonial and men now must* be all taught
by the spirit. Has not this as good a color against the audible voice, as the
other against the visible writing? For as the sound of the voice affects the
ear and understanding of the hearer; so the sight of the letter affects the
eye and understanding of the reader: and as far does a book differ from an
image, in this respect, as a man from a bell. A bell when it sounds in the
ear, yields no distinct articulate voice, for the edifying of the hearer;
but a man when he speaks, is understood of the hearers, and his reanable
voice does edify: so an image when it is looked upon, affoardeth a man no
edification (no not if it were an image sent from heaven, unless it had a Job.
4. 16
voice withal:) but a book when it is read, informs the mind, and feeds
not the eye only, as does a picture. An image and picture has a Ps. 1^5. 5
mouth and speaks not; no spirit or breath of life is in the^: but the book of
God, is 2 Timothy 3. 16.
theopneustos, inspired of God, his spirit and life is in it; it is not a dumb
teacher, but Romans 4. 3. and 9. 17.
speaks and Joh. 5. 39
testifyeth the mind of God; and by that which is there written the spirit Rev.
2. 7. 11. 17. 29.
speaks to the Churches. Wherefore a mayn difference is to be put between
livelesse pictures and Gods lively oracles in his book; and so in all writings.
And if M. S. continue in this mind that a book and an image are both of a
nature, I could with he would set out no more books, but images in their sted:
so should less harm come unto men's souls, then now does by reading his
heretical writings.

But if books and writings be in nature of ceremonies, and reading (as he
says) ceremonial; whereof he gives this reason, for as the beast in the
sacrifices of the old testament was ceremonial, so was the killing of the beast
ceremonial:) how is it, that he said before of reading, that it is a lawful
ecclesiastical action; does not the Prove. 12 19.
lying tongue vary inco^tinently? For shall we have legal ceremonies, (the
Col. 2. 17
shadow of things to come, whose body is in Christ,) to be used as lawful
ecclesiastical actions? may we not then have pictures and images of Exodus 25
cherubims etc. for ecclesiastical use; as we have the holy scriptures, which
by M. S. religion, are in the nature of images and ceremonies. In another page
22.
place he says, As musical instruments and playing upon them was typical,
because it was artificial: so reading of a book was typical also, because it
is meerartificial. So then the playing on the organs, and the reading of the
scriptures are both of a nature, both types and ceremonies, and so abolished.

How near these reasons and grounds do reach to Judaism and Familism, I leave
unto the wise to judge; and future things will show more: for as yet the Jude.
13.
wandering stars have not run al their course.

Of the Original scriptures.
AFter his censure of books in general, to be of the nature of images: M. Sm.
comes to fight against the use of Gods scriptures in his worship; beginning
even with the Originals, the Hebrew and Greek as they were written by the
prophets and Apostles. Wherein he is fallen into a higher degree of error, or of
frawd; then when we had controversy with him: for then See before page 2.
his plea was, no translation (for it is apocrypha) but only the canonical
scriptures are to used in the church in time of Gods worship. Now he will out
with canonical scripture also, for the reading of it, he thinks was a
ceremony ended by Christ: thus see we fulfilled the saying of the Prophet,
Jer. 9. 3.
they proceed from evil to worse. And first to prove them ceremonies, he lays
these grounds.

Difference. page 5.
The holy Originals (says he) signify and represent to our eyes, heave^ly
things: therefore the book of the law is called the similitude of an heavenly
thing. Heb. 9. 19 -- 23. Holy scriptures or writings began with Moses, Exo. 24,
4. and 31. 18. Ioh. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 3, 7. Before Moses, holy men prophesied out
of their hearts, and received and kept the truth of doctrine by tradition from
hand to hand. 2 Pet. 2, 5. Jude ver. 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 31, 24. When Moses had
written the law, he caused it to be put by the ark in the most holy place, as a
witness against the people, Deuteronomy. 31, 26. therefore the Apostle caleth it the
handwriting in ordinances which was contrary to us, which Christ nailed to his
cross. Col. 2, 14, Ephesians. 2, 15. Hence it follows that the holy Originals, the
Hebrew scripture of the old testament, are ceremonies, 2 Cor. 3, 3, 7 Number. 5,
23. 24. and by necessary consequent. The book or tables of stone, typed unto
the Jews their hard heart, void of the true understa^ding of the law. 2 Cor 3,
3. Hebr. 8. 10. Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27. 2 Cor. 3, 14, 15. The ynk wherewith the
letters were written, signified the spirit of God. 2 Cor. 3; 3, Heb. 8, 10.
with Exodus 31, 18. The letters written or characters engraven signifies the
work of the spirit, who alone does write the law in our hearts. by proportion.
also Deuteronomy. 9, 10. with Heb. 8, 10. Reading the words of the law out of the
book, signifies the uttering of the word of God out of the heart, by
proportion. See also 2 Cor. 3. 2. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 12, 7. The writings of the old
testament being ceremonial, are therefore abolished by Christ only so far
forth as they are ceremonial, Col. 2. 14. 20. Gal. 4. 9. The thing signified by
the book, viz the law of God and the new testament remains, 2 Cor. 3. 11. 7.
Heb. 8. 6. 7. 13.

Here first may be observed, how M. Sm. professing to treat of the original
scriptures, in which both old and new testament, both law and gospel are
written unto us: takes one part only, to weet, the law or old testament, and
from it will conclude against the whole body of the scriptures; and this
fallacy he often uses in his writings. But if all he here says were
granted, that the writings of Moses were abolished by Christ: Yet will it not
thereupon follow that the writings of the other Prophets and of the Apostles
also, are typical, ceremonial and abolished. Nay rather the contrary would
follow thus; that as circumcision, and the passover etc. were figurative
shadows ended by Christ, no more to be used; but baptism and the Lords supper
instituted by Christ in sted of the former, are continually to be practiced: so
the writings of the old testament, if they were shadows and ended by Christ,
yet the writings of the new testament, given insted of the other, are never to
be abolished.

Secondly, let it be considered what M. Sm. has here left unto us, not
ceremonial and unabolished; the thing signified (says he) by the book, viz,
the law of God and the new testament: but where is this to be had? not in
letters written with ynk, on paper, or parchme^t, for all these he says are
ceremonial and so abolished; but written in men's hearts as in books, with the
spirit as with inck, and so to be uttered by men, out of their hearts. If Satan
can but persuade this point, he will bring out of men's hearts, as out of the
bottomless pit, a smoke of heresies, insted of the fyrie law of God, and who
shall control him. For men's hearts now, are the same which Gods book was of old;
and as Israel fetched their laws, doctrines, worship, and services from the
scriptures written with inck: so Christians now must fetch their laws,
doctrines, worship. etc. from the hearts of men, as from the tables of the law,
and what is from thence uttered, is to be counted, as written with inck of
Gods spirit. For the hevenly things themselves are as much yea more to be
honored, esteemed, credited; then the book which was but a type and similitude
of heavenly things. H. N. the enemy of Gods scriptures, can show no stronger
ground for his familisme, wherein he reprocheth scripture learning: then this
which is here laid by M. Smyth.

But the scriptures and reasons which he has brought, be far from proving so
deadly an error. For the book of God as always, so still, signifies and
represents to our eyes heavenly things; (although As that mentioned Heb. 9.
19.
some figurative extraordinary use thereof be abolished:) for it signifies and
teaches unto us the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. And as the book of the
law was a witness Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
against Israel, when they verse. 27.
walked rebelliously and with a stiff neck: so is it a witness to this day
Ioh. 12. 48.
against all Christians that walk in like sort. But such in Israel as had the
word Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
near unto them in their mouth and in their heart for to do it; the book of the
Law was a witness for them; a Psalm. 19. 7 8.
sure testimony giving wisdom to the simple, a perfect law, converting the
sowl; and the statutes of the Lord therein, were right unto them, and rejoiced
the heart, the commandment of the Lord was pure and gave light unto the eyes:
even so to all faithful Christians now, the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles is a 2 Pet. 1. 19.
sure word, to which they do well to take heed, as to a light shining in a dark
place; by it they Ioh. 20. 31.
believe, and so come to life; and by it 1 Ioh. 1. 4
their joy is made full.

Again M. Sm. erroneously substituteth one extraordinary use of some part of
the scripture, for the ordinary uses of the whole. Moses wrote in a book the
old testament or covenant of works, (summed up in Exodus 20. 21. 22. and 23.
chapters:) which book was read in the peoples ears, and sprinkled with blood,
as the people also was; for a sanction or confirmation of the Testament: in
which action there was an extraordinary and figurative use of the book for that
time, which now is abolished by Christ's blood which has confirmed the new
testament, and abrogated the old. The holy histories, prophesies, psalms,
parables etc. were never thus sprinkled with blood; but only that book wherein
the conditions of the covenant were written. Wherefore there were besides this,
other ordinary permanent and perpetual uses of the scriptures, by Deuteronomy, 19.
19. Psalm. 1. 2. Pro. 1. 1 2.
reading them privately and publikly, for the teaching exhorting comforting
reproving of the people, according to their daily need and occasion, that every
child of God might have knowledge Pro. 22. 20, 21.
of the certainty of the word of truth, for to answer words of truth to them
that sent unto him; as Solomon says. And therefore as at the publik solemn
assembly of al Israel in the sabbath year, the law was Deuteronomy. 31. 10 -- 13.
Act. 13 15. and 15. 21.
read unto them al, that they might learn, and fear God, and keep al his
words, they and their children: so at their particular assemblies in their
synagogues throughout every city, both Moses and the Prophets that wrote after
him, were read every Sabbath day: and this from old time, even unto Christ's
days on earth, who himself Luke 4. 16. 17.
in his own person and action allowed and sanctified this holy custom; and
commended by his Apostles 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 19
all the scriptures fore written, unto his disciples; and gave them also other
scriptures, for like end and use; and warned them that no man should 1 Cor. 4.
6.
presume above that which is written. Wherefore it is a deceit of Satan for
man's ruin, to seek to make the scriptures generally and wholly ceremonial and
abolished; because of that extraordinary use of them at the sanction of the
law, at mount Sinai. But the counsel of God unto his people is, Jsa. 34. 16.
seek in the book of the Lord, and read; and Joh. 5, 39,
search the scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life.

As for the law of God to be written in men's hearts by the spirit, this takes
not away the use of the law written in books with ynk; for in Israel when the
bible was read every Sabbath, David had the law of God within Psalm. 40. 8, 9.
his bowels, whereby he declared righteousness in the great congregation; and as
he, so every other righteous man's mouth, spoke of wisdom, and his tongue talked
of judgment, Psalm. 37. 30. 31.
the law of his God being in his heart, as Moses Deu. 6. 6
commanded: yet ceased not the reading of the law out of the book. So at this
day, true Christians in wose hearts Gods law is written, are not (no though they
be 1 Timothy 4. 13. 2 Timothy 3, 15 -- 17. and 4. 13.
ministers extraordinarily furnished with grace) to leave the reading of the
law written in books any more then they did in Israel; and Christ's Apostles
have written the word even 2 Ioh. 11 3 John 13. with 1 Ioh. 1, 3, 4. and 2 12.
etc.
with paper and ynk, as they spoke it with voice; to meet with their dotage
that dream ynk and paper to be merely ceremonial. As for all hypocrites, they
are now as heretofore stony hearted, and the outward letter written with ynk,
resembles their hypocrisy.

But whereas M, S. having cited Deuteronomy. 31. 26. infers, therefore the Apostle
caleth it the handwriting in ordinances which was contrary to us, which Christ
nailed to his cross Col. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2, 15. he mismatcheth the places: for
Paul speaks of Col. 2. 8.
worldly rudiments, the outward services of the Law, (which elsewhere he caleth
also Gal. 4, 3. 9.
beggarly rudiments) such as was Col. 2. 11. Gal. 5, 2, 3.
circumcisio; the observing Col. 2. 16. Gal. 4. 10.
of days and months etc. which ordinances were as an handwriting or
obligation against the Jews, witnessing that they were debtors unto God,
sinners, miserable, and under the curse: unless they saw and learned Christ in
them: by whom the obligation is cancelled, and curse done away. For by
circumcising themselves, they acknowledged (as by a bil of their hand) that
they were born in syn, and impure by nature: even as we by baptising our
selves, do the like. By offering sacrifices for syns, they acknowledged
themselves actual transgressors of the law, and the killing of beasts, argued
themselves were worthy of death. Now it was not possible Heb. 10. 4.
for the blood of bulls and goats to take away synns, and the law Psalm. 40. 6.
7.
taught them so much: therefore it was a Gal. 3, 24
schoolmaster to lead them to Christ, that they might be made righteous by
faith. This handwriting which stood thus in decrees against the Jews, and
which rose up as an adversary and contrary unto them: Christ blotted or
wiped out by his death on the cross, where he spoiled also the Col. 2. 15.
principalities and powers, the Divils which were ready to plead against
Israel, and urge this ha^dvvriting, these ordinances which they practiced,
against them; if they used them not with faith in Christ, but with
expectation of justice by works of the law. Now this word handwriting
figuratively used and applied to the legal ordinances, M. Smyth takes
properly, for the written law and prophets: as if Christ had blotted out them:
and taken them from his Church, even as he took circumcision, altars,
sacrifices, etc. which how far it is from truth, I leave unto every conscience
(...) judge. But were it as he thinks, the writtten word of God, yet must it
then be limited, so far forth only as men do abuse it, and learn not Christ
by it; for to such only it is a handwriting, contrary to them: and so is at
this day. But this is not the proper use or end of the law or scripture in it
self, for it preaches to men the Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 11 -- 14. with Romans 10. 4. 5 --
8.
word of faith, and righteousness thereby in Christ, as well as righteousness by
works of the law: and the gospel has Ro^. 3. 21.
witness of the law and prophets, and they Ioh, 5, 39
testify of Christ, and are a 2 Pet. 1. 19
sure word unto Christians. Wherefore it were woe with us, if these were
blotted out, and taken away as ceremonies and shadows abolished: the reading
whereof both publik and private, is a continual light and comfort to our
hearts, and confirmation of our holy faith. And to substitute men's hearts (which
are, by testimony of the prophet, Ier. 17. 9.
deceitful and wicked above al things,) in sted of the holy bible, whose
words Ps. 19. 7. 8. 9.
are al true and faithful: is a miserable exchang; for either men must be as
were the prophets, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
moved and carried by the holy ghost; and so all their words taken for heavenly
oracles: or else we shall be fed with chafe in sted of wheat, and drink
deadly poison in sted of wholesome liquor.

The serpent is subtle Gen, 3, 1.
more then any beast of the field: he savv this ground of making the scriptures
of God, ceremonies, and abolished by Christ, would be distasted of many, yea
of any that fears God: therefore he labors to svveeten this vvormvvood,
with an after receipt: which yet is so tempered, as it may serve to help
forward his purpose, in taking the book of God out of the church.

M. Smyth in the Differen. page 6.
next place grants, that the holy scriptures are the fountain of al truth:
the ground and foundation of our faith: that by them al doctrines, and every
spirit is to be judged: that they are to be read in the church and to be
interpreted: nevertheless, not retained as helps before the eye, in time of
spiritual worship.

There is no such battle, as when a man is at war with himself: and it is a
special judgment where with God smites his enemies. Would any man think that
such bitter and sweet waters could come out of one fountain, as have flowed
here? Stands this either with religion or with reason; that that which as an
adversary, is blotted out, nailed to Christ's cross, and abolished as being
ceremonial and a worldly rudiment; should yet be the fountain of all truth,
the ground of faith, etc. If these will stand together, what will not? Then also
may circumcision, altars, sacrifices, and other Jewish services, although they
were shadows and abolished by Christ; yet be retained and used of Christians,
with a little qualification, and distinction of worship properly so called: and
this will like the Jews very well. But we that have learned Christ, cannot
brook such contrary potions. For if the book, writing and reading of it be
Jewish shadows ended and abolished by Christ; and the heart and speaking out of
it, be the shadowed thing, the heavenly truth, figured by, and substituted for
the other: we would keep the substance, and leave the ceremony for such as
follow shadows. But if the book of God, the written scriptures, be the
fountain of all truth, and foundation of our faith; as it is in deed, and we
so esteem it: then can we not but detest, that former plot, as a groundwork of
Satan, that hung up the scriptures as our enemy upon the cross, so blotting
them out as a cancelled bond, and abolishing them for ever.

Wherefore the reading and expounding of the scriptures, continues, now as of
old in Israel, where the law and prophets were read in the synagogues every
sabbath, for to teach and inform Gods people in his vvayes: so read we them
still for like end and use, and shall by Gods grace (maugre Satan's slights) so
do unto the end. And as for the snare, the distinction I mean, of spiritual
worship properly so called. Which was set to take the simple: it is broken
page 5. etc.
before; and the adversary himself, if any man be, is caught with the same.

Yet cease he not, but proceeds with reasons, Differen. page 6.
that the original scriptures are not given as helps before the ey in
worship. But the foundations being already overthrovvn; we shall with less
difficulty and more brevitie, discover and do away the errors. His reasons are.

Because Christ used the book to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. and 1.
Reason.
having by the use of the book fulfilled the law of reading, he shut the book
in the synagogue, to signify that the ceremony of book worship, or the
Ministry of the letter, was now expired and finished. Luke 4. 20. Ioh. 19.
30.

First here is the law of reading brought to an end, according to Answer.
that first ground of ceremonies; and contrary to the second grant that the
scriptures are to be read in the Church and to be interpreted: which reading
and interpreting if it be not Gods worship and service, it is the worship of
the Divil. Thus M. Sm. wavereth as a reed shaken with the wind.

Secondly, in the other side of the leaf, Differ^n. page 7.
M. Sm, forgetting himself as a drunken man, says, all the worship that was
appointed by Moses for the Priests, was limited to the holy place, whether the
people were not admitted; and therefore reading was of an other nature
performed in the utter court or synagogue or elsewhere, either by the Levites
or any other learned men; (quoting again Luke 4. 16.) and so no part of
worship properly so called, but only a ceremonial ground or foundation, of
inward or outward spiritual worship, common to the Churches of all ages.

If this be so, how ended Christ the ceremony of book-worship, where none was
to end? If there were no proper worship in the synagogues but exercises of an
other nature; then Christ reading in the synagogue, read not worship; and
shutting the book there, shut not up book worship, nor caused it to exspire;
and so M. Sm. has lost his dream.

Again, if Christ by shutting the book there, signified an end of reading; and
the reading that there was, (as M. S. even now said,) was such as is common to
the Churches of all ages: then Christ has ended all manner reading whatsoever
in the Church, even that which is common to all ages; or else the allegory
will turn to a fancy; and so all reading must be abolished out of the Church;
and that would the Divil feign bring to pass.

But the reason of ending reading, is slight; that because Christ shut the book
and gave it to the Minister, therefore he ended the work of reading. He used not
to do such weighty matters, by dumb signs, without Joh. 13. 12. 13. etc.
word of signification. And if the closing of the book were such a mystery:
what was the taking and opening of the book, nothing? proportion will carry it
to be the beginning, as well as shutting should be the end. But they be vain
speculations, to gather from mute actions, an otherthrow of moral laws,
permanent and needful for the the Church in all ages. Neither was this the
first or the last time of Christ's reading thus; for as his custom was (says
Luk 4. 16
the scripture) he went into the synagogue and stood up to read: neither was it
a decent thing, that he having received the book shut, should redeliver it
open; their books being long rolls or volumes, not bound up like ours. Finally
this argument against reading, has like weight of truth, as the Papists have
for their vanities, who Sanders Rock Pref.
allege for prayer in a strange tongue, that Christ prayed Eli Eli lama
sabachthani, which the people that heard him, understood not: and ibide^ chapter 9.
that he preached out of S. Peter's bote, to signify how in S. Peter's chair,
his doctrine should always be steadfastly professed. Such trifles must be
brought where sound proofs are wanting.

2. Because reading words out of a book, is the ministration of the letter. 2
Reason.
2 Cor. 3. 6. namely a part of the Ministry of the old testament which is
abolished, Heb. 8. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 11. 13. and the ministry of the new
testament, is the ministry of the spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 6.

This scripture of the 2. Cor. 3. M. Sm. often allegeth for his Answer.
purpose; page 1. and 7. and 13. and 19. and 20. he thought belike it would
sound well in simple folks ears, that the reading of scriptures should be the
ministry of the letter. But the ignorance and evil of the allegation is
great; and fitted for Satan's policy, to draw men from reading the book of God.
For if reading be the Ministration of the Letter there spoken of; then is it
the ministration of death and damnation, as the Apostle there calls it, verse.
7. 9. and then the Papists have done best of al, forbidding the people to read
the scriptures, least they should gather out of them errors, and so death and
damnation. And who can comfortably read the scriptures, if that be the
ministry of the letter, and so death? But out upon such a slanderous
interpretation; it is far from the Apostles meaning. He calls the Law the
letter, figuratively, because it was written with letters, and graved on
stones: he intends not the books of the Prophets, wherein both law and gospel
was written, and always to be read for instruction, comfort and salvation to
the people. The law was first spoken, and afterward written by Moses: the
gospel of Christ was also first spoken, and afterward written by his
Apostles. If vvriting and reading made the other the letter, then makes it
this the letter also; and so the word of life, shall be the ministration of
death. The law if it had never been written, but only spoken, yet had it
been the ministration of death: for all Israel hearing it, Exodus 20. 18. 19.
were afraid, and death seized upon their consciences: and this by hearing
Gods lively voice from heaven, not by hearing the stony tables read, for it is
not manifest that ever they were read unto them, but only put and kept in the
ark for a testimony. Deuteronomy. 10. 1 -- 5. and when the 10. commandments were read
Ex. 24. 7.
out of the book, there was no such fear: and the glory of Moses face
terrified the people when he Exodus 34. 30. 31. etc.
spoke and talked with them, for which he put a veil upon him: but of reading
out of a book at that time (whereto the Apostle here has reference,) there is
not a word. So it was not reading only but speaking also without book, which
was the ministration of the letter to the Jews; and as Paul here calls the
law the letter, so elsewhere he calls it, Heb. 12. 19. 20.
the voice of words.

It is not therefore the writing, but the thing written which he intends. And
if M. Sm. should fall to the heresy of justification by the works of the law,
and teach this in prophecy out of his heart, though he never read line in the
holy Bible, yet should he be a minister of the letter and of damnation to his
disciples.

Of this letter Paul says, 2 Cor. 3. 7
it is the ministration of death: but of the scriptures Christ says Ioh. 5. 39
search them, for in them ye think to have eternal life. Of this letter Paul
says, it is verse. 9.
the ministry of comdemnation; but of the holy letters in Gods book, he
says, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
they are able to make one wise unto salvation through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

The law is called the letter (not letters as the 2 Timothy 3. 15.
scripture is called) by a similitude: for a letter is an outward visible thing
appearing to the eye of an other that looks on; whereas the thing whereon it
is written, whither paper or stone, is not moved or changed thereby. Such is the
doctrine of the law to the professor of it. It makes him seem a fair
hypocrite before men: they look and see the commandments of God written on his
forehead, on the fringes of his garments, and on his door posts: but his heart
and mind are stony still. For the law renueth no man, but syn that is in us,
Romans 7, 8.
takes occasion by the law, and works in us al manner transgression of the
law, and so death. But the Gospel is the spirit that renueth and quickneth by
faith in Christ: and changes Eze. 36. 26, 27. Heb. 8. 10.
the stony heart into flesh, and writes there the laws of the most high. Thus
by the letter is not meant the holy scriptures, which are Gods instrument for
our renovation: but the external work of the law upon a man: in which sense
Paul also mentions circumcision in the letter Romans 2. 29. meaning outward
circumcision of the flesh to be seen and read of men: where to take it as this
man does 2 Cor. 3. of reading the scriptures, were to follow the Ps. 52. 4.
devouring words of the deceitful tongue.

3. Because upon the day of pentecost and many years after the churches 3.
Reason.
of the new testament did use no books in time of spiritual worship, but
prayed, prophesied and sang psalms merely out of their hearts Act. 2, 4. 42.
and 10. 44. 48. and 19, 6. 1 Cor. 14, 15, 17, 26, 37.

4. Because no example of the scripture can be showed of any man ordinary 4.
Reason.
or extraordinary, that at or after the day of pentecost used a book, in
praying, prophesying, and singing psalms: if yea, let it be don and we yield.

Nay, it is not in men's power to yield to the truth though Answer.
it be showed them: or though their own writings convince them: it is in Romans
9, 16
God that shows mercy.

First M. Smyth holds that such reading as was in the Jews synagogues
Diff. p. 7.
was common to the churches of all ages. Secondly he says page 6.
the scriptures are to be read in the church, and to be interpreted, Col. 4.
16. compared with Luke 24, 27, and 1 Cor: 14, 27. and 12. 10 by proportion. 2
Pet. 3. 16. If these assertions and these places alleged, (let the reader look
and examine them) prove that the scriptures are to be read in churches; as in
deed some of them do: we need fight no longer: the enemy unawares has
yielded the field.

His flourish that he makes, how the churches of the new testament used no
books, because no example can be showed: is a deceitful argument. For when
there is a ground from God to do the thing: we are to suppose men did it,
although it be not expressly Ioh. 21. 25.
written. And this adversary grants the scriptures were to be read; and we
are sure that the churches were to be taught by the men of God: and Paul says
that all the scripture 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness:
that the man of God, that is the 1 Timothy 6. 11.
minister of the new testament as well as of the old, may be absolute, and made
perfect unto al good works. Wherefore as the Priests and Levits which were to
Deuteronomy. 33 10.
teach Israel, taught them by Neh. 8. 8. Act. 15. 21 2 Chronicles. 17 9.
reading and expounding the scriptures; so doubtless did the ministers in the
Apostles days, upon the same ground and proportion; though their particular
form of administration be not expressed.

That cavil of spiritual worship which as a leprosy overspreadeth al M. Smyths
book, is before taken away. Praying never was by reading out of a book;
prophesying and singing psalms, being extraordinary gifts of the spirit, were
also uttered by the spirit, without a book. All this notwithstanding, the
scriptures were read and expounded to the people, and so must be still; and this
though it be not proskunesis adoration supplication or worshipping of God, in
the strict sense; yet is it latreia his worship or service in general.

5 Because none of the books of the new Testament were written many 5. Reason.
years after the day of penticost, at the least 7. years: and the Churches all that time, could not use the books of the new Testament which they had not.

But they could use the books of the prophets, which they had: Answer.
wherein both old and new Testament were contained. And Peter commended the
Churches for 2 Pet. 1. 19.
taking heed unto them, as to a light that shined in a dark place.

6. Because the Churches of the Greeks had no books to use, that they might 6.
Reason.
use lawfully; for they understood not hebrew, and the septuagints translation
ought not to be used or made; and the Apostles made no Greek translation. etc.

If they had no books to use, they were blameless if they used Answer.
none. But they had the Greek translation, which was lawful to be made and used
in the Jews synagogues; as anon shall be showed, when the Septuagints work
comes to be scanned.

7 Because as in prayer, the spirit only is our help; and there is no outward
7. Reason.
help given of God, for that kind of worship; so also in prophesying and
singing 1. Cor. 11. 4. and 14. 16.

God never gave books to read for prayers unto him: but Psalm. 10. 17.
pre, Answ.
pared men's hearts and bended his ear. And as every man 1 King. 8. 38. 39.
knew the plague, (and consequently the benefit) in his own heart, so was he to
pray and supplicate unto God, who heard in heaven, and was merciful, and did,
as he knew every man's ways and heart. But as in praying men speak their minds
to God: so in preaching God speaks his mind to us; and this he does by his
scriptures and by gifts unto men for teaching and applying them ordinarily to
his Church. Prophesying and singing, has often been performed by the spirit
without book, Number. 11 25. 26. 1 Samuel 10. 5. 6.
both in the old Testament and in the new 1 Cor. 14. Act. 19. 6
. If any now have such gifts, it were folly to say they must read them out of a
book. Reading the scriptures is for ordinary teaching; which by extraordinary
gifts, was never destroyed; and things coordinate, are not contraries.

8 Because it is against the nature of spiritual worship: for when we read, 8.
Reason.
we receive matter from the book into the heart: when we pray, prophesy, or
sing, we utter matter out of the heart, unto the ear of the Church Ezekiel, 2. 8.
-- 19 and 3. 1. -- 4. Rev. 10. 8. -- 11.

If Ezekiel a Priest under the law, prophesyed without a book; Answer.
and yet reading the book of the law and expounding it, was their ordinary
service every sabbath, as before is manifested: all men may see, that these two
may stand together in Gods worship, and not one throw out an other, as M. Sm.
would have it.

Neither is it against the nature of spiritual worship, to read Gods book in
the ears of the Church: for if it be worship in them to hear the spirit speak
out of the Ministers heart; it is worship also in them to hear the spirit speak,
out of the holy book. And it cannot be deneyed but Gods spirit Rev. 2. 1. 7.
speaks there; and that which comes out of the heart of man, must be tried
by that book; and accordingly, accepted or refused. As for the Minister himself
when he reads out of Gods book, and when he speaks by gift of the spirit
the meaning of the scripture, to the people; he serves God in them both:
having Christ himself for an example. Luke 4. 17. -- 21.

9. Because upon the day of Pentecost, fyerie cloven tongues did appear, not 9.
Reason.
fyerie cloven books. Act. 2. 3. and always there must be a proportion betwixt
the type and the thing typed. Upon the day of Pentecost the fyerie law was
given in books, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. Exodus 24. 4. 12. upon the day of Pentecost the
fyerie gospel was given in tongues, Act. 2. 3. Mat 3. 11. Act. 1. 5. the book
therefore was proper for them, the tongue for us.

In deed if any fyerie books had appeared at the giving of the law, Answer.
M. Smyths allegory would have had some light: but when as no such thing was
seen, but only Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
a voice of words was heard, as Moses tells us; we should beware of such
clowdy collections.

The fyerie law mentioned Deuteronomy. 33. 2. has plain reference to Gods
promulgating of the law, by voice out of the midds of fire, Exodus 19. 18. 19.
and 20. 1 -- 18. Deuteronomy. 4. 11. 12. Afterward those and other laws were written
by Moses in a book, Exodus 24. 4 and God himself vvrote the ten words on tables
of stone: not then at Pentecost, but 40. days after, Deuteronomy. 9. 9. 10. Even so
the fyery doctrine of the gospel was first uttered by voice, and afterward
written in books, Luk 1. 1. 3. Act. 1. 1. etc. Ioh. 20. 30. 31. The book then
was not proper to them, (as M. S. feighneth,) but common also with us. God by
Moses Exodus 24. 3. 4.
first spoke, then wrote to his Church: Christ by his Apostles, first spoke,
then wrote also, to the same Church: and though the Mark. 3. 17.
son of thonder wanted no gift of utterance by voice, yet Christ Rev. 1. 19.
and 2. 1.
bad him write: when if he had pleased he could have sent him to speak. And
Rev. 1. 3.
blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of that prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein: but cursed is he that
despises reading of the Lords book, and dissvvadeth the Church from that use
thereof; by colorable reasons causing the Deuteronomy. 27. 18.
blind to go out of the way: and all people should say, Amen.

10. Because as all the worship which Moses taught began in the letter
outwardly, 10. Reason.
and so proceeded inwardly to the spirit of the faithful: so contraryweise all
the worship of the N. Testament signified by that typical worship of Moses,
must begin at the spirit, and not at the letter originally. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8. 1
Cor. 12. 7. or else the heavenly thing is not answerable to the similitude
thereof.

The true and proper worship which Moses taught Israel was the Answ.
worship of God in spirit and truth, Deuteronomy. 5. 7. 8. and 6. 4. 5. 6. though he
led them hereunto, under veiles and shadows, and by the covenant of works
brought them to Christ, who does both that covenant and shadows away as the
wise did understand; Psalm. 32. 1. 2. with Romans 4. 4. 5. 6. 7. Psalm. 40. 6. and
51. 6. -- 16. etc. with Heb. 10. 8. 9. Their spiritual worship, proceeded
from the spirit and heart unto God, 1 King. 8. 22. 23. 33. 35. 38. etc. Ezra, 9.
5. 6. etc. Nehem. 9. 5. 6. etc.

Of the legal worship, and M. Smythes inept allegorizing thereof, is spoken page
12.
before; also his abuse of that scripture, 2 Cor. 3. 6. is already page 33.
manifested; with his aequivocation about this word worship: that the reader
may be vvearied, to have the same things often repeated. Only now the falsehood
and snare of these reasons against reading Gods word, being discovered: let
him learn to bevvare of Satan's deceit. For the mouth of an heretik is a deep
pit, like the Pro. 22. 14.
strange vvomans: he with whom the Lord is angry shall fall therein.

After this M. Sm. feighneth 4. objections for bookworship, as he terms it;
and then frames answers as he sees good; but ever and anon retyring to his
old skonce of spiritual worship, thinking thereby to ward off all blows.
Though it be a vvearynes to follovv such an empty clovvd; yet for help to the
vveak, I vvil briefly show his vanity.

Reading in the old testament was commanded by Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 9-13. 1.
Objection.
was amplified by David, 1 Chronicles. 16. and 25. was practiced by Josiah 2 Chro^.
34. 30. by Ezra and Nehemiah, Neh. 8. 8. and 9. 3. allowed by our Savior
Christ, Luke 4. 16. and by the Apostles, Act. 13. 14. 15. and reported as a
thing of ancient approved continuance. Act. 15. 21.

To this hs answers; First, the reading commanded by Moses Answ.
was only once every 7. year, Deuteronomy. 31. 10. 11. and therefore it was no part
of ordinary worship, and there is no commandment in Moses, given either to the
Priests or Levites, for ordinary reading of the law in the tabernacle.
Secondly, hence it follows, that reading in the old testament, was no part of
the worship of the tabernacle or temple, or of the service performed by the
priests therein, etc. Thirdly, therefore reading was of another nature performed
in the utter court or synagogue or elsewhere, either by the Levites or any other
learned men of what tribe soever: Math. 23. 2. Luke 4. 16. Act. 13. 14. and 15,
21. Deuteronomy. 31. 9.-11. 1 Chronicles. 16. 4. 7. 37. 39. and 15. 1. 8. and 28. 13. 2 Chronicles. 34. 14. 30. 31. Neh. 8. and 9. and so no part of worship properly so
called, but only a ceremonial ground or foundation of inward or outward
spiritual worship common to the Churches of all ages. Lastly it is not deneyed
but that reading now is to be used in the Church: only we say it is not a part
of spiritual worship, or a lawful means in time of spiritual worship.

M. Smyth cannot see any commandment in Moses for ordinary reading Reply.
of the law in the tabernacle: and no marvel, for neither could all the
Sadducees see any doctrine in Moses that taught the resurrection of the dead;
but Christ could Mat. 22. 31. 32.
find it by necessary consequence: Moses commanded Levit. 23. 34. 36.
the feast of boothes to be kept seven days to ^he Lord, mentioning but holy
convocations and sacrifices: M. Sm. (I dare say) will not gather reading, out
of this commandment. But Ezra the Priest and all Israel with him, saw it here
employed and practiced it, Nehe. 8. 14. -- 18.
by reading the book of the law of God, every day, from the first day unto the
last: when they kept this feast. If every seventh day was to be sanctified in
Israel, and all things be sanctified by the word and prayer; and in the
synagogues they sanctified the Sabbathes by Act. 13. and 15.
reading the scriptures: reason might teach us, that the tabernacle was not
behind the synagogues in holiness. And where finds M. Sm. a commandment to
read the law in the synagogues? yet was it commanded, or else it was will
worship and vanity. The ordinance for Levi to Deuteronomy. 33 10.
teach Israel Gods law; was commandment enough both to read and preach it, as
they did daily: and they were not so dull or carnal, but they could well perceive
this to belong to their charge and ministry.

But here M. Sm. says, that the reading in Israel was no part of worship
properly so called: forgetting himself (it seems) when elsewhere he says,
that the page 19.
worship that begins in the book, is from the letter or ceremony and so is
not properly of the new testament but of the old; and again that, page 20.
book-worship is Iudaisme and so Antichristian; and idolatry now under the New
testament; and again, that page 6.
Christ shut the book in the synagogue to signify that that ceremony of
bookworship, or Ministry of the letter was now exspired. Thus fights he
against himself; one while they had book worship; an other while it was no part
of worship; and if properly so called help not here at a need, M. Sm. will be
found a calumniator both of us, and of Israel, and of Christ himself. For he
would have his reader think that we whom he opposes, made arguments for
bookworship, which here he answers, whereas we never spoke or thought of
reading to be worship in such a sense, as he would draw it unto, nor
othervveise worship then reading was in the synagogues, by Christ himself,
neither was there controversy about worship at all, but only whether it were
Gods word or man's, that we read in the Church, in the worship of God. But now
to cloak his blasphemous error, he has dived into his wit, to bring out a
distinction of properly so called: so cogging the reader with the Ephesians. 4. 14
die of deceit, and calumniating us. And has he not also injuried Israel in
charging them with book worship, and belyed Christ himself, that he should use
and finish a ceremony of book worship? when yet here he grants it was of
another nature, it was no part of worship properly so called: it was that
which is common to the Churches of all ages.

As one tossed in the sea of error, so reedeth this adversary to and fro, and
staggereth like a drunken man.

The second objection he forgeth thus. Reading is commanded in the new
testament, Col. 7. 16. 1 These. 5. 27. and 2. Object.
a blessing promised thereto, Rev. 1^5. and the commandment is that it be
practiced in the church: therefore it is a part or means of the worship of the
new testament.

The sum of his answer hereunto is.

Not every thing performed in the Church, is a part of spiritual worship:
Answer.
for all the parts of publik administration of the kingdom ar done in the
Church, and yet cannot be said to be parts of spiritual worship properly so
caled chap. 1, and 2.

Properly so called, is a common vizar of deceit, pulled off before Reply.
as here it shall be again. For M. Smyth divided the whole leiturgie of the
church, into actions of the kingdom and of the Preisthood of the saints. chap.
1. and 2. The actions of administering the preisthood, he made to be actions of
concord and union: and of these generally he says, they be actions of
spiritual worship properly so called. The actions of administering the kingdom,
he made to be actions of opposition, difference plea and strife: and of them
generally he says, they are not actions of spiritual worship properly so
caled. Now here and often he deneyeth reading of the scriptures to be such
spiritual worship, therefore it is no action of the preisthood; therefore no
action of concord or union. So when the Priests and Levites read the law in the
synagogues, and at their Nehe^. 8. 13 -- 18.
solemn feasts; we may not say, they did any action of the preisthood; and when
Christ read the prophet Esaias, Luke 4. we may not say he did an action of
concord or union; and when Col. 4. 16.
Paul would have his Epistle read in the churches of Colosse and Laodicea; and
Christ would have the Rev. 1. 3.
Revelation read of al, we must not understand them to mean reading as an
action of concord or union in the church; for then it must be an action of the
preisthood, and consequently worship properly so called: which M. Sm. will by no
means admit of: for he has limited their bounds: and if any read the
scriptures in the church as an action of concord and union, he will draw it as
by the hair of the head, along these grounds, to be Diff. p. 20.
antichristian and idolatrous; so sets he his Psa. 73. 9.
mouth against heaven. Yet reading he grants, but it must be of an other
nature: and what is that trow we? He is loath to speak: of the preisthood it is
no part; and in handling page 1.
the actions of the kingdom, he specifieth it not; only there he says, that
books of al sorts may be produced for finding out of the truth: and he quoteth
among other Act. 7. 22. and 17. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 33, Tit. 1. 12. Where the
learning of the Egyptians, and testimonies of the hethen poets are alleged:
and further he names particularly translations, dictionaries, histories,
chronicles, commentaries. etc. Behold here what place this man allows the
reading of the scriptures, yea even of the Originals: they must not be read but
by way of opposition, difference, plea and strife; they must not be read but
where when and as histories, chronicles, commentaries, books of hethen poets
and al other like, may be read and produced: so they are tolerable, otherweise
there is no place allowed them: though elsewhere he page 6.
esteems better of them then of other writings. But in the actions of the
preisthood, in the actions of concord or union, to read them is idolatry. What
haeretik professing Christ could more have sought the disgrace of Gods holy
book; then thus to shut it quite out of Gods worship, allowing it no other
place, by these his wicked grounds, then Julian the Apostata Christ's deadly
enemy, would and did allow it (though he esteemed worse of it) in his
blasphemous writings. For eyes he in cases of opposition, plea and strife,
Cyril. con. Julian. lib. 2. and 3. etc
alleged the testimonies of holy scriptures, among other writings; but in his
worship of his Gods he would none of them. No marvel though God have stricken
this man like Elymas with the blindness of Anabaptisme; it is a just recompense
of his former error: that as he would have deprived the church of the use of
the scriptures, the instrument of Gods covenant: so himself now should be
deprived of the covenant with Abraham and his seed, and become an alien from
Ephesians. 2. 12
the common wealth of Israel.

But let us proceed with his answer.

Moreover ( says he) when he commands his Epistles to be read in the Answer.
churches, his meaning is not strictly literal: that is that the very words
which he wrote should be repeated verbatim out of the book: but his meaning is
that the sense of the words or meaning of the Apostle should be related,
whither by reading the very words, by expounding the meaning by interpreting or
translating. etc.

Lo here the shifts of haeretiks. Paul wills the church Col, 4, 16.
to read Reply.
his Epistles, yea 1 These. 5. 27.
charge them in the Lord, to read them to all the brethren; and writes to
them again, to 2 These. 2 15.
keep the instructions, taught by his Epistle: M. Smyth says the meaning is
not strictly literal, that the words which he wrote should be repeated: but the
sense ralated. As if Paul wa^ted fit words to set down his meaning, and they
that should read, could tell it better. He that reads, must read words as they are written, specially in Gods book, and Epistles from the holy Ghost, wherein
Pro, 30. 5* 6.
no one word is vain idle or unprofitable, no word misplaced or out of order:
and he that shall presume to add or diminish or change the order in reading Gods
writings, does wickedly, and Rev. 22. 18. 19.
is near unto the curse. If things in reading be difficult, God has given
gifts unto men to open and expound them, to the understanding of al: but this
expounding is not reading. Reading is first, exactly to the letter; exposition
comes after with such words as God puts in the expositors heart; as by Dan.
5. 25 -- 28.
Daniels practice, we may learn. Neither are the words of the expositor
comparable to the words of the writer; these being divine, are al as silver
Psa, 12. 6
fined seven times, no dross mixed with them. The other being humane, (I speak
of ordinary men as we are) and showing the man's judgment that expounds them,
are mixed with humane infirmities, mistakings, and sometime deadly errors.
Wherefore reading of the Original scriptures whereof here we treat, must be
strictly literal, as is in the book. Translations are after to be spoken of;
and is here vainly inserted, for Paul wrote in Greek, which al in Colosse,
Laodicea, Thessalonica, and the whole country over, used as their vulgar tongue,
that they needed none to translate for them.

Further M. S. answers, that the Apostle wrote upon particular occasions,
Answer.
for particular ends, and the commandment of reading was special in these
respects to them etc. yet acknowledges he at last, an absolute necessity of
reading; only he denies it to be a lawful help or part of spiritual worship.
etc.

As the Apostles, so the prophets wrote upon particular occasions; yet Rep.
is there a general use, for Romans 15. 4. and 4. 23. 24.
whatsoever is fore written, is fore written for our learning, as Paul himself
teaches. Wherefore this cavil is frivolous. An absolute necessity of reading
the scriptures now, as they were read in Israel, and in the Christian churches,
and to the same end: is all that we hold, and stand for. Which how it is worship
is before showed.

The Apostle 1 Timothy 4. 13. 16. commanded Timothee and so al Elders to 3. Object.
attend to reading: where reading is joined with exhortation and doctrine; and
so imports, that it is to be understood of the joining of reading in the time
of spiritual worship.

This objection (as the rest) is made of M. Smyths own fashion; and was never
thus framed by us. And here he excepteth, that it is not spoken of the
execution of his office, but of preparing himself to the execution Answer.
of it. etc.

That reading in the publik church is necessary, he is forced to acknowledge:
Rep.
and in that we rest. If he think this place is not meant of publik, but of
private reading: he may keep his judgment. My self see no cause why it may not
also be meant of the publik execution of his office; for Paul departing from
Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
besought Timothee to abide there and look unto the Church; and after 1 Timothy 3.
14. 15.
wrote this letter for his direction how to behave himself in Gods house,
whiles he tarried away, and in it says, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
til I come attend to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. where seeing al
these are publik ecclesiastical actions, (as M. Sm. himself grants,) seeing
they are joined thus together, and with this limitatio^ til J come; what
lets but these al should be executed by him in publik? Private reading for
his own preparation, was to be always, and not only til Paul's coming. And as
for such preparation, it is mentioned after, in verse. 15, and both again
jointly verse. 16. for the salvation of himself and others.

Let it be granted that the Apostles and Evangelists used no books being 4.
Object.
extraordinay men, and having the extraordinary direction of the spirit, for
they needed no such helps of books as we do: yet we being ordinary men have
need of books. etc.

This last objection, I reject as frivolous, and falsely intimated to be ours.
The Apostles I am sure had no greater measure of the spirit then Christ: yet he
Luke 4, 16
read publikly in the book: and so did holy men of God before Neh. 8. 13, 14.
him: and publik reading is granted yet necessary: therefore we are to use it.
Though we have more need of the book then the Apostles, (our memories and
judgments not being sanctified like theirs,) yet had they their infirmities,
and 2 Timothy 4. 13.
used books. But it is Gods ordinance of reading, that we stand for: which how
M S. has sought to undermine, and how he is snared in the work of his own
hands; is worthy to be noted with Ps. 9. 16.
Higgajon Selah, and meditated to the praise of God.

OF TRANSLATIONS.
THe first and only controversy between M. Sm. and us being about the
scriptures translated or overset into other tongues, which he affirmed to be
apocrypha and humane writings: how ever he has sought to excuse and hide his
error, yet has he no will to forsake it, as appears by this, that having
spoken of writings 1. by men inspired of God, as the prophets and Apostles, and
2. by ordinary men of al sorts; he shuffleth the translations of the holy
scriptures among these latter; and affirms that * there is no better warrant
to bring translations Diff. p. 10.
of scripture written into the church, and to read them as parts or helps of
worship, then to bring in expositions, resolutions, paraphrasts and sermons
upon the scripture, seeing al these are equally humane in respect of the work
equal ly divine in respect of the matter they handle.

Very impious is this comparison which thus matcheth a man's comment or written
sermon, with Gods written word set over into an other tongue: for it debaseth
the majesty of Gods law, and advances too high, the baseness of men.

Translation is that in writing, which interpretation is in speaking: namely
the expressing of an others mind: but commenting or expounding, is the
expressing of ones own mind or understanding. The scriptures first written in
Hebrew, and secondarily written in English: do set forth one and the same word
and mind of God unto us, though which different letters and sownds: as Emmanuel
is interpreted and translated God with us, Mat. 1 23. Messiah is interpreted
CHRJST in Greek; ANOJNTED in English. John. 1. 41. Here the Hebrew, Greek and
English differ only in outward letter and sound; the meaning substance or
essential form being one in them al, and the word of God, so caled by relation,
because the mind of God is made known hereby to the mind or understanding of
man. The different letter or character changes not the nature of the thing:
for if it did, then Emmanuel written by Mat. 1. 23.
Matthew in Greek letters (...), and by Isa. 7. 14.
Esaias in Hebrew letters (...), should not be one and the same name of Christ;
and so the Apostle should be made a falser, and our gospel betrayed to
faithless Jews. The different sound or pronu^ciation changes not the nature
of the thing: for then Messiah and Christ shoul not be one and the same; and so
the gospel and new testament, and our faith were overthrown; and more then
Jewish superstition should prevail. But God who has sanctified by his Act. 2.
4.
spirit, all sounds and languages to the ear: has also sanctified by the same
spirit all Rev. 1. 8.
letters and characters to the eye; as The Apostles practice shows, writing
with Greek letters, words and phrases; which had been profaned by lying
histories and lascivious poets, unto all manner idolatry and wickedness.
Hereupon it follows, that the word of God, in whatsoever letter or language
it be written or spoken unto us; is the word of God still; so to be reverenced
and regarded: and not to be basely and profanely counted among humane and
apocryphal writings.

A comment or exposition of scripture, as for example, upon this word Emmanuel,
shows the man's judgment mind or understanding that commenteth; tells the
reason of this name why it was given to Christ, discourses of his godhed, of
his manhood, of the uniting of these two in one person, of the end and use of
these, and many such like things. This being done by ordinary men, is properly
an humane writing, (though it may be, agreeable to the word of God,) showing by
letters as by signs, what is the mind or understanding of such a man in this
mystery of Christ's incarnation: even as Paul says of his own divine writing;
when ye read ye may know mine understanding in the mystery of Christ. Ephesians.
3. 4.

Now God has by his Prophets and Apostles written to his Church a short sum
of his mind and will; guiding and 2 Pet. 1. 21.
carrying them, and 2 Timothy 3. 16.
inspiring their writings with his good spirit; that there should be nothing
but Eccles. 12. 10. Psalm. 19. and 119. Prove. 8.
words of truth, faithfulness, equity and perfection in them; that men might
have a sure ground for their faith and actions, throughout all generations. And
minding man's weakness, the holy Ghost has omitted to write John. 20. 30. 31.
and 21. 25.
many things, (though otherweise in their nature very good:) penning such only
as were needful and profitable for our faith and salvation: giving us warning
also to take heed of other things, because there is no end of making many
books, and much reading is a wearynes to the flesh. Ecclesiast. 12. 12.

But because in these scriptures, somethings are 2 Pet. 3. 16.
hard to be understood, and all men know not how to use and apply Gods word
unto their times, estates, actions, etc. therefore has Christ given Ephesians. 4. 11
12. 13. 14 1 Cor. 12.
gifts unto men, to open and apply the scriptures for the edification of the
Church unto the worlds end: always binding them both teachers and hearers, to
the foundation laid 2 Pet. 1. 19. Ephe. 2 20.
by the Prophets and Apostles, whose writings are sufficient to make men wise 2 Timothy 3. 15.
unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Iesns.

For this cause the holy scriptures are necessary for all Churches, to be read
and expounded unto the people: and as every nation differs in language, so to
have the word spoken and written in their vulgar tongue, which change of the
tongue or letter, changes not the nature of the word spoken or written, but it
is still divine and heavenly. Only because in this changing or translating,
imperfections, wants, errors may fall in: therefore the first writings as the
Prophets and Apostles penned them, are to be made the absolute canon, rule,
touchstone, whereby al translations are to be tried: by which being tried and
found faithful, it is the same word of God, in what language or letter soever,
and differs as much from humane commentaries or expositions, as heaven does
from earth.

But Mr. Sm. avoucheth men's written sermons or co^ments upon the scripture, and
the scripture it self written in English, to be equally humane in respect of
the work equally divine in respect of the matter they handle. Of this his bold
and false assertion he makes no proof at al, it is a speculation of his own
heart. Two carnal reasons he sets down, which are these. To translate the
originals into any mother tongue is as well and as much the work of a man's wit
and learning, as to analyze the scriptures rhetorically or logically, to
collect doctrines and uses theologically, to give expositions and
interpretations of places doubtful. Where first if M. S. mean the action of
translating simply, without reference to the matter and thing translated, he
does but dally and seek to deceiv: for writing, printing, translating are al
alike humane actions, but the things written printed translated, are different,
some good some evil, some of God, some of men and of the divil. The books of
Moses written printed or translated, are Gods law; the book of Mahomet written
printed or translated, is the divils law: the actions of writing, printing,
translating, are mere humane actions in all of these. Now if because
translating is an humane action, therefore the thing translated must also be
humane, and the work of man's wit and learning: then also because writing and
printing are humane actions, therefore the bible written or printed in Hebreue
Greek and al languages, must likewise be humane, and the work of men's wit and
learning: and then there can be no divine scriptures but the very first copies
which the Prophets and Apostles wrote with their own hands: And if Satan could
persuade this; he would be glad.

Secondly if Mr. Sm. means the thing translated, as Moses law, David's psalms
or other like in English: that these are as well and as much the work of a man's
wit and learning; as an exposition of doubtful places in them or doctrines and
uses collected from them; he teaches wicked error, which al of judgment and
conscience will abhor. The holy scriptures faithfully expressed in English or
any language, is the work of Gods wisdom and unserchable knowledge: and cannot
without injury to his majesty, be said to be the work of man's wit and
learning; though man have used his skill in writing or translating it according
to the original copy given of God. This plea of Mr. Sm. is like as if Jeroboam
should have said; the 1. King. 6 23.
cherubims and 1. King. 7. 25.
the brazen bulls in Solomon's temple, are as well and as much the work of man's
wit and skill as my 1 King. 12 28.
golden calves; and if they may be admitted into the house and worship of God,
then why not these? If M. Sm. should answer that the cherubims and bulls which
Solomon made, were commanded of God, and from the divine pattern, though humane
art did make them; but Ieroboams calves were from his own heart: so answer I in
this case; the translation is from the divine pattern of Gods original book,
and commanded to be made and used; but to write comments or homilies to read in
the Church, is from a man's own heart, and has no commandment or warrant from
God so to be used; but are forbidden. Eccles. 12. 12.

Secondly he says The translator cannot conceive nor express in writing the
whole mind of the holy spirit contained in the originals, but only some good
part of it: the expositor, paraphrast, commentator may express as much as the
translator, yea and in respect of some particulars, as Hebraisms, Grecismes and
the like considerations much more.

If a translator cannot express the whole mind of the spirit in all the bible,
by his interpretation litteral or grammatical: then much less can the
expositor express the whole mind of the spirit in the bible, by his exposition
theological. For it is a thousand times easier for a translator to do his duty
to the full, then for the expositor: yea this latter is utterly unpossible, I
say not only for one man, but for all the men in the world.

Though the translator cannot express to the full every word and sentence in
the Bible, yet the most part he may; vvheras the expositor cannot do any at
all, but is still to seek all days of his life, and they that come after him
also.

Hebraismes cannot always be expressed, through defect of the language: yet
translation is needful, and the translator is blameless. For example, this
name God called in Hebrew Aelohim, Genesis 1. 1. is in Greek translated Theos, and
that by the Apostles often in the new Testament. Here is a want in the
language, for Aelohim is in form the plural number, signifying the Trinity;
yet joined with a word of the singular number bara, he created: signifying the
unity of the persons in the Godhed. Such a phrase the Geek tongue vvanted:
therefore the Apostles admit of the Greek propriety, doing the full duty of
translators and the defect rests in the language, of which they were not
Lords. And that the Lord respects not so much the words and phrases, as the
matter meant by them; infinite examples in the scriptures do manifest.

But whereunto leads this cavil? what if all cannot be expressed in the
translation, shall we therefore have none in the Church? then neither may we
have any preaching by the voice of man; for none can fully express in his
sermon, all things that God intends by a place of scripture, or any ground of
religion. And if preaching must be used, though many humane infirmities be
mixed with it; then also reading the scriptures (and consequently the
translations to them that know not the originals,) must be used, though fewer
humane infirmities be mixed therewithal; seeing these both are the ordinances
of God, as before has been proved.

But then M. Sm. will draw commentaries and homilies into the Church also. But
that is denied to be Gods ordinance. He has 1 Cor. 12. and 14.
appointed the lively voice of his graces in the mouths of his servants to be
heard in the Church, for the opening and applying of the word unto them: but
not their writings to be read. And because of some infirmities in translations,
to disgrace them, as this man does, and match them with commentaries; it is
capele^^in (as the 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Apostle speaks,) to play the false vintner with the wine of Gods word. For
as such a falser to make sale of his mixture, wherein some wine, much water,
yea perhaps some puddle water is brewed together, might say, you can have no
wine but such as is turned out of the first vessel; and it cannot be in the
turning of it out, but some of the spirit and strength of the wine will vapor
away, some taste it will have of the new cask; therefore you may as well drink
of this liquor, for in respect of the vessel they are both alike changed, in
respect of the matter they are both alike wine. Let M. Sm. therefore cease his
odious comparisons of the translation with the comment: or else let him show us
some comment or sermon written upon any text, wherein at the least there is not
water and wine, and perhaps death in the pot.

OF THE LXXII. INTERPRETERS.
HEre Differene page 10.
M. Smyth before he proceed further, takes up an accusation against the Church
of Israel, who in the days of Ptolomee Philadelphus King of Egypt, and at his
request sent 72. learned Jews to translate the Hebrew Bible into Greek before
the Apostles time almost 300. years. This their translation (says M. Smyth,)
was a grevous syn.

1. For that the covenant of grace ought not to have been preached The 1.
reason.
unto the gentiles til the fulness of time Mat. 10. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Romans 16.
25. 26. with Mat. 10. 5. 6. and 28. 19. and therefore that the Lxx. by their
translation did communicate it to the Graecians, before the fulness of the time,
was their greevous syn.

I answer in the behalf of Israel; First, by M. Smythes divinity, Answer.
the Church of Israel Charact. of the B. page 16.
was a carnal people, had a carnal covenant or promise of carnal things, etc.
how is it then that he charge them here with profaning, the covenant of
grace? and how will this agree with his grounds of Anabaptisme?

Secondly, by his divinity also, the scriptures and reading of them, is the
mimistration of the letter 2 Cor. 3. 6. that is of death and damnation; as page
32.
before has been handled. How then could the litteral translation and reading
thereof, be the ministry or covenant of grace? the ministration of death, was
fit enough for the Gentiles that were to die. Or, did it kill them before the
time?

Thirdly I deny his collection from those scriptures against this action: for
although the fulness of time was not yet come, that God would send preachers
with the power of his spirit, to convert all nations: yet follows it not
hereupon, that no gentile, no nation, (no not though they desired it, as King
Ptolomee desired the Bible;) might have the truth imparted unto them. There is
no such law made of God; nay the contrary is plain. For, 1. there were many
strangers, Egyptians and others that went out with Israel to the Land of
Canaan, not forbidden nor debarred of grace with Israel, Exodus 12. 38. nay the
law admitted any stranger to circumcision and the passover, and so to the
covenant of grace, Exodus 12. 48. 49. 1 Cor. 5. 7. 2. The Gibeonites which were
of the worst sort of hethens, devote to destruction, yet obtained mercy with
God, to be in the covenant of his grace. Josh. 9. 27. 2 Samuel 21. 1. 2. 5. etc.

3. There were also in Solomon's time 153. thousand and 600. strangers, none
exempted from partaking with Isreal's mercy.

4. God gave his law to be read even unto strangers also, Deuteronomy. 31. 12. so far
was he from vvithholding grace, if any sought it.

5. And solomo^d dicating the temple prayed even 1 King. 8. 41. 43.
for strangers, that dwelled in far countries, (who might when they heard of
Gods name, come thither and pray in that house) that they even all people of
the earth might know Gods name, and fear him as did his people Israel. All
which do show the untruth of M. Sm. collection, that it was a syn for Israel
to impart the scriptures and covenant of grace to the gentiles.

Because all the Gentiles ought to have been Proselytes of the Jews Church,
and to have come to Jerusalem to worship, Exodus 12. 43. 49. The 2. reason.
Mat. 23. 15. Act, 2.. 10. and ought to have learned their tongue and worship,
which was prevented by the Lxx. translation.

First, this reason enterfeireth with the former; for, if all ought Answer.
to have been proselytes: how might not the covenant of grace be preached
unto them? Could they be converted without the word of the covenant? Here the
accuser of the Saints has Prove. 26. 27.
rolled a stone, which is returned unto himself.

Secondly, their conversion was not hindered but furthered by the Greek
translation; for many now might read and hear of Gods name, enquire after his
truth and finding it, come to Jerusalem, and learn that tongue, if they could.
So yet the seventie are not found in syn, which helped men to righteousness.

Because the Hebrew characters and writings were ceremonies, and so The 3.
reason.
ought not to have been profaned among the Grecians by their wr^ings etc.

Whether the characters were ceremonies or no, the LXX. are innocent Answer.
of this blame; for they wrote the bible to the gentiles in the Greek
characters, syllables, words, sounds etc. and not in Hebrew. If M. Smyth make
the substance of the scripture a ceremony, that is a shadow to be ended and
abolished at Christ's coming, it is Ro^. 15. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 19
a wicked error. Or if he make the characters ceremonies in that sense, it is
erroneous: for the Hebrews converted to Christ may and ought to read the Hebrew
scriptures in the Church, as they were wont in their synagogues. The profaning
and abusing of the translated scripture was in deed a syn, in all that so did:
so was it if any Israelite or stranger profaned the Hebrew. Yet Hebrew copies
might go abroad, notwithstanding the danger of profanation, how much more the
Greek? The personal synns of some, may not hinder the publik good. Otherweise,
at this day bibles should not be printed and commonly sold, because atheists
and profane people may buy and abuse them. The scriptures are as much to be
reverenced now, as ever they were; although M. Sm. has labored their disgrace.

If it were unlawful to sing one of David's Psalms in a strange nation as
Babylon, 4. Reason.
Psalm. 137. 4. then much more unlawful was it to translate the scriptures into
a strange tongue: for the ceremonial law was bounded within the holy land.

If at this day Turks captiving Christians should ask in scorn and Answer.
mockage to sing some spiritual song for them to laugh at, I doubt not but we
should answer them as the Jews did the Babylonians; and not expose Gods word
to derision. But if any would hereupon infer, it were syn to translate the
scriptures into vulgar tongues, M. S. himself page 17.
would condemn him: like mesure must be meted to himself, for these frivolous
reasons.

The scriptures were not ceremonies, (though there was some figurative use Heb.
9. 19
of the book of the law,) but if they had been, yet this is an error in M.
Smyth. to bound them within the holy land. For circumcision was a shadow, (or
as he calls it, a ceremony) yet did they it in Babylon, and many shadows
more. And for the scriptures, who doubts but the Jews had and used them in
Babel, which was out of the holy land: Yea some of the scripture was written
and sent to Babylon, as Ier. 29. 1. etc. some written in Babylon, as the
prophesies of Ezekiel and Daniel, Ezekiel. 1. 1. etc. and some written in the
Babylonian language, and not in Hebrew, as Ezra. 4. 7. 8. etc. Dan. 2. 4. 5.
etc. Wherefore if any Babylonian would have sought for God, the scriptures
should not have been deneyed him.

The translation etc. is contradictorie to the Lords mercy to the 5. Reason.
Jews Church, and their special privileges. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. Romans 3. 1. 2.
Act. 10. 28. and 22. 1. 2. 3. 4 -- 18. Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Act. 13. 46.
47. 48. Romans 16. 25. 26.

This reason is in a manner the same with the first, and so Answer.
before answered.

The Jews privileges even then appeared, that the Gentiles must have the
instrument of mercy, the scriptures from them. And that God gave them this not
for themselves only, but also for the Gentiles occasionally, is before proved.
General mercy I know there was not, as is now under Christ.

Peter's fact was caled in question, about conversing and eating with them,
being uncircumcised, Act. 11, 2. 3. not for letting them partake of the
privilege of Gods word: for it was permitted the Gentiles to hear the word read
and preached in the synagogues, as appears Acts. 13. 42. 44. 46. 48. And how
was it contradictorie to Gods mercy to the Jews, when his prophets wrote some
of the scriptures in the hethens language: as did Daniel and Ezra, which are
mentioned before.

Because that seeing the Hebrew writings were ceremonies, it was 6. Reason.
unlawful for the Septuagint to change them from their proper kind, and to
picture them out by the Greek writings for the Greeks use.

Here again is a repetition of the third reason, refuted before: Answer.
and if he will he may make it twenty; by a little change of the words. But the
weight of the argument is showed to be too leight: and Greek writings for
Greeks use, was no more unlawful, then Chaldee writing for the Chaldeans use;
which the LXX. had learned by Daniels example, if no way else.

Because the LXX did of purpose concele many things, as judging the Gentiles 7.
Reason.
unworthy to know them fearing also least they should profane such holy
mysteries, wherein their consciences told them plainly that their translation
was syn. Also they did pervert many things of purpose, add something, and
infinitely corrupt their translation, which was their greevous synn.

This last reason seems to come from M. Smyths gealous Answer.
head, or surmising heart: and it is overthrown by himself. For a little after
he page 14.
says, it is manifest by histories that the LXX. translation is lost; and this
that goes under the name of the LXX. is a patcherie made out of ancient
writings. If this be so, how knows this accuser, that they infinitely
corrupted their translation? seeing he never saw their work, which long since
is lost? Belike he thought it might be so; and therefore he wrote it was so. If
he make not better proof of this his heighnous charge; al men may see whose
son he is, that so calumniateth the saints: and reads without book not
only their infinite errors, but what their consciences told them also.

His inference hereupon, that the Apostles would never account so synful a
translation to be holy scripture coming from the holy Ghost, nor approve the
use of it in the Greek churches; This faleth with his weak reasons: there being
no such greevous syn proved against the Greek translation: but rather we may
judge it a blessed work of God, that hereby brought many Gentiles to be
proselytes, and prepared them for the receiving of the gospel. Albeit I deney
not but errors were in the translation, some of which as occasion was, the
Apostles in their writings did amend. And whereas he further says, there could
be no use of the LXX translation for reading in the latin church of the
Romans. I answer, First if there was use of it, in the Greek churches only: it
is enough to warrant like use of translations in all churches, in what tongue
soever. Secondly, there could be use of it even in the church of Rome, where
the Greek tongue was commonly known before the Apostles time, as Orat. pro
Archia.
Tullie testifyeth, and the poets Omnia Graece. Iuvenal. Sat. 6
taxed the people for it. And if they understood not Greek, is it likely that
Paul would have written his Epistle to the Romans in Greek, as he did? seeing
he misliked speaking (and consequently writing,) in an unknown tongue. 1 Cor.
14. 6. 18. 19.

M. Sm. having spent his strength, (though in vain) to heap syn upon Israel for
translating the bible: Diff. page 11.
proceeds unto arguments against reading translations in time of worship.
Where first I will give the reader advertisement, how contrary this enemy is to
himself: and then I will come to his frawd against the truth. Of the scriptures
set over into other languages, commonly caled translations; he thus affirms
page 12.
A translation is as much and as truly an humane writing, as the apocrypha ( so
commonly caled) writings are. Again he says, Translations are not the pure
word of God, and so contrary to Eccles. 12. 10. Mat. 15, 9. Again, page 10.
that translations of scripture, and written sermons upon the scripture, are
equally humane in respect of the work, equally divine in respect of the matter
they handle. These and the like blasphemous opinions he sought to infect our
church withal, for which he was resisted: these labored he by word and writing
to confirm, with sophistical reasons, the pillars of al heresy. Yet even in
this same book, he pulls down this his former uncouth building; it being the
nature of error, as the Pro. 14. 1.
foolish woman, to destroy her house with her own hands. For afterward he
writes thus, Dif. p. 17.
The translation agreeable to the originals, is a secondary scripture, yet much
inferior to the originals. So then it is not apocryphal, unless he use a
fallacy in this word scripture: for we understand hereby (as Christ Joh. 5. 39
himself did) holy scripture, inspired of God: as 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. It may be
read (says he) in the church, and sung in tunes. Then (say I) it is not as the
apocryphal (so commonly called) writings are: for their very name signifying
hidden, teaches that they are not to be read in the publik church. It may
(says he) be expounded in the church. But so (say I) may not homilies be, nor
apocryphal writings. And if M. S. in his synagogue do read and expound such
scriptures to his people, he makes the^ with himself notorious idolaters.
Exodus 20. 4. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Eccle. 12. 10. The matter of it (says he)
agreeable to the originals, is inspired to weet, of God. But the matter (say I)
of the Apocryphal books, as Judith, Tobie etc. though exactly translated, is
not inspired unless of the Divil; for lies and fables are in them both, the
translations I mean, and the original Greek copies. It may be made a ground of
our faith (says he) and an instrument to try doctrine by. Then is it (say I)
not apocryphal but Canonical: for it is made a Gal. 6. 16.
canon, that is, a rule of our faith and walking. But far be it that humane
apocryphal writings should have such use in the Church of God* Will M. Sm.
ground his faith upon this, that there are Tob. 12: 15.
seven holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Saints; and that lying
Raphael, (of the kindred of Tob. 5. 12
Azarias,) is one of them? will he ground his faith upon this, that Tob. 6. 16,
17.
the smell of the heart and liver of a fish perfumed on the coals, will so drive
away the Divil, that he shall never come again any more? or will he have his
disciples to try their religion by such crooked instruments? no marvel though
they be led with him into the ditch, when they try his doctrine by that which
they profess to be as much and as truly an humane writing, as the Apocrypha
(commonly so called) writings are. For it argues that either they use the Bible
but for a show and color, (seeing they esteem so vily of it:) or else that they
honor the base borne apocrypha, as inspired of God. Which is the very syn and
snare, that they have sought to bring upon us.

Now let us examine his arguments.

1 These. 5. 21. Try all things, keep that good thing. But no man ignorant 1.
Argument.
of the tongues can try whither the translation be fit or good: and therefore
no man ignorant of the tongues, can strictly keep or read a translation in time
of worship.

Here first M. Sm. striking at the translation, mysseth that, and Answer.
hitteth only the ignorant reader of it: for if one have skill of the tongues,
and know it to be truly translated; this reason makes nothing against his
reading, but for it. So M. Sm. plays the sophister, to argue against a holy
thing, because of the ignorances and infirmities of some men. He might thus
have cavilled against reading the law in Israel; that no man blind of sight (as
was 1. King. 14. 4
Ahijah the prophet) could try whither the original scriptures were truly
written or not.

Secondly, if he proceed further as he has begun, hereafter he may come with
like reason thus: Try al things, keep the good thing: but no man ignorant of
the tongues, can try whither the interpretation of scriptures which the
minister gives in preaching the word, or any text that he allegeth in his
doctrine be fit or good; then mind what conclusion the Divil will make
hereupon, in a simple man's conscience: to draw him to doubt of, and
consequently to forsake and despise, not only al reading, but also preaching
of the word, because he being ignorant of the tongues, cannot judge or try
whither that which is read or taught be true; according to the original
scriptures. And thus he falls into the snare of Satan, which Mr. Sm. here
has set in secret.

Thirdly, this reason overthwarteth that which elsewhere the man grants; that
the page 17.
translation may be made the ground of our faith and an instrument to try
doctrine by. This being so, how does Paul's counsel ( Try al things etc.) make
against translations?

Romans 14 23. 1. Tim. 1. 4. - 7. Heb. 11. 6. whatsoever comes not from The 2.
argument
faith is syn. but no man ignorant of the tongues can of faith use the
translation, seeing he cannot examine it whither it be good or bad; and so beleve
or refuse it. Therefore it is not of faith in him, and so it is syn for him, to
use it before the eye in time of worship.

Like sophistry and impiety is in this argument as in the former; Answer
for it concludes not the thing unlawful in it self, but only in him that is
ignorant of the tongues; and his faith, it seeks to shake. For there is no faith
without Romans 10. ^^
Gods word, and where to have this word he cannot tell. If it be set over from
the originals to his mother tongue in writing, he cannot try whither it be
good or bad: if the Minister translate or interpret it by voice, the poor man
is as much uncertain, or more, whither the teacher speak true or false. Thus
can he neither read nor hear of says, if M. Smyths engine once take him: But
either he must look for enthusiasmes, or revelations from heaven; (which some
Anabaptists have dreamed of;) or else, he faleth to profanenes or desperation.
And it is not M. Sm. distinction of worship properly so called, that here vvil
comfort the troubled sovvl; for he must do Romans 14.* 23. Heb. 1^
al, especially his ecclesiastical and religious actions of faith, and not his
proper worship only. Yea the serpent will build more on this rotten
foundation, and assault him also that has skill in the tongues and trouble him,
saying; though thou have knowledge of Hebrew and Greek, yet how can thou tell
vvhither this that thou read, be the pure word of God? There be many Tit.
1. 14
Jewish fables and humane Mar. 7. 8. 9 -- 11.
traditions, that have been written in Hebrew, and in Greek also: and vvhither
God spoke or vvrote these things, as now thou read them, thou know not:
and therefore can not of faith make this book a ground of thy religion and
worship. And if thou vvilt credit M. Smyth, lo he tells thee, that Dif. p.
14.
as Antichrist has polluted al Gods ordinances, so has he violated the
original scriptures. Do not thou therefore build thy faith upon the scriptures
any longer; but beleev that which M. Smyth and his like, shall prophecy out of
their hearts, for so he Dif. p. 5.
says, holy men prophesied before Moses time: (and indeed so some prophesyed
Eze, 13. 2
in Ezekiels time, though they were blamed for it:) and Diff. p. 4.
books are in the nature of pictures and images, and therefore ceremonies, and
reading a book is ceremonial; and page 22.
reading Prophesies in the time of the law, was a type of prophesying: and page
5.
reading the words of the law out of the book, signified the lettering of the
words of God out of the heart: and page 6.
Christ fulfilled the law of reading, and shut the book in the synagogue, to
signify that the ceremony of book-worship or ministry of the letter was now
exspired and finished: and now page 18.
the worship of the new testament must proceed originally from the heart and
spirit. Wherefore lay aside the scriptures, and hear what men shall prophesy out
of their hearts; orif that like thee not, exspect thou revelations and visions
from heaven. Thus M. Sm. as a Hos. 5. 1.
snare on Mispah, and a net spread upon Tabor, has laid in his book such a
groundwork against the script* as fitteth the Divils purpose to inta^gle men's
sovvls; although to deceive the birds withal, he has strewed some wheat at
the mouth of the pit, as, that translations may be made the ground of our
faith, and an instrument to try doctrine by: etc. so breathing out of one
mouth, both hot and cold.

Argument. 3.
A translation made verbatim from the originals is absurd by reason of the
difference of the dialects, and therefore unlawful seeing it edifieth not, 1 Cor.
14. 26. a translation paraphrastical or a paraphrast if it be lawful in time of
worship to be read then why not a written sermon.

Answer.
These are but blocks, to make the blind stumble. Gods word may be set over into
English, for the most part word for word without absurdity: and where our
language wilnot bear the strict propriety of the original phrases; we are
warranted by the Apostles allegations of scriptures in an other tongue, to use
such words as the language will affoard, to express the other withal. Though
tongues differ one from another in propriety of speeches: yet God has
sanctified them all, for instruments to convey his word and law unto us; and
this in writing as well as in speaking. Dan. 2. 4. etc. Act. 1. 4. 8. 9. -- 11.
and 15. 23. Rev. 1. 11. 19.

Written sermons are the works of men: Gods book set over into English, though
with some diversity of phrase, is Gods book and word still; for (as has been
showed) it is not the letter or sound, but the thing signified and meant by
them, which properly is Gods word, and which we are so to reverence. But M. Sm.
having granted that the translation may be read in the Church, made a ground of
our faith etc. and now asking why a written sermon is not also lawful in Gods
worship: either allows humane writings to be read in the Church, as well as
Gods writings translated, which is a notable error; or else he cavilleth against
the truth, contrary to his conscience: And in his reasoning, deals like a
false coyner; who because the gold of the common wealth is not so fine perhaps,
as the gold of Job. 28. 16.
Ophir or Dan. 10. 5.
Vphaz: says to the merchant, if such course metal may be taken for money; then
why not brass or copper?

A paraphrast, commentary or exposition upon a chapter which conteyneth
Argument. 4.
more of the contents of the originals and the holy Ghosts meaning is unlawful
to be read in time of worship: therefore a translation of a chapter which
conteyneth less, is unlawful also to be read in time of worship.

First by Mr. Sm. grownd laid in the page 1.
beginning; a paraphrase, Answer.
comment or any humane writing, may be used in the administration of Christ's
kingdom, in like sort as the scriptures; which is erroneous. Secondly he
adds more to his error, in teaching here that a co^mentary has more of the
contents of the holy Ghosts meaning then the text it self in English or
othertra^slatio^s. His co^clusio^ therefore brings forth vanity, and Job. 15.
35.
his belly has prepared deceit. No co^mentary in the world made by an
ordinary man, conteyneth the meaning of God, so as the text it self in a
faithful translation of the book or chapter does. Thirdly, Mr. Sm. confesses
that page 17.
the matter of the translation agreeable to the originals is inspired: but not
the writing or character. If the thing written be inspired of God, then is it
canonical scripture, 2. Tim. 3. 16. then not apocryphal nor an humane work, as
a commentary: then conteyneth it more of the contents of the originals, then
any man's exposition. As for his exception of the writing or character, it is
but vanity: for the Apostles had the matter of their writings by inspiration,
from God: as for the writing or character, that was not inspired* but Gods word
was written in such characters, words, phrases, as the hethen Greeks,
philosophers and Poets, had used long before.

Argument 5.
Lev. 22. 22. Mal. 1. 8. 13. 14. Mat. 22. 37. Ro^. 12. 1. 2. Ps. 119. 45. and
103. 1. God will be served with the best we have. But there is no one translation
the best we have, seeing the Lord may in time of worship, minister better to him
that administreth, if he understand the originals; if he understand not the
originals he has it not at all, for it is an other man's work; and therefore no
one translation written may be read in time of worship.

M. Sm. is like one of them that Ezekiel. 13. 18.
hunteth the sowles of Gods people; setting reasons as hayes to entangle. No
one translation Answer.
(says he) is the best we have seeing the Lord may in time of worship minister
a better: as good a reason against reading the translated scriptures* tures, as
if he should have said unto an Israelite, no one sheep of thy pasture is the
best thou have: seeing the Lord may in time of worship minister a better, (as
he did the ram Ge^. 22. 13
to Abraham:) therefore no one sheep of thym may be offered for sacrifice Mal. 1.
8. Nay his reason against translations has not so good a color as this: for
it is certain that God once ministered a ram to Abraham for sacrifice; but it
was never heard that God so ministered an other translated book to read, then
that which was brought to be read. The gift of interpreting or expounding by
voice, is of an other kind, and not properly reading, whereof we entreat. But
let us follow M. Sm. in his circle, and see whither he will lead us. No
translated bible may be read in Gods worship, for God may minister a better:
what then? shall I bring the original bible and look on that, exspecting what
interpretation God will give me to speak: seeing I may not read? Not so neither
(says M. S.) Diff. p. 6.
the holy original scriptures are not to be retained as helps before the eye in
time of spiritual worship: So then neither is that the best sacrifice yet, but
I must exspect the Lord to minister a better. If neither the translated bible
nor the original be the best: where then is the word that is best to be read or
uttered to the people? In a man's own heart: that must be the book out of which
M. Sm. will have Gods law to be read in his worship: al other books are as
images and ceremonies, abolished, and ended by Christ. Though he plead here
against translations, colourably; yet he aims at Gods book generally, even as
his holy Prophets and Apostles vvrote it. But the wickedness of this engine is
before discovered. Also for translations this further I say; the scriptures in
English are the best for to read unto English ears; better then either Hebrew
or Greek, which they cannot hear. And seeing it is needful the scriptures
should be read; the translation is best. Yet so, as no Christian is tied to the
words of the book, but if he know any error in print or tralation, or any
better words to express Gods mind; he is to do all things for the best unto
the church; giving the sense together with his reading, as the practice was in
Israel, Nehem. 8. 8. But he that withdraws corn, the people shall curse him,
Pro. 11. 26
says Solomon: how much more deserves this man the curse of Gods people, that
has sought to withdraw from them in all their publik worship, the whole
scriptures and book of God, whereby the true corn and bread of their sovvles,
is broken unto them.

Deuteronomy. 16. 16. 1 Chro. 21. 24. Ephesians. 4. 8. Romans 12. 3. we must worship God with
Argum. 6
our own, not with another man's: with that which cost us something, not with
that which cost us nothing. But for one ignorant of the tongues to read the
translation and offer it to God, is to offer to God an other man's labor not
his own, that which cost him nothing, but is an other man's cost, therefore it is
unlawful.

Al wisdoms words Pro. 8. 9.
are plain and straight; but M. Smyths are Answer.
rough and crooked. Who ever said before, that men read translations and offered
them to God? He might as well have said, we minister the sacraments unto God.
For if he mean, the last end is the glory of God: so is it of al a Christian
man's actions. Did Paul when he 1 These. 5. 27.
charged that his Epistle should be read unto all the brethren the saints, mean
they should read and offer it unto God? Or had it been for them to except (as
this man here cavilleth) we must worship God with our own, not with an other
man's, with that which cost us something, not with that which cost us nothing:
but this Epistle cost us nothing, it is another man's cost and pains: therefore
it is unlawful to read it, and offer it to God. If this reason had been
ridiculous in them, why they would not read Paul's Epistle: even so is it here
in M. Smyth, for we read the bible (which is Gods Epistle Ro^. 15. 4.
unto us,) in no other manner, nor to no other end then they read Paul's letter
which was part of 2 Pet. 3. 16.
holy scripture) in the church, and the book costeth us as much, as that cost
them. And David which would not 1 Chro. 21 24.
offer burnt offerings wtihout cost: would he not read, or be at the reading of
the book of the law in the church, because it cost him nothing, Deuteronomy. 31. 9 --
13.
but had been written by Moses, and freely given unto Israel? Never was there
heard more childish sophismes. But what if a man translate a book or chapter
or text himself and vvriteth it: this is his own cost, I think: and then he
may read and offer it to God, or else M. S. cavilling is little vvorth.

Reading a translation is not commanded, nor was ever practiced by Christ, the
Argum. 7.
Apostles, or primitive churches in time of worship, and so being devised by
man, is the account of vain worship Mat. 15. 9. and will worship Col. 2. 23. and
so a kind of idolatry, and therefore the translation is self before the eye in
time of worship an idol, and so has a curse denounced against the use of it in
time of worship. Rev. 22. 18. Exodus 20. 4. 5.

Though they curse, yet thou will bless, says Psa. 109. 28.
David to God Answer.
against his enemies: and so say I against this adversary, who curses the
reading of the scriptures, as a will worship; which God Rev. 1. 3.
has blessed: so makes he himself by his blasphemy, a 2 Pet. 2. 14
child of the curse. And by his own mouth let him be judged: for thus he
writes in his book. Diff. p, 17
Mat. 28. Christ commands to go teach al nations, and therefore al nations
may have the holy scriptures translated into their own vernacular tongue, that
thereby they may learn the truth. Then further he adds. The translation
agreeable to the originals, may be read in the church and sung in tunes, may be
expounded in the church, may be made a ground of our faith etc. From whence I
reason, if Christ commanding the Apostles to teach Mat. 28. did thereby intimate
a commandment (or permission) of translations to learn the truth by; and such
translations may be read and expounded in the church, and made a ground of our
faith: then we and al other Christian churches that have made and used
translations to this end, are not idolaters, neither have used will worship, nor
incurred the curse: but it hangs over M. S. own head, if he prevent it not by
repentance.

Writing and reading the law is a part of preaching the law, Act. 15. 21. Deuteronomy.
33. 10. with Nehem. 8, 7, 8, Mat. 28. 19. with 1 These. 5, 27, Ephesians. 3, 4, Col.
4, 16, Rev. 10, 10, 11. with Rev. 1, 19, and 22. 18. Preaching must be in all
languages, therefore writing and reading must be in all la^guages: and being a
part of preaching of the word and one joint action with it, (so as one and the
kara. Isa. 29. 12. and 61, 1, 2. Zac 7, 7.
same word is used in the holy tongue both for to read and to preach,) it is a
part of the worship or service of God in spirit, in the gospel of his son, as
Paul speaks; Romans 1. 9. But Jsa. 5, 20.
woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; and with feighned
words make merchandise of men's sovvls: 2 Pet. 2. 3
their judgment long agon is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not.

A translation being the work of a man's wit and learning, is as much and Argum.
8.
as truly an humane writing as the Apocrypha (so commonly called) writings are;
and seeing it has not the allowance of holy men inspired but is of an hidden
authority, it may be justly caled Apocryphon, for the signification of the
word imports so much, and therefore not to be brought into the worship of God
to be read.

The Apocryphal vvritings are humane both in matter and form, Answer.
in language, letter, words, sentences, method and order: the book of God set
over into English, notwithstanding the difference of the letters and sounds, is
yet for the substance divine, the words, sentences and method heavenly. He
that translateth faithfully, alters not the nature of the work translated,
neither makes he it his own. Luke translating into Greek Esaias prophecy from
the Hebrew, (Luke 4. 17. 18.) and we translating it into English, have not
changed the prophecy it self, from divine to humane, from Gods work to man's:
it was no fruit of our wit or learning to find out such a prophecy of Christ;
but we understanding the originals, express the same thing in English which
Esaias wrote, and it is his prophecy not ours. And the visions of John in the
Revelation now Englished; are not as much and as truly an humane writing, as
if M. Smyth should make a book of visions or dreams, out of his own wit and
learning, and set it forth in English. Wherefore his heart is stricken with Exo.
10. 21.
the darkness of Egypt, that can see no difference betwixt the Prophets and
Apostles set over into our tongue, and other men's apocryphal writings; but
makes these alike as much and as truly humane.

Again this enemy of Gods book is herein condemned by his own mouth, for the
apocrypha commonly so called, are holden and described thus; Arg. set before
the apocryphal books, in many English bibles.
These books etc. are called apocrypha, that is books which were not received
by a common consent to be read and expounded publikly in the church, neither
yet served to prove any point of Christian religion, save inasmuch as they had
the consent of the other scriptures called canonical to confirm the same, or
rather whereon they were grounded.

These things are spoken of the Apocrypha, not as touching the outward letter
or language, but for the substance or things in them contained.

But M. Smyth allows translations to be read and expounded publikly in in the
Church, and made a ground of our faith: which agrees as well with this his
argument, as did the evil servants plea with his practice. Luk 19. 20. 22. etc.

All the arguments used against the reading of homilies and prayers, may Arg. 9.
be applied against the reading of translations in time of worship, as, 1. they
do stint or quench the spirit, which is contrary to 1 These. 5. 19. 20. 2 Cor.
3. 17. 2. They are not the pure word of God: and so contrary to Eccles. 12. 10.
Mat. 15. 9. 3. They are the private works of men: contrary to 1 Cor. 12. 7. 8.
2 Pet. 1. 20. 4. They are the private openings or interpretations of the
prophesies of scripture, contrary to 2 Pet. 1. 20. 5. They contradict the gifts
bestowed by Christ upon the church for the work of the ministry: contrary to
Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12. Act. 2. 4. Joh. 16. 7. 6. They derogate from the virtue of
Christ's ascension, and dignity of his kingdom: contrary to Ephe. 4. 8. 7. They
blemish Christ's bounty to and care of his church, contrary to Ioh. 14. 16.
18. 26. 8. They disgrace the spirit of God, setting him to schole: contrary to
1 Ioh. 2. 27. 9. They bring into the church a strange ministration, contrary
to 1 Cor. 12. 5. and so a new part of the Gospel or covenant, contrary to Gal.
3. 15. 10. They do not manifest the spirit which comes from within, but the
letter which comes from without 2 Cor. 3. 6. Therefore they are not spiritual
worship, Joh. 4, 24. with 2 Cor. 3. 17. Gal. 5. 1. and 4. 31.

Indeed if lies may go for arguments, here is a heap. What Answer.
Lucian could have written more reprochfully and slanderously of the holy
scriptures? Cannot the written word and spirit of God, his scriptures and his
gifts to open them, stand together: but one must contradict, stint, quench, and
disgrace another? Did Christ when Luke 4. 16-21.
he took the book, read the text, and after spoke from the same to the people:
did he herein contradict his own gifts, blemish his own bou^tie, stint or
quench the spirit in him? or did the church of Israel contradict Gods gifts or
quench his spirit, when they preached and read the law Act. 15. 21.
every sabbath: Or did the churches of Colosse, Thessalonica etc. run into any
of these evils, by Col. 4. 16. 1 These. 5. 27.
reading the scriptures in the publik assemblies? Nay rather this adversary
would quench the spirit, by abolishing the scriptures out of Gods worship:
seeing Gods spirit is in his scriptures, and he having commanded them to be
written, commands also him that has an ear, to hear what in them Rev. 2. 1.
6, 7. 13.
the spirit speaks to the churches. Let him not here cavil that he means
these things of translations only; for we have heard before, how even the
original scriptures are also by him shut out of Gods worship; and the reading
of them so, condemned for ministration of the letter, Iudaisme and
Antichristian.

But some special things here are, which he seems to bend at translations
only: as that they are not the pure word of God, and so contrary to Eccles.
12. 10. Math. 15. 9. So then belike, when we read the laws of God, Exodus 20
thou shall not kill; thou shall not steal; honor thy father and thy mother: or
any other scriptures how faithfully soever translated into English; we read
not the pure word of God; nor as Solomon says, Ecc. 12. 10
an upright writing, the words of truth: but we do that which Christ blamed the
Pharisees for, Matthew. 15. 9. worship God in vain, teaching doctrines the
precepts of men. Lo here some part of the deepnes of Satan, who would persuade
that the pure word of God, the upright writing, the words of truth, cannot be
written in English; no nor spoken; for if they may be spoken, they may be
written: but vvhatsoevet is written, (and by consequent spoken) of us in our
mother tongue, is a doctrine and precept of men. For thus far reaches this
impious argument.

Again where he calls them private works of men, private openings or
interpretations of prophesies, contrary to 1 Corin. 12. 7. 8. 2 Pet 1. 20. he
injureth the holy scriptures: for the work or thing it self is Gods, whosoever
has written, printed or translated it. The decree of King Ahashverosh, when it
was translated and published Est. 1. 20 22.
into all the provinces after every peoples language, was it a private decree of
him that translated or wrote it? If M. Smyth should translate Paul's Epistles,
or John's Revelation; should we esteem them M. Smyths epistles or visions?
These be but delusions to make the work his, or of the nature of him, that is
but the interpreter or oversetter of the same.

Neither do the scriptures by him alleged, speak ought against tra^slations;
for God having given to his church, the Joh. 20, 31 1 Cor. 14. 37.
scriptures for a a ground of their faith; and 1 Cor. 12.
gracious gifts unto men for opening and applying the scriptures: the one of
these destroys not the other, but they confirm each other. And Peter 2 Pet. 1.
20.
speaks not of translation or grammatical interpretation of a tongue, caled 1
Cor. 14. 26 -- 28. Mar. 15. 35.
hermencia: which even an infidel that wants Gods spirit, yet having skill in
the tongues, can do: but he speaks of a theological resolution, opening and
applying of the prophesies, called of him epilusis, which may be done without
any translating at al, as Christ epelue.
unlosed or expounded his own parables, Mark. 4. 34. and as Joseph Heb. pathar
Gr. epelusen.
opened or expounded the dreams told unto him.

Thus see we the weakness of these reasons; and how M. Smyth quoteth many
scriptures to prove things that we al hold: as that it is syn to quench the
spirit, to contradict Gods gifts etc. but for that which we deney, namely, that
in reading the scriptures we commit these evils; this be will have taken for
granted: thinking belike his readers will be so simple, that if any one
proposition of an argument be proved, the whole shall be yealded unto. How then
does he reason against us in vain, seeing in his arguments there Joh. 21. 34
remayns but leasing?

The last of his reasons follows.

Children may read a translation perfectly well: but children cannot perform
Arg. 10.
any part of spiritual worship: therefore reading a translation is no part of
spiritual worship.

The second proposition is untrue, and injurious to all the children Answer.
of God; and the Divil it seems put in his heart to write this, as a ground of
his anabaptisme, whereunto soon after he drew him; and now has moved him to
write further, that Coar. of the B. in the Epistle.
an infant is no more capable of baptism then is any unreasonable or
unsensible creature; thus evil men and deceyvers wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy
3. 13.
deceiving and being deceived. Is not the praising of God, a part of his
worship? and Christ when the children cried Hosanna in the temple, defended
their fact against cavilling Jews, by this, that out of the mouth of babes and
fuklings, God had made perfect the praise. Mat. 21. 15. 16. Wherefore this one
testimony is enough to confute and Psa. 8. 2.
still this enemy and avenger, whom Satan uses to wreak his teen upon the
children and infants of the Lord.

But I will turn his own weapon against him thus. Mr. Sm. anabaptised himself
with water: but a child could have done the like unto himself, who cannot
perform any part of spiritual worship: therefore Mr. Sm. anabaptising himself
with water, did no part of spiritual worship: and consequently it was carnal
worship, and service of the Divil. If he answer, that a child though he could
cast water on himself, and utter such words as he heard Mr. Sm. speak withal;
yet could he not preach or open the covenant as Mr. Sm. did: I answer in like
manner, though children may read the scriptures perfectly well; yet can they not
preach nor open the covenant as did the Priests and Levits, Nehem. 8. 8. and as
Christ himself did when he read in the synagogue, Luke 4. Wherefore reading and
preaching being joined together, as baptising with water and preaching: he that
condemns the one outward action because a child can do it, condemns also the
other by the like reason. And Mr. Sm. having thus written of children, and done
to himself; the babes and sucklings whose souls he would murder by depriving
them of the covenant promise and visible seal of salvation in the Church; shall
rise up in judgment and shall condemn him in the day of Christ.

Objections for translations answered and mainteyned.
After this Mr. Sm. Diff. page 13.
professes to answer objections for translations: where he takes his liberty
to make the objectio^s, as liked him best to answer, thus.

Romans 4. 3. What says the scripture, and then follows the Septuagints 1.
Objection
translation. Heb. 3. 7. The holy Ghost says; and then follow the words of the
Lxx. translation: and it is observed that the Apostles quote the words of the
seventies translation not only where they expound the meaning of the holy
Ghost, as Heb. 10. 5. Romans 4. 3. where the Apostles follow the Lxx. not the
Hebrew, but also in their devises besides the original; as in the second
Cainan, Luke 3. 36. 37. and in the 75. persons of Iaakobs family, Act. 7. 14.
whereas there is but one Cainan and 70. persons in the Hebrew.

If the originals themselves are not to be used as helps in time of spiritual
M. Sm. answer
worship, as has been proved; then this objection is of no force for
translations.

But the original scriptures are to be used in Gods public worship, Reply.
by such as understand them; as has been proved: therefore this answer is of no
force against translations.

Secondly, if it were of force to bring translations to be read in time of
worship, Answer.
it were available thus far even to bring in to the time of worship, the errors
of the translations. etc.

Whatsoever the Scripture and holy Ghost says, may be read and heard Repl.
in Gods publik worship ordinarily; as before has been manifested: Errors by
Gods special extraordinary dispensatio^ admitted because of men's infirmities;
as Cainan in Lukes genealogy, etc. are not of us ordinarily to be followed;
that we should put new persons into genealogies, no more then we may dispense
ordinarily with Gods commandments, because himself dispensed with the Jews
for Deuteronomy. 24 1 etc. and 21 15. etc.
putting away their wives, for having many wives, and the like; which he
suffered Mat. 19. 8.
for the hardness of their hearts.

The holy Ghost needs not the lies of men to work his work, nor the Answer
seventies errors to support the faith of Theophilus and the Graecians. etc.
And it is one thing by connivencie to pass by syn, as was the tolleration of
polygamie, divorce and usurie, see Act. 17. 30. another thing to translate
errors from a translation into the original, which is to approve them, and this
whosoever affirms, speaks little less then blasphemy. Thirdly, therefore as
Antichrist has polluted al Gods ordinances, so has he violated the original
scriptures; and therefore one Cainan must be put out, for some ancient copies
have it not: and for 75. there must be seventy al: pente for pantes: as Romans
12. 11. kairo kurio, and it is possible easily to mistake so small a matter, in
copying out any thing, as experience teaches.

Thus Mr. Sm. is slipped aside from translations, to quarrel with Reply.
the original scriptures and correct them: where (though I would not follow his
wanderings) I observe breefly these things.

1. He restreyneth, the holy Ghost from using the seventies errors (bearing
with men's weakness:) because he needs them not: why does he not also restreyne
God from suffering divorce and many wives to one man in Israel, seeing he needed
not thus to have done then, more then now? Shall man limit the holy Ghost, to
do no more then he needs?

2. He mismatcheth Gods passing by the syn of hethens idolatry, Act. 17. 30.
with Gods Mat. 19. 8
permission of divorce and 2 Samuel 12 8.
polygamie in his law, and putting in Cainan in Luke 3. The first was horrible
syn in all that did it, though God overlooked it upon their repentance: the
latter not so, but tolerable; and Lukes naming of Cainan, holy.

3 He injurieth Luke, intimating as if he put errors from a translation If by
the original M. S. mean Lukes own writing: he iniurieth him otherweise, as if
he approved an error which only he bare with by direction of Gods spirit: and
which if M. S. blame in him, let him self beware of blasphemy.
into the original; indeed he had so done, if from the Lxx. he had put it into
Moses Hebrew; which was far from him. But he only sets it down out of a
common known and received record, into the genealogy which he wrote; which al
would allow of, and by which they would try Lukes writing: where the leaving
of it out, might have caused much strife. And if God so bare with the Jews
hardness of old: what mouth can blame him for bearing with the weakness both of
Jews and Gentiles here? Nay rather his mercy is to be magnified for writing
his word so: as the weak might not stumble or fall away, the froward might not
cavil. For had the Apostles written in Hebrew, the Greeks (and of liklihood
many Jews)* could not have understood: and if they should have ordinarily left
the common translation, not only the Gentiles might have made doubt, but the
Jews would have taken occasion to speak evil. For they reverenced the labors
of the 70* greatly, and would suffer no other translation. God therefore who
turns al things to his glory turned this his indulgence, to the praise of
his grace.

4 Mr. Sm. hazardeth the credit of the original scriptures, and of al men's
faith; in saying Antichrist has violated them, as he has polluted al Gods
ordinances. It is not good, they say, to belly the Divil: and Antichrist has
evil enough upon him though he be not charged with violating the originals,
which this accuser will not easily prove. No doubt but copiers, and writers
might fail, and did mistake; and some thinking to mend the new testament by the
old, or Luke by Matthew, might make it worse; which by true copies may be
amended. So faults are in translations through ignorance or oversight. But this
point if it were true, helps translatio^s and hurts them not. For if the
originals be violated, and yet are not for the faults to be rejected: so
translations may be violated, and the errors in the part, are no cause to
reject the whole.

5 He presumes to put Cainan out, because it is not in some ancient copies:
these some I take it will prove but one, which Beza mentions: and if the
credit of it will countervayl al others in Cainan, it must do the like also in a
great part of the genealogy beside; Beza annot. in Luk ^. 23.
varying all the names from Joseph up to David, according to Matthewes
narration: which is to overthrow Lukes purpose quite. For he deduceth Christ
from Nathan his father in the flesh; and not from the brother Solomon, his
father but in the kingdom, as Matthew does. But to change pente five, into
pantes all, Act. 7, 14. without warrant of any Greek copy at al, is too much
boldness; and cannot be be born out by kurio and kairo, where many copies are
for a ground. If men that perceive not the counsel of God in penning his word,
shall presumptuously change it according to their own conceit: we shall have
nothing left sound or incorrupt. Rather, if men be ignorant, let them Job. 39.
37
lay their hand on their mouth.

Lastly ( says he) fully to answer the objection whatsoever is good in the
Answer.
LXX translation, was taken out of the new testament, and ancient fathers of
the Greek church. For it is manifest by histories that the LXX translation is
lost, and this that goes under the name of the LXX is a patcherie made out of
ancient writings: and therefore the holy Ghost does not aim at the LXX.
translation at al, as is imported in the objection.

This is not fully but foolishly to answer: for though the LXX. trans. Reply.
were now lost, yet was it not lost in the Apostles days, nay there was no
other but that known in the world; and to reason because we have it not now,
therefore they then aimed not at it at al, is without reason or color of truth.
Neither does M. Smyth manifest by histories that the Seventies translation is
now lost: rather the translations of Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotio, and others
that since the Apostles time set over the bible in Greek, these al are lost,
save some pieces of them; and that which we have, is for the body of it the
Seventies, though much corrupted with words and sentences of the other. And
this Hieroms translation of the prophets from the Septuagint, and his
commentary citing the diverse versions of Aquila, Symmachus etc. shows: and
the best Greek bibles now extant, that have varias lectiones do confirm the
same.

Neither if al were granted which he would, is the objection fully answered:
for the Apostles Romans 4. 3. Heb. 3. 7
cite the scriptures in Greek, which the prophets wrote in Hebrew; either
therefore they aimed at the Septuagint or translated it themselves. Whereupon it
follows that the Hebrew text set over into Greek, is the scripture of God
still, and speech of the holy ghost. Or (if M. Smyths divinity had then been
known,) the unbeleeving Jews might have alleged, that Paul proved not his
doctrine by canonical scripture, but by apocryphal writings, that were equally
humane with the Rabbines commentaries in respect of the matter: and in respect
of the letter and language, worse.

There were Greeks and Graecians, Hellenes and Hellenistai, Romans 1. 16. The 2*
Objection
Act. 6. 1. The Greeks were so by progeny and blood, the Graecians or
Hellenists were Jews by progeny, borne in Grecia. Therefore Paul calls
himself an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Phil. 3, 5. These Graecians had forgotten
their language, and spoke Greek only; and in their synagogues had the Greek
translation read unto them: and the Apostles coming into their synagogues
approved that act: and so it follows, that reading translations is lawful in
worship.

The distinction of Greeks and Grecians, is vain (says M. Sm.) as appears M.
S. Ans.
by these places compared, Act. 21. 39. and 18. 2. 24. with Act. 6. 1. Phil. 3.
5. For Paul was born at Tarsus in Cilicia, and Aquila at Pontus, and Apollos at
Alexandria: and yet are al called Jews, not Hellenists or Graecians. And Act.
6. 1. The Hellenists murmured against the Hebrews: the Hellenists did
understand their own tongue, and had not forgotten their own language.

This reason of Greeks and Grecians, was propounded not as certain, Reply.
but as probable: because humane writers testified it, and in the scriptures,
some footsteps only might be seen.

That there is a distinction in scripture of Hellenes Greeks, and Hellenists
Greekists or Graecians; all that have eyes to see, and judgment in the tongue,
may read: though in our English this difference is not always manifested. For
ordinarily they of that nation are called Hellenes Greeks. Ioh. 12. 20. Act.
16. 1. and 18. 17. and 21. 28. Romans 1. 14. and often in that and his other
Epistles. Hellenists or Grecians are mentioned Act. 6, 1. and 9. 29, and 11.
20. The Hellenes or Greeks are usually set against Jews; as Act. 14. 1. and
18. 4. and 19. 10. and 20. 21. Romans 1. 16. and 2. 9. 10. and 3. 9. and 10. 12.
1 Cor. 1. 24. and 10. 32. and so in other places* The Hellenists or Grecians,
are set against Hebrews, Act. 6. 1. The Hellenists were such as spoke Greek;
for Hellenisti is the Greek tongue, Act. 21. 37. as Ebraisti is the Ebrue
tongue, John. 19. 20. Al Hellenes or Greeks could their own language; but many
of other nations could speak it also, it being spread over al; and such were
called not Hellenes but Hellenists; as a Latin is he that is born in Latium,
or of that blood; but a Latinist is he that can speak Latin, what country man
soever.

That the Jews were dispersed in the Greek nations, we may read al over the
history: for there were synagogues of Jews at Salamis, Act. 13. 5. at Antioch
of Pisidia: Act 13. 14: at Iconium, Act. 14. 1. at Thessalonica, Act. 17. 1. at
Beraea, Act. 17. 10. at Athens, Act. 17. 16. 17. at Corinth, Act. 18. 14. at
Ephesus, Act. 18. 19. and other places. Their dispersion among the gentiles,
had been about 300 years: for Ptolomee Lagi King of Egypt, surprising
Jerusalem unawares, carried many thowsands of them captives, and made them
freemen of Alexandria upon their oath of fealty; and after them many Jews
went thither of their own accord, as de antiq. Iud. lib, 12. cap. 1.
Josephus witnesses. And his son Ptolomee Philadelphus who procured the bible
to be turned into Greek; willing to gratify the Jews, made free six skore
thousand of their captives: who remaining in those parts, not only learned
Greek, but forgot Hebrew, as may evide^tly be gathered by Ben Sirachs words in
his prologue before his fathers book, among our Apocrypha, caled
Ecclesiasticus. For Prologue of Jesus son of Syrach: or Ecclesiasticus.
he in the days of Ptolomee Euergetes, (who reigned next to Philadelphus)
turned his Fathers Hebrew work into Greek, that they which remained in
banishment (as he says) and were desirous to learn, might apply themselves to
good manners, and live according to the law. This pains he might have spared if
his people al, could have understood Hebrew. Also under the tyran Antiochus, the
Jews troubles and dispersio^ continued and increased, as the book of Machabees
witnesses: and so The Apostles in their days found synagogues of the Jews,
almost in all cities of the Gentiles, as before is shevved. Now who knovveth
not, that far fewer years then three hundred in a strange land, vvil make a
people, specially in bondage and affliction, forget their native speech:
wherefore as it is most probable, that many Jews had forgot Hebrew, so is it
almost incredible, that al should keep it, in such estate; when also they
married with the gentiles, as Timothees mother is a president. Acts. 16. 1.
Moreover in Jerusalem it self it may be probably gathered they knevv and spoke
Greek. For when Paul spoke once in Hebrew to them, it it is noted how the
people kept the more silence. See Act. 22. 1. 2. and 21. 37. 38. 39. 40. And
very learned Jews, as Philo of Alexandria, who lived in the Apostles days,
and Josephus, wrote eloquently their works in Greek, having small skill in
Hebrew, as by their writings may be gathered.

Now for M. Smyths exception, that Paul, Aquila, and Apollos, are called Jews
not Hellenists: it is nothing to the matter: for I grant, al were called Jews
but not al Hebrews: and in Act. 6, 1. not Jews, but Ebrues ar murmured against
by the Hellenists, that is, by such as spoke Greek. Wherefore, he needed not
have caled the distinction vain, when himself can make but such an empty
answer. Neither shows he any reason at al, why Paul reckoning up his
privileges (Phil. 3, 5.) caleth himself an Ebrue of the Ebrues: and unless it
be for the language I can show none sufficient. For thus I mind his speech; by
kindred or stock in general, he was of Israel by tribe in particular he was of
Benjamin; by language an Ebrue; by profession of law or religion, a Pharisee;
for zele, a persecutor of the contrary; and for legal righteousness,
unrebukeable. Herein the Gr. Scholiast agrees with me, saying that the name
Ebrue is added pros ^^desin tes Ebraidos glosses, for his skill in the Ebrue
tongue. The like he speaks of himself 2 Cor. 11. 22, They are Ebrues, so am
J, they are Israelites, so am J, they are Abraham's seed, so am J. It is well
known this people had much to boast of for their stock of Israel, famous
throughout all the bible; likeweise of Abraham Ioh. 8. 39.
they boasted because of Gods Gen, 17.
covenant with him, and of his fatherhood. But of Heber they had nothing to
rejoice more then of other patriarchs, save for the language only, which was
derived from him to Abraham the Genesis 14. 13.
Hebrew, and so to his posterity, til in dispersion it was lost of some, by
others retained. And if it be excepted that Paul was born at Tarsus in Cilicia,
and therefore an Hellenist as others there: I answer, though there he was born,
yet his bringing up was in Act. 22. 3
Jerusalem at the feet of Doctor Gamaleel, where he learned both the language
and law of the Pharisees; and therefore boasted to be an Ebrue as well as any
other.

And for those whom the scripture calls Hellenists or Greekists they seem to
be no other but Jews. For they that were Proselytes or converts among the
Hethen, are called Hellenes Greeks; as John. 12. 20. there were Hellenes.
Greeks among them, that came up to worship at the feast. Neither know I why a
Greek converted to Iudaisme should have the name of a Greekist, seeing by his
conversion, he does more degenerate from Greekisme; so that the name were
unfit. Besides, in Act. 2. 10. and 13. 43. such converted strangers, are called
Prosclytes not Hellenists. Likevveise when Paul newly converted, disputed in
Jerusalem with the Hellenists, and they went about to slay him, Act. 9. 29.
this their carriage argues that they were Jews, for it is not like that
strangers would have been so busy in that place.

Also the Hellenists in Antiochia Act. 11. 20. seem to be Jews there, to
whom the Gospel was first preached; as in the words immediately verse. 19.
before is noted, they preached to no man, but to the Jews only: after that,
ve. 24. 26
many more were converted there daily: and when the gentiles of the city had
received the faith, they were troubled Act. 15. 1.
concerning circumcision, (this fell out about 7. years after the conversion of
the Hellenists, Act. 11) and then the church at Jerusalem vvriting thereof,
directed their letters Act. 15. 23.
to the brethren of the Gentiles in Antiochia: al which do persuade that the
Hellenists first spoken of were Jews. Hereuppon I conclude, that the
testimony of learned men, Ios. Scaliger. de eme^d. temp. lib. 5. De pr. anno.
Chal. Et lib 2. De Ci^l. Iudae. Karraim.
recording how the Hellenists were dispersed Jews, that used the Greek
bibles in their synagogues; has more probability, if not certainty to be
true, even by the scripture; then M. Smyths slight answer can turn away. But
he has yet more to speak.

A. Secondly (says he) it cannot be proved by scriptures, that the Hellenists
had the Gr. transl. read in the synagogues: it is manifestly otherweise by the
reasons used before against the translation of the LXX.

R. Those reasons were rather calumnies; and I have before refuted the^,
showing that no such syn can be proved upon the Sep. fortheir tra^sl. That the
Greek bible was read among the Hellenists, the point before handled gives
light; and I leave it to the judgment of the wise Further I answer, that seeing
by scripture we learn that not Jews only but Act. 18. 4. and 13. 42. 44. and
14. 1. and
Greeks were present in the synagogues; it cannot be thought that the Lectures
there were in Hebrew; which the Jews themselves in liklihood, the Greeks of
certainety, could not understand.

Thirdly ( says M. S.) the worship of God properly so called of the whole Answ.
Church of the Jews was performed in the holy place at Jerusalem, and so that
which was performed in the synagogue was not properly the worship of the whole
Church of the Jews: but was of that nature that passed between Christ and the
Doctors in the temple Luke 2. 46. with Act. 17. 2.

Neither is that which we perform in our assemblies, the worship Repl.
of the whole church of the Christians, but of our own particular Church:
neither is our reading the scriptures, the worship of God properly so called:
as before I have manifested. So in the man's answer, lodges guile and deceit.

Though all the Jews worshipped at the temple thrice in the year, yet follows
it not thereupon they had no proper worship in their synagogues. For Mr. Smyth
himself counts prophecy or preaching, proper worship; and this was in their
synagogues. Again Prayer and thanksgiving is worship properly; and this they
did other where then in the temple as appears Act. 16. 13. Neither can we
think of our godly forefathers (howsoever Mr. Sm. counts them a carnal
Church,) that they would read and preach the word, and not pray in their
synagogues; yea their synagogues were caled Oratories or prayer howses; as
witnesses Philo a Jew in the Apostles age, who complaining of the outrage
offered in Alexandria (the city where he lived) by throwing down the synagogues
Philo de legate. ad Caium.
caleth them Proseuchas Oratories; and mentions also the synagogues of Rome,
by the same name.

Fourthly ( says M. Sm.) if the Hellenists read the seventies translation Answ.
as a part of their proper worship having forgotten their own language, therein
were committed these synns:

1. Forgetting their tongue, one part of the ceremonial law. Nehem. 13. 24. 2.
Instituting worship in a common tongue, which was as unlawful as sacrificing a
dog. 3. Therefore it was false worship; as it was to sacrifice an unclean beast
Proper worship is an improper term wherewith Mr. S. would cloak Repl.
his error, before discovered. But had it been proper worship, yet this man's
charge of them were both unproper and untrue. For, although the willing neglect
and forgetting of their Hebrew, was syn: yet the constreyned loss of it was
not syn. The scripture alleged might have taught him this; for Neh. 13. 24
they that of lust married strange wives, which taught their children Azotik or
Ashdod speech, are justly blamed by the holy Ghost: but were any blamed for
speaking Babels tongue, where they had been prisoners near 70. years? nay Ezra
and Daniel wrote a great part of their books in Babylons language, and not in
Hebrew. And if it had been such a breach of the ceremonial law as is intimated;
Daniel and his brethren who refused the Dan. 1. ^. etc.
King of Babels diet, would also have refused his language, which they did not
at al.

The comparison of sacrificing a dog is odious: for might not converted
strangers pray and praise God in their mother tongues; did God abhor their
languages, as dogs in sacrifice? Daniel was skilful both in Sions tongue and
Babels: and he writing his book, records his own prayer and thanksgiving in
Babylons language; Dan. 2. 20. -- 23. He that should have condemned this for
false worship: the godly Jews would have counted him a dog. The Prophets
warned Israel of the Idols of Babel, but never of their tongue: nay Jeremy in
Canaan, teaches the people in the Chaldee tongue, how they should answer and
confute Idolaters. Ier. 10. 11. And what will this calumniator of the saints,
say of Christ himself, who prayed on the cross, Mark. 15
Eloi Eloi lamma sabachthani, which was Syriak not* Hebrew, though the
scripture which he had reference unto, Psalm. 22. 1, was Hebrew. And ordinarily
he spoke Syriak, as by Mark. 7. 34. and 5. 41.
Ephphatha, Talitha coumi and other like words recorded by the Evangelists, may
be probably gathered.

Lastly ( says M. Sm.) if they read the seventies translation, and the Answer.
Apostles came in and heard: it follows not they did allow it, as a part of
the worship of the new testament, any more then circumcision etc.

First this follows, that the bible translated, is the bible still; Repl.
and Moses turned into Greek, is Moses still: for it is not said that apocryphal
humane writings were read in the Synagogues, but the Act. 13. 15. and 15. 21.
law and the prophets. So it proves the question, that the scriptures in our
mother tongue, are divine writings, not humane, as M. Sm. avoucheth. Hereuppon
it will follow undenyablie, that they are to be read in all Christian churches
now, as then in Israel: and not as profane and apocryphal, to be quite thrust
out of Gods worship. The Apostles showed an end Act. 15. 24. etc. Col 2, 16. 17.
of circumcision, and like legal shadows: but never any end or ceasing or
reading the scriptures: nay they show plainly the contrary. 2 Pet, 1, 19, 2 Timothy 3, 15, 16, 17. 1 These. 5, 27.

Deuteronomy. 31. 12. The reasons that are alleged for reading the law are perpetual,
3. Objection.
and therefore the law of reading is perpetual: the moral reasons are, hearing,
learning, fearing God, and keeping his laws.

Hereunto M. Smyth answers: First the law of reading is not moral in Answer.
the particular act, but in the equity, for it was commanded to be done but
once in seven year, at the feast of tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 31. 10. and if it had
been moral in the particular act, it should have been from the beginning, which
was not so, seeing it began with Moses, and it should continue after the end of
the world, for moralities endure for ever: but books and so reading of books
shall perish.

Men should Pr. 24. 26
kiss the lips of him that answers upright words: Reply.
but our adversary answers with a froward mouth. He says the law was
commanded to be read but once in seven year: these words, but once, are not of
the law, but of his own false comment. There was a special charge to read the
book then, in the ears of al together; not intending to read it but then. For
every sabbath, was to be Exodus 20.
sanctified, and al things are sanctified by the word and prayer; and Israel
knew this well, and therefore from old time read the word in the synagogues Act.
15. 21.
every sabbath; and our Lord Christ Luke 4. 16.
accompanied the^ in this holy work; so that he is more then Sadducean blind,
which says it was commanded to be done but once in seven year.

No better is the next plea, that because writing and reading began with Moses
and was not from the beginning of the world, therefore the law of reading is not
perpetual, neither binds us now: a Familist or Atheist may likewise say,
baptism or the Lords supper in the particular outward act, is not to continue
til the worlds end, because it was not from the beginning, but began with
Christ. A practice commanded of God, at what time soever; is to continue til by
him it be repeled, which reading the scriptures never was, but repeted and
augmented, by the Apostles writings. Like vanity is in the reason following:
books and reading of books shall perish, when the world is at an end: therefore
now whiles the world continues, we are not bound to read Gods book. Might he
not have made these reasons against preaching the word, and other ordinances of
God, as well as against reading; seeing these shall cease also at the end of the
world. But a Isai. 44. 20.
seduced heart has deceived this man, that he cannot deliver his sowl, nor say,
Js there not a lie in my right hand?

Secondly (says he) it is moral in the equity, that is, that al means must
Answer.
be used to attayn the knowledge of the truth, whereof reading is a principal:
and yet hence it follows not, that reading is either part or means of
spiritual worship: For books are things merely artificial, as are pictures and
images, Genesis 4. 22.

Here again the enemy is caught in the snare of his own tongue: Reply.
for if reading Gods law be a principal mean to attayn the knowledge of the
truth now, as it was in Israel, Deuteronomy. 31. 12. and so moral and perpetual: then
his former cavils against the objection, may be cast as dung upon his own face.
Then do we well to read Gods word in our church, for that end: and M. Sm. has
done wickedly for it to blame us, and charge us with idolatry. To hide this
his shame, he runs into his old borough, that it is no part or means of
spiritual worship; but out of this he has been often hunted before: and we
are sure that observing it according to Gods will, we worship and serve God in
spirit and truth, as well in this as in other like ordinances of the gospel.

His matching of books with Tubal-cains craft (Genesis 4. 22.) and images, shows
how his idol error has Isa. 44. 1^
shut his eyes that he cannot see, his heart that he cannot understand. For in
holy scriptures (whereof we speak) the mind of God is made known unto us, and
his spirit Rev. 3. 1*6.
is in them, so as when we read in the book of Moses, we read that which is
spoken to us of God; as the Evangelists Mar. 12. 26, compared with Mat. 22. 31
in plain words teach us: whereas in handicrafts we see or enjoy but the fruit
of man's wit and skill; and an image without life, is the Hab. 2. 18
teacher of lies. Such impious comparisons seem rather to come from Tubal-cains
forge, then from any possessed with the spirit of God.

Reading the law was performed in the Synagogue, and not tied to the 4 Objection
temple: an argument that reading is not ceremonial but moral, for no part of
ceremonial worship was performed from the tabernacle or temple.

This objection with the reason, (I think) was never so made of any, but by M.
Smyth himself. It is true that reading was not tied to the temple; it is true
also (though this argument thus framed, hardly proves it) that reading is not
ceremonial. The last branch is untrue, for some ceremonies or figurative
services were performed out of the temple. His answers to this objection, are
for the most part true, being well understood: but in part false, when by the
way he denies reading the law to be a moral action; whereof he gives no reason
at al: and the thing is handled before.

Luk 4. 16. Christ stood up to read and redd his text, and then preached 5.
Object.
out of it. Now his actions are our instructions: and therefore we are to read
words out of a book, in time of preaching or prophesying.

This objection M. Smyth has falsified: it was never thus pressed by us for
translations, whereof now we treat: but thus. Luke reports that Christ Luke
4. 17. etc.
read where it was written The spirit of the Lord is upon me etc. This text
Luke sets down in Greek, which Esaias wrote in Hebrew; whereupon it
follows, that the scripture translated into an other language, is the same
scripture still for the substance of it, though the letter and language differ,
and is not an apocryphal humane vvriting, and so an idol in Gods worship, as
Mr. Smyth blasphemed. Else, Luke and the new testament cannot be defended
against Jews that should cavil, how humane apocryphal vvritings, are cited
for divine and canonical. Thvs serves it to prove the reading of translated
scriptures, by necessary consequence: and that we are not bound to bring the
book of the law and prophets in Hebrew when we would read to the people, and
so interpret or read mentally out of it, as M. Smyth then dreamed: though since
he is fallen to forbid the Original Hebrew also, in Gods worship, as we have
heard before. But M. S. finding (as seems) this objection too heavy for him,
has sought to change it, as he could best make answer: which is thus.

First in that it was done in the synagogue by Christ which was neither M. Sm.
answer.
Priest nor Levite, it is an argument that it was no proper part of the worship
of the old Testament, but of that nature as was the exercise performed by
Christ and the doctors in the temple, so that reading most properly is
searching the scripture, which is not worship.

Christ as his custom was, (says Luke 4. 16
the scripture) went into the synagogue Reply.
on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read: and after speaking from the
scripture which he had read, ver. 22.
al bare him witness, and wo^dred at the gracious words, which proceeded out
of his mouth. He Mat. 26. 25. Joh. 18. 20.
sat daily teaching in the temple and in the synagogues among the people. But
all this reading and teaching: was no proper part of the worship of the old
testament, (with M. Smyth) because he was neither Priest nor Levite. Howbeit,
Dif. p. 6.
before he would needs persuade us by a mystical interpretation, that Christ
having by the use of the book fulfilled the law of reading, he shut the book,
to signify that the ceremony of book-worship was now exspired. So svveet an
accord and harmony is in his vvriting. Well, Christ's action here is excluded
from being a part of Gods worship. But M. Smyth though he were neither Priest
nor Levite of the old testament, nor Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist, Pastor nor
teacher, no nor member of the church of the new testament, (he and his
followers having dischurched themselves and dissolved their communion;) yet he
in that estate, preached, and anabaptised himself, and then anabaptised others:
and this in him was the worship of God, or else of the divil, properly so caled.
And has not this man behaved himself like a proud Korah, that without al
office would presume to do these things which he counts proper worship; and
yet censureth Christ's action in reading and preaching of the word to be no
proper part of worship, because he was neither Priest nor Levite? Shall the word
out of Christ's mouth, read and applied with all grace of the spirit (which he
had without measure) be no proper part of Gods worship; and shall the word which
Mr. Smyth utters out of his heart, be proper worship? And of what nature may
we think, was that exercise performed by Christ and the Doctors in the temple?
was it none of Gods worship? He was I am sure Luke 2. 49 46. 47.
in his fathers business, among the teachers of the word, whom he heard, whom he
asked, whom he answered with such understanding as astonished all that heard him.
If M. Smyth esteem his own teaching or prophesying used in his synagogue to be
the worship of God; and this of Christ and the teachers of Israel in the
temple, to be not his worship: he is worthy of al true Christians, to be holden
Anathema.

But reading (says he) is serching the scriptures, which is not worship. But
reading (say I) as Christ now did, is proclayming the word of God unto the
people: and if preaching be worship, reading in this sort is worship: not
proskunesis, supplication or prostrating unto God: but latreia Romans 1. 9.
a worship or service of God in the spirit, in the gospel; as before has been
manifested.

Secondly ( says M. Smyth) Christ had the Originals the Hebrew Answer.
text of Esaias the Prophet, and read or interpreted out of it: for it is
doubtful whither he uttered the Hebrew words, or spoke the sense of the Hebrew
in the Syriak dialect, and therefore from hence reading a translation cannot be
concluded, but either reading or interpreting the Originals.

How it makes for translations, I showed before against Reply.
M. Smyths frawd: and to that we have no answer, but by-matters brought as
clouds to darken the light. And if we had alleged this for the Originals, yet
Mr. Smyth would not have allowed it, as before has been showed. He doubts
whither Christ spoke in Syriak or not: but if he so did, and preached or
prophesied in that common language, (as before I have showed it most likely,)
and preaching or prophesying be properly worship; and instituting worship in a
common tongue, Be as unlawful as sacrificing a dog, as M. Smyth before Dif. p.
15.
affirmed: will not he be found a blasphemer of Christ, as one that speaks not
by the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
calling Jesus execrable?

Thirdly ( says he) hence cannot be concluded that manner of preaching Answer.
now used, that a man shall take his text, and then divide it into parts,
analyzing it rhetorically and logically, collecting doctrines and uses from
every member, etc. of his text, all this while he having his book before his
eye, to help him at al assayes: a thing whereof I am assured the holy scripture
yields no warrant that it may be counted a part of spiritual worship. For
though the scripture may be so handled, and that for very profitable use; yet
that is rather a scholastical lecture, then an Ecclesiastical worship, it is
rather an inquisition and serching of the holy spirits intent and purpose then
prophesying

If the scriptures may be so handled, and that for very profitable use: Reply.
surely Mr. Smyths schism, and charge of idolatry laid upon us, had very
unprofitable use, and wicked end. For his own conscience can testify for us,
if it be not feared; that we never pleaded for other use of the scriptures,
then was in Israel, where Christ Luke 4.
read the text, and after taught from and applied it; where the Neh. 8. 8
law was read, the sense given, and the people caused to understand the
reading; where Act. 13. 15. and 15. 21.
lectures were of the law and prophets in their synagogues every sabbath; and
other such like exercises. But because we did thus out of our translated
English bibles (of him called apocrypha,) he accused us of idol-latrie, that is
the worship or service of idols; we mainteyned it to be theo-latrie, that is,
the worship or service of God, because it was Gods word, not man's, though
written in English. This point is now sought to be shifted off, and a nue
question made, whither reading the scriptures in the Church may be caled
worship: which I have cleared before.

His sophistical distinction of scholastical lecture, and ecclesiastical
worship; we heard not of til now; and it serves him in no stead: for every
such lecture in the Church to Christ's scholars, is the latreia or service of
God, not of Idols; and is a manifestation of the holy spirits intent, as of old
was in prophesying. The teacher most properly does then inquire and search, when
he prepares himself privately by reading, study and meditation, to expound
the scriptures in publik. Were not the voices of the Prophets in Israel, a
manifestation of the spirits intent? But when they were read in the synagogues,
their phonas.
voices were heard, as the scripture teaches; Act. 13. 27.

Lastly ( says M. S.) if we must needs be tied to this example of Christ,
Answer.
(which J see no reason for, seeing reading was of the old testament,) then the
example of Christ shall bind also thus far, as that the book shall be laid
aside, so soon as the text is read, and the book that is used, shall be the
originals, which is nothing for vocal but for mental reading, or for
interpreting, which I never have thought to contradict. etc.

No man that I know, tieth to follow this particular example. Repl.
We doubt not but men may teach, without any book. But that it is lawful by
Christ's example here, to read, open and apply the scriptures; as by other
examples of him also, to preach without reading. The mayn thing is left, and
new questions set on foot.

We know well, he at first contradicted not mental reading (as he calls it) or
interpreting out of the originals though now he writes against the use of the
originals also, as before we have seen: so fast he runns on in error. His
co^ceipt of mental reading, as it has no ground from Christ here, nor any
prophet or Apostle, to be the ordinary way of reading or interpreting
scripture: so mind we it to be a far more uncertain and erroneous course; let
the man make as many Querees after it, as he will.

Having answered these few objections, as we see; he Differ. page 18.
afterward questioneth whither the hearers may have their translations or the
originals to read or search in time of prophecy. Which he deneyeth. Of this
point, though it was not controverted between us, yet I will speak what I mind
about it. Not condemning it, as does he; nor justifying it, as it is abused by
some; but showing the mean, which I take to be best.

His first reason is; that the Prophets and Apostles wrote books, but never
divided them into chapters or verses, Henry Stephen first made the verses of
the N. Testament: whereupon he concludes that the hearers could not search
their books in time of hearing. I deney the consequence; for in reading the
law and expounding it, comparing words with that which went before and after;
the hearers might search and see; though it were with more difficulty.

Secondly the Hebrew bibles that we have, are all divided into chapters and
verses; as also into other sections, noting where the lecture of the law began
and ended, and the lecture of the Prophets answerable to it. Whither the first
writers did this, or the Church after them, I will not dispute; but that thus
they might do, I make no doubt: For God has left to the discretion of the
Church and Ministers, what quantity of scripture to read and teach of. And
this was the practice in the Apostles days; for it was not possible that every
sabbathall the law and prophets should be read over: and the Hebrew letters and
marginall notes, are sufficient records of the antiquity of them. The Churches
practice in the books of the Prophets, shows us our liberty in the Apostles
writings; which cannot be read over at once. And long before Henry Stephens
time the Greek copies of the new Testament had chapters and sections though
otherweise then we now have. And Matthewes gospel parted into 68. chapters or
titles, and 355. sections, was in a manner as easy for the readers to search,
as it is now with us; and so the rest.

His second reason is, that the Apostles in citing scriptures, quote not
chapter and verse, but only say it is written by Zachary, by Jeremie; the
scripture says, etc. This reason depends on the former, and is there
answered, in part. Further I observe, the Apostles speak diversely, sometime
naming Act. 13. 47.
no book at all; sometime naming the book, as Act. 1. 20
the Psalms; sometime a part of the book; as Act. 13. 33.
the second psalm, and how they particulated matters in their doctrine, is not
set down; the summonely of things is recorded. The argument therefore
concluding, thus, it is not written that they quoted chapters, therefore they
did it not; is not of force, negatively. But if if be true which Hilarie an
ancient writer Prolog. (...) Psalm. expla.
records that the seventie Greek interpreters did number and order the
Psalms; and we find that sometimes the Apostles quoted what Psalm in number
they alleged; it may warrant us such like use of humane labors, for help of
our memory.

His third reason is of like nature, that no mention is made of any hearer that
had his book etc. yet might it be, say I, though it were not mentioned, they
used to dispute in their synagogues (after the lecture was ended); and that
Act. 17. 2
by the scriptures: and the hearers serched verse. 11.
the scriptures daily for trial of doctrine. Who now can say that the hearers
had or used no books in the synagogues?

His 4. reason is, that serching quotations hinders attention, for the mind
and affections are distracted from hearing by seeking the places etc. This I
grant to be amysse, in all that so use their books; for diligent ear shoud be
given to all that is spoken. Howbeit this abuse, may not abolish the lawful
use: for as by turning of leaves many hinder themselves in time of hearing; so
many again attentively harkening, and comparing things spoken with the matters
before and after in the chapter, are not hindered at all, but greatly furthered
by looking on their books. And for this matter, I rest with that rule given by
the Apostle, for all things to be done unto edification, seemlily, and with
order. 1 Cor. 14. 12. 40.

His last reason is, that manuscripts being few, and very dear, (there being
yet no printing found out) all could not have or bring their books; but there
is only one kind of true aad profitable hearing: either all to have books and
search or none. If God have left it to the wisdom and discretion of his people
when and how to use the scriptures, so it be not to confound actions or hinder
their good: I will not bring their liberty into bondage, nor prescribe a law,
where God has given none. Though written copies were dear, yet were they many;
and many had them; not all: for all now have not. That such as have not books,
or cannot read, should prejudice other that have and can, there is no reason.
It is not therefore for us to walk by example in this case, but by general
ground and equity from Gods law: who permits us free use of the scriptures
for our edification, according to which if men use them in private or publik,
they do well.

Thus am I at an end about the mayn controversy of the scriptures, which for
the readers good I have beaten out and explaned, showing the true differences
which he handled covertly for his best advantage. Wherein the judicious may
discern, how Mr. Sm. has been up and down, wavering like a reed shaken of the
wind; sometimes seming to allow translations, sometime bitterly writing against
them: that as easy it is to know Pro. 30. 18. 19.
the way of a serpent upon the rock; as the way of a man with his mineon error.

A DEFENSE OF CHRIST'S MINISTRY in the church: against the contradiction of M.
Smyth.
Unto the former battle against the scriptures, M. Sm. adds strife about the
ministry: affirming that the triformed presbytery (as he calls it)
consisting of three kind of Elders, viz. Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, is none of
Gods ordinance, but man's devise; and that lay elders (so called) are
antichristian.

That other point, being an idol of his own invention, which he would have had
worshipped in our church, I have more largely dealt against: this latter being a
thing often discussed heretofore, and no new thing by him alleged; I will the more
briefly answer.

M. Smyth a while before, both agreed in judgment with us; and wrote Principles
etc.
in defense of this ministry which now he oppugneth: but that his first faith
and labors, he retracteth in this book: and sithence is fallen into further
error about the covenant between God and his people. So by degrees he is come
to undermine the word, the ministry, and the covenant of grace, three mayn
grounds of Christian religion: to manifest himself one of those which 2 Pet. 2.
1
privily should bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation.

Touching the Eldership, his assertion is; Dif. p. 22.
The presbytery is uniform consisting of Officers of one sort. Esa. 66. 28.
compared with Exodus 28. 1. and Number. 11. 24. 25. 1 Timothy 3. 1 -- 8. Act. 14. 23.
Phil. 1. 1. Ier. 23. 1 -- 4. Ezekiel. 34. 1 -- 6.

If this opposite would have avouched the contrary, he might with far more
reason have alleged these scriptures. For Isa. 66. 21. speaks of Priests and
Levites., which had charge of the sacrifices and sanctuary: and Number. 11. 24.
mentions the LXX. elders of Israel, joined with Moses to aid him in the
government: and which might not meddle with the sacrifices. And are these fit
scriptures to prove Officers of one sort? If he mean no other Uniformitie in
the presbytery, then was between those Elders and the Priests, he fights
with his own shadow, not with us: who hold a more strict agreement in the
Eldership of the church now, then was in that Eldership and preisthood of the
law; where one tended to civil causes, the other to ecclesiastical. But I will
come to his Dif. p. 23.
reasons, proving the Elders to be of one sort, viz. al Pastors.

First in the old testament ( says he) there was but one kind of Priests, 1.
Reason.
who had equal authority to administer all the holy things: excepting the high
Priest, who typed forth Christ: so proportionably in the new Testament, there
is but one sort of Elders, who succeed the Priests in the dispensation of holy
things. Esa. 66. 21.

Behold here at first, the falsehood of this adversary: even now Answer.
he quoted scriptures that spoke of Priests, Levites and other Elders; al which
were different: and here he takes one sort only, Priests, to conclude about
the Eldership of the church of Christ. But thus to reason from part of the
figure; to the whole thing figured, is mere deceit.

Again, he misseth in his proportion, making all the Elders now, to succeed the
Priests then, who had equal authority to administer all the holy things. For
the prophet speaks both of Priests and Levites Isa 66* 21. which had not
equal authority in all the holy things, as the law plainly shows, Numb. 16.
8. 9. 10. 40. and 18. 2. 3. If now all the Elders be of one sort, and equally
administer all the holy things, proportion is not kept with the Priests and
Levites of the law as Esaias prophesied.

M. Sm. saw this inconvenience, and therefore page 28.
afterward seeks thus to shift it off. The Deacons (says he) in the new
testament are answerable to the Levites in the old; as the Elders ar answerable
to their Priests Esa. 66. 21. compared with 1 Chronicles. 26. 20.

Here again he uses his former fallacy, concluding from part of the Levites,
unto the whole. And taking one piece of scripture he neglects many other
which make against him. For as 1 Chronicles. 26. 20. shows that some Levites had
charge of the treasures; so 1 Chronicles. 23. 27. 28. etc. and 25. 1, 2. etc. and
26. 1, 2. etc. and Number. 18* and other scriptures many, show that othersome
were assistants to the Priests in the service of the Lords house in all
businesses, standing 1 Chr. 23 30.
every morning and evening to give thanks and to praise the Lord: and together
with the Priests Neh. 8. 7. 9.
did teach and instruct the people, according to the blessing which Moses
pronounced upon the whole tribe, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. 10. So that the Levites were
Ministers also of the word and prayer, which is directly differing from the
Deacons office in the Church now, as appears Act. 6. 2. 3. 4.

As in the old Testament there was the sanhedrim which consisted 2 Reason.
of 70. ancients for the administration of the kingdom, which was a type of the
visible Church, all which elders in their first institution Number. 11 25.
did prophecy and were of one kind under Moses: so in the new testament under
Christ Jesus which is the King of the Church there is asu^^drion or eldership
consisting of ancients of one kind, who administer for the good of the Church.
Rev. 4. 4. and 5. 6.

First here is the same fallacy that we had before, concluding from Answer.
a part to the whole. For in the former, Esaias was cited for Priests and
Levites to be figures of our Ministers, and now the Ancients of Israel are
alleged for figures also; and because these Ancie^ts were of one sort,
therefore all the Presbytery figured both by Priests of Levi, and by Ancients
of other tribes, must be all of one sort. The conclusion is vanity. Rather the
reason should be framed thus, as the teaching Priests were of one sort and the
governing Elders of an other; so the teaching Ministers, and the governing
elders differ at this day.

Or, taking those Elders politik, to be figures of our Elders ecclesiastik, as
M. Sm. makes them, the true proportion is but this, as governing elders then,
so governing elders now, are all of one sort; and this is that which we hold.

Neither will his other places Rev. 4. 4. and 5. 6. help him any better. For he
seems to understand by that vision, the church; and by the 24. elders about
the throne, (all which were of one kind) the eldership of the Church: but he
should with all have considered, that besides those Elders, there were 4. other
Rev. 4. 6. 8.
winged creatures full of eyes, which incessantly praised God, and went verse. 9.
10
before the Elders in this action of worship: and these were of the number Rev.
5. 8. 9. 10.
of the redeemed by Christ blood, and of the Kings and Priests that reigned on
earth; and being as meet to signify the Teachers of the Church, as the 24. are
to signify the ruling elders; will rather show a difference between the
teachers and governors of the Church; then that they should be of one sort.
How beit I rest not in his exposition of those Elders: but that is another
point.

Again ( says he) if Pastor, Teacher, Elder, had been 3. offices formally 3.
Reason.
differing, the Apostle intending to teach the several officers of the church,
would have mentioned them, 1 Timothy 3. but there he only mentions Bishops and
Deacons, according as Philip. 1. 1. go: Bishops are only of one sort or kind.

How M. Sm. understands this phrase of formally differing, I Answer.
cannot tell; his logik is not like every man's: the speech being well taken, I
admit of; and do deney the consequence of his argument, that if they differ
formally they should have been mentioned 1 Timothy 3. for it is as if he should
have said, if Priests and Levites differ formally, Moses would so have
mentioned them, Deuteronomy. 33. 8.-10. Nay Moses having mentioned the difference Number.
18
other where; thought it not needful to set it down here; and so does the
Apostle. It is a weak ground to conclude against a thing, because it is not
written in such or such a chapter.

But the Apostle (says he) intends to teach the several offices of the
Church. Not so; but rather he intends to show, how officers in general
should be qualified; and setting down things common to all, it had been
needless repetition to speak of the Pastor first, and the same things of the
teacher, and again the third time, the same of the Elder: he uses no such
tautologies. And Timothee needed not to be taught what offices belonged to the
Church, though he might have need to be put in mind of their qualifications.
Yet even in the same Epistle, upon other occasions, he mentions 1 Timothy 5. 17.
the difference of the office, some being to rule well, some to labor in the
word and doctrine. Of which we shall speak anon. And in his other Epistles, the
like differences ar plain. Romans 12. 7. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 28.

Moreover, ( says he) if the Apostles had ordained three kind 4. Reason.
of ELDRS Acts. 14. 23. they would have mentioned them with their several
kinds of ordinations: but that is not done: for in one phrase their election
and ordination is mentioned: go; their ordination being one, their office is
one, and not three.

A reason much like the former, and of like vanity; for to say, such Answer.
a thing is not mentioned in such a place, therefore it was not done; is
inconsequent.

And here the minding of his own words, might have stayed him from so
concluding: for if Luke writing the action, does in one phrase yea even in one
word sum up both the election and the ordination, which yet ar different, and
done with many circumstances: may he not also under the general name Elders,
imply different sorts. Again where the holy Ghost expresses not any one kind
of ordination, nor any one word spoken to the officers, concerning their charge
and office laid upon them; which yet no doubt was done: Who would look for a
several kind of ordination, to be mentioned in such a place?

Further if there had been 3 kind of Elders at Ephesus, then the Apostle at
Miletum would have given them several charges as having several duties 5.
Reason.
lying upon them: hut the Apostle Act. 20. 28. gives them one general charge
common to them al, namely the duty of feeding, the work of the Pastor. go,
they are all Pastors.

These reasons be al of a suit: and the prayer of David seems to have
prevailed against this man, for Psalm. 58. 7
when he shoots arrows, they Answer.
ar as broken: or like unto strawes.

First, we cannot say what several charges Paul gave those Elders; seeing all
his words in particular are hot recorded. For there is no doubt, but he spoke
many more words, then are set down: and it is usual in the scriptures, to sum
up men's speeches.

Secondly suppose he gave no several charges, but one general common to them
all, which was verse. 28.
Poimainein to feed and govern the flock: yet will not this prove that they had
all one undistinct office: any more then that Peter had no other then a common
Pastors office, because Christ gave him but a general charge common to al
Pastors Ioh. 21. 16.
poimaine, feed my sheep.

The Priests and Levites had distinct offices, as before is manifested: yet
Hezekiah speaking to them al generally, (as Paul does here to the Elders,)
gives them not several charges, according to their several duties, but uses
one common exhortation to them al: which if one would pervert, (as this man
does Paul's speech,) he might plead that all the Levits then were properly to
burn incense, as that all the Elders now should properly do the Pastors duty.
See 2 Chro. 29. 4. 5. -- 11.

The conclusion which he makes that therefore al are Pastors, if he mean it in
the strict sense, is deneyed, as inconsequent. If in the large sense, it is
from the question, and deceives by ambiguitie: for Christ is a Ioh. 10.
Pastor, the Apostles-were Joh. 21.
Pastors, and so are all Bishops and governors generally: yet no man I think
doubts but these do differ.

Besides. Ephesians. 4. 11. Pastors and Teachers are all one office. For whereas 6.
Reason.
the Apostle had spoken distributively before of Apostles Prophets, Evangelists
as intending them several offices: he speaks copulatively of Pastors and
Teachers, exegetically teaching that they are both one office.

First, let it be observed, how himself does say, Apostles, Prophets Answer.
Evengelists were several offices; yet can he not deny, but generally they were
to poimaeinein, that is do the duty of Pastors, feeding and governing the
Church of Christ: and so his former exception against Act. 20. is found of no
weight. Also his reasons from Isa. 66. 21. and Numbers 11. 25. for one sort of
officers to be figured in the law, are of as little value; unless we should
think that the principal officers of the Christian Church, were not figured or
prophesied of at all.

Secondly the exposition which he gives of Ephesians. 4. 11. is against the
Apostles purpose, who distinctly and distributively sets down the diverse
gifts and offices of the church: and therefore cannot be thought to express one
and the same office by two names. For though he speak copulatively, pastors and
teachers, yet is there no reason why these should be taken for one, seeing this
word and, coupleth diverse things and diverse officers; as Apostles and Prophets,
Ephesians. 2. 20, and 3, 5. Apostles and Elders Act. 15, 2. Prophets and Teachers,
Act 13, 1. and a thousand the like. Neither needed he teach exegetically, by
way of exposition what the pastors office is; seeing it was as well, if not
better known, then the Prophets office or Evangelists: neither is it an
exposition, when the latter is as dark and more then the former; and the first
more proper then the second. For the proper name of the office, as M. Sm. takes
it, is Pastor: now to say Pastors that is teachers, were to explayn the proper
by the unproper, or commune name, which neither Paul nor any wise writer uses
to do.

But is ignorance or a worse thing that causes M. Sm. to pervert so plain a
place. The Apostle particulating the several offices some Apostles, some
Prophets etc. does in the last branch according to the elegancie both of the
Hebrew and Greek tongues, omit the word some, putting and in the sted, in the
very same meaning. An example of the Bebrue may be seen Hos. 3. 4. where the
Prophet tells how Israel should remayn without King, and without Prince, and
without offering, and without statue, and without Ephod, and Teraphim: meaning
and without Teraphim. Here in the last place the word without, is omitted, and
to be understood of the reader, as our English translation does express; for
it were trifling to say as Mr. Smyth, that the two last are one, because and
coupleth them, or that exegetically one expounds an other, when as it is but
an elegancie in the language: as all that have skill in it can tell.

The like is in the Greek tongue, and in Paul's own writing* Gal. 3. 28. There
is neither Jew (says he) nor Greek; there is neither bond nor free: there is
neither male and female: that is nor female* where and coupleth in the last
place, male and female, not as of one kind but diverse; and means the same
that nor did before.

The very like phrase and elegancie uses he here, Ephesians. 4. 11. as any that
favors the language and purpose of the Apostle, may perceive. and this is
plainly confirmed by the Syriak, which speaks of the two last as of the
former, saying, and some Pastors and some Teachers. It is also manifested by
Paul himself elswher distinguishing these two offices, as 1 Cor. 12, 8. to one
is given the word of wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge: and Romans 12.
7. 8. or he that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on exhortation. And
if in one place he puts a difference; we should not think that in another he
takes it away. And there is no plain doctrine set down in scripture, but may be
corrupted by such violent expositions as Mr. Smyth makes of this place.

Lastly ( says he) if all the Elders have the pastors gifts, and the works 7.
Reason.
of the pastor, and the pastors ordination, then they have all the pastors
office. But all the Elders have the pastors gifts viz. the word of wisdom or
the gift of exhortation, Tit. 1. 9. and therefore the pastors work, as Act. 20.
28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. which is feeding or exhorting: and so the same ordination.
Act. 14. 23. Therefore all the Elders have the same office of the Pastor, and so
are al of one sort.

The second part of this reason is deceitful; for though in some Answer.
sort and common mesure all the Elders have the pastors gifts, and ordination,
and do the pastors work; being al Bishops, that is, careful lookers to, and
feeders of the flock: yet in special manner and measure they differ in all.
Otherweise, we may also confound other offices: as Apostles and Evangelists,
the Evangelists and the Pastors. For Paul an Apostle says of Timothee an
Evangelist, 1 Cor. 16. 10.
he works the work of the Lord, even as I. Had these two therefore one office?
Again, Timothee and Titus Evangelists, and the other pastors of the churches,
had the same gifts, namely the word of wisdom to exhort, 1 Timothy 6, 2. Tit. 2,
15. with Romans 12, 8. and therefore the same work, (as these scriptures alleged
show;) and the same ordination by imposition of hands of the Apostle and
Eldership 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. with Act. 14. 23. Will M. Sm. hereupon
conclude, therefore al pastors have the same office with the Evangelists? If he
acknovvledge an error in that, so may he do in this. For it is the special
excellency of the gifts of exhorting, teaching, ruling, which causes the
pastors, teachers, rulers, to be designed unto several works and offices. For
it were vanity to suppose, that the teachers might be without the word of
wisdom at all, or Pastors without the word of knowledge, or rulers without
both. Every Levites lips were to preserve knowledge, for the people to seek
the law at his mouth, as at the priests; Deuteronomy. 33. 8. 10. Mal. 2. 7. yet was
there difference in the office So in Christ's Church where gifts are bestovved
in variety, he that excels in the word of vvisdome and exhortation more
then doctrine, is (being lavvfully caled thereto, a pastor; and he that
excels in doctrine more then in exhortation, is a teacher: and they that
excel other brethren in discretion gravitie etc. though they have not meet
gifts for pastors or teachers, are (being caled thereunto) Elders or
governors, to assist the other in guiding the vvayes of the church. And
needful are they unto the same, for one man may well teach an hundred, but two
men vvil scarce govern half so many in peace and order: so great a difference
there is, betvveen the knowledge of the truth, and the due vvalking and
practice of the same.

Whereas therefore M. S. gives all the Elders, the word of wisdom, and so the
pastors office; meaning strictly and properly: he contraryeth the Apostle who
says, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 8.
there are diversities of gifts; and to one is given the word of wisdom, and to
another the word of knowledge; and again speaking of office, he mentions Romans
12. 7. 8.
distinctly teaching, and exhorting, and ruling, not in one person but in
sundry. Although sometime speaking of the Eldership in general, he ascribes
the same work in general thereto, as in Tit. 1. Act. 20. and other like
places. Of the ordination Act. 14. we spoke before.

Now after al these reasons, M. Sm. thus concludes. Hence this con^ectorie
(says he) arises: that the Eldership consisting of three sorts of Elders, is
the invention of man, having both an antichristian ministry and government in
it. And therefore when the popish prelacie was suppressed, and the triformed
presbytery substituted, one antichrist was put down, and another was set up in
his place. etc. with other like contumelies.

But the falsehood and vanity of his reasons having been manifested, al these
reproaches do turn into his own bosom, and in him is fulfilled the word of the
Prophet, Jsa. 57. 12*
whiles like the raging sea, he thus casts up mire and dirt. For God having
given to his church 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6.
diversities of gifts, diversities of administratio^s (or offices,) and
diversities of operations, some for to Romans 12. 6* 7. 8.
teach, some to exhort, some for to rule; and having evidently distinguished
between 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Teachers, and Governors; between those Elders that 1 Timothy 5. 17
rule well, and those that labor in the word and doctrine: it must needs be the
spirit of Antichrist and of Satan, that thus despiteth Christ's holy ordinances,
which this adversary himself sometime acknowledged and walked in; and now has
forsaken, without ground of truth. But he has more yet to say, in answering
the objections for 3. sorts of Elders: which he thus page 24.
lays down.

The first objection.
1 Timothy 5. 17. In this place the Apostle makes two sorts of Elders, 1. those
that rule only, 2. and those that teach and rule. And Ephe. 4. 11. he makes
2. kinds of those that teach, Pastors and Doctors. Therefore there are 3.
kinds of Elders formally differing each from other.

Mr Smythes answer.
The Apostle to Timothee teaches that Elders are to be honored for 2. works,
well ruling and laborious or painful teaching: and the place does not import a
distribution of Officers, but a commendation of several works of one office:
and the specialty consists not in the works of ruling and teaching which are
common to all Elders; but in the quality of the works, viz. well ruling, and
painful teaching, as if the Apostle should say. Elders are to be had in double
honor for wise government, but much more are they to be honored for their
laborious and painful teaching.

Reply.
If empty words might carry away matters, it were woe with the truth of
religion, for each spirit of error would bear it down. A doctrine most plain, set
forth in evident words; is here turned aside, with a deceitful gloss, contrary
to the tenor of the text.

Two several works he acknowledges ruling and teaching: yet two several men
for these works he will not admit of. But had he learned the Apostles word, 2
Cor. 2. 16.
who is sufficient for these things? he might have seen a reason of the
counsel of God, in adding helps to the teachers of the word. For if the
Apostles those excellent master builders, had need of supply, for want of
sufficiency; how much more need have we weaklings? It is Gods usual
administration in his church, for several works to appoint several persons: so
to Moses he committed Ex. 18. 16 etc.
the government political, to Exo. 28. 1
Aaron the ecclesiastical. To Moses he adjoined Number. 11. 14. 16.
70. ancients of Israel; besides the Ex. 18. 25
ordinary inferior governors: to Aaron he Number. 18. 2. 6,
gave for a gift the whole tribe of Levi. The Levites had also their special
distributions, 1 Chr. 23. and 25. and 26. chap,
some helping the Priests in sacrificing etc. some tending to song and musik,
some warding the Tabernacle, some looking to the treasures: al jointly the
Ministers and teachers of the church. Deuteronomy. 10, 8. and 33. 10.

Christ also providing for the good of his church, as he has 1 Cor. 12. 6.
diversities of operations or effects to work in the same, so has he given
ver. 4.
diversities of gifts, and these to v. 8. 9. 10.
diverse persons, and also with ver. 5.
diversities of ministeries or offices, Romans 12. 7 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 29.
some to teach, some to exhort, some to distribute, some to rvle; that that
gift which is dimm in one man, may shine clear in an other, and the church have
the use and benefit of al. Now comes M. Sm. and he not being able to deney the
diversities of works and operations required in the church: yet dares deney
the diversities of offices, and will have one man in one limited office of the
Pastor, to do all that perteyneth to exhorting, teaching, and governing of the
church: though the scriptures do so plainly distinguish. And if men excelling
in the gift of exhortation, be chosen to attend unto that ministration or
office of exhorting; and others excelling in the gift of teaching, others in
governing, be chosen to execute their gifts in the teachers and governors
offices; this he exclaymeth to be Antichristian: for one office he thinks must
do al.

To this end wresteth he these words of Paul 1 Timothy 5. 17.
The Elders that rule well, are worthy double honor: specially they that labor
in the word and doctrine. The specialtie says M. S. consists not in the
works of ruling and teaching, but in the quality of the works, viz, well ruling
and fupainll teaching. I deney this violent construction: and affirm the
specially here added of Paul, to respect a special distinct person in and for
his work: as may thus be manifested. The Apostle treats of honor, and unto
whom it belongs. 2 Timothy 5. 3
Honor widows (says he) which are widows in deed. Give ver. 17.
double honor to the Elders that rule well: specially to them that labor in
the word. As honor and double honor, respects several persons in their
several estates and employments; so double honor and special double honor,
respects several persons in and for their several works and employments; some
ruling well, othersome laboring in the word. Thus the scripture is plain. But
M. S. will have the specialtie to consist in the quality of the work, viz, well
ruling and painful teaching, As if Paul would have double honor given to them
that rule and teach, but specially if they rule well and teach painfully. But
thus he neither speaks nor means. For all rule is either well or ill: but ill
rule deserves no honor, therefore it were unmeet to appoint double honor in
this respect, where ver. 20.
open rebuke rather is due, and where loss and damage follows, because the
work must burn. 1 Cor. 3. 14. 15. But take it as the Apostle speaks and
intends, widows indeed are to have honor: the well ruling Elders are to have
double honor, thus it is meet, and the meaning evident. Now the specialtie
comes after well ruling, and respects an other work, laboring in the word:
where the former word well is again to be understood. For false teachers
labored in the word, to seduce and deceiv: such were to have no special double
honor, but their Tit, 1. 11.
mouths stopped, and to be 2 Timothy 3. 5. 6.
turned away from, though they creep into howses, though they use Ro^. 16. 18
fair speech and flattering, though they take such pains, as they Mat, 23, 18.
compass sea and land to make one of their profession.

Again, the word laboring makes not the specialtie: as M. Smyth interprets
it, painful teaching; for labor is a common duty lying upon al church
officers, whose office is not in idleness. None can rule well but with labor:
none can teach well but with labor: and therefore PAVL uses this word of all
the officers, 1 Cor. 16. 16. So the specialty here is not for labor simply,
but for labor in the word and doctrine, which some Elders did; differing from
labor in government, which othersome did, as is evide^t both by this and other
scriptures, as 1 Cor. 12. 28. thirdly teachers; after that governors: and Romans
12. 7. 8. he that teaches on teaching: he that rules with diligence.

Thus several men were employed in these several labors or works, and in
respect of the persons employed, is the word specially added, and purposly put
between rulers and teachers, as if the Apostle should say, they that labor in
ruling are worthy of double honor, specially they that labor in teaching. And
that this is Paul's mind his plain words show, when he says, they that rule,
and they that labor: where this word, they, leads to diverse persons; as in
other scriptures, Ioh. s. 29.
they that have done good, and they that have done evil; 1 Cor. 7. 30.
they that weep and they that rejoice; and innumerable such speeches. Again the
word specially being put between them that rule, and them that labor,
confirms this yet more: for it increases the distinction: as when Paul in
the same Epistle says, God is 1 Timothy 4. 10.
the savior of al men, specially of the faithful: the word specially
distinguishes the faithful from other common men of the world, who have not
faith in God, and yet are saved or preserved by him, that is the preserver of
al his creatures, and saves Psa. 36. 6.
man and beast. So to Titus he says, Tit. 1. 10.
there are many deceivers of minds, specially they of the circumcision; where
the word specially distinguishes those of the circumcision from other
deceivers; and means not the same, but different persons. And if here we take
it not so for several persons (where well ruling is first set down, and
specially comes after, for such as labor in the word and doctrine:) we
overthrow the force and grace of Paul's gradation, or stepping to his specialty.
And if he had meant as M. S. takes it, for the quality of the works, done by
the same persons: it should be as otherwhere Paul writes, they that*labour
Romans 16. 6. 12.
much or labor 1 Cor. 15. 10.
more then the rest: but he speaks not so here.

M. S. expounding the place of the same persons to be honored for wise
government, but much more for their painful teaching: confirms not his
doctrine by any circumstances of this scripture, but cites others saying,

Answer.
That this is so see Tit. 1. 9. and 1 These. 5. 2. 1 3. with 1 Timothy 3. 1. 4.

In Timothee the Apostle says every Bishop must be didacticos, and
proistamenos: and therefore that some Elders are only didacticoi, and not
proistamenoi, is contrary to the Apostles intent. Further in Titus, the
Apostle expounds didacticos to be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and
to convince the gainsayers: how then shall some of the Elders be rulers only?

Reply.
That al Bishops must be didacticoi, that is, apt and ready for to teach,
reprove etc. I grant: yet that they must therefore have al one office Ideney. For
Apost. prophets, Evangelists, etc. were al didacticoi, yet differed in office.
But how then shall some of the Elders be rulers only? I answer, even Ruling
Elders are to be didacticoi, and yet have the office of ruling only. For every
one set over others to teach or inform them in faith or ma^ners, must have
aptnes to teach the things perteyning to their office, and convince the
contrary: or else they are unfit for the place.

But have they not then the teachers office? No, for this aptnes to teach is
common to al offices of government, but in several sorts, according to every
man's function. For example, an Apostle must be apt to teach as an Apostle: and
though a man have aptnes to teach as a pastor, yet has he not therefore aptnes
as an Apostle. For the office is greater, and requires greater gifts. So a
ruling Elder must be apt to teach as a ruler: yet has he not therefore aptnes
to teach as a pastor, in whom greater skill is required.

Let us see this in Israel* Aptnes to teach was to be in all the Governors: in
the whole tribe of Levi generally, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. in the priests of Levi more
specially, Mal. 2. 7. Deuteronomy. 24. 8. in the judges of Israel also according to
their office, Deuteronomy. 1, 13, 16. with Exodus 18. 15, 16, 21, 22. For this cause
God gave the 70. Elders, the spirit of prophecy, Number. 11. 17. 25. And in the
reformation by K. Iehoshaphat, we find not only priests and Levites, but other
Princes of the king, sent for to teach the people, 2 Chr. 17, 7, 8. 9. These al
were didacticoi, apt to teach, but in several respects, and measures, and in
several offices.

Otherweise if one will understand aptnes to teach, strictly as in the pastors
office: then are Paul's words to be taken figuratively Synechdoche.
the whole for a part, or general for a particular: as a Bishop, that is a
teac^hing Bishop, must be didacticos. And thus the scripture som^^me speaks;
as Deuteronomy. 33. 8. 10. of the whole tribe of Levi, it is said they shall teach; they
shall put incense etc. when as, though al were to teach, yet all were not to
burn incense but the Luke 1. 9. Nu^. 16. 40
Priests only; Also in Deuteronomy. 10. 8. of the Tribe of Levi in general, it is
said, God separated them, to bear the ark, to stand before the Lord to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name. Yet were there special things about Nu^.
6. 23
blessing, Deuteronomy. 31. ^.
bearing the ark, and other ministration, which belonged to the Priests of the
Levits in particular. Even so Paul writing to Timothee and Titus, of the
Eldership in general, may note some things, which more specially perteyn to
some only in particular.

Touching the word Proistamenos; Provost or Ruler; although I will not deney but
every Elder may be so called in a large sense: yet specially it is the title of
Ruling Elders only. And it is an oversight in M. Smyth to write that
The Apostle says, Every Bishop must be proistamenos: for that word has
relation to the 1 Timothy 3. 4.
ruling of his own house, which every Bishop must be able well to do; but in
relation to the Church, the governing elders only 1 Timothy 5. 17.
are called proistamenoi; and it is their Romans 12. 8.
peculiar titie, even as Pastors and Teachers are peculiar titles to others,
and the name BISHOP and ELDER, Philip. 1. 1 Act, 20.
common to them all.

In the last place M. Sm. repeateth his former reason from Ephesians. 4. how the
Apostle says not some Pastors, some Teachers, but Pastors and Teachers
copulatively. But that is before answered, and the plain meaning of Paul
manifested, to be, some Pastors and some Teachers, as the ancient Syriak
speaks, and other reasons from that and the like scriptures do confirm.

The 2, objection.
1 Cor. 12. 5. 8. 28. The Apostle says, there are diversities of ministeries
namely one that has the word of wisdom, another that has the word of
knowledge, another that has government, verse. 28. Therefore the Eldership
consists of three sort of Elders. etc.

Mr Smythes answer.
First it is granted that there are diversities of ministeries, as Ephe. 4. 11.
1 Timothy 3. 1. 8. Phil. 1. 1. namely Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Deacons. Yet it follows not hereupon, that elders are of diverse sorts, as is
pleaded. see verse. 28.

Again the word diaconia, signifies sometime any spiritual work proceeding
from any member or officer of the Church, as 2 Cor. 8. 4. alms is caled
diaconia, 1 Pet. 4. 10. diaconein signifies any work that proceeds from any
gift. So it may signify here: and all the works that follow almost: may be
referred thither. Only there are certain energemata mentioned in verse. 10.

Reply.
I perceive though the light shines in darkness, yet Ioh. 1. 5.
the darkness comprehends it not: especially when men do Mat. 13. 15.
wink with their eyes, least they should see. The sun shines not clearer at
noon, then the truth shines out of this scripture, with M. S. seeks to darken
with a clowd of deceit. The Apostle teaches, first that 1 Cor. 12. 4.
one and the same spirit of God, bestows on the Church diversities of gifts;
to verse. 8.
one the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, etc. Secondly, that
verse. 5.
one and the same Lord, (Jesus 1 Cor. 8. 6
Christ) gives to his Church, diversities of ministeries or offices, that so
the diverse gifts may be ministered to the people, Romans 12. 7* 8.
doctrine by the teacher; exhortation by the exhorter or pastor; government by
the ruler etc. Thirdly that one and the same God (the 1 Cor. 8. 6
father of whom are all things) 1 Cor. 12. 6.
works or effects diversities of effects or operations in the Church, by
those diverse gifts, and diverse ministeries. For example; as Christ is given for
Act. 3. 22.
Prophet Heb. 9. 11
Priest and Rev. 19. 16.
King of the Church; a Prophet to work upon the knowledge of men, that they may
discern syn and righteousness: a Priest to work upon the will and affections,
killing them as sacrifices, Ro^. 12. 1. 2.
that a new and reasonable creature may be given up to GOD; asking, that the
things taught by prophecy; and applied by preisthood, may be orderly practiced
in life, preserved from 1 Cor. 15. 25.
all adverse power, and in the end perfected: even so in his Church (besides
extraordinary miraculous Ministeries of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Tongues, gifts of healing and the like, which were but for a time,) he has
set ordinary permanent Ministeries to the worlds end; of Ephesians. 4. 11
teachers that by the 1 Cor. 12. 8. Romans 12 7.
word of knowledge should teach and inform the minds of men; of Ephesians. 4. 11
Pastors, that by the 1 Cor. 12. 8. Romans 12 8.
word of wisdom should exhort and apply the truth unto the conscience and heart
of men; and of 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Governors, that by Romans 12. 8 1 Timothy 5. 17
diligent rule, should look unto the practice and walking of men, and conserve
the church in order and peace. Thus God effects diverse effects by the diverse
Ministeries in his Church, as the Apostle teaches.

Now though in the enumeration of the Ministeries, Teachers and Governors 1
Cor. 12. 28.
are evidently distinguished, as thirdly teachers, after that, governors; and
elsewhere as plainly distinct in their administrations, as 1 Timothy 5. 17.
the Elders that rule well, and they that labor in the word and doctrine: and
again, Romans 12. 7. 8.
he that teaches on teaching: he that rules, with diligence: yet Mr Sm. would
darken all this light, with this dimm answer, it folowes not hereupon that
elders are of diverse sorts: see verse 28. as if he should say, though
The Apostle plainly speaks it, yet do not you believe him.

So though Paul expresses the office of Teachers, 1 Cor. 12. 28. which M. S.
will have to be the exegesis that is the exposition of the word Pastors Ephe. 4.
11. and so must needs be the proper and plain name of the office: yet in his
book where he pleads for the abomination of Anabaptisme, he thus proclaims,
among other challenges, Charact. of the beast. in the epist.
Lo. we protest against them, to have a false Ministry of Doctors or
Teachers: as if he would have the world to take notice, that he means to war
against heaven.

With like grace striveth he against the word Diaconia, Ministry, (which the
Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 12. 5.) saying that it signifies sometime any spiritual
work etc. and, so it may signify here. But if such shifting and winding may be
admitted, we shall have no truth so plain, but may be oppugned: yea Iudaisme and
Atheism may be mainteyned. For we allege against Jews to prove the death of
Christ how the Angel prophesied Messiah shall be slain Dan. 9. 26. I, says the
Jew, but Messiah sometime signifies any one that is anointed; Priest or King;
and so may it here be meant of any anointed governor, and not of him that is
properly the Messiah. Tell an Atheist that Genesis 1. 1.
God made heaven and earth; and he may answer that Aelohim God is sometime used
to signify Angels, Psalm. 8. 5. with Heb. 2. 7. sometime to signify Magistrates,
Psalm. 82. 1. 6. and therefore he believes not any such God properly, as we
profess. Thus every truth, upon a diverse use of the word, may be turned away.

But shows Mr. Sm. any reason, why diaconia should so signify here? none at
all: but says, so it may be, and tells of certain energemata mentioned verse.
10. which is as much to the edifying of the reader, as if he had told him there
are certain giants Number. 13. 29.
of the sons of Anak, with whom it is not safe to meddle.

He should not thus trouble the reader with clouds; the truth is clear and
plain. For diaconia is the most proper fit word that the Apostle could possibly
use; it being the ordinary word used for ministry of every kind; as the
ministry or office of the Apostleship, Romans 11. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 12, the
ministry of the Evangelists, 2 Timothy 4. 5. the ministry of Pastors or
Teachers, Col. 4. 17. the Ministry of Rulers, and ministry of Deacons, Romans
12. 7. 8. Act. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 12. 13. So Diaconos is every minister, and
Diaconia every ministry or administration of what sort soever. Now Paul here
spoke 1 Cor. 12. 4.
before of diverse gifts to be administered; and verse. 6.
after of diverse effects or operations of the gifts being administered; and
between verse. 5.
booth mentions diversities (diaconioon) of ministeries or offices whereby
those gifts should be administered and manifested in the Church, that they might
be effectual: which what can they be, but the offices or ministeries committed
to men and executed by them for this end? Even as immediately follows verse. 7.
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. And
after by a similitude of verse. 12. etc.
the body, and members, applied verse. 27. 28.
to the Church and officers, he confirms the same. But though the wisdom of
God Prove. 1. 23.
powers out her mind unto us, and makes us to understand her words: yet some
men verse. 30.
will none of her counsel, they despise all her correction.

The 3 Objection.
The Apostle Romans 12. 6. 8. makes an opposition between prophecy and an
office and makes five kinds of officers, Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, Deacons,
Widows.

M. S. Answer.
That is denied to be the true resolution of the place etc. for although there
be five several actions repeted, yet does it not follow that there are five
several officers to perform those actions: for one person may perform them al,
and yet be no officer, viz. teach, exhort, rule, distribute, show mercy. 1 Cor.
14. 3. 26. 31. Romans 12, 13. 1 Cor. 5. 5.

Reply.
Behemoth is so big that he Job. 40. 10. 18.
trusts to draw up Iarden into his mouth; but no beast (I trow) weeneth that
he can drink up all the waters of the sea. Korah thought so well of his Number, 16.
1. 3. 10.
holiness and ability, that though he were but an ordinary Levite, he could
do the Priests office also: but I never heard of man til now, that could
perform all the actions that are to be done in a church. The Apostles could not
Act. 6. 2 3, 4.
tend to two offices therein at once, but got others to do one; and
notwithstanding complained of their inabilitie in that, saying 2 Cor. 2. 16.
who is sufficient for these things? And may one person now perform al actions?
needs must the works become much more easy; or the person that does them,
much more mighty, then any that lived in the Apostles time. How ever it may be
in distress and extremity, that one man may do some things one after another,
about al these actions, yet perform them he cannot. And who but one stricken
Deuteronomy. 28. 28. 29.
with madness and blindness and astonying of heart, (as Moses did prophecy) to
grope at noon day, as the blind gropeth in darkness, could read this scripture
Romans 12. and the other places cited, and gather such a doctrine from them? The
Apostles purpose in Romans 12. is to persuade unto virtue, among virtues
specially to ver. 3.
sobriety or modesty, which bewtifieth al good actions. Hereunto he
persuades by this, that every man has but his part and mesure from God, and
one has not al. This he confirms by the similitude of the ver. 4.
body, whose members have not al one office or action, but many: ver. 5.
so is it with the church; for God has given ver. 6.
diverse gifts unto the many members or persons of the same; some have simply
the gift of prophecy, which they may use to the edifying of the church, some
have an ver, 7.
office or ministry also whereunto they are appointed and must attend. Some
are Teachers, ver. 8.
some Exhorters, some Distributers, some Rulers, some shewers of mercy. Every
one of these must look to the administration and dispensation of his gift, in
sobriety, according to the measure and vocation that he has from God, for the
good of the whole body of the church.

The like doctrine is taught again, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 8 -- 12. etc. Now let him
that reads consider, whither M. Sm, doctrine that one person may perform al
these, be not as directly opposite to the Apostles meaning and scope, as
darkness to light? But he has yet more to answer.

Answer.
Again the distributive particle Eite four times repeted, in prophecy,
diaconia, exhorting, and teaching, imports thus much: that the Apostles
intention is not to subordinate teaching and exhorting to diaconia, but to
oppose each of these 4. particulars to other, as thus: Prophecy is the
manifestation of a gift, 1 Cor. 14. 3. Diaconia is the office, and there are
diverse kinds thereof 1 Cor. 12. 5. Teaching is one action or work of the
prophets or officers 1 Cor. 14. 26. Exhorting is another action or work of
them. 1 Cor. 14. 3. Hence it follows that teaching and exhorting are as well
subordinate to prophecy as to diaconia.

Reply.
Thorns and snares (says Pro. 22. ^
Solomon) are in the way of the froward: that find we here. For to trouble and
entangle the simple reader, al shifts are sought out, least truth should
prevail. First the objection was of M. Smyths own contriveing, as he liked
best to answer: otherweise he could not (I suppose) be ignorant, that most
learned men of these times, (so far as I have seen) though they detest his
error, do grant his conclusion. But he concludes not the question, namely that
1. Teaching, 2. Exhorting, 3. distributing, 4. ruling, 5. showing mercy, are al
to be performed in the church by one person: or that Paul intends any such
thing here. I have before showed the contrary.

But I will labor to break his snare, that the simple fall not therein. diaconia
he rightly interprets Office, and says, there are diverse kinds thereof:
citing 1 Cor. 12. 5. Let this be compared compared with his answer before to
the second objection: where he pleaded that diaconia in 1 Cor. 12. 5. might
signify a work. There he set himself to cavil against the truth, here unawares
he grants it. Well, seeing diaconia here is an office; and there be offices
diverse: let us proceed. Teaching (says he) is one work of the prophets or
Officers; exhorting is an other work of them. Of them, I grant; for they are
diverse: but is it of him, that is of one and the same officer? is there any word
or title that intimates this? none at al, but the contrary: for as the
Apostle mentions diverse works, teaching exhorting etc. so mentions he
diverse persons, the teacher, the exhorter, the distributer, the ruler. Neither
does he say, let him that teaches, teach, and exhort, and distribute, and
rule, as if one man should do al: but, let him that teaches teach, let him
that exhorts exhort. As if he should speak of the members of the body (which
similitude he used) let that which sees, see circumspectiv: let that which
hears, hear attentively; let that which speaks, speak warily etc. Would any
reasonable man think, that one member must do al these actions, that the eye
because it sees, it also must hear, and speak: and not understand this of the
three several members, the eye, ear, and tongue? Even so unreasonable is the
collection, that Paul should mean one person to do those several actions.

But M. S. striving about the particle eite, which signifies whither and or,
and applying it to the 4. particulars; makes the two last to be teaching and
exhorting: wherein he uses deceit for advantage. For he puts the action for
the actor that does it. The Apostle says, or he that teaches, or he that
exhorts, so noting two persons: M. Sm. says or teaching, or exhorting, so
noting two actions. Thus he intending to have many actions done by one person,
wresteth the scripture, and makes it speak after his own fancy.

This being observed, his pleading about Eite will be little worth, for the
Apostle by it, dis joyneth things thus. Ro^. 12. 6.
Gifts ye have diverse, which gifts ye use and manifest, either by prophecy
(which 1 Cor. 14. 1. 31,
any private person in the church may do, even as al other like gifts, of
verse. 26.
tongues, interpretations, Psalms and the like:) or by ministry that is by
office and charge laid upon you, which as it 1 Cor. 12. 5.
is diverse, so every one must Act. 6. 3. 4.
attend unto, and look that he Col. 4. 17.
fulfill the same

Thus is here a full and perfect distribution of all the gifts that are in the
church, by the two general sorts of persons, or subjects that have them: 1.
private brethren, or 2. publik officers.

This first division being perfect: that which follows is an under division,
or an other division, not of the gifts, but of the persons that have the gifts:
which are five, 1. Teachers, 2. Exhorters, 3. Distributers, 4. Rulers, 5.
Shewers of mercy. The two first whereof have the sign of disjunction or
before the^, in the other it is to be understood: for such defect is common.
Now al these persons are to be referred, either to the former 1. prophecy, or
2. ministry, that is office: or both. But seeing no scripture, that I know of,
speaks of distribution, or Ruling, or Showing mercy, under the name of
prophecy: therefore I refer them to the latter word Office or Ministry, to
which they al agree. Teaching and exhorting I grant are done in 1 Cor. 14. 3
prophecy, by private brethren: but that they are more specially done in 1 Timothy 5. 17.
ministry by publik officers, none I think will deney. And that here Paul
referrs them to ministry, seems to me most evident: for prophecy was
limited by him, Ro^, 12. 6.
according to the proportion of faith: so that if any brother in prophesying,
kept unto the proportion of faith he did yenough: but an officer must not only
do this, but must also attend unto the continual doing of it, 2 Timothy 4. 2
in season, out of season, Act. 20. 20.
privately, publikly, and therefore must 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16.
give himself hereunto; whereas a private brother follows other vocation, and
speaks but 1 Cor. 14. 30.
when he sees occasion. For this cause, Paul says here, Romans 12. 7
an office should be in the office, or ministry in the ministration: meaning
that it should be waited upon, and executed in sobriety. And then coming to
the Teacher and Exhorter, he uses like speech, in doctrine and in exhortation,
meaning that they should give themselves to these works, and execute them with
modesty. So the officers, rather then the private brethren (upon whom no such
burden is laid) seem here to be intended by teacher and exhorter, and so
consequently diverse officers, as there be diverse actions for them to perform,
and have diverse gifts of God for the same end.

But M. S. continues his answer thus.

Further if Diaconia be the genus to these 5. species following, then I say
Answer.
that Diaconia signifies not an office, but a work: and of works there are
those 5. kinds. That diaconia does sometime signify a work is plain. 2 Cor.
8. 4. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Lastly, the Apostle that knew how to speak would never have
made teaching and exhortation members distributive with prophecy and diaconia,
if he had intended to make them species subordinate to diaconia: therefore
questionless that is not his intention.

Rather then he will yield to the truth, he seeks every corner of error: Reply.
and now the diverse use of the word diaconia must again be urged, against the
proper meaning of the same, against the evident light of this scripture, and
against the man's own former interpretation. And sure he is used to rough ways
and words, that says it is plain, diaconia signifies a work: the scriptures
that he quoteth show it not. The word signifies ministry or office, and
ministration or service done unto any other: but work is an unproper
interpretation. Let linguists judge. Nay let M. S. himself judge, if he will be
tried by himself; for in his book against M. Bernard (written after this) he
has this proposition; Parallel. page 93.
The true ministry has a true office, in execution whereof it is exercised;
Romans 12. 7. 1. Cor. 12. 5. 28 Ephesians. 4. 11. I would gladly know how M. Sm. will
prove his aslertion from these scriptures, if diaconia do not signify an office
in this place. But it is Gods special judgment against haeretiks, that they
should be Titus 3. 11.
autocatacrit^i, condemned of themselves. Yet were it translated work, what
would it help him? Of works there are 5. kinds says he. Who denies it? but
are there not also as many kind of workers? let this be disproved: otherweise
to strive for the former, is to fight with his shadow.

The Apostle (we doubt not) knew well how to speak; and therefore spoke not as
M. S. feighneth, of teaching and exhortation as distributive members; but of
the teacher and exhorter. And all men know that an office and officer have fit
reference each to other; so ministry being mentioned in general, the several
ministers ar fitly next named. But of this point I spoke before.

The 4. objection
The Apostle by the commandment of Christ; writes to the Angels of the ^*
Churches of Asia Rev. 1. and 2. and 3. That is to the Pastors which are but one
in every particular Church. For so the words are, to the Angel of the Church,
etc.

Mr Smythes answer.
First it can never be proved by scriptures, that there was but one Pastor in a
Church, it is plain, Act. 20. 28. that there were many in the Church of Ephesus,
(that was one of those 7. Churches) that did perform the work of the Pastor,
which is poimainein to feed; even all the elders verse. 17. with verf. 28. And
therefore there were many Pastors in that Church in Paul's time. Again, al
churches had officers of one sort, and one kind of Presbytery; etc.

Reply.
This is the last objection which M. Sm. makes and answers. Other reasons
many there are, more pregnant: this alone without conference with other
scriptures, I know will not prove many sorts of officers But it may serve to
confirm the point thus: seeing in Ephesus the were Act. 20. 17.
many Elders; and Christ here directs his Epistle to the Rev. 2. 1.
Angel or Messenger of that Church; this seems to be one that had the
principal charge of the whole, that is the Pastor. But it can not be proved
(says M. S.) that there was but one Pastor in a church. Neither can it be
proved (say I) that there were many. Yes says he, all the Elders in Ephesus
were Act. 20. 28.
poimainein to feed, or do the Pastors work therefore there were many Pastors.
I answer, it follows not; for the reason deceives by aequivocatio^ or double
meaning of the word. Pastor, generally taken is any governor; paricularly and
strictly (whereof now we speak) it is the Romans 12.
Exhorter, or he that has 1 Cor. 12.
the word of wisdom. In the general meaning Christ is Joh. 10.
the Pastor, the Apostles Ioh. 21. 16
Pastors, 1 Pet. 5. 2
all the Elders of a particular Church ar Pastors. Will he conclude hereupon,
that an Apostle and a Pastor properly so called, is all one office?

The Apostle shows the contrary, Ephesians. 4. 11. As then an Apostle and a
Pastor be diverse officers, though both do poimainein, feed: so Pastors,
Teachers, Rulers, may be different officers, though all do poimainein, that is
feed and rule the flock.

The Pastors in Israel, in the scriptures which he before alleged, Ier. 23. 1.
Ezekiel. 34. 2, had they al one particular office? Far otherwise. For Priests and
Levites were distinct in office, and other Elders distinct from them both, as
before I have manifested. yea not only the Sacrificers, but the civil
governors were Pastors. K. David was a Pastor Psalm. 78. 70. 71. 72. 1 Chronicles.
11. 2.
taken to feed Iaakob and Israel. Accordingly in Act. 20. and 1. Pet. 5. all the
Elders may feed, and yet not al be in one and the same, but in distinct office.

Answer
Further, (says Mr. Sm.) the Angel of every one of those Churches, does not
signfy one Pastor only in every Church, but either the college of Pastors if
they were many, or the company of the most sincere and holy men, that most
opposed the corruptions of the Church, or were most holy and zealous in life and
doctrine. That an Angel signifies a company of men, is plain, Rev. 14. 6. 8.
9. and 18, 4.

Reply.
It is not plain, but very obscure and figurative, if an Angel signifies at any
time, a company of men; the scriptures alleged show it not. For though there is
no Angel or messenger mentioned, but there is a people also implied, to whom he
is a messenger; as there is no Pastor, but implies a flock; yet is not the
Pastor the flock, nor the Angel the people. Special persons are rather noted by
the Angels in my judgment. To take the Angel for a company of the most sincere
and holy men; is further from the mark: seeing some are written to, in whom
little zele or sincerity can be gathered, Rev. 3. 1. 15. and to pass by the
officers, and direct the Letters to private persons, and such especially; is
not according to order; encommended by Christ to the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Answer.
Lastly (says M. S.) in all likelihood there were some extraordinary men yet
living in the Churches, either Prophets or Evangelists, that had extraordinary
gifts, whose zele and holiness might win them special estimation in the
Churches: in regard whereof it might be the holy Ghost intending his Epistles
to the whole Church, chiefly directs them to these Persons so qualified, as
men best able to prevayl with the Church, and caleth them Angels, whether one
or more: as John the Baptist is caled an Angel. Mark. 1. 2.

Reply
Any thing has more likelihood with Mr. Sm. then that which is most likely to
be true. Can this have all likelihood, that the Evangelists or Prophets
extraordinary, on whose Ephe. 2. 20.
foundation Christ's Church is builded, should come to that corrupt estate,
which some of these Angels were come into? Rev. 3. 1. 15. Has it al likelihood
that such as were officers of all the Churches in general, should be entitled
Angels of particular Churches? But it seems M. Sm. thinks the name Angel
must needs import some zealous or godly person: wherein he is mistaken. For the
Angels are the Rev. 1. 20
stars in the firmament of the Church, and of these stars or Angels, many are
Reu. 12. 4
cast by the Dragons tail, from heaven to earth, and some have Rev. 9. 1.
the key of the bottomless pit; and some Angels Rev. 7. 1. Song. 4. 16.
hold the wind of Gods spirit from blowing on the earth. So that the Angels or
stars in the book of Revelation, usually signify the ministers of the
Churches, whither good or evil. Who rather in likelihood have the title of
angels or messengers given unto them, both from the like title given by God
himself to the Priests of Israel, Mal. 2. 7. and by the Jews common phrase,
who called him that was chief ruler in their Synagogues, Sheliach tsibbur, that
is the Legate or Messenger of the congregation; which name Sheliach the
Rabbines R. D. Kimchi, Comme^t. in Mal. 2. 7. and Hag. 1. 13.
use for Maleach an Angel; and the Chaldee paraphrast puts Meshammesh that
is, a Minister, in the sted.

Now Christ used to speak familiarly and to the understanding of the people,
and so I doubt not but he does here. And although it be questionable whither
there may be more pastors then one in a Church; yet see I no likelihood of more
then one here; though many Elders. For the Pastor both by his name 1 Cor. 12. 8.
gift and Ro^. 12. 8.
employment, has special charge of the flock in such things as Christ writes
of to these Churches. And as Archippus in the Church at Colosse is in special
charged to Colos. 4. 17
take heed to his Ministry to fulfill it, (though it is to be thought there
were more Elders with him, as Act. 14. 23.
in all other Churches:) so might Polycarpus (the Pastor in John's time of the
Church in Smyrna, as Jrenaeus l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
writers record;) be Rev. 2. 8.
written to in special, to look to his Ministry, and so the other Pastors,
the Angels, in their several Churches; that by them Christ's mind, might be
signified to the congregations. This course God takes usually; his messengers
the watchmen are to hear the word at his mouth, and give the people warning
from him Ezekiel. 3. 17. Things that concerned the whole Church of Israel, were
first spoken from God to Moses, from Moses to the Elders, from them to the
people: Exodus 19. 3. 7. and Exodus 12, 1, 3, 21. God does nothing but he
reveleth his secret to his servants the prophets, Amos. 3. 7. So in this
Revelation, God Rev. 1. 1.
gave it to Christ, Christ to an Angel, (properly so called;) the Angel to
John: and John writes to the Angel of the church, the Minister: that by him it
may come to all the Congregation.

Thus have we heard the reasons and arguments whereby M. Sm. labors to
manifest that the triformed presbytery (as he calls it) consisting of three
kinds of Elders, Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, is none of Gods ordinance, but man's
device: and Antichristian. wherein what weakness or vanity rather, has
appeared, the judicious reader, may discern; and how little cause this chalenger
had, to cry out the second time for an answer, with, Char. of the B. Epis.
lo, we protest against them to have a false government of a triformed
presbytery, But Christ who has set these for officers in his church, and
holds all the stars in his right hand; will rescue and deliver them from the
hand of aliants, Ps. 144. 11.
whose mouth talks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

OF THE TREASVRIE.
THe last point of difference from us Mr. Smyth sets down thus Dif. after
the preface.
We hold that in contributing to the church treasury, there ought to be both a
separation from them that are without, and a sanctification of the whole action
by prayer and thanksgiving. Of these and other points about the Deacons office,
he speaks page 28
after in his book. Wherein, if he would have his readers think we differ in all, he notably abuses both them and us. But of the two points mentioned in his
article, I will briefly entreat. First, for the separation from the^ without,
thus he writes page 30.
There ought to be a separation in alms and contribution to the treasury, as
well as in other parts of our spiritual co^^union. Act. 4. 32. and 5. 13. 2 Cor.
6. 17. Act. 2. 42. Heb. 13. 16. 2 Cor. 8. 7. therf^^e they that are without, if
they give any thing, must lay it a part severally from the treasury, and it
must be employed to common use. Mat. 27. 6. 7.

How M. S. gathers his proposition from those scriptures, and how far he will
stretch them, I cannot tell: the first place (Act, 4, 32.) mentions co^munitie
of al goods among the saints: the second place Act. 5. 13. shows how no
other man durst join unto the^: the third place 2 Cor. 6. 17. requires Gods
people to come out and separate from unbeleevers, and touch no unclean thing.
If he match these things thus together, as if the goods of unbeleevers ar
unclea^, and not to be touched or received of the Saints, he misseth of Paul's
intent: for upon this ground, that Psa. 24. 1.
the earth is the Lords, and the plenty of it: the Apostle proves it lawful
for Christians to partake with unbeleevers at their table in 1 Cor. 10. 26. 27.
whatsoever things is set before them: so that meat drink, clothing, or money
may be received from them: neither are these or any like outward things, the
unclean things that he forbids to touch, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Consequently, if we may
go to their table, we may have them at ours: if in our poverty we may receiv
releef of the^: in their poverty, we may and should releev them: wherefore
there is that communion in these carnal things permitted: which in spiritual
things, as prayer, sacraments etc. is unlawful: and though it be said Act 2.
42. they continued in the Apost. doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and
prayer: yet he that shall gather we may have no more communion with an
unbeleever in eating and drinking, then in prayer; mistaketh quite. We know
that to the defiled and unbeleeving no thing is pure, Tit. 1. 15.
as Paul says, but unto the pure al things are pure: and if an idol cannot
defile Gods creature so, but a Christian may 1 Cor. 8. and 10, 25. etc.
use it, (so it be not with offense) neither can the idolater.

In some outward things, I observe difference between the Jews state and ours.
They went not in to, nor ate with men uncircu^cised, Act. 10. 28. and 11, 3. we
go in to men unbaptised, and eat with them, 1 Cor. 10, 27. They did not eat of
al meats set before the^ by infidels, Dan. 1. 8. we do eat of all that is set
before us by such, 1 Cor. 10. 25. 26, 27. They admitted not an uncircumcised
into the temple Eze. 44 9. Act. 21, 28, 29. we forbid not any unbaptised to
come into our assemblies. 1 Cor. 14. 23 -- 25, Notwithstanding his I find among
them, that Solomon asked and received outward things as timber for the temple,
2 Chr. 2. 3. 8.
of Huram King of Tire: and king Darius gave Ezr. 6. 8. etc.
of his own revenues toward the temple and worship of God, and it was not
refused. In Israel I find not that any admitted into the publik place of the
word and prayers, was forbidden there if he would to contribute: neither any
such law made by Christ. Rather the ground laid by the Apostle shows the
contrary: if the Gentiles (says he) be made partakers of their spiritual
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things. Romans 15.
27. Unbelievers are admitted to the ministry of the word in Christian
assemblies, and so made partakers of our spiritual things; if then and there
they will give of their carnal things, upon what ground may we refuse them?

It is alleged, how 2 Cor. 8. 7. the communion of almose is called a grace, and
in Heb. 13. 16. a sacrifice. I acknowledge it thus to be in the saints,
whither they give it in publik or private. For when he says, Heb. 13. 16.
to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased; he means it not only of publik contribution in the church, but of
private distribution to any at any time. Paul brought almose and offerings to
his nation Act. 24. 17. and himself received such a sacrifice from the
Philippians, Philip. 4. 18. And if any one Christian in private had sent him
the like, had it not been a sacrifice also? Wherefore the Almose of the Saints
are sacrifices, though one give to another Mat. 6. 4.
in secret: yea if a Christian releev Gal 6. 10
an unbeleever in poverty and distress, it is a sacrifice and sweet odor to
God. If therefore upon this ground we may not receiv it of unbeleevers in the
publik Church, because it is in the saints a communion of grace and sacrifice:
how may we receiv it of such in private?

But (says M. Sm.) they that are without if they give any thing, must lay it
apart, several from the treasury, and it must be employed to common use. Mat.
27. 6. 7. This position I will not absolutely condemn: neither can I yet grant
it, for the proof is insufficient. For whereas the Jews (Mat. 27) would not put
Judas wages into their treasury, it was not because he was one without; for
Judas was a Jew, no stranger unto them: but because it was the price of blood,
therefore they might not put it into the treasury. This teaches us, that
goods gotten by violence, extorsion, murder, theft or other like evil way: may
not be put into the treasury, though the members of the Church do offer them.
But this is no more for those without, then for those within. And for common
use of al unbeleevers gifts; I suppose this example will not bear it out. For if
in the poverty and distress of Christ's church, they which are not of the
same, minister releif thereunto, (which if they do not, it shall be one reason
of their Mat. 25. 41 -- 45.
condemnation at the day of judgment:) has not the church liberty to use and
enjoy these benefits for themselves, seeing 1 Cor. 10 26.
the earth is the Lords and the plenty thereof? must they needs bestow it for
the behoof of strangers, as was Judas hire? I am otherwise minded, for the
reasons before rendered. Howbeit concerning these things if any shall better
inform us, by the word of God, we shall be willing to receiv it.

For the latter branch, that it should be sanctified with blessing or thanks
giving to God, we do well approve; upon that general ground of thanks unto God
for all his benefits: and as any do give or send more special releef, so more
special thanks to be rendered therefore, as we are directed, 2 Cor. 9. 12 -- 15.

Albeit for the manner of performing this thing, as whither a special prayer is
to be made before the contributio^, and a special thanksgiving after: or
whither in the general prayers of the Church, it is to be sanctified among
other the publik actions; there may be some question, and I will not contend:
let every one use herein, the wisdom that God gives them. Only I do observe,
how M. Sm. himself makes page* 30.
a quere, at what time of the Lords day, and after what manner the treasury is
to be collected: which shows in him no certainty for the form of this
business. and I doubt not but as he, so we al may be to seek, for the most
covenient manner and order of doing many things: wherein if any lust to be
contentious, I say with the Apostle, 1 Cor, 11 16.
we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.

A FEW OBSERVATIONS UPON SOME OF M. SMYTHES Censures, in his answer to M.
Bernard.
Mr Smyth in his printed 1609.
late book, caled Parallels, censures etc. seeks occasion to censure some
things which I had written in answer to Mr. Bern. but chiefly insisteth upon
the question of ecclesiastical government, wherabout he charge me with
antichristianisme. If it were not for others that may stumble at this reproach,
I would bear it in silence; minding my adversary so fickle and unconstant, as
he holds almost to nothing that himself has written; and I would restin Gods
work, who as already he has made this man Psalm. 83. 13.
like unto a wheel, so, if he repent not, in due time will make him like
stubble before the wind. For from the faith which he defended in that his book
he presently after, in great mesure fell away himself. The constitution of our
Church, (in which estate himself then professed to be with us,) he writes of
it thus Parall. page, 15.
I am bold to pronounce etc. our true constitution to be the most honorable
and bewtiful ornament of our Church; more glorious then our true Ministry,
worship, and government. Contrary to this, a few days after, he setts out The
character of the Beast, wherein (having dissolved and forsaking his former true
and glorious constitution,) he exclaimeth against us, (as before page 3.
I have showed,) as having a false Church falsely constituted, and therefore no
one ordinance of the Lord true among us. Thus Rev. 8. 10. 11*
Wormwood fell from heaven.

Again in this answer to Mr. Bernard he acknowledges, Parall. p. 14. and 23.
the apostate Church of the 10. tribes in the old Testament to be a Church
falsely constituted; and so the Churches of Antichrist in the N. Testament:
contraryweise in his Character of the Beast, seking shifts for his anabaptisme,
he says Char. page 48.
Isreal's apostasy did not destroy the true constitution of the Church, but
Antichrists does, etc. I leave these and other like flowers of contradiction,
for others to gather that deal in that controversy. Only because his answer
to Mr. Bern. seems to be written in defense of our cause, and so may be taken
of posterity: I would have the reader take notice, that the silver there is
mixed with dross and the wine, with the Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
gal of aspes. As where Mr. Sm. says, that Parall. p. 30.
to the constitution of the typical Church, (meaning the church of Israel)
there was not required true holiness but ceremonial cleannes. This is a false
and blasphemous assertion, injurious to Gods holy majesty, as making him to
constitutea Church of hypocrites: and it is evidently overthrown by the
covenants made between God and them; Genesis 17. Exodus 19. 5. 6. 8. Exodus 20. and
21. etc. and 24. 3. 4. 7. 8. Levit. 19. 2. with 1. pet. 1. 15 16. Deuteronomy. 5. 1.
2. 3. and 26. 17. 18. 19. and 29. 10. 11. 12. 13. etc.

So when he says, the Israelites Parall. p. 30.
did worship to repentance, we do worship from repentance: therefore they might
and did worship, thereby to reconcile themselves to God, we being reconciled to
God and accepted in Christ, do proceed to offer to the Lord the calves of our
lips, the best grace we have with us, first men declare their repentance* and
then we receive them into our communion to worship with us: with the^ first men
were received into typical communion, and then they were trained up to
repentance and faith in Christ etc. These and the like distinctions Mr. Sm.
has fetched out of his own heart, not from the word of God: for although there
be differences many between them and us, as touching outward rites and
services, ended and abolished by Christ, (as the Epistle to the Ebrues
shows;) yet as touching the substance of their religion, worship,
constitution etc. as touching repentance, faith, reconciliation to God etc.
there was no such differences as Mr. Sm. feighneth. They had the law to show
them their fyn, and to bring them to Christ: so have we. Mat. 5. 17. Romans 3 30.
31 and 7. 7. -- 12. 21. etc. Iam. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. We have the gospel, to show
us our righteousness by Christ, without works of the law: so had they, Heb. 4.
2. Levit. 26 42 -- 45. with Luke 1. 54. 55* 72. 73. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. -- 12. 13. 14.
with Romans 10. 5. 6. -- 8. Genesis 15. 6. Psalm. 32. 1. 2. with Romans 4. 6. etc. 1
Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. Hebr. 11. Only in the manner of administration the Law
and gospel, there be differences manifested.

Also when he Parall. p 30.
says, that the Jews moral uncleannes did not pollute their ceremonial
communion; that their real wickedness did not pollute their ceremonial or
typical CHURCH, worship and communion; but lawfully they might have typical
communion in typical worship, that were typically clean, though they were
wicked in deed: these assertions, manifest M. S. to be not only a typical but
a real seducer and deceiver of minds in deed; who would make us believe that if
a man in Israel had but touched his own wife lying Levit. 12. 2. 5. and 15. 19.
etc.
in her childbed, or put aapart for her disease; if he came to worship in ^^e
tabernacle, and had not washed and cleansed himself according to the law, he
polluted the Church and communion of the Saints: but though he had committed
adultery with his neighours wife, and came into the tabernacle in his syn to
worship, without repentance; yet he polluted not the Church, but lawfully
might have communion in the word, prayer, sacrifices etc. which unclean
doctrine is evidently condemned, by these and many other like scriptures.
Levit. 4. 2. 3. 13. 14. 22. 23. 27. 28. 35. Levit. 6. 2 -- 7. Number. 15. 22. 23.
24. 27. 29. 30. 31. Levit. 19. 17. Levit. 18. 29. 30. Josh. 22. 16. 17. 18. 20.

But upon these and like rotten grounds, M. S. has now sought to build his
towr of Anabaptisme, which the breath of the Lord, will throw down upon his head.

Although therefore the cause which M. S. then had in hand was good, and many
good things are in that book; yet the Eccles. 10. 1.
dead flies have caused to stink, and putrified the ointment of the
apothecarie: as in these so in other points, which the wise must observe.
Leaving therefore those things, I come to the matter which he makes against
me, and in his foresaid book of Parallels, page 67. has thus inveighed.

But Mr Ains. steppeth up with a new kind of Antichristianisme, never heard of
before: and he teaches us, if we will believe him, that Christ's ruling power is
in the Eldership; and that the Pope and Prelates, ar I said; ar antichrists,
not for taking. etc.
not Antichrists, for taking into their hands the power of the multitude, but
the power of Christ.

Here first Mr S. makes his own collection, to be my assertion. I said not,
neither would say thus absolutely, Christ's ruling power is in the Eldership, my
words are these (Counterp. pa. 176) We acknowledge Christ to have ordained a 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Presbytery or Eldership, and that in Tit. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Act. 14. 23.
every Church: for to 1 Timothy 5. 17.
teach and rule them by his own word and laws.

That which I wrote, I plainly confirmed by scriptures in the margin, which
the reader may search and judge of: neither has this adversary taken them
away; or said ought against them; or yet set them down in his book (where he
page 68.
printed my words) for his reader to take notice of.

That which I have written, is further confirmed, for the substance of it, by
Mr Sm. himself, in the very same book of Parallels, the last page but one,
where he has set down this argument. The government of the primitive Apostolik
institution, was by a college of Pastors, or presbytery. The government of the
English assemblies, is by an antichristian M. S. Argument.
Prelate and his officers. Therefore, The government of the English assemblies is
not the primitivs Apostolik government. The mayor is evident; etc.

Again, in this very passage, where he treats of popular government, he is
driven into such straits, as force him to say: page 55.
We dispute not whither the Elders must rule or not: but we dispute who have the
negative voice, etc. and a little after: yet we say the Elders are to lead and
govern al persons and causes of the Church. Who now will not wonder, at this
man's malice, to charge me with Antichristianisme for my writing: and himself in
the same book, to write as he has done.

And were i^ in deed Antichristianisme, as he says, which I have stepped up
with: yet he overlasheth with his tongue, in calling it a new kind, and
neverheard of before; considering what he had heard before of M. Bernard, (if
not of others) as the opinion of those that he caleth Puritans. But let us turn
the edge of his own argument against himself, thus: The government of the
primitive Apostolik institution, was by a college of of pastors or presbytery.
(This M. S. himself defends,) But popular government by the multitude, is not
the government by a college of Pastors or presbytery. Therefore, popular
government by the multitude (which yet M. Sm. would also plead for,) is not the
government of the primitive Apostolik institution.

Again his argument helps me thus, The government of the primitive apostolik
institution is not Antichristianisme. The government which J plead for, in
answer to M. Bern. is the government of the primitive Apostolik institution;
(for it is the government by the Presbytery,) Therefore the government which I
plead for is not Antichristianisme.

Thus might M. Sm. have been better advised what he censured in me: if he had
duly weighed, what he wrote himself.

In his confutation of my writing, he first would page 67.
have it remembered, that the power of Christ which they speak of, is a
ministerial delegated power, given to man etc. I answer, that I had to deal
with M. Bernards book, and knew nothing at all, of (...) which had passed
between M. S. and him: but finding him to have set down things so badly, as
that he might make his reader beleev, there was no other difference, between
Papist, protestant, puritan, and Brownist, (as he caleth them,) concerning
church government; then only who should administer the same: whither the Pope,
or a Prelate, or the presbytery, or the multitude: I thought it needful in my
answer, to show the reader a further difference, even in the power and
jurisdiction it self, which whosoever do administer, they make themselves
Antichrists: seeing the Pope and al Papal prelates, challenge such ruling
power, as incrocheth upon Christ's own right: besides their usurping of the
power of the church.

And where I say that the Pope is Antichrist, not for taking into his hands the
power of the multitude, but of Christ, to rule and govern the church as head of
the same: my meaning was not altogether to free the Pope of Antichristianitie,
for taking the power of the multitude, which I acknowledge to be a heighnous
syn in him: but for to show by way of comparison, that the other syn is much
greater, to usurp the power of Christ. And thus I write, not only from the
general equity of the law, which Mat. 22. 37 -- 39. 1 Samuel 2. 25
makes a syn against God, to be much more then a syn against man: but also
from the like speeches in the scriptures. For when Jeremy said in the Lords
name to Israel, Ier. 7. 22.
J spoke not to your fathers, nor commanded them when J brought them out of the
land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offrings and sacrifices: but this thing I
commanded them, obey my voice etc and when Paul 1 Cor. 1. 17
said Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach, etc. neither of them denied
simply, the things which God had plainly Number. 15. Lev. 1. etc.
spoken, and 1 Cor. 1. 16
Paul practiced; but only by way of comparison: even so do I. And yet if I
should stand upon fit and proper terms, I would not call the Pope Antichrist,
for doing that which the people in Christian liberty should do: but for doing
that which Christ only is to do, who is L. and head of the church. Even as the
Apostle John makes such to be Antichrists in his days, as denied Jesus 1 John
2. 22. 2 John 7.
to be the Christ, or come in the flesh: so all that in these days, deney or
oppugn Christ, are properly Antichrists: and they that bereave the brethren of
their liberty, are tyrans and oppressors of the church. But as things ar some
time taken largely, he that synneth against his neighbor, may be said to syn
against Genesis 39. 9
God and 1 Cor. 8. 12
Christ. Anabaptists, Arrians, and al other heretics, ar Antichrists: and so I
acknowledge the Pope for robbing the church of her power, may be called
Antichrist.

But M. Sm. to help the Pope, if thereby he may think to hurt me, pleads page
68.
that the Pope does not assume that power which Christ as king has in his own
hands reserved to himself. This is catholikly spoken of him and very favorably
on the Popes part: but how truly, let the sequel show. The The pope assumeth
this power, to be Rector of the universal church; director of the Lords
universal flock: ( P. Bonifac. 8. Sexto. decretal. cap. vbi.) To be Cephas,
that is (by his interpretation) Caput, the head of the Apostolik church. (
Anaclet. did. 22. cap. sacrosa^cta.) To be Lex animata in terris, a living law
in earth; whose sentence and judgment must stand, as given out of heaven by the
mouth of Peter himself. Sext. decret. c. Ab arbitris. glosa. P. Agatho. did,
19. c. sic omnes. which sentence no man must break nor retract, no man must
dispute or doubt of. ( P. Nicol. 9. q. 3. c. patet. P. Jnnoc. 2. Art. 17. q. 4.
Si quis.) The Pope assumeth this power, to be-set of God over nations and
kingdoms, to pluck up, and to root out etc. even to judge the princes of the
earth; to be one and the same head with Christ of the visible church: and
therefore every earthly creature if he will be saved, must of necessity be
subject to the Pope. ( Bonifac. 8. Extrav. c. unam sanctam. De mayor. and
obed.) He by Romish religion, is that one Ioh. 10.
Pastor, over the one fold: God himself and he his vicar, have but one
consistory. ( Hosti ens. in cap. Quant. de trans. praeb.) under his feet are
al things subdued, Psa. 8.
sheep and oxen and beasts of the field, fowls of heaven, and fishes of the
sea, that is to say, (in catholic interpretation) Jews, heretics, pagans,
Christen men of al sorts, Angels in heaven, and sowles in purgatory Antonin.
sum. mayor. 3. part. did. 22. As for emperors and kings, (whom God himself
honors Psa. 82.
with his own title of Gods,) they may serve to hold the Popes stirrup, or
kiss his foot: for they be more inferior to him, then lead is inferior to
gold. P. Gelasius. Did. 96. cap. duo. Wherefore his doctors have kept decorum,
in giving him the titles of the highest God; as Optimus, Maximus, most good and
most great, and Supremum in terris numen, (Staplet. in princ. fid. doct. praef.
ad Greg. 13) Yea Dom. Deus nosterpapa, our Lord God the Pope, Can. Extravag.
Johan. 22. c. cum inter. In glosa. These and many more like testimonies which
might be alleged, vvil tell every wise heart, whither the pope assumes not the
power which Chr. has reserved to himself: and whither M. S. had not a greater
splen against me, then against the Pope: when to contradict what I had written,
he sets down, Paral. pa. 68.
that properly the Pope is not antichrist, for chalenging Christ's kingly power
proper to himself: and in another place also says, page 41.
The pope is not Antichrist, for that he usurpeth that regal power which is
proper to Christ: but is antichristian for usurping the delegated power. etc.

As for his freindly qualifications, page 68.
that the Pope claims to be a ministerial head*vnder Christ, and in that he
does many actions proper to Christ himself, it is but the misinterpretation of
his ministerial headship, not understanding how far it extends, etc. these
are but colors to hide the filthiness of that skarlet whore, who surmounting in
arrogancy all the children of pride, yet will needs be called servant of the
servants of God. But I set down, not what the Pope and papal Prelates say
they be; (for the Divil will say he is an Angel of light,) nor what they plainly
profess to do: but what they be and do in deed; though yet they profess so
much, as any forehead might blush to say, the Pope claims not the power proper
to Christ alone.

And what if I would press Mr Smythes words as much for the Pope on the other
hand, namely that he claims to be ministerial Bishop under Christ, and in
that he does many actions propre to the Church, it is but the
misinterpretation of his ministerial office, not understanding how far it
extends, etc. and hereupon conclude, that properly the Pope is not Antichrist
for challenging the Churches ruling power propre to it self; would not this
plea be as good as Mr Smythes? And thus the Pope might be freed from being
Antichrist properly at all; or else Mr. S. pleading is but little worth.

Again, for Papal Bishops among the Protestants, however they utter not such
speeches of their power, (being curbed through fear of the civil magistrate:)
yet their Lordly jurisdiction, which they challenge and usurp over many
parishes and provinces, together with the names of blasphemy upon their
foreheads as Lords-spiritual, Archbishops etc. do prove them toincroch upon
Christ's kingly power, and usurp the same; though neither they, nor the Pope,
nor Belial himself, will say so much.

Next for the government by Elders which I proved by scriptures; Mr Smyth,
neither answering, nor once mentioning the scriptures quoted, seeks to blind
his reader with a page 69.
We say, and a general disclayming of mine error, (as he calls it,) without
conviction. And let the reader observe his manner of disputing against me. At
the first, he said to me, page 67.
This of you deney M. Ains. (which I think you do not) I say you are therein
departed from the faith. Behold how his own heart checked him, when he began his
invective against me; it told him, that I denied not the truth. But he
proceeds; and after he had showed his own faith, he comes upon me with an other
Jf, and conceles his own thought, saying, page 68.
If you hold any other faith, it is not the faith of Christ. After drawing to
an end, he concludes a against me thus page 69.
I do therefore utterly disclaim this your error Mr. Ains. as one part of
Antichristianisme in your Church. First let us see what mine error is, and then
how it is convinced. Is it mine error to hold that Christ has ordained a
Presbytery in every Church? why the scriptures which I cited prove it to be
truth; and mine adversary has nothing to say against it, but yields it
himself in the last leaf of his book as before I showed. Or is it mine error
to hold, that this Presbytery is to teach and rule the Church by Christ's own
words and laws? This seems in deed to be the scandal, which Mr. Sm.
stumbleth at, and would thus spurn away. The power ministerial of the Elders
(says he) is rather a leading power, then a ruling power: neither ar the
Elders in all the new Testament (to my knowledge) caled rulers Archontes, but
overseers leaders, elders, prohistamenoi: whereby the holy ghost would teach,
that their power is not to rule but to lead and direct. I do therefore utterly
disclaim this your error etc.

I answer that Mr. Sm. does sophisticate and dally with the word Rule, whiles
he makes it to answer only to the greek word Archein; which signifies to
rule and reign as Princes; Mark. 10. 42. Romans 15 12. whereas he knows or may
know that other words also are fitly translated Rule; as poimainein, Rev. 2.
7. and proistasthai, Romans 12 8. and he savv before his eyes, how I alleged for
teaching and ruling 1. Tim. 5. 17. where this later word is used. Which he
not knovving, as it seems, how to translate better, and yet not vvilling to
brook the word Rule, says they are not caled Rulers archontes, but
prohistamenoi. He might as well have said, neither ar they caled Overseers but
Episcopoi, nor Leaders, but hegoumenoi, nor Elders but Presbyteroi; and so have
bleared the simple readers eyes, with al Greek words, to spoil Christ's
Ministers of their authority, and to make men believe they stand but for
ciphers. If he be so ignorant of the Greek tongue as he pretends, that he
vvil neither allow Prohistamenoi to be translated Rulers, (which so many
Greek authors vvil allow,) nor give us an other English word for it, I vvil
leav him to his ignorance or frowardnes rather, and referr the reader to 1 Timothy
3. 4. 5. 12. where this same Greek word is applied to the ruling or governing
of a house, and of children, which the Apostle after in 1. Tim. 5. 17. and
other places, applies to the ruling of the Church by Elders. So that Mr Sm.
may as well teach househoulders, they must not rule their howses or children:
as that Elders must not rule the Church, because they be not called Archontes
princely-rulers, but prohistamenoi, rulers standing before or over them.

Again if this reason of Mr S. be good it has broke the neck of his popular
government; for it is this; If Elders be not called Archontes (Princes or
Princely-rulers;) then are they not to rule the Church of God. But Elders are
not called Archontes. Therefore etc. Which I return upon himself thus, If the
multitude of brethren be not called Archontes; then are they not to rule the
Church of God: but the multitude of brethren are not called Archontes; if they
be, let M. S. show where. yea I might add, that they are not called Overseers,
nor Leaders, nor Elders, nor prohistamenoi; Therefore neither are they to rule
the Church; and so it is to be without rule or government of man at all; which
if M. Sm. do hold, it will be found that himself deneyes the faith. For however
it be true, that only Christ himself (who is the Rev. 1. 5.
Archon or Prince of the kings of the earth,) is properly the Archon or
princely-ruler of the Church, and imperial power perteyns to him alone: yet he
has given ministerial power and authority to his servants, Act. 20. 28.
poimainein and 1 These. 5. 22.
proistasthai, to feed, rule, govern, go before and direct his Church: and who
so refuses them whom he has sent and set, Ioh. 13. 20.
refuses him.

Whereas I further added of the Elders set to teach and rule, that unto them all
the multitude, the members, the saints, ought to obey and submit themselves,
as the scriptures teach; Heb. 13. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 5. this Luke 10. 16
wholesome doctrine Mr. Sm. before misliked and kicked against, in answering Mr.
Bern. and seeks to turn it away, with this peremptory and perverse answer
Parall. p. 65.
To the place Heb. 13. 17. J say the Apostle does not intend to teach that the
whole body of the Church must yield to the voice of the Elders, in every thing
that they list. O notable cavil! who says they must yield to every thing the
Elders list? Is this a fit answer to casshier the government of the Elders?
Then away also with his popular government: for I say, no scripture intends to
teach that either minister or member, must yield to the voice of the multitude,
in every thing they list. If so; then Aaron had been blameless for making the
golden calf; because it was the peoples list, and they importuned him thereto
Exodus 32. 1. 22. 23.

But M. S. proceeds, saying; nor that the Eldership has in their hands the
power of Christ to rule contrary to their liking. I answer, the Elders are to
teach and rule the Church by Christ's own word and laws, as I have Counter. p,
176.
expressed. And herein I presuppose that both the Elders will teach and rule
according unto godlynes, and the people will obey the godly doctrines and
directions of their Elders, without mislike or coffeehouse. For Christ's
sheep will hear his voice; his kingdom is peaceable; his subjects loyal and
obedient. Now whiles I speak of the ordinary power that the Elders have to
teach and rule the Church, as Christ has constituted it in peace; it is but
from a contentious humor, to object, that they have not power to rule contrary
to the peoples liking, as if there could be no rule, but when the Elders and
brethren are at war one with another. Of the Church it is written, Act. 4. 32.
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one sowl; yet none
(I think) doubts, but there was rule and government among them. And of such
quiet rule spoke I, though M. Sm. would disturb it with his exception; which he
might also have alleged against the Presbyteries authority to pray preach
and administer the sacraments; seeing these ar no more to be done contrary to
the peoples liking, then rule and government: for God has caled us in peace. So
for ought that is yet said; the government by Elders stands fast.

The last battry follows. But (says M. S.) the intent of the Apostle is to
show, that all the particular members in all their affairs, must submit
themselves to the instruction and guidance of the Elders. For although Christ
has placed the Elders as stewards over the servants yet he has not appointed
them as Lords over his spowse and wife. Your argument therefore (says he) is a
fallacian a coniunctione and divisione thus; All the particular members must
obey the elders in their lawful instructions and their wholesome admonitions
severally; Ergo the whole body must jointly obey the voice of the Elders.

Here M. Sm. running himself into a fallacy, by dividing those that are joined
together of the Lord, would bear himself out in his evil, by blaming an other
first, but without al equity, as the judicious reader may easily perceiv. For
his reason is to this effect, Jf Elders be stewards over the servants, and not
Lords over the wife ( the church): then is not the church to obey or submit
unto them. Where learned the man this logik? Is there no obedience or
submission, thinks he, but unto Lords? Then is there no obedience
ecclesiastical, which the church may yield to any save unto Christ, for he is
the 1 Cor. 8. 6. Mat. 23. 8. 10.
only Lord. But this man is blinded with his erroneous conceit. For as in
civil government we are to obey and submit, not only to the King as unto the
superior, but 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
also to the governors that are sent of him: so in government ecclesiastical we
are to obey and submit, not only to the King Christ, but to 1 Pet. 5. 5 Heb.
13. 17
the Elders his ministers sent of him: to the one we submit as to the Lord and
King: to the other as to servants and ministers, set over us by the Lord.
Again, I would fayn know, whither Mr. Sm. thinks the Elders to be Lords over
the particular members? If he say, yea, I abhor his pride, for it is injurious
to Christ the sole Lord of al and every one in the church: if nay, then I
detest his sophistry; for by the same reason that he disswadeth the whole flock
from obedience, he might also dissuade each particular member: which yet he
does not, but yields the contrary. Now that the Apostle intends not only
the particular members, but the general flock also, is apparent; First, by his
reason which he annexeth, Heb. 13. 17.
for they watch for your souls as they that must give accounts. Al good
Elders, I ween, do watch as well for the publik church, as for the private
members, and shall give account for the whole. If then the Apostles reason be of
weight; the whole flock, as well as the particular sheep, must obey and submit
to such as vvatch over them. Secondly the Apostle says elsvvhere, to the
Elders of an other church, Act. 20. 28.
take heed to all the flock, whereof the holy ghost has made you overseers:
poimainein, (that is to feed, rule, govern, guide, direct and do al other
duties of good shepherds unto) the church of God. Now these words flock and
church, mean not particular members, but the general company under charge and
guidance. And if the holy Ghost have set Elders and shepherds over the whole
flock: can any man doubt, but they must teach rule and direct the whole? and if
they must do this by authority from God: is not the whole flock bound to be
taught ruled and directed by them in the Lord? What perverting of the scripture
then is this, that when the Apostle writing to a whole church, to obey and
submit unto their guides: it should be restreyned unto particular members for
to obey? Such doctrines fit rather the confusion of Babylon, then the holy
order and government of Sion. But it seems the stinch of this restreynt, went
up into the nose of the man himself as he wrote it: for presently he seeks to
sweeten the ill savor with these flowers: that page 66.
All the saints shall yield obedience to the Elders in things commanded by God:
and the Elders shall al of them obey the voice of the church in things commanded
of God. He might also have added that both Elders and people should obey the
voice of any particular person, in things commanded by God. For if the whole
church do syn, and Lev. 4. 13 etc.
any one make it known unto them, and show them the law of God: they are bound
to obey him, and submit to his good counsel in the Lord. But what is this to
the purpose? The question is into whose hands Christ has committed the
ordinary teaching guiding governing and ruling of his saints here on earth.
The scriptures Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These 5. 12. 1 Cor. 16. 16. Heb 13.
17.
teach, and we accordingly have long since Confess: art. 17. and 19.
professed, that it is into the hands of the Bishops or Elders. This is that
which I defend in my answer to M. Bernard: for this, if for any thing, M. S.
also inveigheth against me: being indeed against himself also herein. For
besides the testimonies fore alleged out of his book, he has further in the
same book written thus, paral. p. 86
Christ is not their king, seeing he only rules by his own laws and officers,
and not by Antichristian Lords and laws etc. And again, page 107.
You refuse Christ's testament and his kingdom, and will not have him to reign
over you in his own offices and laws, which is contrary to these places, Luke
19. 27. Apoc. 14. 9. 10. 11. Lo here the truth which I defend, confirmed by my
adversaries own penn; for this is the only thing which I plead, that Christ
rules his people, only by his own laws and officers, as mine opposite
himself grants: and yet see, what an outcrie he makes against me, as
teaching such Antichristianisme, as was never heard of before. But by his
former dispute against the Presbytery, himself is found to be one of those
enemies, that will not have Christ to reign over them, by his own offices and
laws.

Whereas he puts page 66.
the question thus, how far the sheep must obey the Elders which are
shepherds: that is not the point between Mr. Bern. and me, neither meddle I
with it: yet if any be desirous to know my mind in general, it is. So far as
the shepherds do teach rule and direct the sheep in the ways of Christ, by
his own word and laws; so far at they al jointly and every one severally,
bound to obey and submit to their shephards, and no further. For although this
be the ordinary way of teaching and governing the Church; yet if
extraordinarily it fall out, that the shepherds walk and lead awry, and the
sheep go aright; then is neither the whole flock, nor any one sheep to follow or
obey them, unless they will fall together into the ditch.

Neither will that reason, which M. Sm. so labors about, namely that the
Ministry is not by succession but by election of the church; make ought
against me: unless the man thinks this consequence good, If Elders be chosen
by the Church, then are they not to teach and rule the Church by Christ's word
and laws. The contrary rather is true. For if the Church be authorized and
commanded of Christ to chose and set Elders over them, for to teach and rule
them by his own word and laws; and are also commanded to obey and submit
themselves unto their Elders: then are the Elders to teach and rule them by
Christ's word and laws, and the Church is therein to obey. But the first is
true, as the scriptures and reasons forealleged prove; Therefore alsothe latter.

No more will that similitude of a body, (which as all parables will easily be
perverted, being streyned beyond the purpose of the holy spirit) help ought
against the truth I defend. For as God 1 Cor. 12. 18.
has disposed the members every one of them in the body at his own pleasure,
and given them several faculties, so as all the members have Romans 12. 4.
not one work; and as the eye for seeing, the ear for hearing, the mouth for
speaking, etc. do administer, not for particular mebers only, but for the
whole body: even so the Church has many members with 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6.
diversities of gifts, and diversities of offices or ministeries; which they
Romans 12. 6 7. 8.
are to attend unto and execute for the whole body: and the whole, (not the
particular members only, as this man fansieth) are to obey and submit unto
these distributions and administrations, being al of the Lord, as the Apostle
teaches. And as all the members of the body have not the gift of speaking,
seeing, smelling etc. but these are bestowed on special members for the use of
al: so in the church, al verse. 29.
are not prophets, or al teachers, or al governors etc. but ver. 8.
to one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge etc.
unto the administration of which gifts, by the due offices or members; all the
body is to submit, and obey in the Lord. So that a wonder it is any man should
have the face to blame me with Antichristianisme, for disclayming that position
which M. Bernard imputed unto us; namely, that the power of Christ, that is,
avthoritie to preach, to administer the sacraments, and to execute the censures
of the church, belongs to the whole church, yea to overy one of them: or for
affirming, some special authority to be committed to the Elders for reaching
and ruling the church by Christ's own word and laws, unto whom the other
brethren are to obey, always in the Lord. What would it be but a mere
confusion and abuse of the holy ordinances of the gospel, if every one in the
church should administer and perform the works of al Christ's ministers: which
they may, if the power and authority perteyneth unto them: for who may abridge
the saints of these things?

And most strange it is, that M. S. (if any thing may be strange in him,) would
thus inveigh against me: when in handling this very point against M. Bern. he
writes thus Para^* p. 61.
Wherefore I say unto you, that the gifts of preaching, administration of the
sacraments, and governing are given unto some men, but the offices and officers
endued with these gifts are given unto the church etc. If but some men in the
church, have the gifts of preaching, administration of sacraments and
governing: will M. S. blame me for deneying this position of M. Bernard, that
Christ's power and authority to preach, administer the sacraments etc.
belongs to every one in the church. Have they authority to preach or govern,
which have not the gifts of preaching or government? I leave the judgment of
this controversy, to every wise heart.

And this I hope may suffice for clearing my self of Antichristianisme, in that
which I wrote about church government: being the mayn thing which M. Sm. has
wrested against me. Other things there are which he girdeth at briefly: and
which I omit to strive with him about, whom I see to be set upon debate. And
how adversarylike he deals with me, in mangling, corrupting and depraving my
answers, for his advantage: they that compare them with his book may see. Let
this one be an instance. To an objected error against us, I thus answered:
C^^n. p. ^73.
Neither is this position set down in our words, (to my knowledge) neither does
Mr. Bernard take away, but confirm rather the thing that we hold: for he
grants that they offend God, which may and do not ordinardie (having means
offered) live in a church rightly constituted: and we grant, that many of
Christ's subjects for want of means, do not live in a true constituted church.
If therefore he were not a caviller, he would not have reckned this among our
errors.

This my answer M. S. of his liberality has set down in Parall. p. 16.
his book thus.

M. Ains. answering M. Bern. page 173. uses these words. Neither is this
position set down in our words, (to my knowledge:) if therefore M. Bern. were
not a caviller, he would not have reckned this among our errors. Thus having
dealt more injuriously with my words, then the unjust steward Luke 16. 6. 7.
did with his Masters reckning, in abating more then half of my writing,
without so much as any note or mark to intimate of further matter in my answer,
(which he makes almost senseless): he proceeds to charge me with forsaking
the defense of the truth and then runns on to justify that he had written to
Mr. Bernard which I knew not of.

But for his injurious dealing with me, and persecuting this poor church (which
deserved better of him) with his pen in publik, as the world now may see he
has don in high measure: I leave him unto God for mercy or judgment. Whose
hand as it is heavy upon him already, in giving him over from error to error,
and now at last to the abomination of Anabaptisme: so will the same hand still
follow him unto further judgment if he do not repent. But I vvish he may find
grace in the eyes of the Lord.

FINIS.
Faults escaped*
Page 12. line 2. for tunea read tuned.

page 15. line 2. for alled, read called

page 98. in. the last line, read well ruling, and painful. Other faults may
easily by discerned and pardoned.


