READ DEBITVM. OR, A DISCOVRSE IN defense of three chief Fatherhoods,
grounded upon a Text dilated to the Latitude of the Fifth Commandment; and is
therefore grounded thereupon, because 'twas first intended for the Pulpit, and
should have been concluded in one or two Sermons.

BUT IS EXTENDED SINCE to a larger Tract; AND WRITTEN CHIEFLY in confutation
of all disobedient and factious kind of People, who are enemies both to the
Church, and State.

By JOHN SVVAN.

Greg. mag. lib. 7. Indict. 2. Epist. 78. In causa in qua Deo placere cupio,
homines non formido.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for John Williams, at the Sign of the Crane, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

TO ALL SVCH FAMOVS WORTHIES as are both able, and zealous Patrons of the
Church, and State, and of such as endeavor the good thereof; Grace, Mercy,
and Peace be multiplied from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Right worthy of Renown,
THIS is a Piece which craves your Patronage. It contains nothing but what is
just and honest; and yet is like enough to meet with such as shall oppose it:
For I both know and find it true by experience, that he who sides not with
the humors of the common multitude, incurres the odium of not a few. And
indeed my comfort is, 'twas always so: Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
That great Apostle could have said as much; Galae. 4.15.16.
for whereas he remembers the good will that the Galatians once bore toward
him, he finds the case quite altered, and is now become their enemy, because
he tells them what is truth: Not that he ever taught them other, but because
he presses the more earnestly, where he fears or finds their reluctation.
They had (as well appears) a mind to go astray; and he not yielding to them,
but directing otherwise, is slighted for his labor. But if it be good (as he
also speaks) to be zealously affected always in a good thing; it is fit that
men submit and learn with patience, till they come to the knowledge of what is
good; otherwise their zeal cannot but be preposterous, and violent passions
take place of true and righteous informations. This is that which I only aim
at, a rectifying of such as walk amiss: and if herein my poor endeavors may
but find a courteous acceptance, I account my pains as much as nothing; being
always willing to promote what I can, the happy prosperity both of the
Church and State. When therefore this Book which I now send abroad, shall be
so happy as to kiss any of your hands; be pleased to shelter it under the
zealous wings of your favorable protection. And so praying God to bless you
always; I rest devoted to do you the best service that I can,

John Swan.

TO THE CHRISTIAN and courteous Reader.
WElcome prosperity knows not how to advance her stately Standard in any such
society; which by means of faction and want of unity, is miserably
dis-joynted. For, let the body be without ligaments, and it cannot stand; the
joints that should help to uphold it, will be quickly broken: and so fatal
ruin steps on too fast, and proclaims that mischief, which for the want of
concord, follows as an effect of such a want. In consideration whereof, my
unfeigned wishes and good desires have put me forward, to cast in one poor
Mite among others, who are not only joyful and glad to see, but willing also
to advance the desired beauty, and happy prosperity both of the Church and
State; whose mutual dependence is such, that the welfare of the one, is the
prosperity of the other, both helping to uphold the good of one another:
Whereto is pertinent that famous speech of Gulielmus Occam, to Lewis the fifth:
Domine Imperator, defend me gladio, and ego te defendam calamo. Protect thou
me with thy sword Lord Emperor, and I will defend thee with my Pen. And indeed
'twas right. For as Moses, and Aaron were sent together; and as the Priests of
old were employed even inbidding battle to the enemy, and inquiry not
seldom made at the mouth of the Prophets concerning affairs of the like
nature: So should still the Church, and State be truly united each to other,
and be mutual upholders one of another.

Turbulent dispositions wish well, I fear to neither; for with them, the
troubled waters are the sweeetest streams, and to kindle the fire of
contentiou, their highest aim. But far be it from any son of Peace, to
have either his heart, tongue, or pen defiled with the filth of such
proceedings. Rather let it be the care of us all, not only to mark them who
cause divisions, and avoid them, as St. Paul directs: Romans 16.17.
but to oppose what we can, the disobedient disturbers of this our Israel. For
if Saint Peter were resisted, when he took a wrong course to knit well
together the Jews, Gala. 2.11.12.13.
and the Gentiles; then let not others think it strange, that in a way which
is unwarrantable, they meet with such as shall oppose them.

As for my sefe, I know both mine own strength, and mine own wants: It is
little, I confess that I am able to do; but am not therefore discouraged to
do what I can. Saint Austine did as much (or more) in the Churches quarrel,
as any Father of them all; and yet Saint Hierome was a better Linguist. There
be diver sitie of gifts, 1 Cor. 12.
says the Apostle, but they proceed all from one Spirit, and are given also
for one end: namely, for the edification or good of one another.

Read therefore, and judge impartially, let byrespect be set aside: For though
it oftentimes prevails so far with no few Readers, that according as they
either value or dis-esteeme the Author, they receive, or slight his writings;
yet it is a fault, and faults we know must be amended; otherwise the worst must
needs be theirs who march unmindfull of their reckoning. Whereunto let me add
that which is also common; namely, That be a man's intentions never so sincere,
yet if the subject of his discourse, be not agreeable to the ignorant fancies
of every resolved and selfe-will'd opposite, his books shall be either not
read at all, or looked upon with a scornful and supercilious eye; the lash of
censure not being wanting, where a prejudicate opinion bears the sway. And this
I may the rather mention, because (among such as these) I have somewhat felt in
my former book, the truth hereof: Yea, and have been blamed also even for the
very Title that I put unto it; that is to say, for giving it the name of
Profano-Mastix. Which, howsoever distasted, cannot be so impertinent as some
imagine: For rudeness and irreverence, savours too much of profanation, which
takes (I dare say) firm hold of them, who obstinately refuse to worship God
in the beauty of holiness, notwithstanding there be manifest proofs for such
a practice. And for their sakes it is, that I chiefly prefixed so smart a
title; which to others of a better temper, may be mitigated to a more mild and
gentle meaning; serving only as a caution to let them know, that they might be
more zealous of Gods glory, if they were less indifferent, and more forward to
manifest their inward fear and reverence, by their outward devotion: for so
shall they glorify God, both in their souls, and in their bodies; even as
they look to have both partake in the heavenly joys of the life to come: At
which Saint Paul has plainly pointed, in the 1 Cor. 6.20. Nor is it but
certain that a reward presupposes a work: If therefore we live in hope of an
happy resurrection; why then do we exempt our bodies from the service of God,
and lay the total of this duty upon the soul? Or if we know that the
happiness of the soul separate from the body, neither is, nor shall be
consummate, till the body be again united to it, Why do we not for the
present join both together; and grant, that as the outward worship, without
the inward is but dead, so the inward without the outward is incomplete, even
as is that happiness already mentioned?

I will not be tedious to add any more, save only this: The discourse now
tendered, desires thee (good Reader) to be taken up, as an exposition of the
first Precept in the Second Table. For though it be grounded upon a Text in
Solomon, yet my acceptance of of it, aims chiefly at such a latitude, as may
not cause it to be excluded, from out the bounds of the Fifth Commandment, but
suffer it to be considered in a Catechesticall way. Farewell.

Feb. 26. 1638. Thine (to his power) in all the offices of charity, and truth,
JOHN SVVAN.

READ DEBITVM.
PROVE. 30.11. There is is a generation that curses their Father, and does not
bless their Mother.


THis text in general is the declaration of an offense, wherein we have two
parts. The first is a Denomination of the parties offending: The second is an
expression of the particularities of their offense.

The denomination is in the word generation for (says the Text) There is a
generation.

The offense is twofold. First, that they curse: Secondly, that they do not
bless. For as there is a generation, so there is even such a generation as
curses their father and does not bless their Mother.

Concerning the first of which, there lurkes (perhaps) some ambiguity in the
word generation. I shall by degrees therefore unfold or explicate what a
generation is, together with the kinds thereof, that thereby it may appear
what the text means by saying, There is a generation.

A Generation is either in respect of succession, or in respect of qualities.

That of succession is either general or in more particular.

The General has respect to the succeeding times of all ages and all persons
in every nation under heaven. Thus were the chronologicall periods of time, and
ages of the world, Generations: as from the Creation to the Flood; from the
Flood to the Promise; from the Promise to the Law; from the Law to the Temple;
from the Temple to the captivity; from the captivity to Christ; from Christ to
us; and from us to the end of the world. Or (if they be accounted according to
that distinction of 6. Ages, wherein men suffer the labors and travells of
this present world) they are from the Creation to the Flood, from the Flood to
Abraham; from Abraham to David; from David to the captivity: from the captivity
to Christ; and from Christ to the end of the world. These are the general.

The more particular were pertinent either to some one nation, or to a private
descent of particular families. Of the first of these in the Gospel it is said
that This generation shall not pass till all be fulfilled, And of the second,
L^k. 21.32.
in the Psalmist thus we read, Psalm. 109.12
that In the next generation his name shall be clean put out, which (if we
respect the time) is seldom or never more then an hundred years; Genesis
15.13.16.
as is witnessed by that of Moses [in Genesis 15.] where we read of four
generations in the compass or space of four hundred years.

Now because a generation in these large extents produce a diversity of
factions, and several multitudes of dispositions, some following the stream
of one thing, some another, it is that I have secondly observed another kind of
generation: viz. in respect of qualities. And unto this the text adhereth as
most pertinent, for that is a generation in respect of quality, wherein a race,
Sect, or company of people follow either the doing of that which is good, or
the doing of that which is bad.

The first of which is a generation not so much pure in their own eyes as in
Gods. The second is a froward perverse and crooked generation; from which (as
the Apostle speaks) every good Christian must save himself. The kinds of
these perverse or crooked ones are many and among the rest, this in the text is
one, and as one, so none of the best, For There is a generation that curses
their father, and does not bless their mother. And thus much of the
denomination of the offenders,

2 Their offense follows, and it is two fold. First, that they curse.
Secondly, that they do not bless.

The first is a sin of commission: The second of omission: the one commits
the evil he should not do; the other omits the good that he should do: And so
(like erring sheep) both have wandered and gone astray.

In the commissive part the sin of the generation is set down positively. In
the omissive privatively. Or in the commissive part there is the act and the
object. The Act is cursing: The object is the father.

The Act, in it self single and alone, is bad enough: but is made so much the
worse by reason of the circumstances, or by reason of that special object at
which it aymeth. For such relation as is between the Father and the Son; such
(yea the same) is between this Act or and his Object.

The omissive part affords an object also, but it is detained in the privation
of such an act, as of right should look toward, and not from it; for although
the power of a Father be in many respects greater then the power of a Mother;
yet (as says Chemnitius) there must be an exequation of duty and honor,
Chemnit. in Loc.
as well to the one as to the other; as well to the inferior as the no bler
sex; as well to the weaker as the stronger vessel. Neither are sins of
omission (in known duties) but every way as bad (nay rather worse) then sins
of commission. So that if it be a sin to curse the Father, it must needs be no
less not to bless the mother.

But who are they to whom this right belongs? Are they only such, as in
respect of being, The summo and extention of the Text.
begat and brought us forth? My answer must be negative, for the text will bear
it, as well as that of the 5. Commandment. Give me leave therefore, in as
plain a method as I can to set before your eyes, not only these, but even the
several sorts of other parents, which in a peevish, perverse and crooked
Generation, are rather cursed then blessed, dishonored then honored, despised
then cherished, contemned then obeyed, with a thousand other such desperate
dealings, which a wicked generation casts upon them.

And indeed to take up the matter aright, it must needs be a true conclusion
that it can be but a lame and a disobedient duty, to acknowledge none to be
our parents but those who begat and brought us forth. For, although I speak
nothing of masters, who are Patres familias, 2 Kin. 5.13.
Fathers of a family, or although I speak nothing of the Aged who are Elders,
and must be honored as fathers. 1 Timothy 5.1.2.
Although (I say) nothing be spoken of these, or of some others which by way of
eminency have a prerogative that pleads for their honor, we have besides them,
yea and besides our Natural parents also, even fathers of the Church, and of
the common wealth. And therefore they are not only our parents who give us a
being; but such also as give us a safe and well-being. Our natural parents
give us the first: Our political parents give us the second: And from our
spiritual parents we receive the third or last which is the perfection of all
the rest.

Now, if to give the first be something; then something sure it needs must be
to give or uphold the second; and if the second then the next. That is, If he
who gives the first being must have honor and the like: then he who gives the
second: And if this be due to the first and second, then also to the third.

Neither secondly can I think, that a man's first being is as any thing to him
if he wants the next: that is, if he be oppressed by the mighty and finds no
comforter. For what a poor thing it is to be without a deliverer from the
hard usage of wicked men, Solomon declares in the fourth chapter of
Ecclesiastes, at the first, second, and third verses.

Or thirdly, having both these and wanting that which is the isntrumental
cause of the best or last, is to be without the happiness of that which is
sure to crown even the second and first. For says our Savior concerning
Judas, Woe be to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, Math. 26.24.
it had been good for that man if he had never been borne. Intimating, that
the not being of a creature is far better then the ill being especially when
the end, which should crown the act, must abide for ever in the never ending
sadness of a sad catastrophe.

And therefore as we may not curse, revile harm, contemn, or despise those
from whom we have our first being; So neither may we revile, harm, curse,
contemn, or despise those from whom we have either our safe, or our
well-being. For, as thou art a man, it is that thou honor thy natural
father, and as a member of a political body or society, thou can not but
honor thy civil father: yea, and as a Christian (which is more then a man)
thou must likewise see that thou honor thy Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, or
Ghostly father.

Thy natural parent is Gods instrument for thy natural being: Thy prince Gods
instrument for thy safe, quiet and civil being; and thy pastor Gods instrument
for thy spiritual, well and holy being. Without the first thou could not be
any thing. Without the second thou could not be safely what thou art: And
without the next, thou could not be what thou would. For as the sword of
the civil Governor keeps thee from the foreign and domesticke power of
such wicked builders and bloody hunters, as were Cain and Nimrod: So the sword
of Gods Minister keeps thee from the snatching paws of Satan, that sworn
enemy of all mankind, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who (like a roaring Lion) ramps up and down, seeking whom he may devour.

These then are the chief Fatherhoods of greatest note: the one whereof may be
no more cursed then the other, nor the other less blessed then the first.
Concerning whom, I will both resolve the doubtful, and convince the divelish,
that thus they are; yea, and thus must they be honored: Aeque, but not
aequaliter; Justly and fitly as of right is meet and due, but not all of a just
and equal portion.

I. The first, which be our natural parents, are called Fathers of our flesh,
Heb. 12.9. For we have had fathers of the flesh that corrected us, and we gave
them reverence, says the Apostle. And not without just cause, Prove. 20.20.
for Who so curses his father or his Mother, shall have his lamp put out in
obscure darkness. Look therefore what it means, and perhaps you shall find
that they die the death of the damned, Prove. 20.20. Or, as it is at the 17th.
verse of this very Chapter, The ravens of the valleys shall pick out their
eyes, and the young eagles shall eat them. Shall pick out the eye says
Iunius? Iun. in annot. in Prove. 30.17.
that is, Filium immorigerum, aut parentibus iniquum, in malam rem condemnabit
Deus. God (says he) shall condemn he disobedient and wicked child into some
great mischeife, signified by that phrase of picking out and eating up their
eyes To which I cannot but add a second gloss, namely that if the speech be
figurative, then may these birds of prey (by an allegory) be taken for the
damned Devils, with whom these desperate sinners shall (without repentance)
have their deserved punishment; For he that honors not his earthly parents
whom he has seen, will scarce honor God as his heavenly father whom he has
not seen: and so being obstinately rebellious; and wilfully guilty of the
breach of both Tables, must needs (continuing so) be damned, die and perish
everlastingly.

These are the first.

II. The second are Patres Patriae, Fathers of their country, as Kings, chief
Magistrates, and Rulers bearing office in the commonweal. Thus was Joseph
styled, even by the Law of nature, among the Egyptians. For being advanced unto
honor by Pharaoh King of Egypt (as we read in Genesis, chap. 41.43.) the
people went before him with a joyful acclamation, crying out and saying,
Abrech: which (as St. Hierome expounds it) signifies a young and tender Father,
Hier. trad. (...) Genes
from Abb, Father, and rech, young or tender.

Thus also did the ancient Romans call their Senators; They were Patres
conscripti, Fathers upon record: and to attain to this, to be entitled a
father of their country, they esteemed it the best and the greatest honor. For
thus (I say) did even the Law of nature, teach them to reverence the persons of
their governors, and to give them that honorable title and style of Fathers.

So also Joshua (the chief Magistrate after Moses was dead,) called Achan by
the name of son Josh. 7.19. Now son, by way of relation, implies a Father, as
even in the terms of Logic is apparent where both the relative and
correlative answer to one another. David also (in the first book of Samuel)
spoke thus unto the King and said; 1 Samuel 24.11.
My father see, yea see the skirt of thy robe in my hand.

So also (in the second book of the Chronicles) the chief rulers are called
the chief fathers of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 23.2.


Neither do the scriptures but affirm, that king Hezekiah was a father over
the fathers of his people, even over the Priests, and therefore much more over
the rest of his subjects as it is in 2 Chronicles. 29.11.

And again, Kings and Queens are styled by the prophet Esaias, Esaias. 49.23.
nursing fathers, and nursing mothers of the Church, and are therefore the
nursing fathers and mothers of the Commonweal: these two societies having such
a mutual dependence that the welfare of the one is the prosperity of the
other. For (as mine author speaks) tam arcto inter se nenu colligatae funt,
D^^s et Re^ page (...)
ut altera ab alterius salute et incolumitate pendere quodammodo videatur.
Whereto agrees that exquisite saying of Gulielmus Occam, to the Emperor Lewis
the fifth: Domine Imperator, defend me gladio, et ego te defendam calamo.
Protect thou me with thy sword, Lord Emperor, and I will defend thee with my
Pen.

So also, when the government was in the hands of awoman; The inhabitants of
the villages ceased, they ceased (says she) in Israel, until that I deborah
arose, that I arose a Mother in Israel, Judge. 5.7.

And of Joseph it is again recorded, that God made him a father with Pharaoh;
as Iunius reads it, Genesis 45.8. A father with him, although not above him: for
in this, both he, and all the other governors, must be inferior. A King is
the primum mobile, and from him it is that the other moove. A King is like the
sun in the firmament; from whom the other stars receive their light. He may
have many fathers with him but none at all above him, for this is that one, of
which Sr. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2.13.
who is supereminent and high above the rest: to which even all the rest
(either as they are powers subordinate; Romans 13.1.5.
or as they are men, and so members of some society) must out of duty and for
conscience sake, be subject and obedient.

Here then the fierce frenzy of Anabaptisticall Doctrine, knows not how to
abolish Magistiacie as abominable. Nor may the Consistorian tenets of
dangerous puritans be granted as authentical. Kings hold their crowns of God,
and are not to be limited at the peoples pleasure, they err who think they
may correct or punish them. Nor may the bloody practice of Pope and
Puritane-papists be allowed. The Miter may not trample on the necks of
Princes, and dispose of kingdoms when and where it pleases: no not in ordine
ad spiritualia, Not in defense of Christ's spouse the Church; because there is
no firm warrant for such a practice, as by degrees shall be further showed,
both out of the Scriptures and the Fathers. But before I make myful encounter
with these adversaries severally and apart, I have to tell them in the general
that they are mischievous miscreants, and do but give their right hands of
fellowship to that wicked generation here mentioned, who curse their father and
do not bless their Mother. If it were otherwise the scriptures would not
teach, that we may not curse the King, no not in our thoughts, Eccles. 10.20.
Nor, that it were unlawful to revile or curse the ruler of the people, Mat.
15.4. Prove. 20.20. and 30.11.
Exodus 22.28. Nor that we should honor our fathers, and bless our mothers,
Deuteronomy. 27.16 Nor that every soul should be subject to the higher powers, Romans
13.1. Nor, that the birds of prey should be our punishers. For (as has been
said) The eye that mocketh at his Father, Prove. 30.17.
and dispiseth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the vallie shall pick it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it.

Where again observe, that the blessing or duty which is pertinent to the
Mother (who is the weaker vessel) may in this place stand to signify that not
the meanest officer, which the King (our supreme governor here on earth)
shall constitute, may be cursed or despised. For know that such honor and
duty as is proportionable to the places wherein they are, must be conferred;
nay rather must be rendered as a thing which of right belongs to them. For
this, in some sort, is that exequation formerly mentioned, wherein the mother
is blessed as well as the Father, and wherein the children are taught the full
extent of their duties; not finding all to be fully done, until the Mother
and the Father be proportionably honored,

The Mother then (as herein does well appear) stands not for a mere cipher,
and therefore secondly she also must see, that she be more then a cipher to
fill up room in the place wherein she is. Scar-crowes and no more are to
little purpose. They be but as David speaks of the heathen Images, who have
eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, ears and hear not, and therefore
such as are unfit to bear an office, For the life of the law is the execution
thereof, whilst on the contrary (through ignorance, floth, briberie, fear, or
favor) it is either dead or lives a languishing life to all offenders.

I hold it therefore requisite that an officer be endued chiefly with two
things: Knowledge and Practice.

The Knowledge requires Cor sapiens, a wise heart: Kin. 3.9.
such a one as Solomon prayed for, shadows will not serve the turn where
substance is required; Nor scarre-crowes frey but where the birds are foolish,
perhaps at the first they may affright; but afterward, being known to be what
they are, vices grow impudent and (like unto the fearelesse birds) boldly take
their swindg without any regard at all to those who are set to look at what is
done.

And next, for the execution of this knowledge there must be Cor magnanimum; a
magnanimous heart. Not an heart of wax which will meltinto fear, nor an heart
of lead, which will bend into favor: but a coutagious, stout, and valiant
heart. Kin. 10 20.
To which purpose let Solomon's throne be looked on: view well the manner or
fashion thereof, and it will so one appear that it was not for nothing that
every of those stepped unto his throue of judgment were supported by Lions;
because it fitly served to teach Kings and all Magistrates, that a Lyon-like,
courage and resolution was to be of no mean importance or regard among them.

Beside which (that the execution may be just as well as fearelesse) there must
be also Cor honestum; An honest, upright, and religious heart. Such an heart as
will not suffer envy, or malicious hatred, to satisfy spleen under the color
of executing good and honest laws: For without this, justice may beturned into
wormwood and Physic be made as bad as poison: no good at all being found in
that which otherwise, in it self is (as has been said) the very life of the
Law; yea in a word, such an heart is here requisite as will abandon all favor
and by respect; even as the first will be free from ignorance, and the second
from fear. It was well done therefore of that honest Roman who being known
sufficient to exercise the place of a Judge, was chosen by the Senate as one
fit for that office and at the first was much unwilling to meddle with it: but
at the last (though with much ado) undertaking it, he made a great feast, to
which he caled all his kinsfolks, friends, and best acquaintance, and in
solemn manner took his leave of them all; pretending that he was to travel
far way from them into a strange country, at which they waxed sorrowful,
whereupon he related to them the whole matter, namely; that now being called to
execute the office of a Judge, he must be a stranger to them all, and be as if
indeed he were traveled far away from them, for look what he did must be
without respect of persons, leaning to one no more then to another, but doing
justice and judgment with an even hand; punishing even friends, as well as
others, if they fall within the compass of careless offenders. And indeed there
was good reason for all this, for when men be put in place of authority, and
be either ignorant envious, partial, or regardlesse, they must needs do harm
in the stead of good, not only in giving cause of scandal to their callings,
but in hindering also the increase of Religion, which by the means of them, who
both know and uprightly do their offices, is the better both upholden and
increased.

But leaving these, and returning again to amplify this point concerning the
chief head: It is not as the Anabaptist would have it, for then there should
be none at all, neither head nor Body: all should be equal, nothing proper
all common. But what ground for this? It is a tenet which has neither good nor
ground, witness the very frame of the world, the Hierarchy of Angels, the
degrees of that glory which is Celestial, and the parts of man's natural body.

For in the frame and order of nature all creatures are subordinate unto their
superiors, even until they come to the highest supreme power, beyond which
there is no transcending.

And among the Elements, the Earth is under the water, the water under the
air, the air under the fire, and among the stars one star is higher,
bigger and brighter then another; For one star differs from another star
in glory. In which order the superior bodies, by their influences, the
elements by their alterations, not only bring perfection to the whole, but is
even the preservation of the whole, without which it would fall, and that
instantly run into ruin, and meet with that first Chaos from out of which
within the space of one bare week of days, it was orderly produced, and
beautifully builded.

Nay go a little higher, and in the heavens are Archangels, Angels,
Principalities, Powers, Dominions, Thrones, Cherubins, and Seraphins. There are
also diversities of degrees in glory. For in my fathers house (says Christ)
are many mansion places, John 14.2.
if it were not so, I would have told you. Ioh. 14.2. And how are they many?
They are many; First in respect of the object, because they be not ordained for
Christ only, or for the Angels, or for the blessed and holy Apostles but for
all the Saints, Martyrs and Confessors; Even for as many (in every rank) as
shall continue faithful until the death, for they are sure of the crown of
life, Revel. 2.10. Many also (secondly) in respect of the subject, or
largeness of the place, which is able to contain those many souls which from
time to time have wrought out their salvation with fear and trembling, and
walked in the holy ways of Gods Commandments. And many last of all in respect
of the diversity of the adjoined glory; even as in hell ( Luke 12.47.) be
degrees of torment. For if there be a difference in torment then also a
difference in glory, according to that of Saint Paul, who by a comparison taken
from the stars, proves a difference in such as are raised to eternal
happiness. And of this opinion is Saint Austin and many other of the holy
fathers, together with the greatest stream of our modern Divines (and they
prove it chiefly out of Math. 10.41. Luke 12.47. Luke 16.23. 1 Cor. 15.41. and
2 Cor. 9.6.) namely that the Saints in heaven have diverse degrees of glory,
some more, some less, according to their measure of faith and charity, zeal
and godliness in this present life.

And in the body natural there be likewise many parts, several members and
ligaments, of which some are more honorable than other: the head above the
foot, the eye above the leg, and so of the rest. The one part cannot say to
the other, I have no need of thee, nor thou of me; For in their functions each
one serves to help another need, and are all necessary to the mutual succor
and defense of one another. So in the body politic there must be an head,
eyes and hands, as well as feet. The wise the noble, the noble, the mighty,
must govern the foolish ignorant, and weak, suppress the stubborn, and
bridle the obstinate. For thus does order maintain the brittle fabric of the
world from ruin, enlarge heavens happiness, and take away from man the shape
of monster, in stead whereof he stands as the best most exquisite,
harmonious, and perfect piece of Gods building, for in the visible world there
is naught excells him. And shall then the body politic be all feet and no
head, it cannot, it may not, it must not be. For beside all this we have heard
the Scripture mentioning subjection to the higher powers; And we have heard of
a power superior to the rest. In which regard the adverse tenets are nothing
worth.

Nor is it secondly, as the consistorian or dangerous Puritan would have it,
for By me Kings reign, says the Lord, Prove. 8.15. which the King of Babylon
was taught, not only in a dream, but by a voice sent down from heaven;
namely, that the most high rules in the kingdoms of men, and to whomsoever
he will he gives it, Dan 4.25.32. And so also elsewhere Kings are plainly
said to hold their crowns of God. For I (and not the people, says the Lord,)
have said, ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Ye are Gods; See some other proofs in 2 Samuel 11.7 1 Kin. 2.24. 1 Kin. 11.31. Job 36.7.
and it is I that have advanced you to that high honor. Ye are Gods in title
though not equal in power. I have given ye my name although not my nature. I
have said ye are Gods and children of the highest, that thereby the dignity of
him who swayes the Scepter, and royal prerogative of a lawful King may be
made apparent, to the purblind opposites of a crooked generation. And verily
all this the Queen of Sheba uttered to the very full, for when she came from
the South to hear the wisdom of Solomon, Blessed (says she) be the Lord
thy God which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, that thou mighrest
be King for the Lord thy God, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Howbeit as if climats altered
truths, these men will granthim no prerogative but what they please Will he do
they think, who has said, ye are Gods and children of the highest, be well
pleased to see the people limit the power of a King to their own tedder? or
has he set up Kings so high in place and dignity as that their throns are said
to be his, and all this with an intent or purpose that the people should curb
them? surely no: For as a King may do whatsoever he pleases, so none (says
the scripture) may say unto him what do thou? Eccles. 8.3.4. Si quis e nobis,
O rex justitiae tramites transcendere voluerit, ate corripi potest, si vero tu
accesseris, quis te corripiet? was that which Gregory of Tours said once to a
King of France. And so a Lawyer likewise of our own kingdom, a long while
since, Omnem esse sub Rege et ipsum sub nullo, sed tantum sub Deo, meaning that
all are under their King, and he under none but God alone. Nor did the heathen
but acknowledge it, and therefore Horace has expressly said, Reges in ipsos
imperium est Iovis: that is, Against Kings themselves there is no power, but
that of Jupiter. Why then I say seeing the case stands thus, do these men
grant him no prerogative but what they please? Why do they limit his power to
their ownetedder? make him but the Bailiffe of the Common weal, or why do
they not tremble to maintain, that it rests in the peoples hands to set the
crown upon whose head they please? yea that which is worse, why do they in
some cases expose him to the violence of the multitude to kill, correct or
otherwise to punish as they list? o infandum facinus! This last is more
divelish then all the rest, because Kings are Gods anointed ones, and may not
[vel eo nomine] even in that respect, be touched with any virulent tongue, nor
invectives of a bitter pen, much less with any violent or lessive hand, for
so the destroying Spider uses to give a touch to the painful and laborious
Be. But Nolite tangere Christos meos Touch not mine anointed and do my
Prophets no harm, is that which cries against such desperate wickedness.
Bish. Andr. Sermon. upon those words of touch not mine anointed ones.
Nay (says one whose words are admirable) There is a further matter yet, (for
if we mark it well) it is not Ne tangite, but Nolite tangere: Nolite, that is,
have not so much as the will once to go about it. So that not only tactus the
touch is forbidden; but voluntas tangendi, the very will to do it. And
therefore I am sure that in no case, that which these factious brains dare be
bold to vent, may be done without treason to a lawful sovereign no, though
he be a tyrant that reigns over them, or an heathen for Religion. This
therefore is a true rule, and worthy of observation, that if it be the hard
hap of any people to be oppressed with the too heavy hands of their supreme
Governors, they must not do as Alsted teaches, Alsted. Syst. Polit. 2. cap.
3. Buch. de jure regni. Iobannes Sarisberienses de nugis curial. lib. 8. cap. 20
that is take away the government from them which use it not well, and set up
others in their stead, nor as Buchanan directs, kill them like wolves or
bears, nor pray for them in such fort as for thieves, that is pray for them
both, and punish them both, but let them alone; They must be untouched. So
that the people have no more to do but this; They must fly to the patronage of
Gods mercy, and with devoute prayer strive to turn away the whip wherewith they
are scourged, Peccata enim delinquentium, sunt vires tyrannorum; The sins of
offenders, are the strength of tyrants; whereupon it is that the Lord does not
only sometimes set up a wicked man to reign over a nation, but sometimes also
uses the foreign power of wicked Princes to scourge a sinful people. And if
so then by no means may the people seek a remedy by rebellion, against those
(though wicked) who are over them, for civil obedience is due even to such as
these; And so long as they command nothing which is certainly known to be
contrary to the word of God, it is the duty of their loyal subjects to
perform obedience to their precepts: not out of constraint; but willingly,
freely, and ex animo; for though it be indeed most certain that in things
which are directly contrary to the Law of God, and such as carry in them a
plain and manifest impiety, there is no question to be made but it is better
to obey God than man, Act. 4.19.
yet nevertheless when the matter is either not so at all, or only seems so
in misapplying or misunderstanding the word of God, then the subject is bound
to obey, not for fear of wrath alone, but for conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

And now for further enlargement of this truth who has not heard of Saul, how
like a 1 Samuel 22.18.23. and chap. 24.12.
tyrant he hunted David as a Partridge, and how he gave command to Doeg to
run with violence upon the Priests and slay them? Howbeit, neither did the
Priests, either by themselves or others, raise head against him: Nor yet would
David lay violent hands upon him, no not in the cave, when there was as fit an
opportunity as could be offered, for without any conflict he might have
changed a public war into a private slaughter, and have ended those troubles
which by the means of this Kings cruelty were fallen upon him, shall we say
that he was a Coward, and therefore did it not? He was no coward sure, witness
the Lion and the Bear, and that great Goliath subdued by him. There was nothing
then that hindered him, but the unlawfulness of the act. 'Twas this and only
this which kept his hand from the sword, and that from the blood of Saul. For
oh victory (says one, in the behalf of David) thou do in vain provoke and
invite me with thy triumphs, I would willingly conquer mine enmie, but I must
rather keep the Commandments of my God, I will not (says he) lay my hands
upon the Lords anointed. And so (says Optatus) he repressed his hand together
with his sword, and whilst he feared the oil he saved his enemy; of which read
more at large in 1 Samuel 24. and 26. chapters.

And again was not Tiberius an heathen, and yet Christ living in his time
refused not to pay him tribute?

Also did not the Apostles afterward teach and maintain the same doctrine,
and yet they never saw any other Emperors then such as were still unchristned,
oftentimes bloody, and always wicked? St Peter, in his first Epistle and
second chapter, Compare the first verse of the 1. chapt. with chapt. 2. verse
13.
writes to those of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia (which
were Provinces belonging to the Empire) that they should not only fear God,
but also honor the King. And in whose time was it that Saint Peter wrote this
Epistle? was it not in the Baron in his Annal. Tom 1. Anno dom. 45.
days of Claudius? And what was Claudius, but a King or Emperor, who for his
religion was as foully bedaubed with the Ethnicke superstition, and blockish
Idols of his Ancestors, as was any before him? was he not likewise by nature
blood-thirstie, cruel, and extremely libidin use? Let Suctonius speak and we
shall hear him tell no less. For (says he) Claudius upon sight of the least
prodigy, worshipped the heathen Gods after the custom of the ancient Romans.
Suet. cap. 22.29. and cap. 33.34.
He was naturally so merciless, and given to bloodshed, that he would have
tortures used in examinations. He had cruel searchers for all those who came
but to salute him, He was greatly delighted to see the faces of Fencers, as
they lay gasping and yielding up their latest breath, (for if it were but their
chance to stumble in their prizes, or sword-fights, he caused their throats to
be cut for stumbling.) Neither was he but excessively given to the wanton love
of foolish women, Romans 13.5.
that as they affected honorable dignities were granted, conducts of Armies
appointed, and freedoms from punishment decreed. And yet to such a one as this
Saint Peter exhorts to yield obedience. So also does Saint Paul for when he
wrote his Epistle to the Romans, he made it no less then a matter of
conscience to have every soul be subject to the higher powers. And if at this
time Claudius were It makes no matter whether these Apostles wrote either under
Claudius or Nero seeing neither of them both were Christians but cruel wicked
Emperors. 1 Timothy 2.1.2
dead, as some men think, yet Nero was alive, and of his bloody practices,
who is there that has not heard? And again, in his first Epistle to Timothy
(which was wrote much about the same time) as he desired prayers and
intercessions to be made for all men, so for Kings chiefly, and such as be in
authority, no where at all in any of his writings showing, that either
diversity of religion, or any hard kind of governing, should encourage subjects
to take up arms, or otherwise to hurt and molest a lawful Sovereign.

Neither did the holy Fathes and good Christians, who lighted their candles
from these bright burning torches, but oftentimes iterate the same divinity.
For was not Iustine Martyr in the days of Marcus Antonius? (who was an
unbeleeving and a persecuting Emperor) and yet says he, Helvic. in Chronol.
and Calvis.
Nos solum Deum adoramus, Just. Mart. Apol. 2. ad Antonin.
et vobis in rebus alijs laeti inservimus We only adore God and in all other
things cheerfully perform our service unto you: meaning to the Emperors. God
in the first place, they in the next.

And again did not Tertullian speak to like purpose, when (in the Eusebius. in
Chronol.
days of Severus, another bloody Infidel) he inferred that if it were
unlawful to offer injuries to ordinary men, Tertul. in Apol. 6.36.
then much more unlawful to a King or Emperor. Quod in neminem licet eo for
sitan magis nec in ipsum qui per Deum tantus est.

Nor did the Orthodoxe Christians decline in their obedience from the Arrian
Emperors. Nor did the Christian soldiers refuse to serve that Apostata
Julian; but in civil affairs were willingly Ruffin. bist. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 1. et Aug. in 124. Psalm.
subject to his royal commands. Not that they wanted power to prove rebellious
(as I shall afterward show you;) but rather as holy Austin observes, upon the
124. Psalm; They were subject to him their temporal Lord, for his sake that
was their eternal Lord. For if the ground of their obedience had not proceeded
from that which is the rule of every ones conscience, I do not doubt but that
he might have spoken as to men without ears, and so have wanted sufficient
forces to have fought his battles.

And now from hence I infer, that if such wicked and bloody ones as these,
An inference from the premises.
shall out of duty be honored and obeyed, then much more those who are godly
and pious Princes, in whose Realms the Gospel is cherished, learning
advanced, wholesome Laws inacted, factions supressed, the Bond of unity
maintained, and in a word where things are carefully studied and put in
practice for the good and defense both of the Church and state: perhaps the
success does not always answer; because the unruly are pestilent lets to good
proceedings, yet the care and intent remain still the same.

Or put the case, that in some such kingdom as I now mention the loving
subjects of his majesty do sometimes meet with just grievances, yet I dare
say, it is more then the chief head of such a place, either knows, or
intends. I suppose it to be without question, that some ill disposed members
may sometimes work their own ends by grants obtained from their Prince,
craftily (under pretense of common good) for things which redound to their own
private profit. For though righteous lips (as Solo non speaks, in the
sixteenth chapter of the Prove rbs at the thirteenth verse) be the delight of
Kings, and they love him that speaks right things. yet the innocence and
goodness of Princes, do what they can, may sometimes be beguiled: And in that
when things are thus, they suffer surely far enough although they come not
likewise within the gunshot of their wicked mouths Who curse their Father, and
do not bless their Mother.

Nor secondly, is every thing to be taken as a just grievance, at which some
one or other will be ever and anon ready to grudge and murmr. For who has
not heard, that in state affairs there be many mysteries? And mysteries of
state appertain not to private persons: What have they to do to meddle with
them; or to whet and repine at that, the intent or end whereof they know not,
Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. And therefore they that will (either in public
as much as they dare; or in private as much as they can) kick and spurn at
such proceedings and inveigle others to the same faction, do without out
question deserve the heavy wrath of a King, and strict hand of justice to
bridle their peevish frenzy. For if all things were according to the filth of
their fancies who are the heads of this faction, or the chief sticklers in it,
there should be neither Ecclesiastical nor temporal superiority. And look
how the old cocks crow, the young will soon learn, the little spawne and
nibling fry will scarce degenerate: For although (before they be well grounded
in this rebellious way) they may be somewhat better minded than their
Captains; yet by degrees they are like enough to grow up into bigger fishes;
and so the more busy to stop the clear current of a Kings Prerogative, and to
trouble the fair waters of Church government. But for matters of the Church I
forbear to show their malice till anon: In the mean time wondering that
nothing but a Parity (which breeds an Anarchy) can please their distasteful
palates. I would to God that they were of another mind, for I am sorry to see
that they should digest nothing but what agrees to their factious humors. This
argues either a foul or weak stomach, when wholesome food is disrespected.
Or if you will believe them in their outward shows or own pretenses, they are
a queasie kind of people. But what need is there of words, when deeds are
manifest? Let them but abate their high minded wills, and they may soon
inform their weakness; otherwise they must be curbed as with bit and bridle,
least (in their headstrong courses) they fall at last upon their Sovereign.
For before that any of their grounds shall be impugned (as our late King James
of blessed memory has well observed) let King, See the preface to his
Basilicon Doron. and his Premonit. to all Christian Monarchs, Page 45.
people, Law, and all be trodden under foot. Meaning, that they care for
neither; but think it their greatest honor to contend with Kings, and
perturbe whole Kingdoms, calling those mischiefs by the name of holy wars:
and therefore prefer them far before true loyalty and obedience; which (as
they wickedly term it) is in it self an ungodly peace.

These then are those serpents which have a desire to sting, but a power
greater then their own prevails against them, their wishes would be actions,
were it not that (like cursed Cowes) they find themselves hindered in nothing
more then in their short horns. But shall a King be our father and shall we
cease to honor him? Shall God put the sword into his hand, and shall we be so
seditious or disobedient, as to wrest it into our own? Or shall a King take
care over us that what we have we may possess it in peace, fit every man
under his own Vine and Fig Tree and shall we have no care at all to be loving
and liberal unto him, but be as blockish and churlish as was that foolish
Nabal, notwithstanding David secured his goods and cattle? 1 Samuel 25.7.10.


The beauty of a crown to him that wears it not, seems (perhaps) as if it
were all of gold and precious stones, but to him that wears it I do believe
it sits not seldom like a crown of thorns; by reason of those many cares
which prick and vex the head. To which purpose I may recite a story of a
certain King, mentioned by Valerius Maximus who when the Diadem or Crown was
brought unto unto him, before he would set it upon his head, held it long in
his hand, considering and looking seriously upon it; and at the last burst
forth into these or the like words and said, O nobilem magis quam foelicem
ornatum! quem si quis penitus cognascat quam multis s^licitudinibus, et
periculis, et miserijs sit refertus ne humi quidem iacentem tollere vellet.
That is, Oh more noble then happy crown! which if any one did but thoroughly
know with how many troubles, and dangers, and miseries it is attended, he would
not do so much as stoop to take it from the ground, although he saw it lie
before him. And the reason seems to be plain for he that has many thousands
of people under his government, must provide that his care be the cause of
their safety, his labor their rest, and his troubled thoughts the quiet of
their minds: it being with him and his, as with the stars and planets, by
whose light and motion the world thrives in all the parts both of times and
seasons, soiles and climates. For as the course of nature would suffer
detriment, if the Heavens should leave their motions; So a Prince cannot be
void of care, without the great damage of his people; whose study is no less
to maintain them in peace, then to defend them both in and from the wars.

These be then in part those pricking thorns which they have for a
counterpoyse of their brightness and royal dignities, yea these, and such like,
are the common calamities that accompany Scepters, Crowns, and Diademes;
whereof a mean estate never finds any taste.

To which add the cost as well as care, and can ye not then conclude, that he
who keeps our tillage must have tribute out of our Lands: he that keeps the
Sea must have custom from those who traffic in and out from thence: And if
the walls of such a kingdom want repairing or the channells want scouring, the
subjects must set to their willing hands to build them up, and make them clean
from the perturbation of infesters, thieves and robbers. Which as it concerns
us, is no more but this: We have under God no other walls but Ships: nor
Scavengers for the seas, but such Royal forces.

And next look that as by how much the beauty of succession shall more and
more appear in the welcome Stemmes, and royal branches of a Kings increase,
by so much there is the more need of tax or subsidy. For Kings and Princes
must not live like Peasants; Neither may Peasants live like Princes: And yet
(contrary to all order and decorum) each peasent among us begins to be a kind
of Prince. For do we not see how the toes of the inferior sort tread upon the
heels of the Court? there cannot be a Midianitish Camel, but he must shine
with Gold; for Laborers strive to be as good as their Masters: Farmers despise
yeomen: yeomen would be gentlemen: Artizans (in our very country towns and
villages) would be Citizens: Gentlemen and Citizens though of ordinary rank
do not always delight to keep within the compass of their tedder. But says
our Savior, Luke 7.^^.
They that wear sofe raiment be in Kings courts. In Kings courts, and not in
rude hovils and country farms: No not in Citizens, or Tradesmens shops or other
houses of the inferior sort; unless an orderly proportion be well observed.
For these thus disordered, promise scarceness in the greatest plenty, and
dearness in a land of Promise. And therefore they do ill to complain of
dear times, when they themselves are without doubt in this vain way, maine
helps (although notsole causes) to make them such. And herein there is one
thing more which I grieve to utter; that hospitality, charity and means of
doing good, should in a manner be quite dead and gone. And why is that, but by
reason that all is too little to maintain this their apish pride, these their
foolish fashions, with other as vain and idle spendings, for by how much we
are the more in wast unto our selves; by so much we are the less to God, the
King, the poor and honest neighbourly society. Whereas on the contrary, if
every one would be orderly contained within their own bounds, and unthrifts
wast less by unwarrantable courses, I dare be bold to say that many sorts of
men might have where with all, the better to show their zeal to the Church and
state wherein they live; might be hospitable, charitable, yea and might
entertain many friends and acquaintance with that, which to the entertaining
of a Prince or Prince his Ambassador, is scarce so much as the Widows two
mites cast into the treasury.

Beside all which, (with much more that are the charges of a watchful Prince)
there be times also of more then ordinary necessity: and then a King may not
spare, out of his royal prerogative to raise an Army, or press of men, from
among his subjects, and have a stricter hand over men's persons, children, and
goods, then at other times. The testimony of which truth is in the first book
of Samuel the 8. chapter, at the 11. ^ Sam. 8.11.
verse, and so on to the end of the 17. verse: where the words be these, This
shall be the manner (or right) of the King that shall reign over you: He shall
take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his charets, and to be his
horsemen, and some to run before his charet. He shall appoint some to be
captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and some to make him
weapons for the war. He shall take your daughters, your fields, the tenth of
your seed, your Menservants and Maidservants, together with the best of your
yong-men and Asses. And at the 17. verse. The tenth of your sheep and ye also
shall be his servants.

But to this (perhaps) it may be objected,

Whereto I answer, that the main drift was indeed to deter them.

I say might: For it no where appears, that Saul put in practice all these
things here mentioned. And therefore should it [in the second place] be
objected, that Samuel deterres them (not by showing the lawful power of a King
but) by declaring the customs of a Tyrant: it must be granted that Saul was to
be such a one as is there described; or else, in my judgment, they are wide
from the matter. Saul I grant was tyrannous enough in his cruelties against
David, and bloody practices against the Priests, formerly mentioned. But, if
in case of necessity, he had been forced to do what this scripture declares,
I doubt not but he might have done it without the imputation of injustice, or
of any tyrannous usurpation. For be it granted, that if the extremity of this
were ordinarily urged by a King, or put in practice upon every trivial slight
occasion, or without just cause, it were not better then tyranny, as we are
taught, in Deuteronomy. 17.20. yet on the contrary, for a King to exercise such or
the like authority over his Subjects, when any imminent danger or known
necessity shall compel him to it, is no tyranny, but the top and high
branch of his regal power, and royal prerogative. For if not in such cases,
then in what is it that A King may do whatsoever he pleases, where his word
is there is power, Ecelos. 8.3.4.
and who may say unto him what do thou?

And be it granted, that this be not done out of tyranny but necessity, it
serves not only for safety, but for trial also of a subjects inclination, or
affection toward his Prince. Yea and thus also may be said, even when we
speak more generally not only of this, but of all the foresaid occasions,
comparing one time and business with another.

Neither do I find, that there is, or can be any time, wherein the head ought
not to be strengthened. For by suffering the head to be weak how can the
body prosper? Or if the Kings treasury be not like a spring, how can the waters
of safety be conveyed into the Cisternes of his subjects? And therefore to
be, as some are, so much be witched to what we have, that we had rather loose
all, then part with some, argues as well folly as malignity. For, as the Moon
and stars would fall infinitely short of that bright luster which now they
have, if the Sun were stripped of his abundant shining; So, take from a King
his Royal prerogative, with the Consistorians and their peevish adherents;
stint him to the modicums of the churlish Nabalists, and let him be as if he
were a King and no King; and then his very people will in a short space find,
that as from his flourishing comes their happiness, So from his want comes
their misery.

But here (perhaps) will some man object, Deuteronomy. 17.17. That a King may not
gather unto himself much silver and gold, and therefore it is in vain to
urge, that he should have a full treasury.

To which I answer, Subjectionis testificandae gratia in token of subjection;
but also that they may be enabled to undergo with cheerfulness, the costs
and charges appertaining to the manifold and unknown affairs of the
commonweal, together with the education of their offspring, which in
hereditarie Kingdoms cannot but be acknowledged (among loyal subjects) as the
welcome Stemmes, and hopeful branches for the future times. For these are
indeed those royal spirits of life, which can put full measures of wished joy
into a peoples heart; for where the case stands thus, though the Sun may set
no night appears, but the day is still kept in brightness by the happy
arising of another Sun.

In a word therefore to look (yet once again) unto our selves, our land has
been and still is, a treasury and a storehouse for Gods blessings; but God
grant that (among our other sins) our disobedience, riot, pride, and
covetousnes, be not a means (as the Prophet speaks) to remove these good
things from us; Ier. 5.25.
For we are yet happy if we could but see it, whereas our neighbor
countries have been, yea and still are the only cock-pits for all
Christendom to fight their battles in, we have been raised to our labors by
the noise of the cock, who (in his cheerful crowing) can merrily greet the
morning and bid good day unto the rising Sun, whereas others have been
roused up with the sound of Drum and Trumpet: And for what? Not to plow, but
to fight their fields; Not to banquets, but to battles; Not to the merry
pastimes of hawks and hounds, or some other harmless sports, but to the noise
of gunnes; Not to the sound of axes and hammers but rather to the clashing of
Arms; We have not seldom had the light of bone fires, in token of triumph;
They the light of Beacons in token of trouble. We have had peace the child of
heaven, and plenty the child of peace; whilst they have been measured with
the Sea the 2 Kin. 21.1^.
line of Samaria, and felt the force, not only of him who rides upon the Red
or bloody horse, but sometimes also even of him who rides upon the black, in
whose hands are balances to weigh, and thereby to stint the people in their
needful viands. For if the Black horse shall once appear, and with his rider
show himself to any people, then presently (as says Saint John) may a voice
be heard from among the four living creatures, Revel. 6.5.6.
crying out and saying, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of
Barlie for as much, upon which place no few expositours observe, that the
Bushel of wheat was sold for five accustomed prizes, and the Bushel of
Barlie for three. Or put the case, that our Harvests have been sometimes less
plentiful then other: yet what is that to the penury and want of sundry other
nations, where war makes a spoil of what they have? O fortunatos nimium,
bona si sua norint, Agricolas! is true of our husbandmen, but seldom or never
can it be fitly applied to theirs. And therefore let it be our care, that by
no kind of means we go about to darken that Sun, which next under the God
of heaven, gives us all this light, all this comfort, tranquillity, peace, and
safety which we have: least otherwise, we be of that generation here mentioned,
Who curse their father and do not bless their mother.

Nor is it thirdly as the Pope and Puritan-papists would have it: for Deus
transfert regna; God (and not the Pope) disposes of Kingdoms Dan. 2.21. and
Dan. 4.32. For as by him Kings reign; even so it is, that by him kingdoms are
disposed, and therefore to entrench upon another right, is bold presumption;
nay rather (in such a case as this) it is divelish desperate dealing.

But I partly know what they have to object: and therefore I answer: First,
that it was not Samuel that set up Saul no otherwise then by the immediate
direction of the holy Spirit. Neither was it Samuel that deposed Saul. Samuel
deposed him not by any authority in himself existing; What was done was by
the special direction of God Almighty, as cannot but appear to him who
reads the Scripture, in the 1 Samuel 15.16. Suffer me (said Samuel to the King)
and I will declare unto thee what the Lord has spoken to me in the night. And
then forthwith he delivered his message which God had revealed to him; namely
that although he were in his own person to enjoy the Kingdom as long as he
lived (as by the event of things appeared) yet the Lord had so rejected him and
his progeny from being King, that none of his race should have any right of
claim, or place of succession ever after, to or in the Crown.

And secondly, 2. Kin. 11.
as for the fact of the High Priest Ioiada; it proves indeed that it is and
ever was lawful for a state or commonweal to depose an Usurper, and restore
the true heir to his right: but to depose any lawful Prince (be he otherwise
never so exorbitant in life, manners and belief, or cruel in his government)
cannot from thence be proved. For if the Synagogue, or chief Priests, had ever
such ordinary power granted to them, why did they not practice it on the
persons of sundry wicked Kings which sometimes reigned both in Judah and
Israel? it seems they might not, and therefore we find they did not.

Samuels example then proves nothing; for it was by immediate direction. And
Ioiada's proves as little unlest it be in the like case. For Athalia was no
lawful Queen, but an usurping Tyrant; from whose bloody hands Ioash the right
heir was strangely preserved by the means of his aunt Iosaba the wife of
Ioiada the Priest, who took him privily from among the number of the Kings
children appointed to be slain, and hid him in the Lords house six years:
Then Ioiada brings him forth not as he was Priest, but rather as a Guardian and
Protector, having married the sister of the former King, and presents him to
the people like a good and loyal subject, that thereby the crown might be
set upon the right head, and the Scepter taken from an usurping Tyrant.

If therefore the Pope can show more for himself, then in plain truth can be
showed against him, let him take all that he claims, and we on our side will
freely acknowledge that we have done him wrong. But till the scriptures of God
deny themselves (which I am sure is never) his tyranny and pride herein too
well must needs appear. Let him therefore forbear to send out his thunders
against Christian Princes; and let not the simple be deceived with his
dispensations: for he neither can nor may authorize Subjects to curse these
their Parents, nor to to take up Arms against their lawful Sovereign.

Nay more; it is also certain, that even the very Priests (although Rome deny
it) do owe a subjection and obedience to the civil powers: for, that they be
not exempted by any divine right, Act. 25.10.
appears even in this one instance; I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I
ought to be judged. Not where I will suffer mp self to be judged, or where I
may be judged if I will; but (...), says that blessed Apostle, that is, where
I ought to be judged. Is it to be thought that he would have said, he ought
there to be judged, if de jure he had not been subject to that tribunal? Or
that he did it for fear of death, who was ready before, not only to be bound
and imprisoned, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of Jesus? It cannot
be that these by-respects took place in him: for even his Master Christ (whose
steps he followed) would have Peter careful to avoid offense, in not refusing
to pay the tribute money; Goepay (says he) formee and thee. Mat. 17.27.
Where though Christ might have pleaded a freedom which was more then they
knew who gathered the tribute; yet Peter could not: because it crosses that of
Saint Paul whose doctrine is, as well as his practice Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom
is due, And if every soul, then Peter and Paul and James and John; and Thomas
and Matthew with all the rest.

Nor again can it be showed, that any of the ancient fathers understood these
things otherwise For first I shall make mention of Saint Cyprian who says that
in his time the number of Christians was grown to be very great. Cypr. in
Demetrianum. Tertul. in Apotogetico cap. 37
Tertullian also writes thus: Were we disposed to practice not secret revenge,
but even to profess open hostility, should we want number of men, or or force
of arms? Are the Moors or the Parthians or any one nation whatsoever, more in
number then we who are spread over all the world? We are not of you (says
he, speaking to the heathens) and yet we have filled all the places and rooms
which ye have, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns, Assemblies; your Tents,
Tribes and Wards. How then is it true which Bellarmine alleges, that the
Church in her nonage wanted sufficient forces to rebel against the Emperors?
It Is sure she might not; and therefore we find she did not. And again
secondly Tertullian elsewhere speaking both in respect of himself and of other
Christians also, Terrul. ad Scapulam. Colimus ergo et Imperatorem sie, quomodo
et nobis licet et ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo se^undum et quicquid est a Deo
consecutum, et solo deo minerens.
affirmed, plainly that they honored the Emperor in such sort as was lawful
for them, and expedient for him a man next unto God, and obtaining from God
whatsoever he has; Solo Deo minorem being only inferior unto God. Pelagius
also the first Roman bishop of that name, writes to Childebert King of France,
that the scripture commands even Bishops to perform obedience unto Kings.
And Gregory the great in an Epistle to Mauritius and Augusta, calls himself
their unworthy servant; Indignus pietatis vestrae Famulus: says also (without
complement) that he is subject to their command; and have paid (says he) what
I ought because I have yielded obedience to the Emperor, and not holden my
peace in what I thought for God.

And again, to speak more nearly of that text of Saint Paul formerly
mentioned, even Pererius the Jesuit witnesses that Augustine, Chrysostom,
atque omnes fere Chrysostom. in 13. Romans hom. 23. Aug. in lib. exposit. quorundam
propos. ex epist. ad Romans cui Theod. Tbeophyl. Oecum assentiuntur.
veteres, and almost all the Ancients, Perer disput, 10 in 1^. cap. ad Romans
by those higher powers understand the secular powers: and by every soul, they
understand likewise all sorts of people, as well Priests as Laickes, Etiamsi
Apostolus sis, si Evang lista, si Propheta, sive quiisquis tandem fueris: Neque
enim pietatem subvertit ista subjectio. That is, whether thou be an Apostle, an
Evangelist, a Prophet, or whosoever else: for this subjection subverteth no
piety or religion, says Chrysostom. No, nor yet does piety or religion
subvert this civil subjection: For Christus leges suas non ad hoc induxit;
Christ has not made laws to overthrow policies and states, but for the better
ordering and establishing them as Saint Chrysostom, among the rest, again
observes.

Till therefore ambition secretly got the start of piety, the Great commanders
of the world had their every soul to be subject unto them. For it is easy to
find, not only that it is a new claim or challengofor men of the Church to
resist the civil Magistrates, and not to be obedient to them, but also the
times of stirring up Subjects to rebel against their Sovereigns, are well
enough known to all such as have an eye to history, truths herald, Anno 726.
and times register. And thus we find that it first was about the year 726
when Gregory the second caused all Itaby to withdraw their obedience from the
Emperor Leo, and to deny their tributes, because he had commanded Images to
be broken and burned And for the same cause also the said Pope excommunicated
him, and took from him the Cottian Alps, under a color of a gift, by which
they were granted to him from the Lumbards. Then also about the year 752. Anno
752.
Pope Zachary encourages and assisteth Pipin to depose his Master Childericke
King of France, and to take upon him the government of the said Kingdom;
which caused Pipin to give to the Popes the exarchy of Ravenna, which of right
belonged to the Grecian Emperor. Anno 772.
In the year 772. Adrian the first began, in his time there was held a
Counsel at Rome, wherein the Pope with consent of the Counsel, clearly to
casheire the the Greek Emperors, and to thrust them out of all, made
Charlemaine Prince of the Senate, giving unto him the power of investing the
Pope; and (as Du Plessie collecteth out of Sigonius and others) the Pope
acknowledged to hold of him Ravenna, and other pieces by fealty and allegiance,
adoring him after the manner that was used to the ancient princes, yet no
sooner was Charlemaine dead, but Rome wrought upon the good nature of his son
Lewis. And so again, about the year 817. Anno 817.
Pope Paschall the first procured himself to be chosen and consecrated
without the consent of the Emperor; but pleads an excuse for it afterward. In
the year 868. was Adrian the second: Anno 868.
He also was chosen without the Emperor, and excusing the matter, the Emperor
was appeased. Anno 884.
But Adrian the third who was in the year 884 decreeed that the election
should be free to the Clergy only; and that no Prince or Potentate should
meddle with choosing any men of the Church. Then in the year 964, Anno 964.
was Leo the eight, in whose time he, with all the Clergy and people of Rome,
to avoid the French as they had before avoided the Grecians, granted and
confirmed to Otho the first, and his successors after him, authority to elect
and ordain the Bishop of Rome; pronouncing Anathema and banishment or death to
them that should do the contrary, and confirmed by oath to him and his
successors, all that which they held by Donatian or otherwise from lustinian,
Pipin, Charlemaine, or Arithpertus, declaring moreover, that whosoever should
hinder the effect there of should incur the punishment of high treason. Yet
nevertheless, no sooner was Otho dead but in the year 974 Boniface the
seventh was made Pope by sedition and murder, Anno 974.
having strangled his predecessor Benet the eight, and put out the eyes of
John that was chosen against him. Some say that Damasus the second was set up
by the Emperor, Anno 1048.
in the year 1048. but Pantaleon out of Platina affirms that he entered by
force. After all which to add life to the foresaid practices, came Hildebrand
(otherwise called Gregory the VII.) in the year of our Lord 1073. Anno 1073.
and he most of all exalted himself above the Emperors, arrogating as a thing
proper to the Popes, the power of constituting Kings and Emperors; causing the
Emperor Henery the IV. to attend three days barefoot at his palace gate, Anno
1095. Anno 1102.
Urban the second, and Paschall the second gave nourishment to Gregory's
proceedings. Adrian the IV. chides with the Emperor for holding his wrong
stirrup. Alexander the third treads upon the Emperors neck. Celestine the
third crowns him with his foot: then kickes the crown off again to show his
power. And to make it appear that all was now in these Prelates hands:
Boniface the eight proclaimed it in an open Iubilee, Anno 1300.
in the year of our Lord 1300 clothing himself the one day in the
pontificials of a Bishop, and the other day in the robe royal of an Emperonr,
causing two swords to be carried before him, and these words to be uttered:
Ecce duo gladij: Behold the two swords: meaning that both the spiritual and
temporal power were now in the hands of the Church, and that therefore none of
the Clergy ought to be obedient to the civil Magistrate.

In which tenets and practices, both he and his fellows did not only
transgress the truth purely taught, maintained, and practiced in the first
times of the Gospel; but also went contrary to the ancient times of those many
godly Prophets and Priests under the Law: witness in the Court of the Jews,
one for all; even Nathan, who when he came before the King made his obeisance,
called him his Lord, and acknowledged himself a subject, or servant to him, 1
Kin. 1.24.
as it is in the 1 Kin. 1.24. And in a strange common weal, Daniel (in the
court of Darius) shall suffice, Dan. 6.21.
who prayed for the life and prosperity of the King, Dan. 6.21.

The reason of which obedience and subjection, is not as they are Prophets,
Prelates or other Priests but as they are Citizens and members of a body
politic: Igitur ut tales, subjecti esse debent eivili potestati; Therefore as
such they ought out of duty to be subject to the civil power. But otherwise in
causes merely Ecclesiastical, they are exempted by a divine right, from secular
judgments. For in all such causes as pertain to men bearing office in the
Church (whether it have respect to the function of their ministry, or to the
key of their government in foro exteriori) Priests also must be honored,
reverenced, and obeyed; than whose office I know (as Saint Ambrose witnesses)
none more excellent, A^br. de dig. ^it. sacerdot. cap. 3. Iosepb. antiq. lib.
11. cap. 8.
none more honorable, which was also declared by Alexander the Great, when he
met with Iaduah the high Priest of the Jews; as Josephus tells the story. Or to
come more nearly to our selves which was also declared by Theodsius the first,
who was willingly content to submit and yield himself to the reproof and
admonition of the aforesaid Ambrose, by whom he was (though not
excommunicated,) yet prohibited to come as at other times into the holy Temple
by reason of that great and rash Massacre of the Thessalonians, until upon his
hearty sorrow he obtained at length the assent of that holy Father. For thus
he (though an Emperor) was subject Domino spirituali (as we Domino temporali)
propter dominum aeternum. Of which act even as it was done on either side,
Theodoret speaks after this manner, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17.
saying that when all was done, both by the Bishop and Emperor, Tali tantaque
virtute, et Pontifex, et Imperator erant illustres; as it is in the latin
version. Meaning, that what they both did the Bishop in using his power and the
Emperor in submitting unto it) made them both famous. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 24.
And in Sozomen the same story is again recorded: To which is added that by
the appointment of this holy Father, the Emperor was placed, or seated in the
Church, so as was thought to be most covenient. And yet this man was no papal,
but a painful Bishop, one that feared not to speak or rebuke the greatest,
if need or occasion required him so to do. For Neque imperiale est libertatem
dicendi negare; Neque sacerdotale, Ambr. Epist. 29.
quod sentit non dicere. It is (says he) neither Princelike to deny liberty
of speech, nor Priest like not to speak what he thinks: The one argues an
affront offered to God, whose messenger he is that speaks; The other is a
sign of cowardice in Gods Minister, who may not hold his peace, if there be
just cause to reprehend. And of him Saint Hierome witnesses that his writings
and books are incorrupt, and that his sentences are most firm pillars of the
faith, and of all virtues beside. The like to which does Saint Austin also
testify. Yea, and the very Emperor himself confesses freely that the
sentence of the said Ambrose was just and right Nota enim est mihi (says he,)
justiciae sententia Ambrosij; Theod lib. 5. cap. 17.
neque ille reverentia Imperatoriae po^estatis divinam transgressurus est
l^gem. Long before the which times was one Fabianus (about the year of our
Lord 239. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 33.
) who would not suffer the Emperor Philip to join tanquam consors in
precationibus multitudini ecclesiasticae: would not suffer him (I say) to join
with the faithful in their prayers when they were met in the Church until he
had first stood in loco poenitentium, because although he wished well to
Christianity, yet in multis culpabilis effet: that is, because in many things
he was still faulty.

And therefore to spurn against the power and authority of Gods Ministers,
and to draw back from a mutual or reciprocal subordination between the
officers of the Church and common weal, is but to kick against the pricks and
to join with Corah and his company, who cry against the Priests, Down with
them, down with them, even to the ground: for ye take to much upon ye, oh ye
sons of Levi! cry such as these. And so doing they be also in the number of
those who curse their Father and do not bless their mother.

And thus I am come to the next sort of Parents; the Fathers of the Church.
Now, though in this discourse, I come not to these until the last, yet are
they not therefore to be disrespected. For prejudicate opinions may not rob
another of what is right: Nor is it any breach of piety to see the Church in
dignity I shall show it, that there be Lords spiritual as well as Lords
temporal: and that the best times and ages of the world, have thought it
religion to countenance the Clergy.

When therefore that famous K. James in his Basilicon Doron, lib. 2. page 38.
King of blessed memory, was about to speak severally of those 3. estates into
which the subjects of England are divided, he begins after this manner. First
(says he) that I prejudge not the Church of her ancient privileges, reason
would she should have the first place, for orders sake in this catalogue the
ground of which privilege I do believe came first, from among Gods people of
old; with whom the highest Priest was second in the Kingdom.

And albeit every one who is a Priest: or man of God among us, be not a
Prelate, nor may look to be of as high dignities as Aaron, Nathan or Zadoc;
nor to have the like honors and employments that Archbishops, and Bishops
have: yet know that we are all the men of God being lawfully called; et pro
Christo legatione fungimur, and Ambassadors of Christ. 2 Cor 5.20.
And therefore (besides what has been else) this I may say; Let a man so
account of us (even in geuerall) as of the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1.
and stewards of the mysteries of God; For to esteem otherwise of us, is to
have an evil eye at that calling which the Lord has honored, and to vilify
those persons whom he has magnified and would that they should be in high
account because they are placed in an holy function, which must at all times
put a difference between them and other men: Nor is it but observed, till we
meet with those who curse their Father and do not bless their Mother.

But enough of this till by and by; We shall have it again at another turning;
till when I leave it; and come now to the proof of such things pertinent to
all, and every of the Fathers in this body, as must be first handled.

Wherefore to proceed orderly, let the scriptures, and constant practice of the
Church built thereupon First testify that Churchmen have the name of Fathers,
Secondly that they be not all of one equal rank, but of differing degrees.
And last of all that there is reverence and honor due to them; as in the
following Chapters, Sections, and Divisions shall be further showed.

CHAPTER I. That the name or title of Father is pertinent to Churchmen.
THis truth I shall first prove out of the words of Saint Paul, who witnesses
to the Corinthians that he had begotten them in Christ Jesus through the
Gospel: 1 Cor. 4.15.
And so, though he were no carnal, yet a spiritual Father to them. Where note
that because he makes the word to be the means of their begetting it must needs
follow that every other Minister who converteth souls, is a spiritual Father
because he, by the word does also beget children unto Christ. In like manner
he also speaks to the people of Galatia: My little children of whom I
travel in birth, Gal 4.19. 1 Timothy 5.1.
till Christ be formed in you. And again, Rebuke not an Elder, but exh^rt him
as a Father, which (albeit he there means it of such in special as are
Fathers for their age; yet it) prooveth the title of Father to be due to all
who bear the name of Elders, whether in Church or Commonweal. For when he
speaks afterward of such into whose hands, in respect of discipline, the
government of the Church is committed, 1 Timothy 5.17.
he calls them by the name of Elders; Seniores officij: and would that (if
they rule well) they should have double honor: especially if they labor in
the word and doctrine, as well as in government. This is also proved out of
the words of Saint John: For, to those whom he writes in his first epistle he
speaks as a Father; using these words often, My little children. And at the
fourth verse of his third Epistle, I have (says he) no greater joy, then to
hear that my children walk in love. And in his old age (as St. Jerome tells
the story) being carried to the Church in the arms of his scholars, and
lifted into the Pulpit, and not able to speak many words, he used only this
sweet saying, Filioli diligite alterutrum: Little children (or my sons) love
one another.

Neither was it, but that in the times of the Law, the Prophets also and
Priests were called Fathers. Oh my Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel
and the horsemen thereof: So said Elisha to Elias; 2 Kin. 2.12. So said King
Ioash also to Elisha; 2 Kin. 13.14. Yea, and thus says the Scripture likewise
of the Priests; as we read in the 2 Chronicles. 29.11.

CHAP. II.
SECTION I.
BUt from hence I come to their ranks or orders. And in the first place stands
the King or chief Magistrate, whom Esaias calls a Nursing Father of the
Church: Esa. 49.23. 2 Samuel 5.1.
and by the ten tribes was acknowledged to be their Pastor. And so indeed he
was although in a differing manner from the Pastourship of Priests.

And yet not so far differing neither as that he be See Bishop Jewel
against Hard defense of Apol part. 6 chap. 15. divis. 1. p. 612
mere laicus: for then he must be tied altogether to the State, and meddle
nothing with the Church in matters Ecclesiastical, how negligently,
wrongfully, or disorderly soever he see things to be carried. But being the
keeper of both Tables, he must have an eye to the Church as well as to the
State; not only ordering that the Church be obeyed but that Bishops and other
Priests do their office, as well as they who belong to the affairs of the
Common wealth. Yea in a word he is to mairtaine Gods worship, K. James in his
Apol. for the oath of allegiance, page 108. printed Anno 1609.
as well as the peoples welfare, for thus as that second Solomon has recorded
do godly and Christian Kings within their own dominions, sit to govern their
Church, as well as the rest of their people; assisting the spiritual pover
with the temporal sword, making no new Articles of Faith, but commanding
obedience to be given to what the word of God approves, suffering no Sects and
Schisms, but reforming corruptions, and also ordering that a decorum be
observed in every thing, that thereby the inward dulnes of the heart may be
the better awaked to a more reverent respect, both toward God and his holy
worship: for if the outward beauty of Churches stirs up devotion; then much
more the decent and comely manner of the service there. Both do well; and well
is it, when both can be found to go together.

Now if any should suppose that this power of a King takes away the power of
Bishops; I answer that they are much deceived. For this is not to annihilate or
take away the jurisdiction or power of Bishops; but to nurse, cherish and
oversee it. For the Christian Church had Episcopal power granted (as
afterward shall be showed) before ever there was any Christian Magistrate.
Kings and Princes therefore are not sent to abolish this power and order, but
(where they find the same) to nourish it; yea, and to see that it go on and
do that which shall be for the glory of God and the good of the Church. For
wherreas Church officers might be resisted and disabled, without the assistance
of such a chief governor; and whereas they might be either negligent, or
otherwise in their office then beseemes them, it is the goodness of God to
send Christian Kings as chief fathers both for and over them, that thereby all
may go well among such as profess the name of Christ in a Christian Church.
To which purpose the words of Saint Austin are not impertinent: In hoc Reges
Deo serviunt, sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Aug. contra C^esconium lib. 3.
c. 15.
in quantum sunt Reges, si in suo Regno bena jubeant, mala prohibeant; non
solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad divinam
religionem. Meaning, that Kings herein serve God, as it is commanded them from
above in that they be Kings, if within their Kingdom they command good things
and forbid evil; not only in things pertaining to humane fellowship or civil
order, but also in things pertaining to Gods Religion. Now he that does this
must needs be supreme Governor over all persons, in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as civil within his own dominions, or else he cannot do it.
But seeing God has given him this power does he not therefore call Councels to
have Laws and orders made, and matters (where need is) to be settled for the
good of his Church? Yea, and because this power of supremacy comes to him from
above, it cannot be in Man to take it from him. Factibi, et erunt tibi (says
B^^ Andr in his Sermon upon Numb. (...) 1.2.
one of whom we may learn to speak) was that which God said to Moses; and to
him only: There was no Fac tibi said to Aaron. And therefore, the propriety,
or right of both Trumpets, commanded to be made for the calling of Assemblies,
both in the Church and State, must rest in Moses. From whence it came to pass,
that ever after, whosoever was in Moses his place, must have the same right and
power that Moses had. Sometimes I confess there was no such magistrate; but no
sooner did God send one again, then that this power was put in practice:
witness Nehemias after the captivity; Neh. 7.64. 1 Mac. 14.4^.
Simon after the fury of Antiochus: yea, and witness also that famous
Constantine, whom God raised up to overthrow the power of the persecuting
Dragons, and to reduce things to their former order.

Yet nevertheless this power of correcting, ordering, calling, and disposing
of men in matters of the Church, gives no authority to Kings or chief
Magistrates, to make new Articles of faith, to preach the Gospel, administer
the Sacraments, denounce excommuication, or exercise the function of the
Priests in their Church Service. For in these things Princes must forbear to
meddle, and acknowledge Priests to be their pastors, submitting their
greatness to be obedient to them in their directions; yea even to the meanest
of Gods Ministers, sincerely declaring the will of God. For though they may
force the Priests (where they find them negligent) to do their duties: yet the
duties themselves they cannot do. Defense of the Apolog part. 6. cap. 9 Divi^.
1.^. pa. 558.
Whereto agrees that of Bishop Jewel: Christ (says he) is evermore mindful
of his promise, for when he sees his Church defaced, and laid waste, he
raises up faithful Magistrates, and godly Princes, not to do the Priests or
Bishops duties, but to force the priests and Bishops to do their duties. The
duties themselves then must not be done, but by the Priests: and doing of them
Princes must be obedient to them, not despising (as has been said) the
meanest of Gods Ministers, sincerely declaring the will of God For as Gods
Ambassadors they beseech, exhort, admonish, and reprove even them (if need be)
as well as any other of Gods heritage. Number c. 16, etc. 17.
Who can be ignorant that it was a Corah and his company, which would have all
the Congreation alike holy, whereas it was Aarons rod among all the rods of the
Tribes that flourished? 1 Samuel 13. 2 Chronicles 26. So^om lib. 7. cap. 4.
Also who has not heard that it was a Saul who dared to offer sacrifice in the
stead of Samuel? and Vzziah that invades the Priests office? But it was the
part of a good Theodosius to So also did K. David to the ^^ssage of the Prophet
Nathan 2 Samuel 1^.13. (...) in ^^ronol.
submit to the censure of an upright and holy Ambrose: And yet nevertheless
the said Father granted, that it was the right and power of Princes to summon
Councels. For, about the year of our Lord 381. there was a Synod at Aquileia,
in which Saint Ambrose was president: Who (with the rest there assembled) did
fully testify, that by the appointment of the Emperor, and power of his
authority, they held their Synod: And hereupon it was that they gave notice to
him of all their proceedings therein. These are the first.

SECTION. II.
THE second follow: and they are those whom the So King James calls the Puritans
in his Basilicon Doron. lib. 1. page 41.
Pests of the Church (but not the scriptures, or primitive times) account
abominable: I mean the reverend Hierarchy of renowned Bishops, so much
condemned by the fiery Zelots of our peevish Puritans, whom nothing can please
but their own fancies. They contend for parity, and would have all be entitle
as high as Aaron: They would that all should be Governors, rather then private
Ministers, whereupon they urge, that of right there are no Diocesan, but only
parochial Bishops; That the authority, and jurisdiction and rights of a
Bishop, are no other then what belongs to all Parsons and Vicars of parish
Churches, and consequently, that every such Parson and Vicar is as good a
Bishop as the best. Neither do some but think that the Church cannot, or
ought not to be governed without a wise worshipful company of Lay Elders,
which may annually be removed, and return at the years end to their trades and
occupations again,

But that these, and the like are but idle fancies appears both in regard of
Christ's own order or institution, when he laid the foundation of his Church;
in regard of the Apostles own times; and also in regard of the Primitive times
after them.

As for the first, thus it was: The Apostles did not ordain the difference;
They only proceeded as Christ had ordained. For as there were chief and
inferior Priests in the times before Christ: in like manner, at the first
preaching of the Gospel the foundation of the Church was so laid, that all
Priests were not in all things equal, for the twelve Apostles were first
called and sent; See Mat. 10. and Luke chapter 2.8. 10. ver. 3.
Then after them the seventie Disciples; Christ likened the first to sheep;
the second to lambs: thereby declaring, that there was a greater dignity in
the one then in the other: and that the first-sent, had not only the priority
of time, but of place and authority. It was Christ's own act: and therefore
let no man presume not so much as to think of joining together those whom
Christ has put asunder. And so says the ordinary gloss; Sicut in Apostolis
forma est Episcoporum, sic in septuaginta Discipulis forma est Presbyterorum
secundi ordinis, as it is alleged by Stella and Aquinas. It is also so
understood by Theophilact, and sundry others upon the tenth of Luke, viz. that
the seventy were inferior to the twelve. Some express it thus; that the
seventy in stead of Aarons sons, should be amongst us as inferior Priests,
others thus, that the twelve were as the chief Captains and Commanders in the
Church. And although in these ordinances, it is as if Christ took pattern
from the Law, (wherein all Priests were not equal;) yet is it nothing against
the abrogation of the Law. For the Ceremonies both might be and were abolished,
although the form of the old government be still retained, seeing that was a
thing which pertained not so much to types and figures, as to that (...), or
rule of doing things decently and in order, for paritie is the next way to
bring all things to an Anarchy, and so no order, unless there be an order in
confusion. And without doubt, when our Savior said, Dic Ecclesiae: Tell it to
the Church, he had an eye to those whom he had made chief in authority above
the rest. And all this whilst Christ lived.

Next, if we have respect to the times of the Apostles, we shall find that
Saint Paul, though last called, 2 Cor. 11.5.
yet not a whit inferior to the ^hi^fest Aposles, by warrant from the holy
Ghost appointed Timothy to be a Bishop over all the Churches of Ephesus,
saying; I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Maced^nia,
1 Timothy 1 3.
to charge some that they teach no other doctrine. At the end therefore of the
second Epistle to Timothy it is said, that it was written from Rome to
Timotheus, the first elected Bishop of Ephesus. Tit. 1.5.
And to Titus he also writes thus; For this cause I left thee still in Crete,
that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City. The end likewise of that Epistle witnesses, that it was
directed to Titus the first elected Bishop of the Cretians.

And in the stories of the Church, declaring the Acts and Monuments of ancient
times, thus we read Eusebius reports in his third book and fourth Chapter of
Ecclesiastical history, that Timothy was the first Bishop of the whole
precinct of Ephesus, in as ample manner as Titus was chief Bishop of all the
Churches of Crete. (...) 2. c. 16.
He also writes that Saint Mark did institute the Churches of Alexandria.
lib. 2. c. 24.
And in another place, that Anianus did immediately succeed Mark the Apostle,
in the said Churches of Alexandria. And again Julian the tenth had the
Bishopric of the same Churches, (...). 5. c 9.
and in his third book, and 20. chapter speaking of Saint John; When he
returned (says he) out of Pathmos to Ephesus, at the request of others, he
visited the places bordering thereupon, that he might ordain Bishops,
constitute Churches, and elect Clergy men by lots, whom the Holy Ghost had
assigned: and coming to a City not far of, he cast his eyes upon that Bishop
which was set over all the rest, and unto him he committed the tuition of a
young Gentleman, saying I do earnestly commend this young man unto thee,
witness Christ and his Church.

Nay, before this alleged of these Apostles, we read in scripture of Philip,
one of the seven Deacons, who being sent forth an Evangelist, preached and
baptized; but neither might, nor did ordain others to do the like: For when
the Apostles heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they send thither
Peter and John because they had power of imposition of hands which Philip had
not as is recorded in the eight chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Act.
8.14.17.
Nor did Saint Paul but set down rules how Bishops should behave themselves,
which were in vain if the Church ought of right to be without them.

But among all passages, this may not slip; namely, that the seven Churches of
Asiae, had their Bishops, even at the very time when the Spirit of God
endeavored to lay open the particulars of their faults: And yet amongst all
the things worthy of blame wherewith they were charged, there is not a word
against them for being governed by Bishops, and surely, that order had not
escaped reprehension, if it had not been known to have been of divine
Institution.

And next (the testimonies being thus clear) can any but a madman think,
that they are meant only of ordinary Parish Priests, such as are now; as if
every such Priest should be a Bishop? Or if of other Bishops, is there any
color for it, that they should be Bishops only in title without jurisdiction,
when one (as we see) is plainly said to have the government of many Churches,
which by the Apostles were founded, planted, constituted, or appointed?
Certainly the word Churches in the plural number, does not import more
Catholic Churches then one for there is but one, and therefore by Churches is
meant the several plantation of Churches to be settled and governed by their
Bishops: some one having the chief oversight of as many as were within the
bounds of one precinct, and some other of as many as were within the bounds and
limits of another precinct. For, that word (...), used by Eusebius, is thus to
be taken, both the word Churches formerly mentioned, as also the grammatical
signification thereof do fully witness. Of which Scapula in his Lexicon
writes after this manner: namely that it signifies Accolarum conventus, et
Accolatus, sacraque vicinia: And therefore may be taken for many Churches
within any limited Precinct or jurisdiction: namely, for a Diocese, either
large or small; which is but as a great and general Parish: Mr. Seld. hist. of
Tithes, c. 6 page 80.
the lesser being since called by the same name, because they limit the people
unto which particular Church they are to go, and unto which to pay their tithes.

Thus were the first beginnings: The imitations, continuations and
inlargements, were afterward, and built upon the same grounds, when as the
number of believers increased there was a more general division of
Congregations into a greater number of particular parishes: Yet so as they were
to have their dependence on the mother Churches first erected, and to be
governed by every such Bishop as was the Bishop of their bounds and limits:
yea, and also, according to the said increase or growth of Churches, and
consequently of Diocesses, it was held agreeable to the divine institution of
this order, to have not only Archbishops, as well as Bishops, but Patriarchs
as well as either of both, that thereby all things might be the better ordered
in the Church of God. And albeit the Church of Rome, by the subtlety of
Satan, turned this honey into poison; yet what is that against the divine
right of the Churches Hierarchy? I like not to loath my meat, because some
have surfetted; nor to abhor my drink, because many a disordered person has
been drunken: No more may Or as the H^erar^hy by of Angels is not to be
rejected because the T^^ll is fallen; no more may the order of Bishops be
therefore despised because the Pope is indeed degenerate. Irenaeus lib 3. cap.
3.
Romes arrogancy cause us to contemn or sight against Christ's ordinance.
Christian Emperors, even in general Councels, have benenursing Fathers to it;
and upon all occasions, devoute and pious reverencers of it: The whole strcame
of religious and holy fathers had nothing to say against it: For all the
Orthodoxe generally believed, that they even in this followed the divine
institution, and Apostolical practice of what Christ had first founded.
Irenaeus says in his third book, and 3. chapter against heresies, Traditionem
Apostolorum in toto mundo manifestam, in Ecclesia adest perspicere omnibus qui
vera velint audire, et habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt
Episcopi in Ecclesi^s, et successores little usque ad nes. Capr. lib. 4. epist.
9. seu edit recent. epist. 69.
And in Saint Cyprian, Vnde schismata et haereses obortae sunt et oriuntur,
nisi dum Episcopus qui unus est, et Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam
praesumptione contemnitur; Et home dignatione Dei honoratus, ab indignis
hominibus judicatur? That is, whereof do Schisms and heresies spring but of
this, that the Bishop who is Which he means of but one Bishop in a Diocese.
one, and governs the Church, is through the proud and arrogant presumption
of some, contemned and set at naught; and being a man honored by the
appointment of God, is judged of unworthy men? And in Saint Austin thus; Nemo
ignorant (says he) Episcopos salvatorem Ecclesiis instituisse. Aug. quaest. ex
Novo Pest. Tom. a quell. 97 sub sinem.
Ipse enim prius quam in coelos ascenderet imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit
eos Episcopos. Meaning, that although Christ had formerly put a difference
between one Minister and another; yet that there might be a more full
instalment of the Apostles into their office of Episcopal authority, he laid
his hands upon them before he would ascend away from them; as is expressed in
Luke 24.50.51. From whence they were only to expect till the day of Pentecost:
and* then they were completely authorized, See Act 1.8.
had power sufficient, and might put it in practice, even to the ordaining of
Elders and Bishops, as occasion required: The laying on of hands appertained
then to them, Acts 8.14.17. and not to them only but to whomsoever else, by
virtue of their power, the office of a Bishop was conveyed; according to that
of Saint Paul to Timothy, Lay hands upon no man suddenly neither be partaker
of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22.

The opinion therefore of Aerius was reckoned for an heresy, because he put no
difference between the Bishops and other Presbyters. For although every Bishop
be a Presbyter or Priest, yet every Priest is not a Bishop; Bishops may create
Priests, and make them spiritual Fathers to beget children unto Christ; but
Priests cannot make Fathers or create Bishops: For how can it be (says
Alleged by Saravia de diverse. Minist. grid. c. 22. vide etiam A. quin. sum.
2.2. q. 184 Art. 6.
Epiphanius) that a Priest should create, qui potestatatem imponendi manus non
habet, who has no power of imposition of hands, Thus Epiphanius: And so also
Austin, before whom by many years, was Ignatius that holy Martyr of Christ
who, writing to those of Smyrna, has these words Laici subjecti sunto Diacoms,
Diaconi Presbyteris, Presbytert Episcopo, Episcopus Christo vt Chrislus Patri.
Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn.
(...), etc. That is, let laymen be subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to
the Priests; the Priests to a Bishop, and a Bishop to Christ, as Christ to his
Father. Tertullian also (as Ireneus formerly mentioned) accounts them for
heretics who could not show when their Church began or declare how it was
founded by some among the Apostles: which he knew they could not, for sine
Matre, Tertul. de praescript. cap. 32. and cap. 42.
sine sede extorres vagantur, et Ecclesias non habent. And Ambrose, explaining
that place in the fourth Chapter to the Ephesians, ver. 11. says: In Episcopo
omnes ordines sunt quia primus sacerdos est.

Saint Hierome I think of all the Fathers speaks the most sparingly of these
things; Hier. in Titum cap. 1.
in some place seeming to affirm that it was an humane invention to put a
difference in authority between the Bishops and other Priests or Elders. But I
wonder much at him, that he should tread so near upon the heels of Aerius,
especially, seeing he elsewhere confesses, contra Lucife^^nos.
that the Church consists of many degrees, the highest whereof he ends in the
Bishops. And in another place, where he expounds those words in the 44.
Psalm, namely, that in the stead of Fathers thou shall have children; thus he
speaks: Fuerint (O Ecclesia) Apostoli Patres tui, quia ipsi te genuerunt;
Nunc autem, quia illi recesserunt a mundo, habes pro his Episcopos filios. See
also his second book against Iovin an. To which let me add that of Saint
Bernard; Vae tibi si praees, et non prodes: sed vae gravius, si quia praeesse
metuis, prodesse refugis.

I shall need to say no more: for if this order had been against Gods
ordinance, neither would the Apostles allowed it, nor the seven Churches of
Asia escaped the rebukes of the holy Ghost for using it, nor yet the godly
fathers at all embraced it.

Let none therefore deceive themselves, for it is more then manifest, that
there ever was a difference. An inequality was laid, even in the first
foundation of the Church. All Priests have idem Ministerium, sed diversam
potestatem. For although it be, that as all are bound to feed the flock of
Christ, there is no difference otherwise then it pleases God to give diversity
of gifts: Or although the Ministerial offices of one are as truly ministerial
as if they were done by another, because both have an equality of Priesthood;
Or although in respect of the general service of Christ (as in the
dispensation of his word and mysteries) Bishops and inferior Priests, whether
they be Doctors, or others, are all Brethren and fellow Presbyters; yet, in
the power of government, equal authority belongs not to them, nor ever did
since first the Churches of Christ began to be planted. One in a certain
Sermon of his, upon Acts the 15.36. does thus declare it; namely, that although
a Bishop does not differ from an ordinary Pastor Quoad virtutem Sacerdotij:
yet there is and must be a difference Quoad potentiam jurisdictionis. And
again, although a Bishop and an Archbishop differ not in potestate ordinis;
yet there is a difference in potestate regiminis.

SECTION III.
WHat then shall become of those annual offices of Lay Elders, which the
Genevian Factours would put upon us? I find no such thing in Scripture, as
these men dream of. All the Elders there mentioned which have any thing to do
in the Church, and appertain to the government thereof, are no silent or
unpreaching Governors. In Gods book we have neither example for instance that
ever there was, nor precept for direction that ever there may be any such
Lay-Eldership. And although they allege that saying of Saint Paul to Timothy
[The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor; 1 Timothy 5.17.
especially they that labor in the word and doctrine] yet can it be no good
consequence to argue from thence; that there were some Elders in the Church
which taught nothing: For do we not all know, that it is one thing to teach
another to labor or be painful in teaching? It may be granted, that although
all be in some measure painful, yet some again have been more painful than
others. If either their constitution of body, years, gifts, or careful using
of them were such that they could both rule well, and be painful also in
teaching, they are worthy not only of honor, but of double honor. So that out
of these words can be collected no such distinction as they do imagine, of
preaching Elders, and governing Elders, which are no Preachers.

The office then of Eldership which the scripture mentions, must be in a
lawful Minister, and not in a Layman out of orders. 1 Pet. 5.1.2.
Saint Peter was a Preacher; yea, and a chief Elder: He charge therefore
other Elders to feed their flocks. The word which the Scripture uses is (...),
an appellation pertinent to all Priests, as being (...), fellow Presbyters,
although not of equal power, as has been showed. Act. 20.17.28.
Saint Paul also charge the Elders of Ephesus to feed the Church of Christ,
which he has purchased with his own blood. And to Titus he gives charge,
Tit 1.59.
that he appoint Elders in every city: showing, that by these he means such
as must be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to convince them which
say against it: not one word being mentioned of Elders out of orders to be in
the stead of Bishops, and to take upon them the governing of the Church. Which
last testimony puts into my mind that speech of the thrice famous man Erasmus,
E^asmus in an Epistle to John Alasco prefixed to the works of Ambrose.
viz. That if we had more Bishops like unto Ambrose, we should have more
Emperors like unto Theodosius And it is as true likewise of inferior Priests;
The sitter for their office the better for the people. For what is there, which
brings more harm then either ignorance, or want of courage. They who be
tainted with either of these are. rather led by the people, then the people by
them: For either they cannot or they dare not be what they ought in their holy
functions.

SECTION IIII.
BUt now I mention that holy Father Ambrose, viz. where he expounds that of
Saint Paul to Timothy, Rebuke not an Elder etc.) give some allowance to this
office of Lay-elderships.

Nothing at all. He gives I confess, England, which we call by the name of
Sworne-men, Gardians, or wardens of the Church, into whose hands the care of
Church provisions is committed, both in the providing of things wanting, in
repayring of things decayed, and in the trusty keeping of things had. These
are those men who present to the Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, or their
Chancellours, the faults and disorders done in their parish against those
Articles to which they are sworn, against the Canons, and against his
Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical. and so the Arch-bishoppe, Bishop,
Archdeacon, or their officers, proceed according to the information of the
said Wardens of every such Parish. For albeit the love of money, rather then of
virtue and reformation, be ready (among some underofficers) to send out the
Apparatour as a close spy, into the Country; yet we know that the Canons of
our Church do in no wise tolerate such indirect courses. Whereupon, in the
138. Canon, thus we read; that They (meaning Aparatours) shall not take upon
them the office of Promoters or informers for the Court. Which in some sort
agrees also to that of Saint Ambrose saying; that there is nothing done in the
Church without those Elders of which he speaks: because such disorders as
are proceeded against, according to the tenor of their informations, are
legally proceeded against, and justly punished; there being an oath taken for
the discharge of this office in a pious and conscionable way.

Thus it is with us; And thus also (or not far otherwise) it was in the days
of old; St. Ambrose complained of the want of it, and we do well to retain
still these useful footings appertaining to it.

Only sometimes we have a double fault committed: The one in the choice of
those annual officers; The other in that too high prerogative which some men
give them above their Minister.

First of all, in many country parishes, the lowest and meanest of the people
are chosen although they be but young and ignorant boys in comparison of
others: whereas they ought of right to be grave, sober, and able Seniors (if
not for years yet for parts) who both know their office, and are not afraid to
do it. And yet be they whom they will, either in this office for the Church, or
in that of Constable for the commonweal, if they would or could but tell how
to make conscience of an oath, there would not come in so many omnia bene's,
when there be Multa passim mala. Howbeit I do not mention this to encourage the
envious busy practices of some ill disposed officers, but only to stir up the
negligent to a more careful consideration of the wrong done to themselves,
through their slight regarding of known evils.

And next as for that exaltation which some men give them, it is fit they have
all that of right belongs to them: but to be exalted above their Minister, is
more then can, may, or ought to be granted. The subordination rests in them,
and not in him; at whose hand I dare say they ought to be always ready to do,
and to take advice as occasion shall require. For although no private Pastor be
a Prelate, yet I take it to be without doubt, that he is a kind of Rectour in
his own Parish by way of reference to the higher powers; and not to be a
mere cipher among his people. Ignatius I suppose knew it well enough, in the
subordination before mentioned. And yet, now adays, there is a generation to
be found, who would be very glad (for the disrespect they bear to the
Clergy) to see the Churchwardens made superior to their Priest, and he to be
but a dull spectator in all matter of business, to stand with his finger in
his mouth, and not dare to meddle with any thing, but be gainsayed,
over-topped, and not suffered to bear any sway at all; whilst they go on as
they list, and rule all the roast, as the common proverb speaks. It Is sure
that such a generation there is: But I dare not be he that should maintain
such doctrine for good divinity: for if it be not (in them that do) a trick
to please the people, or a sowing of pillowes under their Elbowes, I am
certainly much deceived. But let them tell me if they can (for I would be glad
to know it) what Canon in our Church, or Rubricke in our Liturgy, will serve
any whit to countenance such a proud and ambitious faction. The 113. canon
gives Ministers power to present, for fear if all should be left to the
Churchwardens there would be nothing done to rectify things amiss. The 89.
canon makes it lawful for the Minister to choose one of the Churchwardens and
sidemen, and to take notice of their accounts. The 91. cannon alowes him (and
not the Churchwardens) to niake choice of the Parish clerk. Also he (and not
the Churchwardens) is Can. 26. and Rubr. before Communion
allowed to be a judge between two offenders, and whom he finds to be
obstinare in malice, not to admit him (but the other) to the holy Communion. It
is also left to his Rubr. after the Commu.
discretion to judge whether the number be sufficient to be administered unto.
Also the Churchwardens Can. 20 and Rubric after the Commu.
are to take advice from him (and not he from them) receiving his direction for
the providing of Bread and Wine for Communions.

Also the time for baptizing of children (whether in the Morning, or in the
Afternoon) is Rubr. before public Bapt.
left to his discretion. It is likewise left to his discretion to determine
whether the Rubr. before private Bapt.
excuses alleged by Parents for not bringing their children to holy Baptism,
on the next Sunday or Holy Day after they be borne, be just and reasonable.
Also if he shall perceive any to come to the Font (who never received the
Communion) to answer for a child, he shall not Can. 2^.
suffer the said party to be an undertaker. He shall also Can. 28.
put back strangers from the Communion, and has Rubr. after Confirmati^.
it also in his power to order such as shall be catechized, according to his
discretion. He is also to have a key of the almes-box and other chest: and to
be employed in taking a Terrier of Glebe lands, and other possessions belonging
to the Church: For which see canon 84 70. and 87. And again by virtue of the
88. cannon he may either forbid the ringing of Bells, or give leave to have
them rung, as he thinks fitting, where though the Church wardens (as in some
other things be also mentioned; yet sure we find it not, The Churchwardens and
the Minister, but the Minister and the Churchwardens; He in the first place,
they in the next. So that now it well appears, that every Minister is more
then a dull spectator in his parish for the ordering and disposing of things
there, and that the Churchwardens are so far from being superior to their
Minister, as that they be his servants rather, and at his command in the
absence of the ordinary, to whom they are bound to present that which cannot
be amended or ordered otherwise: for there be indeed those courts to which
offenders must be cited, and from whence the censure for their faults must be
received.

But I hasten: for all hitherto is plain enough especially against those who
would have the Church government committed to the Layty; or if to the Priests,
in a confused parity.

Neither (last of all) shall I need to speak much of some others, who whilst
they decline the name of Bishop, retain the office under other names: which
they do (I dare say) in hatred of tyrannical proud papal Bishops: For what
other color can they have? But (alas) what harm is there in the name, seeing
the Tyranny rests not in the name, but in the person; otherwise every King
should be no better then a Tyrant, because Tarquin, and many other Kings have
used Tyranny. The Hierarchy of Bishops is as ancient (you see) as Christ and
his Apostles; The institution was not Apostolical, but divine in a more high
alloy: Christ first founded it, and the Apostles took it up from him, in their
administration of the public government; and so it descended to the
succeeding times of all ages, as formerly has been showed. And therefore to be
stubborn, disobedient, rebellious, or dis-respective toward it, is to fight
against Gods ordinance, to trouble the peace of the Church with fond fiery
factions, and to join with that generation, who curse their Father, and do not
bless their Mother.

CHAP. III.
THE next thing considerable, is the Reverence, Obedience, and Honor which the
people owe to their spiritual Fathers; not to some, but to all in every order,
rank, or degree amongst them.

And herein five things are considerable. First that the people have a reverent
respect toward the persons of such as are Ministers. Secondly, that they
disdain not to hear their Preachings, Rebukes, and Exhortations. Thirdly,
that they obey both Doctrine, and Discipline, conforming themselves to the
orders, rites, or ceremonies of the Church under which they live. Fourthly,
that they be peaceable toward them. Fifthly, that they rob them not, but
render to them their true and just dues out of all their goods.

SECT. I.
AND why I begin first with this, viz. that the people are bound to show a
reverent respect toward the very person of a Minister; is not because their
persons are more honorable then their doctrine; but because their doctrine
cannot profit, where their persons are despised. Cujus persona despicitur, ejus
doctrina contemnitur, says Saint Bernard. Bern. Sermon. 2. deresur. Demini.
And the reason is plain; for whilst men are so wicked as to slight, mock,
contemn, and despise our persons, they forget that we are the Ambassadors of
Christ; and forgetting this, the message likewise will be thought our own,
and none of Gods. Men will forget that Gods authority shines in us; and so
the message be set at naught, as well as he that brings it. Which whilst the
Devil perceives, he helps the world forward what he can, in this desperate
mischief; casting a black thick foggie cloud, before the bright beauty of
their glittering feet, who are sent to bring the glad tidings of good things,
to a wicked and ill-deserving people. Wherefore in the second Council of
Matiscon ( Canon 15.) it was strictly ordained, that all secular men should do
reverence to the Clergy, even to the lowest degree of them. whersoever they
met them. Neither is it but just with God, that their profit should little be
in the graces of the Spirit, who kick at those by whom his Spirit See the
right meaning of this afterward, in Chapter 3. Sect. 2.
speaks. Were it so, that the hurt went no further then our selves, we should
make the less account of it: But seeing by our reproach and infamy, the
Doctrine which we teach is greatly hindered, and God dishonored; it is our
duties to let you see and know the danger of our disgraces. This is the cause
of all evil (says Saint Chrysostom) that the authority of spiritual
governors is decayed; no reverence, Chrysostom. in (...). Epist. ad Ti. moth. c.
(...) verse (...).
no honor, no fear is showed toward them, etc. which I do not speak (says
he) for their sakes, but for your own. And a little after, He that honors
the Priest, honors God; and he that despises the Priest, by little and
little falls to this also, that he will use reproach against God himself.

But am I not loath to mention what the Heathens have done in this, even to the
very dispraise of Christians? and yet they were led thereunto by nothing more,
then by the light of nature left still in the soul of man. Loath (I say) to
mention their actions, least the Christians blush at their own pride, which
steals away so greedily the honor of their Priests; thinking all too little
which is given to themselves, all too much which is given to them. But if they
blush, it is a sign of Grace (I hope) as well as guiltiness. And therefore
whilst the knowledge may be profitable; let them all know, that by that light
of nature which is left still in the souls of men, and by which the very
Heathens have judged, that either a God, or gods ought to be worshipped; they
have esteemed their Priests worthy of no mean honor, reverence, and
observation: And better is it to learn from these men now, then that hereafter
they rise up in judgment against you. Wherefore let me mention what is
written of the Medes, and Persians, that they reckoned none fit to wear a
Crown, sway the Scepter, or be a King, who had not first been taught the
learning of their Magi. Virgil speaks of Anius, Aeneid. lib. 3. verse. 80.
that he was both a King, and a Priest. Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique
Sacerdos. In Aegpt (says Plato, alleged by Saravia) it was not lawful for a
King to command, without the Priesthood. Strabo in one place says, Strab. lib.
12. and Alexand ab Alexandro, lib. 2. c. 8. Strab. lib. 17.
that the chief Priests of Bellona's Temple (though subject to their King,)
were twice in a year to be are the Diadem. And in another place, that the
Priests were conversant, and of council with the Kings. Nerodot. in ^^terp.
Herodotus, and Diodorus testify, that they had their Ordinary from the King;
which agrees to that of Moses, in Genesis 47.22. witnessing that the King of
Egypt provided for the Priests, and would not that Joseph should meddle with
their lands. Which cannot but be a condemnation to all them, who neglect the
true Ministers of Gods word, as some have noted upon that Text. In a word,
Alexand. ab Alexandro, lib. 2. c. 8.
such was their honor, that as from the Philosophers they chose their Priests;
so out of their Priests, they chose or made their Kings. And again, to look
among other Nations, the first Kings of the Romans were Priests: The Emperors
afterward would be Pontifices Maximi. Tull. lib. 2. De legih.
And the Augurs (says Tullie) were chief in the Common-werle. The Flamines,
and other Priests were of no mean account. Caes. com. lib. 6.
Here also with Us, and in France, the Druides were of great esteem among the
chief ranks of honor: To which also add, that our Ancestors of latter
times, accounted none to be Milites legitimi; who had not first offered their
swords upon the Altar, and received their consecration to the trade of war,
from the Bishop or Priest of their place; B. Hall.
which is also a cause why it still is, that some orders of Knighthood (says
one) are held religious. And indeed, seeing all Nobility came at the first
from the Pen, or the Pike; Dr. Boyse.
that is from Learning, or Chivalrie, as another speaks; there is a plea for
the Scholar, as well as the Soldier, and consequently for the Divine; and for
him chiefly in his profession above the rest, because Divinity is the most
excellent, no other study or profession being fit to be compared with it.

But if all this be able to move you nothing, cast (I beseech you) your eyes
from hence to a better light, to the sacred sheets of holy Scripture, and
there observe what Gods Spirit has recorded. And first I shall show you, that
the Jews were esteemed to mur^^urre against the Lord, yea, and to despise the
Lord; when they murmured against Moses, and Aaron, and made but a small account
of those his servants: For so you may read in Exodus 16.7. Numb. 16.11. 1 Samuel
8.8.
and chap. 26.9. And to Samuel (says God) They have not despised thee, but
me: Esaias 57. and Ezekiel. 3.7. Luke 10.16.
And in the Prophecies of Esaias, and Ezekiel it is recorded; that whilst the
people jeered at the Prophets, they reproached God. Christ also takes the
wrong done to his Messengers, as done to himself. For who has not heard it,
that who so despises us that be sent, despises Christ? and if Christ be
despised, then also God. For he that despises you (says our Savior)
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. As on
the contrary, he that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me, as it is in Luke 10.16, and in Math. 9.41. He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward: And
in the 1. Cor. 14.1. it is the Doctrine of Saint Paul, that men esteem of
their Ministers, as of the Ambassadors of Christ: And in another place, 1
These. 5.12.
Know them (says he) which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord.
Which knowledge he also explaineth, and Verse 13.
shows, it not to be a scornful kind of knowledge, such as is in many; who
in contempt and derision can say, Lo, yonder goes a Priest, that man's a
Divine, etc. But such a knowledge [reade the place] as carries with it a
reverent esteem and regard: and this not after a mean manner neither, but
after an eminent or high manner; yea, says he, let it be (...); that is, super
exabundanti; or in English very highly; nor this out of constraint, or through
fear, but out of love. All which he further shows, must be, if for no other
cause, yet for this; namely, for their works sake: that is, vel co nomine,
even in regard of their holy function, wherein they are set apart to be the men
of God, 2 Cor. 6.1.
Christ's Ambassadors, and such labourours as labor among you for your
edification, Ephesians. 5.30.
into that mystical body of Christ Jesus.

Out of which Seripture (seeing the Apostle speaks so generally) it is easy to
learn, that in case the Heralds book (as some have scornfully objected)
should either deny, or be sparing of civil honor, to those of our Tribe, who
are not able to derive their pedigree from renowned Ancestors. Gods book is
of use to supply even that defect; for we see that the book of God neither
denies, nor is sparing of any such thing to us; but would have us known with
respect, and not meanly esteemed, but be of high account in regard of that
office whereunto we are called. And whereas again these pratlers speak of
spiritual honor, which they say they are willing to bestow upon us; I wonder
what is their meaning! I am sure they will not worship us, nor is there cause
why we should desire it. But be their meaning what it will, that which they
grant us must appear, or else in conclusion they grant us nothing. And indeed,
that I may not flatter them, they stand so much upon spirit, in the respects
which they owe to God, and his Ministers; that it may well be feared they
decline from truth in either of both, let them prate, or prattle to the
contrary what they please.

And from whence comes all this? does it not proceed from the ambitious hearts,
and swelling minds of the proud emulatours, ignorant, rude contemners, and
irreligious despisers among the Laity? I believe it does; for these things
chiefly are the prime roots, or causes, why Corah, and his company live still
among us; and why the spirit of those dead Children (taught by their worser
Fathers) who mocked the Prophet, breathes still in the breasts of our opposers.
But why may not two She-Beares, 2 King. 2.24.
or some worse punishment light upon them? Shall a judgment seize upon some,
and will not others be warned? Saint Austine says, The Children were stricken,
that their elders might be taught. For when the pride of the Jews was grown
extravagant, and that the very Children could scoff at the Prophets; the holy
Spirit was grieved, and the Children torn in pieces. Vt percussis parvulis,
majores reciperent disciplinam; St. August. de Temp. Se^^. 204.
and mors filiorum, fieret disciplina Parentum, and Prophetam, quem mirabilia
facientem nolebant amare, discerent vel timere. And if so, then why do these
mad people strive to let the world be witness, that they care not for the
Scriptures, although they speak both by precepts, and examples? Certes if they
had any true regard to what is written in them; they would surcease at the last
to dis-respect us, and not labor still to have our heads tied under their
girdles. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. It were a wrong to our callings
(and so to that sacred Majesty from whom we are sent) to dance attendance on
proud contemner, or to yield with willingness to such servilitie. Hertofore the
Hier. tradi^. in Genes.
first borne had the right of Priesthood; but now the world strives to make
Priests of younger brothers, and younger brothers of the Priests. Repentance
may come when it is too late, and therefore learn betimes to know God's
Ministers.

I go not about to find fault with all, we have no such ill measure (God be
thanked) at every ones hands. Howbeit, this is a theme which I might extend to
that which many (and they perhaps such as are usually accounted the best in a
Parish) would be loath to hear it. But I forbear them all, and shall rather
make my enlargement, by setting down the pious patterns of holy Christians; who
like the true servants of God, have honored his Messengers.

And first I will begin with the Galatians, Gala. 4.14.15.
of whom it is written, that they received Saint Paul as an Angel of God; yea,
even as Christ Jesus: and would if it had been possible, have pulled out their
own eyes, Aug. homil. de Pasloribus, inter opera Hierom.
to have done him good. And yet (as one speaks) accedit ad ovem languidam,
adovem putridam, secare vul^us, non parcere putredini: that is, He came to a
sick and an infected sheep; to lance the wound, not to spare the rottennes.

Thus also did the Carthaginians, Dieteri^. ex Vict. de Persecut. vandalic.
lib. 2.
who (as Victor relates) were so well affected toward Eugenius their Bishop,
that (if it might have been) every each one of them would have laid down
their lives to have redeemed his.

And as for the noble Matrons of Rome, it is thus recorded: That when their
Bishop Liberius was banished, because he would not condemn that holy man
Athanasius; Theod. lib. 2. cap. 17.
being ruled by the advice of their husbands, they came to the Emperor
Constantius, being clothed with their most precious ornaments; and desired
that he would restore again their Bishop, and take pity of so great a City,
which (being deprived of her Pastor) was exposed to the treacheries of
devouring wolves.

Nay more, for even that famous Constantine; under whom the Church began to
flourish, used the Clergy with no mean respect. Neither did the pious Princes
after him but remember it.

Yea, and thus also did the godly Kings and Princes before Christ. They
honored the Prophets, Priests, and Levites with an high regard, had them in
great price; and (which in these days is most envied) chose from among them
such as should be employed in matters of State, be Judges, and Justices in
Courts of civil affairs; the High Priest being always the second man in
their Kingdom.

And that these were best able in matters of greatest difficulty to be thus
employed, read God's own Sanction in Deuteronomy. 17.18. See also what God had
appointed concerning this, in Deuteronomy. 21.5.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, etc. then shall thou
arise and go unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shall
come to the Priests of the Levites, and to the Judge that shall he in those
days, and ask; and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment. Upon which
ground, David setting the Kingdom in better order then in process of time it
was grown into, 1 Chro. 23.4.
appointed six thousand Levites to be Indges, and Magistrates over the
people: and beyond Jordan toward the West, 1 Chronicles. 26.30.
a thousand and seven hundred, both to serve God in the place of Levites, and
also to serve the King in offices of State. ibid. verse 32.
He also set two thousand and seven hundred to be over the Tribes of Ruben,
Gad, and Manasseth, to hear and determine in causes, both Ecclesiastical, and
Civil.

The like also did Iehosophat in his reformation of the Church and
Commonweal. 2 Chronicles. 19.5.8.11.


Ezra was a Priest, Ezr. c. 7. and 8.
yet who but he that first of all after the Captivity, ordered all matters
both for the Church, Nehe. c. 1.
and State. Nehemiah came not up until 13. years after; for Nehemiah was in
the twentieth, and Ezra in the 7. year of Artaxerxes. Zorobabel I grant was
long before; but he did little or nothing for the reducing of things into a
form of government; or suppose he did, Ezra we are sure did a great deal more.

Neither was it, 1 Samuel c. 2.18 etc. 7.15.16.
but that (even before all these) Samuel as a Priest ministered before the Lord
in a linen Ephod, and as a Judge did ride his circuit every year, over all
the land: yea, and in the days of Saul, although he was the anointed King;
yet Samuel ruled jointly with him so long as they lived each with other: or at
the least was such a Counselor to him, as that after he was dead and buried,
he seeks to hear what he would advise, or answer, standing then destitute of
such direction as he had usually received from him.

Nay sooner yet, for Phineas was sent Ambassador to proclaim war against the
Rubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses. Josh. 22.12.3.

The Priests overthrew the City Jericho, Josh. 6. Nor did they afterward but
sound their Trumpets, and bid the battle in the war of Ahiiah against
Jeroboam. 2 Chronicles. 13.12.14.

The land also is divided among the Tribes, by Eleazar, and Joshua. Numb. 34.17.

A thousand likewise of every Tribe is sent out to war against the Midianites,
under the conduct of Phineas, Numb. 31.6. And in the same war, the spoils
were divided among the Soldiers, by Moses, and Eleazar the Priest, and the
chief Fathers of the Congregation. verse 26.

The people also were numbered by Moses, and Eleazar in the plain of Moab; as
they had been numbered formerly by Moses, and Aaron in the wilderness of Sinai,
Numb. 26.63.64.

From which testimonies it is plain and manifest, that some such Priests as
the King thinks fit, may (when he pleases) be lawfully employed in civil
affairs or offices; and may even thus be honored, as were those Priests of
old.

And whereas some object, that arguments drawn from the old. Testament, An
objection answered.
prove nothing now under the New: it is answered. First, that they may as well
deny the arguments taken from thence against the Popes authority, and
domineering power over Christian Kings, and Princes, as deny these arguments,
for proof of that civil honor which is thus given to the Ministers of the
Gospel. And therefore it is not love, but envy, which would seem to bolster
out things with such new Divinity.

Secondly, the Ministers of the Gospel (as one has well observed) may with
more convenience be employed in civil offices, then those Priests under the
Law; whose time is not now taken up (as then it was) with attendance on the
daily sacrifices; great number of feasts, solemnities, and such like occasions,
by which their leisure was less to hear civil matters, then now to the
Minister under the Gospel.

Thirdly, the Ministers of the Gospel have succeeded in a place of the
Levites, and look what in that kind was lawful for them to do, is not
unlawful now, especially seeing these employments pertained not to things
typical, figurative, or ceremonial. And fourthly, although Christ and his
Apostles were never thus employed, yet is that nothing against our tenet: For
who made me a judge over you, says Christ? Intimating, Luke 12.14.
that unless the supreme Magistrate shall assign Clergymen to such
offices, they may not meddle with them. But had the Church and Commonwealth
been both one, then it had been as lawful as in the days of old; which
appointment or assignation was never like to be, so long as the Church was in
the Kingdom of heathen tyrants.

Certain it is, that when the Emperors became Christians, some men of the
Church were thus employed. And although the condition of the Ministers of
Christ, differed not in this from that of the Levites, yet it could not show it
self till then. Examples are not wanting. Theod. lib. 2. c. 30.
Theodorit. makes mention of one James Bishop of Called also Nysibit.
Antioch in Mygdonia, who shined with Apostolical grace; and yet was both
Bishop, and governor of the aforesaid City.

Or if this testimony be obscure, see another; Saint Ambrose was twice
employed in the office of an Ambassador, by the Emperor Valentinian, and not
without good success.

Socrates also makes mention of one Marutha, Socrat. lib. 7. c. ^.
Bishop of Mesopotamia, whom the Emperor of Rome sent in an Embassage to the
King of Persia; which employment likewise proved good, both to the Church, and
Commonweal.

Neither can this be called an invasion of the offices of the civil
Magistrate, or be contrary to the rule of any ancient Canon, when it is done
by the consent and appointment of the chief Magistrate; as in the laws of
Justinian (alleged by Saravia) is apparent. Lib. de honor Prasulibus et
Presbyt. debito. cap. 20.
And although the the Popes laws have decreed the contrary; yet it is not fit
(says one) that we which are a reformed Church, and have long since abandoned
the Popes authority, Dr Dove of Church govern. page 40.
should now forsake God and the examples of the holy Bible, to follow the Pope,
and his Canons.

Fifthly, and lastly, Saint Paul thought it lawful to spend his spare time in
the work of his hands: But if the necessity of Domesticke affairs may excuse
a Pastor of the Church for so doing; then much more may they be excused for
doing such offices (when the King thinks it fit that they be called
thereunto) as shall benefit the common wealth wherein they live.

Neither does this appertain to the entangling of our selves with the things
of this World. For that text where this is mentioned; strikes at those whose
covetous hands and greedy hearts are so glewed to the earth, for the gathering
to themselves a private estate, that they forget every such thing as may tend
to the good, either of the Church, or State wherein they live; which every good
Christian, and therefore every upright man of God will be careful to avoid.

Nor again, does that of our Savior [in Luke 22.25.] deny the titles of
civil honors to men of the Church. Titles of civil honor are not their
denied; for it does not (as shall appear) forbid honor and authority, or the
titles thereunto belonging: but ambitious seeking of it, or them; together with
that tyrannical using of it, which the wicked kings of the Nations, through
the conceit of their own greatness, and soothings of their flatterers proudly
take upon them.

And that this is the meaning of that Text, appears by these reasons.

First, because Christ acknowledged that the title Rabbi (which signifies a
Master, an honorable person, or a man that is eminent by reason of his many
dignities and places of honor that he holds) was a title of right belonging
to him: He disclaimed it not, but embraced it. Ye call me Master, and Lord,
and ye say well, for so I am. John 13.13.

Secondly, John Baptist was called Master, and not refused it. Luke 3.12.

Thirdly, although Saint Paul, and Barnabas Act. 14.15.
denied to be worshipped with Divine honor; yet when Paul, and Silas were
reverenced with civil honor, and called (...) [Lords] by the Master of the
Prison, they made no scruple of it, but only said; Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved. Acts 16.30.

Fourthly, the change of Abram, to Abraham; and of Sarai, to Sarah witness no
less: for their names being thus changed, were not only a token of confirming
the promise; but also an honorable favor which God himself vouchsafed to
them, Dr. Willet ex Mercer. in Genesis
for their greater grace and respect among those with whom they lived; as was
seen when Abraham communed with the Children of Heth; who answering, said unto
him: Hear us my Lord, thou art a mighty Prince among us. Genesis 23.6. And God
also told Abimilech, that he was a Prophet. Genesis 20.7.

Fifthly, because when Obadiah met Elias, he fell on his face, and said; Art
thou my Lord Elias? He answered, yea; Go and tell thy Lord, behold, Elias is
here. 1 Kings 18.7.8.

Sixthly, because Elisha accepted of the like title, as it is in the 2 Kings
4.16.

In which regard Beza noted not amiss upon these words [in Mat. 23.8.] Be not
ye called Rabbi, etc. Ne vocemini, id est, Ne ambiatis. Be not ye called;
that is, do not ambitiously seek after that title, or pride your selves in
it: for otherwise our Savior does not accept against any, either for not
denying the titles of their office, or for not refusing the honor due unto
them. And here an end of this Section.

SECT. II.
THE next thing that follows, is, That the people give ear, and come where
they may hear the Doctrines, rebukes, and exhortations of their ghostly
Fathers. For though they be men whom the Lord has assigned to this holy
office: yet men, to whom he has conveyed a peculiar grace, 2 Timothy 1.6. ibid.
which the Orthodox and right do so stir up, that when they preach, they
preach not themselves, but Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.5. Heb. 5.4.
They have power to officiate, but they take it not; it is given them before
they have it. It came to those of Christ's school, from Christ himself; but
was not to end with them, for there is a * building which cannot be perfected
without it: And being therefore appointed for it, Ephesians 4.12. Mat. 28. ult.
it has been conveyed ever since by the imposition of hands, to such as are
not otherwise any lawful Priests of God. And finally, that care may be had in
the conveighance hereof; It is the counsel of Saint Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy
5.22.
That he lay hands upon no man suddenly.

Thus then we have it, and are by this means become persons sacred, and have
authority to deal in holy things. We bless in the name of him that blesses:
The dispensation of the Word and Sacraments is committed to us; We have power
to bind, Mat. 18.18. 2 Cor. 5.20.
we have power to loose, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us.

The message is from Heaven, as delivering to you God's blessed will, out of
his holy Word: And therefore to be received, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13
not as the word of men, but as the Word of God. So that as we, if we love the
Lord, Ioh. 21.15.16
will feed his Lambs, and Sheep: In like manner ye, if ye despise not
Christ, Luke 21.16. Acts 7.51.
nor resist the holy Ghost; will be content to hearken to the words of those by
whom he speaks.

For this he does, he speaks by us, though not by immediate inspiration (as
some phantastickes fondly dream;) yet by our rightly dividing that Word of
truth, which is properly and indeed the Word of God: Aug. cont. Epist.
Parmenioni l. 2. c. 11.
In cujus praedicatione spiritus Sanctus operatur, as Saint Austine speaks.
So that though our Sermons ought to have no greater credit, then they can gain
unto themselves by their agreement with the Scriptures, yet not dissenting from
them, they are truly and indeed the Truth and Doctrine of God, and though not
his Word by immediate inspiration; yet the Word of God, in a secundarie sense;
as being the sober explication, and application of some such part or portion of
the Word as we then pitch upon. In which regard, the Preachers of it are
Co-workers, or jont-labourers with God, as even the Apostles were: For though
we cannot be compared with them in worthiness of grace and virtue; yet in
likeness of office and Ministry, we may, and must. And indeed it is a
perpetual Sanction, Mal. 2.7.
that the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and that the people seek
the Law at their mouths; for even in this they are the messengers of the Lord
of Hosts. So that in what way so ever they convey or give notification of the
object of faith (which is the Word) unto the people, whether it be by reading,
or otherwise; it is to be of more esteem, then when it is done by any other.
Which I do not note to deter Lay People from reading of the Scripture, but
to show the difference that is between their reading, and ours; as also to
signify, that no Scripture is of private interpretation, 1 Pet. 1.20.
as Saint Peter has declared.

And now to the amplifying of all this, thus I proceed.

The Lord's Day [or Sunday] is God's chief Schoole-day, wherein God's people
must come to the Church, for that is his Schoole-house; wherein (among other
duties to be done) they must hear his Word, for that is their lesson.

Some be Truants, and care not for coming. Others be Recusants, and may not
come to join themselves with us. A third sort be Schismatics, and will not
come, except where they affect, and when they please. And last of all, others
be indifferent, and will sometimes come; but in respect of the end, their
coming and hearing is in vain, they are yet in their sins.

I shall speak of these in their order: Of the time, the place, the persons.

I. And as for the chief time, I call it (as I ought) the Lord's Day, or
Sunday; because the Sabbath as ceremonial, was abolished at the death of
Christ; as in the second Chapter to the Collossians is declared.

And why a day must be still observed, is inregard of what is moral in the
fourth Commandment: For it is absolutely and directly of the Law of Nature,
that some time be set apart, for the public worship, and solemn services
of God. And why one day in seven, is not in regard of what is strictly moral,
in respect of Nature dictating; but in respect of Nature informed by the Divine
instruction of the God of Heaven. For whereas Nature knew not how to make
choice, or put a difference between one number, and another, it pleased God to
instruct and inform Nature; that thereby that which is not strictly moral
ratione naturae, might be known and accounted as moral ratione disciplinae:
of which condition, is the quota pars. both for Tithes, and for the time of
God's public worship.

And next, why this part of one in seven, has (since the ceasing of the
Sabbath) been observed by us rathe^ ron the first, then second, third, or any
other day of the week; is, not in regard of any precept expressly commanding
it; but in regard of the Churches practice at all times, and in all Ages ever
since.

Now they that began it, were the Apostles; being led thereunto by our (and
their) Lords resurrection, and by his often apparitions to them upon that very
day, rather then upon any other day beside: For, as they knew the Sabbath to be
abolished by Christ's death; In like manner, by his resurrection they had ground
sufficient to direct them to the choice of a peculiar day, for the observation
of a new and chief Festival; and so much the rather, because Christ used then
(as I said) to appear unto them.

Hence therefore it is, Revel. 1.10. Ignat. epist. ad Magnes.
that Saint John makes mention of a Day, which he calls Dies Dominicus, the
Lord's Day: And Ignatius (one of Saint John's Disciples) tells us, that it was
the first day of the week; the very Queen and chief of Days, renowned by
our Lord's resurrection. So also says Saint Austine, Aug ad Ianua. epist. 119.
c. 13
the Lord's Day was declared to Christians by the resurrection of the Lord; and
from that time began to be celebraeted. De verb. Apost. Sermon. 15.
And in another place, The raising of the Lord, has promised to us an eternal
day, and has consecrated for us the Lord's Day. By which he means, that
Christ thus honoring this day; did thereby (as it were) point it out as the
only day to be made choice of, for the religious and solemn services of God.
Or to use again his own words, Demonstrare and consecrare dignatus est; Ad
Ianuar. epist. 119. c. 9.
He did vouchsafe to demonstrate, and consecrate it.

Thus they and their successors first took it up. Apostoli and Apostolici
viri: This was their ground; and from them to us the observation thereof has
proceeded, and is still retained in the Christian Church.

Yea, Just apol. 2. ad Anton. Imperat. ppope finem.
and further; even this Day which was thus frequently called the Lord's Day:
Iustine Martyr calls also Sunday; and may fitly be so named, not because the
Pagans dedicated that day to their Idol of the Sun; but because (as another
Father speaks) The Son of righteousness which enlightneth every one of us,
Saint Ambr. Sermon. 61.
did then arise. Neither was it known to have so much as the name of Sabbath
ever after in the Church of God, without some distinction added, to distinguish
it from that of the Jews. For in a proper and litterall sense, it cannot be
called the Sabbath Day, as being neither that day which the Jews observed, nor
of such strickt rest as was that Day of theirs.

And indeed the very stricktnesse of their rest, gave the name of Sabbath to
the Day which they were to keep; but was not the principal thing wherein the
sanctification of it consisted. For though the rest was strictly exacted, yet
but accidentally annexed: and therefore now removed in the removal of that
yoke of outward observances, which for the time was laid upon them. Gala. 4.
For as the effect abides so long as the cause remains, but perishes when
the cause cease; so the strictness of Rest, was to remain so long as the
Day and memo^y of the things veiled under the strict rest thereof abided. But
the Day being taken away, the end and reason of the said Rest is gone, and also
the strict Rest it self; which being figurative, could not be too strict. For
the more exact the figure is, the better it signifies; as in the Lamb for the
Passover well appears, which was to be always such, as had no blemish.

And that this Rest of theirs thus strictly exacted, was but accidentally
annexed; will be manifest: if we consider the many causes, more then the chief
and principal, for which they were to keep it. For though such a Rest be
always requisite, as may promote the divine duties of God's public worship;
and not be contrary to the observance of that precept which requires the
performance of them. Yet if there be other ends beyond that which the solemn
service of God requires; those ends must be examined whether they be
connected, with that end which participates with the morality of that
Commandment, which leads us to the setting apart of some time, for God's
public and solemn service. We deny nothing to be abolished, which is as a
means requisite to that end, for which a Day is set apart. But if in the
Jewish rest there were things figurative; and to signify something which was
either past, present, or then to come: We are nothing bound either to the name
of their day, to the day it self; or to the strict observance of such a rest,
as that day of theirs required. For if this be not granted, we retain not
only the substance, but ceremony likewise of the Sabbath: their many ends of
rest, beside that for which the day was chiefly set apart, must needs be the
cause of an extreme stricknesse: But being to signify, as aforesaid; it was
to them, and not to us, that God intended such a Rest.

For first they rested in memory of the Creation, which on that particular day
was ended, six days being spent in Creating, Exodus 20.11.
before that day of Rest approached. From the memory of which (after the
manner that they remembered it) we are now called; in regard that the
observation of the day it self is ceased. Col. 2.16.17. Not that we do hereby
deny God to be our Creator, but acknowledge Christ to be our Redeemer. And
indeed the benefit of Redemption being greater then that of Creation; the
memory of the first, is obscured by the last, and so the one is to give place
unto the other; as in a case not much unlike it, the Prophet Ierem^e has
declared. Ier. 16.14 15.

Nor again, does this last impose a like commemoration with the former, in
regard of Rest; because our Savior did not so much rest upon that day whereon
he arose, as valiantly overcome the powers of death. It may be rather said that
he rested before whilst he lay in the Grave; and so they who are dead, be
said to rest from their labors: but to rise again, implies a breaking off
from rest, and a beginning of labor, which even in this cannot but be granted;
if the consideration be taken up, with relation to that rest which went before
it, whilst the body lay in the quiet Grave till the time appointed. Nor do I
think it strange to say, that on our Day of the Lord, the memory of the
Redemption be come in place of that of Creation. For tho we have the proper
solemnity of Christ's Resurrection, upon that day which is called Easter; yet
this weekly day of public worship, being (as Saint Austine speaks)
consecrated to us by our Lords Resurrection; does not only deserve to be made
choice of, for the peculiar day of our solemn Assemblies, but to be judged
also to relate in some sort to the benefit of Redemption.

Secondly, their strict resting was a memorial of their deliverance from the
hard labors which they had lately suffered in the Land of Egypt; as is
expressly mentioned in Deuteronomy. 5.15. Now this was a thing peculiarly belonging
unto them, and not to us: Therefore they, and we are not both bound to one and
the same strictness, unless their condition and ours were both alike.

Thirdly, Ezekiel. 20 12.
this their Sabbath was given them for a sign, Psalm. 147.20.
that God had then chosen them from among all the Nations of the earth, to be
his people: For the Heathen had no knowledge of his Laws; but they had: the
partition wall was then unbroken. In token of which favor they had the
Sabbath, which they were strictly to observe; not doing their own will, nor
speaking so much as their own words, as in these Scriptures is declared. Exodus
31.13. Ezekiel. 20.12. and Esa. 58.13.

And albeit all Christians now be likewise the people of God; yet because they
are of more Nations then one, and live in times of more maturitie; they are not
tied to such a strict yoke, as if they were still in the days of the Law, but
differenced from that Heir, who whilst he is a Child, must live as a servant,
as the Apostle speaks, Gala. 4.1. For when the fullness of time was come; the
condition of God's people was altered, as at the fifth verse of the foresaid
Chapter is declared. And at the seventh verse, thus; Thou art no more a
servant, but a Son. And therefore though bound to be obedient; yet freed
from those hard taskes, which of old were strictly required from the Jewish
people.

Last of all, their Sabbath was a type whereby was prefigured that Rest, Heb.
9.4.
which (as the Apostle speaks, and of which their Canaaen likewise was a
figure) remained for the people of God, to be purchased for them by Christ: who
being come, and gone into his Fathers house, Ioh. 14.2.
wherein are many mansion places, went to prepare them; as was prefigured in
the foresaid Rest of the Jewish Sabbath. And therefore, seeing Christ has
actually purchased, that which was then prefigured, it were injurious to Christ
to lay the same yoke still upon our necks.

Yea in a word, by what has been said, it cannot but appear, that although
our Lord's Day or Sunday, has of late years been vulgarly known and called
by the name of the Sabbath; yet of right, neither the name, nor manner of
keeping it, appertains thereunto: For there is so great a difference between
the old Sabbath and our Sunday, that it is a manifest mistake to urge those
Scriptures upon us, which peculiarly belonged to them in the observation of
their Day.

But if the Sunday be no Sabbath, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath
day, etc. yea and why are the people bound to pray at the end thereof, Lord
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law?

For answer whereunto, Sol.
this is first; that although all the other Commandments are to be kept, ut
sonant, according to the letter, as St Austin speaks: yet this of the Sabbath
is of another kind; being partly moral, partly ceremonial. And if so, then
in part it is abolished, and in part retained. And being but in part abolished,
it must upon necessity have still a place among the other precepts. For so
far as it is moral, it is still of force; and is therefore put among the
Precepts of the Decalogue for that which is moral in it. For (as I said
formerly) it proceeds from the Law of Nature, that some time be set apart for
Gods public service. And therefore this being revived in the Law of the
fourth Commandment, ought to be remembered and kept upon one day in seven:
which last, though unknown till Nature was informed, is now to be reckoned as
that principal portion of time which God requires. And so last of all, being
bound to the morality of the precept, there is good reason that we pray to have
the Lord incline our hearts to the keeping of it: for being strengthened by his
assistance, there will be care had, that we decline not away from the
observation thereof.

And whereas I formerly gave notice, that it is the very chief of Days; or
(as I then expressed it) Gods chief Schoole-day, I had reason for it: because
there is no Holy Day, which the Church has appointed to be kept, of such
eminency and excellency as is this Day of the Lord; according to that of St.
Austin, in his 251 Sermon De tempore, at the very beginning thereof, in these
words, saying: Sciendum est (Fratres charissimi) quod ideo a sanctis patribus
nostris constitutum est christianis, and mandatum, ut in solennitatibus
Sanctorum, and maxim in Dominicis diebus, otium haberent, and a terreno
negotio vacarent, ut paratiores and promptiores essent ad divinum cultum. In
which words appears, not only the excellency of this Day above other
Festivalls; but the necessity also of such a Rest, as may be no hindrance, but
a furtherance to Gods public worship. For such a Rest as this, is as a means
requisite for that end for which the Day is set apart. The ancient Sabbath had
(as has been showed) other ends, which here in this Day can take no place,
because the Day it self is now abolished and gone, and the arms of the Church
extended further then to one only Nation. All that can be added more, is this;
Nature requires some refreshment, and Religion teaches us to be merciful to
our very Beasts; Prove. 12.10. Deuteronomy. 5.14.
and if to them, much more to our servants: In which regard the other parts of
the Day (and so the whole Day) are fitly freed from all servile labors, except
in urgent cases of extreme necessity; which also makes it not unlawful, to
take in hand some harmless recreation for refreshment, after the ends of all
Divine-services in the public assemblies. For when all the public duties of
the Day be ended, then is that accomplished for which the day is chiefly set
apart.

And because this cannot be done without Rest, there is a cessation from
ordinary labors, both before, and at the times of public worship. Before, for
preparation; that thereby we bring not with us Cor fatui, Eccles. 5.1. Exodus
3.5.
A fools heart, as Solomon speaks: but be fitted aforehand for the sacred
employments to which we are going. And at the times likewise; because the one
cannot be done without the other: that is, our own private businesses, and the
general and public duties of piety and devotion, cannot be followed both at
once.

And because the Rest also of the Day points at mercy as well as sacrifice, (of
which there is something spoken in Deuteronomy. 5.14.) harmless recreation, which is
a means of refreshment, claims her privilege; and steps in at the last,
after all the public services for the Day be ended: yea, and as the case with
some may at sometimes stand, is not so long denied them; no, not so long as
then.

But some singular privilege is not to be alleged as a general practice. And
therefore, as it is both a pious and prudent constitution of the Church, Can.
14. Eccles. Anglic. and Aug. de temp. Ser. 251.
to appoint (by way of preparation) certain holy offices to be used on the Eve
before: In like manner as pious and prudent is it for a Christian Magistrate,
See this in his Majesty's Declarat.
not to suffer any sportings or recreations, till all the public Services of
our God be ended for that present Day; and that none should enjoy the benefit
of this liberty, who has not first resorted to the Church; nor that it be
abused, but used in a moderate, discreet, and pious way.

Now albeit this liberty be both thus qualified, and comes not in place till
God be first served; yet there want not those, who trouble both the peace of
the Church and State, by setting themselves against it. But he who has said,
Hos. 6.6. and Math. 12.7.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, has said enough to signify, that he
will not then be displeased at it; especially in those, whose education, or
parts be such, as are unfit for long meditation; the rigid tie whereof being
laid upon them, makes the Rest of this Day more burdensome unto them, then
their weekly labors. Or if Christ could say of the Jewish Sabbath, that it was
made for man, and not man for it; Math. 12.8.
then much more may we affirm it of our Festival, in as much as their yoke
of ceremonious bondage belongs not to us.

Howbeit they are not to be excused, who have more mind of their Pastime, then
of their pious and holy worship; wishing in their hearts that the Priest would
make a quick dispatch, by cutting short the service of the Day: For what is
this but to have hell set at liberty, there being no better concord then thus
between them and heaven. They do indeed desire to have a Day set apart: but
because they prefer the less principal end of its separation before the
chief; they observe a Day, not as they which observe it to the Lord, but as
they that observe it to themselves. And therefore we justly reckon these among
such, as are willingly desirous to profane this blessed Day, although it be
now the Queen of days, and time of greatest eminency for Gods public worship.

Nor again do we blame those, who (without hypocrisy and superstition) spend
the whole day in works of piety and devotion. For, as Christ said in some
cases, so may we say in this; it is a thing commendable: Math. 19.12.
and therefore, Let him that is able to receive it, receive it, without judging
of another liberty. The one may not be accounted irreligious or profane, in
the lawfulll use of his Christian freedom; nor the other over strict (if he
judge not his brother) in the copious measure of his more plentiful devotions.

II. And thus I have done with the first thing, the circumstance of time. That
of the place is next. This is the Temple, or Church: Gods House, and his
earthly Sanctuary, whereunto they who seek his face will resort: Which is as
Abraham said, In the Mountain will the Lord be seen. For though the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him; or although in a strict sense he dwells not in
Temples made with hands, because of his Omni-presence. Yet nevertheless he
has vouchsafed to afford different manners and degrees of his Presence; and is
otherwise in Heaven, otherwise in earth.

Nor on earth is he every where alike; for in such places as are dedicated to
his Name, 1 King. 9 3. Psalm. 132.15.
he has promised a more special dispensation of his Presence, then in places
of common use, and to accept of them as his peculiar houses. In token whereof,
we do not only read, Psalm. 87.2.
that the Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob;
and that he said, his eyes and his heart should be in that house which Solomon
had builded for him: Psalm 42.2. Psalm 105.4. Psalm. 132.8. 2 Chro. 6.41 Genesis
4.14.15 Genesis 28.16 17.
but also that the said Temple, Tabernacle, and first places of his worship,
are not seldom called the Rest, and Face of God, and the gate of Heaven.
Enough to signify, that both by his more special Presence, and by a
peculiaritie of propriety, these places are become sacred, and are so the
Lords, as that they be no longer ours. He also herein vouchsafing it as a
special honor, even to the places themselves, that they be so called, named,
and esteemed; the comfortable effects of that by which the place is thus named,
being always such as shall be sure to show themselves, Mat. 18.20. Psalm.
145.18.
by the religious sincerity of devoute worshippers.

And if in the general such be not only the peculiaritie of propriety, but
honor likewise of set and prepared places; then in particular, that which
has the most near relation to his Presence, must needs carry with it both the
highest propriety; and be also taken up in our regard, as the most Presentiall
place in all his House. This the Ancients (as some also now adays) did so well
observe, that doing their obeisance, they turned their faces this very way, and
yet were neither superstitious, nor idolatrous for doing so. We profess and
say indeed the Lord is there, but not the Lord is this; and therefore are no
more idolatrous then was David, in the fifth Psalm at the seventh verse. Yea,
in a word; if men were disposed to be right, there stands before us in our
assemblies, a chief sign of God's presence; as being that from whence we have
our perfectest communion with the God of Heaven: For though it begins in
Baptism, it ends in the Supper, nearer then which we cannot go, till we pass
from hence to a better place. So that although he give us good assurance of his
Presence in sundry things, and by many testimonies tells us truly, that he is
with us; yet in nothing so much, nor so really, as in this high mystery of our
Religion.

And next, albeit every circumstance, in respect of the form and fashion of
these places not known at the first: yet 'twas a Dictate of the Law of nature,
that some place, as well as some time, should be holy to the Lord.

It had footing as soon as might be, Some say in Paradise, Genesis 3.8. But more
plainly afterward: for the place mentioned in Genesis 4. unto which Cain and
Abel brought their offerings (that their Father Adam, as a Priest might offer
them to God for them) is, at the 14. and 16. verses, called the Face or
Presence of God: that is, the House of God, being that place where the public
and solemn services of the Lord were usually performed. For first they came
unto it, says the Text. Secondly, they brought their offerings thither.
Thirdly, Cain also confesses that he was excommunicated or driven away from
thence; that is, he was expelled from the Congregation of the faithful; (for
Adam had sundry other Children at the same time) as is signified at the
fourteen verse. How else could he be said to go out, or be driven away from
the presence of the Lord, who in other respects is every where? And last of
all, it is thus to be expounded, because the Scriptures afterward do so
explain the like phrases; speaking so punctually to our capacities, that
whereas in one place it is, Bring an offering, and come before him: in another,
it is, Bring an offering, and come into his Courts. See the proofs in the 1 Chronicles. 16.29. and in Psalm. 96.8.

By the face then, or Presence of God, is here signified a peculiar sacred
place; where teaching, hearing, praying, sacrificing, and other duties of Gods
public worship used to be performed. And so also in other the like phrases of
holy Scripture; for by them we know how to take up the true sense of this.

Afterward we also find that the Patriarchs used Altars, Groves, and
Mountains, to the selfsame purpose that Adam and his Sons before them, had
used their foresaid place of meeting. As for example, it is recorded in Genesis
13.4. that Abraham with all his household went up from Egypt unto the place of
the Altar which he had made there at the first; and there Abraham called on the
name of the Lord. And again [in Genesis 13.18.] we also find, that when he came
to Mamre and dwelled there, he built in that very place an Altar unto the Lord.
And [in Genesis 21.33.] when he sojourned in the Philistims land, he planted a
Grove in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting
God. And in the next Chapter it is also thus written, that when he was to offer
up his son Isaac, he is directed to a Mountain in the land of Moriab; which
signifies The fear of God, as being a place not of common use, but for God's
honor: as was signified afterward more openly, when Solomon built there the
holy Temple. Next look upon Isaac, who where he spread his Tent, built an
Altar, Genesis 26.25. But above all, that of Jacob is most remarkable; who, when
he came to Luz, found that there was an house of God, which at the first he
knew not, and is therefore said to be afraid lest perhaps he had offended in
not ordering of himself so there, as of right he knew he ought to do in all
such places. For indeed had he been a stranger to such chosen places, had he
been ignorant of their holiness, or had the knowledge of them been a new
thing never heard of before among the Patriarchs, he had not now suspected this
to be God's house, nor the Gate of heaven. See Genesis 28.11.16.17.18.19.
He lodged (says the Text) in a certain place, had there a vision, and by
virtue thereof he presently declared, that this was no other then the house of
God; and therefore a place of fear and reverence. Intellexit Jacob (says one)
quod prius nesciebat, Lipp. in Genesis 28. ex Cajet.
tum Deum esse in illo loco tanquam in loco appropriato auditorii sui. Briefly,
if we look at nothing but his fear, it is enough to signify, that he was no
stranger to chosen places. For supposing it to be granted, that none of the
Patriarchs had ever used to worship here: yet, that they had peculiar places,
set apart from common use, is still apparent: for less then so cannot possibly
be gathered hence.

Now then, if these things were thus before the Law, they are ill advised who
care not for the difference of places after the Law: for if we be still the
worshippers of our God, we must still have places for his holy worship, which
must be dedicated and set apart only for him and his services.

Nay, if we look no further then the days of Moses, and from thence cast an
eye to the times of David and Solomon, it is sufficient. For, as the Christian
religion is come in place of the Jewish: so are our Churches come in place of
theirs. Their Tabernacle (says one) was a pattern of their Temple, and their
Temple a type of our Churches, even as all their service was a type of our
Christ. And also, as it was of old, Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my
Sanctuary; so now, the Sunday being God's holy day in stead of the Sabbath, the
Church must be the place of his holy worship. These two (in that very saying)
has the Lord joined together; and therefore it is not for man to divorce, or
put them asunder. If we deny the place, we are against the day: but if we
acknowledge the one, we grant the other.

In which regard, Act. 18.11.
although St. Paul at the first, when he had just occasion given him to
renounce the Jews and their Synagogues, Act. 28.8.
was necessitated to preach in a private house; yet, as soon as might be, 1
Cor. 11.22.33.34.
he took order for the building of Churches: teaching moreover, how both men
and women should behave themselves in them. And so did other godly Christians
after him: They were careful (even in the times of persecution) to have such
special places erected. And although Dioclesian made fearful havoc of them;
yet no sooner was that godly Constantine become a Nursing Father to the Church,
but they were again restored, their number much increased, and their beauty
made apparent in a glorious and well beseeming manner. Which, because it was
not so at the first, the Gentiles made a mock at Christians, as if they had
neither Churches nor Altars: whereas in very deed they had them both. Churches,
though no such stately structures as were erected by the Gentiles: and Altars
too, though not for such sacrifices as were theirs. For indeed, though
persecution kept the Christians under, yet they labored what they could to
have prepared places for their holy worship, never meeting elsewhere but when
necessity urged them to it. And in this, though dead, they cry against our
sick-braine Schismatics, who (upon no necessity are in a manner as well
devoted to any one place, they care not where, (either to a wood, a Chamber, a
Parlour, or a Barn) as to a place separated and dedicated on purpose to the
God of heaven. This therefore makes them preach in chaires, and maintain their
faction in private conventicles, to the harm and detriment of God his Church.
For it is without question, that although Churches are not necessay necessitate
absoluta; yet necessary necessitate conditionata: that is, when we may enjoy
them we must (upon necessity) provide them; and being provided, we must
frequent, maintain, honor, and reverence them as the Houses of God, and
places of his special presence here upon earth. So that as on the one side we
blame all Schismatics in that already mentioned: in like manner on the other
side we blame both them and all rude kinds of people, who are not afraid to
make as bold with God's house as with their own, putting no difference
between things sacred and profane, between things set apart, and things of
common use. God grant they repent not when it is too late: For it is Theodorets
observation, that against all Senacharibs army the Lord sent forth but one
Angel only; but against the prophaners of his Temple, six. For when Ezekiel
painted forth the abominations of the Temple, Ezekiel. c. 8. etc. 9.
he says, Behold there came six from the way of the upper gate, which looked
toward the North, and every one of them had vasa interfectionis, the vessels
of slaughter in his hand. Dan. 5.23.24. etc.
And when Balthazar was quaffing in the vessels of the Temple, the handwriting
came against him; to signify that he was weighed in the Balance and found too
light. And in times which do more nearly touch us, who has not heard of that
filthy Julian, who was uncle to the Apostata? who has not heard (I say) both
of his irreligious actions, and his punishment? This Julian coming into a
Church, beautified and adorned by that zealous Constantine, made no more regard
of it then if he had been in a common Iakes or Stable; whereupon we read,
that he feared not to piss against the Holy Table, as Theodoret has recorded.
Theod. lib. 3. c. 12.13.
But the God of heaven, abhorring this wrong done to his House and Altar in it,
soon after laid his heavy hand upon him, and struck him with such a fearful
disease, that his excrements forgot all their former passages, and found no
other way then his wicked mouth, to evacuate themselves from his hateful body.
So in like manner do we read of Felix, who only for scoffing at the plate
belonging to that blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior, was
pursued by divine punishment: For so it was, that both night and day [quickly
after] he never ceased to vomit blood, till the rivolets of his veins, Idem
ibid.
and every other part of his body, became empty; and so he dyed, being overcome
by the immediate hand of a just Revenger. And therefore, Procul ite prophani!
for neither is this a place of common use, nor in these vessels may you drink
your mornings draughts, nor use them safely at your common boards. The case you
see is not altered yet; It Is nune ut olim still: Christ's coming has not
altered it. For as before he came, Balthazar was punished: so since his
coming, not only were the buyers and sellers whipped out of the Temple, but
Julian and Felix have been met with. In which passage I would that this should
be likewise marked, that it was not in the time of divine Service when Julian
pissed against the Table; no holy congregation was then assembled: nor yet were
the vessels employed about holy actions, when filthy Felix scoffed at them: and
therefore in these things and places, there is such a relative propriety as
never cease; but makes them always Holy, and always His, to whom they be
dedicated and set apart. Which how it makes for those, who think that they have
yielded far enough, if they honor God's house on the Sunday, though they
disrespect it, or behave themselves rudely in it all the week after, let any
man be Judge: for such thoughts are apparently deceitful; and therefore such
men must rectify themselves, and return to a better mind, otherwise they
persist in a banefull evil. Saint Austin, I remember, reports, that the
Goths having sacked Rome, as many of the people as betook themselves to the
Churches of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, remained free; so much could the
respect of sacred places prevail, even with those cruel Barbarians. Ambr.
lib. 5. epist 33.
Saint Ambrose also witnesses, that the reverence of holy Altars prevailed so
far with the foresaid Soldiers, that they willingly fell down and kissed
them. And Saint Hierom against Vigilantius, says; Confiteor timorem meum; I
confess my fear, when entering into the Temple of the Churches are not crected
to Saints or Martyrs, but to their and our God, in memory of them. So also
concerning Holy days.
Martyrs, I conceive any anger or evil thought in my mind. But what shall I
need to say any more, seeing the very feasts of Charity were driven hence; as
in the Council of Laodicea, at the twenty eighth Canon is declared.

And next, whereas some make doubt whether it be lawful for Christians in the
contriving of their Churches, to have an eye upon the Fabric of Solomon's
Temple: My answer is; that as that proportion of time for Gods holy worship is
most warrantable, which he himself ordained; So that form or fashion of place
is best to be followed, which he himself delivered: other fashions have no
warrant. It is true indeed, that they were Jews, and we are Christians; and
therefore there must be a difference between us: Yet the difference herein,
needs not to be in the form of our Fabrics, but in the use of the Courts and
places, which are so divided, as if the one took pattern from the other. And
so indeed they did; for as to the one there was an Atrium exterius, an Atrium
interius, a Sanctum, and a Sanctum Sanctorum: So to the other, a Locus Poen
tentium, Auditorium, Presbyterium, and Sacrarium. Of the first and second
Eusebius speaks, in the sixth book, and 33th. Chapter of his Ecclesiastical
history; where he shows, that when the Emperor Philip (who was long before
Constantine) would have joined himself with the Congregations of Christians;
he might not, until he had first stood in Loco Poenitentium. And of the two
last, Theod ret makes mention, in the relation of that passage which was
between Theodosius, and Saint Ambrose. For Saint Ambrose putting the Emperor
in mind of the difference of places; Theod lib. 5. c. 17.
tells him plainly, that the Locainteriora should not be entered, but by the
Priests only. And this he said, not only in regard of the Altar-place, but of
the whole Quire, or Chancell, which was severed from the body of the Church
per Cancellos, whereupon it was called a Chancell; even as the propriety
thereof caused it be named Presbyterium; that is, a place only for the
Priests, peculiarly and solely belonging unto them. Revel. c. 4. etc. 7. verse.
11.
At which Saint John also pointed, when he saw the Presbyters, or 24. Elders
nearer to the Throne, then the four living Creatures, viz. the word for the
living creatures. See Psalm. 68.10.
whose word is elsewhere used to signify the Congregation of the people.

The Throne then and place of Majesty must be first; that is the holy Table
within the Sacrarium, and answers to the Mercy Seat, and Sanctum Sanctorum
among the Jews; in which the most excellent part of their typical service was
perfomed. And well may I say that it answers thereunto; For as then there was
to be a proper and selected place for that Ceremony of expiating of the people:
So now, for the Commemorating thereof (not as it was a Ceremony, but as it was
in act performed by our Savior) There is to be in our Churches a Sanctum
Sanctorum still, wherein we are to celebrate the memory of Christ's sacrifice,
in those holy Mysteries which he himself ordained, and commanded to be done.

The Presbyterium must be next, being the Court of the Priests: In which Saint
Ambrose would not that so much as the Emperor should have a seat, Sozom. lib.
7. c. 24.
but ordered that he should be placed without, immediately next to those bars
or lattices which severed the Church from the Chancell. Nor was the Emperor
any whit against it; for he knew (as the said Father told him) that Purple made
no Priests: and therefore such places as belonged unto them, he would be
careful ever after not to meddle with.

Then next after this must be the Court of the people; for though the book of
the Revelation be very mystical, yet (as I have elsewhere showed) seeing the
visions there mentioned of things appertaining to the Christians, do so
frequently allude to the fashions of the Jews, and are expressed as if they
were represented to Saint John in the Heavens; it is as if it should be said,
Gods Church is in it self but one, though the part be two; Militant, and
Triumphant. And therefore as the Church of the Jews was ordered according to
what this holy Man saw in the Heaven represented to him: so ought the Church of
the Christians, as being surrogated into their room for whom the Temple was
built.

I shall not need to speak much more; for the Locus Poenitentium is the Porch,
and answers to those outward Courts which were of old. Only herein there is
one thing yet to be discussed, concerning the Presbyterium, and Sacrarium, for
some have gone about to persuade, that they were not at the end of the Church,
because Eusebius seems [to them] to speak as if they were in the midst,
Eusebius. lib. 10. eccles. bist. c. 4. ex orat. parugyrica in Encaniss.
and so our modern Fabrickes are differing from those among the first
Christians. But I answer, that in case it were so in some Churches, yet are
they but exceptions in particular, and nothing at all against a general order.
Nor is it clear to be so at all, by that which is urged; for Eusebius does
more plainly say, that the Altar in the Church there mentioned, was in the
middle of the Chancell, than that the Chancell and Altar were in the middle of
the Church. And yet this [even thus; that is, supposing the Altar there to be
in the middle of the Chancell, rather than at the upper end thereof, in the
middle between North, and South] being but a particular instance, can be no
fit president to be opposed against a general practice: For generally the
Altarium, or place allotted for the Altar (which I have formerly mentioned by
the name of Sacrarium) was in the East, at the upper end of the Quire or
Chancell; as is apparent by that of Socrates; who takes special notice of that
Church at Antioch of Syria, Socrat. hist. Eccles lib. 5. cap. 21.
in which the Altarstood at the western end thereof, contrary to the situation
of it in other Churches. And again, that the Presbyterium, Quire, or Chancell
was not in the middle of the Church, and all the people round about it;
appears by that of Saint Ambrose, in allotting the Emperor Theodosius a
place within the body of the Church, immediately before those bars or lattices
which severed the Church, from the Chancell, of which I have spoken a little
before. And this the said Ambrose did, that so the Emperor might have a place
before the people, as had the Priests before the Emperor: for as a learned D.
has fully proved, See Dr. Heylyn, Antid. Lincoln. c. 7.
the Quires or Chancells had in them, First, the seats appointed generally for
the Clergy, then the Bishops chair; and last of all the (...), Altarium, or
Sacrarium; this being the whole space purposely set apart for the Altar, or
holy Table, and was severed from the rest of the Chancell, by Rayles, or
Curtain. To which may be added that ancient custom of praying Eastward, and
then there is nothing to be objected further.

And now if this be not enough to prove, that God must have his house on earth
[yea and thus contrived too, if a right order be well observed, and not
otherwise stopped] then nothing can. For though the Jews indeed had their
highest Court at the other end, because their times were dark in respect of
ours; yet we having been visited by that Dayspring from on high, do turn our
faces toward the East, have there the place of highest Majesty: and by turning
thither, profess our times, to be those very times of light, wherein the
signification of their shadows is accomplished, as I have else where showed
more at large. And last of all, to speak more generally; the Lord being to
have such peculiar places as Temples, or Churches, it is the peoples duties to
resort unto them, there to express their praises, pour out their prayers, and
hear the preachings of his Priests. 1 Timothy 2.8.
For although privately a man may pray any where, as occasion shall require, 1
Cor. 11.22.
lifting up pure hands, etc. yet nevertheless to abhor public meetings; is
to deny ourselves to be any of Gods people. For as we are all members of one
body, we must jointly assemble to one place; so shall we keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, and be so in the number of Gods people here, that
we may the better know how to be taken into the number of them heareafter: For
the Prophet is witness, that God will teach his ways to those who shall go
and say; Come, and let us ascend to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob. Esaias. 2.3.

III. But (as I said before) some be Truants and care not for coming. Others
be Recusants, and may not come to join themselves with us. A third sort be
Schismatics, and will not come except where they affect, and when they please.
And last of all, there be others which make no great scruple of coming; but in
respect of the end, their coming and hearing is in vain, they are yet in
their sins.

First, the Truants are of two sorts; either such as hate the Word in respect
of it self, or such as are ill affected toward it for some by respect.

The first of these esteem preaching but folly. There is much ado in it and
about it; but it is to small purpose. They can see no good that it does to have
one stand an hour together perking in a pulpit: for this does but hinder the
people from their business, as Pharaoh once said to Moses and Aaron. Let him
that is a Preacher say there what he list, they will believe but what they
please. The Minister must do something for his living, and if he could not
talk for it, he could do little. And yet that which he does, seems (in their
judgment) to be as much as nothing. Wherefore, if all were of their minds, he
might speak long enough before he be regarded.

To whom I answer, that although the wisdom of God be foolishnes to the
wicked world, yet it has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
those that believe. 1 Cor. 1.18. to ver. 28. and chap. 2.14.
And there fore, if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that be lost; whose
minds are darkened by the god of this world, 2 Co. 4.3 4.
Satan, that prince of darkness, who striveth to extinguish the glorious
light that it brings with it. It is without question that the time may come,
when these men (since they call it talking) may talk for mercy too, Prove.
28.9. Romans 1.16.
and go without it. Wherefore I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it
is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jew
first, and also to the Centile. And in a word, as lightly as these account of
the Gospel, Romans 2.16.
and the preaching thereof, it shall one day judge them. Yea and now, whilst
they live in this valley of the shadow of death, if they were well grounded in
it, and humbly devoted toward it, they might find comfort in what they have
learned from thence, when all the world beside is but a dry and a barren tree,
and can afford nothing of so sweet a nature. We are not mad men to maccrate our
selves in studying away our blood, spirits, strengty, and health: but that we
know God has ordained us to be Laborers in his harvest, 2 Pet. 3.9.
and would that the worst under us, should of tares become good corn. If
therefore these men perish, let them thank themselves; for they resist the
Holy Ghost. There is no fault in the Word, but in them, who do so lightly and
slightly esteem it. For, though to them it be mere foolishness, yet to God
and the faithful it is far otherwise.

And as for the second, they be such as hate the Word and the hearing of it,
because it crosses them in their wicked projects, and divelish practices. For
cannot a Tyrant be bloody, an Oppressor crush and grind the poor, a
Tradesman lie and swear, a Flatterer dissemble, an Hypocrite wear a mask, a
Gallant frequent the stews, an Usurer undo his brother, an Incloser
depopulate, a Drunkard reele in the streets, and know the way to an Alehouse
better then to God's house; or cannot a Blasphemer curse and swear, a
Church-robber commit sacrilege, a Backbiter detract, a Malicious man wreck his
spleen, a Monopolist engrosse, a Proud man look aloft, a wanton Dame use her
paintings, a Cormorant withhold his corn to the starving of the poor, a Poor
man despise the rich, a Landlord undo his tenants, a Voluptuous man bath
himself in sinful lusts, vanities, and wicked pleasures, but the Pulpit must
needs proclaim it? Hinc illa lachrymae; this is their great Cordolium. If we
could but let them alone, and not hinder them in their travel to Tophet, then
all were well: But because we call them back from their evil ways, cross
them in their proiects, and in the clear glass of God's word let them see
their faces, they hate the hearing of the Word, detract and backbite the
Preachers of it; 1 King. 22.8.
like unto Ahab King of Israel, who hated Michaiah because he prophesied
contrary to his liking: He prophesies (says he) no good to me, but evil. Or
like unto those in the Acts, Act. 16.19. and Act. 19 24
who abominated the doctrine of the Apostles, because it crossed those wicked
gains which their divelish and heathenish practices brought in unto them. By
which it appears, that as Truth loves no corners: so neither would they bear
hatred to it, if their deeds were but such as might abide the trial.

2. The next are Papists, or Recusants; a people so wedded to the Church of
Rome, that they may not join themselves with us in our Assemblies: and this,
not because they have any just quarrel against our Liturgy; but because they
are afraid of the Popes curse. As for our doctrine, if That displease them, I
am sorry the Truth should prove distasteful. Or if we have enough in our
Religion necessary to salvation, what need we more? And that we have so much,
is witnessed by a Pope, Pius Quintus by name; who signified in a Letter to
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory (before the time of his excommunication
denounced against her) that he did allow our Bible and Book of Divine Service,
See Judge Cook in his Charge at Norwich Assizes, Anno Dom. 1606.
as it is now used among us, to be authentic, and not repugnant to truth; and
that therein was contained enough necessary to salvation: as in a charge given
at Norwich Assizes, in the year of our Lord 1606, was openly avowed. And if
enough, then without question we need not the help of any Pope to supply us
with more. Unto which, this I add, that it can be no harm to the Papists to
turn unto us: for, in departing from them, we made not a New Church, but
reformed the old: and, among the Churches reformed, this of England comes (I
dare say) nearest to those of the Primitive times; and shall (I hope) come
every day more near then other to them: insomuch, that if then it might be
truly said, not only that the Kings daughter was all glorious within, but that
her clothing likewise was of wrought gold; so also now. For whereas the
factious from time to time, together with their silly Proselytes, have
endeavored to cry down that uniformity which best becomes God's public
worship, it is more like to be advanced now then ever, since the days of
Reformation. And it is for certain a good and pious work: God's blessing
therefore light upon them, who do their best to set it forward: for it will
cause that beauty of holiness to be apparent, which best beseemes devote,
sincere, and pious worshippers.

3. The third sort are Schismatics; a perverse and peevish generation, who
will not come but where they affect, and when they please: and yet these be
they who are all for hearing. For were it not for Sermons, it were more then a
miracle to see them approach God's holy Temple. And so Saint Chrysostom
observed of some in his time, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
saying thus, Why therefore do we enter the Church, except we may hear one
stand up and preach. And yet not every one neither: For it is seldom when that
their own Pastor can please them. They have an itch in their brains, and must
be fed by such as they best affect: and as for Learning and Conformity, they
grinne and snarle against it. This makes them run to and fro to seek out
such as spit against set forms of prayer, disrespect Churches, delight in the
breach of Canons, hate Discipline, contemn orders, and despise Bishops,
although the Scriptures teach them a lesson which is clean contrary; and in
particular tells not obscurely, that He who will not obey the Church must be
accounted as an Heathen and a Publican: Math. 18.17.

But let the Scripture say what it will, if it makes against them, such is their
humor that they care not for it: and therefore, they who be most disordered,
are best affected. These they will follow from parish to parish, from town to
town, from city to city, from one kingdom to another people; yea from one
England to another. And if it be that upon necessity they must sometimes
frequent their own parish Churches, they will (if it be possible) be Tarde
venientes, Late comers; for what care they for Common prayers? That kind of
Service may not be touched; they contemn, they scoff, they inveigh against
it. But let them take heed, that this foul sin be never laid unto their
charge. They sink without recovery, who persisting kick at what they should
embrace. And therefore let them take heed (I say) that God wipe not out their
names out of the Book of life, for scorning that Book which (as I have else
where showed) contains the services of the living God, in which I know nothing
contrary to his holy Word. For although the Prayers be short, mixed with many
ejaculations; and the form of them be set, and not conceived by men ex
tempore, yet is it no just plea to except against them. It is enough for
Heathens, and bragging Pharisees, Math. 6.7.8.9. and Math. 23.14. Mark 12.14.
Luke ^0.47. Eccles. 5.2.
to make long and idle babbling prayers: but as for those who will avoid the
censure of our Savior, and vanities which Solomon observed in divine Service;
it is for them not only to let their words be few, but also to regard that they
be not rash with their mouths, nor hasty to utter any thing before God. It was
certainly in another case, that Christ would not have his Apostles to be
careful what to speak; for this was in cases of persecution, Math. 10.19.
when they should be enabled to speak before those, unto whose judgment Seat
they should be brought; a singular gift in those days to the holy Martyrs. But
for Prayer, he gave his rule of Pray thus: and that even then, when he blamed
such as prayed otherwise. Thus, or after this manner. That Is first, Let thy
words be few; and next, Let the form be Set. And so thou have a perfect Thus
made up of these two, as has been the Churches practice in all Ages ever
since. For first, they did not only pray in those very words, and season all
their service with that Prayer of the Lord; but even the Prayers that they made
were Creberrimae and brevissimae, frequent, and full of fervent brevitie:
Because in a long and tedious Prayer, not well compacted, as there may be many
vain and idle repetitions; 1 Cor. 14.16
so a weak devotion may be lost, but being short, often Amens, and answers are
required, and so the attention kept the better waking. And by how much the more
earnest, by so much the shorter and fuller of ejaculations, as in the end of
our Letanie well appears. We do not conjure then, nor cut our Service into
shreds; when with instant cryings, the eager spirit does show how fervently it
Asks, it Seeks, it Knocks.

And so also for the second, they used forms, set and digested; least somewhat
might be uttered through ignorance or carelessenesse, which might be contrary
to the Faith, as in ancient counsels is declared. Council. 3. of Carth c. 23.
Council. Milv. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2 Cor. 8
And so also speaks holy Chrysostom; Our Prayers (says he) are common, all
say the same Prayer.

Nor was it but an injuction to Aaron and his Sons, to use a short set form,
when they blessed the people. Numb. 6.23.

Nor was it likewise but the practice of holy Meses (who was faithful in the
house of God) to have one set form of blessing, Heb. 3.2.
which he used at the removing and resting of the Arc. Numb. 10.35.36.

And did not Saint Paul bless often in the same words? read his Epistles, and
it is apparent: and chiefly see what he says in the 1 Cor. 14.26. How is it
when ye come together, that every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine,
has a Tongue, etc. Let all things be done unto edifying.

Nay more, even he who taught his Disciples to pray in that manner formerly
mentioned; did also pray before his Passion, more then once or twice, not in
other, but in the same words. For look in what words he prayed to the Father
at the first of the three times there recorded, in those he prayed at the
second and third time also.

And will none of these things move thee to come betimes to Gods house, and to
perform all duties as well as some? or art thou so singular by thy self, as
that thou scornest to pray with thy neighbors at the appointed time, after the
appointed manner, and in the appointed place? If thou art, then Scalam in
Coelum erigito; Make thee a Ladder, and ascend up into heaven from us; as
Constintine once said to Acesius: Sozom. lib. 1. c. 21.
for what do thou here, if thou art too pure to be one among us?

Verily, might these men have their wills, there should be no face of religion,
nor order in the Christian world. They profess themselves to be Hearers; but
if you talk with them, they are then become Preachers rather then Hearers;
bragging that Laymen know the meaning of the Scriptures as well as Priests,
and therefore need none of their directions, excepting when they direct
according to what is already fixed in such a peoples fancy. For I know well
enough the bent of their bows: either we must preach what and how they will
hear, or they will not hear what or how we preach. All, or the most of them,
hate a written Sermon as abominable. But, as before they might have remembered,
not only that the Scriptures are not of private inter pretation, and that the
Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, Mal. 2 7. Jer. 36. and Baruck 1.5.
and that inquiry is to be made at his mouth; so also now, that Baruck wrote at
the mouth of Jeremy: that is, as Jeremy did indite, so Baruck wrote. Yea, and
Baruck also declares, that he wrote and read his own Sermons.

To which purpose I may likewise add what I have often read in the stories of
the Church, of one Atticus, Bishop of Constantinople, who preached many
Sermons, yet because they were done extempore, (...). l. 7. c. 2
Non ejus genoris fuere (says mine author) ut merito vel ab auditoribus
studiose perdiscerentur, vel monumentis mandarentur literarum ad posteritatem.

But what care they for this? and therefore, to please the fancies of not a
few, we must roll out our Sermons without premeditation, or else their tongues
are fierce against us. And now, because every one will not produce such
abortives, nor do the work of the Lord so negligently, for fear of that
curse in the Scriptures, they cry out and say, We have an unpreaching Minister,
Ier. 48.10.
a dumb Dog, an idle Drone: not at all considering, that even they themselves
are in the mean time possessed with that Devil which makes them deaf. For,
if it were otherwise, they could not but be better husbands and huswives of
what they have heard; and show the truth of their zeal, by the light of their
practice. Beside which, this also should be remembered, that as all have not
received a like measure of gifts; so neither have all a like measure of
strength, but are impaired either through age, sickness, want, or other
calamities. Now in such cases, if they stand so much upon Sacrifice, that they
forget Mercy, where is their charity?

But do I speak any jot of this to beget a dearth of Sermons? it is far from
me: for I know that there is no famine, like that of the Word. Do I not rather
speak it to correct our Schismatickes in their idle wanderings, and to inkindle
the fire of a godly zeal in them, toward the orders of our Church, and form
of our prayers? They may remember (if they please) that He who was daily
teaching in the Temple, said also that his Fathers House was an house of
prayer; not to one only people, but to all nations, Math. 21.13. Nay more,
there is this order to be observed in Gods service, that prayer is to have the
first place. For, We will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministration of the Word; say the blessed Apostles, Act. 6.4. Or again; Do I
speak it to encourage the idle to go and hide their talents, glut themselves
with pleasures, or leave the Word, to follow the world? That be also far from
me: for he that has the meanest gift, Math. 25.28.29. 1 Timothy 4 14.15.16.
as by using it he may increase it; so by hiding it, he may chance to lose it.
And therefore let every one of God's Ministers be conscionably careful to feed
that flock, over which the Holy Ghost has placed him, to the utmost of his
power: and withal let his sheep know, that they are bound to hearken and
listen to him, and not forsake him to follow strangers. For if the worst be
said of him (thus set over thee) that can be, I hope he will be able so long as
he is with thee, Act 15.21.
to preach unto thee as Moses was preached, being read in the Synagogue every
Sabbath day: or as the Epistles of Saint Paul were preached in the Churches
wither he sent them: 1 Thessalonians. 5.27 Act. 16.4.
or, as the orders of our Church injoyne us, by the reading of Homilies. Can 49.
All which is called Preaching, and may (without question) be profitable to
such as apply themselves to be taught thereby. Romans 10.17. Mark 4 24. 1 Timothy
4.2. Esa. 18.1. Heb. 4.12.
For as faith comes (is increased, and mannersamended) by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God; So also by this kind of hearing, in which (or in nothing)
you hear the Word of God: For it came to pass, when Shaphan read the book of
the Law before the King, that herent his clothes, 2 King. 2^.11.19.
enquired of the Lord, humbled himself, and was moved in his heart; as the
Scriptures bear us witness, in 2 King. 22.10.11.19. And last of all, neither
is it but the opinion of Martin Bucer, that our Homilies were penned by some
eminent Preachers, such as that age did then afford: of which kind of
Preaching Sunt sane quidam, qui hene pronunciare possunt; quod si ab altis
sumant eloquenter sapienter est conscriptum, memory que commendent at que ad
populum proserart. si eam personam gerunt, non improbe faciunt. Aug. de doct.
Christ. lib. 4.
Saint Austin well approves, as may be seen toward the latter end of his
fourth book De doctrina Christiana. For, if he holds concerning some in his
time, who knew better how to pronounce then to make a Sermon, that they did not
amiss to seek the benefit of their people by preaching what others had
written; then it must needs follow, as an order fit to be embraced, that we
neglect not the reading of Homilies, at such times as we have no other Sermons:
for hereby, having the more time to provide us, our own Sermons will be the
better, and fitter to be preached. They who have a charge under them, and be
not able to do this, if aged, must be helped; if indiscreet and ignorant,
doing things ridiculously, or abusing things they meddle with, ought to be
removed; for they have but crept in, to the dishonor of the Ministry, (like
him among the guests) and want their wedding garment. Wherefore, all these
things being well weighed, they be more nice then wise, more rude then learned,
more envious then charitable, who inveigh so much at they know not what.

4. The last are next: Let them be summed up, and thus they stand. The wandering
hearer; the wondering, or curious hearer; the accidental hearer; the pleasing
hearer; the scoffing hearer; the critical or cavilling hearer; and the envious
hearer.

By the first of these I do not mean such wanderers as the former, who trot
up and down the country and the world for fresh pasture; but such, as coming
to the Church (either because they would not be accounted Atheists, or because
they are loath to fall into the hazard of forfeitures) and there being set,
presently fall either a musing, a gazing, or apratling: their corn, their
cattle, their market, or other such like worldly business; or in some, the
thoughts of their pleasures, sports, and pastimes, make them forget themselves,
and transport their minds from the matter for which they were called: for by
these they are captivated; and so (though they come to hear) the pillars of
the Church, or stones in the wall (excepting the sound of words) hear as much
as they. Neither is it but that sometimes this their brown study of wandering,
shuts up their eyes as well as their ears; and so they scarce hear so much as
before; not the sound of words: but are even as a dead corpse before the
Preacher: and he unto them, as if he were preaching at their unworthy funerals.
But [in Act. 20.7.] Paul preached, and the people heard him till midnight: One
only, (namely Eutichus) fell asleep; and he (as ye know) was taken up dead;
the rest watched. Whereupon a Father thus observes, Media nocte vigilant, ut
eos condemnent qui media die dormiunt. Or if they wander not in musing, nor
drown their senses in a silent sleep, they run in the maze of uncomely
gazing, looking about to see what others do, how the time passes, who comes
in, or what they wear; who has the best flowers, the newest fashion, or the
finest dress. But while they look thus after such things, they harm their
souls, they lose their God. Or if they wander neither in musing, nor gazing,
they are carried away with vain talking, and private whispering one with
another; it being an ordinary thing for such as these, to tattle toys in the
ears of their neighbors. But the very Turks do far excel them; they go
beyond them, and shall therefore rise up in judgment against them, as is said
of Tire and Sidon, against the Jews: for they do not only put off their shoes
from their feet, when they enter into their Churches, otherwise called their
Moschits; but do also so attend their service, that (as some have said it) if
by chance they do but scratch their heads, they think all their former
devotion to be lost. However this I am sure of, that when Christ preached in
the Synagogue, Luke 4.20.
the eyes of all the people were fixed on him. And when Peter and John stood
and talked to the Cripple, Act. 3.4.
whom they intended to heal, they commanded him that he should attend them,
saying, Look on us.

The second (as I said) is the wondering or curious hearer. For first, though
he comes not to wander, he comes many times to wonder; and in conclusion can
tell you nothing but this, The Preacher made an excellent Sermon, Is a rare
man, and the like. But what good does this excellent Sermon to such an Hearer?
Little or nothing. For indeed how can it, unless he comes with a purpose to
lead his life as the Word (and not as the world, flesh, and the devil) shall
teach him. Or secondly, put the case that this hearer be sometimes such a one
as is more expert in witty conceits then the vulgar: if so, then his curiosity
goes yet a little higher. For as the Oyster lies and gapes for a fresh Tide,
so he for fine words, count phrases, smackes of eloquence; and by these he
intends to better his discourse. But if it chance that he meet no such passage,
he thinks the time tedious, and his labor lost: for it was not Matter, but
Words that he came to hear; and so he goes home, and will not stick to say, He
has heard nothing. How beit I do not condemn elegancy of phrase; it is a
singular gift: and to cloth good matter in elegant words, wins many times
even an unwilling hearer. But as Preachers may not aim at Words without
Matter; so neither may the people catch at the shadow, and lose the substance.

The third of this sort be Accidental hearers; such as think themselves more
bound to Man then God: for it is by reason of the service which they owe to the
one, that they sometimes come and seem to serve the other. The world has many
such, who care not for coming, were it not upon that occasion: and these
chiefly are those idle Serving-men, who (having crept into the service of some
great man here upon earth) forget, that both they and their masters have a
Master in heaven.

The fourth is the Pleasing hearer, near of condition to the former: for
hoping for some portion, or preferment, from some friend or other, who is
better devoted then himself, he dares not displease him: This makes him come,
although he leaves his ears behind him. So his body be there, it makes no
matter for his heart, his mind, his soul: The one he knows is seen, the
other hid. But because he halts where he should be sound, it is morethen
probable that both he and his companions go out of the Church as the unclean
beasts went out of the Arc; that is, they go out unclean, as they came in
unclean: and for having no greater love to God's house here upon earth, are
not unlike to lose the fair beauty of it in the glorious heaven.

The fifth is the scoffing Hearer: he has learned of the natural man to be a
kind of Atheist; and though he has (as a man may think) the outward formality
of a Christian, yet do but mark him, and you shall find, that he mocketh at
nothing more, then at the Ordinances of God: like unto that wicked miscreant,
Theod. lib. 3. c. 12. etc. 13.
revolting Felix; who, seeing the costly vessels of the Temple, which
Constantine and Constantius had bestowed, said: En qualibus vasis ministratur
Mariae silio: See with what plate the son of Mary must be served. But what
was his end, already has been showed.

The next are the Critical or Cavilling hearers, such as love well the society
of factious opposites: for they come as the Pharisees came to hear Christ; to
entrap and traduce the Preacher for his doctrine. These commonly have a
Theology of their own; and all that makes against it, is (in their esteem)
but false Divinity: Or if it be not, they wish it were, that thereby the
Minister may be questioned; and sometimes, rather then he shall be innocent,
they will wrest his words to a contrary sense. But to these may be said, as
that Father, holy Nazianzen, once said to his carping Hearers: Greg. Naz. in
Orat. qua se purgat.
Ye sheep, feed not your Pastors, nor be ye lift up above them: -- Judge not
your Judges, nor give laws to your Lawgivers: for God is not a God of
tumults, but of peace and order.

The seventh and last, is the envious hearer; not so much against the Priest,
as against his neighbor. Ye may easily know him: for he sits like a
malecontent, very sad and sorrowful (as if he were a deaf man and heard not)
until he thinks that the Preacher has a special aim at some one or other
whom he himself hates: upon thought of which he cheeres up his spirits,
begins to look like a willing hearer, and is exceeding well content to drink
up with greediness such a passage; thinking it no small happiness to have his
ears blessed with the vinegar and gall of that particular. But if this be
hearing, I am much deceived: Luke 8.8.18.
For he that has an care to hear (says our Savior) let him hear: yea, and
take heed likewise how he hears. Not turn aside and stop his ear: for then
he does not hear at all. Nor hear as himself pleases: for then he hears
amiss. But hear as he ought; that thereby he may hear indeed: and so at the
last, he shall be one day taken to that happy and joyful place of seeing: yea,
and sing that song; Psalm. 48.8.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God.

SECT. III.
THis therefore brings me unto a third thing propounded; viz. That the people
obey, as well as hear.

The obedience is twofold: Deuteronomy. 30.14. Heb. 13.17.
concerning Doctrine, and Government.

1. That of Doctrine is first; and is no more but the submitting unto, and
practicing of what their Pastors teach them. For except it manifestly appear,
Ezekiel. 33.31.
that the Doctrine delivered be false, thou art bound to reverence, to receive
it, and to obey it as the word of God. Jam. 1.17.
Yea, though the preacher have much out of humane writers, and ancient Fathers:
for what saying soever is agreeable to the word of God, and fitly applied, is
to be received as the word; because, if it be truth, it must needs come down
from God; who is the fountain, 1 Cor. 4.7.
not only of every perfect gift, but of every good gift. For what good is there
in man which he has not received? To which purpose Saint Austin, speaking of
such truths as are many times delivered even by Philosophers themselves, says;
Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 2.
Si quae vera Philosophi dixerunt, ab eis sunt (tanquam ab injustis
possessoribus) vendicanda in usum nostrum: meaning, that what truths soever
Philosophers have spoken, are to be taken from them, into our use, as from
unjust possessours. Nay further, should the life of the Minister distaste thee,
yet fly not his doctrine: For when the wicked Scribes and Pharisees satin
Moses his chair, Math. 23.2.3
they said, but did not. In which case it was Christ's own advice, That what
they taught should be observed, but what they did should be avoided. Dicunt
enim quae Dei sunt, faciunt quae sua sunt; Aug. contra liter as Petil: l. 2. c.
6.
as Saint Austin speaks. Whereto I add, that an Eagles eye an^ an Adders
ear, are badly chosen: for who is there among the sons of Men that can
acquit himself from humane frailties? But why do I talk of frailties? The
world (especially in looking on us) is not so charitable as to put a difference
between gross offenses and infirmities. Nay, should we live like Angels, Math.
10.24.25.
or like Christ himself, there would not be wanting some or other to traduce
us. If we suffer not our selves to be defrauded, but seek for our own; we are
accounted covetous, and seek not you but yours: although in this we do but
call you back from that black sin of foul Sacrilege; wherein you do not
so much rob us, as God, Malac. 3.8. Or if we will not suffer our selves to be
contemned, we are proud and ambitious: although in this, God's honor, and the
dignity of our callings be defaced. Or if we endeavor to have things rectified
that be amiss, we are accounted busy and troublesome: although in this we go
about to discharge the duties of our places. For thus can the world extract
something out of nothing, and multiply molehils into mountains, concerning the
steps of our proceedings. I excuse not all, but rather teach you to be
cautelous and well advised in accusing those who be your Pastors. Nor do I
think all to be free from scandalous living: Howbeit, even in this, sport not
with accursed Cham at your Fathers nakedness: but rather pray with the Church;
that both by our life and doctrine we may set forth God's true and lively word,
and rightly and duly administer his holy Sacraments: For indeed they preach
most who live best; and why is that, but because such is the nature of frail
mortal men, that they are more prone to be led by example, than by precept:
howbeit our Saviors rule directs otherwise, as a little before has been
declared.

Let it therefore be that you hear; and not only so, Math. 7.26. Jam. 1.22.24.
but that ye hear and do: For he that hears and does not, is like unto him
who built his house upon the sands: or like unto one who beholds his natural
face in a glass, who when he has considered himself, goes his way, and
forgets immediately what manner of one he was. Therefore be ye hearers of the
word, Romans 2.13.
and not hearers only, but doers also: for not the hearers of the Law, but the
doers shall be justified. Deuteronomy. 7.12.13.
Or, as it is in Deuteronomy, If thou hearken to my Laws and observe them,
then the Lord shall keep with thee his covenant: he shall love thee, and
bless thee.

Nor again, may the nature of the Doctrine distaste thee: For in case thou
had rather have sugar than salt, honey than gall, oil than vinegar, liberty
than restraint; know that God has sent his Spirit to rebuke the world of
sin, John 16.8. And therefore being reproved out of the word of God, neither
despise nor murmr: but rather remember your obedience, show your
thankfulness, acknowledge your sins, bewail your iniquities, abstain from
your wickedness, Heb. 3.8.^8.
slack not your conversion, nor put it off from day to day, lest (by delaying)
your danger be past recovery. Ye may vow (perhaps) to sacrifice your Minister
upon the unsanctified Altar of your own scorn, for speaking (as you think)
too home unto your souls: But do ye not know, that obedience was preferred in
a far better sacrifice than this; and rebellion branded withan hellish mark?
It is divellish sure to disobey: 1 Samuel 19.22.23.
Disobedience is coupled to the sin of witchcraft. And in Physic, ye also
know, it is not required that it should please, but rather that it should help
and heal. Wherefore, although the word, to flesh and blood, be not tooth some;
yet let it suffice, that in it self it is wholesome. For conclusion therefore,
(with that of Saint Bernard, and that of Saint Hierom) let me close up this
point, and say; Auris bona est quae libenter audit utilia, prudenter discernit
audita, obedienter operatur inteliecta. Meaning, that That is a good ear which
willingly hears things profitable, wisely discerns things heard, and
obediently performs hirgs discerned. For (as Hierom speaks) Ille plus
didicit qui plus facit: He has learned most, who practices or does most.

2. And now from Obedience unto Doctrine, I pass to that of Government. This
has relation to those Fathers in especial, who (as the Apostle says) are
(...), Heb. 13.17.
Praelati: that is, such as are set to have the oversight and government of the
Church; watching and laboring for the good of men's souls, not only like unto
other ordinary Priests, where and when occasion shall require; who are indeed
(...), id est, intendere: but much more, in caring for the Church, as men
peculiarly set over it; and are therefore said (...), id est, superintendere,
and supervigilare. For (...) is one thing, and belongs to every Priest: but
(...) is another, and pertaines solely to such of the Clergy, as have a Key of
Jurisdiction, as well as a Key of Order. These then are they, who (as I said)
do watch and labor for the good of men's souls, not only like unto other
ordinary Ministers, where and when occasion shall require; but much more in
caring for the Church, as men peculiarly set over it, to see to the preserving
of peace and truth, order and decency in Gods public worship: without which,
neither could the Church consist, nor Gods worship be maintained; but souls
sink for want of help. Such watchmen then are not set up in vain, but are
(without doubt) as needful, as was pitch was for the Ark of Noah, to keep it
from drowning under the waters. Obey them therefore, and submit your selves
unto them: it is the voice of God, and not of man, which calls you to it. Heb.
13.17.


Nor is there cause why ye should refuse it: For if the political laws of
[even Heathen] Princes, Romans 13.1.5. Dan 3. Acts 4.15.
are to be obeyed for conscience sake, (except where they enjoine disobedience
unto God) then much more these that are for the maintenance of truth, concord,
order, and decency in his public worship. Or, if you will, take up the reason
thus; Civil powers appertain to the defense of corporal life, and civil
society; and cannot therefore be disobeyed without detriment to the Common
weal. But powers Ecclesiastical have to do with Religion and the worship of
God. They meddle with men, not as men, but as men called to lead a spiritual
life; and therefore cannot be disobeyed, without harm or detriment to that end
for which they were first ordained. Or thus, there is but one God who is the
author of both powers: so that if we must obey on the one hand, we may not
disobey on the other; except we make it a thing of nothing to fight against the
ordinances of our heavenly Father. Tit. 3.2.
Put them in remembrance (says the Apostle) that they be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and that they be obedient. This for the one. So
also; Obey them that have the over sight of you, Heb. 13.17.
and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls. That for the other.
Herein agreeing to the doctrine of our Savior delivered by himself; Go and
tell the Church, Math. 18.17.
and if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Ethnicke and
a Publican. Christian Princes have indeed to do in these things; as (in the
ranks of Church Governors I have already showed:) but not to the disanulling
of the power. For they be sent of God as Nursing Fathers to his Church; and are
therefore to defend and maintain the power thereof, against all sorts of
opposites that oppose themselves against it.

And verily, a law and custom of the Church, was heretofore of greater weight,
than to be of light esteem: The ancients thought it to be a good argument of
it self alone, to convince others in their strugglings. Hereupon that holy
Father Saint Austin could urge, This is the authority of our Mother the Church;
Hoc habet authoritas Matris Ecclesiae. Hoc Ecclesia commendat saluberrima
authoritas. Premitur mole Matris Ecclesiae, etc. In which testimonies we see,
that this blessed pillar of Gods House, accounted the Laws and Ordinances of
the Church to be a strong and conquering weapon against the adversaries of the
Church. But such are the humors of these times, and so thwart to all lawful
authority, that one and the same act, which would be willingly performed, if it
were left to every ones free choice, may not be done when it comes backed with
authority. For though it were accounted lawful, or indifferent before, is now
as if the nature of it were altered, or not so warrantable as before it was
commanded. Why else do they question what the Church enjoyneth, and like
quarrelsome high-minded people, love to dwell in the fiery flames of
contention? It is a sign of some distemper; a distemper that comes of an
heat or humor of pride: for (as Solomon speaks) Only by pride comes
contention; Prove. 13.10.
but with the well advised is wisdom. But what care they for that? for let it
but be that they may cry loudest, and have the last word, they are still bigger
in conceit, and falsely take it as a truth that they have answered all
sufficiently: whereas, on the other side, a modest disputer knows it is to
little purpose to contend with a man full of words, or reason with a resolved
and self willed opposite. Quid prodest Simiae, si videatur esse Leo?

But be not, you who are such; See the 2d Epish to Tim. chap. 3. and 2 Pet.
2.10.
be not (I beseech you) so heady, high-minded, fierce, despisers of government,
presumptuous, selfe-willed, etc. as to disobey or speak evil of dignities:
for these are humors best befitting the lewdness of lawless persons, and
looseness of licentious livers; who have indeed an outward form of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof; witness their creeping into
houses to lead captive simple women, who (as the Apostle speaks) are laden
with sins, ^ Tim. 3.6.
and led with diverse lusts. These are like Iannes and Iambres, which resisted
Moses, as if God had not given him that power and authority which he had. After
whom was Corah and his company; a seditious sect, but smarted for it by a
sudden judgment. Or, to speak with Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 2.10.
They are bold, and stand in their own conceit, not fearing to speak evil of
them that be in place of dignity or authority; especially against men of the
Church. But as Saint John says of Love, so may I say of Obedience; namely, How
can they obey God whom they have not seen, if they will not obey the officers
of his Church whom they have seen? For as judicious Hooker truly speaks, It
does not stand with the duty which we owe to our heavenly Father, (who is the
universal Father of us all) that to the ordinances of our mother the Church,
we should show our selves disobedient. Let us not say we keep the
Commandments of the one, when we break the Laws of the other: for unless
we observe both, we obey neither. And again, seeing Christ (says he) has
promised to be with his Church until the end of the world, her Laws and
Ordinances cannot be contemned or broken, without wrong and despite to Christ
himself.

Neither do the words of Solomon but tend to the same purpose. For he does not
only say, Prove. 1.8.
Hear thy fathers instruction; but adds also, and forsake not thy mothers
teaching. By Father, meaning either God who is the universal Father of all
creatures; or the Pastors of the Church, who are sent of God as Ghostly
Fathers, to teach and instruct the people: And by Mother, meaning the
Governors of the Church; as even the Genevae note declares. Or more plainly
thus; They who teach and instruct thee in the Word, must be heard: and not only
so, but even the laws and directions of the Guides and Rulers (who sit to
govern) may not be neglected. And what our Saviors doctrine likewise is,
concerning this, you have heard already; and may hear more afterward, when
you have read a little further.

In the mean time if I be desired to speak more plainly concerning the word
Church, What is meant by the word Church and of changing the phrase from Father
to Mother.
whose laws must be obeyed. My answer is, that here is not meant the whole
popular or collective company of believers, but the Church in her Officers;
which is differing from the popular and promiscuous body thereof. For the
Church is either representative, or collective. By the first is meant only the
spiritualitie, and chiefly the governing Fathers, or highest Priests. By the
second, all others (as well as the former, them and all) who live within the
compass or pale of one and the same Church. And because the whole Church
together is oftentimes resembled to a woman bringing forth, and nourishing up
of Children unto Christ; we sometimes alter the phrase from Father, to Mother,
although we speak but of the Church in a representative body, where (by a
Synecdoche) one part is put for the whole.

But I proceed. A twofold objection.
And here some object, that the Church officers either bring in rites, and
orders, at which their conscience stumbleth. Or secondly, that Bishops ought
not to have any Courts Ecclesiastical, for the correction of those who break
such laws as are said to be the laws of the Church.

Answer. ^. Answ. to the first objection.
Who can speak more like loose Libertines then these? But I answer more
distinctly.

First, See the Conference at Hampton Court, page 66.
that it is an ordinary thing for those who affect singularity, to turn all
into a subtle inquiry, rather then into an harmless desire of being
satisfied; and under an outward cloak of religion and conscience,
hypocritically to cover the grossness of their disobeience: which is as
Christ said of the Pharisees, They do things under pretense. For it is to be
feared, that some of them which pretend weakness and doubting, are (as King
James observes) strong enough, and such as think themselves able to teach the
King, and all the Bishops of the Land. In which case there is (I think) no
better way to cure them, then that Aarons rod should devour their Serpents:
otherwise they will not only hiss against, but also sting (where they can) the
bosom of the Church. Now in this, perhaps (as their custom is) they will be
ready to complain of cruelty and persecution. But do they not know, Non est
crudelit as pro Deo pietas: as says Saint Hierom? Zeal for God and the
Churches peace, is no cruelty: neither are they persecuted whom the hand of
Justice punishes for breaking the Law. They may bear the world in hand, that
they suffer for their conscience; and abuse the credulity of the simple herein:
but wise and moderate men know the contrary. For as Seminary Priests and
Jesuits give it out, that they are martyred for their Religion; when the very
truth is, they are justly executed for there prodigious treasons, and felonious
or treacherous practices against lawful Princes and Estates. So the disturbers
of the Churches peace pretend they are persecuted for their consciences; when
they are indeed but justly censured for their obstinate and pertinacious
contempt of lawful authority. Could they well remember it, it is they who be
the true Ismaels; not ceasing to infest their better brethren: making head
against their Heads; and crying out like unto Libertines, that all their
Christian liberty is destroyed: And why, but because in these matters of order,
the private fancies of every idle head, or addle brain, may not countermand
the warrantable authority of a public Law, nor set down such Rites as shall
better please them, or (in their judgments) be thought more fitting then such
as the Church ordains. This were indeed to invade another right; to give
Laws to our Lawgivers; an Husteron Proteron: and therefore may not be. Nay
were it so, that every man should be left to his own liberty, then look how
many Congregations, so many varieties. There would be (I dare say) little or no
concord, but in diversities and disagreements; and so the Church of God, in one
and the same Kingdom, should be rent and torn most miserably. The fourth
Council of Toledo had an eye hereunto, Symson hist. of the Church, lib. 4.
page 527
and did therefore (in the second Canon thereof) enjoyne one uniforme order in
their Church service. And surely, seeing Christ's coat was without seame, there
is no reason why in one and the same Kingdom the orders should be different.
It were rather to be wished that the whole Catholic Church throughout the
Christian world, under her several governors in every Kingdom or Church
National, were ordered after one and the same manner: but because this cannot
be in every respect (either in regard of the places, times, or conditions of
the people) it is left to the discretion of every Church to appoint such as
shall best serve them for decency, order, and edification: For if they be
destitute of these properties, they are but brutish and insignificant,
altogether unfit to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance or
expression of his duty to God. For as it is with Tongues, so with Ceremonies:
if they be dark and obscure, or not understood, they cannot edify. Many such
are at this day in the Church of Rome: and I thank God that we of this Church
are free enough from them. It were well therefore that what appertains unto
us, were better observed: for, in the general, their institution is divine,
though in many of the particulars they be but humane. And yet not altogether
humane neither: For even the particulars are partly humane, partly divine; as
being a part of that order and decorum which God has commanded in general,
leaving the particulars to the discretion of the Church, to be framed according
to that general rule in holy Scripture: which being observed, they cannot but
be good, true, holy, and pleasing unto God. Add moreover, that there be some
particulars warrantable from Text, as well as Canon, as uncovering of the head,
bowing at the name of Jesus, kneeling, etc. 1 Cor. 11.4. Philip. 2.10. Exodus
20.5. Psalm. 95.6.
To which may be added many such customs as were of old in the Primitive
times; as Saint Paul insinuates against all Innovatours, saying; We have no
such custom, nor yet the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. So that from hence we
have a plain Text in confutation of those, who love to contend against the old
ancient customs of the Church; as bowing toward the Altar, praying toward
the East, standing up at the Creed, Gospel, and at Gloria Patri; with such
other like. Yea, and may from hence also gather, that the restoring of ancient
Canons, and practices of the best times, (such as are some of those already
mentioned) may better be revived, than sottish devices of I know not whom;
especially such customs as the circumstances of our times and places will best
permit, or be as well for decent order and edification to us as to them. For
even Beza himself confesses, Bez. Confess. Christ. sidei, c. 5. sect. 22.
that particular Synods, called by the Metropolitan of a place, are of singular
use, as amongst other things, so to reduce matters of Ceremony to edification:
Vt omnia ad aedisicationem referantur, says he; That all things may be
referred to edification. And if all things, then also Ceremonies; Veteribus
ipsis Canonibus ad hunc finem revocatis. The ancient Canons themselves being
called back again for the same purpose. If therefore either our or any other
Church shall have officers which endeavor to revive ancient orders, let not
the ignorant either cry out of Popery, or accuse them for troublesome
Innovatours. For as they may appoint new ones, if occasion so require: in like
manner they may revive old ones; and for both have warrant from the Scripture.

Or secondly, A second answer to the first objection.
be it so, that what some of the Brethren pretend is true, namely, that their
conscience is indeed tender, does truly stumble, and that they stand in doubt:
ought they therefore to persevere in their disobedience? ought they not rather
to have their weak consciences better informed, and that as soon as they can?
Surely, yes. For conscience not grounded upon sure knowledge, is a mere
Bug-beare: or (as one better expresses it) is either an ignorant fantasy, See
M. James in Basilie. Doron, lib. 1. page 18.
or an arrogant vanity. Neither may private scruples in particular parties,
against a general Law, be accounted sure grounds to give warrant to any man's
actions. Master Hooker, in the Preface to his works, speaks to the full
concerning this: affirming, that when public consent of the whole has
established any thing, every man's judgment being thereunto compared, is
private, howsoever his calling be to some kind of public charge. And again,
as for the thing pretended; There is Conscience, and there is an error of
Conscience: for conscience may, and does err many times for want of due
information; and so becomes over strict, counting that to be evil and
unlawful, which indeed is both good and lawful. And although this be an
ignorance, yet no invincible ignorance; there is means sufficient whereby such
a conscience both may, and ought to be better informed. It is rather a supine
negligence, a neglected, or affected ignorance, which misleads both it self,
and others too; and therefore sinful to persevere or continue in it. Peccat,
Aug lib 3. c. 15. de lib. arbitr.
says Saint Austin, qui damnat quasi pectata, quae nulla sunt. And in another
place, speaking concerning needless scrupulosity, he well affirms that it is
Superstitiosa timiditas a superstitious fearfulness: Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. c.
2.
for it ties a man so strictly not to offend against his own private opinion,
as that it will not afford him so much Religion as shall lead to a dutiful and
Christian obedience. And yet the Scripture teaches, that where the authority
of the superior goes before, there the conscience of the inferior ought to
lead him after. Whereto agrees that of Tertullian, Tertul. lib. de coron. cap.
2.
saying; Laudo fidem quae ante credit observandum esse, quam did cit. And what
does Saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10.
but beseech them as brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that they all
speak one thing, that there be no dissentions among them, that they be knit
together in one mind, and in one judgment. For the tying of which knot, the
consciences of a few must not oversway the rest, nor the foot usurp authority
over the head, but be regulated by the wisdom of the Church wherein they
live: which may be proved, as well by example, as by precept. For when certain
brethren at Antioch varied from the rest about Circumcision, Act. 15.1.
they were overswayed by the censure of the Council held at Jerusalem, and not
the Council overswayed by them. Whereto, in general agrees the doctrine of
Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13.
that we submit our selves not only to the Law of God, but also unto the
ordinances of men; and that, for the Lord's sake: Or, as Saint Paul speaks,
Romans 13.5.
for conscience sake. And in more particular, as it relates to Church officers,
it is still the same: (not think it warrantable to cherish and nourish your
own peccant humors; but) obey and submit, as in the Text above mentioned out
of the Hebrews is declared. To which also join that which is written in Act.
15.28. and then be rather fearful to offend the Law, than your own opinion.
For, Act. 15.28.
It seems good (say the Apostles) to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon
you no greater burden. Where note, that what some thought burden some, was
rather good and necessary: and therefore to slip down this bitter pill of
disobedience, and to give way to an erroneous conscience, is to strain at a
Gnat, and swallow a Camel. Eccles. 7.16.
But be not righteous over much, neither make thy self over wise. for why
should thou destroy thy self? as the Scripture elsewhere speaks. In which
words (me thinks) it is, as if a finger were pointed from thence to the
Precisians of our times, whose very doubting is dangerous: for it corrupts
their obedience; and so, makes them guilty of a certain sin. Wherefore it is
more safe to obey doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly: for we may not by
disobeying commit a certain sin, in seeking to prevent a probable, but
contingent inconvenience; as even the Author of the Holy Table has declared.

Furthermore, doubts (says another) may be of two kinds; either Speculative,
or Practical. If a doubt be only speculative, of the lawfulness of such
things as lie in a man's own liberty to do or forbear, then to do a thing
doubtingly, is a sin; Romans 14.23. But if the doubt be practical, and the
matter of it a thing commanded by authority, that doubting does neither infer,
nor excuse disobedience; Heb. 13.17.

The exceptions from this Rule are very few; to wit, in cases only when
Superiors command that which does expressly oppose an Article of our Faith, one
of the ten Commandments, or the general state and subsistence of God's
Catholic Church. So then, be a man never so zealous, strict of life, or
highly esteemed for his personal endowments; yet he may be more timorous than
he needs, or contentious than he should: For it were a madness not to know,
that the most sanctified and zealous men are men, and may therefore have some
faults as well as others: For though all be not guilty of sins in one kind;
yet In multis labimur omnes, in many things we sin all. And if all in many
things, then the best have some faults: and this (whilst thus) is one, even
among those of high esteem, be all their other actions never so good, zealous,
devote, or what you please to call them. One, did I say? Yes; and that a great
one too: why else is disobedience likened to the sin of witchcraft, and every
soul (without exception) commanded to obey and submit? as formerly has been
showed. Nor is it but augmented also in regard of circumstances: for whilst
they whom we take to be good men shall stumble, and refuse to yield to the
government under which they live, others are the sooner brought to do the
like; and so the Church troubled, not only by themselves, but by such also as
are too forward to tread in the steps of their proceedings. Let them be loath
therefore to cherish such timorous conceits, as shall from an error in
judgment, make them at the last be guilty of some sinful practice arising from
thence. For no man's goodness is good in this, nor may exempt them from the
obedience unto Laws, nor make them be 1 Pet. 4.15.
privileged to put their hands into bad actions: especially since such men's
immunity would but encourage others to presume upon the like favor.

Saint Paul, I confess speaks to the Romans; Let not him that eats,
despise him that eats not: and let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats. Romans 14.3. But from thence can be no warrant to take liberty, either
for conforming, or not conforming, for the case is not the same. There the
marter of difference was not only indifferent in the nature of it, but was
also left so as concerning the use; the Church had set down no Law concerning
it. But is it so with us? it is not; and therefore obedience is required on our
parts, without any question for conscience sake; we are else no dutiful Sons
of the Church, but a peevish and perverse generation, who are not afraid to act
the Vipers part, within the bowels of our holy Mother.

I shall tell you what Saint Austine did: That pious Father once (in the
behalf of his Mother Monica) consulted with Saint Ambrose about the like
occasion, about matters of ceremony. For she being doubtful what to do, he
went to Saint Ambrose, who told him thus: When I come to the Church of Rome, I
fast on the Saturday; and when I am here, I do not. So thou also, unto
whatsoever Church thou come, follow the orders thereof; if thou would not
scandalize any, nor have any to offend thee: which when he had told to his
Mother, she rested satisfied. In which regard, even Saint Austine also gives
this counsel, In his rebus in quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina, mos
populi Dei, vel instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt.

Neither do our own Stories of the Church but tell us, that even such as
suffered Martyrdom for the truth, made no scruple of conscience against the
orders of our Church. Bucer (for his own part) approved of our English
Liturgy, although at the first he made some doubt. Bishop Ridley went to the
stake cheerfully, wearing a Tippet of Velvet, and a corner Cap: and yet (as
that good old Father Latimer Prophesied) at his burning, there was such a
candle lighted in England, as shall never be put out. John Philpot was an
Archdeacon, and Dr. Rowland Taylour used the Service book to his great
comfort, all the time of his imprisonment; and commended it at his death, a the
last token of his love to his dear wife. Master Hullier also a godly Minister,
burnt at Cambridge, most joyfully embraced the said book, even in the very
flames, These you will say were good and gooly men; but had they sacrificed
their lives in a factious quarrel against Clericall habits, or other comely
ceremonies of the Church, enjoined by King Edward the sixth, their Religious
Sovereign; the author of the Acts and Monuments had never numbered them among
the glorious Martyrs of Christ, as a reverend Doctor well observes.

And now also secondly, An answer to the 2d objection.
whereas some make doubt of the lawfulnes of Spiritual jurisdiction, or Courts
Ecclesiastical: I think there is enough in the former answer, to yield
satisfaction even in this, here therefore I shall need to say the less. For
can a Superior have power to make Laws, and not have power to punish where
they be transgressed? or shall the civil Magistrate not hold his sword in
vain, Romans 13.4.
and must the Prelates stand for ciphers with their keys? No, says our
Savior: Go and tell the Church. Math. 18.17.
But to what purpose, if there be in the Church no power of jurisdiction? Yes,
to persuade say some; or to rebuke with words. Nay sure, it is more then so: for
in our Saviors speech, there is mention made of binding and loosing. Verse 18.
And, what will you (says Saint Paul) shall I come unto you with a rod, 1 Cor.
4.21.
or in love, and in the spirit of weekenesse? that is, as one truly speaks,
will you be persuaded by fair words, or shall I exercise my judicial
authority over you, shall I punish you? For punish sure he might, or else it
had been to little purpose to have told them of his Rod.

But to put all out of question, see what the Apostle writes to Timothy, the
first Bishop of the Ephesians: namely, that against a Priest [or Elder] he must
receive no accusation, 1 Timothy 5.19.
under two or three witnesses: where I would that you mark these particulars,
viz. That here is an accuser, here is a person accused, here is an examination
of witnesses, here is a judgment and deciding of the matter; therefore here is
an exercise of jurisdiction, and a Court for determining of Ecclesiastical
affairs.

What then remains, but that the Officers belonging to such Iudicatures, make
uprightness their aim; that thereby all just cause of scandal may be taken
away from these their lawful Courts. For when they have done their best,
either ignorance, or malice, or both, will be ready enough to traduce them:
and therefore, so much the more are they like to be exclaimed against, when
indirect courses are plain and manifest. But herein care must be had, that the
scandal of injustice be not laid upon such as are free enough from it. If some
base minded under Officers abuse their places; it is no good argument to prove,
that therefore Bishops are maintainers of unjust practices. For we know for
certain, the Church (like a careful Mother) has provided Laws to suppress
such abuses, as she feared might be fostered in these her Courts. Witness
those many Canons concerning the jurisdiction of Arch bishops, See the Canons
of out Church.
Bishops and Archdeacons; yea, concerning Judges, Proctors, Registers, and
Apparatours. As in Canon the 92. that none be cited into diverse Courts for
Probate of the same Will. And in Canon 115, that Ministers and Churchwardens
be not sued for presenting: And in the 116, and 117 Canons, that Churchwardens
be not troubled for not presenting oftener then twice a year, excepting at
Visitations, or that the custom of the Dioces be otherwise: And, in Canon the
121, that none be cited into several Courts for one and the same crime, but
that the officers cerrifie each to other what has been presented to them:
And, in Canon the 123, that no act be sped but in open Court: And in Can. 127.
128. that Judges and Surrogates be well qualified: And in Canon the 129, that
no Proctors retain causes unlawfully: And, in Canon the 133, that Proctors be
not clamorous in Courts: And, in Canon the 134, that Registers abuse not their
places: And, in Canon the 135, that no Ecclesiastical officer exact more than
his ordinary fees: And, in Can. 136, that a Table of their said feees be set up
in open view in Courts and Registers: And, in Canon the 138, that Apparitours
shall not take upon them the office of Promoters or Informers for the Court.
All which had been never done, if the Prelates had intended the upholding of
wrong and robbery: for by these Constitutions it well appears, that they are
no ways bent to countenance the courses of unjust proceedings, but to punish
and subdue all such offenders. And therefore to be (as many I think are) too
ready to blame Bishops, for maintainers of pouling Courts, is (as one truly
speaks) a matter in a slanderer to be punished, and not a fault in a Bishop to
be blamed. In a word, such is the general looseness of these miserable times,
This was proved true a long while since; as may be seen in an old ancient book
called an Admonition to the people of England; printed, anno Dom 1589.
that all kind of justice (among too many) is grown into hatred and contempt:
and men disdain to be ruled by it. And therefore when they are called,
convented, and punished for such things wherein they have offended, or be
bridled from that they would do disorderly, they grudge at it; their stomachs
rise against it, and think all that is done to be unlawful, although it be
never so just. And because they are not able otherwise to be revenged, they cry
out that they be cruel and pouling Courts. But as I said before in advice to
officers, Let uprightness be their aim: so now to offenders, in the words of
God by his holy Prophet; Esaias 5.18.20, 21.
Woe be to them that draw on iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were
with a cartrope; that call good evil and evil good, that put light for darkness,
and darkness in the stead of light: that thereby they may the better nouzle
themselves in feigned colors, and imagined excuses; although in so doing, they
do but like unto that wicked generation, Who curse their Father, and do not
bless their Mother.

I should now come to the next particular, were it not that still I find another
thing, which the factious first, and others next, distaste and slight too
much. And that is the celebration of such holy days, as they who live within
the pale of our Church are urged to keep. But let me tell them, that in this
they also go astray. For though some stick not to affirm, that it is a This
they affirm, because the Commandment says, Six da^es (...) on shall labor.
breach of the fourth Commandment, and so a sin, to make more Holy Days
than one in seven: yet shall they never be able to prove why it should be a
sin rather now than heretofore. For shall the Jews be no transgressors of
the Law, though they have more days than their weekly Sabbath; and must the
Christian offend in consecrating days beside the Sunday? Yes, say some; for
they were led thereunto by God's express command. For some, I grant, they
were: but for other some again they were appointed no otherwise than their
Church ordained. Ester 9.21.
For did they not every year solemnize and keep holy the fourteenth and
fifteenth day of the month Adar, in remembrance of their great delivery from
the treason of Haman? 1 Mac. 4.59.
And had they not likewise their yearly feast of Dedication; Ioh. 10.22.23
for the observation of which there was no precept, and yet Christ himself
refused not to observe it with them? It Is sure they had. And therefore to say,
Six days thou shall labor, and not let to keep holy any other day than one,
is an idle cavil, and scarce worth the answering. Howbeit, for thy further
satisfaction, take this also with thee; that God, who might challenge all our
time for his work, does there show that he is willing to remit Which part is
ordinarily six days, though not always; as the Jews themselves do bear us
witness.
part of his right for thine own works: yet so, as he does not restrain thee
from doing public service to him, on any of those days which the Church shall
appoint: for except there be superstitious ends aimed at on the days set
apart, this which I say must needs be granted.

But say some again, though we yield to the observing of such weekly days as
are either in honor of the Savior of the world, for the diverting of some
judgment, or for the testification of thanks for some great benefit; yet why
should the Church press upon us the keeping of Saints days too as well as
these? Why? because the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; as
the Psalmist speaks: Psalm. 112.6.
and the memory of the just be blessed; Prove. 10.8.
as the son of the Psalmist has expressed. Or because of that knot of
fellowship which is between the dead Saints and the living, this being that
Communion which we confess and believe in the Apostles Creed: so that as they
pray to God for our good in general; in like manner we praise God for them in
particular, account their memory precious, set their examples before us, as the
glasses of our lives, and desire to be made partakers with them of the glorious
resurrection in the life to come.

I would to God therefore that none but Puritanes were guilty of this sin in
sleighting such Holy Days: others also cut off their esteem more than is
meet. For, that I may close up all with full satisfaction, our Church appoints
no set days for titular Saints, such is are many in the Church of Rome: but
for such as were Apostles, Evangelists, and Martyrs indeed; whom Christ
honored so much as to make some of them establishers, and others as it were
founders of that Kingdom which cost him his dearest blood; and accounted them
worthy to suffer death for his sake: so that (as one truly says, Mr Dow of the
Sabbath and Lords Day, page 62.64.
and I speak it in his own words) we may justly solemnize either the days
wherein those burning and shining Lights first appeared to the world, or the
days of their departure hence, which were the days of their happy
inauguration into the Kingdom of Glory, when they both left to the Church
Militant the glorious example of their Christian fortitude, and became an
occasion of new joy to the Church Triumphant, by the accession of new citizens
to that heavenly society. On which days we honor God as the author of all
that good which either they, or we by them are partakers of: for our prayers
and praises are to him, though with reference to them in what they have done.
So that they are honored only as God's instruments, and as those who having
been imitatours of our blessed Savior, are worthy patterns of our imitation.
Neither is such a day more holy than another, but in relation to the separation
of it to such holy and religious duties, which the Church ordains to be
performed on it. And therefore, lest in the revolution of time, ungrateful
forgetfulness should obliterate the blessed memory of such just ones, we have
these solemn Feasts, and set Days, in an annual memorial of them, to the
glory of him whose Instruments they were.

And so an end to this Section.

SECT. IV.
I Come now to a fourth particular; namely, that the people no way hinder their
spiritual Fathers (whether Bishops or others) from going on cheerfully in their
offices: for if through default of their flock they go on Gementes, it cannot
in conclusion but be woefully grievous unto those over whom they watch, Heb.
13.17. Consider therefore and mark it well; and withal observe, that he who
has said, Touch not mine Anointed; 1 Chronicles. 16.22. Psalm. 105.15.
said also, And do my Prophets no harm. Yea and further, that the word of God
may have a free passage, Pray for us, says another Scripture. For as we
desire, that to you may be a door of entrance, Ephesians. 6.19.
whereby you may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: so is it also on your
parts to provide that our door of utterance be not barred through your
occasion.

All which, in a word, tends to this; that you afflict not, trouble, or molest
your ghostly Fathers: For if you must study to be quiet, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. Romans
12.18. 1 Thessalonians 5.13 Ephesians. 6.15. Esa. 32.17.
and have peace with all men, then much more with those who preach the glad
tidings of such good things as Peace, and divide aright unto you the Bread of
Life, on which your souls (except you mean to be damned, dye, and perish)
must be sure to feed. What (I wonder) is it that You who vex your Pastors
peace. Luke 10.3.
you think? You are but Wolves if you worry those who are sent like Lambs
among you. Christ has said it; nay, did foresee it: and the Church of God
(especially the Ministers of truth, Gal. 4.16.
have always found it; and may therefore, in the Herauldry of their Divinity,
take up the Cross (as their most significant Arms) and paint it forth in a
sable field: portraying for the Crest a Wolf rampant, crushing in his paws an
Innocent Dove, or an Harmless Lamb; out of whose mouth may come this Posie or
Motto, Facere bonum, and habere malum. For thus it was with Christ: He
pitied, John 7.
and was mocked; he healed, and was hurt. Yea, and thus has it been not
seldom since with those whom he sends after him, be they never so wary how
they walk, or never so careful how they instruct.

SECT. V.
BUt here is not all. Impoverish not, is another branch: Luke 10.7. Jam. 5.4.
For the Labourer is always worthy of his hire; and to detain it from him is
a crying sin.

The old Pharisee was therefore in this an honest man. He would not rob the
Church, but paid tithes of all that he possessed: not neglecting so much as
Mint, Annise, and Rue. Which practice of his was welapproved by our Savior:
not as a thing arbitrary; but as a thing necessary. Christ sets an oportet
upon it, Math. 23.23. Luke 11.42.
or a necessity of so doing: (...), These things ought ye to have done. And
Saint Paul also teaches it, in such Texts of Scripture as I shall afterward
mention.

Howbeit men (for the most part) now are of another mind. For that which God
requires (not only as a token of his Universal dominion, and liberal
donation, but) as a means to uphold his worship and service, is too eagerly
cried down by them who rob the Church; saying, (as did Judas of the precious
ointment) Ad quid perdito haec? Wherefore is all this waste? For thus do the
sacrilegious worldlings in their hungry zeal, gape after the spoil and ruin
of the Church. And although many of them may perhaps seem more devote than the
residue of that crew, yet may we expect as little good from them to the Church
of God, as from the rest who march more openly. For many will go with the
Wisemen from the East to seek Christ; yea, and will fall down and worship
him: but they are grown too wise to open their treasures; except it be in a
manner of a scant alms to a wandering Levite, fitting to their fancies: or if
more, perhaps some miserable mod cum by way of stipend to a discontented
Separatist, who bears as little love to the Church in her Governors, as they
in her revenewes or honorable maintenance. This makes us hear much talk many
times of competencies, stipends, and benevolence: But as for tithes, if the
Clergy should have them all, then farewell to the Laity, cry these small
friends to God Almighty. They would therefore that tithes should be every where
abolished (excepting from their own hands) that thereby they may the better
bring the Priests to impotency, scorn and misery: Not remembering, that (whilst
they contend to make these things Lay fees) they themselves are like to suffer
for it, both in the want of a zealous and learned Ministry, as also for
devouring of holy things. I will a little touch upon both these.

Want of means is (first of all) a means to hinder free speaking. To live upon
courtesy, is to be kept in awe; the Prophets shall be no better than
shadows; such as may not teach but as their hearers fancy: for they shall be
even forced, Burg. of personal tithes. Hos 9.8. Ezekiel. 13.10, 19.
Fiddler like, to play nothing but what their good masters please to call for.
And, for an handful of Barley, or a piece of Bread, they must not refuse to
ensnare the people; to sow cushions under their elbowes; or to bedaube over
such sins as they should reprove. Secondly, this we also know, that Honos
alitartes. Wherefore if the devil shall by any cunning be able to weaken the
props, or pull away the rewards of learning, he doubts not but that in short
time he shall worry the face of true Religion, and make a fair way to the
devouring of Christ's flock. If the state of the clergy (says one) shall be
made contemptible, Admonit to the Church and people of England, page 29.
and the best reward of Learning a mean pension: he [viz. the divell]
foreseeth that neither young flourishing wits will easily incline themselves to
godly learning, neither will their parents suffer them to make that the end of
their travel. We may flatter our selves (says another) and say, Tho. Ryves
Dr of the Civil Law, in his poor Vicars plea, page 146.
That men ought to take this calling upon them, not for any worldly respect,
but only for devotion unto God: But experience has ever proved, that if there
be no maintenance, there will be no Ministry. The saying of Demosthenes to the
Athenians, is sure and true: Never look for a man (says he) who to do you
service will undo himself; for you shall never find any such. And therefore
(as it follows in the said author) we may not hope that any man will set his
son to School, and train him up in the study of Divinity, unless there be
an hope of maintenance for him. To which agrees that of Panormitan; Ad
tenuitatem Benificiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia Sacerdotium: Small
Livings make wooden Priests: and for want of learning in the Minister,
proceeds a general decay of Religion. For where no Prophet, there no vision;
and where no vision is, there the people decay, Prove. 29.18. Yea, Neh. 13.10.
faith another Scripture, when the portion of the Levites was not given them,
they left the Lord's house, and fled into the field. Which therefore caused
Nehemiah to bring things into a better order, and to help this defect by
restoring to the Priests their former maintenance; as in the place quoted in
the margin may be seen. Before whom Hezekiah did the like; He commanded the
people that dwelt at Jerusalem, to give to the Priests and Levites their
portion, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.
that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. For as St Paul's words
insinuate, If God take care for oxen, much more for Ministers. And therefore
says he, For oursakes no doubt is this written, that he who ploweth should
plow in hope; and that he who thresheth in hope should be partaker of his
hopee: 1 Cor. 9.10. The words therefore of that Winchest. Posthum. page 19.
thrice famous man cannot but be true; Nemo vos seducat verbis falacibus: Vt
salus non sine verbo, nec sine Propheta verbum; sic sine author amento suo,
neque Prophetas neque Prophetarum Scholas, diu fore certum est. To which is
consonant that obervation of a great Lawyer (I mean* Judge Cook) who well
observed, in the Bishop of Winchest. case.
that Julian the Apostata having a purpose wholly to ruin the profession of
Christianity, Ruffin. l. 1. c. 32. Socrat. lib. 3. c. 10. Theod. lib. 3. c. 6.
Dr. Ryves obr out of Plowd.
used not the sword (as Dioclesian and others did) but took away the means of
the Clergy; knowingfull well, that if those once faild, the number of the
Preachers would not long continue. The reverend Judges of England (says
Plowden in his Commentaries) long since observed, that by the abuse of the
Monks, in applying all to their own bellies, and leaving little or nothing to
the Vicars, many abuses came creeping in. Adding moreover, that as the revenew
of Parish Churches decayed, so likewise did Preaching. Winchest. Posth. Conc.
ad Cler. pro grad. Doct. page 19.
Non ergo vectigalium medo, sed and Prophetarum, and Concionum, and Animarum --
gurgites sunt, qui sacra deglutiunt. which is as if it should be said, They do
not only devour the means of the Priests, but even the Priests also, Sermons,
and Souls, who rob the Church.

Next, for a destruction to themselves in more particular, see this Text of
Scripture, Prove. 20.25. By reason of which testimony I remember these words:
Let it be proved (says one) that God has assigned tithes to Gentlemen, and I
will clear them from that menace of Solomon [in the foresaid Text] namely,
that It is a destruction to devour that which is holy. Which is as if it
should be said, They that are guilty of this sin, do but suck in a bitter
sweet, a faire-seeming purchase, but a destroying possession; a desired bait
with a wounding hook; a sacrificed morsel with a burning coal, apt and fit
to kindle a judgment both against them and theirs, who desire (as the Psalmist
speaks) to take unto themselves the houses of God in possession. Psalm. 83.
It is therefore generally observed among all nations, that there was ever a
maine difference set betwixt that which was dedicated to divine worship, and
that which was for common or vulgar use. Which difference not observed, was
judged even by the Heathens themselves, to be an incurable crime; and the
actour thereof, not to be ordinarily evil, but a creature composed of
inexpiable villainies, as Saravia observes out of Plato de Legibus, Dial. 9.
And verily we find it to be one of the most capital offenses tha is pursued
with Divine revenge, as both the holy Scriptures, and stories Ecclesiastical
have recorded.

As for example; When Achan had stolen from the consecrated stuff of Jericho
two hundred shekells of silver, with a wedge of gold, and added it to his own
goods; Josh 7.25.
all Israel suffered the wrath of God, till both he, and his were punished:
Malac. 3.11.
and when Tithes and offerings were not duly pa^d, the whole Land of the Jews
was cursed. Balthazar also, even whilst he was quaffing in the Vessels of the
Temple (not taken away by himself, but by his Grandfather) was an eyewitness
to the inscription of his own doom, Dan. 5.
written upon the plaistered wall of his stately Palace. Alchimus likewise, who
sought to overthrow the Temple at Jerusalem; was stricken with a palsy, and
died miserably. 1 Mac. 9.55.56.
Heliodorus, and his companions, who came to take away the holy treasures, both
saw, and felt the power of God against them. Antiochus, 2 Mac. 3.24.
who had spoiled the Temple, 2 Mac. c. 5. etc. 9.
and vowed to make Jerusalem a place of burial; was (in the height of his
pride) pursued by divine punishment. Judas, John 12.6: Matthew. c. 26. etc. 27.
who first of alrobbed Christ, and afterward sold him to the chief Priests,
became his own accuser, judge, and hangman. Ananias, and Saphyra, Act. 5.3.4.
for keeping back part of what they had devoted to the Church, were suddenly
destroyed: which fact of theirs (as Saravia has well observed) though it were
more excuseable then if they had done so with others money, could not avoid the
high hand of Heaven; and therefore remains as the great terror to all
Christians. Their death was coelitus immissa; and therefore God therein
declared, that even now in the times of the Gospel. he himself is a punisher
of these wicked offenses. Nay more, in that example may be observed.

First, that God is well pleased to see us dedicate our goods to holy uses.

Secondly, that things so dedicated, are (after that act) none of ours; and
therefore may not be taken back again, or detained from that use for which
they were devoted; without the danger of that great impiety which calls for a
direful judgment to attend upon it. Of which nature be our Bishops lands,
Gleabe lands, and such like other portions given to the Church by pious
Princes, and other zealous Christians. I do not say that Abbie lands are of
the same nature: For as it is certain that the Popes, and Monks did in many
things rob the Church of what belonged to those who did the services therein.
So they did also in as many things (or more) rob and wrong the Commonweal;
which was done, not upon the calling, and planting, but upon the corrupting of
Churches; whereas the lands of Bishoprics were given presently upon the
planting of Churches, before they were corrupted with prevailing Heresies, or
Superstion; Dr. Carlton. of tithes. c. 5.
no story being able to show, that ever there was a Church planted in the best
times; but either lands were committed to the government of the Bishops, for
the use of the Church, and them in their government, or else the price was
brought to them who had the government, as in this of Ananias, and Saphira, is
apparent. And therefore though such Ecclesiastical possessions (as they
commonly called them) which were gotten by fraud, or force, and usurped against
all right, or given at first to a mere esupersticious use, Sarav. of the honor
and maintenance of the Clergy. c. 7.
are in the power of the chief Magistrate to take them away, and employ them to
better uses: yet on the contrary, what has lawfully been given to the Church,
and received, is without doubt consecrated to God, nor may without sacrilege
be otherwise transferred. In which regard the Impropriations also, though taken
from the Monks, who took them from the Church, cannot be of right given to
any other use, then to the upholding and maintaining of Gods worship, and those
who do the services belonging to it.

Thirdly, and last of all, from hence we likewise learn; that they who do
either keep back, or take away any part of that portion lawfully devoted; do
it because they want the true fear of God, or (as it is in the words of that
Text) because Satan has filled their hearts. See the whole passage in Acts 5.

And again, how many Stories relate the plagues which fell upon Julian for his
Apostacy, and Sacrilege? who (in derision of Christ and Christians) when he
had stripped the Church and Bishops of all they had; told them that in so
doing, he had an especial care of their souls health, because the Gospel
commended poverty to them. We also know what became of that other Julian, this
man's uncle; viz. how his privy members first, Sozom. lib. 5. c. 7.
and afterward his other parts rotted and corrupted, for his sacrilege,
scorn, and blasphemy; the rottenness whereof turned so fast into filthy
vermin, that no physic could help him. Theod. lib. 3. c. 12.13.
Neither are we ignorant how miserable was the end of that scoffing Felix,
formerly mentioned.

Besides which, Malac 3.9.
even the very negligence of paying Tithes, and Offerings has been punished.
And although all and every offender against the Churches right, has not on the
sudden met with speedy vengeance; yet let not this embolden any: for God
punishes some with sudden and remarkable judgments, that others may take
warning. But if after all they will not be warned, he is as just to them (in
what way best pleases him) as to others guilty of the like wickedness: They
fare no better then their Predecessors; their judgment sleeps not. It is a
favor (if men could see it) that he proceeds many times but slowly to
revenge: But his patience being abused, he turns his favor into the more
bitter frowns: and so, though it be Lento saepe interitu; yet it is certo
tamen to every one not freeing themselves out of that snare wherewith they are
taken. Remember therefore, that Optimum est aliena frui insania; or to be
warned by another man's harms, is a great happiness.

Or otherwise thus. The wrath of God (says one) is either a ruin suddenly
throwing down, or a net catching; and after a certain time destroying: Yea,
the Lord threatens, that sometimes Ephraim should find him as a moth, Hos.
5.12.14
sometime as a Lion: As a Lion he devoureth speedily; and as a moth, he
consumes by degrees. Which is fitly applied to the Robbers of the Church; for
whilst they are bent wholly upon the prey, they forget the snare; and on the
sudden are not able to feel it. Yea, though for the present they be frolic,
fresh, and flourishing; yet their foundation ^ayleth, as being built upon the
devouring quick sands of covered quagmires. And therefore a man cannot be
better secured from this sometimes slow coming evil, then by removing the
moth, which unremoved must needs consume him. I say no more, For aliter perit
navis sentina neglecta, aeliter obruente fluctu, sed utroque perit: They be
the words of Bishop Andrews, in his learned Posthumus.

I might now make mention of the Heathens, but I suppose it needless; for
although they have been punished by an invisiblehand for robbing of Idol
Temples, yet it was by the Devil; who being Gods Ape, strives to come near
him in the imitation of such things, as shall best make for his own purpose:
as is seen in that answer which he gave to his Priests at Delphos, when
Brennus with his Soldiers came to rob the Temple there. Livius, lib. 38.
For when they asked counsel of the Or^cle what they should do, he willed
them to take no care for the matter, because he would defend his own Church;
as he did, by throwing part of an hill upon the Host by a strange earth quake,
terrifying the rest that remained with tempests of hail, thunder, and
lightnings; wherein Brennus was also so sorely wounded, that like one impatient
of his sufferings, he slew himself with his own hand.

I will not therefore stand to tell you of Cambises, Xerxes, or the gold of
Toulouse: Nor will I speak of Pyrrhus, who (with his whole Fleet) perished in
the waters, even whilst the prize of his sacrilege was heavy in his ships.

But I will rather proceed to that which I first intended; namely, to show the
divine right of Tithes, and to declare that where they are impropriated, there
God and his Church are robbed. For can it be thought that man is wiser to order
these things, better than God has done? Or is it reasonable that the rewards
of our labors should be imbezeled into the hands of Lay-possessours for doing
nothing? What is become of Conscience, or true piety, if in maintaining that
they may, men tremble not at it?

It is not enough to vouch prescription for the infeofment of Lay-patrons: for
if nullum tempus occurit Regi, that is; if no custom can prescribe against an
earthly King, much less against the King of Heaven and earth. For first, by
right original Tithes are the Lords: And secondly, by way of assignation they
appertain to the Church in the officers thereof, and this for the service that
they do. To put us therefore off with stipends, courtesy, and benevolence; is
to alter Gods order, and to tie us to such mean modicums, as are commonly both
scant, and uncertain; which is a thing miserable, and not honorable. And yet
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17.
He that rules well is not only worthy of honor, but of double honor.
Wherefore let me tell you in a story what I have read in print to the same
purpose. There was once a certain Seigniour, who came to one of the Images of
our Lady, and threw into the basin an angel of gold; at which the Image made a
low and humble courtesy: Now his manstanding by, and seeing this, did much
admire the matter; and because he also would have a courtesy, he purposed to
throw in something; whereupon he put in six pence, and took out his Masters
angel. So also they that rob the Church, of what was once her ancient
revenews, if they leave her but any thing (be the moitie never so small) they
look for courtesy and observance, and would that the Clergy should think
themselves well that they have any thing left.

But be not deceived; For as Malachie says, Malach. ^. Galat. 6.
God, in so doing is robbed: So Paul affirms, that he is mocked. Shells will
not serve, where the kernel is due; nor a small something acquit you (my
Brethren) from doing of wrong. For as you are bound to communicate to your
teachers; so (...), in all good things, Gala. 6.6. And if in all good things,
or in every thing of the best and highest esteem, then much more in things of
a lower and meaner reckoning: For Omne magis continetin se minus, the lesser is
comprehended in the greater. This first.

And secondly, as there is nothing too good to be dedicated to God, and his
service; so nothing so mean which we can possibly have, without his blessing.
All comes from the bounty and goodness of Almighty God: To be thankful
therefore for every thing, is to pay a tribute out of all, as Jacob did, Genesis
28. Cunctorum quae dederis mihi, Decimas offer am tibi, says that blessed
Patriarch. Sed omnia quae homo habet, sunt ei data divinitus: ergo de omnibus
debet Decimas dare, Aquin. Sum. 22. q. 87. art. 2.
says Aquinas. Yea, and says the Scripture also in another place, Remember
the Lord thy God, it is he that gives thee power to get riches, Deuteronomy. 8.18.
And so some (following the true sense of the place) translate it; Communicate
to thy teachers in all thy goods. although it be literally (...), in all good
things.

Neither thirdly, does that of our Savior (formerly mentioned) but speak as
much. For it is most certain that he did well approve of those smaller Tithes
of Mint, Annise, and Rue; thereby Mr. Rob. Revenue of the Gospel, c. 12.
intimating: that whereas the Providence of God does order and bring forth, as
well the least branch of little herbs, as the whole vallyes of Corn, and
whole herds of Cattle; so it is good reason that the Lord be paid his Tribute
or tenth out of those smaller and tender cropps, as well as out of those more
plentiful encreasings. Yea, so exactly does the Lord require his Tenth, as he
cannot in any case endure the diminishing thereof: Increased it may be, by the
more zealous, and thankful; but not diminished. Whereupon the people of
Israel were strictly charged, that no man should exchange, or make composition
for his Tithes, except he would give for them a sist part more then the price
thereof, Levit. 27.31. The Apostle therefore means [by (...)] that he who is
taught in the Word, should make him that taught him, partaker in all his goods.

It is proved then, that we may claim a part in all: and if a part in all, why
not that part or portion, which in all ages has been paid, until the Church
was robbed? For though in those words of the Apostle formerly mentioned, there
be no express mention of a tenth part; yet if Scripture, may be expounded by
Scripture, we shall find no other part assigned than a tenth: No not now. For,

First were the law of Tithes abrogated, then he would have showed some other
way, how the people might make their Teachers to communicate in all their
goods; but seeing he shows no other way, it must needs be as it was before;
for no positive sanction can reverse Gods appointment. If he has once spoken
thus, or thus it shall be; show me then I pray you who can alter it but
himself: Si princeps causam inter parts audierit, et sententiam dixerit; lex
est in omnibus similibus: which rule does much more hold, as it is appliable to
the King of Heaven. And therefore what has been once commanded in the Old
Testament, does remain a Law for ever, except (as Mr. Robarts truly speaks)
it has been since repealed; which is no where to be showed concerning tithes,
either directly or indirectly. Never was this right disclaimed, nor removed to
a new rate: And therefore, whereas the Lord having formerly both challenged and
received; under the Law, and before the Law, not only a part, but specially,
and by name a tenth part, (as I shall afterward show you;) it is our duty
still to acknowledge and perform for Gods due, not a part (we know not which)
but even this known particularly described Tenth. For as in the case of
divorce, Christ sent the Scribes and Pharisees, to see how it was, Ab initio;
so in this case of maintenance for Gods Ministers, Inquire of the old ways,
and when you find that in the beginning it was not so, as sacrilegious persons
now would have it, nor commanded since that it should be so, you may conclude
without any more ado, that the Quota pars is still a tenth. And indeed (that
we may bring the total of this dispute home to the Apostles Text) that very
way, of paying tithes, is a real communication of all kind of goods; whereas
in stipens, taxing of houses, or rating of persons, cannot but be much error:
Pars celatur, pars subducitur; ausim dicere [(...)] Omnia bona non
communicantur, says that famous Bishop. And. in his Posth. De decimis. page 148
Worthy of happy memory.

And again, secondly, that it ought still to be as in diebus illis, St. Paul (
1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
in another place) speaks it more plainly; expressly setting down the practice
of the Old Testament for a President unto the New. He fetches proofs Deuteronomy. 2^
1.
from Moses awnot only to confirm the equity of providing maintenance for Gods
Ministers; but also to show and confirm the manner how, even to the measure
thereof. For it must be granted, Dr. Carlet of tithes. c. 4.
that the Apostles words concluding sometime certainly, do rather conclude
that which was the ordinary maintenance commonly received in the Church, than
that which was never in use, insomuch, that as the Levites lived by tthes, and
offerings, so should we: For it is in the Text, plainly, and directly, (...)
Even so: Even so has the Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. And if even so, then by tithes and offerings: for so
was the Ministry of Law maintained. Nay, mark it yet a little better, and it
cannot but be yielded, that whereas the Apostle says, The Lord has ordained,
that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, there must be some
ordinance of the Lord showed concerning this of which he speaks: but none
can be showed, excepting that of old. The Apostles times were extraordinary,
and such as they could be, where Persecution put all things out of square; yea,
such as they could be in the first founding of a Church, the Planters and
Waterers being sent from place to place, and things not settled till a long
while after, as anon shall be further showed. Here therefore was no ordinance
for a continued maintenance: Their taking of benevolence proves no such thing,
no more than their going from place to place, proves that a Church should be
always unsettled. And therefore his Ordinance was of old; and so this [Even so]
can plead for nothing else to be ordinarily received, than tithes and
offerings; for Even so has the Lord ordained. And why, Even so, or after the
same manner? but because Gods part is certainly annexed to Gods worship: the
rate or measure whereof (beside offerings) is said to be a tenth of all that,
wherewith the Lord (year by year) blesses his people; this being that maine
and principal tithe, Deuteronomy. 18.1.
which (in Deuteronomy) is called the Tithe of Inheritance, as afterward more
fully shall be showed.

Bullinger, in the tenth Sermon of his fifth Decade, speaks not so much of
tithes, as of stipends, to be given to the Ministers of the Gospel: yet when
he comes to this of Saint Paul, (...), Even so has the Lord ordained, he
then concludes thus. But I judge (says he) this especially to be observed,
which the Apostle speaks in plain words, viz. That the Lord instituted his
Ordinance, concerning the maintenance of the Ministers, unto the imitati (...)
of the ANCIENT LAWS of of the Jewish people. Hereof we gather, that we
miss not much the work, if in this, and such like cases, we do not utterl
reject the ancient institutions of the Fathers. Thus he. Another, speaking of
our own country, says: Here only was the error of that mark, the King did
not restore the Tenths to the constant maintenance of the Ministry; which
portion, whether it now belong to the Church, or no, Iure divine, I intend not
to dispute pro or con: But this I dare say, Gods own order has manifested it
to be both competent and convenient for that purpose beyond all old exceptions,
or new inventions, and so proves it to agree with the Law of Nature, if not to
flow immediatel from thence; deserving therefore to live after the honorable
burial of the Ceremonial Law, as it breathed long before it. Thus that other.

Neither, thirdly is it, but that in the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, Levi
is said to pay tithes unto Christ, because Abraham, (in whose loins Levy then
was) paid tithes to Melchisedech, the type of Christ: which, whether it be
pertinent to our right and claim, who are the Ministers of Christ, I shall
need to say little. Only this I would should be well observed, that as under
the Law it was not so much the Levites, as God by them who received this sacred
tribute; So before the Law, not so much Melchisedech, as the Lord in
Melchisedech: yea, and now also under the Gospel, not so much the Ministers, as
Christ receives Tithes. For he (says the Apostle) Of whom these things are
spoken, is Christ our Lord, who sprang out of another Tribe, then that of Levi,
even out of Judah, Heb. 7.13, 14. Quod debehat Ahraham Deo, solvit in manum
Melchisedeck, says Calmin; Calvin. in Heb. 7.
That which Abraham owed unto God, he paid into the hands of Melchisedeck.
Or, as Saint Chrysostom speaks: Abraham, the Father of the faithful,
Chrysostom. house. 5. adversus Iudaeo;
paying his Tithes to Melchisedeck, shadowed out all the faithful, paying
Tithes unto Christ. Again, Tithes paid to Melchisedeek, are here brought by
the Apostle to prove (not only the greatness, but) the perpetuity of Christ's
Priesthood: and therefore Tithes ought to be paid as long as Christ's
Priesthood stands.

And, as I said before, although the Priests have always received them yet
(the original right is none of theirs. They have them but by way of
Deputation, or Assignment: and this but once made manifest by any written Law.
Howbeit, that once was enough, because the end was ever the same, namely, for
the service that they do. This very end made it be practiced in Nature, toward
them that then were the Lords Priests: though Bishop Mount. against Mr. Seld.
^. 1. page 210.
no doubt the Patriarchs had for this (as for all other points of Divine
service) special instruction and direction, by Illumination, Angelical
information or divine Revelation, which was the Pedagogy God trained them up
in, until that Scripture came in place wherein the Assignation, and reason of
it, was recorded. And from thence also it was, that before the Law they were
taught (not the duty; for Nature it self could teach them that, but) the
proportion of Gods due: this being (as I said before, concerning the
particularity of a seventh day for Gods public worship) a thing moral, not in
respect of nature dictating, but in regard of Nature informed by the divine
instruction, or angelical Illumination of God Almighty: and so the very
particular part is Moral; although not Ratione naturae, yet Ratione
Disciplinae.

Thus then you see, that Ratione originis, or by right Original, Tithes are
the Lords. For all the Tithe of the Land is the Lords, Levit. 27.30. And
therefore, in Malachie, thus we read: Malac. 3.8.
Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, (says the Lord) in Tithes and
offerings.

Now this was known before, but not recorded; and how known, I have already
showed. For better proof whereof, mark well the manner of the words. It is
not said, Thou shall pay all Tithes to the Lord; for such a Precept might argue
an Institution of Tithes, as Dr. Carleton well observes. Dr. Carlt. of tithes,
c. 3.
But it is said, All Tithes are the Lords which words do not express any new
Institution, but declare that ancient Right which God had always in them, long
before the Law.

But how are they his? not as all things else are his: but by a special
propriety. Otherwise when he gave them to the Levites (because he chose them
into the priesthood) he had given them althe Cattle upon a thousand hills,
Psalm. 50.10.
as well as the tenth. And indeed, so ought men to think of whatsoever it is
that here they enjoy. They hold what they have from the Lord; and in token of
subjection, thankfulness, and obedience, he expects back again one part
of ten, as a sacred tribute to himself. And therefore, says Solomon, Honor
the Lord with thy substance: Prove. 3.9.
Nam qui nobis totum dedit, a nobis decimum dignatus est recipere; For he who
has given us the whole, vouchsafes to receive back again a Tenth; as in the
doctrine of the Canonists is fitly affirmed. And so Saint Austine also makes
his descant; Vide Winchest. in Posthum. de Decimis, page 156 and Aug de temp.
Sermon. 219.
Quid enim si diceret Deus, Meuses, o homo; mea est terra quam colis; measunt
Semina quae spargis; mea animalia quaefatigas: Meaesunt pluviae; men's solis hic
ardor. Haec cum omnia mea sint, tu (qui manum tantum accommodas) solam decimam
merebaeris: sed servo tibi novem; da mihi decimam. Si non dederis decimam,
auferam novem. Si dederis decimam, multiplicabo novem. That is, what if the
Lord should say, Thou art mine O man, mine is the earth which thou plowest,
mine are the seeds which thou sowest, mine are the beasts which thou toylest:
Mine are the drops of rain, mine is this heat of the Sun. Seeing all these
things are mine, thou (which do only lend thy hand) deservest only a Tenth:
But I keep for thee nine parts, give me a Tenth. If thou will not give a
Tenth, I will take away the Nine: But if thou will give a Tenth, I will then
increase thy Nine. And again, Nolite de cuncta substantia vestra fraudare
Decimam, ne vobis novem parts aufer antur, et sola decima remaneat. And again,
Idem. Sermon. 219. de teusp.
Quod si decimas non habes fructunm terrenorum, quod habet Agricola; quod
cunque te pascit ingenium, Dei est: et inde Decimas expetit unde vivis.

Besides which, the Lord is also well pleased with the Free-wil-offrings and
oblations of holy men; and although he require both, Exodus 25.2. and chap.
35.5 and 1 Chronicles. 29 9.
yet not both alike: He left the one free, to the pious considerations of the
godly, but not the other. For offerings Psalm. 36.8
are but as his Presents; but tithes Levit. 27.30.32.
are his Rents, or special portion reserved to himself.

And verily, it is even a shame to Christians, if we consider how forward the
Heathens were in these duties: For, as nature taught them to acknowledge a God,
or gods; so it also taught them to be open handed, and to consecrate unto them
both Tithes and Offerings; insomuch, that they, who denied the one, were
accounted as if they denied the other also: Namely, that if they withheld to
give of their increase to their gods, they were called, (...), Atheists,
Irreligious people; not serving God; without piety, and the like: which is
enough to show (it cannot be avoided) that generally they practiced the paying
of tithes, as a necessary duty. I shall nee^ therefore to say little of that
which might be alleged out of Herodotus, Xenophon, Plutarch, Macrobius,
Diodorus Siculus, Livie, Pliny and others; concerning either the Egyptians,
Persians, Grecians, Sabaeans, Ethiopians, Carthaginians, or Romans, with many
more besides, who gave to their gods, both tithes and offerings: For beside
their ordinary payments, they offered likewise (in token of thankfulness)
gifts and sacrifices. Upon recovery of health they remembered to gratify
Esculapius: If they had success at sea, they sacrificed to Neptune: If their
Vintage was good, they made their offerings to Bacchus: If their flocks
thrived, they paid their vows to Pan and Faunus: or if their harvest was
plentiful, they were thankful to Ceres: And all this, because Nature taught
them, that upon the receipt of every benefit, there is a tribute due to the
Author and Donour of it.

By this very light, it was that the Heathen Emperor Alexander Severus could
say, Emperator respondit quoquo modo esse satius in illo loco Deum colero, quam
cauponariam ibiexercert. Diez. Sumne. Tom 1. ex Baptisla Fulgosie.
in a case of contestation between the pagans and the Christians, concerning a
piece of ground employed to a religious use, that it was honest and fit to have
God served before Alehouses. And the Athenians likewise bad Phidias hold his
peace, and talk no more of cheanesse; for in such things as belonged to Gods
service, they could not endure to have cheapnesse, or saving of charges named.
Do we not also read, that the Heathens believed Prometheus to be chained to
Mount Caucasus, and tormented by an Eagle, for coosening Jupiter in his
sacrifices? It is no shame for us to gather good out of their examples. It were
a shame rather that a false God should be more honored than the true. We may
avoid their superstition, but imitate their zeal: otherwise they walk better
by the dim light of Nature, than we who have both the light of Nature, and
of Scripture to direct us.

I do not say, or think, that in the payment of their tithes, Nature taught
them the just portion of a Tenth: For though the substance of this duty was Lex
inscita, yet the other was by way of imitation, taken from the example of the
ancient Patriarchs, to whom the will of God was better revealed then to the
Heathens. Thus also thinks that learned Brentius, in his Comment upon
Leviticus, Chap. 27. Verse the 30th. How they had it from them, is not much
material. It was, without question, time out of mind among them, as well as
amongst Gods people: And a man may as well declare, who was the first that
taught, Deos esse colendos; as who was the first that delivered, the Tenth part
[rather then any other part] to be the reserved, and special portion,
appropriated to a Deity.

In brief, all these practices serve to show, that by the law of Nature (as a
part of Gods service) all people knew themselves bound to give something to
God, of those temporal blessings, which God gives unto them. This Something
was no will worship unrequired, but looked for and expected by the Giver of
all; even from the first times of the worlds beginning, Genesis 4. It was likewise
[for the Quetitie] Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.4. Genesis 28.22. Levit. 27.30.
declared by the practice of the Patriarchs before the Law, and by the words
recorded in the Law, to be a Tenth. What was beside, were those Free Will
Offerings and Oblations already mentioned: Presents, but not Rents; And yet
such as God was, and is, well pleased to receive.

Thus, then you have seen Gods right; namely, that Tithes are the Lords, holy
to the Lord: and therefore out of the power of man to turn them into common
uses.

Next, for the Assignation or Deputement of them to the Priesthood, we have
again to observe: That as the Lord did not begin to have a right in them, when
the Law was given; so the Assignment was not then, although but then declared
by a written Law: And therefore, as the Right was perpetual; so the
Assignment. For when God declared, why the Priests were to receive them, he
affirms, That it was for the service which they do, Numb. 18.21. and Deuteronomy.
18 5. And if for the service, then not due to the Levites as the sons of
Levi, but as the Priests of God: Or, being due principally to the Service, and
not to the Men, but for the sake of the holy Function, and maintenance of them
in their places, it must needs follow, That where God is served, there tithes
are due to those (in a secondary right) who administer in the Priests office,
and do the services belonging to it. Yea, thus have they always followed Gods
worship; as well before the Law, as under it: and why not now also under the
Gospel cannot be showed: For the end of their deputation cease not, no more
now then it did before. Are not therefore Priesthood and Tithes fitly called
Twins? or (as Logicians speak) are they not Relatives; have ever gone
together: and (of Right) ought so to do so long as God has a Church, and
Officers belonging to it? For in Gods Church the work, for which Tithes were
given, can never end: and therefore the wages cannot (without wrong) be
detained from those, who do the Services.

Neither can it be denied, but that the substance, even of the legal Services
(as reading the Law, expounding the Law, performing of public prayers,
blessing the people, and such like) is still of force. For there is nothing
ceased but what was typical: all else abides, with what has ever belonged to
it. So that although it be granted, that Viz. parts of sacrifices, and such
like.
some portions belonging to the Levites are now ceased, because the parts of
those Services, for which they were due, are abolished and gone; yet that which
was paid for the maine duties, and principal services belonging to the
substance of Religion, before any such Ceremonies were commanded, is still of
force; and of right our lawful hire: this being the full Tenth of all that
increase, wherewith the Lord Almighty blesses his people.

And although Cajetan by the name of Tenth, does not understand the tenth part,
but a certain portion, which in Moses his time was called a Tenth. Lippom. in
Gen 14.
Yet Lippoman, seeking no such evasion, overthrowes his supposition, with a
more downright dealing. For, in that story of Abraham, paying tithes
Melchisedech, he renders it from the Hebrew, and says it is thus: Dedit ei
decimam ex omnibus; He gave him a Tenth out of all: which (as the Chaldee
interprets) Is one out of ten. And therefore, Iuxta legem naturae and Dei,
solvuntur Sacerdoti; says the same Author. So also in that vow of Jacob [
Genesis 28. Idem in Genesis 28.22.
] Et ne forte alicui dubitare contigeret de portione quam pro Decima se
soluturum Patriarcha promittit, occurrit Chaldaica (inquiens) Et omnium quae
dederis mihi, unum ex december seperabo coram te. Meaning (as before) That this
Patriarch would separate, one part of ten. And again, to show how the old
Patriarchs came to the knowledge of this part, rather then of any other, the
said Author records out of Hugo de Sancto Victore, Deum docu sse Adam
divinum cultum, quo ejus benevolentiam recuperaret, quam per peccatum transgres
sionis amiserat, ipsumque docuisse filios sues dare deo Decimas and Primitias.
Meaning, that Gods Divine Worship was immediately taught unto Adam by God
himself, etc. And that Adam taught his sons to give Tithes and First fruits
to the Lord. Certain it is, that they brought their Offerings at a set time,
and to a chosen place [Gods House] called by reason of the Lords more special
presence there, See Genesis 4.
Gods Face; that then and there they might offer unto the Lord, not
immediately, but rather mediately by Adam, the Priest of God: for so the Lord
expounds our offering to him, Numbers 5.8. To the Lord, even to the Priest. Or,
as it is in the 2 Chronicles. 15.11. The people are said to offer, when as they
only brought their Sacrifices, and the Priest offered for them.

Neither may this seem strange: For among Gods people, from Adam to Moses, he
that was the eldest of every family, was both the King, and the Priest over his
own family. Thus do the Hebrews tell us, that the Priesthood was a perpetual
annexum to the Birthright. Yea, thus does Saint Hierome witness in more
places of his writings, Hier. quaest. hebraic. et in Epist. 126. ad Evagr.
then one. And we also find it in those many priestly practices of the blessed
Patriarchs. Saint Chrysostom likewise says, that the Prerogative of
Birthright was great, whether it were by nature, or of grace. When Jacob and
Esau therefore strove about their Birthright, they contended not about a
trifle, but about a matter of great weight and moment. And howsoever it was
that in sundry families, there were sundry Priests; yet the eldest Patriarch
then living, was as it were high Priest among them all: Bp. Mount. against Mr.
Seld. c. 1. page 207, 208. Genesis 14.18.
their office ceasing, or being suspended for a time, when a greater high
Priest was present then themselves; witness that passage, which was between
Abraham and Melchisedech. For though when Melchisedech was King and Priest of
Salem, Abraham also was King and Priest over his own family; yet Abraham's
office, yielded, and gave place to Melchisedech, because he was of an elder
house, and so greater then Abraham. For this Melchisedech was Sem, Hier.
tradit. in Genes.
as the Hebrew Doctors also witness; and made the Firstborn, not by birth,
but by his Fathers Genesis 9.26.27.
blessing. And indeed, seeing that Iaphets sons Act. 2.5.
fetch their religion from Salem; (whom God would persuade to Gen 9.27.
fetch it from Sems tents) who should rule Or Jerusalem, as in Psalm. 76.2.
Salem, where God his Tabernacle should be, rather then Sem?

Wherein we may also note, that although there were Priests, and offerings
before, yet is Melchisedech the first, who is directly said to be a Priest: and
the first also that in direct terms is said to take Gods portion by the name
of tithes. Yea, no sooner is he said to be a Priest of God, but tithes are
Abraham gave him tithes of all [Gen. 14.19 20] not by voluntary contribution,
but by necessary injunction. witness both Melchisedechs superiority, as also
the meaning of the word (...) in Heb. 7.6.
paid to him; and those (even as was afterward mentioned in the written Law)
for the service that he did. And what was that special service? As a For thut
do Josephus Rabbt Solomon (among the Jews) and Cajetan among the the Papists,
understand the place. Number. 6.23. and Number. 8.16.
King he brought forth Bread and Wine, to comfort both Abraham, and his
soldiers: but as a Priest he blessed him, namely, Abraham; and then took
tithes, thesa cred due belonging to his holy function. It was no Ceremonial,
but Substantial part, of the Priests office. It was among the Levites
afterward, who were chosen in stead of the Firstborn: Yea, and has still
followed the Priesthood, from the times of Christ, and his Apostles, to our
very days. It was done by Christ himself, Mark 10.16. Luke 24.50. It was by
him commanded, and a promise granted to second it upon such, as readily
received them that he sent, Luke 10.5. It was also practiced by the blessed
Apostles: and has (as I said) still followed the Priesthood ever since, For
according to that form in the 2. Cor. 13.14. the Ministers of the Gospel, in
all ages thereof, have continued to bless the people: or, if otherwise, it is
according to what is else where taught them; as in Phil. 4.7. Rom 15.33. Shall
then the wages for this service be abolished? it cannot, it may not, it must
not be. For to whom the self same power, and duty of blessing belongs, as
did to Melchisedech before the Law, and to the Priests and Levites under the
Law, to them from the blessed ought the same duty to be performed; that is,
the tithes of all: but the Ministers of the Gospel have (as has been showed)
the same power and right of blessing the people; Therefore tithes are their
due, as well as the due of the Priests before them. Thus then (as I said
before) Priesthood and Tithes are Relatives, Quorum uno posito, ponitur et
alterum; et uno sublato, tollitur et alterum. For he blessed Abraham, and
received tithes of all; that for Melchisedech. Genesis 14 19.20. Heb. 7.1.2. Deuteronomy.
10, 9. Numb. 18.22.
And again, to bless in his name: Wherefore the Lord is their Inheritance,
and has given them all the Tenth in Israel; That for the Levites.

Object. Abraham paid the tithes of his spoils, and not of his other goods:
and therefore was not necessarily bound to the performance of this duty
perpetually, at other times, and out of his other substance.

Answ. It is answered, that the word (...), Heb. 7.4.) translated, The spoils
of war, does signify the Top, the Chief, the Principal, or best of
anything; as well, or rather, then the spoils of war. And therefore, as he
gave Tithes of all [which is mentioned at the second verse] so de praecipuis,
of the best of all: (...) that learned Author speaks) He give him the best
of all for tithe. page (...)


But say we should grant, that at this time Abraham gave only the tithes of
the spoils; yet is it so far from hindering the right of tithes, that it
rather confirms all more fully. For if Abraham gave tithes of the spoils,
much more then of his own goods, ordinarily, and at other times. The vow of
Jacob does well confirm it: where I am sure is nothing spoken concerning
spoils. For of all (says he) which thou shall give me, I will give the Tenth
unto thee, Genesis 28.22. out of which words it appears how general this
practice was of paying tithes. It is most manifest, that when he spoke them,
Genesis 32.10.
he had not wherewithal to perform the duty of such a payment: howbeit,
because he knew the equity of it, and had ordinarily seen the zealous
performance of it, he voweth not to be deficient in it, whenever it should
please the Lord to enable him for the performance of it, as well as others of
his kindred. Besides, if there were no other tithes given by Abraham to
Melchisedech, but of those spoils only, why is this compared with Leviticall
tithes, which were paid yearly? It was therefore a common practice, as well
then, as under the Law, to pay their tithes to Gods Priests: and so, what was
done before the Law in these duties, can no more cease now after the Law, then
Christ cease to be a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech.

Object. Mr. Perrot Append. to Jacobs vow, page 5.
It is answered very fitly, that to forsake the Devil, and all his works is a
duty necessary; but we may not only vow this in Baptism, but take the
Sacrament afterward of the Lords Supper, to bind us to the performance of the
same vow.

Object. Jacob vowed tithes with condition; therefore they are not such as are
contained in the Law of Nature.

Answ. It is answered, See Doctor Carlt. of tithes. 6.2. page 8.
yet nevertheless it is nothing unlawful to vow them, that thereby we may be
stirred up to the performance of them, with the more exact care, and fervent
zeal. For beside that, a vow serves to show a resolved, and willing mind, it
also serves to stir up a diligent care. And so, though David was bound
without an oath, or vow, to keep the righteous judgments of the Lord, yet he
See also concerning the vowing of moral duties, in 2 Chronicles. 15.12.13.
bound himself by a solemn oath, Psalm 119. Verse 106. In like manner Jacob
shows his resolved, and willing mind, desiring to be prompted forward to this
duty by making of a vow. And whereas, it was conditional; how could it be
otherwise? for he that shall make a vow for the payment of his tithes,
repairing Gods House, or giving alms to the poor, whilst he wants means to
perform these duties cannot make his vow de presenti, but de futuro; and that
but sub condition neither: namely, that when God shall bless him with goods,
he will then perform what now he voweth. And thus I am sure it was with
Jacob: for when he fled from his Fathers house, by reason of his brothers
hatred, what had he more then his staff, that he carried with him? Genesis 32.10

Hitherto then it well appears, that tithes belong not, either to the
Ceremoniail or Judicial Laws, for tithes were long before them; and are
therefore due by the Moral Law, which binds all men, and at al times. And
though perhaps Captivity, War, or Persecution may sometimes put all things out
of square, and cause them to be (as it were) suspended for a while de facto;
yet the Ins, or right remains in it self inalterable. Which ought therefore to
teach, that in settled times, the fact be reduced again to his true Sic, as
abinitio.

Object.

Answ. To which I answer, They come near indeed to that of Cain and Abel, who
paid to the supreme Lord of all a part of what he gave them; as formerly has
bin showed: But to rank them among the Figures, or Types of Christ, is
altogether beside the scope of any thing intended in them. For first they are
Gods; then by him assigned: and in that, if we mark their end, there is no
cause to dream of Ceremony. For (^s we have already heard) their end of
payment to the Priests, was for the maintenance of Gods worship; being due
principally to the Service, and not to the Men, but for their Service sake.
Insomuch, that so long as God has his Church, and Officers belonging to it,
tithes are due to those, who exercise therein the functions of their office:
For why else were they paid to the Priests before the Law, as well as to the
Priests under the Law? at which time in express words, it was thus written; I
have chosen them in the stead of the firstborn; I have given the tithes for
the service that they do.

And albeit, some would make ten to be a number of perfection, Aquin. sum. 2.2.
q. 87. art. 1. resp. ad 1. Argument.
and so a type of Christ; yet why it should be a more perfect number then
seven, I cannot see. Aquinas himself cannot say, that it is any other then
Quodam modo perfectus: and yet the Lamb, which was indeed a type of Christ,
was to be without any blemish. And as for seven, Lib. 1. Moral. c. 11. as in
Lip. in Genesis 2
in ancient times it was reckoned to be the very sum of perfection. Certis
sime scimus, (says Saint Gegorie) quod Septenarium numerum Scriptura sacra pro
perfectione ponere consvevit, etc. We know for certain that the holy Scripture
uses to put the Seventh for a number of perfection: For six days were spent
before the works of Creation were perfected, and on the Seventh God rested.
Hinc etiam est, quod septimus dies in requiem hominibus, id est, in Sabbatho
datus est. Hinc est quod Iubileus annus, in quo plena requies exprimitur,
septem heb domadibus consumatur. Saint Austine likewise says, De septenarij
numeri perfectione dici quidem plura possunt, etc. Sed hoc satis sit admonere,
De civit. Dei lib. 11. c. 31.
quod totus impar primus numerus ternarius est; totus par quaternarius: ex
quibus duobus Septenarius constat. Thus he: by which it appears, that Seven
(rather than Ten) was held to be the most perfect number.

Besides, all that perfectness which is said to be in Ten, is not so much as
it is a number, but as Art has taught us how to write our numbers, or how to
divide them into Simple and Compound; which I take to be for plainness of
teaching, and reckoning, rather than for any thing else. Men I confess may
strain their wits if they please, to bring a Quidlibet ex quolibet, and yet
may be far enough from the thing aimed at, which in this case is plain
enough: because the end mentioned in Gods assignation, shows why Tithes were
paid, although we invent no new causes never read nor heard off, till the
corrupt times of the Church.

Oh but though they were no ceremonies,

Whereto I answer, Moses, were only concerning things common, or outward
actions; whereby the civil society of the Israelites ought to be governed. It
was a Law meddling only in things appertaining to men, not at all belonging to
any other than to things of common use. And if so, then Tithes are beyond the
reach of such a Law: for they are separated from common use, Levit. 27. Numb 18.
they are holy to the Lord; and devoted to the Priests for the service that
they do.

And again, the newness of these two last opinions overthrow them. For first,
that Tithes are ceremonies, no man ever thought, till about an hundred years
ago, or little more. Secondly, that they are judicialls, was first broached by
one of our own Countrymen; Alexander de Hales, the Master of Bonaventure, and
of Thomas Aquinas. He flourished about the year of our Lord Or 1230. as some
others reckon.
1240, and dyed in the tenth year after; to wit, in the year 1250. In which
passage I cannot but take up D. Carletons observation: Namely, that after the
Pope had through corruption made Tithes away from their proper Churches by
Impropriations, then to salve up this corruption, least it might have been
thought open sacrilege; these devices were first invented, being as pat for
the Popes purpose as could be imagined; of which more shall be spoken
afterward.

Oh but some (perhaps) will say,

I answer here with Master Robarts, Levites to himself, and for his service
(instead of the firstborn) no man might be suffered to proportion the quota
pars of their allowance, Numb. 18.21.
what they were to have was by Gods appointment. For I (says he) I have given,
etc.

The Laws therefore which have been made insundry places of the Christian
world, concerning the paying of Tithes, are not to be reckoned as the
fountains from whence we claim our right; but rather to be taken as good
and wholesome Laws, made in favor of the Church, for the maintenance of divine
right, and for restrayning the filthy wickedness of such devourers, as would
not have paid them, had not the fear of humane Laws been more powerful with
them, than the Law of God. Audi ergo indevota mortalitas! for this is the true
and only end of such Christian Laws, as will better appear if I mention
some; which I shall do, and those of no far fetched proceedings neither: but
of the ancient Kings, Bishops, and Nobles of our own Land.

I. And first in the year 786, with the full consent of the Lords, both
spiritual and temporal, there was a general Synod held under Elfwold King of
Northumberland, and Offa King of Merceland; where among other words to the same
purpose, thus we read: Therefore we adjure all men that they studiously
endeavoure to pay the Tenth of all that they have [quia speciale domini Dei
est] because the Tenth is God's special part.

II. In the year 855, King Ethelulph made a Law concerning Tithes: Totam
terram suam ad opus Ecclesiarum decumavit propter amorem Dei and redemptionem
sui: In the conclusion of which grant, this is added. Qui autem augere voluerit
nostram donationem, augeat, etc. That is, But if any will be willing to augment
this our donation, the Lord Almighty make his days prosperous: Si quis vero
minuere vel matare praesumpserit, etc. But if any shall presume either to
lessen or change the same, let him know that he shall give an account for it:
Ante Tribunal Christi, nisi prius satisfactione emendaverit: that is, He shall
give an account for it before the Tribunal of Christ, unless before that time
he make satisfaction for the same.

III. In the year 930, or thereabouts, King Athelstan made a Law for Tithes,
and grounded it upon the example of Jacob, and athoritie of certain Texts in
the holy Scripture; whose words, concerning his own goods, to his Stewards and
Overseers, be these. Vt imprimis de meo proprio reddant Deo decimas.

IV. About the year 940, in a great Synod held under King Edmond, it was
strictly enacted; That all Christians should pay their Tithes, upon forfeitur,
of their Christendom.

V. Near about the same time were certain Constitutions made by Odo.
Archbishop of Canterbury: in the tenth Chapter whereof we read the same
adjuration which we read before in the laws of Elfwold, and Offa.

VI. And in a Council held under King Etheldred, about the year 1010,
Declmationes frugum and vitulorum and agnorum etc. Domino, per singulos annos,
temporibus rependantur congruis.

VII. Also in some of the Laws of the said Etheldred, thus. Et nemo auferat
Deo, quod ad Deum pertinet, the words being spoken concerning Tithes.

VIII. And in the Laws of King Knout, thus we read: Reddantur Deo debitae
rectitudines annis singulis: that is, let God have his dues yearly paid him.

IX. And again, in the Laws made by King Edward the Confessor concerning
Tithes, this is written: Decima garba Deo debita est, and ideo reddenda: that
is, The tenth sheafe is due to God, etc. And again, Decima pars ei reddenda
est qui novem parts simul cum decima largitur: that is, The tenth part ought
to be paid unto him, who gives the nine parts together with the tenth.

X. And in the 21 year of King Henry the Second, among other things, this was
decreed; as in a Synod at Rosne, viz. Omnes Decimae terrae (sive de frugibus,
sive de fructibus) Domini sunt, and illi sanctificantur: All the Tithes of the
Land (whether the increase of the Earth, or of Trees) are the Lords, and
sanctified to him.

By all which Ten testimonies (beside other which might be gathered.) it well
appears, that these godly Kings grounded their Laws, for the performance of
this duty of paying Tithes upon the Law of God: and did not declare that by
virtue of their Laws they were first of all due; but, that by virtue of their
Laws the jus divinum was upheld, and the obedience thereunto commanded.
Wherefore, where such laws are enacted, the Clergy may take up that old Grace,
and say,

Deo gratias, quod nos satias, bonis Rusticorum, contra voluntates eorum.

Which I English thus: The Lord be thanked for this good banquet,
Which comes from the Hinds, against their minds


And sure (me thinks) hitherto the passages are all clear; and nothing to the
contrary, but that the Tenth is still the Churches due. Less cannot, because
the Ministry of the Gospel is in it self far more glorious, than the
Ministry of the Law. When we therefore speak unto Laymen concerning these
things, we may fitly say unto them, as Pilates wife said unto her husband. For
as she said, Have thou nothing to do with that just man; so may we say, Have
ye nothing to do with these holy things; They are separate, and set apart
from common use: which separation of such a portion, in case it had been made
but by men, yet were it dangerous to alter it: witness that direful judgment
in the fatal story of Ananias and Saphira, of which I have spoken a little
before.

Oh, but say some,

And is it so indeed? we claim? See his reports, in Bp. of Winch. case.
Sir Edward Cook, Sir Henry Spilman, Sir James Sempill; those men of note have
labored to expel this sin of Sacrilege, have bent their forces point
blanke against it; and shall Clergymen (whom it more nearly concerns to
rebuke the world of sin) be forced to hold their peace, and stay their pens,
or else be covetous? We plead indeed, but do not strive immodestly, when we
demand by an orderly proceeding, that portion which the word of God assigns
to us. Nor secondly, is he to be accounted covetous, who asks but his own.
They are indeed covetous, and injurious too, who detain the good from the
owner thereof, who rob Aram Dominicam to furnish Haram Domesticam: Or, in a
word, thus; some who thus object are covetous: others are prodigal, and some
are proud. The very covetous are scarce content to allow themselves things
necessary and convenient; and therefore no marvel to see them grudge at their
payments to the Church, Poor, or to their Ministers. The Prodigal thinks all
too little for himself; and therefore is loath to spare any thing from the
feeding of his own unthrifty vanities. And last of all, the proud (like Corah
and his company) think Ministers take too much upon them; They scorn, they
contemn, they despise to be ruled by them: and therefore (being without
religion) they judge it good policy to curtall the Ministers maintenance, that
by that means they may keep him under, and do what they list.

Object. Oh,

Answ. This was (as Master Robarts well observes) at the first the subtilty of
the crafty Friars to undermine the Incumbents,

Neither again secondly, is it a fit argument to say, because things were thus
and thus in the beginning of the Gospel, under an heathen Magistrate, and in
such times, as persecution made havocke of the Church, and put all things out
of square, that therefore they ought not to have bin otherwise. Things were
then so well, as the times and occasions would suffer; not so well as by
degrees they came afterward to be: and yet (even then) could the Apostle urge
the Lords ordinance to be still of force; and that the Hearers ought to
communicate to their Teachers in all their goods. Which liberty (though
lawful) they could not but suspend for a time, for fear of hindering a new
plantation: and so the Apostle speaks in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, Chap. 9. Verse 12. Howbeit, the fact does not always prove the
Right; no not in this very thing: as it is at the 4.5, and 6. verses of the
forenamed Chapter; nor ever were things settled, or brought into their due order
on a sudden; witness both our own experience in what we have seen, as also
the experience which Paul himself had of the first times: why else did he
say, That the rest he would set in order when he came, 1 Cor. 11.34? And
therefore (to speak in the words of a learned Writer) as Circumcision was
laid aside for a time, Dr. Carlt. of tithes, c. 4. page 22.
whilst Israel traveled through the wilderness: not because the people of
right ought not then also to have used it: but because it was so incommodious
for that estate and time of the Church, See Josh. Chap. 5.
that it could not without great trouble be practiced: Even so the use of
tithes in the time of Christ and his Apostles was laid aside; not because it
ought not, but because it could not, on the sudden, without great
inconvenience be admitted. And as Circumcision was resumed as soon as the
estate of the Church could bear it: so tithes were reestablished, as so one as
the condition of the Church could suffer it.

Besides; the Apostles, as their callings to the Ministry were immediate; so
their gifts were extraordinary: and therefore Saint Paul could preach without
study; and so had much spare time for other business, wherein it was convenient
for the present to get his living, rather then to require the tithes and
offerings, as was wont to be done of old, by those who did the service; And why
not require them, I have already showed: Wereas we, though God has given us
gifts, and these of sundry measures, yet without study we cannot do so with
them, as is fit we should. We therefore study both to increase them, and also
profitably to employ them. And so doing we have more reason to claim our just
dues, then they of the first times: For means you know is requisite; if for no
other cause, yet for this: that we may be the better furnished with Books,
and such necessary helps, as may make us the more able, to go on the more
powerfully in the works of our calling; praying always for Gods blessing upon
our labors, and studious endeavors: for it is not labor alone without
prayer; nor prayer without paines-taking that can do it. I my self have
known this example, of Saint Paul's working with his own hands, not seldom
urged against the honorable maintenance of our present Clergy: but we see (God
be thanked) that it is to very little purpose. It was not ordinary for all the
Apostle to do the like: nor yet out of the power of either Paul or Barnabas to
have done other wise. For which see the proof, in the 1 Cor. 9.5.6.

Moreover, tithes were paid to the Priests and Levites, in the time of Christ
and his Apostles. And we know that the Jewish Synagogue must be first buried,
before these duties could be ordinarily performed toward the Ministers of the
Gospel: and so, when the Synagogue was buried, and the state of the Church of
Christ such, as could bear the practice of paying tithes, they were brought
into use, in the Church of Christ, as formerly in the days of the Jewish
Synagogue.

Also, in the Churches nonage, or first infancy, her Ministers were but few,
and unsettled: whereas afterward they were otherwise, and must then be
hospitable, ready to entertain, and be freely devoted to works of Charity:
but without their due revenew how could they perform any part of this duty?
for Charity we know begins at home; and a man must first have wherewithal,
before he can give.

It was not long therefore, before order was taken for their honorable
maintenance. Something was done at the very first; wherein some Churches (as
Saint Paul speaks) were more forward then others were: and unto this was
added daily more and more; not in one kind alone, Mr. Rob. page 61.
but in a second. Insomuch, that in a short space provision was made for the
Ministers of the Church two manner of ways; partly by the bounty of well
disposed people, which took place at the first: and partly by tithes and
offerings (as soon as might be) which were paid them More Levitarum, as
formerly to the Levites. And herein Zanchie has well collected what we find
in ancient Writers, viz. that these revenues both of tithes and offerings were
wont to be paid to the Bishop of each Diocese; at whose direction they were
distributed among the Ministers, appertaining to every such division. For in
the beginning of those times, the whole Clergy did in common attend the whole
flock, the Bishop and the Ministers for the most part living (as it were) in
common together. But when the Church began more and more to stretch out her
arms over the world, or when the state of it did require another course;
namely, that particular men should be assigned to particular Cures, constantly
to reside among them (for by that means they could the better see to them,
admonish, exhort, and comfort them) then every Minister had the tithes and
oblations of his own parish: which fitly agrees to that questionary direction
of blessed Saint Paul; Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
stock? Say I these things as a man? or says not the Law the same also?

And now suppose it could be proved, that the Primitive times paid no tithes
for a long while together; no, not till toward the end of the first four
hundred years; yet were this nothing against that right which the Church had
always to them. If the inconveniences which Persecution brought upon the
Church, was an hinderance concerning practice, what were this against the
Right. A facto ad jus (as I have already showed) is no good argument. And
indeed [without suppose] this is certain, that the practice, as well as the
right, was manifested long before four hundred years. I shall produce some
testimonies, and then pass on to the first times of their alienation;
declaring likewise the success that it found in aftertimes among such as
delighted to strip the Church of these holy dues.

1. Origin shall be first: he was famous about the year of our Lord 226, and
thus he says. Quia unus est author omnium, Homil. 16. in Genes.
and fons and initium unus est Christus: ideirco and populus Decimas quidem
Ministris and Sacerdotibus praestat, which is, Becacuse there is one Author of
all, one fountain, one beginning, even one Christ; therefore the people pays
Tithes to the Ministers and Priests.

2. Saint Austine also (who was borne in the year 350) has recorded, that the
paying of Tithes was practiced long before his time. For Majores nostri Decimas
dabant: Homil. 48. inter quinque bomil.
Our Ancestors paid tithes. And if his Ancestors, then a practice of greater
antiquity than himself. Ideo copijs abundant, quia Deo Decimas dabant, etc.
They therefore abounded with plenty, because they paid their Tithes unto God.
See also his 219 Sermon De tempore, which is wholly for paying of Tithes.

3. And Saint Ambrose, who was famous about the year 374; admonishes
concerning due care in the practice of this duty: Sermon. 34. inseria 3. post
prim. Dom. Quadrages.
whose words be these. Quicunque recognoscit in se quod sideliter Decimas suas
non dederit, modo emendet quod minus secit: That is, whosoever knows in
himself, that he has not faithfully paid his Tithes, let him amend what is
amiss.

4. And in the imperfect work upon Saint Matthew, said to be Chrysostomes (who
flourished about the year 398) it is thus written. Homil. 44.
Quod si Decimas populus non attulerit, murmurant omnes.

All which we see is spoken concerning practice, which must needs be more
ancient than these men (as by their words appears) although we cannot declare
in what year of the Primitive times it first began.

Neither (upon a further view) can we find that there was any manifest or
remarkable corruption in this practice, until a long while after. No manifest
corruption in practice concerning the alienation of Tithes, from the Ministers
doing the service, into any other hand, until the days of Carolus Martellus
Major of France, who came to that office about the year 714, as Calvisius
writes: and look what he did was upon this occasion. When those Barbarous
people, the Hunnes, Goths, (...) Rob page 74. out of Gagwin hist. of France,
lib. 4.
and Vandals were become lords of Italy, and the Sarazens began to set
themselves against France; Charles Martell was chosen to go out with an Army
against them, but would by no means undertake that charge, until he had
gotten the Clergy of the said kingdom to resign their Tithes into his hands,
that thereby he might maintain the War; promising and protesting that when
the Wars were ended, he would restore again unto them their own, and that
with advantage. To which request, the Church and Clergy there yielded; partly
through fear of being spoiled by the enemy, and partly by the fair promises
of this new chosen Captain. But the War being ended, and the enemy
conquered; he broke his promise with the Clergy, dealt perfidiously with them,
and gave the Revenue of Tithes among such of his Soldiers as he thought good
to reward. This was done about the year of our Lord 740, Calvis. Chron.
little less than a year (or thereabouts) before the said Martells death: for
he dyed in the year 741, upon the 22 day of October. His story is recorded by
many, and they very ancient Authors. See Dr. Tillesely, c. 5.
Ivo in his Chronicle, calls him Tutudi, and says; this Tutudi (who by his
people was called Martellus) because sieldome he had peace in his Kingdom,
gave (for the most part) the Church estate for wages to his Soldiers: who
being dead, and buried in St. Dennis Church, on the left side of the great
Altar, was seen by night in the shape of a great Dragon, breaking the
Sepulcher, to go out of the glass windows with great terror. Thus he. But
whether this last of his carrying out of the Grave betrue, yea, or no, it makes
no matter, nor will I contend about it. Certain it is, that he was a notable
Church-robber: For Boniface Archbishop of Mentz (who lived at the same time)
complains likewise of him; and is a witness that he took away Monasteries,
Bishoprics, Church-rents, and possessions from the Clergy, and profaned
them, to Lay-hands as are ward of their military service then done against the
Sarazens. And for any man to think that Tithes were no part of this great
Sacrilege, is to affirm that the Church as yet had no such Rents: whereas it
is witnessed by the foresaid Boniface, That the milk and wool of Christ's
sheep, was received in his times, and the Lords flock was neglected: received
(I say) Oblationibus quotidianis, ac Decimis fid lium; In the daily oblations
and Tithes of the faithful. And in the days of the second Council at Mascon
(a Bishopric in the Diocese of Lions) in the year 586 (which was 155 years
before Martells death) Churches had their tenths paid them out of that annual
increase, wherewith God Almighty blessed his people. Nor has it but been
already See also St. Cyprian epist. 66. sou lib. 1. epist. 9. where memion is
made of paying of tithes. He flourished about the year 240.
showed, that Tithes were paid in the days of Origin, Ambrose, Austine, and
Chrysostom. And in the relation of the Centuriatours (who quoted what they
said, from Aventine) mention is made that Carloman restored Tithes formerly
taken away by Martell. And so also says Goldistus in his edition 1613;
although in his edition 1610, he mentions them by the name of Pecunia
Ecclesialis: which is no great advantage neither, but may be well interpreted
by the word Decimae, as a general, by a special. But howsoever, what is one
Author against more? and yet this one, in his last thoughts is nothing
differing, but speaks just like those other already mentioned.

Well then, without further question, here was the original of Infeodations,
and first beginning of lamentable Sacrilege in the alienation of Tithes from
the Ministers, or Churches, to the which they were paid.

And in the sum of the whole answer note, that at the first they that had
possessions sold them, and brought the money to the Apostles; this was about
Jerusalem. And in other Churches collections were made, both for the
necessities of the Saints, and of the Ministers. Then after this, it was
thought more convenient rather, that such as were minded to give, should give
the Lands themselves, rather (I say) than the price of them, that thereby they
might remain as a perpetual help to the Church. Here began the endowment of
the Church with Gleab; and this is commonly attributed (out of Polidore Virgil,
Polid. De invent. lib. 6. c. 10.
and others) to the days of Urban the first, who was in the Calvis. in Chron.
year 224: about which time Origin spoke of Tithes, as of things then paid, I
have already showed it. And before Parishes were divided, these were at the
disposing of the Bishop, and paid unto him for the use of the Clergy within
the Diocese. But Parishes being divided, which was in the days of Dennis the
first, about See Folid. Virg lib. 4. c. 6.
the year 266, they were annexed to the Priests of particular Cures. For the
defense of whom (that they might not be wronged in their dues) there were
certain temporal men appointed, either by godly Kings, or by such as gave
Lands to the Church, to be Patrons of Churches, or Defensores Ecclesiarum; who
might be ready to defend the Churches rights. And yet perhaps some particular
parishes (which were by reason of such Churches as were of Lay foundations)
were not known till some while after: and yet not so long after as some have
thought; For, by the fourth Canon of the Council of Arausicanum (held in the
year 441.) it appears, that Parish Oratories, and Churches of
Layfoundations, were even then to beseene.

But what need I loose my self in this argument? for let a man take these
things which way he pleases, yet still he may see that tithes (as well as
other Church goods) belonged, and were generally paid to the Clergy, either in
their own Cures, or to the Bishops for them, before the days of Charles
Martell, who was the first that brought in the most manifest corruption
concerning their alienation: for albeit Julian robbed the Church, yet he did
it as a Persecutor, from whom no less could be expected. And although the
successors of Martel were more honest, and restored somewhat back again,
taking in Lease from the Churches (in regard of the imminent wars, and many
invasions of the enemy) such parts as were retained; and doing all this with
great circumspection, hoping that under the favor of God in this necessity,
they might thus, and not otherwise without prejudice do it: yet the former
example of Charles Martel was the more powerful, and in succeeding times
proved but as a dangerous Load-starre to direct diverse other countries to
imitate his practice, and to profane their greedy hands with the Priests
maintenance, while on the other side the Pope did as fast appropriate
Parsonages to Abbeys and Nunneries; which in those blind times was thought to
be no wrong; it being commonly conceited, that preaching bred nothing but
heresies, schisms, and contentions: and that therefore there was no better way
to save souls, then by the devotions of Monks and Friars. Which also was a
cause, as superstition more and more increased, to get no small portions
fraudulently from the hands of the deceived Laity; it being a constant practice
to give and give evermore to those idle Droanes, and fat-bellied Houses, that
thereby they might have the more speedy passage out of feigned Purgatory. To
which likewise add, how the Popes again (although they would have somewhat
restrained the covetousnes of the Monks, when they saw the greatness of it)
fixed upon another project. For, that they might enrich their Favorites,
friends, and kindred, they would not seldom convert the tithes to their uses.

And now, to countenance and help forward these practices, with a color of
warrantable proceedings, Alexander de Hales began to broach a new Doctrine,
concerning the right of tithes, never known nor heard of among the ancient
Fathers. For this was the Doctrine of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, that
tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel, by the word of God, secundum
literam, literally and precisely, as they were in the old Testament to the
Priests of the Law: whereas this Hales (who was about the year 1230) taught
otherwise; namely, that it was a part of the Moral Law, naturally written in
the heart, that something should be paid: but as for the Quota pars, it had
its dependence merely upon the Judicial Law; and so the Tenth was only
positively due, and no otherwise: due according as the Laws positively should
determine. In which Doctrine was inferred, that they who might make the Laws
indetermination of the Quotitie which was to be paid, might alienate, to
several uses, as much out of that portion as they pleased. The Schoolmen
went after him in the same steps, and to the utmost of their power strained
their wits for the upholding of such a politic opinion. Howbeit, the event
proved afterward extremely pernicious: First, in occasioning that heresy
which held them as Alms: And secondly, in giving occasion also to the civil
power, to take from the Church not only the jurisdiction of tithes, but to
alienate them in the end from the Church and Churchmen to a mere civil use.
Wherein yet one thing is observeable, that (although the times were dark)
there was always some or other (beside the Canonists) who opposed the
abbettours of this new doctrine, and taught this point of tything, not after
the corrupt tenets of the Schoolmen, but as the Fathers had done before them:
of which you may read more in Dr. Carletous history of tithes, Chap. 5. And
for the doctrine of the Fathers, see Doctor Tillesley in his Catalogue of 72.
testimonies, clean contrary to what was taught by Hales, Aquinas, and the
rest. And last of all; why, and how, they are within the compass of the
Moral, and not Ceremonial, or Judicial Laws, (no, not for their Quotitie) I
have already showed. And therefore, as known by, and paid in the name, and
portion of a Tenth part, before the Law. unless a man could find, somewhere in
Gods word, an express command to the contrary. For look but unto the time of
the Law it self, which was the middle time between the time of Nature and of
Grace, and you shall find (I grant) that the worship of God, in regard of the
manner thereof, is ceased since the Passion of Christ: but God has caused the
ceasing of so much as is ceased, Ephesians. 2.15. Colos. 2.14. And look what was
not abrogated by Christ, that still remains, as being the substance which is
perpetual. Mr. Rob. revenue of the Gosp. page 10.
So also of Gods right or portion, which he had in the time of the Law, some
parts are ceased, viz. those fragments of the Sacrifices, which were the shares
of the Priests; for even the Sacrifices themselves, being types of Christ to
come, are fulfilled and abolished in, and by Christ being come. But tithes (as
has been proved) were no types of Christ, neither in their substance, nor in
their circumstance, but were only the maintenance of Gods public worship;
which being perpetual, they also are perpetual. In a word, they did belong to
the worship of God before there was a Leviticall worship; and when they were
paid to the Levites, they did but follow Gods worship, as being principally due
to the service, and not to the men, but for the service sake: and so also
still; such must be their end of Assignation. For Levi should have had as
little portion in them, as any of the other Tribes, if God had not chosen him
from the rest to the Ministry, Number. 18.21. And as for Laymen (besides this,
that they do no service) the very name of Impropriation pleads against them. I
shall still therefore urge, that what the Patriarchs, and old people of the
Jews practiced by the Law of nature, or the rule of right reason, or by
inspiration of Gods spirit many hundred years before the Ceremonial or
Leviticall Law was given, are not to be ranked among Judicial Ceremonies,
which were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, and were by him taken away, and
nailed to his Cross.

This is all: for I know nothing else of moment which can be objected. And
therefore here an end of this Discourse; which may be, to the faulty, a
Correction of their errors, if they will: if not, they have just cause to
fear it as a witness one day to be brought forth against them. For what have
I done, but declared such truths as the Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, and
other Histories of good authority have recorded?

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.



