SPECVLVM MUNDI OR A GLASS REPRESENTING THE FACE OF THE WORLD; SHOWING both
that it did begin, and must also end: The manner How, and time When, being
largely examined.

WHEREUNTO IS JOINED an Hexameron, or a serious discourse of the causes,
continuance, and qualities of things in Nature; occasioned as matter pertinent
to the work done in the six days of the Worlds creation.

AUG. in Ser. de Ascen. Qui se dicit scire quod nescit, temerarius est. Qui se
negat scire quod scit, ingratus est. Printed by the Printers to the Universitie
of Cambridge. 1635.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS JAMES Duke of Lenox, Earl of March, Baron of
Setrington, Darnley, Terbanten, and Methven, Lord great Chamberlain and
Admiral of Scotland, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privie-Councel in both Kingdoms.
May it please your Grace,
AFter I had brought this small portion of my intended labor to that
unpolished perfection which now it is, and loath to let it go abroad without a
Mecoenas to protect it, I could not on the sudden resolve, either whom, or
where to make my choice. For it is a tenet which may be easily granted, that
men of retired lives, and small-grown fortunes, are seldom known to many; it
being with them as with those in the dark, who see and observe the passages to
and fro of others in the light, but are unseen themselves: which condition,
since it does little less then jump with mine, and reflect with an opposite
rade upon me, I could not, I confess, at the first be settled, until my second
thoughts recalled the happy memory of your gracious name: unto whom I could
not but commit the patronage of this unworthy work; both in regard that I was
then a student in that house, where and when your welcome presence made it
glad; as also (if it be not presumption so to say) in that I was directed by
one and the self-same tutour with your gracious self. But above all, my
especial motive hereunto, was the never doubting thought of your kind good
will to students, and encouragement of those whose wishes are well devoted to
the Muses. Now then, if it may please your Grace to make this book yours, by
protecting it from the detracting crew of Zoilus his company, I shall think my
self always too poor to express my thankfulness. Let it be as the grapes of
Babel, who (as the Jews have it in a certain Apologue) sent upon a time to the
vine-leaves of Judea, desiring to be overshadowed by them; for otherwise they
should be consumed by the heat of the sun, and never suffered to grow up to
maturitie. The wings of your favor may be as those leaves to shelter my green
and scarce grown grapes; so shall I hope to see them thrive: not as the
camomill, by being trodden on; nor as the palm, by being suppressed: for they be
like to such a plant which needs props, and is cherished by the pearled
distillations of crystal dew. And as for your gracious self, my wishes are,
that your honors and dignities may increase with your hours; and let eternal
glory be attendant on your virtues, to crown them with eternity: so shall you
live, not only with saints above, but with ^en below; and have the precious
memory of your ren^wned name honored of those, whose times are yet unborn,
and beings as yet far from being. Thus prays

Your Graces most humbly devoted servant, JOHN SVVAN.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Present thee here with a book of no great volume, yet stored with much
variety; and seeing I am guilty of my many weak infirmities, and no few
overfights, I cannot but crave thy courteous acceptance: for it is a granted
Maxim, that a stander by has often better eyes then they who play the game.
Howbeit he were no man that could not err, no more then they whose rancor'd
mouths shall bite with scorn, or vent the poison of a loathed disdain. In a
word, if thou expectest quaint language, or fragrant flowers of flowing
Rhetoric, I am somewhat sorry my sad fate should prove so cruel as not to
give way for satisfaction. Believe it, I could have wished a better style, and
not been sorry to have soared aloft: and yet again I must confess, that as
eloquence was never any part of my essence, so neither was my aim so much at
that, as to produce apt matter fitting the seriousness of the subject I took
in hand. And verily if in this my hopes fail me not, I do not fear but my pains
will be accepted: for although I go not about to teach the learned (because
Humiles arbusta juvant) yet the ignorant may be instructed in what before they
knew not; yea, and the learned also may be occasioned to call again to mind
something which (for the present) has either slept, or slipped their memories by
reason of their better thoughts, and deeper contemplations. Be not therefore
unjust judges in an harmless cause, nor forward censurers, churlishly to blast
young springing blossoms in their tender bud: but rather take in good part
this from him, who rests, as his own, so also

Yours in this or the like endeavor, JOHN SWAN.

To his friend the Author.
THou art the World, and now methinks I see
A world of goodness here distilled from thee;
Distilled in lines so sweetly, I protest
I thought thy book the crystal of thy breast:
Where live Idea's, such as all shall pass
When they endure; only in clearness glass.
Yet now i will blame thee: If thou would have had
The world drawn right, some line should have been bad.
THO. HARLESTON, Coll. Pemb.

WHen fresh Aurora first puts forth her head,
And calls bright Sol from out his Eastern bed,
She modestly does blush; her crimson die
Makes red the verges of the dawning sky:
Fearing (perhaps) that Sols reflecting ray
Procures too hot, to some too cold a day.
So I, with bashful fear and trembling doubt,
This newborn book into the world send out.
Some (sure) *twill please: but never all did any.
I wish the All were few, the Some were many.
But be they as they will; it is told me since,
That envy snarleth most at innocence:
And those who least know where to find the amiss,
Will soonest brag they could do more then this.
Let them go on; they hurt not me nor mine:
Detracting harms reflect at home in fine.
J. S.

A table of the contents in the several Chapters, Sections, Paragraphs,
Articles, and Questions, which are contained in this book.
CHAP. I. THe first Chapter concerns the worlds beginning and ending; and is
divided into three Sections. Sect. 1. That the world began, and must also end.
Sect. 2. Of the manner how the world must end. Sect. 3. Of the sundry times
which some have fancied out for the worlds ending.
CHAP. II. THe second Chapter concerns the time of the year when the world
began: and it is divided into seven Sections. Sect. 1. Of three opinions
concerning the time of the worlds creation; with a confutation of the first.
Sect. 2. Their reasons showed who suppose the time to be in the Spring. Sect.
3. That the world began in Autumn; with an answer to their first reason who
endeavor to prove it was in the Spring. Sect. 4. An answer to their second
reason. Sect. 5. An answer to their third reason. Sect. 6. An answer to their
fourth reason. Sect. 7. Concluding the time to be Autumn.
CHAP. III. THe third Chapter concerns the first day of the world; and is
divided into three Sections. Sect. 1. Of God the Architect of all; and of the
first part of the first days work. Sect. 2. Of the creation of Light. Sect. 3.
Of the intercourse between day and night.
CHAP. IIII. THe fourth and fifth Chapters concern the second day, with such
things as are pertinent to the work done in it; and are divided into these
following Sections, Paragraphs, and Articles. Sect. 1. Of the Expansum, or
stretching out of the heavens, called the Firmament. Sect. 2. Of the waters
above the heavens. Sect. 3. Of the matter of the heavens, etc.
CHAP. V. THe fifth Chapter begins with the second part of the second days
work; and has two Sections. Sect. 1. How to understand the word Heavens. Sect.
2. Of the Air; together with such appearances as we use to see there. This
Section has seven Paragraphs. Parag. 1. Of the division and quality of the
Regions in the Air. Parag. 2. Of Meteors: first in general; then how they be
divided in particular. Parag. 3. Of Fiery Meteors, such as are said to be pure
and not mixed. This Paragraph has thirteen Articles. 1. Of burning Torches. 2.
Of burning Beams. 3. Of round Pillars. 4. Of Pyramidall Pillars. 5. Of burning
Spears, Streams, or Darts. 6. Of dancing or leaping Goats. 7. Of flying Sparks.
8. Of shooting Stars. 9. Of flying Lances. 10. Of Fires in the Air, two
kinds. 11. Of Flying Dragons, or Fire-Drakes. 12. Of Wandering Lights. 13. Of
Licking Lights.

Sect. 2. of the fifth Chapter, still continued. Parag. 4. of the second
Section. It concerns Fiery Meteors impurely mixed. This Paragraph has three
Articles.
1. Of Comets, etc. 2. Of New stars, their matter and significations. 3. Of
Thunder and Lightning.
Parag. 5. Of such Meteors as are Fiery only in appearance. This has seven
Articles. 1. Of the Galaxia, that it is no Meteor. 2. Of Colors in the Clouds.
3. Of many Suns and Moons. 4. Of Beams or Streams of Light. 5. Of Circles or
Crowns. 6. Of the Rainbow. 7. Of Openings, or Chaps in the sky.
Parag. 6. Of Watery Meteros, and of their several kinds. This Paragraph has
eight Articles. 1. Of Clouds, and their matter. 2. Of Rain. 3. Of Dew. 4. Of
Frosts. 5. Of Snow. 6. Of Hail. 7. Of Mists, and their kinds. 8. Of the
Cobweb-like Meteor.
Parag. 7. Of Aerie Meteors. This has five Articles. 1. Of diverse opinions
concerning Wind. 2. Of Wind, what it is, etc. 3. Of the division of Winds,
etc. 4. Of the quality and nature of Winds. 5. Of Whirl-windes, Storm-windes,
etc.


CHAP. VI. THe sixth Chapter treats of the third day, together with such
things as are pertinent to the work done in it. Here befoure Sections, and two
Appendices. Sect. 1. Showing into how many main parts the business of this day
may be distinguished. Sect. 2. Concerning the first thing done; viz. The
gathering together of the Waters, which God Almighty calls Seas. This Section
disputes seven Questions. 1. How the Waters were gathered together. 2. How
they could be gathered but to one place, seeing there be many Seas, Lakes,
Rivers, and Fountains, far asunder. 3. Whether they be higher then the Earth.
4. Whether there be more Water then Earth. 5. Whether the Earth be founded upon
the Waters. 6. The original of Rivers; as also why the Seas be salt and Rivers
fresh. 7. Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
Unto which Section, an Appendix is joined: and it concerns strange properties
in certain Wells, Waters, and Fountains. Sect. 3. Of the Drie-land, appearing
after the Waters were gathered: wherein the cause of Earthquakes, together
with the compass and circuit of the Earth, is showed. Sect. 4. Of the
Sprouting, Springing, and Fructification of the Earth: wherein the variety,
and virtues of sundry Herbs and Trees, is largely discovered, according to the
best Authors. Unto which two last Sections, an Appendix is joined concerning
all kind of Metals, as Gold, Silver, Stones of all sorts, and such like things
as are under ground.
CHAP. VII. THe seventh Chapter concerns the fourth day, together with such
things as are pertinent to the work done in it; namely the Matter, Names,
Natures, Motions, and Offices of the Stars. It has three Sections. Sect. 1.
An entrance toward the discourse of the Stars and Lights. Sect. 2. Of the
Matter, Place, Motion, and Height of the Stars, etc. This Section has two
Articles. 1. That the Stars consist most of a Fiery matter, and are cherished
by the Waters above the Heavens; as was mentioned, Chap. 4. 2. Of their Order
and Place in the Sky: and why one is higher then another.
Sect. 3. Of those offices given to the Stars when they were created. This
third Section has three Paragraphs. Parag. 1. Showing that their first office
is to shine upon the Earth, to rule the Day and Night, etc. Here we have two
Articles. 1. Of Light, what it is: and whether the Sun be the only fountain
of Light. 2. Of the Stars twinkling, and Suns dancing.
Parag. 2. Of that other office; viz. that the Stars should be for Signs,
etc. This Paragraph has three Articles. 1. That the Stars work upon the
inferior world, and are signs of future events. 2. Whether it be not a
derogation from the perfection of things created, to grant that the Stars may
give an inclination to Man, in his actions. 3. Of Predictions, or understanding
the Signs.
Parag. 3. Of that other office, wherein the Stars were made (as it were)
heavenly clocks. This has three Articles. 1. Of Seasons; as Spring, Summer,
etc. 2. Of Days and their kinds, etc. 3. Of Years and their kinds, etc.


CHAP. VIII. THe eighth Chapter concerns the creatures made in the fifth day
of the world; viz. Fish, and Fowl. This Chapter has two Sections. Sect. 1. Of
Fishes, their names, kinds, properties; together with sundry emblemes drawn
from them. Sect. 2. Of the names, kinds, and properties of Fowls; with many
and sundry emblemes drawn from most of them.
CHAP. IX. THe ninth Chapter concerns the creatures made in the sixth and
last day; being such creatures as live neither in the Air or Water, but upon
the Earth. This Chapter has likewise two Sections. Sect. 1. Of Beasts, their
properties, names, kinds, etc. together with sundry emblemes drawn from many
of them. Sect. 2. The creation of Man, being created male and female, and made
according to the image of God: together with the institution of Marriage, and
blessing given to that estate.

CHAP. I. Wherein is showed that the world neither was from eternity, nor yet
shall be extended to eternity; but that it had both a beginning, and shall
also have an ending: wherein also is considerable how that ending shall be; as
also the time when is largely examined.
Sect. 1. That the world began, and must also end.
THe Philosophers of ancient times were diversely transported in the stream of
their own opinions, both concerning the worlds original and continuance: some
determining that it once began; others imagining that it was without beginning,
and that the circled orbs should spin out a thread as long as is eternity,
before it found an ending. Plato could say that it was, Dei Patris ad genus
humanum Plato in (...).
epistola, an epistle of God the Father unto mankind; and that God was (...),
the Creator, Maker, and Father of the whole universe. But Lib. 1. de calo,
cap. 10. 12. and ^b. 2. 1 lib 8. I h^s. and (...), and co^.
Aristotle sticked not to affirm that the world neither began, nor yet shall
end. Yet this his opinion, himself being witness, was nothing else but a
Paradox; and (as without wrong to him may be affirmed) he maintained it rather
by way of contradicting others, then for any desire of truth, calling it
Problema topicum, as in the first book of his Topics, chap. 9. is manifest;
and as in Lib. de mundo.
that book written in his old age to king Alexander the Great, he also
confesses. This therefore made Pareus on Genesis
one say, that it was not so much a logical question, as a thesis or position
which Aristotle held and maintained: whose reasons some have called Inaniasoph.
smata ad obscurandam veritatem, ingenios^ magis quam solid^ excogitata. Pareus
ibid.
vain sophistications to obscure the truth, having more with then matter in
them; and may again be answered by more solid arguments then he alleges. For
that the world had both a beginning, and must also have an ending, even reason
it self, although there were no Scripture for it, is sufficient.

As first, if the world were eternal, then there would be some memory given
us of the generations of men more ancient then that which Moses mentions: but
there is none given us; for all other histories are but late in respect of the
sacred story: which is an evident argument, not only against the eternity of
the world, but also against the fables of the Egyptians, Scythians, and
Grecians, concerning their ancientnesse, and the ancientnesse of their acts and
deeds of fame.

For indeed (omitting their palpable fictions) when Ethnic writers tell us of
any ancient thing, it is either concerning the Thebane or Trojane war; of
Cecrops, of Inachus, of Ogyges, Deucalion, or Ianus; of Ninus, or his father
Belus, or of the war of the giants, striving to heap mountain upon mountain
that they might pull the gods out of heaven. Now all these were either about
the days of the Judges, Moses, Abraham, or Noah at the furthest. For to whom
did they allude by their Ianus with two faces, but to Noah, who saw the times
both before and after the flood? Or whom did they point at by their
Gigantomachia, when Pelion (forsooth) must be set upon Ossa's back, and all
thrown down with a thunder-crack; whom (I say) did they point at, but Nimrod
and his company, or those who built the tower of Babel, and had their languages
confounded for it?

That of the Poet is therefore pertinent, L^ret. lib. 6.


-- Si nulla fuit genitalis origo
Terrarum and coeli, semperque aeterna fu^re:
Cur supra bellum Thebanum and funera Trojae
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
Quo tot facta virum toties cecidere? nec usquam
Aeternis famae monimentis insita florent?
If that the heavens and earth did not begin,
Had no creation, but remained from aye;
Why did not other Poets something sing
Before the Thebane war, or fall of Troy?
What are become of great men's many deeds?
They could not die,
But would remain unto posterity.
Secondly, thus it may be also proved; All things which are to us conspicuous,
consisting of matter and form, are of themselves frail and fading, having such
a nature, that they either are or may be subject to corruption; but such is the
world: and therefore as in respect of its essence it is finite; so likewise in
respect of time it cannot be infinite, but have both a beginning and an ending.
For first that is properly eternal, which is altogether incommunicable, or
which is without beginning, mutation, succession, and end: and such only is
God, and not the world. Secondly, it cannot be denied but that there is the
same reason of the whole which is of the parts; so that if the parts of the
world be subject to corruption, then must likewise the whole world also: but
the parts are (as we daily see) and therefore the whole.

But leaving reason, we have a rule beyond it, which is the rule of faith;
whose first assertion makes it plain that the world began; and that Time (by
which we measure days, weeks, months, and years) has not Genesis 1. 1.
been for ever. For, In the beginning (says Moses) God created the heavens and
the earth: and why is it said, In the beginning he created, but that it might
be known (especially to his Church) that the world (...) from everlasting?

Divinely therefore did Du Bartas sing, as in the sound of Silvester we have it,

Clear fire for ever has not air embraced, Du Barta^ first day.

Nor air for aye environed waters vast,
Nor waters always wrapped the earth therein;
But all this ALL did once of naught begin.
The immutable divine decree, which shall
Cause the worlds end, caused his original.
Which whosoever shall deny, he does but betray his misery; either because he
wants Gods holy word to be his rule, or else because he disdaineth to be ruled
by it.

How great a privilege then is that which even the poorest Christian has
above the greatest and most wise Philosopher! And as for the scoffing Atheist,
whose peevish and perverse opinion leads him up and down in an affected cloud
of ignorance, disdaining to have faith, because he scoffeth at the rule of
faith; it is no more then thus with him, he kicks against the pricks, and
cannot therefore escape away unhurt. For, Sequitur injustas ultor a tergo Deus;
God, as a revenger, follows at the heels of a sinner,

Which many thousands now can witness well,
Whose faults with woe recanted are in hell.
Sect. 2.
BUt concerning the worlds ending, here fitly may The manner of the worlds
ending is showed.
arise this question, viz. Whether it shall be destroyed according to the
substance, or according to the qualities.

1. If it be destroyed according to the substance, then it must be so
destroyed, as that nothing of it be remaining. 2. If it be destroyed according
to the qualities, then it shall only be purged, the substance still abiding.
Now of both these opinions there can be but one truth; which I verily think to
be in the latter of them. For although it be said in S. Peter, that 2. Pet. 3.
10.
the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt away
with heat, etc. Yet it is not so far forth to be understood, as that in their
substances they shall be quite burnt up; but rather that they shall be purified
in their vicious qualities, which the vanity of sin has laid upon the model
of the whole world. And this S. Paul points at when he says, that Romans 8. 21,
22.
the creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we know (says he) that the
whole creation groneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And again in
the hundred and second Psalm, where the Prophet says that Psalm. 102. 26.
the heavens and the earth shall perish, and wax old; he shows that their
perishing shall only be a changing: For as a vesture shall thou change them,
and they shall be changed.

Whatsoever therefore is spoken of their consuming, passing away, and
perishing, is meant only in respect of their corruptible qualities, the
substance still abiding: and so shall the fire at the last day serve for a
purging, not for an utter consuming. There shall indeed be nothing unchanged,
because all things shall be renewed, and each thing brought into a perfect
state, Acts 3. 21. A new heaven and a new earth, 2. Pet. 3. 21. Not new by
creation, but by commutation; Non per interitum pristinorum sed commutationem
in melius, as says Hier. on* (...).
S. Hierome; Not by a destruction of the old, but by a change into a better.

Which thing is yet further seen even in the little world Man, who is the
Epitome of the greater world it self. For he, in the substance of his body,
shall not be destroyed, but changed; and in stead of corruption shall put on
incorruption* as says S. Paul; beholding at the 1. Cor. 15. 53.
Job 19. 26.
last day his Redeemer, not with other (says Job) but with these same eyes. In
like manner, the greater world, in stead of corruption, shall (I verily think)
put on incorruption; and being purged by the fire, shall be delivered Romans 8.
21.
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. It shall not be delivered
only in the liberty of the sons of God; that is, when they are delivered:
but it shall be delivered (...), into their liberty; as it is Romans 8. 21. If
it were only in their liberty, or when they are delivered; then in stead of a
changing, there might be a consuming: which is in some sort a deliverie;
because (although quite taken away) there is then no longer a subjection unto
vanity: but seeing it is into the liberty of the sons of God, it shall
(like man's glorified body) put on incorruption; and so, suo modo, in its
kind, be partaker of an incorruptible state.

But in this changing, I think we may fitly exempt all The creatures remaining
at the worlds ending.
such creatures which now serve only for the necessity of man's life; as those
which be for food, clothing, and the like: because then (at the end of the
world I mean) there shall be an end likewise of all such needs.

Yet there are those who comprehend the brute beasts also, and other creatures
having sense and life, within the limits of this liberty: but they do somewhat
qualify their meanings; as thus: They shall not be partakers of the glory of
the sons of God; yet in their kind they shall be fellows with them in that
glorious state, like as once they were in Paradise, before man had fallen. But
whether I may embrace this opinion, I know not; and See also Dr. Willets Hexap.
on Romans chap. 8. quaest. 34.
that in regard of the foresaid reason: unto which others also assent, Pot.
Mart. ^oc. c^m.
saying, Istas naturas rerum non mansuras in extremo die, nisi aliquid opus
habiturae sint. Wherefore we may rather rely upon this, without any such
special respect unto those creatures; namely, that the worlds fabric,
consisting of heaven and earth, shall not be destroyed, but renewed according
to the qualities, by the purging fire. For the moon shall shine as the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as says the Prophet Esaias, chap.
30. 26. which S. Hierome expounds thus, viz. that the sun and moon shall
receive that admired augmentation of light, as a reward of their labors. Yea
and Zach. 14. 7.
Zachary also witnesses that there shall be but one perpetual day: for there
shall be so great light that there shall be no difference between day and
night; as some observe from thence. Neither is it a marvel, says Pet. Mart. ^x
ch^soss.
Chrysostom, that the creatures should at that time be illustrated with so
great splendor and light: for kings, upon the day when they inaugurate their
sons, are wont to provide, not only that they may come forth with all
singular pomp and appearance; but also that their servants may be well adorned.
Much more therefore may we think, when Christ shall sit in glorious majesty
upon his throne, and the just, who are the sons of God, shall be admitted to
their paternall heritage and kingdom, that then God Almighty shall cause that
all his creatures be decked with an extraordinary brightness, beauty, and
luster. For although it be Esaias 60. 19. Revel. 21. 23.
said that the moon and the sun shall shine no more, but rather that the Lord
himself will be for an eternal light; yet it means not that those stars
should perish, but that the uncreated light shall be Part. in Apoc. cap. 21.
more glorious. So that as now the greater light obscures the less; in like
manner it shall be then when we come into that city which wants not the
sun or moon. It is not said, Solemn and lunam non habebit; sed, Non indigebit,
ut luceant in ea; that the city shall have no sun and moon; but that it
shall not want them to shine in it: silently declaring, that then indeed shall
be those luminaries; yet they shall not then perform, as now, the same uses of
light, being subject to motion, and an incessant wheeling up and down to cause
a rising and setting, yea and to distinguish one time and day from another: For
time is but as a space borrowed, and set apart from eternity, which must at
the last return to eternity again. This for the heavens.

And as for the earth, our Savior promises, amongst other blessings, a
blessing to the meek, saying, that they Matthew. 5. 5.
shall inherit the earth: which promise of his (says Dr. Willet, Hexap. in Romans
one) we see is not performed in this world; and therefore to be then expected,
when there is a new heaven and a new earth for the saints of God; and when the
whole creation (which now groneth) shall be delivered into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. Thus some.

But in this new heaven and earth we must not expect any terrene pleasures, as
the carnal Jews do dream, as the Turks believe, or as that Heretic Cerinthus
held, and after him the Millenaries or Chiliasts: because such pleasures are
fading, and corruptible; joys far unfit for saints, whose very bodies have
put on incorruption. We look therefore for new heavens and a new earth wherein
dwells righteousness, as says S. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 13. and spiritual
delight unto eternity; as in Psalm. 16. 12.

And further, seeing it is said that righteousness shall dwell in the new
earth as well as in the new heaven, it may from thence be gathered, that both
the heaven and the earth shall be the seat of the blessed; and that the saints
shall Revel. 4. 14.
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and that there shall be an
intercourse between the said heaven and earth: which is as Jacob in his Genesis
28. 12.
vision saw, when the angels were some of them ascending, some descending that
ladder which reached from heaven to earth: or as Matt. 17. 3.
Moses and Elias were seen talking with Christ upon the Mount.

But herein let us not be too bold; for in this we may soon wade too far:
namely if we should nicely determine how the saints shall then be disposed of;
whether some always to the heaven; some always to the earth; or such like
things which to us are unrevealed.

Let it therefore suffice, that although the manner of this change be secret,
and not known in every point, yet the change it self is most certain: and
therefore hold we most certainly this truth for our stay, that the world shall
end; and leave we the manner thereof to be exactly and particularly revealed by
him, who will very quickly perform it. But of the time when, in the following
Section.

Sect. 3.
ANd thus much concerning the manner of the worlds ending.

Now follows the time when. But here I purpose not Of the time when the world
ends.
to meddle with any thing which shall tend to the precise scanning of it. I
will leave that to them, who, out of a desire they have to lanch into the deep,
have pried too far (I fear) into the secrets of the Thunderer: for oftentimes
we see that they do but wisely tell us foolish tales, and smoothly bring long
lies unto an end, because they say more then they have warrant for: To whom Du
Bartas by our famous Silvester thus sends greeting,

You have mis-cast in your Arithmetic,
Mis-laid your counters, gropingly ye seek
In nights black darkness for the secret things
Sealed in the Casket of the King of kings.
It Is He that keeps the eternal clock of Time,
He holds the weights of that appointed chime,
And in his hand the sacred Book does bear
Of that close-clasped final CALENDER,
Where, in Red letters (not with us frequented)
The certain Date of that Great Day is printed;
That Dreadful Day, which does so swiftly post,
That 'twill be seen, before foreseen of most.
Yet such is the folly and curiosity of many, that they will needs undertake
to tell us when this time shall be: which if they could, then it seems it
should not come as a Luke 21. 3^. 2. Pet. 3. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Revel. 16. 15.
snare upon the world, nor yet steal upon us as a thief in the night: But so it
shall do. For of that day and hour knows no man, says our Savior: and we
may take his word; because himself by his humanity could not know it: although
in his humanity, by reason of his Godhead, he was not ignorant of it. Had he
not therefore been God as well as man, and of a divine as well as humane
nature, he must have remained ignorant in both with men and angels. Mar. 13.
32. And furthermore concerning us, that we be not too bold, the same lesson
which he taught his disciples is also ours, not to know the times or the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power; as it is Act. 1. 7.

From whence we may learn, that whilst we exercise our selves in things that
be too high for us, we shall sooner betray our own curiosity, then deliver a
truth. For, Maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus;
The greatest part of those things which we know, is the least part of what we
know not.

Whereupon I cannot but think that the predictions of men in this kind
(especially seeing they are so various) must needs be as true as those amongst
the brood of presumptuous Astrologers concerning the end of Christian Religion,
which (as De verit. Christ. Relig.
Du Plessie observes from them) should have been some hundreds of years
before this time: nay, it should then have ended, when indeed it began most of
all to flourish: And so I doubt not, but am certain, that the world also should
have had many endings before this time, according to the doting froth of some
men's idle fancies; which, if need were, I could relate. But as time was little
beholding to them for cutting it off so short; in like manner they were as
little beholding to time for discovering their lies so plainly.

I will therefore (before I meddle further with such approved liars) leave them
unto their best friends to gain (if they can) their credit for the time past,
and address my self to examine those who talk of a time yet to come.

Amongst whom the Jews have a tradition, which although they fetch from the
school or house of Elias, yet we are not bound to credit it: For it was not
Elias the Prophet, but a Rabbin of the same name, as the learned know; and who
more fabulous, or more full of vain fancies, then those their greatest Doctors?

Six thousand years (says he) the world shall stand, and then it shall be
consumed by fire. Two thousand years shall be void or without Law; two thousand
years shall be under the Law; and the last two thousand shall be the days of
Messiah or Christ. Thus far Elias. And that this opinion has been favored
by It was favored by Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Lactantius, Hierome, etc. but
disallowed by Ambrose and Augustine. See Augustine in exposit. Psalm. 90.
some of old, and is also favored now by some of our time, I am not ignorant:
which chiefly they do for this reason; namely, because the six days of weekly
labor do bear the Symbol of 6000 years, wherein mankind should endure the
cares, and troubles, and travels of this world; and then shall come that
Sabbath of Sabbaths in the heaven of heavens, when they are to rest from their
labors. Or as God was six days in creating the world before there was a
Sabbath: so he shall be 6000 years in governing it; and then the seventh
begins an eternal rest in heaven.

Now this they ground upon the words of S. Peter; who, speaking of the day of
judgment, notes that a thousand years in Gods sight are but as one day, and
one day as a thousand years, 2. Pet. 3. 8. So that in this regard, for six
days of weekly labor, they would have 6000 years of worldly trouble, and the
like, before it ends.

But if this weakness be the greatest strength for maintaining their
assertion, then I do not doubt to see their cause fainting upon the ground, as
not being able to subsist, or stand upright.

For first concerning the Rabbin, had he been a Prophet, he would certainly
have been a better Seer. This I am sure of, that he was much deceived in the
particular division of his time, in making three periods, all of 2000 years
apiece. For although the years of the world have been diversely accounted by
sundry authors; yet you shall not find the Rabbis just number of 2000
years, from the Creation to the Law; in any of them. Sealiger, Calvisius,
Helvicus, Funccius, Bucholcerus, and others, who reckon the fewest years, do
account 453 above two thousand; and yet they reckon not so many as they should
by almost 60 years: some say altogether 60: as may be seen by Calvin, Iunius,
Pareus, Ainsworth, or Dr. Willet on Genesis; besides many excellent
Chronologers: especially Sr. W. Ralegh (that learned Knight) who in his
history of the world makes it plain.

And not only does this Elias fail in his first division, but in his second
also: For from the Law to the death of Christ are not 2000 years; there be
wanting well near 500 to make them up. As for example, take a view again of
Scaliger, Calvisius, Helvicus, or our countryman Mr. Thom. Lydiat, or
Bucholcerus, or Petavius, or Funccius, and see if it be not even so.
Bucholcerus (I think) wants the fewest, and yet it is manifest that he
falls short of 2000. Whereupon it may be seen that in his first division
(which is for the time before the Law) he overshoots; And in his second
division (for the time under the Law) he is too short; imitating a bad archer,
who tries, but cannot hit the mark.

If then for the time past the Rabbin is found to be faulty, why should we be
so mad as to give credit to him for the time which is yet to come?
Questionless as he has deceived us in the one, so likewise he will deceive us
in the other; and therefore he is to beslighted and nothing credited at all.
Yea says (...). Tom. 7. Praelect. de fine seculi.
one, Dictum Eliae non est authenticum. Valet quidem adversus Iudaeos (qui
vaticinium illud admittunt) ad probandum venisse Messiam, cum jam elapsi sint
anni quinquies mill and 560: sed ad finem seculi demonstrandum nihil valet.
That is, The saying of Elias is not authentic. It makes indeed against the
Jews (who entertain that prophecy) to prove that the Messiah or Christ is
come, seeing there are Note that the years from the Creation are now many more.
5560 years of the 6000 already run out: but it prevails nothing to show
the end of the world, for which cause it was chiefly intended.

But come we now to the examination of that forenamed place in Peter, which is
brought as an help to uphold the Jews opinion, because a day taken for a
thousand years, and applied to the weekly days, seems to point out six
thousand years: so some imagine. But without doubt the Apostle meant no such
thing; nor yet had in his mind to set down any strict manner of accounting
times, peculiar to the court of heaven: For mark but the circumstances of the
place, and view well the occasion given him to speak so as he did of the Lords
coming to judgment, and then you shall soon find, that it was to comfort the
godly against the cavils and reproaches of the wicked; who, because the time
seemed long to them, did thereupon mock at the promise of his coming, taking it
as if he would not come at all. For, Where is (say they) the promise of his
coming? since the fathers 2. Pet. 3. 4*
fell asleep, all things continue as they did from the beginning, etc. Which is
as if they should say, Is it not a great while since the world began, and yet
what alteration can we see in it? yesterday was as is this day: men are born
and die as orderly as they ever did: nature keeps her course, and the like:
Wherefore if the Judge had meant to come or show himself at all, he would not
surely that his coming should be thus long deferred, but would rather have
showed himself before thus many years could possibly be born. Thus, or after
this manner, such mockers reasoned and cavilled with S. Peter: which cavil of
theirs is agreeable to that of S. 1. Cor. 15. 12.
Paul, where he mentions such as did not believe the Resurrection, but were
like minded with these who mocked at the slacknesse of Christ's coming to
judgment.

Saint Peter therefore, that he might It was but to show (says S. Augustine)
contentnendam futuri tempo^is (...) vitatem.
comfort the weak and confute the wicked, shows how to answer this their
faithless objection; namely thus, That although the time be long in respect of
us, yet to God (with whom there is no time either long or short) it is not so.
A day compared with an hour, to us may seem long: But a thousand years
compared with a day, to God they seem but short; for what is time to eternity?
And therefore, although that day to the faithless seems so to be taken away,
or deferred rather, as if it were not, or would not come because it quickly
came not; yet know that it is not quite taken away. For (as the same Apostle
speaks at the 9 verse) God is not slack in his promises as some account
slacknesse; but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. And this (questionless) was
the Apostles meaning, far differing from their fancies who from hence would
fain gather that for one day God uses to account a thousand years, and a
thousand years for one day. Hic sermo (says Marlor. in Pet.
one) est de aestimatione hominum, qui non aeque aestimant tempus longum and
breve. This speech is according to the estimation of men, who do not equally
esteem of times long and short.

Which also does yet further appear by that in the 90 Psalm. at the 4 verse.
Where, as there is a comparison likewise between 1000 years and one day; so
also, in respect of God, a thousand years are compared to that which is less
then a day, namely to a watch in the night. For (says the Prophet) God turns
man to destruction, and then he says, Turn again ye children of men. For a
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, and they are gone as a watch
in the night. To which purpose S. Hierome Hierome on ^er.
speaks also fitly, saying, Aeternitati comparatum omne tempus est breve;
that is, All time compared with eternity is but short time, yea indeed as no
time. And again, did not Zanchius worthily find fault with Ireneus Zanch. Tom.
7. Praelect. ae (...) se. u^i.
and Lactantius concerning these things? Undoubtedly he did; affirming that
their opinion was contrary to the word of God: For our Lord himself says, that
none can know, etc. Whereas (says he) if this sentence of the 6000 years were
true, then the time might be known.

Let therefore they, who will, embrace this fancy of six thousand years for
the whole time of the worlds continuance; I cannot: For sure I am, that the
tradition of Elias has greatly failed for the time that is past: if therefore
it should be true for the time which is yet to come, it were more then an
unheard of wonder: and as for the argument taken from S. Peter to uphold it,
how his meaning has been thereby forced, is declared.

Yet nevertheless I will not deny but that the world The world has six Ages,
but not reckoned by thousands of yeare^.
may stand six ages before it ends; and so the ages, although not the years,
may be compared to the six days of weekly labor: and that the seventh age
shall begin at the resurrection, as was figured in Henoch the seventh from
Adam, who died not as did the six before him, but was taken up into heaven.
Unto this I assent as probable. But that each age should have a thousand
years, is still denied; and as in setting them down according to Scripture
will be manifest.

The first is from the creation to the flood: and this by S. Peter is called
the old world, 2. Pet. 2. 5.

The second is from the flood to Abraham. Matthew. chap. 1.

The third, from Abraham to David. Matthew. chap. 1.

The fourth, from David to the captivity. Matthew. chap. 1.

The fifth, from the captivity to Christ. Matthew. chap. 1.

The sixth is the time after Christ; called in many places the last age, and the
last of times: as in Hebrews, chap. 1. 1. God (says the Apostle) who at sundry
times and in diverse manners spoke unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken to us by his Son. And again, S. Peter calls this the
last of times, 1. Pet. 1. 20. S. John also says, Little children, it is the
last time, 1. John 2. 18.

These I grant to be the six ages of the world: but who is so mad as to say or
think that there were just thousands of years betwixt each or any of them? The
Septuagints make more then thousands between some of them: and the Hebrews,
they make less; excepting the first age. Yet if you will know their lengths
according to that which is none of the worst accounts, take them thus: and this
account I may afterward prove in another work.

The first has 1656 years.

The second (if we end it at the beginning of Abraham's peregrination and giving
of the promise) has the just number of 423 years.

The third (if we end it at the death of Saul and beginning of David's kingdom
after him) contains the number of 866 years.

The fourth (if we begin the captivity in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar)
has 448 years.

The fifth contains the length both of the Chaldean, Persian, and Grecian
Monarchies; together with so much of the Roman greatness as was past before
Christ came into the world: amounting in all to the sum of 605 years, or
there abouts; although we reckon no further then the birth of Christ. But go
rather to his baptism, and then this age is 634, etc.

The sixth and last has so many years as are from the time of man's redemption
until now: for hitherto this age has continued, and shall not be ended until
the 1. Cor. 15. 52. Revel. 10. 5, 6.
last trumpet be blown, and Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium, Arise you dead,
and come to judgment, be sounded in our ears. Du Bartas in the handy-crafts.


To which purpose, divine Du Bartas, that noble Poet, brings in our father
Adam, speaking of these ages thus: setting them down, as if the speech had been
uttered by him to his son; saying,

The First begins with Adam.
me: the Seconds morn
Is the first Noah.
Ship-wright, who does first adorn
The hills with vines: that Abram.
Shepherd is the Third,
Who after God through strange lands leads his herd,
And (past man's reason) crediting Gods word,
His only son slayes with a willing sword.
The Fourth's another valiant David.
Shepherdling,
That for a cannon takes his silly sling,
And to a scepter turns his shepherds staff;
Great Prince, great Prophet, Poet, Psalmograph.
The Fifth begins from that sad Zedech ^ah, or the captivity.
Princes night
Who s^es his children murdered in his sight;
Or from poor Iudahs doleful heaviness,
Led captives on the banks of Euphrates.
Hoped Christ.
Messiah shines in the Sixth;
Who, mocked, beat, banished, buried, crucifixt
For our foul sins, (still selfly-innocent)
Must fully bear the hateful punishment.
The The eternal sabbath.
Last shall be the very resting-day;
Air shall be mute, the waters works shall stay;
The earth her store, the stars shall leave their measures,
The sun his shine: and in eternal pleasures
We plunged, in heaven shall aye solemnize all
The eternal sabbaths endless festival.
Thus far Du Bartas.

But from hence I proceed; and on the sudden I have met some other sorts of
calculatours. For so various are men's searching heads, that these things have
not only been boulstered out by Rabbinicall traditions, sabbaticall symboles,
and the like; but also by sundry other fancies.

Some have pretended revelations, and thereby deluded many. Amongst whom
learned Ger. loc. com. Tom. 9. page 182.
Gerard makes mention of a certain woman of Suevia in Germany, who was called
Thoda; and she, in the year of Christ 848, prophesied Impostours and false
Prophets concerning the worlds ending.
that by the apparition of an Angel it was revealed unto her, that the world
should end that very year. After whom there were others as true prophets as
her self: namely in the years 1062, 1258, 1345, 1526, 1530, etc. He in the
year 1526, ran up and down the streets, in the city of S. Gallus in Helvetia,
crying with horrid gestures, that the day of the Lord was come, that it was
present. And he in the year 1530, did so strongly prevail with some, that he
persuaded them the last year of the world was come; whereupon they grew Ibid.
ut antea.
prodigal of their goods and substance, fearing that they should scarcely
spend them in so short a time as the world was to continue. But this surely was
an Anabaptisticall trick, and a chip of that block which makes all things
common; boasting of visions and dreams in an abundant manner.

Others have pitched upon certain Mathematical revolutions, and thereby
constituted a time: amongst whom Ioannes Regiomontanus is said to be one, who
partly thought that the year 1588 should add an end to the world; because at
that time was a great conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. Upon which
occasion I remember these verses,

Post mill expletos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post quingentos rursus ab orb datos,
Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus
Ingruet; is secum tristia multa trahet.
Si non hoc anno totus malus occidet orbis,
Si non in nihilum terra fretumque ruent;
Cuncta tamen mundi sursum ibunt atque deorsum
Imperia: and luctus undique grandis erit.
That is,

When from the Virgins Or from the time of Christ born of a Virgin.
birth a thousand years
With full five hundred be complete and told,
The Eighty Eighth a famous year appears,
Which brings distress more fatal then of old.
If not in this year all the wicked world
Do fall, and land with sea to nothing come;
Yet Empires must be topsie turvie hurled,
And extreme grief shall be the common sum.
Which what it was, the event has showed.

Others again dream of secrets in Cabalisticall conclusions.

Some subscribe to Analogies taken from Jubilees, or from the years of Christ's
age, and the like.

Yea, and to omit many, sundry others have their tricks and devices in
Arithmeticall numbers, whereby they can directly calculate the time, and make
the superstitious multitude admire them, and lend a more then greedy ear to
their feared predictions.

Such a one was he, who out of these words, MUNDI A crotchet to show that the
world must end in the year 1657; which is 24 years hence.
CONFLAGRATIO, which signify The burning of the world, has set down the time
when the world must end; namely in the year of our Lord, 1657: and that for
two reasons. First, because as the year of the world 1657 was a fatal year,
in regard of the universal ^loud, which them came and drowned all the world:
In like manner the year of Christ 1657 shall also be a fatal year, in regard
that then shall be the end of the world by fire: for is it not said in Matthew,
As it was in the days of Noah, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be? Matthew. 24. 37.

Secondly, take these two words, namely, MUNDI CONFLAGRATIO, 1000 M 5 V n 500 D
1 I 100 C o n f 50 L a g r a t 1 I o 1657.
which signify in English The burning of the world, and you shall find in
them so many numerall letters as will make 1657, if they be all added together;
as in the margent may be plainly seen. For in the first word [MUNDI] there are
M, V, D, and I; which are all numerall letters: and in the other word, namely
CONFLAGRATIO, C, L, and I, are likewise letters of number; and how much every
one of them does signify is easily known: amounting in the whole sum to 1657.

Thus, upon these two fancies, is this prediction grounded: which that it is
altogether idle may easily appear.

For first concerning the universal flood which they urge; that year was
indeed a fatal year to the world when it came: but that it came in the year
of the world 1657, is denied: for it came, not when Noah was 600 years
complete; but when he was in the six hundredth year current of his age: and so
the year of the world was not 1657, but 1656. As for example; Seth was born to
Adam, when he was 130. Genesis 5. 3. Enos to Seth, when he was 105. Genesis 5. 6.
Kenan to Enos, when he was 90. Genesis 5. 9. Mahalaleel to Kenan, when he was 70.
Genesis 5. 12. Iared to Mahalaleel, when he was 65. Genesis 5. 15. Henoch to Iared,
when Iared was 162. Genesis 5. 18. Mathuselah to Henoch, when Hen. was 65. Genesis 5.
21. Lamech to Mathuselah, when Ma. was 187. Genesis 5. 25. Noah to Lamech, when
Lamech was 182. Genesis 5. 29. Then came the flood in the year of Noah 600. Genesis
7. 11
All which do make (being added together) 1656, and not 1657, as they imagine:
because that which is said of Noah in Genesis chap. 7. verse 6. viz. that he was
600. years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth, is expounded in
two several places after it, that it must be understood of his 600 year
current, and not complete. The places are Genesis 7. 11. and Genesis 8. 13; the one
expressing the beginning, the other the ending of the flood: and so also the
most and best chronologers hitherto have observed, although some do not.

Which, as it is agreeable to the truth of computation, so also (that I may
answer one fancy by another) it is more congruous to the nature of the number
of the year wherein it came: For Six is no number of rest; witness the six
days of creation, the six days of our weekly labor, and the six ages of the
world. But Seven is for rest; witness the sabbaticall days, the sabbaticall
years, and that* eternal sabbath in the heaven of heavens, when the six ages
of the world shall be ended.

Wherefore, in the year of the world 1656, the Ark was without rest, and
tossed upon the waters: but in the year 1657, it found rest; the waters were
dried up and gone; and Noah then came out and offered sacrifice.

And further, admit it be said, that As it was in the days of Noah, so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be: Does this point out any thing
concerning the time of his coming? Verily no. It shows indeed the great
security that shall then be in the world amongst the wicked: so that as the
flood came upon the old world when they feared nothing; in like manner shall
the coming of the Son of man be. But what is this to the time? Our Savior
does not compute the time, but compares the manners of the times together; as
may be very plainly seen by that which he has elsewhere published, saying,
that the coming of the Son of man shall be, not only As it was in the days
of Noah, but also As it was in the days of Lot, Luke 17. 28.

For conclusion therefore, seeing the flood came before that year which they
have computed, it may easily appear that their Mundi conflagratio for the end
of the world in the year of Christ 1657, is but an idle fancy. And as for the
time which they refer to the days of Noah, we see that it is likewise
referred to the days of Lot: the intent only being to compare the times, and
not compute them.

But secondly for their Mundi conflagratio; admit it were so that the flood did
not come until the year of the world 1657 (as they would have it) yet why
should it be that these numerall letters must be picked out of two Latin words
rather then out of words in some other language? In Greek it is (...); out of
which words you may gather 1830 at the least.

Surely in this we may say, that as in the making of anagrams upon a name, if
one language will not help us, we may then write the name in some other tongue
rather then want letters for our purpose: so the same liberty (belike) he took
who was the first author of this fancy for the worlds ending: wherefore we
may well conclude that it is but idle and not worth regarding.

Another (much like to this) is that which others have also hatched; whereby in
the year of Christ 1645, should be the end of the world.

Now this they gather out of these words, ADVENTVS Another erotchet, whereby
the world should end in the year 1645; which now 12 is years hence.
DOMINI, which signify The coming of the Lord; for in them they have so many
numerall letters as will make 2012: out of which they subtract so much as they
gather out of these words, DIES ABBREVIABVNTVR, The days shall be shortened;
namely 517: and then the remainder of 2012 is 1495: unto which they add so
many as these words will afford, viz. PROPTER ELECTOS, which signify For the
elects sake; wherein is a number of 150; and so the whole sum amounts to
1645, being (as they fondly imagine) the last year of the world.

But if such or the like fancies could hold, then (questionless) The former
opinion confuted.
the world should have had many endings since it first began; and must either
have had a new creation, or else no world had been till now.

As for example, either in the year 1532, or in the year 1533, or in the
year 1578, or in the year 1588, or in the year 1623, the judgment day (upon
these grounds) was foretold to come. For first, in the year 1532, they had two
ways to prove it; either out of these words, VIDEBVNT INQVEMPVPVGERVNT; or out
of these words, VIDEBVNT IN QVEMTRANSFIXERVNT; John 19. 37.
which signify, They shall look on him whom they pierced; the numerall letters
being in either of these so many as will make 1532. Secondly, for the year
1533, they had this false proof, binding still upon numerall letters, which
they gathered out of these words, JESUS NAZARENVS REX IVDAEORVM, Jesus of Vide
Buchol. chron. anno Dom. 1533.
Nazareth king of the Jews; here being so many as will make 1533. Thirdly, for
the year 1578, thus it was: viz. they take these words, ADVENTVS DOMINI, and
in them they have 2012; out of which number they subtracted 517, which they
gathered from DIES ABBREVIABVNTVR; and then the remainder makes 1495: unto
which they add the number of the letters [ a, c, n, t, s,] in adventus, which
were not numerall before, yet by their natural position in the alphabet or
crosse-row they give 56: then again by the same reason they take 27 out of [ o
and n] the non-numerall letters in the word Domini; both which numbers being
added to 1495, do make 1578. Fourthly, for the year 1588, the manner of
calculating is as before for the year 1645; unto which number having raised
their sum, they subtract [ a, e, n, t, s,] viz. 56: and so they have 1587
years, which they reckon complete, and refer their prediction to the
beginning of the year 1588. Vide Gerardum in locis communibus, page 185. Tom.
9. Fifthly, for the year 1623, thus was the fancy, IVDICARE VIVOS and
MORTVOS, To judge the quick and Vide Diete^. post Dom. 2. adven.
the dead: Now here (as before) they were led by numerall letters, having so
many as would make 1623, in which year they dreamed of the worlds ending. Now
these times we know are past long since, but the event you see has not
answered to the prophecy. Things therefore of the like nature being yet to
come, and built upon the same grounds, cannot but prove as false.

But what need many words be spent about the confutation of such idle dreams
and foolish fantasies? Surely, that great and terrible day of the worlds
ending, is a thing of greater moment then that it should be thus dallied with.
Let not therefore the quintessence of wit expose us to such impudent folly: For
although it may somewhat please us in show; yet, when the best is made of it
that can be, it will be proved, not only the doting froth of a witty brain,
but also a superstitious and an heathenish vanity.

I have seen a world of fancies more upon this subject, especially such as may
be taken out of See Treas. of ancient and modern times, l. 4. cap. 20.
Cusa, who was made Cardinal under Pius the second: But seeing they are as
idle as the former, and built upon as false grounds, I scarce hold them worth
the answering.

Yet (having come thus far) let me go a little further, because in the next
place I hope to meet some wiser men; granting (as indeed they ought) that the
precise day and hour of the worlds ending cannot be known: yet they would not
have any to be so Napeir on the Revelat. Prop. 14 where he determines the time
to be betwixt the years 1688, and 1700; naming either the year 1697, or 1699.
base of judgment, as to conclude thereby, that an apparent length of this
last age may not be found; or that seemingly between such and such years the
judgment day shall not be known to come: For is it prophesied? and why are
prophesies, if they either may not, or cannot be understood? It is recorded in
Matthew. 24. 15. Let him that reads, understand. It is said Dan. 12. 10. None
of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. And Revelation
1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at
hand. And Dan. 12. 4. it is said, that these things toward the end shall be
unsealed: for many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

Now here I may answer, that although some understand the foresaid texts to
have relation to the times toward the worlds ending, yet there be no See Jun.
Cal^. Polan. or Dr. Will. Hexap. (...) Dan.
few who contradict it; affirming that what they allege out of Daniel was
accomplished about the time of Antiochus: and that by running through (which
some read running to and fro) is meant the diligent perusing of the book:
namely, that though at the first it were not regarded, yet many in time to come
should give their minds unto it: being (as Polanus expounds) thus to be
understood, that in the great persecution under Antiochus, many shall be found
faithful, who shall cleave unto this prophecy: And as for the wicked not
understanding it, we must apply it unto the false brethren which should be in
those days of persecution, and give way unto Antiochus his wicked proceedings;
laboring to seduce and betray their brethren; and they themselves living
without any care to observe the accomplishment of this prophecy, never
comparing the event with the thing prophesied: For (as was foretold Dan. 11.
34.) many shall cleave unto them fainedly, etc. And for sealing it up unto the
end, is meant the not making it too common on the sudden, because from the time
of these visions until the days of Antiochus were about 300 years. In which
regard it is said concerning that other prophecy of the Revelation, that it
must not be sealed up, because the time was at hand, Revelat. 22. 10. Yea some
part of it was not only presently to take effect, but even then in act, chap.
1. verse 19. And as for that in Matthew, it has relation unto the destruction
of Jerusalem under Titus and Vespasian.

Or secondly, be it so that I do not altogether condemn this their inquiry,
because I verily think that a modest and religious search into these mysteries
may see very far: yet nevertheless, seeing interpretours of such mysteries
are not (as yet) at one among themselves, especially in their Synchronismes and
periods of time; it cannot be denied but that even in them there is much matter
of doubt (although they stand upon better grounds then Hesychius did, whom S.
Austine August. Epist. 80 (...) Hesych.
confuted:) so that it is hard to say when such a time appears indeed to be.
And further, were it so that we had perfect Synchronismes of all things
prophesied in the Revelation (for that prophecy does most concern the end) and
knew how to link them together; yet if we erred in the true placing of our
first link, it must needs be that the end of our reckoning either fall short,
or else overshoot that period, which otherwise might point out an apparent
time, if not directly of the worlds ending, yet of such prophesies as shall be
fulfilled before it ends: (for perhaps that which some take to be the
apparent time of the worlds ending, may as well be taken for the time wherein
other things prophesied shall be accomplished) but how long the end shall be
after them, is unknown. We know that the seventh Trumpet shall give an end to
all, because when that seventh Angel came and stood upon the sea, and upon
Revelat. 10. 6.
the earth, he lift up his hand and voice to heaven, swearing solemnly by him
who lives for ever, (...), Time shall be no more: but we do not know whether
the space of time allotted for that Trumpet be either long or short. The
Trumpets before it had time allowed them; and what time this last shall have,
the event will best discover.

Wherefore I do well perceive, that it is no easy thing to find an apparent
length of this last age any long while before it ends, unless we could be
directly certified of the utmost periods of all the Trumpets; or knew the times
of the seven Vials, which by seven Angels were to be poured out. The best and
only way is always to watch, and to be evermore ready either for death or
judgment: For certainly when that time comes, pure hearts (as Bernard
speaks) shall prevail more than subtle words; good consciences, better then
full purses; because the Judge will not be deceived with words, nor moved with
gifts: neither is it possible that any should avoid him; for all shall be
summoned to appear before him. To which purpose Du Bartas descants thus,

Those that were laden with proud marble tombs,
Those that were swallowed down wild monsters wombes,
Those that the Sea has drowned, those that the flashes
Of ruddy flames have burned all to ashes,
Awaked all, shall rise, and all revest
The flesh and bones that they at first possessed.
"But some must Justice, some must Mercy taste;
"Some called to joy, some into torment cast.
CHAP. II. Showing, in what part of the year the world was created.
Sect. 1. Of three opinions concerning the time of the worlds beginning, with a
confutation of the first.
IN the account of Times, it is very necessary that there should be a proposed
point or mark, from whence every reckoning may take beginning; that thereby the
years which have several times of beginning, may the more truly be computed
and compared amongst themselves. Wherefore it cannot be amiss to set down the
most probable conjectures concerning the year wherein the world began;
especially seeing amongst Chronologers it is usual to refer their accounts
either to the year of the worlds Creation, or to the birth of Christ.

And now* concerning this, there be chiefly three opinions.

1. Some imagine that the world was created in the very time of the Summer
Solstice, and that in the beginning of time, the Sun entering into Leo, gave
beginning to the year. 2. Others refer it to the Spring, when the Sun
entered into Aries. 3. And in the last place it is supposed, that the world was
made in Autumn, when the Sun entered into Libra. Of all which I purpose to
discourse severally, and to show the best reasons for that which I think to be
the truest time.
The first is an opinion maintained by Mercator, and (as is thought) was first
hatched among the Priests of Egypt, who, observing the river Nilus to overflow
about the Summer Solstice, adored it for a God, esteeming the time of its
inundation for an infallible beginning of divine actions in things created; and
thereupon, for the beginning likewise of the year at the time of the worlds
creation.

But if this were the only cause, we may not unfitly say, that it was folly
and superstition which first set this opinion abroach; and therefore he is
worthy of blame who will go about to maintain it. And although Mercator in his
Chronology seems to allege some other reasons, thereby to uphold his share in
it; yet his chief reason is not sufficient; for it is grounded upon that which
is not granted; viz. that the Flood should end about July; because in the
eleventh month, which he supposes to be May or June, when the Olive begins
to put forth, the Dove brought green Olive leaves unto Noah into the Ark.

To which it is answered, That the word in Genesis 7. 11. which he takes to
signify green leaves, may (as expositours witness) as well be taken for
branches; even such as have been used to make Bowers with: which (according to
the translation of the Septuagint) is expressed by a word signifying a dry
stalk. And so says that Doctor, in his Hexapla upon Genesis, chapter the
first, question the 17, that the word in the original is G^alce, which (as S.
Hierome translateth it elsewhere) signifies the branches of Olives: and in the
Septuagint it is (...), a stalk without leaves.

That therefore which the Dove brought, might be some branch of the Olive tree
rather then the leaves; and so might the Flood end at the dead time of the
year, rather then when things were fresh and flourishing.

But admit that the stalk or branch had leaves on it, yet it proves not that it
was about May or June, when the Dove found and brought it; because it is
recorded of the Olive, that she loses not her leaves as other Plin. lib. 16.
cap. 20.
trees do, but is green and flourishing all the year. Such leaves therefore
as it had before the Flood, it might have after the Flood: for if they were new
ones, they must needs spring out in seven days, because the Dove was sent out
but seven days before, returning then as a creature disconsolate, not finding
any thing at all.

Sect. 2.
ANother opinion is, that it was created in the Spring, A second opinion is,
that the world began at the Spring.
and that the Sun (who is the Index of time, by whose revolution we account
our years) began his course in Aries.

The most forcible reasons to uphold this opinion, are these.

First, the natural beginning of the year was in the Spring time, because
Noah entered into the Ark the first month; and after a year, about the end of
the second month, he came forth of the Ark again, Genesis 7. 8. Now the first and
second months here mentioned, agree not to Autumn; because if Noah came out
of the Ark at that time of the year, he could not then provide himself with
victuals for those creatures which were with him against the next year, by
reason that the Harvest time was then past, and Winter coming on: so that the
year naturally began in the Spring time, and not in Autumn.

Secondly, it is likely that the world took beginning at such a time when
things were growing more and more to perfection, as in the Spring; rather then
when they were decreasing, as in Autumn.

Thirdly, it is no weak assertion to affirm that the world was created about
that time of the year when by the second Adam it was redeemed; which was not
in Autumn, but in the Spring.

Fourthly, the children of Israel coming out of Egypt were commanded to begin
their year at Abib, called afterward Nisan; which month agrees partly to
our March, and partly to April. [See Exodus chap. 12. verse 1; and chap. 23.
verse 15.] Now by this command it is like that they were only put in mind of
their ancient custom which was in use amongst their Ancestors, and lost by
them, since their going into Egypt, and death of the Patriarchs: For when the
twelve Patriarchs, the sons of Jacob, were dead, they of their posterity
learned the customs of Egypt, and so came to change their year from the
Spring to Autumn: But when Moses brought them out from among the Egyptians,
they had a command to reckon the beginning of their year from Autumn no
longer, but from the Spring, beginning (as has been said) in the month Abib
or Nisan. Now this is chiefly grounded upon that which Moses writes concerning
the order of the months in the history of the Flood: For by that it
appears, that the ancient form of the year was no other then what was
observed from the times of Moses when he wrote his history, until the end of
the old Testament, and afterward. Consider therefore the order of the months
which was before the coming out of Egypt (I mean that order specified in the
history of the Flood) and compare it with that order which God gave Moses
command to put in practice, and see if it be not the same. So that as Moses
reckoned the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, etc. from Nisan, which began
in the Spring; in like manner did Noah: for where can it be showed in any place
of Scripture, when the months are reckoned in their orders, that they take
beginning from any other time?

And thus these are the chief reasons to uphold this opinion that the world
should take his beginning at the Spring time of the year, at the Vernall
Equinox, the Sun entering into Aries, rather then at any time else.

Sect. 3.
BUt, if they be well weighed, I rather think that A third and best opinion is,
that the world began in Autumn.
those, who in the third place imagine that it was in Autumn, are nearest the
truth.

For first in the description of the flood, it is true indeed that the first
and second months there mentioned, are meant the first and second months of
the year: but that they must take their beginning from the Spring, rather then
from Autumn, I cannot be persuaded. First, An answer to their first reason who
place the creation in the Spring.
because Josephus (who wrote the Antiquities of his own nation) in his first
book and 5 chapter writes thus, viz. that the second month, being the month
wherein the flood came, was called by the Hebrews Marhesuvan, and by the
Macedonians, Dyo; both which months agree to that part of the year wherein
our November falls, and not April or May. Secondly, because the Chaldee
Paraphrast begins the ancient year of the Jews from Autumn, as afterward
shall be showed.

And further, whereas it is said, that if Noah were to go out of the Ark when
the year was so far spent, he must needs want food for those creatures which
were with him; I answer, that it follows not.

For first, the mountain tops appeared by the Viz. the first day. Genesis 8. 4, 5.
beginning of the tenth month, which was (according to our Julian account)
about the end of May, or beginning of June, although the head of the year be
accounted but from Autumn: so that if the waters began to assuage so soon,
then surely all the montanous places were flourishing with their fruits and
herbs, by such time as Noah came out of the Ark; which (questionless) he might
then gather to feed those creatures that were with him.

Neither secondly does the temperature of the climate wherein the Ark rested,
afford such a rigid winter, but that Noah might sow some kind of grain, such
as might afford him food against the next year, if need were; and so both
himself and other creatures with him might be preserved and kept alive.

But what need I speak of Noah's providing for himself, or them? seeing to the
beasts, fowl, and the like, their dismission from the Ark was enough;
especially there being but a few of every kind.

And as for himself and his family (who were but eight persons) they had
liberty given them by Almighty God to eat of any living Genesis 9. 3.
creature whatsoever, as well as of the green herb. And therefore their first
reason on the contrary contending to prove the worlds creation in the Spring
rather then in Autumn, is not so forcible as they imagine it.

But let me illustrate the matter yet more fully, and in so doing I cannot omit
what Calvis. chr^. cap. de temp. mundi conditi.
Calvisius urges for proof of the same tenent. Those (says he) who would have
the time of the creation in the Spring rather then in Autumn, use this for one
of their chiefest reasons. Dic mihi, inquiunt, etc. Tell me (say they) if the
world were created in Autumn, and that Noah, with those living creatures which
he kept alive, did then or at that time of the year come out of the Ark* how
could they be sustained, the year being so far forth spent? what? must they
hunger for the space of a whole year, or live with nothing, feeding, like
Cameleons, on the air? etc.

To which he answers, that these men speak, as if for their singular wisdom
the Patriarch Noah had made them of his counsel when he carried food into the
Ark, because thus punctually they seem to know how much of it was left when he
came out from thence: which that it was all spent, how can they tell? yet
nevertheless concerning such creatures as lived ravenously by feeding on
flesh, if Noah's old store were gone, I bid (says he) that they take no great
care for them, because they had dead carcasses enough to feed on. Likewise
concerning the other kind of beasts or cattle, let them not be too
solicitous; because the mountains, being watered with such a fatting flood, and
dried also since the Or from the tenth to the second month. See Genesis chap. 8.
fifth month before, had now brought forth herbs, grass, and young tender
shoots by which those creatures might easily have their lives sustained. Which
reason of his is very pertinent, either because it makes it appear that it was
possible to find food if all in the Ark were spent; or that there might be
some of the old store still remaining to help such creatures as were least able
to help themselves.

Come we therefore now to the examination of their next reason; which is as
follows.

Sect. 4.
SEcondly, whereas they say that it is most like the An answer to ^^eir second
reason who place the creation in the Spring.
world took beginning at such a time of the year when things were growing more
and more to perfection, rather then when they were decreasing: answer is made,
that if we stand upon such probabilities for proofs, it is then more like that
the world took beginning, not when things were growing to perfection, but when
they were in perfection it self, immediately before they began to decline;
which could not be in their insancie, but in their maturitie; not in the Spring
time, but in Autumn. And so we find it even in the history of the creation
it self: for the trees, as it is said, were made to grow Genesis 1. 29. and 3. 2.
up with their fruits on them; not green, but ripe, as is evident: not only
because they were pleasant to the eye, but also because they were good for
food; in which regard they were made even in their very perfection: and so God
is said to have seen them, not only as they were good, but also as they were
very good, which was with an approbation of their perfectness, as may be seen
in Genesis chap. 1. verse 31.

Yet nevertheless we know that the Almighty could have created trees with
their ripe fruits on them, as well in that part of the year which is our
Spring, as in Autumn: but surely the course of nature once begun The course of
nature was never changed.
was never altered: and therefore, as now they are in their perfection about
Autumn, so were they then when they were created.

Sect. 5.
THirdly, whereas it is said that it is very like the first An answer to their
third reason who place the creation in the Spring.
Adam was created about such time as by the second Adam he was redeemed; that
proves nothing: the contrary may rather be affirmed: so that the time of the
fall and the redemption are better severed then conjoined. For surely me thinks
it is far more probable that there followed a sad winter for Adam to bewail
his horrid fall in, rather then an acceptable and pleasant summer: for do but
grant this (which may not well be denied) namely that Adam fell presently after
his creation, and then tell me what time of the year was fitter to express
the time of his fall then Autumn.

For as the trees in Autumn being come to maturitie do then lose their beauty
by the fall of their fruits and leaves; or as the year then slides away like
the day at the setting of the sun: even so mankind, as soon as he began to
be in a perfect state, kept it not, but fell away and lost his happiness: yet
as the day is restored again by the rising of the sun; and life is as it were
put anew into the year by the return of the Spring: even so at that very time
decayed man was again restored by the death of Christ, who in the Springtime
of the year paid the price of our redemption.

The fall therefore of man at the fall of the leaf, and the restoring of him at
the reviving Spring, do make a more perfect harmony, then if for their
circumstances of time we should cast them both into the Spring: for as the
death of Christ was contrary to Adams fall; so the time for the one was
contrary to the time for the other: and yet being contrary, both do well
express the nature of each act at either time.

And now, lest it may be doubted whether Adam fell Adam ^ll soon after his
creation.
presently after his creation, this may be added as a proof.

First, that Satan was a murderer from the beginning, and therefore he delayed
no time to purchase man's misery.

Secondly, it was the sixth day that man was created, even as on the sixth day
he was redeemed. By which it appears that he fell on the very day of his
creation. Whereupon Upon Matthew. chap. 27.
Theophylact makes this observation, saying, Sext a die homo est conditus, qui
and sext a hor a de ligno comedit: Sext a quoque die and sext a hor a Christus
cruci est affixus. Qua igitur hor a Dominus hominem condidit, eadem and lapsum
curavit. By which he means, that as man was formed the sixth day, and did eat
of the tree the sixth hour: so Christ reforming man, and healing the fall, was
fastened to the tree the sixth day and the sixth hour. And hence also came
that common saying concerning Adam, that Broughton^ Concent.
In one and the same day he was formed and deformed, not continuing in
righteousness and true holiness until the Sabbath: for then (as some
observe) he would have performed the ordinances of the Sabbath, which was to
have eaten of the tree of life, and so have lived for ever, being never guilty
of that fall whose ach even yet the sons of Adam feel.

3. And surely Moses making mention of many times, would never have omitted
this time of the fall, except it had been presently after the creation.

4. Besides, it must necessarily be granted that Adam fell before ever he knew
his wife: otherwise Cain had been conceived without sin, because presently
after the man and woman were made, God said, Increase and multiply; as in
Genesis 1. 28. is manifest: but it is a thing not to be imagined that Cain was
conceived without sin; neither is it true that Adam accompanied with his wife
until after he was cast out of Paradise. Eve therefore and Mary may well be
compared together; as thus: Eve being a Virgin, hearing the words of the
serpent, and believing them, brought forth death. The Virgin Mary hearing the
words of the Angel, and believing them, brought forth life. Such is their
resemblance; and it very fitly serves to teach us that the fall was soon after
the creation.

5. To which purpose that place in the nine and fortieth Psalm, at the 13
verse, is very congruous, viz. that Adam lodged not one night in honor. For so
(says Dr. Willet) do the words signify, if they be properly Hexap. upon Genesis
chap. 3. quest. 31.
translated. As for example, the word (says he) is lun, which signifies to
lodge or stay all night: which by diverse of the Rabbis is expounded of Adam
who continued not one night in Paradise, but fell on the self same day of his
creation: which for the time of the year bears a fit resemblance with the fall
of the leaf, even as on the other side the redeeming of him bears a fit
resemblance with the reviving Spring, when he was again delivered from his
spiritual prison, like the herbs and plants from their earthly one.

All which considered, their argument is but weak to prove the creation of the
first Adam in the Spring, because the redemption by the second Adam was at the
same time: for we see by an exact and perfect harmony how those times are
better severed then conjoined.

Let us come therefore unto their fourth reason now, and see the greatest force
it bears.

Sect. 6.
FOurthly, the children of Israel coming out of Egypt An answer to their fourth
reason who place the creation in the Spring.
were bidden to begin their year at Abib or Nisan.

Now they (as has been showed) who maintain the worlds creation in the Spring,
think that the year naturally began at that time, and that the Israelites by
this command were only put in mind to restore again their ancient custom
which was in use amongst their ancestors, before they went into Egypt.

All which is but a mere conjecture: for what author ever reported that the
Egyptians made the Israelites forget their ancient customs? it is written no
where but in some men's imaginations, and therefore it proves nothing* In which
regard we may be rather confident of the contrary, namely that the year was
changed, and not renewed: especially if we consider but of this one thing more
concerning the beginning of the Egyptian year, which was not from September,
as the Jews began; but from July, or about the Summer solstice, when their
river Nilus began to overflow. If therefore the Jews had altered the beginning
of their year that they might observe the customs of the Egyptians and
imitate them, why did they not reckon their first month from the Summer
solstice, as did the Egyptians, but rather from the Autumnall Equinox, as did
not the Egyptians? I confess that conjectures in some cases for want of better
proof may hold water; but here the case is otherwise, as evidently appears.

But it is objected, that the Chaldeans reckon the beginning Object.
of their year from the Spring; and from whom did they learn their customs
but from the ancient Hebrews? wherefore the Hebrews of old time began their
year from the Spring, and not from Autumn.

The Chaldee Paraphrast mentions no such thing, but Answ.
plainly affirms the contrary; showing that that month which after the coming
out of Egypt was the seventh month, had in former times been the first month.
This that author affirms; then which what can be more plain?

But it is further objected, that the order of the Object.
months in the history of the Flood makes it appear otherwise; for it cannot
be showed in any place of the Scripture where the months are reckoned in their
order, as the first, second, third, etc. that ever they began but from Nisan:
Moses therefore, according to the command of God, ordaining this month to be
the first month, does make no new institution, but renews the old, as before
was mentioned.

To which it is answered, that when Moses had occasion Answ.
to speak of the months of the year in the history of the Flood, he must
either mention them as he did, or else say nothing of them at all: For it is
plain enough that all of them had not names to be called by; and must therefore
be reckoned according to their number (if at all they be reckoned) from whence
soever the reckoning began. We do not find that any of them had names,
excepting four, until after the captivity. The four were these: 1 Ethanim.
2 Bull. 3 Abib or Nisan. 4 Zif. The first was called 1. Kings ^. 2.
Ethanim, or mensis fortium, from the excellency and dignity of it; not only
because it was the beginning of the year, but also of the rest and Jubilee.
The next to it was called 1. King. 6. 38.
Bull, which is as much as defluens; because in this month the leaves do as it
were flow, slide, or fall away from the trees. The seventh was Abib, so called
a novis frugibus, from the new fruits or ears of corn then first appearing.
The eighth was called 1. King. 6. 1, ^7.
Zif, which was a splendore and nitore, from the splendor and brightness of
it; seeing the earth was at this time stored with dainty fine flowers, and
curious fair objects. These were all which had names.

That therefore for the order of the months proves as little as any thing else.

Wherefore I cannot see but that this opinion above all others may stand as the
most probable, namely, that the year naturally began from Autumn; and so, by
consequent, the worlds creation was then.

The Autumnall Equinox was at that time (if it be reduced to our Julian
account) about the latter end of October; but now it is about the 13 day of
September: And the Sun then entered into Aries about the latter end of April,
which in these days is about the 10 or 11 of March; so much has the
Equinoctial anticipated since the beginning.

Sect. 7.
BUt concerning the particular day, it was on the The conclusion, wherein the
former part of the chapter is recapirulated, and all explained.
26 or 27 day of October. And as for the other, when the Sun entered into
Aries, it was about the 21 or 22 day of April.

So that if the world began in the Spring, or at the Vernall Equinox, then we
may account that about the 21 or 22 day of April was the first day of the
world. Or if it began in Autumn, then the first of days was near about the
26 or 27 of October.

But in my judgment the best opinion is (as has been showed) that it was in
Autumn when things were not growing to perfection, but even in perfection it
self, as Adam was, who presently after fell: so also the trees and plants in
Autumn, with their fruits and seeds on them at the ripest, were in their
perfection, began the course of Nature, faded afterward by little and little
through the approaching winter: which time seems to be a fitter time for Adam
to bewail his fall in, and to make him the more sensible of his lost
happiness, then a pleasant and cheerful Summer; because by how much the more
he was afflicted, he would by so much the more be sensible of his misery, and
thereupon long the more earnestly after the promised seed.

And not only so, but also the fall of man at the fall of the leaf, and the
restoring of him again at the reviving Spring, do make a more perfect and exact
harmony, then if for their circumstances of time we should cast them both into
the Spring. For (as has been said) like as the death of Christ was of a
contrary nature to Adams fall; so the time for the one being contrary to the
time for the other, does well express the nature of each act at either time.

And further, we have not only the testimony of Josephus before alleged,
against whom some except; but also the Calvis. Chr. cap. de temp. mund. cond.
and B^oald. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Chaldee Paraphrast does witness as much, saying that that month which in the
first book of the Kings, the 8 chapter, at the 2 verse, is called the seventh
month, was in former times the first month. The words of which text stand
thus, And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto King Solomon, at the
feast in the month Lthanim, which is the seventh month. The meaning of which
place that author does thus explain, saying, All Israel were gathered together
to king Solomon in FORTIUM, a praestantia and dignitate dicitur; quia non a ^ni
tantum, sed etiam Sabbati and Iubilaei principium fuit. Wolph. de Temp. lib. 1.
page 15.
mense fortium, or in the month Ethanim, on the feast day; which month in
times past they called the first month, but now it is the seventh month. Thus
he for the ancient beginning of the year: and of what authority this
Paraphrast is in the Church, the learned know.

Also we have testimonies in holy Writ to strengthen the same assertion, and to
show us that the ancient beginning of the year was from Autumn, because that
Tekupha or Quarter is expressly termed the end of the year. As for example:
in Exodus, chapter the 23. verse 16. and chap. 34. verse the 22. it is said,
the feast of tabernacles was to be celebrated in the Levit. 23 39.
seventh month, at the end and return of the year: which seventh month was
agreeable to Autumn, as is well known. It is not only said, at the return of
the year, which may be attributed to any of the 2. Sam. 11. 1. 2. Chron. 36.
10. Ezekiel. 40. See also Wolph. de temp. Bux. de Synag. Iul. Seal. de Em. Temp.
etc.
four Quarters when the sun returns to them again* but it is also said, at
the end and return of the year, being always about the seventh month.

Yet nevertheless we are not to think that the first day of the seventh month
was always the first day of their year; for their months being lunar were
moveable: and therefore the head of the year was to take beginning according
to the course of the sun. So that in what part soever of the lunar month
that Tekupha happened which pointed out the Autumnall Equinox, from thence must
the year be reckoned; for there the last year ended and the next began.

And now if it be further demanded why God commanded Quest.
the Israelites at their return out of Egypt, to alter the beginning of their
year from Autumn unto the Spring, unless it had been so of old:

To that it is answered thus, viz. that there are two Answ.
reasons for it.

1. The one is this; They coming out of Egypt from the bondage of Pharaoh, were
to begin their year from that time in memory of their deliverance. And
therefore it is said in Exodus 12. 42. It is a night to be much observed to the
Lord for bringing them out of the land of Egypt: this is that night of the Lord
to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations. 2. And not
only so, but also at the same time of the year (as God had determined it)
there was a better and a greater deliverie to be wrought for mankind; namely
such a delivery as should free him from the bondage of Satan by the death of
Christ. Now this may be called the Deliverie of deliveries; of which that other
out of Egypt was but a figure, because it was but from a corporal bondage,
whereas this was from a spiritual.
And thus came the year to be changed, which ever before pointed to the time
of man's creation: but now it is made to point another way, namely to the time
of man's redemption: by which God taught his Church (then typically delivered)
how to expect the acceptable year of the Lord, and time of man's redemption;
which was both proclaimed and purchased by that Lamb of God who takes away
the sins of the world: whose offering upon the cross was at the same time of
the year when that Paschal lamb, by which he was prefigured, was slain: which
time why it is severed from Autumn, has been showed.

Yea thus came the first to be last, and the last first: thus came Nisan to get
the dignity from the other months, and to be called the beginning or first
moneth^in the year. At which we need not marvel: for the time of man's
redemption was a more worthy mark from whence to reckon, then the time of his
creation.

And thus have I delivered what I find and verily think to be most probable in
this matter. Unto which may be added, that as the evening was before the
morning, so was the Autumn before the Spring: for the year and the day have a
kind of analogy between the one and the other (as may be seen in the seventh
day compared with the seventh year) and therefore they do well serve, the one
to express the natural beginning of the other.

CHAP. III. Containing a discourse of such things as are pertinent to the first
days work.
Sect. 1. Of God the Architect of all, and of the first part of the first days
work.
TIme, by whose revolutions we measure hours, days, weeks, months and
years, is nothing else but (as it were) a certain space borrowed or set apart
from eternity; which shall at the last return to eternity again: like the
rivers, which have their first course from the seas; and by running on, there
they arrive, and have their last: for before Deus dum coetum (...) et* fecit
aete^nitatis quandam in num^ fluentem imaginem: quam no^ T^pus voca^ us.
Coclen. ex Pl^t.
Time began, there was Eternity, namely GOD; which was, which is, and which
shall be for ever: without beginning or end, and yet the beginning and end of
all things. Aeternitas enim, Dei solummodo naturae substantialiter inest, says
one: that is, Eternity is substantially only in the nature of God. When Moses
therefore would have known Gods name, he tells him, Thus shall thou say Exo^.
3. 14.
unto the children of Israel, ^.
I AM has sent me unto you: By which name, says Junius, he would have himself
known according to his eternal essence, whereby he is discerned from all other
things which are either in heaven, on the earth, or elsewhere. Which in another
place is thus illustrated; Egosum Primus and Ultimus, and praeter me non est
Deus; I am the First and the Last, and beside me there is no God, Esaias 44. 6.
Or thus, Before the day was, I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of
my hand, Esaias 43. 13. To which that of the Psalmist does well agree, Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made, thou
art God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90. 2.

Thus we see, that before ever any thing was, God only was, who When we behold
the admired fabric of the world, etc. we can no more ascribe it to chance,
then a Printers case of letters could by chance fall into the right composition
of any such book as he printeth.
gave both a beginning and a being unto every thing that is: and he, in respect
of his divine essence, is but one. Yet so, as in that single essence of his
there be three divine subsistences, or persons all truly subsisting; whereof
every one is distinct from other, and yet each has the whole Godhead in it
self: and these are, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, 1. John, 5. 7.

1. The Father is a person who from all eternity has begotten the Son. 2.
The Son is a person from all eternity begotten of the Father. 3. The holy
Ghost is a person eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son, Psalm. 2.
7. John 15. 26.
as the holy Scriptures witness.
Du Bart. 1. day of the 1. week.
These thus distinct in person, not divinity,
All three in one make one eternal Trinity.
From which eternal and undivided Trinity, the whole world, consisting of
things visible and Coloss. 1. 16.
invisible, took beginning, as the original words, Elohim and Bara, do well
express. For Elohim being a word plural does signify Dii, Gods: but being
joined with a word singular, namely Bara, which is Created, they then together
show that there are three persons in the Deity, and that the three persons are
but one God, who did create. Or thus; Dr. Willet on Genesis page 20.
Those two words, being the one of the singular, the other of the plural
number, do note unto us the singularity of the Godhead, and plurality of the
persons. And not only so, but they also show that the three persons being but
one God, did Gib. on Genesis Quest. 1.
all of them create: For such is found to be the propriety of the Hebrew
phrase, Elohim bara, Freig. Histor. Mosaic. page 5.
Creavit Dii, The Gods created.

1. Of the Father it is witnessed, that he created as the fountain of
goodness. For says S. James, Every good and perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. Of whom and through whom,
says S. Paul, are all things, Romans 11. 36.

2. Of the Son it is witnessed, that he created as the wisdom of the Father.
For, when he created the heavens, says Wisdom, I was there, Prove. 8. 27. And
again, By him were all things created that are, Coloss. 1. 14, 15. namely by
him who did bear the image of the Father, and was the Redeemer of the world.

3. And lastly of the holy Ghost it is witnessed, that he creates as the power
of the Father and the Son. For by his Spirit he garnished the heavens, and by
his hand he has formed the crooked serpent, Job 26. 13. and chap. 33. 4. Or,
as the Psalmist has it, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all
the hosts of them [spiritu oris] by the spirit of his mouth, Psalm. 33. 6.

All which considered, and found to be done in the beginning, must needs be
then when there was no preexistent matter to work upon. For ( Gib. on Genesis
Quest. 1.
as it is witnessed) the Hebrew word Reshith, which is englished the beginning,
does not signify any substance; neither does the other word Bara, to create,
signify any way to create but of nothing: and thereby it is distinguished from
the word Iatzar, to form, and Gnasha, to make. And therefore though now we
behold a glorious something wherein appears in every part more then much
matter of wonder; yet at the first, says noble Bartas,

Nothing but nothing had the Lord Almighty,
Whereof, wherewith, whereby to build this city.
That Axiom therefore in philosophy, Ex nihilo nihil fit, must needs stand
aloof off when we speak of creation. For although it be Etsi ex rihilo nihil
sit per m^um seu transmutatio^em, id est, generatur, tamen ex nihilo aliquid
sit per sim^licem emanationem, id est, creatur. Go^len. disp* Phys.
true that according to the course of nature and ordinary custom of things,
nothing can be made, unless out of some former matter: yet when we descend ad
inquirendam primarum rerum conditionem, to enquire after the first condition of
the first things, then we shall find that God is above nature, because he is
the Lord of nature. And he, whose sufficiency and efficiencie is altogether
absolute, must needs be able supernaturali quadam ratione, by a certain
supernatural means, to produce all things out of nothing.

Of which nothing that I may say something, my best and only way is to look at
Moses, and (as near as I can) explain his meaning.

In the beginning (says he) God created the heavens and the earth. In which
words he labors not so much to deliver a general proposition of the works
of creation, or of the two distinct parts of the world, or of the matter of
heaven and earth, as if the one word did insinuate all the superior parts of
the world, the other all the inferior parts beside: or as if taking both
together, he meant by them jointly totius mundi semen, the seed of the whole
world, mentioning it under these two words of Heaven and Earth, as a Chaos.
This he means not; because that which concerns the Chaos is mentioned
afterward in the second verse. And what were it but a plain tautologie, to say
that in the beginning God created a Chaos, and that Chaos was a Chaos?
Wherefore in those first words he intends nothing more, then to show that the
world which now is called, according to its parts, Heaven and Earth, was not
from everlasting, but took beginning: and so without controversy the right
reading of his words does also witness. For in their original (as it is
witnessed by expositours) thus they sound, In the beginning God created these
heavens and this earth: as if it should be said, These very heavens and this
very earth which now we see in being, were not always, but began. Then
afterward he proceeds to show how, and in what time God created them:
speaking first how all was like a disordered and deformed Chaos, the earth and
the heavens not distinguished, but lying as it were in a confused heap all
together. And this is manifest. For on the second day, when the heavens were
made, it seems that their matter was from amongst that mass or unfashioned
lump which was said to be void and without form, and not able to be kept
together, had not the Spirit of God cherished it, (for the Spirit of God moving
upon the waters, did as it were sit upon it and nourish it, as a fowl does her
eggs, with heat and life:) yea their matter, I say, was from among the waters,
which by the power of Gods word were extended and stretched like a canopie
round about the earth, as now we see them. In which regard S. Austines words
are also pertinent, saying concerning this All of which we now speak, Confess.
lib. 12. cap. 21.
Materies adhuc erat corporearum rerum informis, sine ordine, sine luce; It was
yet an informed matter of corporal things, without order, without light. Or,
as that Du Bart* first day of the first week.
Nightingale of France has sung it,

This was not then the world: 'twas but the matter,
The nurserie whence it should issue after;
Or rather the Embryon that within a week
Was to be born: for that huge lump was like
The shapelesse burden in the mothers womb,
Which does in time into good fashion come.
Thus and in this manner I cannot but think of these things, not doubting that
Moses in his description of the sensible world means otherwise; but shows
that that heaven and earth which now we see, were in the beginning or first
degree of being, an earth, or as an earth, or one lump, without form, and void;
a darkened depth and waters; a matter of no matter, and a form without form, as
one speaks; a rude and indigested Chaos or confusion of matters, rather to be
believed then comprehended of us. And this, says Mr. Purch. in his first part,
lib. 1. cap. 2.
he, is the second natural beginning. For, after the expressing of the matter,
follows that which Philosophers call a second natural principle, Privation,
the want of that form of which this matter was capable; which is accidentally a
natural principle, required in regard of generation, not of constitution, here
described by that part next us, earth, which was without form, as is said, and
void. This was the internal constitution. The external was darkness upon the
face of the deep. Which deep compriseth both the earth before mentioned, and
the visible heavens also, called a depth, as to our capacity infinite, and
pliant to the Almighty hand of the Creator: called also waters, not because it
was perfect waters, which was yet confused; but because of a certain
resemblance, not only in the uniformitie thereof, but also of that want of
stabilitie whereby it could not abide together, but as the Spirit of God moved
upon these waters to sustain them, etc. Here therefore is the third beginning
or principle in nature, that form which the said Not the air or wind; they
were not yet.
Spirit by that action framed it unto.

The Hebrews Gibbens on Genesis quest. 2. ann^t. d.
call the whole mass, as it is comprehended under the names of Heaven and
Earth, Tohu Vabohu: Tohu, without order; bohu, without variety. But it was not
long that it continued in this imperfect state: for in one week it was (as I
may say) both begotten and born, and brought from a confused Chaos, to a well
ordered and variously adorned Universe. Or, as one says,

Materiam Deus ipse creat, comitque creatam. Whose meaning may be taken thus,

The matter first God out of nothing drew,
And then adds beauty to that matter new.
Which was, not because he was unable to make all the world perfect in an
instant; but because he would not. Whereupon an holy Aust.
Father said, Voluntas Dei est causa coeli and terrae; and ideo major est
voluntas Dei quam coelum and terra: The will of God is the cause of heaven and
earth, and therefore it is greater then either of them.

God therefore does not disable his omnipotence in not working all at once, but
shows that he works all things Ephesians. 1. 11.
according to the counsel of his will; which in this work of creation
(prosecuted both by an order of time and degrees) is so far from eclipsing
his power, that it rather does demonstrate both his power and wisdom to be
infinite: and that he has so done his mavelous works, that they ought
always to be had in remembrance, Psalm. 111. 4. For in wisdom he has made
them all: And why not all at once, was because the counsel of his will was
otherwise.

But may we not yet enquire a further reason why it Quest.
pleased the Almighty thus to will such a space, and would not rather produce
this All perfect at once?

This perhaps may be thought a question too curious Answ.
to be determined, because Gods will is a sufficient reason in all his actions;
and therefore it is better left then looked into. Which surely might well be
so, if the reasons urged prove too eagle-eyed and unprofitable, not bettering
us in our dullness or want of knowledge. But otherwise, if they instruct man in
any thing pertinent to his present condition, and inform him so as he may be
somewhat reformed by them: then they may be urged without the brand of
niceness or imputation of curiosity.

First therefore we may join with them, who say that perhaps it pleased Gods
infinite perfection to take this leisure; because if the creatures had been
made all at once, they might be thought to be increate, and not made at all;
nor yet to have the like sense of their infirmity as now they have, one seeing
another made before them.

Secondly, seeing the world was thus perfected by degrees before man was, who
(being made) was the chief inhabitant of it: me thinks so orderly to raise such
a sumptuous palace for mankind, whilst yet mankind was not, what was it, but
the declaration of a greater kindness, and a demonstration proving how kind,
how careful, and how gracious God would be to us ever after being made? and
therefore now we must not distrust him, but in all our ways acknowledge him,
and he shall direct our paths, Prove. 3. 5, 6. For so he has promised, and so
he does perform to all that love and fear him; causing every thing to work
together for their good; nay, for their best, as the Apostle speaks. Or, as
the Psalmist has it, No good thing shall he withhold from them who live a
godly life, Psalm. 84. 12.

Thirdly, by this example mankind may read a lecture against himself, if
heedlesly or hastily he behave himself in any work, and shall not rather
proceed soberly and by degrees, making haste (as it is said) by leisure. For
true it is, that with us a soft pace goes far: Which made one Bish. Hall,
contemp. lib. 1.
fix this contemplation upon the works of creation, saying, How should we
deliberate in our actions which are so subject to imperfection; seeing it
pleased Gods infinite perfection (not out of need) to take leisure! Upon
thought of which, let us

Make sober speed: for it is observed by proof,
That what is well done is done soon enough.
Festina lent: Nam sat cito, si sat been.
Thus having (as it were) considered the first part of the first days work, we
may now come more nearely to that which is the beauty of it, I mean the Light,
which some call Gods eldest daughter, or the first distinguished creature,
wherewith the Lord Psalm. 104. 2.
decked the world as with a garment.

Sect. 2. The creation of the Light.
ANd now concerning this bright creature, no sooner did God say, Let it be, but
lo it was. He 2. Cor. 4. 6.
commanded that it should shine out of darkness, as speaks the Apostle; and
that being separated and set apart from Ex tenebris dicitur eduxi^se lu^em, non
ut ex materia (nihil enim tenebrae fu rient, nisi negatio lacis) sed ut e
con^rario termino. Pare. in Genesis page 146.
the darkness, the first of days might be, and Gods good works appear,
beginning with the Lights proceeding to show forth his exceeding glory.

But of this resplendent creature (without which the beauty of the rest could
not be seen) there are no few opinions.

1. Some would have it a spiritual Light; and so under it they comprehend the
creation of Angels. But surely in my judgment their opinion is the founder who
make it a natural and material Light only, such as now is in the Sun, the
Index of time, and the worlds bright eye. For as the office of the Suns light
is now to distinguish between the Day and the Night; so was the office of this
Light, being commanded to shine out of Which was the local, but not material
original of it, as says Pareus. ibid.
darkness before the Sun was made: which being made, was the subject ever
after to retain it. If it were otherwise, or any other light, where is it now?
shall we say that it is either extinguished or applied to some other use?
surely I think not; because God (who made all by the power of his word) needed
no instrument or help in the work of his creation: And therefore that Light
which at the first made his works appear, is no spiritual Light; but such and
the same that now is in the Sun. And yet perhaps, as Aquin. Sum. 1. par.
Quest. 70. a^tie. 1.
Aquinas thinks, it was but Lumen inform, quod quarto die formatum est; An
informed Light, which on the fourth day had its perfect form.

And as for the creation of Angels, it is not like that Of Angels, and when
the^ were created.
they were made this first day, but on the fourth day: For it is very probable
that there was the like order observed in making of the invisible world, which
was in the visible; and that on the second day, not only the visible, but also
the invisible heavens were created; yet so as both of them remained as it were
unpolished or unfinished until the fourth day: For then as the outward heavens
were garnished with Stars, so might the inward and highest heavens be
beautified with Angels. This me thinks is not obscurely pointed at in Job,
chap. 38. verse. 7. Where were thou, says the Lord to Job, when the stars
praised me (or sang together) and all the sons of men shouted for joy? it
being here See Dr. Willet on Genesis chap. 1. Quest. 33.
evident that when the Stars were made, the Angels also had then their being,
and rejoiced before God; which was but upon the fourth day of the creation. All
this, I say, might well be thus although Moses does not directly mention it;
which was because he applied himself to the simple capacity of the people,
describing the creation only of sensible things, being that which at the first
he intended, and did in plain terms testify in the beginning of his history,
when he said, These Heavens, and this Earth, of which I spoke before.

And further, were the creation of Angels comprehended under the creation of
the heavens and light, what were this but to leave the literal sense (which is
to be followed in the history of the creation) and to cleave unto Allegories?

But secondly, concerning this Light, others think that the element of fire was
signified by it, whose effect is light, and whose act and quality is to
enlighten: which made one therefore say, that The uncreated Light (viz. God)
commanded this elementarie light to be, that so the thinner and higher element
severed from the air, might by his enlightening operation effect a light some
shining, -- and the air, according to the nature thereof, receive it: which to
the fire was an essential property, -- to the air an accidental quality
approved of God, as good both to himself and the future creatures. Thus some.
But others except against it, affirming that this light was moveable, by the
presence of it making day, and by its absence making night: which could not
have been, had it been the element of fire; unless it be more or less in one
place then in another, and not equally dispersed. Or, as Pareus answers, it
could not be the element of fire, because that is above the clouds (according
to the common rules of Philosophy) and therefore in his judgment the fiery
element was not until the second day, being created with the Expansum or
stretching out of the air.

But unto these exceptions I think an answer may be framed, as I perhaps shall
afterward show you.

Thirdly, if (as some have done) we should think that this was the very light
of the sun, and then in the sun, or in such a cloud or subject as was the
matter of the sun, the text would be objected against it; which affirms
that the sun was not until the fourth day: for the creation of that was but
then, although the light was before.

Fourthly, Aquinas says, Aquin. Sum. part 1. quest. 70. (...)* (...).
Lux primo die fuit producta secundum communem lucis naturam: quarto autem die
attributa est luminaribus determinata virtus ad determinatos effectus: secundum
quod videmus alios effectus habere radium solis, and alios radium lunae, and
sic de aliis. Whereupon he concludes, that howsoever it was, it was but an
informed light until the fourth day.

Now therefore, amongst a multitude of opinions which are besides these already
mentioned, I (for mine own part) cannot but prefer this as the best; namely,
that the light for three days space wanted a subject, such as now it has: and
yet it did perform the same office which now it does being fastened to a
subject, or to the body of the Sun, which is Vehiculum lucis, A Chariot for
the light. For we may easily perceive that in the works of creation there is
such an God made one proper center for all things of one kind, unto which he
reduce^. them.
harmonious order observed, as that there may be an union and reduction of all
things of one kind to their own heads and center.

As for example, the upper waters must be severed by the out-spread firmament;
and the lower must repair all to one sea, as their natural subject: and as for
heavy substances, they hasten downwards; and the light ones, they fly upwards.
In like manner, that light which at the first was dispersed and fixed to no
subject, does presently (as soon as the sun was) unite it self unto that
body, as now it is.

This of all other seems to me the best opinion to pitch upon, and the most
probable in this kind: which may well be as an Emblem how God will one day
gather his elect from all coasts of heaven to the participation of one glory.
S. Paul applies it to our regeneration, thus; 2. Cor. 4. 6 and Ephe. 5. 8.
God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, etc. that we, who were once darkness, are now light in the Lord. And
in this consideration I think we need not much dissent from them who would have
the element of fire signified by it; which opinion was before mentioned: for
howsoever it be that that element be now dispersed, or wheresoever placed, yet
it might be that the first light shined from it; thus I say it might be,
because we may not reason Purc^. lib. 1. cap. 2.
a facto ad fieri, or from the order of the constitution of things in which
they now are, to the principles of their institution whilst yet they were in
making. And for further proof of this, I do easily assent to them (...). (...).
(...). cap. 4.
who have probably affirmed that the stars and lights of heaven contain the
greatest part of this fire; as afterward in the fourth days work shall be
more plainly showed.

This I have said, as seeming to me the best and most probable tenent; although
perfectly to affirm what this light was, must be by our enlightening from him
who commanded that it should shine out of darkness. Of which shining and
darkness (seeing the Sun was not yet made, which by his course and turning
about makes it day and night at the same time in diverse places) it may be said
that it was day and night at the same instant now over the face of the whole
earth: which made Pareus in ^n. page 148.
one therefore say, that the first darknesses were not loco divisae, sed plane
depulsae a luce ut nusquam essent; yet so, as that they should either return or
depart, according to the contraction or expansion of this first light, caused
by a divine dispensation. But otherwise it may be said, that the first days
light was carried to another hemispheare just with the dawning of the second
day: for as soon as the out spread Firmament was commanded to be, the Heavens
surely were made, and began to move.
Thus Pareus.

And now of thee, oh bright-shining creature, it may be said, that, had thou
never been, the beauty of the world had been as nothing: For thou art the
beauty of all the beauties else, as says Du Bartas,

Gods eldest daughter, Oh how thou art full
Of grace and goodness! Oh how beautiful!
Quest. But if God made the Light, was he not before in darkness? Answ. No:
For he needs not any created light, who is himself a Light uncreated; no
corporal light, who is a spiritual one. God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all, 1. Joh. 1. 5. He made this light for our mortal journey on
earth; himself is the Light of our immortal abode in heaven: neither did he
more dwell in this light that he made, then the waters were the habitation of
the Spirit, when it was said that the Spirit moved upon the waters.

But see, there was Night, Light and Day before the Sun; yet now without it
there is neither: which shows that we must allow God to be the Lord of his
own works, and not limit his power to means.

And surely as it was before man was made, so shall it be after he is
dissolved: For then, as the Esaias 60. 19.
Prophet speaks, The Sun shall no more be thy light by day, neither shall
the Moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory.

Lastly, unto this amongst many things let me add but one thing more. God made
light on the first day; so Christ arose from death on the same day, being the
first of the week: And he is the true light which lights every one that
comes into the world: Of which light if we have no portion, then of all
creatures man is the most miserable.

Sect. 3. Of the intercourse between day and night.
WHat now remains? God called the light Day, and the darkness Night: It Is
true;

The Alls Architect alternately decreed,
That Night the Day, the Day should Night succeed.
Of both which we have more then manifold use and benefit. The night eases the
burden of the day; the day drives away the terror of the night. The night
burieth our cares, and does what she can to drown all our griefs in a silent
sleep: the day serves for our needful labors; is the wicked man's just
terror, the mother of truth, and true beauties only glass, wherein she may
both see her self, and be also seen. The night serves to temper the days
exceeding drought, and to cool its heat; for by moistning the air it makes the
earth to fructify: the day again warmeth the coolness of the night, melting
the white hoarie hairs of winters beard; and with a reviving, cherishing, and
nourishing of things, as well sensible as vegetative, adds life afresh into
the dying universe; serving (as I said before) for the need full labors of
man: For, as the Psalmist has it, The sun arises, and then man goes forth
unto his work, and to his labor until the evening, Psalm. 104. 22. And so also
for the night, it is destinated or appointed for quiet and sleep, wherein the
wearied bodies of living creatures are refreshed, and their strengths repaired:
the noisome beasts now come forth and feed, lest coming in the day they might
be a terror unto men: For, as the Psalmist again records, Thou make
darkness that it may be night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do move;
as the lions roaring after their prey, and the like, verse. 20.

But of this enough. And now last of all when this days work was done or
brought to an end, God is said to view it, and behold there was nothing amiss;
That is, Moses, speaking according to our capacities, tells us that God does
approve and ratify that work now done, which before he purposed to make.

So Eve and Morn conclude the first of days,
And God gives to his work deserved praise.
CHAP. IIII. Of the second day; and of such things as are pertinent to the work
done in it.
Sect. 1. Of the Expansum, or stretching out of the Heavens.
COncerning this days work what it was, we find it thus expressed, And God
said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters; and let it divide
the waters from the waters. And God made the firmament; and divided the waters
which were under the firmament, from the waters which were above the firmament:
and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven: and the evening and the
morning were the second day. Genesis 1. 6, 7, 8.

This is the narration of what was done. And here let us consider, first of the
Firmament: then of the waters which it separateth: and lastly of the several
Heavens, together with the regions of the air, and of such appearances as we
use to see there: unto which if any thing else be met withal pertinent to this
days work, it shall be added.

The word Janius, Gibbens, and others.
Rakiah translated Firmament, signifies Expansum, or expansionem, which is a
stretching out; not only from the earth, but about the earth: so that the
world being man's house, the Firmament is as the vaulted roof of it: Or ( as
Meth. The^l. lib. 2. page 333.
Hyperius observes) it is tanquam theca quaedam, omnia quae Deo ipso inferiora
sunt, inclusa continens; as a certain husk, shell, or box, inclusively
containing all things without the Heaven of heavens, or which are below that
place where God does manifest his glory. Which also is further to be seen in
the hundred and fourth Psalm, at the second verse, where it is said that God
has stretched out the heavens as a canopie: or, extendisse incurvando coelos
tanquam conopeum, as some read it: by which comparison it seems that the
Firmament is not so much expansum ratione extensionis a centro, quam circa
centrum; not so much a thing stretched out by reason of its distance from the
center, as about the center.

And again, we call it the Firmament, because in the stretching out it was not
weakened, but made strong: In which regard expositours do well observe the
difference which is between Rakiah and Karah. For, the word which is here used,
they read it Rakiah, and See Gibbens on Genesis chap. 1. quest. 5.
say that it does properly signify a thing made strong by stretching out;
being therefore contrary to the word Karah, which is to break in stretching.

And the Greeks likewise, that they may give a full expression according to the
propriety of the word, do translate it and call it (...), from the verb (...),
signifying to make strong or firm: and thus also the ancient Greek Philosophers
observed, calling the whole compass of the heavens See Lydiats disquisitio
Phys. cap. 10. page 196.
(...), meaning the very utmost bound of them, which is not so weak that it
should be broken in the stretching; but strong, and far more free from a
fluid nature then is that air which the concave of it keeps and holds.

The Latins also call it Firmamentum; and we, in our speech, the Firmament:
which in respect of its extension is the whole compass of heaven on all sides;
being as it were the case of the visible world and all things in it, as has
been showed.

Sect. 2. Of the waters above the Heavens.
BUt from the concavitie of this firmament, we may pass to the convexitie of
it. And now if it be considered as it is unequal, then we shall come to the
examination of that which God assigned as proper to it most especially; viz.
that it separate the waters from the waters. For this out-spread firmament is
by its office to separate; and to be, not above the waters, but between them:
and therefore those waters which it separateth, cannot be such waters as are in
the clouds, but rather above the concave of the firmament.

If they be such as are in the clouds, then are they rather in the middle of
the firmament, then the firmament in middle or between them. And this made one
argue thus, saying, ^oclon. disput. 18. sect. 29.
Expansio in nubium regione aut finitur, aut ulterius extenditur: si ibi
finitur, stellas infra nubes constitutas esse oportet. Sin ulterius extenditur,
supercoelestes aqu^s ab inferioribus expansio non sejungit, sed nubes potius
unam expansionis partem ab altera dispescunt. Atqui utrumque horum a Mosis
narratione absonum. Tutissime igitur aquas coelestes supra sidera esse
constitutas; totumque illud, quod a globo terrae and aquae sursum expanditur,
coeli velaeris nomine contineri sentiemus. That is, The out-spread firmament
either is ended in the cloudie region, or is further extended. If it be ended
there, then the stars must needs be under the clouds, because they are within
the firmament, Genesis 1. 6. But if it be further extended, then the
supercelestiall waters are not separated by the firmament, but rather the
clouds sever one part of the firmament from the other: both which are against
Moses his narration. Therefore we may safely think that the celestial waters
are above the stars, etc.

In which regard it may be also thought that both these waters dropping from
clouds in the air, and also all other waters under the canopie of Heaven, or
within the concavitie of this Expansum, are but the lower waters: and those
other, which are separated from them, must be in an higher place, viz. above
the firmament, and so shall they be divided by the firmament; otherwise not. To
which purpose In his second day of the first week.
Du Bartas thus,

I Will rather give a thousand times the lie
To mine own reason, then but once defy
The sacred voice of th'everlasting Spirit,
Which does so Genesis 1. 7. Psalm. 104 3. Psalm. 148. 4.
often and so loud aver it,
That God above the shining firmament,
I wot not, I, what kind of waters pent.
Or, as Hyp. Meth. (...). live. 2. page* 335.
Hyperius also writes, Assentiemur Mosi, ac simpliciter statuemus aquas non
tantum infra firmamentum, ubi in portiones and quasi regiones certas eae ipsae
sunt distributae, aliaeque per aerem circumvehuntur, aliae terris sunt
adglutinatae; verum etiam super illud esse alias undique circumfusas. That is,
Let us assent to Moses, and plainly determine that there are not only waters
below the firmament, as it were divided into certain portions and regions, some
of them carried about through the air, some fastened to the earth; but also
that there are other waters above the firmament spread round about it.

Which thing is also thus further manifested; because those waters that are
separated by the firmament, are to be at all times separated. For God, in the
creation of this firmament, did not only command that it should separate, but
also that it should be separating: that is, Let it Ainsworth on Genesis
continually separate or divide the waters from the waters; Lydiat. disqui
s^tio Phys. cap. 10.
quasi voluerit nullum esse tempus quo non distinguat; as if he would have it
that there should be no time wherein it might not distinguish between the one
and the other. Which as it cannot be do^e unless there be always waters to be
distinguished; so neither can it be pertinent to those waters in the clouds,
because the air is often clear, and those bottles of rain are not always
there.

And again, it is from the vapors drawn from ^er. 10. 13.
below that clouds and rain come: which cannot at all times be; but then only
when there is a natural concourse of causes to effect it. And then again when
they are there, they be soon gone: for the rain, proceeding from those vapors
which we call the clouds, stays not long in the air, but forthwith falls
down again; and so by little and little the vapor consumes and the cloud is
gone. How can it therefore be that these should be those supercelestiall waters
separated from all other waters by the firmament, seeing the firmament is above
them? and not only so, but also their proper place is here below, being but at
times drawn from hence, and then it is as it were against their wills, which
makes them therefore hasten hither again with all the speed they can: whereas
on the contrary the firmament is to be between those waters, and not over them;
separating them, not at times, but continually.

Neither may it seem strange how the out-firmament can be able always to
uphold them, seeing (as has been said) it was made strong by stretching out,
lifting then the waters up with it, and therefore well fitted for this office,
and can no more fall then (...) no^ magis (...) c^lum ipsum qu^ant. Hyper.
Meth. The^l. lib. 2. page 335.
the heaven it self, whose beams or rafters are laid in the waters, as the
Prophet speaks, Psalm 104. 3. And hereupon it also was that noble Bartas
said,

I see not why m^ns reason should withstand,
Or not believe that He whose powerful hand
Bay'd up the Red sea with a double wall,
That Isreal's host might escape Egyptian thrall,
Could prop as sure so many waves on high
Above the Heavens starre-spangled canopie.
This was his opinion concerning the waters separated by the firmament; of
which opinion are sundry more.

But on the contrary side are other some who are of The contrary and their
reasons.
another mind, affirming that they are meant only of those waters in the
clouds: for (say they) the air is called the firmament; so also is the sky,
etc. And of the clouds it is said in Job, that Job 26. 8.
God binds up his waters in thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under
them. So that, first as every part of the water is called by the name of water;
in like manner every part of the firmament is called by the name of the
firmament: in which regard those waters in the clouds, although no higher then
the air, may be taken for those waters which the firmament does separate: and
secondly, that place in Job shows no less, making it appear, how and in
what manner the waters are separated by the firmament.

Furthermore, Ex ipsa nubium natura, says In Genesis page 70.
Pareus, From the very nature of the clouds this appears to be so: for what
other thing are the clouds but waters separated by force of the diurnall heat,
and by the cold of the air made thick? whereupon (as Pliny calls them) they
are said to be Plin. lib. 31. cap. 1.
Aquae in coelo stantes, Waters standing in the heavens. Also, it may be added
(says Pareus) that Moses makes mention but of two kinds of waters, superas,
and inferas, the higher and the lower: but the clouds are waters, as has been
showed; and no low waters; therefore they are the upper waters: unless there
be three kinds of waters, which is contrary to Moses.

Besides, this (says he) is confirmed by the grammatical construction of the
words. For Moses says, not that it divided from the waters which were supra
Expansum; but thus, viz. from the waters which were desuper Expanso: The sense
therefore is, not that the waters were carried up above the whole Expansum or
Firmament; but rather that they were carried upwards, so, as that with the
firmament they were supra and desuper; that is, above and on high.

Also, the name of heaven confirms no less: for (says he) the Expansum is
called according to the Hebrews Schamajim or Shamajim; from Sham, There, and
Majim, Waters: which derivation is common. And therefore those upper waters are
not quite above the Expansum, or the Firmament; but are there, that is, in the
Firmament, namely in the middle Region of the air.

Thus we see the difference concerning these waters. And now let the reader
choose which opinion likes him The reader is left unto his free choice.
best. But for mine own part I like this latter worst: yet let me not tie
another to be of the same mind any further then he pleases: for it is no
matter of faith, and therefore we have our free choice according to the best
reasons and most forcible demonstrations. Wherefore let me proceed a little
further, that thereby (as near as I can) I may set down that which seems to
me the best meaning and nearest to the truth.

First then I answer, that they do mistake who divide The matter in question is
cleared by answering the contrary arguments.
the Expansum into parts, as if in so doing they could absolutely clear the
matter in question: for it is not a part of the Firmament that is appointed to
this separating office, but the whole Firmament; as any one may see, if he do
but observe the words of God, producing and assigning it. Neither do we find
that the Firmament is any more then one. To divide it into parts so as they
imagine, is not to divide it into parts, but rather to make so many Firmaments
as they imagine parts; like as every scale of an onyon is a several and
differing scale, and not one the part of another. And besides, neither is there
the same reason between the parts of water and these supposed parts of the
Firmament: for then when God made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, he would not
have said, Let them be in the Firmament, but above the Firmament; for they are
far higher then the clouds; yet, I say, they being The sun, moon, and
stars, are higher then the clouds, and yet they are not said to be above the
firmament, but in it* the fowls also fly in it, but not above it.
higher then the clouds, he is said to place them but in the Firmament: and
they being no more but in it, how improperly do we affirm those things to be
above it, whose places are lower then either Sun, Moon, or Stars!

And secondly, admit Job tells us that there are waters bound up in thick
clouds; does not Jeremie also tell us that they are drawn up in ^er. 10. 13.
vapors from the earth? which (as has been showed) cannot at all times be,
but then when there is a natural concourse of causes to effect it: whereas the
out-spread Firmament is to be always between them, separating them, not at
times, but continually. And as for the rain proceeding from those waters which
we call the clouds, it stays not long in the air, but forthwith falls down
again; showing that of right their proper place is here below: and therefore we
make not three kinds of waters (as if we would be contrary to Moses) in saying
that there are other waters above the concave of the Firmament, which on this
second day of the worlds creation were separated from all other waters.

Wherefore observe but this, they being separated on this second day, how could
they be such as the air affords? for the middle Region of the air, which is
the place for the clouds, was not until the third day: There was no middle
Region until the third day.
Not until the third day, I say, because it is found by experience, and from
sufficient witness proved true, that the tops of the highest mountains do
reach up unto that place which we call the middle Region of the air, being
some of them more lofty then the clouds.

As for example, in Iapan there is a mountain called Figeniana, which is some
certain leagues higher then the clouds. And in Ternate among the Philippine
Islands there is a mountain, which (as Mr. Purchase in his pilgrimage relates)
is even angry with nature because it is fastened to the earth, and does
therefore not only lift up his head above the middle Region of the air, but
endeavors also to conjoyn it self with the fiery Element. And of the
mountain Athos between Macedon and Thrace, it is said to be so high, that it
casts shade more then Viz. 300 furlongs which make 37 miles and an half.
thirty and seven miles. Also the mount of Olympus in Thessalie is said to be
of that height, as neither the winds, clouds, or rain do overtop it. And
(although I omit sundry others of As Atlas, Pelion, Ossa, Caucasus, and Tabor,
which last rises up 30 furlongs, as Iosephu^ writes.
exceeding height) it is also written of another mount so high above the
clouds, that some who have seen it do witness that they have been on the top
of it, and have had both a clear sky over their heads, and also clouds below
them pouring down rain and breaking forth with thunder and lightnings; at which
those below have been terrified, but on the top of the hill there was no such
matter. This surely was that mountain which Lyd. de orig. fonti^ns, cap. 10.
Mr. Lydiat meant when he said, that etiam aestivis diebus, even in the summer
time, when the clouds are at the highest, those on the top of the mountains
have had fair weather, and withal perceived that there was plenty of rain
about the middle height of the same hills.

Thus we see that there are lofty mountains: And indeed their loftines is the
cause of a middle Region: for the hills, hindering the air from following the
motion of the heavens, do make it about their tops a fit and convenient place
to thicken these vapors into clouds, which by the attractive power of the
heavenly bodies are drawn up thither.

Wherefore (that I may conclude) the place of the middle Region being both
caused and also overtopped by sundry high mountains, it will appear that there
was no middle Region of the air until the third day, because the waters were
all over the earth, and standing above the hills until that very day: For
then, and not before, God gathered them together unto one place, and made the
dry land to appear, which before was covered with waters as with a garment,
Psalm. 104. Rarior aqua, says one, velut nebula, terras tegebat, quae
congregatione densata est; The thin water, like a mist or wet cloud, covered
the earth, which by gathering together was made thick. In which regard it may
be said, says Aquin. Sum. p^r. 1. Quest 69. Art^.
Aquinas, that it was as natural for the water to be every where about the
earth, as for the air to be about both water and earth: yet nevertheless,
propter necessitatem finis, says he, for the necessity of the end, namely
that plants and living creatures should be upon the earth, it was meet that the
earth should be so uncovered, and the waters so gathered, that the dry land
appear. Now this was a work pertinent unto the third day; and before this work
done there could be no middle Region: and the middle Region being on this day
and not before, how can the waters in the clouds be those waters which were
separated by the out-spread Firmament on the second day? Neither do I here
argue a facto ad fieri, because in the very creation of this Firmament, God
then said, Let it be between the waters; that is, even then beginning its
office and art of separating them. Which that it is even so, we see he speaks
next concerning the lower waters, and makes no more mention at all of those
upper ones, because he had already done with them, and left them in their place
unto which he had appointed them.

But furthermore, this tenent is not a little helped by a Of the windows of
heaven opened in the Flood.
consideration of the cataracts or windows of heaven which in the days of Noah
were opened, and poured down rain by the space of forty days: For me thinks
the clouds could not be those windows of heaven, because it rained forty
days, and before it left raining the waters were higher then the hills, being,
when forty days were ended, fifteen cubits above the highest mountains, as in
the history of the Flood is manifest. And hereupon it was that one once by the
same reason concluded and said, that either it did not rain forty days,
(which assertion we are sure is false) or else it rained from some other where
then from the middle Region: For seeing the middle Region it self was drowned
before it ceased to rain, it cannot but be that the rain descended from some
higher place.

1. Object. But perhaps some may think that the clouds mounted higher and
higher as the waters increased; insomuch that as the waters by little and
little gat above the mountains, so did the clouds.

Answ. This cannot be; because that which makes us distinguish the air so as
it may have a middle Region, is nothing else but the differing temper that it
has, both from the upper and lower Region; and this differing temper is caused
by the hills, which hindering the air from following the motion of the
heavens, do make it a fit place to thicken those vapors into clouds, which by
the attractive power of the stars and planets are drawn up thither; as
already has been showed, and as afterward shall be touched when I come again
to speak of the several Regions and their tempers; showing you that it is an
Axiom undeniable, that the farnesse from a circular motion gives quietness,
coldness, and heaviness; even as the nearenesse to it gives motion, heat, and
lightness.

2. Object. Or secondly, perhaps some may think that the hills and mountains
were not before the Flood, but made by the violence of the waters; and that
Moses, when he would describe how high the waters were, does but show us that
they were higher by fifteen cubits then the highest mountain that was then in
his time: which he might well say, and make such a comparison, although there
were no hills before the flood.

Answ. That which has been said in the former answer concerning the cause of
the middle Region, does sufficiently stop this last objection, unless it be
granted, that there were no clouds until the Flood had made the hills: And
indeed if any such thing be granted, then all is granted, and the controversy
quite ended concerning these waters above the Heavens.

But besides that answer, I hope to make it appear That hills and mountains
were not caused by the Flood.
that mountains, valleys, and plains were created in the beginning, and were
before the Flood in the days of Noah.

For first, if hills were caused by the Flood, then it must be that the waters
suffered an extreme violent motion: but the waters being over the whole face of
the earth had nothing to hinder them from their own free motion, nor any thing
to compel them to a violent motion; such I mean as should make them work such
wonders as are supposed. Had they been overtopped by any thing, then indeed
running from one place to another there might have been a repercussion, and by
such contention more strange accidents then were, might have been produced, as
the making of hills, and the like.

Or secondly, if there were such a violent motion, (as questionles the waters
moved until all places were filled alike, with no small violence) yet the
violence was not so great as to be the parent of the hills and mountains; for
then without doubt it would have been so forcible also as to have turned rivers
and changed them from one place to another, cast down all manner of buildings
and structures, rooted up all trees and the like, so that after the Flood
nothing should have had the same name, bounds, and description which before it
had, neither would the memories of the former ages have been but buried from
all succeeding time; which we know is otherwise: for if it were not, it is
likely that Moses, speaking of the site of Paradise, and setting down all the
rivers of it exactly, would have specified it in his history, that thereby
after-ages looking for those places might not mistake or suspect the truth of
his relation. Neither have we just cause to think that all buildings and
ancient monuments of the Fathers before the flood were extinguished in the
flood: For it is reported by Pom. Mela, lib. 1. cap. 11. and Plin. lib. 5. cap.
13.
Pomponius Mela, and Pliny, concerning the city Ioppa, that it was built
before the flood, and that Cepha or Cepheus reigned there; which is witnessed
by certain ancient altars, bearing titles of him and his brother Phineus,
together with a memorial of the grounds and principles of their religion. And
of the city Henoch there is a much like relation. But what need I mention
more, seeing Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Josephus, a writer of good credit, affirms that he himself saw one of those
pillars which was set up by Seth the son of Adam? and this for the truth of
it was never questioned, but warranted by all antiquity.

Moreover, seeing the dove was twice sent out of the ark, and returned with an
olive branch at her last return, and not at her first, it is not without reason
that we think the trees were not torn up by their roots, but remained still
fixed in the ground even as they had done before; for, if the trees had been
swimming or floating upon the waters (as some may think) then the poor dove
might have found one branch or other as well at the first as second time.
Besides, when she did bring any thing, Noah took it not as a token what havoc
the flood had made, but as a sign that the waters were decreased: she
therefore plucked it off from some tree growing on the earth, and not floating
on the waters.

And last of all (although I say nothing of the delectation and profit of the
mountains, which do thereby even amplify the goodness of God in his works,
creating and not occasioning them) I shall need to point you no further then to
the plain text it self, which does most plainly tell us, not that the waters
were as high as the highest mountains which are now, or were then when Moses
wrote his history, but that even from the beginning there were hills and
mountains whose lofty tops in the universal flood were covered with waters:
for thus stand the words, Genesis 7. 19, 10.
And the waters* prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills
which were under the whole heaven were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the
waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. Whereupon, as I remember, Ains.
on Genesis
one writes thus, saying that this judgment was admirable, seeing there are
mountains, as Atlas, Olympus, Caucasus, Athos, and other such, that are so
high, as their tops are above the clouds and winds (as Historiographers do
report it) and yet see, all these are covered: and these being covered, the
middle Region must needs be drowned; and that being drowned, how could the
clouds be those windows of heaven which poured down rain for forty days? And
those not being the windows of heaven, it cannot but be that the waters above
the heavens are in a more remote and higher place, even above the concave of
the out-spread Firmament.

3. Object. But perhaps you may think that I now pitch too much upon reason
concerning this of the Flood; seeing it was caused not by natural and ordinary
means, but by the extraordinary power of God.

Answ. To which it is answered, that this flood was partly natural, partly
supernatural; and to show how far nature had a hand in this admirable
effect, we may distinguish with them, who say that an effect may be called
natural two manner of ways: first, in regard of the causes themselves:
secondly, in regard of the direction and application of the causes. If we
consider the mere secondary and isntrumental causes, we may call this effect
natural; because it was partly performed by their help and concurrence: but if
we consider the mutual application and conjunction of these second causes
together with the first cause, which extraordinarily set them on work, we must
needs acknowledge it to be supernatural.

Now then, although we have built upon reason, and so found that before forty
days fully ended the middle Region it self was drowned, whereupon it could not
rain from thence; yet in so doing we do not argue amiss: for it is no whit
derogating from the power of the Almighty to ascend up higher till we find the
cause of this long rain, and also the place from whence it came, seeing that
when we have so done we shall plainly find, that in regard of the direction
and application of the cause it was extraordinarily set on work by a divine
dispensation; and so the effect was supernatural.

I may therefore now proceed: and that I may make the matter yet a little
plainer concerning these cataracts or windows of heaven, and so by consequence
of the waters also above the heavens, this in the next place may be added;
namely, that Moses sets down two causes by which there grew so great an
augmentation of water as would drown the world: the one was the fountain of the
great deep: the other was the opening of the windows of heaven. Now if these
windows were the clouds, then it seems that the waters were increased but by
one cause: for the clouds in the air come from the waters in the sea, which by
descending make no greater augmentation then the decresion was in their
ascending. And although it may be thought that there are waters enough within
the bowels of the earth to overflow the whole earth (which is demonstrated by
comparing the earths diameter with the height of the highest mountains) yet
seeing the rainwater is made a companion with the great deep in the
augmentation of the drowning waters, I see no reason why that should be urged
against it; especially seeing it is found that the earth emptied not all the
water within her bowels, but only some: For thus stand the words, Genesis 8. 2.
The fountains also of the deep, and the windows of heaven were stopped, and
the rain from heaven was restrained: their store therefore was not spent when
they had sufficiently drowned the world, but their fury rather was restrained,
when they had executed Gods purpose by climbing high enough above the hills.

Cardinal Cajetane was conceited that there was a mount in Paradise which was
not overflown, and there forsooth he places Henoch: The like dream also they
have amongst them concerning Elias: And, as their champion and Goliath Dr. Will.
ex Bell. de gra. pri. hom.
Bellarmine is persuaded, all those mountains only were overflown where the
wicked dwelt. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Josephus also reports out of Nicholas Damascenus, that the hill Baris in
Armenia saved many who fled thither for succor. But these are dreams and
devices, which are soon overthrown by Moses in his foresaid evident text; where
the words are so general, that they include all and every mountain, under, not
only the Aerie heaven (as Cajetane collecteth) but under the whole Heaven
without exception.

And now after all, what hinders that there should not be waters above the
concave of the Firmament, and that the opening of the windows of heaven should
not be more then the loosing of the clouds? For it is affirmed, and not without
reason you see, that the rain, or a great part of it which fell in the
universal Flood, came from an higher place then the middle Region of the air:
and that the upper waters are to be above the Firmament, and not the parts of
it, is an assertion well agreeing to Moses his description of this second days
work. For (as has been showed) concerning the fowls and stars, it is true that
they are but in the Firmament, and not above it: neither is there any more
Firmament then Necessario fatendum est, si modo ^ubes sint superiores ill^
aq^ae, duo esse expansa, and ita duo, ut de fabrica illius quod duo^um multo
est nobillus, nulla siai ment^o. Lyd. de Orig. font. cap. 10.
one, seeing Moses mentions not a second. The fowls indeed fly above the earth
(as the text it self speaks in Genesis 1. 20.) but not above the Firmament:
their course being (as Iunius reads the place) versus superficiem expansi
coeli; or ante expansum; or coram expanso coeli; but never supra expansum. And
as for the stars, the text likewise says, ver. 15. Let them be for lights in
the out-spread firmament; mentioning never more then one and the same
Firmament. But for the waters, it is otherwise: The Firmament is appointed to
separate them, as being between, and not above them. Esto expansum inter aquas
(it is learned Iunius his right version of the place) ut sit distinguens inter
aquas. Fecit ergo Deus expansum quod Distinguit, a word of the present tense,
noting the present performance of that which it was made for.
distinguit inter aquas quae sunt sub expanso, and inter aquas quae sunt supra
expansum. That is, Let there be a firmament between the waters, etc. Between
the waters, as having waters above it: And how unlike it is, that the upper
waters should be placed otherwise, let the former reasons witness: For, all
things considered, we need not stand so much upon Pareus his reading Super,
quasi in expanso, and desuper expanso, as if they were but above, or on high
within the concave, as are the fowls and stars: this (I say) we need not
stand upon, seeing Iunius reads Supra expansum, without any such nice
salving, although he thinks with Pareus that these upper waters are no higher
then the middle Region of the air. And also, admit that some derive the word
Schamajim or Shamajim (which signifies Heavens) from Sham, There, or in that
place; and from Majim, Waters; concluding thereupon that these waters which we
now speak of must be There, viz. in the heavens, and not above them: although
some (I say) make this derivation, yet others derive the same word otherwise:
And no As Val. Schindi. and Fagius upon Genesis chap. 1. out of Aben Ezra.
few be there, who, not without reason, do suppose that it is no derivative nor
compound word at all; but rather that the Ismaelitish word Schama, which
signifies nothing else but High or Above, does proceed from this word
Schamajim which in English we read Heavens: In which regard the Etymology
helps nothing to prove the adverse part.

And yet (as I said before) let the reader take his choice: For perhaps he may
now think after all, that if there be waters above the starry heaven, and that
part of those waters descended in the time of the Flood, that then the Heavens
would have been corrupted and dissolved (as some have said) the rain falling
through them from the convexitie of the out-spread Firmament.

Sect. 3. An objection answered concerning the nature of the Heavens, examining
whether they be of a Quint-essence.
BUt concerning this it may be said, that it is not known whether the heavens
be of such a nature, as that the rain falling through them should dissolve or
corrupt them. Those indeed who follow Aristotle, make them of a Quint-essence
altogether differing from things compounded of the Elements: But for mine own
part more easily should I be persuaded to think that there is no such fifth
essence in them, but rather that they are of a like nature with the Elements,
or not much differing.

For first, although Aristotle deny any change or alteration to have been
observed or seen in the heavens since the beginning of the world; yet he was
deceived: For Hipparchus, who had better skill in Astronomy then ever
Aristotle had, he (as Plin. lib. 2. cap: 26.
Pliny witnesses) tells us out of his own diligent and frequent
observations that the heavens have had changes in them; for there was in his
days a new star like unto that which was once in Cassiopea. And that which
is beyond the authority of the greatest philosopher, does also witness as
much; I mean the sacred voice of the everlasting Spirit, affirming that the two
parts of this universe, the heavens as well as the earth, do both of them Psalm.
102. 26.
wax old even as does a garment: which is as if it should be said, that by
little and little they are changed, tending so long to corruption till at last
shall come the time of their dissolution.

What great difference then can there be between the heavens and things here
below, seeing in their own natures both of them do tend to corruption, and are
subject to mutation?

Besides, as it is with Man who is the little world, so certainly it is with
Macrocosme who is the greater world: but man changes and declineth daily, not
being now as heretofore he has been; and so also as a good consequence it must
follow, that the greater world does also suffer change, and, by declining,
alteration. That man declineth, Dove conf^t. of Atheil. chap. 14.
says one, is a thing most manifest: For men are of lower stature, lesser
bones and strength, and of shorter lives then their forefathers were. Now from
whence comes this but from the declining estate of the greater world? The
earth, we see, which is the lower part of it, is not so fruitful as before,
but begins to be barren like the womb of Sarah; neither do the fruits which
she brings forth, yield so much nutriment as heretofore they have done. And
how comes that to pass but because the heaven also faints? For the Planets
wax old and cannot afford so great virtue and influence to these lower bodies,
as in times past they did; which Ideme* ^lin. lib. 7. ^ap. 1^. ^ (...) Gell.
Not. A^. l. 13. c. ^.
Pliny and Aulus Gellius testify. And indeed this must needs be a manifest
proof, seeing less and weaker bodies are conceived every Age in the womb of
nature, that nature therefore waxes old and weary of conceiving.

Also, says he, if a man do but behold the face of heaven, the Moon looks
pale and wan, Mars less rubicund, Sol less orient, Jupiter not of so amiable
and favorable countenance, Venus more hypocritical, and all the rest both of
the wandering and fixed stars more weak and suspicious then they did before.
That mighty Psalm. 19. 5.
Giant, which was wont to run his unwearied course, now waxes weary, as if
he would stand still in heaven, as he did in the days of Joshua; for he
shines more dimmely, and appears more seldom then before, being much nearer
to the earth then of ancient times. For, (if we may give credit to the
calculations of the chief masters in Astronomy) the Sun, quoth Copernicus,
and after him also Stofler, is nearer to the earth then it was in the days of
Ptolomie, by the space of twenty six thousand, six hundred and sixty miles: or
(as Philip Melanchthon says) nine thousand, nine hundred, seventie and six
miles; to whom (says Di^. Po^. (...). 2. (...) A^vent.
Di^tericus) assenteth that famous mathematician of our age, David Origanus, in
his Prognostication for the year of our Lord 1604.

All these are proofs: and although we do not greatly contend concerning this
last allegation of the suns approach so near us, yet nevertheless the
assertion in general is true enough, that the heavens as well as the earth, as
they grow older and older, do suffer change, and in that regard their natures
cannot but be much alike.

Unto which add this, namely, that these visible heavens, of which we now
speak, were taken from that mass or lump which lay here below, and that the
whole lump was created at once; in which regard it cannot be denied that they
differ toto genere or altogether, but that they are of a much like nature with
inferior bodies or things here below. And as for Aristotle, he never would so
earnestly have defended the contrary, had he not known that it was an excellent
means to color that which he also held concerning the worlds Phys. lib. 8.
cap. 1. and (...).
eternity.

But besides all this, the observations of our best and modern Astronomers make
much against him: for they have modestly and manifestly proved, that not only
new stars, but comets also have been far above the moon. As for example,
that strange star which once was at the back of Cassiopea's chair, was of an
extraordinary height above it; for it shined without any difference of Aspect,
Parallax, or diversity of sight, even until all the matter whereof it
consisted was consumed; having always (as the observers thereof do witness)
one and the same station to every of the stars, both in all climates, and
also in all parts of the heaven, no diversity of sight at all observed: all
which in the lowermost Planets is otherwise, and perceived most of all in the
moon, because the Semidiameter of the earth (according to which quantity we
dwell from the center) has a sensible bigness unto the distance of the moons
sphere from us. Had therefore that New star, Comet, or what you please to
call it, been lower then the moon, and not in the starrie heaven, then (like
the inferior Planets) it would have suffered a Parallax or diversity of
sight, and never have kept such a regular motion as it did; contending not to
be overcome of the starrie heaven in its motion, but to keep as it were an
equal pace with it: thereby showing that it was even in the Ethereall heaven
it self. For this is a rule, that by how much a star is higher then the
earth, by so much it imitateth the highest heavens in their daily motion.

Neither was it this star alone, but others also after it, even Comets
themselves, whose places were found to be above the moon: for observing more
diligently and exactly then in former times, the observers could easily
demonstrate this truth also: thinking thereupon that many of those Comets which
have been seen in former ages were burnt out, even in the starrie heaven it
self, and not so many of them below the moon, as generally (without serious
observation) have been supposed. Lib. de (...).
Longomontanus proves this, both in that last Comet which was seen in the
year 1618, and also in other Comets before it. And now what of all this?
Nothing but only thus: viz. If Comets be burnt, consumed and wasted in the
starrie heavens, it seems that there is no great difference between them and
things here below: for if there were, it might be thought that they would not
suffer such earthly matter to ascend up their territories; such, I say, as does
either wholly or in part compose them. Wholly or in part I add, because
(perhaps) even the heavens themselves may afford some matter toward the
generation of them, especially if they be For new stars Tycho affirms it,
lib. de nova ^iella.
new stars, such as Aristotle never saw; wherefore he writes that a Comet
consists altogether of an hot, dry, and a kind of oily exhalation drawn
from the earth: and questionless in such as are utterly below the moon it is
even so; but if they ^e higher and continue longer, they, as well as new
stars, may have some help from such matter as the heavens afford toward the
generation of strange appearances: which though they have, yet that they have
no earthly matter is not excluded, because next under God the efficient cause
of these things is attributed to the stars and their operation; for when they
are aptly and conveniently placed and aspected, then by their power, working
upon things here below, they draw up hot, dry, and oily exhalations, and
these exhalations afford unto Comets that matter whereof they consist. Ptolomie
attributes much in this kind to Mars and Mercury; and so do many others else
beside him: and why the yearly aspects of these stars do not always produce
such effects, is because they are not always aspected in the same manner, but
sometimes in one part of the heavens, sometimes in another, and cannot
therefore produce their intended effects, without either the meeting or
avoiding of apt or inconvenient occurrences.

But I conclude, and do yet affirm that the nature of the heavens is certainly
such, that the waters above the heavens might pass or issue through them in
the time of the Flood, and yet the heavens not be dissolved, nor suffer damage
by their falling; damage, neither in corrupting them, nor yet in leaving a
vacant place by coming all away: of which in the fourth days work, when I come
to speak of the stars, I shall add yet something more.

CHAP. V. How to understand the word Heavens; and of the several Regions of
the air, together with a consideration of such appearances as we use to see
there.
Sect. 1.
ANd now to go on with the residue of this days work: God (says Moses) called
the firmament Heavens, etc.

By heavens in this place Moses means only the visible heavens, because he
speaks only of the visible part of the world. And yet the same word which is
here used is sometimes put for the Dan. 7. 2, 13.
air, wherein winds, clouds, and fowls do fly: sometimes for the Psalm. 8.
9. Genesis 1. 16. 17.
upper Firmament, where the sun, moon, and stars are set: and sometimes for
the high places, where Matthew. 22. 30.
Angels dwell. And hereupon it was that S. Paul mentioned the third 2. Cor. 12.
2*
heavens, wherein he saw things unspeakable.

The first of these is like to the outward court of Solomon's temple, and is the
most open to us.

The second is like his inward court, less open, and abounding with starrie
lights or lamps never going out.

And the next is as the Sanctum Sanctorum, whither he is entered once for all,
who is a Priest for ever, and makes intercession for us.

In the two lowest is no felicity; for neither the Bish. Halls contemplation^.
fowls nor stars are happy. It is the third of these alone where the blessed
Trinity enjoys it self, and the glorified spirits enjoy it.

And questionless in this highest part must needs be more then exceeding
glory, seeing the other two within the concave of the Firmament are so full of
wonder.

But of the one of them I shall need to speak little in this days work: yet of
the other under it, as being more pertinent, something must be added.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 1. Of the Air and the several Regions in it.
WE may therefore now (if you please) look into the Air: and here, following
the common path, and separating it from the starrie heaven, I must say that it
is divided into three stages or Regions: although I verily think (as afterward
shall be showed when I come to speak of the stars) that all this space, even
from the earth to the eighth sphere, is nothing else but air.

The highest Region is said to be exceeding hot, and also The highest Region.
dry, by reason of the neighborhood that it has with the fiery element (as
is said) and with the stars; by the force of whose beams it receives heat,
which is also much increased by following the motion of the heavens.

The lowest Region is somewhat contrary; for it is The lowest Region.
said to be hot and moist: hot chiefly by the reflection of the sunne-beams
meeting with the earth; and moist, by reason of the proper nature of the air,
and also by reason of the vapors exhaled out of the earth and water. This is
the quality which commonly is attributed to this Region.

But I think that we may rather say it is variable; now hot, now cold, and
sometimes temperate; differing according to the times and seasons of the year:
In which regard Du Bartas writes thus,

Warm-temper'd showers do wash it in the Spring;
And so in Autumn, but more varying:
In Winter time it is wet, and cold, and chill:
In Summer season hot and soultry still;
For then the fields, scorched with flames, reflect
The sparkling rays of thousand stars aspect.
The chief is Phoebus, to whose arrows bright
Our The earth.
Globie Grandam serves for But and White.
Neither is it altogether variable in regard of time, but also by reason of the
diversity of place; some climates being more hot and dry, some more cold and
moist then others; which comes to pass according to their distance from the
Equinoctial toward either of the Poles.

Thus for these two Regions. But now concerning the The middle Region.
middle Region, it is always cold: yet surely in its own nature it would be
warmer then the Region which is here below, were it not cooled by a cold
occasioned by the reflection of the Sunne-beams: For they, reflecting upon the
earth, drive up above the beams of their reflection much cold from below, which
being daily supplied is kept as a continual prisoner between the heat above
and the heat beneath.

Or, if you will, take it thus, namely that it is cold, but not extremely cold:
yet cold (I say) it is in respect of the two other Regions which are hotter
then it. And this coldness happens partly through the causes before
expressed; and partly by reason of the Air in it which cannot follow the
motion of the heavens, seeing it is hindered by the tops of the mountains. And
hereupon it is that the Philosophers make this a rule, saying that Remoti^ ^
(...) circula^i dat qui^tem, frigiditatem, and (...); si^ pro (...) dat m^um,
calo^ and levitate^.
the farrenesse from a circular motion gives quietness, coldness, and
heaviness; even as the nearness gives motion, heat, and lightness: Which in
this thing concerning the middle Region is found to be true, the Air in it
being cold, because it is hindered from following the circular motion of the
heavens. But (as I said) it is not absolutely cold, but respectively: For if it
were extreme cold, then the heat of the Sun would never pass through it to
this Region here below; neither would there be grass, herbs, and such high
trees as are upon the tops of the mountains.

But to proceed; 1. In the highest Region, and often times above it, be generated
Comets or Blazing stars, and such like fiery Meteors of diverse sorts. 2. In
the middle Region, Clouds, Thunder, Rain, Winds, Storms, etc. 3. In the lowest
Region we have Dews, Mists, Hoar-frost, Ice and Frost. As also here is your
Ignis fatuus, or foolish fire, with other Lights burning about graves, or such
like fattie places where there is store of clammie or fat oily substance for
their matter. These Lights are seen also in fields, and are driven by a gentle
wind to and fro until their matter be consumed.

Now these and every one of these, seeing they have their causes in nature, let
us a little view them, both how and what they are: For they who send us to God,
and his decree in nature, have indeed said what is the true cause, but not how
it is by natural means effected. For the manner of producing these things does
no less amplify the power and providence of God, then the things themselves
when they are produced.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 2. Of Meteors, first in general, then how they are* divided in
particular.
ANd these things of which we now speak, seen in any of the Regions, by a
general name are called Meteors. And the matter of Meteors, as it is remote,
is from the Elements; but as it is propinque or near, it consists of
Exhalations.

And Exhalations are of two kinds. 1. There is Fumus. Exhalations are of two
kinds.
2. Vapor.

If it come from the earth or some sandy place, it is Fumus, a Fume or a kind
of Smoke.

If it come from the water or some watery place, it is Vapor. For this is a
rule, that A Fume has a certain earthly nature in it, and yet is not earth;
and a Vapor has a certain watery nature in it, and yet it is not water. Or, if
you had rather, take it thus; Fumus est mediae naturae inter terram and ignem;
Vapor vero inter aquam and aerem: That is, A Fume is of a middle nature between
earth and fire; but a Vapor is of a middle nature between water and air.

And further, all vapors are warm and moist; and will The nature of vapors.
easily be resolved into water; much like the breath that proceeds out of a
man's mouth, or out of a pot of water standing on the fire: and these are never
drawn higher then the middle Region of the Air; for there they are thickened
and conglomerated by the cold into clouds. And why vapors are warm, being
drawn from that Why vapors are warm.
which is cold, is not from any internal property of their own, but they
receive this quality from the power and influence of the stars. For after that
the matter is by them attenuated or made thin, their beams cannot but warm it,
although it proceed from that which is cold.

Again, all fumes are as smokes which be hot and dry; The nature of fumes.
which because they be thin and lighter then vapors, they often pass the
lowest and middle Regions of the Air, being sometimes carried even beyond the
highest Region it self.

And thus we see how there are two kinds of Exhalations;

The One somewhat hot, but heavy, moist and thick:
The other light, dry, burning, pure and quick.
Moreover, these Exhalations being the matter of Meteors (as has been said)
are either from the Earth or Water. As for the Fire and Air, they are mixed
with this matter, as with all other things, but not so abundantly that they may
be said to be the material cause of any Meteor, although without them none can
be effected. And thus much generally. But now more particularly.

And in coming to particulars, it may be found that these kind of Meteors
concerning which I speak, are Three sorts of Meteors.
of three sorts; either Fiery, Waterie, or Aierie.

Fiery are of two sorts: either such as are in very deed fired; or else such
as only seem to burn, which are therefore called Phasmata: In which regard it
may be said that these Fiery ones are either Flames or Apparitions.

And again in respect of their matter, if they be such as burn in very deed,
then they be either more or Two sorts of Fiery Meteors which burn in very deed.
less pure.

Their place where we see them is according to the abundance and scarcity, or
rather quality of the matter whereof they consist: for if it be heavy and
gross, it cannot be carried high; but if it be not so gross, but rather light
and more full of heat, then it aspires and transcends so much the higher by how
much it is the lighter; sometimes above the highest Region of the Air, even
into the starry heaven it self; which is witnessed by our best modern
Astronomers, who have observed many Comets above the Moon.

Furthermore, these Fiery impressions, according to the diverse disposing of
their matter, are of several fashions; and thereupon they have several
appellations, being called according unto the names of those things unto which
they seem to be like.

As 1. Torches. 2. Burning Beams. 3. Round Pillars. 4. Pyramidall Pillars. 5.
Burning Spears, Streams, or Darts. These sorts are ignita pura.
6. Dancing or leaping Goats. 7. Flying Sparks. 8. Shooting Stars. 9. Flying
Lances. 10. Fires, either scattered, or else as if all the air burned. 11.
Flying Dragons, or Fire-drakes. 12. Wandering Lights. 13. And also licking or
cleaving fire, sticking on the hairs of men or beasts.


Now all these kinds (of which I have mentioned thirteen) I take to be such
fiery Meteors as are said to be pure and not mixed.

Then again have you those which are said to be mixed and less pure:

As 1. Comets of all sorts. These sorts are ignita (...).
2. All kinds of lightening. 3. Unto which must be joined thunder, as an
adjunct.


And now of these severally, before I mention any more of another kind,
whether waterie or aierie.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 3. Of such fiery Meteors as are pure and not mixed.
1. FAx, which is a Torch or Firebrand, or as a lighted Article 1. Of burning
Torches.
candle, is an exhalation hot and dry, drawn beyond the middle Region of the
air, where being arrived it is set on fire (as are all exhalations that come
there) partly by their own heat, and partly by the heat of that place: and
because the matter of the exhalation is long and not broad, and being equally
compact, and fired at the one end, it burns like a torch or candle, until
the whole whereof it consists be consumed. And why it should burn at the one
end rather then at the other, is found to be because it is long and stands
upright, having the most of its aspiring matter in the top; and in this station
ascending up, it comes to pass, that when the upper end does present it self
to the heat of the upper Region, it is fired, and so consumes by degrees, even
as by degrees it ascends, or peepeth into that hot place.

2. Trabs ardens, a burning Beam, is an exhalation hot and Article 2. Of
burning Beams.
dry, drawn beyond the middle Region of the air; the matter of which
exhalation being long and not very broad, makes it seem like a beam or logge:
and because it is more gross and heavy on the under part from the one end
unto the other, and on the upper part has much aspiring matter equally
dispersed, it is transversly carried up, and so being fired it lies at length,
and stands not upright.

3. Round Pillars are of the same nature, unless perhaps Article 3. Of round
burning Pillars.
their light and heavy matter is not so equally or in like order disposed, but
rather heavier toward the one end then the other, which makes it be carried up
or presented in perpendicular fashion; and also having the hottest and driest
and most combustible matter driven to the superficies or outside of it, by
reason of a contrary qualitied substance within it, which makes it therefore be
fired on all sides alike, and appear like a burning Pillar.

4. Pyramidall Pillars are nothing differing from the Article 4. Of Pyramidall
burning Pillars.
other, unless that the exhalation have more earthly matter in it below, and
not so much above: for when the lighter and thinner parts are ascended to the
top, then the grosser, heavier, and thicker are left in the bottom: which
makes it therefore of fashion great beneath and small above. Article 5. Of
Flashings, Streams, or Darts


5. Burning Streams, Spears, or Darts, is that Meteor which is called Bolis or
Iaculum, and is an Exhalation hot and dry, meanly long; whose thick and
thinner parts are equally mixed: and thereupon being fired in the highest
Region, it flameth on the thin or subtle part; which nevertheless, because the
matter is well mixed, does also send fire to the other parts, insomuch that it
seems to run like a dart from the one unto the other.

Or, if you will, this Meteor (or one very like it) is thus generated, viz.
when a great quantity of hot and dry Exhalations (which indeed may fitly be
called a dry cloud) is set on fire in the midst, and because the cloud is not
so compact that it should suddenly rend, as when thunder is caused, the fire
breaks out at the edges of it, kindling the thin Exhalations which shoot out in
great number like to fiery spears or darts, the streaming or flashing being so
much the whiter by how much the Exhalation is the thinner. Such like
coruscations as these we use to see many nights in the North and North-east
parts of the sky.

6. Caprae saltantes, or dancing Goats, are caused when Article 6. Dancing
Goats.
an Exhalation hot and dry is so compact, that on the one side or other it
has some parts which appear as the appendices of it, or joined to the main
Exhalation by an other kind of Exhalation far thinner then the main one, so
that the fire running on the main part, and as it were outright, by the way it
cannot but seem to skip unto those parts on the sides, inflaming them also;
which, because it is variously and nimbly performed, makes the flame seem to
leap or dance, just as wanton goats use to do when they are dancing or playing.

7. Scintillae volantes, or flying Sparks, are caused when Article 7. Flying
Sparks.
the matter of the Exhalation is not only thin, but in all parts thin alike,
but not compacted or knit together: and not being closely joined, but
interrupted by small spaces, those parts which come up first into the highest
Region are fired before the other that follow, and thereupon they fly abroad
like sparks out of a chimney, even as when saw-dust or any such like matter is
cast into the fire. This Meteor by some is called Stipula ardens, or Burning
stubble.

8. Stellae cadentes, Shooting or Falling stars, are Article 8. of Shooting
stars*
caused when an Exhalation hot and dry is gathered as it were on a round heap,
but not thoroughly compacted, nor yet so apt to ascend as other Exhalations,
which makes it therefore be beaten back again when it comes near the cold
confines of the middle Region; and so, hovering aloft, by an Antiperistasis is
a repulsion on every part, whereby either heat or cold is made more strong in
it self by restraining the contrary.
Antiperistasis, or repulsion by the contrary to it on every part, it is set on
fire, and then sliding away, it appears as if a star fell down or were
thrown to the earth.

For, shooting stars these some do fondly call;
As if those heavenly lamps from heaven could fall.
Moreover, sometimes it is generated after another manner, which is but in
respect of the disposing of the matter; and then the Exhalation is more long
and narrow, which being kindled at the one end burns swiftly to the other,
even like a piece of waxed thread being lighted in a fire or candle.

Again, some think that this Meteor is not so much set on fire, as directly
under some star or other which gives it a shining. But how this can be I
cannot well perceive, seeing it shoots obliquely as often as directly downwards.

9. Lancea ardens or volans, A burning or flying Lance, Article 9. Flying
Lances.
is another fiery Meteor kindled in like sort that the former was, and has
this name because the matter of it is so disposed, that when it is fired it
seems to be like a Lance.

10. Illuminations, or Fires scattered in the Air, and Article 10 Of the
seeming burning of the heavens.
appearing in the highest part of the lowest Region, are caused when very dry
and hot Exhalations are drawn up, and meeting with cold clouds are sent back
again, which motions to and fro do set them on fire, and then their parts not
being thick in equal proportion, but as it were unjoyned together, do seem as
though Fires were scattered in the Air. Thus one way. But sometimes the matter
of this Exhalation is more nearely conjoined, and then (if the Exhalation be
large) it is as if the whole Air were on fire, as appeared on the 15 day Stow
in his Abridg. Ann, 1574.
of November in the year of our Lord God 1574; in which year about the last
day of March the strange star in Cassiopea's chair vanished and disappeared.

11. Draco volans, or a flying Dragon, called by some Artic. 11. Fire-drakes,
or flying Dragons.
a Fire-drake, is a Fiery Exhalation whose matter is thick and as it were hard
tempered together; or rather not so hard as conglutinously conjoined: which
lump, ascending to the Region of cold, is forcibly beaten down or back again;
by the force of which motion it is set on fire; and not only fired, but also
bent and violently made crooked: For (as has been said) the matter of it
hangs so conglutinously together, that the repulse divides it not, but by a
strange encounter moulds it into such a fashion as (seen afar off) looks much
like Paracelsus is persuaded that it is a fiery living creature bred in the
element of the Fire, even as flies in the Air, fish in the Water, and worms in
the Earth: affirming that it is of a short life like the Salamander, etc. But
if this be not ridiculous, then nothing is.
a Dragon. This is the opinion of the most. But some say that it is done into
this fashion between two clouds of differing natures, the one hot, the other
cold: and so perhaps it is sometimes made.

12. Ignis fatuus, or foolish Fire (so called, not that it hurts, but fears
or scareth fools) is a fat and oily Exhalation hot and dry (as all Exhalations
are which are apt to be fired) and also heavy in regard of the glutinous
Artic. 12. Foolish Fire, Jenny, or Will with a wisp.
matter whereof it consists: in which regard the cold of the night beats it
back again when it striveth to ascend, through which strife and tossing it is
fired, (for in this encounter it suffers an Antiperistasis) and being fired
it goes to and fro according to the motion of the Air in the silent night by
gentle gales, not going always directly upon one point, unless the wind be
more then such a gale as is commonly called Aura: And note that if the wind be
any thing big or blowing* then this Meteor cannot appear at all, because the
wind will disperse the matter of the Exhalation, not suffering it to be
conjoined.

Moreover, some think that it may be kindled of it self, although it be not so
moved as before: and this is performed by the active moving of the heat which
is within it, as is seen in an heap of moist hay which will set it self on fire.

These kinds of lights are often seen in Fennes and Moors, because there is
always great store of unctuous matter fit for such purposes; as also where
bloody battles have been fought; and in Taken therefore (but falsely) for the
souls of the departed: as you may see if you look but a little further.
churchyards or places of common burial, because the carcases have both
fatted and fitted the place for such kind of oily Exhalations. Wherefore the
much terrified, ignorant, and superstitious people may see their own errors in
that they have deemed these lights to be walking spirits; or (as the silly ones
amongst the Papists believe) they can be nothing else but the souls of such as
go to Purgatory, and the like. In all which they are much deluded: For souls
departed 2. Sam. 12. 13.
cannot appear again; I shall go to him (says David) but he shall not return
to me. And (says Job) He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his
place Job 7. 10. Psalm. 103. 15, 16. and Psalm. 39. 15.
know him any more. Or (as it is in the Psalmist) Before I go hence and be no
more seen. So that if they walk, sure it is invisible, for (says the
Scripture) They shall be no more seen. But what need I urge that? For we see
that they cannot at all return, but are Eccles. 9. 5, 6.
ignorant of all things done under the sun; and as it was with Dives and
Lazarus, so it is with every other: Wherefore we may well say thus,

1. If after death souls can appear,
Why then did Dives crave,
That one his brethren word might bear
What pains the damned have?
2. Or if there be Eccles. 9. 10. Hos. 13. 14. John ^7. 24.!
another room
Which is not Heaven or Hell,
How escaped the Luke ^6. 22. and chap* ^3. 43.
beggar from the doom
Of Purgatories cell?
3. What shall become of Christ's dear 1. John (...), 9.
blood,
If after death there be
A way to make our own works good,
And place the soul in glee?

Quest. But, if these lights be not walking spirits, why is it that they lead
men out of their way?

Answ. They are no spirits, and yet lead out of the way, because those who see
them are amazed, and look so earnestly after them that they forget their way;
and then being once out, they wander to and fro, not knowing whither, sometimes
to waters, pits, and other dangerous places; whereupon the next day they will
undoubtedly tell you strange tales (as one says) how they were led up and down
by a light, which (in their judgment) was nothing else but some devil or
spirit in the likeness of fire which fain would have hurt them. But of this
enough: and know last of all, that if one be something near these lights, and
the night calm, then going from them they will follow us, because there being
no wind to hinder, we draw the Air after us; or going toward them they go
from us, because we by our motion drive the Air before us.

Moreover, when the like matter chances to be fired Of Helena, Castor and
Pollux.
in some such part of the Air as is over the Sea, then these lights appear to
mariners, and are called Castor and Pollux, if there be two at once; otherwise
Helena, if there be but one: The reason of which names was this; Helena was the
daughter of Jupiter and Leda, and by the heathens she was taken for a goddess,
but not for a goddess of good fortune: for this Helena was the cause of Troyes
destruction; as thus. She was stolen away by Paris the son of Priamus K. of
the Trojans, stolen, I say, out of Greece; whereupon her two brothers Castor
and Pollux sail to seek her, but they were never heard of more, or seen after:
which loss of these brethren made it be supposed that they were translated
into the number of those gods who use to give good success to mariners; for
they were lost at sea; which is, as if they were translated from thence. Now
then the Seamen having seen by often experience that one light was to them a
sign of some tempest, and that two lights were a sign of fair weather, they
called the one light Helena, and the two lights they called Castor and Pollux.

Quest. But why should it be, may some demand, that they should thus appearing
show either fair or foul weather? can any reason be shown for it?

Answ. It is answered, that one flame alone may be Why two lights at once show
fair weather, and one light foul weather.
a sign of tempest or foul weather, because, that as that matter which burns
is so compact into one that it cannot be dissolved into two; so in like manner
the matter of tempest being exhaled, by the like cause is kept from being
dissipated, and is so close together that before any long time it must needs
work.

And again, when two lights appear, why then it should be fair, it is because
there is not the like working in nature which was before; but rather the
contrary: for as this Exhalation of the lights is divided; so the matter, which
otherwise might be fit for tempest, is not thickened, but by the like cause is
also divided, scattered, and easily dissolved: insomuch that it cannot work so
as at other times, when there is a working to compact, and not to dissipate.

13. Ignis lambens is a cleaving and licking fire or light; Artic. 13. Licking
Lights.
and is so called because it uses to cleave and stick to the hairs of men or
beasts, not hurting them, but rather (as it were) gently licking them. These
flames may be caused two ways, as the learned write.

First, when clammie Exhalations are scattered abroad in the air in small
parts, and in the night are set on fire by an Antiperistasis; so that when any
shall either ride or walk in such places as are apt to breed them, it is no
wonder that they stick either on their horses, or on themselves.

Secondly, they may be caused another way, viz. when the bodies of men or
beasts, being chafed, do send out a fat and clammie sweat; which (according to
the working of nature in things of this kind) is kindled and appears like a
flame. Virgil makes mention of such a fire as this, upon the head of Iulus, the
son of Aeneas;

Ecce levis summo de vertice visus Iuli Virg. Aeneid. lib. 2. prope finem.

Fundere lumen apex, tactuque innoxia molli
Lambere flamma comas, and circum tempora pasci.
Behold, the lively crown
Of soft Iulus head
With light was circled round:
A flame his temples fed.
But touched, not having hurt, nor feeling harm,
The licking fire his hairs would scarcely warm.
Livie also makes mention of two others, upon whom the like Meteor appeared:
For Servius Tullius, when he was a child, even as he lay sleeping, had his
hair on his head as if it were all on a fire. And upon the head of Marius, that
worthy Roman, was the like appearance, even whilst he was making an oration
to his soldiers. And I my self do also know one, who has often protested to
me, that as he lay in his bed one night, his head was all on a flame; which
hurt him not, although it greatly scared his wife and him, as I have heard them
both confess. Moreover, others testify how they have been scared in their
beds by a kind of light sticking to their coverings, like dew upon the nap of
a frieze coat: which must needs be this Ignis Lambens, caused by some kind of
clammie sweat proceeding from among them. For, that a clammie sweat will cause
these things, is manifest in the nimble currying of a foggie horse; visible
sparks appearing and coming from him, if it be done in the dark. But of these
kinds of fiery Meteors enough.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 4. Of such fiery Meteors as are impurely mixed.
Article 1. Of Comets.
NOw follow those which are Ignita mixta, and less Why some fiery Meteors are
less pure then others.
pure; coming so to pass when the Exhalation, through the admixtion of some
vapor, is more slimie, gross, and impure: For those Meteors already described
were merely Fumes without the admixture of Vapors; unless it might be some
little in one of a glutinous nature or composition. Now these Ignita mixta are
usually divided into two sorts: for they are either such as continue long; or
else such as are but for a little while.

Those that continue long, are Comets or blazing stars.

And a Comet is a fiery Meteor, whose matter is an What Comets are.
Exhalation hot and dry, fat and clammie, drawn by virtue of the heavenly
bodies into the highest part of the air (and sometimes into the starrie
Region) where it is closely conglutinated into a great lump, by reason of
supply that it has from below, so long as there is a working to exhale it: and
being thus compacted and exhaled, it is set on fire in convenient time by the
excessive heat of the place where it rests. Sometimes it continues burning
long; sometimes but a little while: seven days is the least time; whereas some
have been seen Pliny makes their shortest time to be seven days, and their
longest 80 days, lib. 2. cap. 25. but we find it otherwise: And therefore
there is a fault; 80 being put for 180, which might come to pass by the loss
of a C.
six months: all which comes to pass by reason, either of the paucitie, or
plenty of the matter whereof it consists. That last Comet which was seen of
us, viz. Anno Domini 1618, was perspicuous by the space of one month; namely
from the 18 day of November until the 16 day of December next following; and
was far above the highest Region of the air, overlooking even the moon her
self, as Longomontanus proves in a book of his, where he treats of new
stars, and such appearances as have been seen in the heavens, since the year
of our Lord God 1572.

But in a Comet two things especially are considerable: the one the color; the
other the fashion: both which arise out of the diverse disposing of the matter.

Their colors are principally three. 1. If the matter Three principal colors
in a Comet.
be thin, then the color is white. 2. If meanly thick, then the color is
ruddie, looking like fire. 3. If very thick, then their color is like the
burning of brimstone, or of a blew appearance.

Yet know that they are not always exactly of these three colors without any
difference, but as near them as the disposing of their matter will suffer: as
in stead of white we sometimes have them of a yellowish color; in stead of
blew, of a watchet or greenish color, and the like.

Concerning their fashions (if we stand upon a curious Two chief fashions in a
Comet.
examination of them) they may be manifold: and yet, as Aristotle accounts,
they are principally but two, all their other shapes being dependant on these
two. For first either they seem round, having beams round about them; which
comes to pass when the matter is thin on the edge^, and thick every where
else: or secondly, they seem as it were with a beard or tail; which comes to
pass when it is but meanly thick toward some one side or other, and rather
long then round. But some would have these two fashions to be three, because
the tail sometimes hangs downward as well as sidelong: and so there is by this
means stella crinita, stella caudata, and stella barbata; concerning which I am
not much solicitous.

That therefore which in these things I do much more The strange effects of
Comets.
wonder at, is the strange and admired multitude of effects which are produced
by them; as not only change of air, but change of heirs also, proceeding from
the disturbance of states, translation of kingdoms, bloody wars, and death
of Potentates. Histories have carefully recorded these things, and left them to
the consideration of aftertimes.

First therefore let it be observed, that when the kingdom of the Macedonians
came to an end, in the last year of Perseus, which was about the year 584 or
585 of the building of Rome, a Carrion, ex Seneca, lib. 2.
Comet appeared, as if it came to point out the last period of that kingdom.

Secondly, when the Emperor Iovian attained to the empire, succeeding the
Apostata Julian, under whom the Church suffered much persecution; when (I say)
the said Iovian was Emperor, and that under him both Church and Commonwealth
were like to have had a Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 22.
flourishing time (had he not been taken away by sudden death) then also
Carrion, lib. 3.
appeared a Comet, showing that further trouble was yet to be expected.

Thirdly also, when a certain captain of the Goths, an Arian, named Cajan, had
raised sedition against the Emperor Arcadius, God showed by manifest wonders
that both Arcadius and his city should be well protected: but before this
tumult (says Lib. 3. page 294.
Carrion) a strange Comet was seen, great and terrible, casting flames down to
the very earth; the like whereunto no man had ever seen before.

4 And again, other authors make mention of a strange Comet seen in the year
of Christ 410, being like unto a two-edged sword, which portended many
mischiefs. For Rome was taken about the same time by Alaricus King of the
Goths. Sundry calamities happened both in the East and West; and so great
slaughters of men were about those days, as no age ever afforded the like. All
Europe was in a manner undone, no small part of Asia was affrighted; and Africa
also was not void of those evils. War, Famine, Drought, and Pestilence, all
of them strove (as it were) to trouble the whole world.

5. Also in these years, viz. 1400, 1401, Of this Comet you may read in
Carrion, lib. 5. page 854.
1402, 1403, Comets appeared, and great calamities followed; sundry and
unheard of diseases were felt, rivers dried up, and plagues were increased.
Tamerlain, K. of the Scythians and Parthians, with an innumerable host invadeth
Asia, calling himself the WRATH OF GOD, and DESOLATION OF THE EARTH; as did
Attilas, of whom it is written, that he named himself THE SCOURGE OF GOD.

6. Also in the year 1529 appeared Alst. Chron. (...).
four Comets: and in the Goclen. Phys. Lanquet. Chron. and in contin. Chron.
Eusebius.
years 1530, 1531, 1532, and 1533, were seen in each year one: ( So also a
certain Germane in the continuation of Eusebius. Chron.
Lanquet says that there were three within the space of two years) upon
which, these and the like changes and calamities followed; (viz.) A great
sweating sickness in England, which took away whole Myriads of people. The
Buchod. in his chron.
Turk, in the quarrel of John Uvavoyda, who laid claim to the crown of
Hungary, entered the said kingdom with two hundred and fifty thousand fighting
soldiers; committing against the inhabitants thereof most harsh and
unspeakable murders, rapes, villainies, and cruelties. A great famine and dearth
was also in Venice and the country thereabout, which swept away many for lack
of sustenance. The sweating sickness Idem, ibid.
also vexed Brabant, and a great part of Germany, and especially the city
Antwerp, where it consumed five hundred persons in the space of three days.
Great wars concerning the Dukedom of Millain between the Emperor Charles
the fifth, and Francis the French King. All Lusitania or Portugal was struck
with an Earthquake; insomuch that at Ulisippo or Lisbon, a In Lanq. Chron. it
is 1400. Vide Ann. Dom. 1531.
thousand and fifty houses were thrown down, and 600 so shaken that they were
ready to fall, which made the people forsake the city and run into the
fields: and as for their churches, they lay upon the ground like heaps of
stones. Upon this followed a great pestilence in those parts. But a little
before, viz. in the year 1530, was a great deluge in Brabant, Holland, Zeland,
and the seacoasts of Flanders; as also an overflowing of the river Tyber at
Rome, occasioned by unseasonable tempests of wind. Upon the neck of which
troubles the Turk comes again into Hungary and Austria; but he was beaten
back, and a great company of his men slain and taken. Unto which may be added
how the sect of the Anabaptists, not long after, brought new tumults into
Germany.

7. And for that last Comet, in the year 1618, says a Germane writer,
Praesagium ipsius jam ^heu est in manibus nostris; meaning that they felt by
doleful experience the (...) Bohemicum and Germanicum oritu^, quod hodie que
affligit (...) nostram Germaniam. (...). Chron. mirab. Dei, Fuit etiam anteces^
mortis Ma^hiae Imperatoris.
sad events which followed after it.

Wherefore seeing these and the like accidents have been attendant upon the
appearing of Comets, it may well be said that although they have their causes
in nature, yet Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether; The sky never burnt
with such fires in vain. For (as one says) Loquitur cum hominibus Deus, non
modo lingua humana, per Prophetas, Apostolos, and Pastores; sed nonnunquam
etiam ipsis Elementis in formas and imagines diversas compositis* That is, God
speaks with men, not only with the tongues of men, by Prophets, Apostles,
and Teachers; but sometimes also by the very Elements composed or wrought into
diverse forms and shapes; there being a Theological end of sending Comets, as
also a Natural and Political end.

But first (before I come to that) I think it not amiss to Why wars, deaths,
famines and the like, are the effects of Comets.
speak something concerning these their events and accidents; namely whether it
can be showed why they should be wrought either so or so.

To which it is answered, that in some sort we may give reasons for this, and
show the causes of their significations. For being Comets they consist of many
hot and dry Exhalations: And hot and dry Exhalations do not only stir up
heat, dry and parch the air, which may cause drought (especially when much of
the earths fatness is drawn away with the Exhalation) and drought bring
barrenness: but also the bodies of living creatures upon the distemper of the
air are mainly hurt, suffering detriment in the consumption of their radical
moisture, and suffocation, through the poisonous breathings which the bellows
of the body suck in, and receive: insomuch that there cannot but be
sicknesses, plagues, and much mortality.

Besides which, that they should usher in wars, seditions, changes of
kingdoms, and the like, may also proceed from the same cause: For when the
Air is distemperately heated, then it is very apt so to disorder and dry up
the blood in humane bodies, that thereby great store of red and adust choler
may be purchased; and this stirs up to anger with the thought of many
furious and violent actions; and so by consequent to war: and from war
comes victory, from victory proceeds change of commonwealths, and
translations of kingdoms, with change of Laws and Religion: for, Novus Rex,
nova Lex; New Lords, new Laws. Unto which also may be added, that because great
personages live more delicately then other men, and feed more daintily, having
as many new fashions in their diets as in their clothes, for their boards as
for their backs, that their bodies therefore are more subject to infection, and
will take the poison of an intemperate air before more temperate livers;
whereupon necessity inforceth that they die sooner in such a calamity then
other people, as he once witnessed that said, Plures pereunt gula quam gladio.

Besides, the death of great ones is more remarkable then when inferior
persons die, so that if but some of them be taken away in common calamities, it
is as if they were only aimed at; because they are obvious to every ones eye,
as cities standing upon hills, which cannot be hid.

And now that our bodies should follow the temperature Our bodies follow the
temper of the air: and our minds do somewhat sympathize with the body.
of the Air, is nothing doubted, seeing every lame, aching, or bruised joint
does witness it even to the very ignorant: But that our minds and manners
should follow the temperature of the body, is more strange and wonderful. Yet
true it is that by the mediation of humors and spirits, as also through ill
disposed organs, the mind also suffers. For the body is Domicilium animae,
the souls house, abode and stay: so that as a Torch (says Burton, in his
Melancholy.
one) gives a better light, and a sweeter smell, according to the matter it is
made of; in like manner does our Soul perform all her actions, better or worse,
as her organs are disposed: or as wine savours of the cask where it is kept, so
the soul receives a tincture from the body, through which it works. For the
Understanding is so tied to, and captivated by his inferior senses, that
without their help he cannot exercise his functions; and the Will being
weakened so as she is, has but a small power to restrain those outward parts,
but suffers her self to be overruled by them: of which I shall have occasion to
speak more in the Chap. 7. sect. 3 parag. 2* art. 1.
fourth days work, until when I leave it; in the mean time adding, that
Comets do not always, when they bring sicknesses, corrupt the air through
immoderate heat and dryness, but sometimes also through immoderate heat and
moisture; as also by immoderate winds which may bring the poison of the
Exhalation whereof the Comet consisted, unto some such place as lies obvious
unto it, and the like. Yea and upon the raising of winds come often showers
and rains, or else overflowings of banks upon high tides and other lofty
waters, which are forced over upon the violence of the winds.

Astrologers say that Comets do most hurt either unto those places to which
they are vertical, or unto those countries which are subject to the sign
wherein they are (for they maintain that such and such countries are subject to
such and such signs:) but omitting part of How to guess at the signification
of Comets.
that, they also tell us (which stands with good reason) that in earthie dry
signs they produce barrenness by reason of drought; in waterish signs
barrenness also by reason of too much wet; in aierie signs extraordinary
wind; in signs of a fiery triplicitie, extraordinary heat, wars, fires,
drought, and the like; and in all of these (seeing their operation is
extraordinary) some one perilous and infectious sickness or other.

Besides, they also Origan^ de effectibus, page 526, ex Cardano.
tell us that if a Comet be in fashion like unto a sword, it then signifies
wars and destruction of cities, etc. If it be stella crinita, or blazing
round about, and of diverse colors; then it signifies wind, seditions,
heresies, and the like: but if it be blackish, with a short tail, and no hairs;
then it is a sign of barrenness, together with long and continued wars.

But know now that although these and the like accidents be produced by Comets;
yet if Comets should not be, the case would be far worse for mankind, and
more readily would eager death seize upon him. For if that which is the matter
of Comets were not taken into one place, and drawn, so as it is, up into the
air; it would kill us by being dispersed about our dwellings: such being the
nature of their poisonous Fumes, as they by experience know who have seen the
danger of damps whilst they played the part of Pioners under ground.

Wherefore let me add, that the end for which Comets The several ends of
Comets.
are, is threefold: for either they appear for a Political end; for a
Theological end; or for a Natural end.

In respect of a Political end they are so to be taken Political.
for the Heralds of future calamities, that men being forewarned may be
forearmed, and provided either to shun the threatened disaster, or else to
endure with patience the common and inevitable misery.

In respect of a Theological end, they are either a Theological.
sign of calamities, or else the efficient cause of calamities. If they be a
sign, then their end is this, viz. that they may be monitours, instigatours,
and admonishers to repentance; and to desire and expect either the turning
away, or mitigation of those public punishments. But if they be the efficient
causes of misery, then their Theological end is, that they are sent as the
instruments of punishing some such enormous malice and contumacie of mankind
as would not be kept under or restrained by any humane law or discipline.

And lastly in respect of a Natural end, it is that those Natural.
pestiferous winds, spirits, or breathings, which are gathered from metallique
liquours and the like in the earth, should be taken up far into the air from
the common seat of men, that thereby we may partake the less of their malice:
for being burnt out and consumed there, they can less hurt us, then if they
were below. If they should remain in the earth, they then (as they often do)
would rend and shake it: or should they remain below in the near neighboring
air, they would poison us Witness the great plague which was in Portugal Ann.
Dom. 1531, occasioned by vapors which through a breach of ground in an
earthquake issued forth and poisoned the air. Lanq. Chron.
sooner then above; because if the air be infected when they are on high and a
great way from us, much more would it be infected should they be below and
round about us.

But of Comets I have said enough. And now methinks I am led from them to a
consideration of such appearances as are called New stars; such as were in
the years After which were these appearances, if not new stars, yet most of
them supralunary Comets: as in the year 1577, which Sibylla Babylonica
prophesied of (as may be seen in Tycho) showing that it should arise about
four years after the vanishing of Cassiopea's star; which was true
inclusively: and in the years 1580, 1585, 1590, 1593; and in the year 1596
(but this was a New star) and in the years 1607, and 1618.
1572, 1596, 1600, 1602, 1604, and 1612.

Artic. 2. Of New stars, and especially of that which was in the
Constellation of Cassiopea, Anno Dom. 1572.
NOw here I must confess that I know not what to write: for how they are
generated, or what they signify, is a matter of most intricate question.

Noble Tycho, that Phoenix of Astronomy, and after him Longomontanus, with
certain others, have been persuaded that they were more then Comets, and
generated far otherwise, or of other matter then fiery Meteors are; being
first set a work so to think by the sight of that strange and admirable New
star which was seen in the constellation of Cassiopea; seen from the ninth of
November in the year 1572, until the last of March in the year 1574.

Which star was indeed truly admirable, and (as I may say) attended with a
sad event; I mean that cunningly plotted Massacre of Protestants in France, at
the solemnization of a marriage between Henry of Navarre chief of the
Protestants party; and lady Margaret, sister to the French King Charles the
ninth, then reigning, and chief author of the foresaid Massacre: at which
wedding there was not so much wine drunk as blood shed; thirty thousand
Protestants and upwards, of the best and most potent, being sent through this
Red sea to the land of Canaan.

Or if this New star were not attended with that particular accident, because
the Viz. on Bartholomew day. Calvis.
Massacre was in August, and the star appeared not until Viz. on the ninth
of November.
two months after; yet we may hope, that rising after such a butcherie, and so
soon after it as it did, that therefore it came to animate distressed
Christians, shining at the first with a cheerful countenance, but at the last
turning into a martial and bloody hue: as if in so doing, he which sent it
would have the world take notice that his righteous servants should see truths
enemies (be they where or whom they will) confounded at last by martial
discipline; and that those who had made havoc of others should be trodden down
at last themselves, although for a time they fairly bore it out.

But by what instruments the execution of these projects should be performed,
we cannot tell. Yet this I verily think may be said, that those late, blessed,
and admired proceedings of the prosperous and successful GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS
King of Sweden, whose manifold and sudden conquests made him a spectacle to the
astonished world, that those (I say) do point us to him above all men, as being
the man appointed to show the first effects of that strange star; and that it
was to have an operation far surpassing the saddest consequents of former
threatening Comets.

To which purpose I find, that learned Tycho has added a kind of
prophetical conclusion to that book of his which he wrote concerning this New
star; wherein he declares (according to his modest and harmless rules of
art, proceeding in them not like a doting heathenish starre-gazer) that the
effects were to be declared by And therefore he could not then name any one in
particular.
succeeding events: which as they shall not begin (says he) until some years
after the apparition, so they shall continue for a long time afterward. The
beginning of the effect, or some part of it, was to fall out after the third
septenarie of years from the first appearing of the star (as he also
writes) which was afte^ one and twenty years; about which time I plainly
find that the foresaid The King of Sweden born at such time as the star
began its operation.
King was born: For the time of his birth falls into the year 1594, which is
the very next year after the one and twentieth year from the stars first
rising; so that the year of his conception falls into the very one and
twentieth year it self: or, if you account inclusively from the year of the
stars vanishing, unto the year of the King of Swedens appearing, or entrance
into the world, then not his conception, but his birth, falls into the said
one and twentieth year. Which thing is also somewhat agreeable to Tycho his
own meaning, where he tells us (although he names no particular person) that
those noble Heroes which shall happen to be born at the first rising of this
star, are ordained to be the authors and atchievers of such great mutations
as should then be, when the men ordained for them came to be fit, and of ripe
age to work them. Thus he; the difference between us being, that he applies it
to the birth of such eminent men as were to be born when the star first
appeared; and I to that time when (according to his conjectures) the operation
of it first began: which, albeit he casts it into the year 1592, must not be
until the year after, being the one and twentieth year from the stars
first rising, and the very year of the King of Swedens conception: For he was
born on the last day of November in the year 1594; being also (as has been
said, both terms included) the very one and twentieth year from the stars
first vanishing.

Neither does the time of his birth fall out thus fitly, The place pointed at
by the heavens has 62 degrees of North latitude.
but the place likewise, which was to be the ominous nest concerning the
occasion, or bringing forth of one, for the author or beginning of the
intended alterations, is pointed at by the heavens to be such a place as has
for its latitude about 62 degrees from the Equator northwards; for in that
parallel the star moved day by day, and was vertical once every day to
Norvegia, Swedia, Finlandia, Livonia, Moscovia, and Tartaria, with all such
places as lie under the same parallel.

Now though the star in his daily motion was in this manner vertical to more
places successively then to the King of Swedens dominions; yet at the time of
the next new Moon (which Tycho makes a rule concerning the place, from whence
either the occasion, or authors of the great changes should proceed) it was
just over the Meridian of Finland, being vertical to that country: And who
but the foresaid GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS King of Sweden has the country of Finland
as a part of his dominions? For he is not only King of the Sweds, Goths and
Vandals; but also great Prince of Finland.

Tycho, I confess, does not directly name the country of Finland, but chose
rather to express the place by callng it Moscovia, or Russia, bordering upon
Finland: wherein I find (according to the observations of a learned and great
Divine) that he was something mistaken. For in a book lately set forth, and
entitled The new star of the North, the said Author, having made some
observations from Tycho's writings concerning that star, and applied them
unto these times, does manifestly prove that it ought rather to be Finland
bordering upon Russia, then Russia or Moscovia upon Finland: withal, amongst
other reasons which should make Tycho choose that place, rendering this for one,
that perhaps he was loath to bring the prediction too near home, seeing there
often happened diverse distastes and quarrels between his Sovereign the King of
Denmark, and the neighboring King of Sweden: Which, upon this ground may the
better be granted, viz. because Tycho was once fain to hide his head for
denoting in too direct terms a prediction too near his own home, although it
afterward proved true. But I refer you to the book, and proceed.

And now we shall see, that not only the time of his birth and place pointed
at by the heavens, but the chief time also when the stars influence should be
most perceived, does point at him. For Tycho witnesses that about the year
1632 (if not also a few years after) the chiefest force and influence of this
strange star should show it self, the greatest significations depending upon
the Trigonall revolution and transmutation of the Planets: which force and
influence, why he refers it to those times, I leave to the admired
perfection of his art, wherein he was a kind of Phoenix, and scarce has left
his parallel. For will you hear King JAMES of blessed memory, and our late
learned Sovereign speak for him? his commendations then will surely be no
less. For in certain verses (as being able to judge both of him and his
treatises) he approves his labors, and commends his skill as superexcellent.
The like also he does in an Epistle which he wrote unto him: some of which
verses, as I find them englished, are to this effect,

Great Tycho's labors also do fore-show
Events, which shall befall on earth below;
And by disasterous or fair Aspects,
What destinies on kingdoms God directs.
Now then, if the chief effects shall demonstrate themselves about the year
1632; questionless the King of Sweden must not be baulked in his late
proceedings, but taken as a prime man upon whom the beams of this New star has
shined: for his great famous victories, and never enough admired conquests in
Germany (that Seeds belli) achieved in so short a time, have witnessed as
much. Nay, when I hear himself speak to his soldiers, and those citizens
where he conquered, I am confirmed. For speaking to the men of Norimberg, thus
he says; Truly God has marvelously preserved you, as he has also pleased to
call me to this work. For I had rather thought that the last day of judgment
should come, then that I should come into Norimberg, and (as you said your
selves) leave so far behind me mine own dominions, good subjects, and what
else there is loving and dear unto me; and to bring along with me so many
brave worthies, to expose their lives (as I do mine own) for the restitution,
safety, and preservation of the common Evangelicall cause, and liberty of
Germany. And again, to those of his Court before Ingolstadt, amongst other
things, he adds this; I know (says he) that the good success which it has
pleased God to afford me in my enterprises, has made some to be envious, who
labor to persuade the simple that I endeavor nothing more then mine own gain,
and the robbing and spoiling of others. But I call to witness in this case the
Princes who were thus spoiled, which I have again established in their own
right and estates; as also the creditours of whom I have borrowed such
extraordinary sums of money, both at Frankford and elsewhere, and the dangers
which I do daily expose my self unto: I call all these to witness, whether I
have left mine own kingdom, and the dearest I have in the world, to any other
end, and with other intention, but only to destroy the tyranny of the house of
Austria, and to obtain a profound and settled peace unto all.

These words of his show nothing less then that he was extraordinarily set on
work to undergo such fortunes as the eyes of all the world have bravely seen
him struggle with: and God knows who shall end that which his coming into
Germany has begun. It was his own saying, that if he himself should not
survive so long as to bring to pass so great a work, that then in his stead
some other might succeed and go on, until a full point and period were put
unto the war. For upon the occasion of his deliverance from a cannon shot, he
utters these words; saying, that he was not only mortal, but subject also
unto the very same accidents that the poorest and meanest soldier is subject
unto. It is a general law, ( In a speech to his court at Ingol^tadt.
says he) from which my crown, my birth, my victories, are not able to rescue
and exempt me. There remains nothing else therefore, but that I must resign
my self to the providence of the Almighty, who (if it please him to call me out
of this world) will nevertheless not abandon and leave a cause so just as that
which I have undertaken; but will doubtless raise up some other, more wise,
more courageous and valiant then my self, who shall put a period to this war.

And again, it was but three days before his death, that at Naumbourg he
uttered these words; Our affairs ( Taken out of the relation of his last
battle, page 20. translated out of French into English.
says he) answer our desires; but I doubt God will punish me for the folly of
the people, who attribute too much unto me, and esteem me as it were their God:
and therefore he will make them shortly know and see I am but a man. He be my
witness, it is a thing distasteful unto me: And what ever befall me, I shall
receive it as proceeding from his divine will. Only in this I rest fully
satisfied, that he will not leave this great enterprise of mine imperfect.

Great King of Hearts, in arms transcending fame! A memento for aftertimes.

Eternal praise shall blazo^ forth thy name.
Soul of thy friends thou were;
But terror, scourge of foes.
Can thou then die, though death
Thine eyes in spite may close?
No no: For times unborn shall yet repeat
What deeds were done by thee a King so great.
And this does ^lso raise thy just renown,
That in thy fall thine enemies fell down.
Thine was that day: thy men undaunted fought
Until their foes the field were driven out:
For as it were from forth their Kings last blood
The palm and bay sprung up, and conquering stood.
Great deeds thou did soon: hot Mars his sphere
In Germany thee moved a double year:
From whence at last above the spheres he caught thee,
And to a place of peace eternal brought thee:
Where thou shall rest, how e're the rest proceed
With those fierce wars which heaven has thus decreed
But let me now return again to this New star, and show you that in the days
of Hipparchus, He flourished 135 years before Christ's birth. Helvic. Chronol.
who lived toward the end of the Grecian Monarchy, there appeared one much
like it: and so Lib. 2.
Pliny tells us. But since that time we read of no other until this in the
year 1572, excepting that which appeared at our Saviors birth, which indeed
was no such star: for it had three properties See more in Aquinas sums.
never seen in any else; moving first from the North to the South; secondly, it
was seated in the lowest Region of the air; thirdly, it was nothing hindered by
the light of the sun, etc. Yet in later times, following the said year 1572,
some smaller ones have been: as in the year 1596; this was seated in the
Whale. And in the year 1600, or thereabouts, another was seen in the
constellation of Cygnus. Kepler makes mention of one in the year 1602 in the
constellation of Pisces; soon after which upon the death of Q. Elisabeth, and
coming in of K. James, was that great plague at London. Some say that
Andromeda's girdle and the constellation of Antoninous afforded each of them
one, in the year 1612. But the year 1604 must not be forgotten; for in the
Some say the 17 degree. Calvis. ch^ei.
16 degree and 40 minute of Sagittarius toward the Southwest a remarkable one
appeared, having 2 degrees and 15 minutes of North latitude, and was seated in
the constellation of Ophiucus: this at the first shined as bright as Venus; and
in the very next year that damnable powder plot of the Papists was discovered.

But now, though these and more were reckoned up, yet that in Cassiopea would
be the chief, the elder brother, and captain of them all; because both in
height, bigness, and luster, they were less remarkable.

Tycho, upon the sight of this New star, labors to A consideration of this
New stars matter.
prove that the heavens, and not the earth, afford matter to such as these are;
thinking that it differs not from the matter of other stars, unless in
this, viz. that it is not exalted to such a perfection and solid composition of
the parts as in the first continuing and created stars; the main and
principal reason being taken from the magnitude of them, together with their
extraordinary height. As for example; Lib. denova ^ella.
Tycho affirms concerning that New star in Cassiopea (being as it were the
elder brother of all the other after it) that it was 300 times Yet the same
matter, had it been crushed together, or as solidly composed as the earth,
would have been as nothing in respect of the earth.
bigger then the earth. Which being so, it is with small probability affirmed
that it should have matter from that which is so much less then it; and indeed
a thing impossible. The heavens are large enough to afford matter, although the
earth be not: and no part of the heaven can be imagined to be more fit for such
a purpose then the via lactea, or milkie way; for that place always shows it
self, even to the eye, so as if there were much indigested matter in it,
reserved only to work such wonders.

Yet nevertheless I suppose it may be also granted, that an earthly Exhalation
may have recourse sometimes unto the battlements of heaven, and in some sort
and in part concur toward the composition of these New stars (as they are
called) and of such Comets as have been above the Moon. What should we think of
that last, in the year 1618? it (...) de novis (...).
was (as I have already said) amongst the wandering stars themselves; and yet
it was no other then such a star as we call a Comet or a blazing star. Now
then, if this had matter from the earth, and spent it amongst the Planets,
rather then below the Moon; why might not those which we call New stars
obtain the like freedom to have the like matter ascend a little higher? What
should hinder this conjecture I do not easily see: for questionless the same
power remains still in the stars to exhale the matter as well after it comes
into the highest Region of the air, as before it came there; neither need we
then imagine an abatement of their exhaling virtue.

Object. 1. But perhaps it may be thought that the nature of the place above
the Moon does sufficiently deny the ascent of any terrene Exhalation so high;
there being too great a difference between the one and the other; between the
matter ascending, and the matter of that place whither it ascends.

Answ. To which I may partly answer as before, in the 4. Chapter and 3.
Section, that seeing the out-spread Firmament in the creation was taken from
that mass of matter which lay here below, and separated from it rather then
created of any newer matter, that therefore (I say) there cannot be so great a
difference as to bring in such an Antipathie as will not at all suffer any
terrene Exhalation to scale those flammantia moenia mundi, or battlements of
heaven; but rather, that without reluctancie, or any great striving, the one
may admit of the other, and entertain it as a guest near of kin unto it self,
or unto the nature of that place where the continuing stars have ever had
their residence.

For, if I urge it further, it may well be proved even by From the earth to the
highest Firmament is nothing but air.
opticall demonstration, that the great vast space from the earth, as high as
the fixed stars themselves, is not of a diverse nature from the Air; for if
it were, then there would be a multitude of Mediums between the sight and the
thing visible: but there is no multitude of Mediums: For where there is a
multitude of Mediums, there the beams which come to the sight from the thing
visible would beget a multiplicitie of refraction in the said rays or beams;
but it is manifest that there is only one refraction found in the beams of the
stars, and that but only when they are near to the edge of the Horizon, at
which time the ascending vapors are between our sight and them: And therefore
there is but one kind of Medium by which the stars offer themselves to our
sight: And being but one Medium, there cannot be such diversity of natures
between the heavens and things compounded of the elements. Whereupon it may be
concluded, that an Exhalation may ascend into the territories of the starry
heaven, and so by consequent have a mutual concurrence with such matter as the
heavens do naturally afford toward the generating of supralunary Comets, or
new admired stars.

Indeed I must confess that were I of Pythagoras his opinion, I then would cry
out with Auditus in the Called Lingua.
Comedy -- Hark, hark, list, list now, etc. What, are you deaf? do you not
perceive the wondrous sound and the celestial music the heavenly orbs do make
with their continual motion? Or I would imagine firm spheres or solid orbs,
and so set an undoubted stoppage, and hinder the passage of any Meteor above
the Moon: But seeing that tenent is made the fit subject of laughter, I
therefore pass it over.

Object. 2. But may not the Element of Fire stand in the way, and so consume
such matter as ascends, before it come beyond the Moon?

Answ. To which it is answered, that the chiefest cause why men have been
persuaded to think that Fire is generated immediately under In (...) Lun^
generat^r ignie.
the spheres, and that within the concave of the Moons orb, the said Fire, as
it is there generated, has there its place of residence, is for no other
reason but because of an imagined attrition of the spheres and orbs: Which
seeing they are taken away, and that all is filled with Air, the Elementarie
fire is not hindered from ascending, but may have a more lofty station. For
questionless, this kind of fire, as What place the Element of Fire possesses.
it is not visible to the sight, so neither may it be thought any other thing
then the more subtle, light, and hot part of the Air; in which regard it must
needs be both in and of that part, which is nearest to the highest heavens: For
both the motion of the heavens is there most swift; and also, there is the
greatest neighborhood to that infinite number of stars fixed in the heavens.

An earthly Exhalation may therefore climb above the Moon, and yet not run
through a fiery purgatory, or be consumed by the way.

Mr. Lydiat our countreyman, his opinion is, that if we consider of this
Element, not as it is absolutely pure, then the greatest part of it is in the
stars (of which see more in the fourth days work) and some also is under
ground, as being there a great cause of generating metals; occasioning the
burning and breaking out of sundry sulfurous hills, and the like.

But of this enough. And in the consideration of it I have made way (you see)
for the admittance of terrene Exhalations to join their forces toward the
effecting of supralunarie Comets, or new and strange admired stars. This, I
say, I have proved as a thing both possible, and not unlike. But that they do
always therefore thus concur, I am not certain; neither will I stand
curiously to decide it.

Let therefore learned Tycho his tenent go for current concerning Cassiopea's
star, that the heavens only were the material parents of it, and especially
the Galaxia, or white milkie way; unto the edge of which place (whilst it
appeared) it was situated, and continued visible in the same, for the space of
19 months, or thereabouts.

And thus I conclude, adding herewithall concerning other Comets whose station
has been supralunarie, and time of continuance any thing long, that if in them
there could be any right to challenge a portion out of the same storehouse,
then questionless they were tied to rest beholding both to the heavens, and
also to the earth, for the matter of their composure. But for ordinary Comets
the case must needs be otherwise, seeing their place and small continuing time
confirm it.

These things for mine own part I think more probable then if I should affirm
that the Planets afforded certain Exhalations, which by force of the Sun are
expired and exhaled from them, and being exhaled are made the matter of all
kind of Comets above the Moon; yea and New stars also (as some affirm)
consist of no other causes: wherein they dissent from Tycho, thinking (contrary
to him) that the Galaxia affords no matter toward the composure of these
appearances. For (as Lib. 3. Met. cap. 2. Art. 7.
Fromondus, a late writer, affirms) Simon Marius beheld a New star in the
year 1612, in Andromeda's girdle; and one Iustus Prygius beheld another in the
constellation of Antoninous; Kepler, in the year 1602, saw one in the
constellation of Pisces; and David Fabricius, in the year 1596, saw another in
the Whale; all of them far enough distant from the Galaxia or milkie way.

But suppose all this; must the continuing stars therefore needs be forced to
waste their own bodies, and spend themselves in teeming such ample portions of
matter as are required for glittering Comets, or New strange shining stars?
Surely if they should suffer their bodies to be thus exhaled, they could not
choose but fall into a deep consumption, and be visibly disproportioned in
their shapes and figures, far otherwise then we see them: For it is a long
time since the world began, and no few Comets have had their seats above the
Moon, where they all cry out against an opinion so improbable, showing that the
changes would be such as would be apparent and visible enough to every vulgar
eye.

Besides, it cannot but be granted, that for ordinary Meteors every star and
Planet has an exhaling virtue as well as the Sun: why therefore should they
now desist and leave it all to him, who, if he may have this liberty, will at
the last suck them all to nothing? These men may well imagine (as they do)
mountains in the Moon, with woods and groves, seas and rivers; and make every
planet another world: but yet 'twere good they knew that God made all but one,
although the parts be two; and that Adam being cast out of Paradise was sent to
till the ground and labor the earth, which he sought, not with the man in the
Moon; for he knew that that was not to bud forth with fruit, bear trees, and
the like, because it had another office. For Let the earth (says the
Almighty) bring forth grass, herb, fruit, trees, etc. but let there be lights
in the Firmament, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to
rule the night.

Also, if the Sun should work thus among the stars, and that there should
be vapors exhaled from their bodies, how comes it to pass that we perceive no
clouds in the Ethereall vault, and that we cannot see them glide between star
and star, flying upon the wings of such winds as must necessarily upon the
admittance of this tenent be generated there? Perhaps they will answer that
these things may be, and we not see them, by reason of the great distance
between us and them. Well, be it so; yet know, that although we could not see
them, we should sometimes feel them, and perceive our mother earth to be
watered with showers of rain, when we see nothing but a clear sky over us.
But it may be they again will answer, that the stars do not frequently afford
such Vapors and Exhalations, but sometimes only: and then if they be not
copious enough to make such a cloud as may shine like a Comet or blazing
star, they are rather dispersed into nothing, then turned into rain: for
their matter is too hot and dry to make a rainie cloud. In good time. The
stars do not frequently afford such Exhalations; and why so I pray? surely
the sun is never so far distant from some one Planet or other, but that he
would make this his operation appear, if he had at all any such working, or
power of exhaling matter from them; and, if not a waterie, yet a dry cloud
might be visible. The stars surely are of such a nature that they be rather
fed and nourished by vapors, then compelled to suffer an unwilling wasting
caused by an exhaling virtue, which is improperly given only to the Sun,
because only to him: and from whence these Vapors come, which upon all
likelihood do continually nourish the stars, shall be showed in the fourth
days work.

Neither do some exempt the Sun from these evaporations, but affirm that day
and night he also expireth vapors from him: which others again deny, because
they imagine that this public lamp of the world ought to be more immortal,
lest being extinct, he should be quite without light, and afford the world
nothing but black and dismal darkness.

That therefore which before I affirmed, joining in part with Tycho, who
fetches matter from the Galaxia, seems to me far more probable concerning
the generation of these appearances. For first, the Galaxia does sensibly
appear as if it were an ample storehouse, and had large portions of matter,
reserved only for such purposes; which, when there is a working in nature apt
and convenient to produce it, is liberally afforded, and sent thither where the
most power is to attract it. And secondly, that an earthie Exhalation may
sometimes be admitted to join with the abovesaid matter, this seems to me a
reason, because, like other low and ordinary Meteors, these also show
themselves or first begin to shine in the Autumnall season, and not in the
Spring, Summer, or Winter Quarter.

Article 3. Of Thunder and Lightnings.
NOw it follows that I speak of such fiery mixed Meteors as are of less
continuance then Comets or blazing stars: and by their general names they
are called Thunder, and Lightnings.

Concerning the first, which is Thunder, it is not properly any kind of
Meteor, but rather an adjunct or depending effect.

For Thunder is nothing else but a sound heard out of a What thunder is.
thick or close compacted cloud: which sound is Io^nnes Bodinus putat a geniis
aeris and (...) fulmma jaci, and (...) ill^m coeli cieri.
procured by reason of hot and dry Exhalations shut within the cloud, which,
seeking to get out, with great violence do knock and rend the cloud; from
whence proceeds that rumbling noise which we call thunder. For when an
Exhalation which is more hot then ordinary, meets with cold and moist vapors
in the middle Region of the air, and are enclosed all together in an hollow
cloud, it cannot but be that they fall at variance; and by this strife being
driven together, the Exhalation is made stronger: and either by the motion, or
by an Antiperistasis, it is set on fire; which violently breaking the clouds
whilst it seeks for liberty, gives an horrid sound. A similitude may be taken
from a chest-nut, apple, or egg breaking in the fire; or from the cracking of
moist wood, or any such like thing: for this is apparent, that when any
enclosed hot wind is holden and withholden so as it can have no vent, it will
then seek it self a way by breaking the skin, shell, or case; and in the
breaking, seeing it is with violence, it must of necessity make a noise. And
thus it is in thunder.

But observe that in thunder the noise made is not always of a like sound: for
in respect of the hollownesse, thickness, or thinness of the cloud, and small
or great force of the Exhalation, the sound is altered.

A great crack is caused when the cloud is very hollow, Great cracks.
his sides thick, and the Exhalation very dry and copious: which if it break
the cloud all at once, then it makes a short and terrible crack, much like the
sound of a gunne. If it rend the cloud all along, breaking out by leisure, then
it makes a noise like to the rending of broad cloth, or the rattling of stones
out of a cart.

A small crack is caused when either the cloud or Exhalation Small cracks.
is but weak; or the cloud strong, and the Exhalation of some little quantity.
And in small thunders it sometimes falls out that when the sides of the cloud
are stronger then the force of the Exhalation is able to break, that then it
runs up and down within, and sticking against the cold and moist sides,
makes a noise much like to the quenching of an hot iron in cold water, or of a
squib made of wet powder: in which regard Lib. 2. cap. 43.
Pliny seems to aver that thunder is but the quenching of fire in a wet
cloud. Also if the Exhalation be meanly strong, and the cloud of unequal
thickness, then it breaks out at the thinnest places, and makes a kind of
buzzing noise like to a wind blowing out of narrow holes.

And so sometimes it happens that there may be a Sometimes (...) and ^o (...)
ligh^ning and n^ (...).
thunder-crack and yet no lightning; and sometimes lightning without thunder.

The first is caused thus; either when the cloud is so thin that it cannot keep
in the Exhalation till it be kindled, but suffers it to go presently forth,
making a noise like to the wind out of a pair of Smiths bellows: or else when
the cloud is so thick, and the Exhalation so slender and thin, that although it
stir up and down within the cloud, yet it fireth not, but wastes it self
within that prison, as not being able to get out. And thus may thunder be
without lightning.

The second is caused, when either the Exhalation and How there may be
lightning without thunder.
Vapor are both thin, and the cloud also as thin: or else thus, namely when
many thin, light, and hot Exhalations by immoderate heat are drawn up from the
earth, and by the absence of the sun are destitute of that force by which
they should be drawn up higher; yet somewhat ascending by their own nature, (in
that they be light and hot) they meet with the cold, either of the night in the
lowest Region, or else of the air in the middle Region; and so by an
Antiperistasis or resistance of contraries, they are beaten back, and with the
force of their motion set on fire, as in summer nights and evenings we often
see after an hot parching day. Now this kind of lightning some call Fulgetrum.
The kinds of lightning.


Another sort they call Coruscatio; which indeed is nothing else but the
shining of the lightning; the shining or glittering of it rather then the
lightning it self: for in this regard we can perceive a flashing when there be
no clouds above our Horizon; or if there be clouds, we see the flashing when
our backs are turned from them; or else we often perceive even through a thick
cloud that it lightened, when the lightning came not so low, but only issued
out of a thinner cloud which was above that thicker one, and shined through it.

A third kind is called Fulgur: and this is accompanied with thunder, caused
by the strife and reluctation which the Exhalation makes in the cloud, showing
it self in Why we see the lightning before we hear the thunder.
the breaking of the said cloud: and although the crack be heard long after we
have seen the fire, yet they come together; the seeming difference being,
because the quickness of our sight preventeth our hearing; which is so much
the sooner done, either when the thunder is far off and not near unto us, or
when the wind is contrary; which is also seen in the cleaving of wood, or any
the like knocking: for let us be but in some sort distant from the party
making the noise or striking the blow, and we shall see the ax heaved up again
before we hear the sound.

The next is Fulmen; and between this and the other The worst ^inde of
lightning.
is a great difference: For Fulmen is an Exhalation which in respect of its
quantity is so copious, and in respect of its quality is so hot and dry, and
mixed with so many other vapors of a contrary nature, that when it breaks
the cloud wherein it is enclosed, it comes with such a violence, and continues
burning so long, that it falls even to the very ground, making a more
fearful fragor or crack then ordinary: And oftentimes a great stone is blown
out of the cloud with it; whose cause is also natural. For when the Exhalation
is drawn up with more The making of the thunderstone.
then an ordinary violence; or is so drawn up, or from such a place as it may
carry much earthie matter with it, then is the stone procured. The matter
causing it at the first is thin, and like unto the finest sand that can be
imagined; yet nevertheless through the moisture which it gets in the Air,
and by the meeting with wet vapors in the ascent, it clottereth together, and
being also it self of a kind of clammie nature, it disjoyneth not, but
sticks fast: and then by the (...) heat which it finds in the general
matter of the Exhalation when it is fired, it is thoroughly hardened, even as a
brick which is burned in the fire: and being Or thus; Gene^ ex exhalation^
(...) v^scosa, and (...), quos (...) ce^ (...), mutatione (...) so (...) s^
(...) cu^ (...) mi^ (...) in (...). (...). lib. 2. (...). 7. cap. 3.
thus hardened and burnt, it breaks forth with the Exhalation, and they both
come tumbling down together. For the force of the Exhalation shoots it out, and
look whatsoever is in the way, it overthrows, burns and dasheth in pieces.
Howbeit, when it strikes the earth, it is reported to go never above five foot
deep.

All this is pertinent to that which is called Fulmen. But for that other,
which is Fulgur, the case is far otherwise. For in regard of the little
plenty of the matter it never falls to the ground, but is wasted and
consumed by the way.

Moreover, Philosophers make three kinds of Fulmen; Three kinds of Fulmen.
viz. Terebrans, Discutiens, and Urens: or (as some call them) Scindentia,
Infuscantia, and Urentia.

1. The first is said not to burn, but rather to pierce, The first kind is
dry of quality.
cleave, and extirpate such things as are obvious to it. For seeing it is more
subtle and pure then gross, as also wondrous dry, and carries with it great
plenty of spirits, wind, or breathings, it must needs produce strange
effects, and pass through the pores of any thing be they never so small;
striking through with such wonderful swiftness, as that it cannot possibly
hurt, but where it is resisted and hindered by the close composure of that
matter against which it strikes. And hereupon it comes to pass that money is
sometimes melted in the purse, and the purse not hurt at all; the bones broke,
and the skin sound: yea and sometimes the whole man burnt to ashes when his
clothes are not consumed, with many the like strange accidents. And why it
should cleave a wine vessel and the wine be so dull as not to run out until
some 2 or 3 days after, this may be a reason; viz. in regard of the swift
alteration and change, whereby also all the clamminesse of the wine is drawn to
the outwardmost part, which keeps in the wine as in a skin, not suffering it
suddenly to disperse it self.

2. The second kind burns not to ashes, but blasteth The second kind is
something moist.
or scorcheth, leaving the tincture of fire, and as it were of smoke behind
it; for the things which it strikes do use to look black, or of a footie
color, like unto a chimneys stock. And this is caused in regard that this
kind of lightning is far more full of moisture then the other; and yet in a
manner as subtle, swift and pure: otherwise it would not blast but burn.

3. The third kind is Fulmen Urens; and this is magis The third kind is most
gross of the three.
igneum quam flammeum, more fiery then flamie; being of a gross and earthy
substance, having much slimie matter in it: which makes it therefore set such
things on fire as are combustible, whenever it meets with them.

And yet there are some things which (as Plin. lib. 2. cap. 55.
it is said) the lightning hurts not. As for example, The The Poets therefore
write that she carries Jupiters armor* which is lightning.
Eagle, Joves bird, is free. The laurel is not hurt: neither can the earth be
wounded any more then 5 foot deep. Such places also as are covered with the
skins of Seals, or Seacalves, are secure: wherefore of old time the tents of
the Emperors were covered with them for their better safety. Suetonius
tells us a story of the Emperor Caligula how he was scared with Thunder;
who, although he bragged and boasted of himself that he was a god, and
threatened war with Jupiter for a shower of rain that fell against his mind,
was nevertheless by and by so terrified with thunder and lightning, that he
thereupon runs and hides his head under a bed.

Moreover it is said, that if lightning kill one in his sleep, it opens his
eyes: if it kill one whilst he is awake* it shuts them. The reason being
because it waketh him that sleeps, and kills him before he can shut his
eyes again: and him that waketh it so amazeth, that winking he dies before he
can open those eyes of his which the sudden flash of the lightning caused him
to close.

And know that it is not good to stand gazing upon the Not wholesome to gaze on
the lightning.
lightning at any time* for when it does no other hurt, if it be any thing
near us, it may dry up, or so waste the crystalline humor of the eyes that it
perish the sight: or it may swell the face, making it to break out with scabbes
or leprosy, caused by a kind of poison in the Exhalation which the pores of
the face and eyes admit and receive. For this is certain that the matter of
lightning, seeing it comes from sulfurous and other poisonous metallic
substances, is much infected, and therefore hurts where it enters.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 5* Of such Meteors as are fiery only in appearance.
Artic. 1. The Galaxia is no Meteor.
ANd thus have I done with all those kind of Meteors which are fiery in very
deed, whether pure or mixed.

Now it follows that I speak of such as are fiery only in appearance; not
being such as they seem to be, but rather seeming more then they are.

Some account eight of them, and make the Galaxia or milkie way to be one. But
that last may rather be left out: For although Aristotle would have the Galaxia
to be a Meteor, yet his opinion is worthily misliked of most men, and that not
without good reason.

For if it were a Meteor, and of the nature of the Elements, as Exhalations
are, it would be at the length consumed like to other Meteors: but this circle
never corrupts nor decreaseth; and therefore it is no sublunarie concretion
attracted and formed out of the stars which are above it, and placed by their
power in the highest part of the air. Moreover, if this his tenent were true,
why has it continued (the Galaxia I mean) in the same form, place, and
magnitude always from the beginning of the world until now? And besides,
other stars might also attain to the like luminous concretion as well as
those which he imagines to be over it.

And moreover, this milkie way of Aristotle would admit of a Parallax, were it
so as he persuades; and according to the opticall consideration (says noble
Tycho) by the shining of the fixed stars through it* it would beget a strange
refraction, differing far from that which is occasioned by the vapors that
are seen about the Horizon. For they seldom rise to the twentieth degree of
altitude; whereas this, proceeding from the Via lactea, would reach to the
greatest height.

Wherefore we may say that it is rather of the nature What the Galaxia is.
of the heaven, or a certain heavenly substance, but somewhat thicker then the
other parts of heaven: or (if you will) much like to the matter of the stars,
or to the substance of the moon; but diffused and spread abroad, and not
conglobated into one body as the stars are. For although all be filled with
air from the earth to the fixed stars, yet there the matter may begin to be
more thick, firm, and solid; and so the waters above the heavens are the better
upheld.

For conclusion therefore, not reckoning this amongst any of these Meteors
fiery only in appearance, I may account them in number seven.

As thus: 1. The colors of clouds. 2. Many Suns. 3. Many Moons. 4. Beams of
light. 5. Crowns or circles about the Sun or Moon. 6. The Rainbow. 7. Chaps
or openings in the sky.
Concerning all which in general, although they seem to burn, yet they do not,
but are caused by refraction and reflection of light, either from the Sun or
Moon, or brightest Planets.

Artic. 2. Of colors in the clouds.
ANd particularly for the appearance of color in the clouds, it arises not
from the mixture of the four qualities, as it does in bodies perfectly mixed,
as herbs, stones, etc. but only from the falling of light upon shadow or
darkness; the light being in stead of white, and the shadow or darkness in
stead of black. Not that they are always perfectly white and black; for they
differ according to the quality and composure of the cloud: wherefore some be
very white, and that is when the vapor whereof the cloud consists is very
subtle and thin; some yellowish, when the vapor is thicker; some ruddie and
duskish, when it is meanly thick; some black, when it is very thick; and some
greenish, when it is more waterie then ordinary, being best discerned when it
is far from the Zenith, and obvious by an oblique aspect.

The red and ruddie colors are seen only in the Why red clouds are seen only
in the morning and evening.
morning and evening, when the light of the sun is not in his full force; for
at other times his light is too vehement, clear, strong and piercing. And by a
diligent observation of these colors, I think a man may as easily judge of
fair or foul weather and the like, as a physician may of the temperature of the
body by inspection of the urine. But of colors you may see more Viz. Parag.
6. Artic. 1.
afterward.

Artic. 3. Of many Suns and Moons.
ANd now concerning many Suns; they are called Parahelii, from (...) and
(...); which is as if one should say, apud solemn: because they are as it were
with the sun in place, as also not absent from him in splendor and fashion.

Their generation is after this manner; viz. when a smooth waterie cloud which
is of equal thickness, quiet and still, is placed on the side of the sun:
not under the sun, for then there would be a circle; nor opposite to the
sun, for then there would be the appearance of a Rainbow: but on the side;
which must not be too far off, nor yet too near: for if it be too far off,
then reason tells us that the beams will be too weak to reflect in a
convenient manner: or if it be too near, then the sun will disperse it
without any image at all.

Now if such a cloud as this we speak of shall happen to be on both sides of
the sun, then the appearance will be as if there were three suns; whereas
there is indeed but one: the other two being the images of the true Sun, seen
only by reflection or refraction upon the cloud on either side. Or be there
more pieces of such a cloud then one, set at a convenient distance; then there
may be many suns: even as in a broken looking-glass, every part will show
the shadow of that face which is obvious to it.

Moreover, these many suns may be said to have a What is signified by many
suns.
double signification; the one natural, the other supernatural.

According to their natural signification, they betoken rain and moist
weather; because they cannot appear but in a moist disposition of the air.

And as for their supernatural signification, experience has witnessed, that
they have appeared as the portenders of change in states and kingdoms; or as
the foretokens of Gods wrath upon sinners. For this is a rule, that A rule and
in observation concerning strange sights.
such things as are strange may be derived both from natural causes, and also
include God the chief and best cause of all things; by whose admired providence
each thing is ordered, and by whose unspeakable wisdom each particular change
has been decreed: yea even in the course of nature (before ever nature was) he
both foresaw and appointed how things should happen; although in respect of our
weakness and want of skill, the searching of them out be too abstruse and
hard. For as I verily believe, that not so much as one poor sparrow falls to
the ground without Gods providence; so I do also acknowledge, that by his
providence likewise he brings to pass these and the like things, for such
ends, as he in his secret counsel has determined; using his creatures (whose
courses in each particular he both set and foresaw) as instruments and means to
effect them.

But I proceed. And as for the supernatural signification of these suns,
experience (I say) has witnessed that some strange thing or other usually
follows after them. As not long before the contention of Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, for the Empire of Rome, there appeared three suns, as it were
pointing out the strife which followed soon after between them three Fulks
Meteors.
for the imperial diadem.

Also in the year Stows Abridg. of chron.
1233, upon the 7 day of April, four suns were seen besides the natural
sun: in which year (as Lanquets chronicle testifies) there was great debate
kindled, and much variance stirred up between Henry the third, K. of England,
and the Lords of his kingdom: and in the very Stow* ibid.
next year, England was wasted with fire and sword from Wales to Salisburie;
which said town was also burned: and at the same time was a great drought and
pestilence.

Also in the year Idem.
1460, three suns again showed forth their orient faces, which was but the
day before the three Earls, viz. Edward Earl of March, with the Earl of
Pembroke, and Earl of Wilt-shire, fought their great battles in Wales at
Mortimers cross (as Stow in his Abridgement affirms;) where the Earl of
March put the other two to flight, and slew many of their people. And again, in
the year 1526, toward the slaughter of Lewis the second, King of Hungary,
Fulks Meteors.
three suns marched out, In the year 1619 were 3 also seen at Lovan in the
month of May, at the rising of the Sun. Fromond. Met. lib. 6.
betokening the three Princes which strove for the kingdom after him: which
three were these, viz. Ferdinand, who was afterward Emperor, and John Sepusio
Vaivode governor of Transylvania; as also Solomon the Magnificent, or Great
Turk, being one of the hardiest captains in all his time.

And now after the consideration of many Suns, it follows that I speak of
many Moons, of which it is no hard matter to know the natural cause, seeing
their generation is, as before has been showed concerning many Suns.

For if a watery Cloud shall side-long sit, Du Batt.

And not beneath or justly opposite
To Sun or Moon; then either of them makes,
With strong Aspect, double or treble shapes
Upon the same. The vulgar then is affrighted
To see at once three sparkling Chariots lighted;
And in the Welkin, on nights gloomie throne,
To see at once more shining Moons then one.
Artic. 4. Of Beams or Streams of light.
NExt unto these I mentioned Beams or Streams of light, and they are generated
after this manner; namely when the light of the Sun falls into a watery
cloud of unequal thickness, or rather of unequal thinness; or into such a
cloud whose parts are some of them of a spungie nature, and some of them more
closely compacted: For the thinner and more spungie parts receiving the light
do represent certain clear and white streaks or beams, whilst the thicker
parts and more full of humor are not pierced at all, but look of another hue;
from whence it comes to pass that these streams are often of differing and
many colors.

Artic. 5. Of Circles or Crowns.
CRowns, Garlands, or Circles, are seen sometimes about the Sun, sometimes
about the Moon, and sometimes about the brightest Planets, as Jupiter and
Venus. This appearance is commonly called Halo, Graecis (...)
Halo; and the matter or subject of it is a cloud, which must be endued
nominatur, hoc est, Area: quoniam (ut Seneca testatu^) apud veteres terendis
frugibus loca destinata fere rotunda suerunt.
with three properties: First, that it be thin and not thick; Secondly, that it
be equal and uniform, not in one part more thin then in another; And
thirdly, that it be directly under the Sun, Moon, or any such star whose
Latini Coronam vocant, quia rotunda plerumque constat figura, and sidera
cingere atque coronare videtur.
beams cause the circle: Unto which add this last, namely that it be not
disquieted by any wind. And being thus placed and composed, look how a stone
cast into the water makes a circle until the force of the blow be wasted; So
this watery cloud being struck with the force of the Suns, Moons, or stars
beams, does retain their light in form and manner of a circle. Or rather thus;
the beams of the star, etc. equally dispersing themselves so far as they
can, do at their utmost extent make a refraction in the cloud, which must of
necessity be round, because the body of the star it self is round, and
cannot possibly send out his beams further in one place then in another. This
therefore made Du Bartas say,

Sometimes a fiery circle does appear,
Proceeding from the beauteous beams and clear
Of Sun and Moon and other stars aspect,
Down-looking on a thick-round cloud direct;
When, not of force to thrust their rays throughout it,
In a round crown they cast it round about it.
And note that sometimes it appears greater, sometimes lesser: which is in
regard of the quality of the matter whereof the cloud consists. For if it be
gross, the beams piercing it can spread or dilate it but a little way. If it
be thin, they then are able to dilate it further.

And as for their significations, they sometimes signify The signification of
Circles.
rain, sometimes wind, sometimes fair, clear, and calm weather, sometimes
frost, sometimes tempest, and sometimes snow.

1. Rain, if the circle wax altogether thicker and darker. 2. Wind, when the
circle breaks on the one side: The reason whereof is, because the circle is
broken by the wind which is above and not yet come down to us here below: But
by this effect above, we may gather both that it will come, and also from what
quarter; namely from that quarter where the circle breaks first. 3. But if it
vanish away and be dissolved altogether, or in all parts alike, then it is a
token of fair weather: 4. Or of frost, in winter, when it is great about the
They are very seldom seen about the Sun, because of wind in the day time;
or because the Sun either draws the vapors too high, or else disperseth
them too much. In the year 1104 there was a blazing star and 4 circles about
the Sun, which was a sign of the new kindling malice again between Henry the
first, King of England, and his brother Duke of Normandy. Stow in his chron.
Moon: 5. Of snow, when at the same time of the year it seems to be craggie
and rockie: 6. Or of tempestuous weather, when it looks ruddie, and is
gross, and broken in many parts.
And thus much concerning Circles.

Artic. 6. Of the Rainbow.
THe Rainbow is to be spoken of next: And this is nothing else but the
apparition of certain colors in an hollow, watery, distilling, or dropping
cloud directly opposite to the Sun, representing in its fashion half a circle.

Or thus; It is a bow of many colors, appearing in a dewie, dark, droppie, and
hollow cloud, by reflection of the Sunne-beams opposite to it. For this is
certain, that lightsome or luminous bodies do cause images, colors, or
appearances upon slender, clean, and thin objects: Now of all bodies the Sun
is most lightsome; but the air and water are clean, thin, and slender.

Here then it appears that the Efficient cause of the The efficient cause of
the Rainbow.
Rainbow is the light or beams of the Sun; which falling into fit, apt, or
convenient matter, opposite to them, are refracted and reflected to our sight.

The Material cause is not water in act, nor yet The material cause.
thick air, but a dewie vapor; which is not continuus, sed potius corpusculis
guttularum discretus; not absolutely of one body, but rather severed into many
bodies, or little drops. The formal cause.


The Form of it is to be gathered out of the Figure and Colors.

And for the Figure, we see it is circular: But yet it never represents to us
any more then a Semicircle; and not always so great an arch: The reason of
which is, because the center or middle point of the Rainbow, which is
diametrally opposite to the center of the Sun, is always either in the
Horizon, or under it: So that seeing our sight of the heavens is cut off by the
earth in such a manner as that we can never see above half of them, it must
needs be, that the appearance of this circle be either more or less to us,
according to the Suns great or little distance from the Horizon. The colors
in the Rainbow.


And as for the colors, they are commonly accounted three, viz. Ruddie, Green,
and Azure. To which some add a fourth. The first is in the thickest and
darkest part of the cloud: For where a bright shining falls upon a darkish
place, there it represents a ruddie color, being somewhat like a Flame. The
second is caused by a more weak inf^action, being in a remoter and more waterie
part of the cloud: whereupon it looks greenish.

The third, which is further into the cloud, proceeds from the weakest
infraction, and is therefore of a more dark and obscure color, tending to a
blew or an azure hue. And sometimes a fourth color is also perceived, being
very like a yellow or orenge-tawnie, proceeding from a commixture of the red
and green, according to Aristotle's judgment: of which the learned may see Iul.
Scaliger, exer^. 80. sect. 4.

Now these colors in some rain-bows are more vehement or apparent, in others
more remiss or obscure; which is according to the aptness of the cloud, etc.

And in rain-bows caused by the moon (for sometimes, Moon-bows.
though seldom, they have been seen in the night) the colors are weaker,
whiter, and less conspicuous; being in a manner as white as milk: which is,
because the moon having a borrowed light, is nothing so strong in the
projecting her rays, but far more feeble then the sun.

But come to the final cause, and you will find it twofold; The final cause.
partly Natural, partly Supernatural.

As it is Natural, we take it either as a sign of rain, because it cannot
appear but in a waterie cloud, which is so prepared that it is ready to fall
in very drops: or as a How to judge of the weather by the rainbow*
sign of fair weather; namely then when the beams of the sun are strong, and
the heat of it so great that the moisture of the cloud is dried up, and the
drops attenuated into thin air. All which may be discerned after this manner,
viz. when the colors grow either darker and darker, or clearer and clearer.
For if the colors appear dark, thick, or obscure by little and little, till
at the last they bury themselves in a black cloud, then rain follows. But if
the colors by degrees grow clearer and clearer till at the last they vanish
away, then we may expect fair and bright weather. And this as it is a natural
sign.

But now as it is Supernatural: and then we behold it as a sign or symbol of
Gods mercy toward the world, betokening that it shall never be destroyed
again through any Deluge or universal Flood. For it shall be a sign of the
covenant (says God) between me and the earth, viz. that there shall be no more
a Flood of waters to destroy the earth, Genesis 9. The derivation of Iris,
signifying the rainbow*


From both which significations or ends, it may well be called Iris; for (...)
in the Greek is as much as dico in the Latin, signifying I say, I publish, I
tell, or I declare. Iris therefore comes from (...), dico; First, because this
bow publishes or tells to us the constitution of the air. Secondly, because
it declares the covenant of God made with the world after the Flood; showing
that his wrath is so far forth appeased, that he will never drown the world
again; which appears even in the order observed in placing the bow: for we
see it with the bended ends downwards, and as one that holds a bow in peace;
insomuch that had it a shaft in it, the earth should not be shot; neither ought
man to fear that the Lord will shoot any more such arrows of displeasure as
before.

Some have thought that there was no rainbow before the Flood, but that it
appeared since; because God says, When I make the heaven thick with clouds, I
will put my bow in the clouds, Genesis 9.

To which it may be answered, that God says, not The rainbow was before the
Flood.
that he will of new create a bow, but that he will then put it into the clouds
so as it never was before; namely to be a sign, etc. So that although it were
not as a sign of any covenant before the Flood, yet without doubt it was as a
Meteor then as well as now; and therefore was: otherwise we might deny both
bread, and wine, and water to be before the institution of the Sacraments: for
it is the same reason. Wherefore, as there was water before ever it was used
for the water of regeneration in the Sacrament of Baptism; and as there was
bread and wine before ever they were used as signs at the holy Communion: so
also the rainbow was before ever it had that office to be a sign of Gods
covenant between him and mankind, just as at this day it appears even to
such as are not of the Church; very Heathens and Pagans beholding it as well as
we.

Besides, there were from the beginning the same causes in nature to produce
it: for there wanted neither a sun to draw vapors from waterie places, nor
yet a convenient place in the air to thicken them into clouds; neither was the
sun destitute of sparkling rays to make reflection and infraction: but as it
is caused now, so also then; and to think otherwise were to think amiss.

Some again have been persuaded that this bow was before, but was not in a
cloud before. And thus thought certain amongst the Hebrews.

But this is a reasonlesse assertion, and against all Philosophy, and not at
all approved by Divinity. For how could that appear in a clear air, which
can have no existence or being, but in a dewing or distilling cloud? Verily of
both absurdities the former was the better, namely that it was not at all: and
yet that also wanted grounds to uphold it, as has been showed, and is yet
further manifest. For seeing the Lord God in six days finished the creation,
and set the perfect order of all his creatures; it follows that the rainbow
had then his place either in being or in power. And thus from two absurdities A
gross absurdity of some who think that there shall be no rain nor rainbow 40
years before the worlds end.
I bring you to a third. For further more, it has been the opinion of some
idle doting brains to think that there shall be no rain, nor rainbow, 40
years before the end or destruction of the world by fire; because the very
air (say they) must be prepared a long time before by a continual dryness,
and each thing made fit for combustion.

Which surely is a brainsick fancy. For what do they in this but show their
extreme folly; derogating, not only from reason, but also from the power of
God? For is not God able to destroy the work of his own hands without such a
supposed preparation, and make the world combustible in an instant, if need be?
Or should there be no rain, and consequently no bow (because it appears in a
waterie cloud) then how should the fruits of the earth be preserved? Great
famine and misery must needs follow in the world if this be true. For when the
clouds drop no fatness, then the ground pines away through barrenness; and
when the heavens are iron, then the earth is brass: whereas it is manifest,
that at the coming of Christ there shall be pleasant and fruitful times; times
full of mirth, wherein they shall eat and drink, marry and be given in
marriage, even as it was in the days of Noah. Who therefore will think that
these men are in their right minds, whilst they affirm that no rain shall
fall by the space of 40 years before the world ends?

The Jews as soon as they behold this bow (not daring What the Jews do at the
sight of the rainbow.
to gaze upon it) do presently go forth and confess their sins,
acknowledging that they are worthy to be destroyed with a Flood as the old
world was; and in being spared they celebrate the mercy and ^lemencie of God
for sparing them. But, says On Genesis chap. 9. page 898.
Pareus, although they mingle this religion with much superstition, because
they dream that the name of Jehovah is as it were engraven on the bow, and
because they turn their eyes away as from the majesty of God appearing there,
not daring to look upon it, lest (as may be said) beholding the face of God
they die: Yet it is meet even for us upon the sight of it to be so far forth
touched with a reverence toward God, that we pass not away the symbol of the
covenant with a brutish dullness, lest thereupon we grow unmindefull of Gods
severitie and goodness.

There is also another thing observable concerning this bow which I may not
forget; namely this, The mystery which (according to some men's fancies) is
involved in the colors. For in a mystery they would have it betoken both the
baptism of Christ, by water and fire; and also the two judgments of the
world, the one already past, the other yet to come: that which is past
appears in the watery colors, showing that the world has been drowned: that
which is yet to come appears in the fiery colors, showing that the world
shall be destroyed by fire, or burnt up at the day of judgment. But (says Dr.
Willet on Genesis
one) these and the like applications are witty and pretty, rather then wise
and pithie: I leave them therefore, and proceed:

Artic. 7. Of chaps or gapings in the sky.
THe Philosophers call this Meteor Chasma, (...), quod est hio, vel dehisco, to
gape or open: and in Latin it is Hiatus, a word of the same signification.
There are two kinds of these gapings or openings: the one wide, the other
round. And although I reckon these amongst such fiery Meteors, as are fiery
only in appearance; yet it may be that they sometimes burn, and sometimes
only seem to burn.

They seem to burn when the Exhalation by reason o^ the (...)* na^* ^hilosoph.
want of viscuous matter is not enflamed, but enlightened rather on the outward
parts, having much raritie or thinness in them: at which time the middle part
receiving no light, in regard that it is black and thick, there appears as it
were a gulf in the sky. The reason whereof is, because the black is compassed
about with white; which white presenting it self Qu^ clara sunt, alboque
apparent color, (...) visum movent: qu^ vero nigra and obscura sunt, minus cum
afficiunt.
sooner to the sight then the black, makes the black seem to be far off, and
the white near hand: and the black being far off, seems like a gaping deep:
which (as has been said) is sometimes Si magna fuerit, vorago; si non it a
magna, hiatus non^natur. Titclman.
greater, sometimes less, according to the fashion or quantity of the
Exhalation, or cloud represented by it. And after this manner do cunning
painters deceive the eye in shadowing their pictures. For when a bright,
clear, and aerie color is laid circularly, and a thick, dark, and obscure
color in the middle of it, then the appearance is like some gulf, hole, deep
or pit: which they fashion diversely according to their skill in fancying the
laying of their colors.

All this is when it burns not.

But note that sometimes this Meteor burns in very deed. Which is when the
Exhalation has much viscositie or clammie matter in it; the thick and dark not
burning, but remaining in the midst; and the thinner-parts on fire, deceiving
the sight with a seeming gaping, as before when there was only light in those
thin parts in stead of fire.

And thus have I showed you the natural cause of all fiery Meteors.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 6. Of watery Meteors and their several kinds.
NOw it follows that I speak something of watery Meteors, and show after what
manner they are generated. They be called watery because they consist most of
water; their substance being that kind of Exhalation which we call Vapor, and
not Fumus.

And that which in the first place offers it self, is Nubes, a Cloud.

Artic. I. Of Clouds.
I Begin therefore with clouds. And a cloud is a vapor or Exhalation cold and
moist, drawn from the earth out of wet or watery places, by heat of the Sun,
into the middle Region of the air; where by cold it is so thickened and knit
together, that it hangs, until either It is said that clouds have sometimes
fallen down to the earth with great noise, to the te^rour and damage of such as
had them in their Zenith, which clouds came but from the highest part of the
lowest region: yet nevertheless they were generated in the middle Region, but
waxing very heavy have sunk down by little and little, till at last they seem
to fall no further then the lowest Region: But this is seldom. They may also
fall by drops through their own weight.
the own weight, or some resolution, causes it to fall. If it be a great
cloud, it is Nubes; if it be but a little one, it is called Nubecula. The name
comes ab obnubendo, id est, operiendo coelum, from hiding or covering the
heavens: because a cloud (through the thickness that the vapor is condensed
into) hinders, that a less portion of the heavens is conspicuous, then
otherwise would be.

It is also twofold; either fertile, or barren.

A fertile or fruitful cloud affords rain: but a barren cloud does not;
because it is at length by the blasts of wind, and virtue of the heavenly
bodies, turned into thin air.

And to either of these clouds belong motion and color.

Their motion is caused by the wind most commonly, through whose force they
are driven to and fro: But if the winds blow not, then they are drawn along by
the Sun, and made a companion with him in his travels, always moving that way
which the Sun goes.

Concerning their colors I spoke before in Paragraph 5. Article 2. And
therefore here you may expect the less: yet let me say that they are either
simple or mixed.

Black or white are simple; because they consist of no other colors. But red,
green, and the rest, are mixed.

They appear white when the vapor is thin; for then it is easily pierced by
the light, which disperseth it self into it.

But when they appear of a Nigredo in nubibus ob vaporum densitatem oritur,
qu^ lumen collustrans non admittit. Et sic e contra ^it Albor; viz. e vapore
subtiliore and parum conspissato, quem radius facillime pe^etrat, and
^quabiliter in illum spa^gitur. Goclen. Dis^us. Phys.
black color, then the vapor is thick, and more closely condensed: insomuch
that the beams of light cannot be admitted*

As for their redness, it may be caused two ways, according to Goclenius:
either through the adustion of the air, magno aestu incensum, as he says: Or
propter retusum radium Solis, by reason of the beams of the Sun beat back
again; which, falling upon a watery cloud that is thickly condensed, pierces
not; but being doubled causes redness, as in the morning: and this is a sign
of rain: but the other is not. For the other redness is in such a cloud as
shows the dryness and adustion of the air; the cloud it self consisting of
a smokie humid substance, unto which is joined a kind of dry and adust
matter. This therefore is a sign of (...) rubedo (...) significat, quia*
rubedo nubem rara^t est^ solis (...), ejusque (...) ab^ esse ^tat. Sed (...)
rubedo plu^ias (...) ventos promi^tit, quia vapores humidarum and sub densarum
(...) absumi non (...). Ibid.
fair weather, being seen in the evening toward the place of Sunsetting;
according as it has been said of old, Sero rubens coelum, mane indicat esse
serenum.

Concerning green clouds they are altogether watery, and as it were already
resolved into water; which receiving into them the light appear green, like
unto water in a great vessel, or in the sea and deep rivers.

Blew clouds come something near to the nature of black, excepting that the
black are thicker.

And note, If when the Sun sets, there appear or arise black dark clouds, it
portendeth rain. Also observe the place opposite to the Sun at his setting,
viz. the East, and see if that be clear: for if it be pestered with black
clouds, there is but small hope of fair weather that night, or the next day.

The common opinion is, that the height of the clouds The height of the clouds.
is not above nine miles. But it is agreeable to no reason at all why any
certain height should be determined: for they are of unequal heights,
differing both according to the matter of their composure, and also according
to the time of the year; being lower in winter then in summer: for when the
sun has the greatest force they then ascend the higher; and in his smaller
force they hang the lower. By which it appears that the sun helps to
uphold them, and keeps them (although heavier then the air) even in the
air: for they* sometimes also follow his motion.

But note that it is not the sun alone which upholds How the clouds naturally
hang in the air.
them; for the air it self is also a cause of their not falling; and that both
within the clouds, and also without them: within the clouds; for the clouds are
of a spungie nature, and full of pores, which are filled with air le^t there
should be vacuum; and this air heaveth them up, causing them to aspire:
without the clouds also, because they do as it were float up and down in the
air, as some heavy things do in the water, and yet not sink, unless their
substance be too earthie and heavy.

Artic. 2. Of Rain.
FRom clouds I proceed to speak of rain. And rain is nothing else but as it
were the melting of a cloud turned into water. Or, according to Aristotle, it
is the flux of a fertile cloud resolved by the heat of the sun into
distilling drops of water, which being depressed with their own weight, fall
down to the earth. For when the matter of the cloud, being a cold vapor, and
earthly humor, is drawn from the earth and waters, into the middle Region of
the air, and there thickened through the cold, dwelling in the confines of
that place, it is at the last dissolved, and cannot therefore but fall down in
drops: which drops, if they be great, are caused, either by the quick
resolution of the cloud, or else by the little distance of it from the earth.
But if they be smaller, then either the This may be seen if any will but assay
to pour water from an high place.
great distance or slow resolution makes them of no ample quantity.

The first of these is named nimbus; the other is called imber.

And note that the dissolution (as has been said) proceeds out of heat;
which is not only of the sun, but of winds also of an hot temper: as is
seen in the southern wind, which blows up rain sooner then any other wind.
And as for rains which come from cold coasts, and at cold times of the year,
if the cloud be not at such times (as some may think) dissolved through the
heat of any wind, it dissolveth it self through its own weight, (being a
little helped by the sun) for it continues in the air even whilst it can
stay no longer. And at these times also, if we consider all aright, we shall
find that the wind somewhat helps, although not so speedily as from hotter
coasts: for naturally there is a kind of heat in every wind, (because it is
an Exhalation hot and dry) although by accident (as from the nature of the
place over which it passes) it may be altered: of which I shall speak more
afterward. And besides all this, the secret influence of the Planets works
greatly toward the dissolution of the foresaid vapors.

But I proceed. And now it follows that I divide all sorts of rain into two
kinds: First, such as are ordinary; Ordinary and extraordinary rains.
secondly, such as be extraordinary.

I call those ordinary when nothing but water falls. And I call those
extraordinary which others call prodigious rains: as when worms, frogs, fish,
wheat, milk, Prodigious rain.
flesh, blood, wool, stones, iron, earth, etc. fall from the clouds. Pliny
makes mention of many such prodigies as these, in the 56 chapter of his second
book; setting down the times when they happened.

Concerning all which, next under God (the causer of the causes causing them)
these or the like reasons may be urged to show how it is possible they should
be procured, and upon what causes they naturally depend.

1. And first for the raining of worms; it may be thought Worms.
that the putrefaction of some dead carcasses or other has been drawn up into
the air as fumes and vapors are, where it breeds such worms as use to breed
out of the like matter here below.

2. The like may be said of frogs, when the vapor is Frogs*
exhaled out of marish grounds at such times as they engender.

3. So also of fishes; excepting that (as is supposed) the Fishes*
force of winds may suddenly sweep away little frey out of ponds upon
montanous places: and so also little young frogs, with many the like things,
may be taken up. Some write of a whole calf falling from the clouds; and have
been thereupon persuaded that it is possible, of Vapors and Exhalations, with
the power of heavenly bodies concurring, a calf may be made in the air. But
this is idle. It was therefore (as others write) taken up in some storm of
whirl wind, and so let fall again.

4. As for wheat and other grain, it has been observed Wheat.
that their raining down has often come in case of extremity, to the great
preservation and refreshment of the distressed: in which regard it may be
supposed that it was an immediate work of God, wrought without the rule of
nature: so, that were all the wits in the world pressed into one, yet were they
all too weak to show a true cause of such a prodigy. Which made Du Bartas
write concerning such;

Let them declare what cause could yerst beget
Amid the air those drizzling showers of wheat,
Which in Carinthia twice were seen to shed;
Whereof that people made them store of bread.
To speak therefore as I think, I will not boldly affirm how this was caused,
but only touch at the possibility of it; namely, that it might be effected
like unto other strange rains, first drawn from the earth into the air, and
then sent down again. For (as I have Paragraph ^. art. 3. and elsewhere.
already said) in showing probable reasons for such things as are strange, we
do also include God the chief and best cause of all things. And so also we
read, that when the Red sea was bayed up with a double wall, to give the
children of Israel safe and free passage through it, God sent a strong
East-winde all that night, etc. by which the waters were divided. Exodus 14. 21.
And again, when the Quails came and filled their tents, being as it were rained
round about them; they were brought from the sea with a wind, and let fall a
days journey on this side, and a days journey on that side, even round about
their camp. Numb. 11. 31.

He that has seen (says Fulk, in his Meteors.
one) an egge-shell full of dew drawn up by the sun into the air, in a May
morning, will not think it incredible, that wheat and other grain should be
drawn up in much hotter countries then ours is, much rather the meal or flower
which is lighter.

5. By the like reason also it sometimes raineth milk: Milk*
for when the intensissimus solis calor, the vehement heat of the sun, shall
either draw milk from the udders Which may the sooner be done in summer, and in
hot countries.
of cattle, and shall mix it with the other parts of the cloud; or shall so
thoroughly try, purify, digest or concoct the vapor, that it may look
something white, then will the drops look as if it rained milk.

6. As for the raining of flesh, it is supposed to be after Flesh.
this manner, namely through the drawing up of blood from places where much
blood has been shed, which being clottered together seems as if it were
flesh.

7. And so also it may rain blood; namely when it is Blood.
not clottered together, but thinner, etc. In the year of Christ 480 was such
a rain. As also in the year 864, near unto Brixia in Italy, was the like.
Yea and before either of these times, our own Lanquet* ^tow, etc.
chronicles tell us that in the days of Rivallo King of the Britains, we also
had blood rained; upon which ensued great mortality of people. Histories make
mention of the like wonders at other times.

But, say some, there is often great store of blood spilt, Object.
and yet no prodigy appears.

To which is answered, that it is not the ordinary exhaling Answ.
virtue which rests in the stars and Planets that can draw up such bloody
vapors, although much blood be spilt; but then only when there is a more
unusual concurrence of causes: for sometimes they are disposed to one thing,
sometimes to another. And for the working of any strange thing, it must be when
there is a strange kind of combination amongst them. To which purpose we know
(although we cannot always directly see and demonstrate how they are mixed and
combined) that they principally intend and cause at the same time other
changes, of which the visible prodigy is but the proclaimer or forerunner:
as, if you look but a little before concerning Comets, you may see, and so rest
satisfied.

And unto this also add, that there may be drops like unto blood, and yet no
blood drawn up: And this may be, either when the Sun draws vapors out of
putrified watery places, in which (as I have often seen) in a drought rests
much slimie and red-coloured corrupted water; or else when the Suns immensive
heat does so boil the water in the cloud, that like unto the urine which a man
makes in a burning fever, it looks red when it falls. The like cause I
gave before unto the water of a white color: but know that it must then be of
another quality, the matter of the vapor I mean: for there are some kind of
waters, as is well known, which being boiled turn to white salt, etc. And as
for a red color, the ordinary rain shows that it is possible: for we see
that ordinary rainwater looks always more brown then spring or river-water,
being as if a more powerful operation would turn it into red.

8. The raining of wool or hair, is when a certain Wool.
mossinesse like wool, such as is upon quinces, willows, and other young
fruits and trees, is drawn up by the Sun among Vapors and Exhalations, which
being clottered together falls down like locks of wool, or hair.

9. Concerning stones, they proceed from earthly Stones.
matter gathered into the clouds, as before was showed concerning the
Thunder-stone, etc.

Pliny, in the 58 chapter of his second book, writes of a strange stone which
fell out of the heavens; the fall whereof was foretold by Anaxagoras in the
second year of the 78 Olympiad.

10. Iron may also drop out of the clouds, when the general Iron.
matter of all metalls, which is quicksilver and brimstone, with the special
matter of mixtion making iron, are all drawn up together, and there concocted
into metal: Or (as one says) Quando vapores metallici aut sulphurei in aere
indurantur, vehementi siderum caliditate; When metallic vapors, or vapors of
a sulfurous nature, are hardened in the air by the vehement heat of the
stars.

11. And as for earth, chalk, dirt, and the like, it is Earth.
drawn up in thin dust at the first with the vapor: Or else, by force of some
wind blowing from caverns, or holes of the ground, it is carried up; and being
conglomerated, or as it were glued together, falls down again.

12. But beside all these, there have sometimes been Red crosses.
red drops, which falling upon men's garments have made a stain like unto a
cross. Such drops as these fell upon the Ru^finus, Histor. Eccles. lib. 1.
cap. 39
clothes of the Jews, when in the days of the Apostata Julian they went about
to restore their city and temple. For when the said Julian raged with impiety
and devilish fury against the Christians, he gave the Jews license to build
their temple, that they might restore again their ancient sacrifices, and the
like things that they longed for: at which time Cyril was Bishop of Jerusalem;
and he (to animate the Christians) showed that it was impossible for the Jews
to finish that work which they had begun: alleging the prophet Daniel in his
ninth chap. at the 27 verse; and also that saying of our Savior in the 24 of
Matthew: by both which places it did appear, that their house was left unto
them desolate, and that there must not be one stone upon another; but that
their desolations must be perpetual.

Thus it happened to the Jews. But this surely was a thing altogether
miraculous. For their red crosses came not alone, but were accompanied with
other prodigies. As first of all an Earthquake, which overthrew and tumbled
down their building which they had raised upon the old foundation. Then came
forth a fire which consumed all their engines and instruments. And last of all
fell these drops, imprinting upon their clothes, crosses with so deep a stain,
as they were not able to wash them out: And both the Theod. Histor. Eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 20.*
same night, and night after, was also a bright sign of the cross seen int he
sky, as Theodoret in his Ecclesiastical history reports: adding
herewithall, that when the Jews saw this, they fled and returned home, being
perplexed through fear of a divine scourge; confessing that he, whom their
forefathers had nailed to a cross, was God indeed.

This was both the prodigy, and the issue of it: of which, being so plainly
miraculous, I know not what to say.

But I find that other times have in a manner afforded Reasons concerning Red
crosses at other times.
the like. Wherefore (although I speak nothing at all of these at this time
thus miraculous) concerning them some reasons may be given.

And not to go far, Magirus, in the Lib. 4. cap. 6.
Comment upon his Physics, tells us, that in Suevia a Province in Germany,
in the year of our Lord So also in Westphalia, ann. 1543. at Lovane, 1568.
ipso Pentecostes die. And in the year 1571 in duione Embdensi, in Frisus
Orientalibus. See Fromond. Meteor. Lib. 5. cap. 6. art. 3.
1534, the air distilled certain red drops, which falling upon linen garments,
made such an impression or stain as was like unto a cross. Which impression
(as he alleges out of Cardan his sixteenth book De subtilitate) might be
procured thus; viz. because a certain kind of extraordinary dry dust sticked
to those garments; which, by the piercing or through-washing drops falling upon
it, was so miraculously divided into parts, that there seemed a figure as of a
cross. Or thus, because the woven threads in themselves had such a form. Or
else (which is most probable) because the humor in the middle part lay on
high, whereas the sides were but thin, and fashioned according to the dashing
of the drop. For when a drop falls upon any thing with a kind of force, we
see that most of the humor rests in the midst, whilst certain sparkling
rays are dashed about the sides: And thus he thinks it might be then, in the
fall of those staining drops; which why they stain, has relation to that which
I said before concerning the raining of blood.

I will therefore now conclude; adding in the last The devil many times works
in the Air.
place, that the devil, by Gods permission, both often has and also does
produce many such prodigies as these that I have spoken of, with sundry other
like unto them; especially amongst the Psalm. 78. 49.
Heathen, Pagan, and superstitious nations. For he is quovis homine scientior,
more subtle then any man; his knowledge and skill whereby he works wonders,
arising, First, from his spiritual How it comes to pass that the devi^s
knowledge is far beyond man's.
nature, which proclaims a large measure of cunning and wisdom in him: for
we know that there is a greater measure of knowledge in man, then is in a brute
beast, by reason of that nature which God has given unto man above beasts: and
where there is a nature and a substance beyond either, there must also be
knowledge above either. Secondly, God created him a good Angel; and although,
like man, he lost much by his fall, yet thirdly by his long observations, and
continual experience, he has as it were made up the breach, or want of his
created knowledge, by acquired skill: and therefore, when he has Matthew. 8. 31.
Job 1. 12.
commission, he can upon occasion work strange wonders. As for example, nothing
more familiar or common in Saxo Grammat. Olaus magnus.
Lapland, Lituania, and all over Scandia, as also in Tartaria, then to sell
winds to mariners, and cause tempests; which the witches and sorcerers there
procure by the help and power of the devil: wherein he shows himself,
according to his Ephesians. 2. 2.
title, Prince of the air.

Wherefore (as I said) I do not doubt, but that many such as the former strange
prodigies, especially long ago in heathen times, and amongst heathen people,
were procured by his power. For what did the magicians in the sight of Pharaoh,
but as it were rain frogs, and turn Exodus cap. 7* and 8.
the waters into blood, although Moses and Aaron were by?

Besides, it is apparent that in the little world, I mean when parties are
possessed, the devil can cause them to vomit strange things out of their
mouths and stomachs; as crooked pins, iron, coals, nails, brimstone, needles,
lead, wax, hair, straw, live eels, and the like; of which many have been
eyewitnesses, confirming the same for truth. All which, he can as well and
easily perform in the greater world; causing the air to spit, and the clouds
to vomit (for his own advantage) most strange and prodigious things.

Zanchius his opinion was not much differing: for, speaking of strange rains,
Sentio (inquit) tales (...) is ver^ prodigio^as esse, and fieri (...) sola Dei
potentia, eoque iram Dei portendere; qualis fuit (...) pluit sulphur and igne
supra Sodomam, and alias urbes: aut etiam (...) praestigi^, Deo permit ten^e
fieri. Zanch. Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 5. qu^st. 6. These. 3.
he confessed (concerning some of them) that they were produced by such causes,
or the like, as I before alleged; concluding for the rest which were more
occult, that they were truly prodigious; and caused, either by the power of
God, as portenders of his wrath; or else by the sleights of the devil, through
Gods permission.

Artic. 3. Of Dew.
DEw offers it self in the next place, as being a near kinsman to rain. For it
consists of a cold moist vapor which the sun draws into the air: from
whence, when it is somewhat thickened and condensed through cold of the night,
and also of the place whither the sun exhaled it, it falls down in very
small and indiscernible drops, to the great refreshment of the earth.

And this is certain, that the morning and the evening are the only times when
it falls; the reason being in Why dew is but in the morning, and at evening.
regard of the sun, which both positively and privatively causes it. Dew at
night is caused privatively; dew in the morning, positively. At night or in the
evening privatively, because when the sun sets, the lowest part of the
vapor, not being high enough to hang in the air, falls down through absence
of the sun. And in the morning positively, because at the return of the sun
the residue of the vapor, together with the augmentation of it (happily by some
condensed air caused by cold of the night) is dissolved by his approaching
beams, and so made fit to fall, rather then hang any longer. For look what
vapors are about the Horizon at the rising of the sun, are dispersed by his
first approach; and so it comes to pass that the morning as well as the
evening affords dew. But know that if the vapor be not conveniently Why no
dew is a sign of rain.
placed, that is, if it be very high above the Horizon, or in a lofty station
of the air, then the suns approaching beam neither dissolveth nor disperseth
it; whereupon we have no dew, but rather look for rain, because the matter of
dew is still in the air, staying there till it be turned into a cloud, and so
into rain.

And now by this you may see what is the material, what the efficient, what
the formal, and lastly what the final cause of dew.

The material cause is a subtle and moist vapor, being the thinnest of all
vapors.

The efficient cause is the temperate cold of the night, together with the
absence and approach of the sun.

The formal cause is the sprinkling of most thin drops, which the hand can
scarcely perceive.

And the final cause, that (without rain) the earth may have some refreshment.

Yet nevertheless, this I find concerning dew, as it is of a calorificall
nature, that Tit^lm. (...). lib. 6. cap. 6.
rorilentas segetes collectas putrefacit, because every external heat is
putrefactive.

Also dew is a great enemy to sheep, begetting a How sheep may^ get a deadly
flux.
deadly rot in them, or a dangerous flux of the belly; which comes to pass
in regard of the humor being of much viscositie, and not thoroughly refined or
purged. Wherefore your careful and skillful shepherds will never drive out
their sheep to feed, until the sun or the wind have licked the tops of the
grass and flowers. Also know that a windy night hinders the falling of dew.
Some say three things hinder it; viz. wind, great (...) of dew.
heat, and cold: for the most temperate and calm times afford it; when other
times want it.

As for the kinds of dew, I cannot but join with them who divide them into
three.

For there is, first, common dew; secondly, sweet Three kinds of dew.
dew; and thirdly, bitter blasting dew.

The common dew is ordinary. Sweet dew is threefold. 1. Manna. 2. Mel. 3.
Ladanum.

Manna is said to be white like sugar: by some it is Manna.
called Coeli sudor. The matter of it is a fat and pure vapor, not tainted
with any putrid or corrupt Exhalations. Or, according to some, it is roris
melliti genus, sed concreti, a kind of hony-sweet dew, but concrete or compact
more close together: it falls in the East parts, Arabia, Syria, etc.

As for that Manna which God rained to the Israelites Of the Israelites Manna.
in the wilderness, some think that it was altogether miraculous; others that
it was ejusdem speciei cum Manna vulgari, of the same kind with common Manna:
which I also think; because Josephus, in his third book and first chapter,
writes, that in his days there was great store of it in that part of Arabia
wherein Moses was 40 years with the Israelites. What should hinder this
opinion, I see not, unless because the common Manna is of a purging quality,
and therefore to be taken for a medicine rather then for food. To which I (...)
o^ (...).
find an answer, that happily at the first it might work the like effect on
their bodies also, till it expelled the humors proceeding from the onyons and
leeks that they eat in Egypt; but afterward through custom it might not work
at all upon them: or else God, for their good, that they might be fed, might
allay that quality in it by his mighty power: for God resting from all his
works on the seventh day, created no new species of anything afterward.
Fuohsius a learned Physician, testifies that there falls great store of
Manna upon the mountain of Libanus, which is eaten without harm, although they
take it in plentiful abundance. Yet nevertheless it cannot be denied but that
the Israelites had many things miraculous in theirs: The Israelites Manna was
not without miracle in many respects.
as that they could not find it on the Sabbath day: that he which gathered
little, and he which gathered much, had always sufficient for his eating; and
the like: All which proclaimed the power of God: In which regard he says that
he fed them with Psalm. 78. 25, 26. How Manna is said to be Angels food.
Angels food. Not that the Angels eat of it; but because it was cibus
excellentissimus, a most excellent kind of meat; insomuch that were the Angels
to be fed with bread, they might be fed with this. In which sense, we also call
that which is dainty meat, meat for a King, or a Prince, intimating the
goodness of it: So also the poets called their Myrrhina is a wine mixed with
Myr^he and other sweet ^pices.
Myrrhina or their Nectar, the drink of the Gods, because it was a liquour of
such excellency. But besides this, the Scripture in like manner says that it
was bread from heaven, as How Manna is said to come from heaven.
well as Angels food. Not that it came from heaven, if heaven be taken in a
strict sense; but because it was a symbol of Christ's descending from heaven,
as it is John the 6. Moses gave you not that bread (says our Savior) but I am
that bread of life come down from heaven. Or else it is said to come from
heaven, because it came out of the air: for so the word signifying heaven is
often used; as the fowls of the air are said to fly in the open firmament of
heaven, Genesis 1. 20. The clouds are called the clouds of heaven: and the winds
the winds of heaven, although they be but in the air, Dan. 7. And thus much
concerning Manna.

The other kind of sweet dew is Mel, or an Hony-dew. Hony-dew.
Now this falls, not only in other countries, but also here in England; and
we cannot give it a more significant name then a Mel-dew, being both as sweet,
and also of the same substance that honey is. Some suppose that it is drawn out
of sweet herbs and flowers, which I also believe, acknowledging that there is a
kind of resudation of juice proceeding from them at a certain convenient time
of their growth: which juice is either drawn up as a vapor, and so sweeteneth
the dew in the air by such time as it falls; or else, issuing of it self
from the said flowers and plants, but not ascending, it sweeteneth the dew
after it is come down or fallen on them, although the said dew be but ordinary:
for when ordinary dew falls upon any of those leaves which yield such a
resudation or sweat, it cannot but be sweetened, although none of the sweet
liquour be drawn into the air as a vapor with it. Now of these two choose
which in your judgment is the most probable.

Lib. 11. cap. 12.
Pliny witnesses that these dews are most common at the shining of Syrius, or
the great It rises with Sol about the end of July.
Dog-starre; and that before the rising of Virgiliae or the Which is about the
17 day of April.
Seven stars in the morning with the Sun, they cannot at all be.

Ladanum is another kind of sweet dew. Arabia has Ladanum, the third kind of
sweet dew.
great plenty of it, and no other country (as Pliny writes) unless it be
Plin. lib. 12. cap. 17.
Nabathaea, bordering on the Arabic coast of Syria.

It is called Ladanum, because it is a vapor falling upon the herb Ladon or
Ledum; and is sweetened by the juice issuing from the leaves of the said herb,
mixing it self with the vapor. Goats hairs are often found amongst it; because
the Goat feeding upon that herb, scatters some of his hairs, which are
incorporated with the vapor and the juice of Ladon, whilst like gum it is
hardened by the Sun.

And thus much of sweet dews.

Now follows that which I called bitter blasting Blasting dew.
dew. The Germans say it is Magir. Phys. Com. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Mildaw; which is an improper name if it has relation to that which we call
Mel-dew. For Mel-dew (as before I showed) is an hony-sweet dew, and not a
bitter dew. This therefore may be rather named Ros noxius, or bitter blasting
dew, because it hurts and kills such herbs and plants as it falls on, and
sticks or cleaves to. This vapor has much earthly matter in it, and
therefore it remains white when the moisture is gone. It is also corrupted:
which comes to pass (as it is conjectured) through the often change of the
Air, which being tainted or infected through variety of differing
Exhalations, sends down noisome and unwholesome dews, falling sometimes even
in the day time it self. And here an end concerning dew.

Artic. 4. Of white hoar-frosts.
I Come now to speak of Frosts: for as dew claimed kindred of rain, so white
hoar-frost is of the house and lineage of dew: As for example thus. When a
vapor drawn into the air is congealed before it can be turned into dew, then
we have Pruina in stead thereof, or a white hoar-frost: so that such a frost is
nothing else but dew congealed by overmuch cold. Lib. 1. de Mete^ c^p. 10.
Aristotle affirms the like, showing among other things, that both in respect
of matter, and place of generation, they do well agree; to which is also
pertinent the calmnesse, clearness, and quietness of the time wherein either
of them falls. For both of them consist of subtle thin vapors, and are
generated in the lowest region of the air, because upon some high hills there
is neither hoar-frost nor dew to be seen; the vapor (as it seems) ascends
not so high: And as for a windy obscure time, it is an enemy to them both.
The difference being, that hoarfrost is congealed in the vapor before it can
be turned into water: The one caused in a season that is temperately warm; the
other when it is cold. The material cause therefore of hoar-frost is a subtle
thin vapor. The formal, is the congealing of it; by which it differs from
dew. The efficient is the autumnall or winter cold: for those are the most
common and ordinary times peculiar to it, although sometimes it comes as an
unwelcome guest in the spring and summer, when the air through cold is forward
to send it. And last of all the end, or principal effects (when it comes not
out of season) or the final cause, is the contraction, or shutting up of the
pores or breathing holes of the earth, and about the roots of plants; that
thereby their spirits, being the chariots of heat, may be contained in their
own bowels for the good of such things as they give life unto. And thus much
concerning frost.

Artic. 5. Of Snow.
THere is no great difference between the matter of snow, and matter of rain
and hail; excepting (as some think) that the vapor for snow is of an hotter
quality then the vapor for rain, and yet not so hot as that which is the
material cause of hail. For it is a tenent amongst Philosophers, that hot
things being cooled are Hot things cooled are soonest congealed.
apter for congelation then cold: as is seen in warm water taken from the fire,
which will more suddenly and thoroughly be frozen then that which never felt the
heat. And this comes to pass in regard of the pores or passages made into the
water through heat: into which the cold entering, it both cools it the sooner,
and congealeth it the more.

Neither is there any difference between white frost and snow; excepting that
frost is made of a vapor before Arist. Met. lib. 1. cap. 11.
it be turned into a cloud; and snow of a cloud before it can be turned into
water. The matter of snow.


Snow therefore is a cloud congealed by great cold, before it be perfectly
resolved from vapors into water. For if it should come to the densitie of
water before the congelation, then it could not fall so like locks of wool as
it does; but would be more closely compacted or joined together, having little
or no spunginesse in it.

As for the whiteness, it proceeds not from its own Why snow is white.
proper color, but rather in respect of those parts which are more aierie then
the rest: whereupon I find some Fulks Meteors.
authors who determine the case thus; namely, that the white is by receiving
the light into it at those many small parts; even as in froth and foam is seen.
For, say some, Havenreut. com. In Arist. de Met. lib. 1.
Nix est spuma quaedam, Snow is a kind of froth: and when it loses part of
its frothie nature, and begins to melt; it loses also part of that whiteness
which at the first it retained. To this also may be added the coldness that is
infused into it when it is congealed, as being a cause of whiteness; even as
in phlegmatic bodies and cold countries may be seen: For such people are
always whiter of complexion then others; cold being the cause of that their
whiteness.

Such winters as are void of snow, are not so good for Warm winters hurtful.
the fruits of the ground, as more snowie winters. Whereupon Lib. 17. cap. 2.
Pliny affirms, that he which says clear winters are to be wished, wishes
no good for the trees and plants: and in that regard your experienced husband
man desires that the winter may be cold and snowie, rather then clear and
warm: For besides this they also say, that a hot Christmas makes a fat
Churchyard.

Wherefore, to see the earth do penance in a cold white sheet, and the woods
hang periwigd with wool, bending their boughs in token of thankfulness to
grayhair'd Hyems for their safety from the cold, is a sight both wished and
welcome: the good whereof will show it self, when liberal Nature, out of her
bounteous wardrobe, bestows more beauteous raiment on them.

And note it is found by experience, that it may snow on the mountains, and
rain in the valleys, and yet both One and the same cloud may give the mountains
snow, and the valleys rain.
come out of one and the same cloud; which comes to pass for this reason,
because the snow coming from the middle Region melts after it comes into the
lowest Region: for here is always more heat then above where the snow is
generated; yet not always heat enough to melt the snow as it falls; neither
will the congelation be always so weak as to suffer it. And thus also it comes
The reason of sleet.
to pass that we have sometimes sleet, which is snow and rain together.

Moreover (as some affirm) Crystal is made of snow: Crystal.
for Fulk. Met.
when the snow melts upon the tops of high hills, and is afterward frozen
again, it then becomes so hard that it is a stone, and no other then that
which we call Crystal.

Artic. 6. Of Hail.
HAil is said to be engendered of rain being congealed into ice, the drops
freezing presently after the dissolving of the cloud.

Or (as some say) a cloud resolved into water, in the fall congealed, makes
hail.

Aristotle assenteth to the same, affirming that the material near cause is
rain; the remote a cloud; the efficient an Antiperistasis, or a mutual adverse
strife between cold and heat; as in the first book of his Meteors, at the 12
chapter, may be seen: affirming moreover that the precedent heat of the water
whereof it is made, helps to the speedy concretion of it: being agreeable to
that which I said before concerning snow; namely that it consisted of a warmer
vapor then rain, and yet not of one so warm as that from whence hail
proceeds.

Whereupon I think we may make this a conclusion concerning hail, and say that
it is an hot vapor drawn What hail is.
into the middle Region of the air; where, by cold of that Region, it is made
thick into a cloud, which falling down in drops like rain, is presently met
withal and encountered by the sudden cold of the lowest Region, and so
congealed into a kind of ice. Now this sudden cold thus meeting with it, is in
the highest part of the lowest Region, and caused by an Antiperistasis of heat
from below, which forces up the cold to the greater augmentation of it; and so
(because the vapor it self at the first was also warm) it does very speedily
turn it into ice: for seeing (as has been said) it was formerly warm, it is
the sooner cooled; because heat having made it thin and full of passages, gives
leave to the cold, both to pierce it more suddenly, and also more soundly. And
this most commonly is the manner of generating hail.

But know that hail may sometimes also be made in Winter-hail how and where it
is made.
the middle Region; and then it is without an Antiperistasis: of which sort for
the most part is that small and spungie hail falling in winter, when there is
no such heat in any part of the air, by whose Antiperistasis it may be
congealed. For seeing the drops are scarcely come to the densitie of water
before their congelation, as also seeing they are something swollen through the
spirit of the Exhalation, they appear not only round, but also light, and
hollow, or of a spungie substance, little differing from the matter of snow,
being generated in the middle Region as well as this kind of hail. And thus
comes hail in winter.

But at other times of the year, the hail being more stony, or better
hardened, it may well be caused by an Antiperistasis proceeding from the heat
of this lowest Region, which sends up, imprisons, and augments the cold above
it.

And know that hailstones are not always of one and the same bigness, but
are variable according to the The sundry fashions of hailstones
quantity of the drops whereof they be made; the cause whereof is their
propinquitie or remoteness from the earth, as was showed before concerning the
different drops of rain. And for the most part, know that they be also round,
because the drop is so. Yet nevertheless they be sometimes knotted and piked
with many corners; or else fashioned like a Pyramid: the last of which shapes
proceeds from the spirit of the vapor which ascends to the top of the drop
so soon as the lowest part of it touches the congealing cold; and so
ascending, it makes it smaller above then below. And as for the triangled,
knottie, or many-cornered shapes, they are caused thus, viz. when many are
suddenly congealed and frozen into one.

Note also, that sometimes little straws, or light chaffie stuff, is found
within the stones; coming thus to pass, because they were at the first blown
up from the earth by the wind, and mixed with the vapor.

And again know that sometimes you may see hailstones all icie and clear
without, having within them (as their center) little white round spungie parts.
The reason of which is, because those white ones within were generated in the
middle Region: but in their fall justling themselves against the drops of rain
which uncongealed came from the same cloud, they gat a waterie substance on
their outsides, which being frozen to them looks clear like ice; and so
makes the whole conglomeration appear in the shape and fashion before
mentioned.

Moreover, it has not seldom been that hail has Hail does many times much
hurt.
done much hurt. Yet evermore the greatest fear is whilst the ripe corn
stands in the ear. For a violent storm of hail thresheth it so thoroughly,
that turning the words a little, we may truly say, Illa seges demum votis non
respondet avari agricolae. Such a storm was felt in many parts of this kingdom
not long ago, namely in the year 1631; which, about the beginning of harvest
(beside the harm it did to other things) untimely beat out much corn in the
fields to the great damage of many people. And at sundry other times also
heretofore the like sad accidents have been. Wherefore the ancient husbandmen
amongst How the heathen used to secure their fields from hail and other harms.
the heathen (as Cato and Pliny mention) had certain charming verses to keep
hail and other dreadful calamities from their fields: in which they showed
themselves of a like mind unto those devilish enchanting haggs, who made the
Poet sing, Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam, Charms can pull even the
very Moon out of heaven. But this was not all: For beside these, Palladius also
makes mention of others who would take the skins of Crocodiles, Hyena's, or
Sea-calves, and lay them here and there about their grounds; or else have a
bloody Ax lifted up in threatening manner against the heavens; or an Owl set
staring up, with her feathers spread abroad. All which are but magical,
devilish, and absurd practices; such, as even an old doting woman (whose
confidence is the sheers and the sieve) cannot but acknowledge to be void of
any the least show of reason: fit therefore for heathens only, and not for
Christians. For let Christians know that there is a God above, who can better
secure their seed sown, then all those magic spells and foolish fopperies.
For, Psalm. 107. 34, 35
A fruitful land he makes barren because of the wickedness of those who
dwell therein. Or, as it is in the 28 of Deuteronomie, If thou shall hearken
diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his
commandments, etc. then shall thou be blessed in the city, and in the field.
Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy ground. But if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, cursed shall thou be in
the city, and cursed in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Yea and cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land.

Beside, add unto this the danger of devilish practices, Charms unlawful.
with the unlawfulness of charms and incantations. For thus again the
Scripture speaks, There shall none such be found among you. For all that do
these things are an abomination to the Lord; as it is Deuteronomie 18. at the
10, 11, and 12 verses.

Here then I end this discourse concerning hail, and now proceed to speak of
mists.

Artic. 7. Of Mists.
COncerning which, I like their division best who make two kinds of mist; the
one ascending, the other descending.

That which ascends (says Dr. Fulk) goes up out of the water or earth as
smoke, but seldom spreads it self any thing far; being most of all seen
about rivers and moist places.

The other (says he) namely that which goes down toward the earth, is when
any vapor is lifted up into the air by heat of the Sun, which, not being
strong enough to draw it so high that the cold may knit it, suffers it to
fall down again after it is a little made thick; and so it fills all the air
with gross vapors, obscuring the Sun from shining on us.

Now this last kind of mist may be twofold; either The descending mist is
twofold.
congealed, or incongealed. That which is congealed comes near to the nature
of that matter whereof white frosts consist; and is never but in a very cold
time: it often also stinketh; which perhaps Why mists and fogs stink.
comes to pass in that the matter whereof it is made was drawn out of lakes,
or other muddie and stinking places. Or thus; the matter of this mist has much
earthy substance in it, which the hindering cold suffers not to be consumed:
and from this comes an unpleasant and an unwholesome smell. This water, A rot
for cattle, and an harm to men.
as also the water of dissolved frost, is very bad for cattle to drink: for it
will quickly rot them. Neither can it be good for any one to walk abroad in
such a mistie time: For, by breathing, we draw this unwholesome vapor into our
bodies, and so corrupt our lungs extremely.

But for incongealed mists, they are in warmer and more temperate seasons,
coming near the nature of that matter which is the matter of dew. Some call it
a sterill vapor hanging near the earth, being neither moist enough to drop
like rain, nor yet hot enough to be carried up on high into the air. Yet as
sterill as it is, sometimes we find that it is but the forerunner of rain: For
when it departs, if it ascends, How, by a mist, to judge of the weather.
then rain follows; if it descends, then expect a hot and fair day. And
here an end concerning mists.

Artic. 8. Of our Ladies threads, or those things which fly up and down the
air like spiders webs.
FOr mine own part I must confess I have not seen many who have writ any thing
concerning this cobweb-like kind of Metcor: and therefore at the first I
rested doubtful, not knowing whether it were best for me to speak any thing of
it or no. But at the last finding that some false tenants were engrafted
amongst the ignorant, as if they perfectly knew what thing it was, I thought
good to add something whereby their fond opinion might be taken away, who, as
in a dream, suppose it to be spunne from out the spiders bowels: which cannot
but be a strange absurdity. For it is evident that some one of these threads
contains more matter then many spiders; their bodies not being big enough to
afford a thing so copious: neither are their webs at any time of such a length,
or their threads of such a thickness, as these thus flying about the air.

This Meteor therefore (since it is a Meteor) may rightly be supposed to
proceed out of a through-boyled or digested vapor, being mixed with earthy and
slimie Exhalations: and, although it be no spiders web, yet the temperature of
it little differs from that viscuous humor and slimie And that is the reason
why (when it hangs on the stubble, or the like places) we see so many little
spiders busy in it: for the matter does as it were feed them, and (perhaps)
through the Sunbeams, generate them.
excrement which they in their spinning send out from them.

As for the time, it appears neither in Summer nor in Winter, but in the
Spring and Autumn; because it requires a temperate heat and temperate
dryness. Yet the chief time is Autumn, because the Air has then some dry
relics of the late Summers Exhalations left, and they are very necessary
toward the tempering and generation of this Meteor.

And thus I end, not only this Article, but the whole Paragraph also; coming
at length to speak of that third kind of Meteor which in the beginning I
propounded to be handled last.

Sect. 2.
Parag. 7. Of Aerie Meteors; wherein is showed the natural cause of winds.
Artic. 1. Of the diverse opinions concerning wind.
IN the former Paragraphs and Articles pertinent to the second Section of this
chapter, I spoke at large (as is apparent) of every sort, both of fiery and
waterie Meteors: now therefore (if you please) you may go along with me to
those which are called aierie; wherein I purpose to speak concerning the
generation of winds, showing upon what causes they depend. And by the way I
would have you observe a packet of opinions which have been posted to and fro
as if they were pertinent to the purpose.

1. For some in the first place may be found, who immediately The first opinion.
refer the motion and generation of winds unto God, because the winds are
said to be brought out of his treasures, as you may read, Psalm. 135. 7. And in
the 4. of Amos, at the 13 verse, He forms the mountains, and creates the
winds.

To which I make this answer, that they who send us, Answer.
concerning these and the like things, to God and to his decree in nature, or
to the might of his power, have said indeed that which is primarily true, but
not showed how it is secondarily effected. For although concerning some things
extraordinary, the cause be hid; yet such as be ordinary are not wrought by the
first cause without an administration of the second. As for example, God is not
only said to bring the winds out of his D^ dicit, Deum producere ventos de
thesauris suis, hoc tantum innuit, ventorum materiam and exhalati^nen; in terra
tanquam thesauro inclusam esse, unde De^s ventos producit per causas
intermedias and naturales, quae sunt calor solis and terr^. Havenreut.
treasures, but also to send forth the lightnings with the rain; as it is in
the forenamed Psalm: yet nevertheless the Prophet Jeremie shows that these
are wrought, not immediately, but mediately, by the help of secondary causes;
as in Jer. 10. 13. He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth.
By which it appears that he makes not the rain without them, but of them;
those ascending vapors being the matter of rain. And again; * The day is Psalm.
74. 17. 18.
thine, and the night is thine: thou have made summer and winter; as in the
Psalmist. Yet nevertheless we know that the day and the night, together with
the seasons of the year, are not made but by the motion of the sun and
stars; as it is in Genesis 1. 14.

2. Wherefore in the second place, seeing God works A soc^nd opinion.
these things by means, the motion of the winds is attributed to the Angels,
it being supposed that instrumentally they perform Gods will in this, causing
the winds to blow, etc. Whereupon the Psalmist is again alleged, showing that
the Psalm. 104. 3.
clouds are Gods divine chariot; the horses carrying it are the Ibid.
winds; the coachmen are the Psalm. 18. 10.
Angels, whom God calls Cherubims; and his darts are hot Ibid. verse. 14.
thunderbolts, which he casts from the clouds. And furthermore, that Angels
cause the winds, S. John declares it also, Revel. 7. 1. affirming that he saw
four Angels standing upon the four corners of the earth, holding the winds
that they should not blow. The Angels therefore move the winds.

To which again it is answered, that neither is this Answer.
opinion sound.

For first, concerning the Psalmist, what does that Prophet but in a figurative
speech express Gods swiftness in coming to succor him?

And secondly, for the four Angels standing upon the four corners of the
earth to keep the winds from blowing, I marvel that it can be taken so near
a literal sense.

Napeir, in his Comment upon the Revelation, confesses that the Jews indeed
have certain books of antiquity, dividing the government of the earth among
four great Angels, and under them they imagine to be many inferior ones. But
he withal acknowledges that they are assertions more curious then certain.
And therefore he understands by these four Angels, the good Angels of God;
and the four winds he expounds to be the spirits of Satan, and executours
of vengeance. For in a figurative sense, these and the like things are to be
taken.

Besides, the irregularitie of the winds, turning sometimes three or four
times in a day, does sufficiently show (as it is elsewhere witnessed by another
author) that they are not immediately governed by any intellectual substance;
for in their actions you may observe a greater constancy, and more certain law.

3. Wherefore leaving this opinion also, I come to a ^ third opinion.
third; wherein I find that wind is nothing else but the flowing and
reflowing, or motion of the air, having no other material substance then the
very thin air it self.

To which it may be answered, that this opinion, although Answer.
better then the former, cannot float far before it sink, and will therefore
drown him in an error who sticks to it. For, as Met^r. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Aristotle testifies, we fall into other absurdities upon the admittance of
this tenent; (or else we dissent from them who maintained it of old) imagining
thus, that when the air is compelled to move, we have wind; when it stands
still, it is thickened into a cloud; when it raineth, it is condensed into
water: all which is very idle.

For furthermore, if the wind were nothing else but Wind is more then the
motion of the air.
the motion of the air, then it would necessarily follow that all and every
air moved should be wind: but all and every moved air is not wind:
therefore wind is more then the moved air.

Havenreuter, in his Comment upon Aristotle's Meteors, proves the assumption by
this similitude. Even as every flowing water (says he) although there be great
plenty of it, cannot be called a river, but that only which arises from a
fountain, or has some certain beginning of fluxion: so also, not all and every
air, moved by one kind of means or other, can be called wind, but that only
which is as it were derived from some beginning or fountain. As for example,
the air which is turned about by the heavens, is moved, yet it was never
called wind. And again, in a bloody bulleting fight, the air is forced and
stirred by the thundering sound of gunnes, and yet no wind is raised by it.

Besides, make wind to be nothing else but the moving of the air, and then
there can be no sufficient reason given why we should have greater plenty of
winds at one time then at another; nor yet why they should blow from this
point or corner, rather then from that. In which regard they also are confuted
who suppose that the motion of the heavens moves the winds: for if they were
moved by the heavens, then the wind must blow always one way, and never turn
into a differing corner. But it follows.

Another opinion (and this is the last that I mean to Another opinion.
mention) maintains that the winds do actually reside somewhere, and are
shut up as in a prison, from whence they have sometimes liberty for a while,
but at length they retire, and betake themselves to their dens or cave again.
This the Poets aimed at, when they The reason of which fiction was, because the
clouds and mists rising about the s^en Aeolian Islands, of which he was king,
did always portend great store of winds.
made Aeolus the God of the winds, affirming that he kept them close, or let
them loose at his pleasure. Whereupon Homer may be remembered, who brings in
Ulysses speaking of the said Aeolus thus: -- But he gave me (says he) an
bollow bottle or leather bag, made of the skin of a nine-year^old ox, in which
he bound the blasts of the stormic tempestuo^ winds. Or as Metamor. lib. 1.
Ovid speaks of Jupiter, who had a commanding power over all the other Gods;

Protinus Aeoliis Aquilonem claudit in antnis,
Emittit^que Notum; madidis Notus evolat alis.
He forthwith shut the Northern wind within Aeolus den;
And loose he lets the Southern wind,
which flies with moistened pen.
Now this last opinion, although the Poets have turned it into a fiction, is
not so bad as it seems to be. For take all cum grano salis, as is said, and
then it will appear that the wind is in some sort shut as within a den; and
although not loosed by Aeolus, yet by Helios: for Helios (which is the Sun)
does indeed help to let it loose from out the bowels of the earth; drawing it
into the air, and above the ground; where we may feel it fan our faces:
sometimes churlishly, as if it were angry; sometimes gently, as if it were
pleased. But of the several kinds of blasts I shall speak afterward; and
therefore let them now rest until I meet them.

Artic. 2. What wind is; upon what causes it depends; and how it is moved.
FRom the falsehood of the former opinions I come to declare the truth
concerning the generation of winds; affirming that winds are generated by
virtue of the Sun, which causes an hot and dry Exhalation to be evaporated,
or aspired out of the earth. Unto which L^d. de orig^ font. cap. 3.
some add the power and operation of certain subterranean fires, which are as
an antecedent cause, or causa (...) of the said windy exhalations: yet so, as
being come near to the superficies of the earth, the Sun provokes or stirs
them up to come abroad, being therein causa (...), or the moving cause* for the
Sun, as a porter, rarifies the superficies of the earth, and thereby opens
the pores and passages of it, through which the matter of wind comes forth,
and flies sidelong over the face of the earth. And if at any time it The cause
and effects of an earthquake.
happen that these exhalations can have no way made them, but are kept close
prisoners; they then (by striving to get out) shake the earth: which makes sad
mortals always fear, sometimes suffer, and not seldom wonder.

Wherefore, wind may be thus defined; namely that it is a certain plenty of
hot and dry exhalations void of The definition of wind.
pinguid matter; which being partly aspired, and partly exhaled out of the
earth, are driven about it, lest the air should be corrupted.

The matter then, we see, must be an exhalation. The quantity of it must be
copious: and so Met. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Aristotle also witnesses; affirming that in the generation of winds, there
is a concourse of many exhalations, by little and little begetting a large
mass of matter. The quality of which matter must be hot and dry, not mixed
with any fattie substance: for if it were of a pinguid nature, then it would be
enflamed like lightning; seeing lightning is an hot and dry exhalation and
like unto this, save only that it contains great plenty of fattie matter,
such as is not amongst the matter of wind.

Unto which add this observation, that a mere earthie exhalation is never the
whole matter of wind. For it draws up many mixed vapors with it, as may be
seen if we call to mind the storms and showers which Why it uses to rain when
the wind is down.
often happen upon the allaying of a wind. For that part of the exhalation
which is more moist and vaporous then the rest, is thickened and condensed into
a rainie cloud, whilst the other is either drawn high into the upper Region,
or else quite wasted, dispersed and consumed.

Also know that the air may increase and augment The air moved augments the
wind.
the exhalation after the motion is begun, and so the blast seems the
greater. For the exhalation cannot but drive some part of the air before it;
then follows other some after it, lest there should be vacuum.

And furthermore, in that I assent to a twofold efficient cause of wind, viz.
the beams of the sun attracting, and also some certain subterranean fires
expelling, it is not without reason: for it evidently appears, when the sun
has either little or no force to draw up an exhalation, that then we have
often great blasts; as those Northern winds in winter, and boisterous blasts,
which happen in the night above our Horizon, when the sun is under it. And
unto this may be also added the secret influence of the Planets, who being in
such or such a position do powerfully cause the earth to afford the air great
store of windy exhalations. As for example: the aspect of Jupiter (especially
his conjunction) with the sun, causes great winds; producing also (as they
may be placed) thunder and hail, as well as fair weather. And as for Mercury,
if he be aspected either with the sun, moon, or Jupiter, in Gemini, Libra, or
Aquarius, it is evermore an infallible sign of wind; unless there be some
other particular and more powerful influence to cross it: for, as some have
found it, general influences may hinder those which are particular.

But come now to the motion of winds. I said before How the winds are moved,
and by what.
in their definition, that they were driven about the earth: and now it may be
demanded how that motion is, and from whence it proceeds.

Their motion is a laterall or sidelong motion, caused through the aspiring of
the exhalation and detrusion of the air. For the exhalation is hot and dry,
and drawn up by the attractive power of the sun and other stars; whereupon,
whilst it tends toward the middle Region of the air, it is beaten down
again through the coldness and densitie of that place: and so, with a
refracted and disjoynted force, it is driven hither and thither, and not
suffered to fly up, nor willing to fall down in respect of the great levitie in
it: and having as it were divided the contention between both (viz. the cold of
the air, and heat of the exhalation) neither overcoming other; it flies, not
directly up, nor directly down, but laterally or obliquely: for it is
Haven^^us. de Mes. lib. 2. cap. 4.
held to be a kind of Axiom, that those things which are moved partly by
force, and partly naturally, move themselves obliquely. By which reason
lightning also, shooting stars, and the like Meteors, fly not directly down,
nor up; but sidelong, as the wind: unless it be, that when they consist of
Heterogenean parts, or parts of a diverse kind (which some also attribute to
the matter of winds) they then, through the strife of those their elevating
and depressing parts, have a transverse motion as before.

The place from whence this motion of the winds Where (...) motion of the
wind begins.
begins, is from above.

First, because the motion must necessarily begin from that place whither the
exhalation is carried, as is seen in a vapor turned to rain.

Secondly, because all those things which have great force, there, where they
have their greatest force, are not far from their head or beginning of
motion: but the winds have their greatest force in places up on high:
therefore there they begin their motion, as Havenreuter proves.

Thirdly, know that the redness of the sky, and all other visible signs of
wind, do declare that some spirits or windy breathings are above, which in
short time will be turned into blasts. For redness is a token of the adustion
of exhalations in the air: and the breaking of a circle about the moon from
some one side or other, does also show the wind that is above, but not as yet
come down unto us. The like also does the swift motion of a single cloud in a
clear sky when we feel no blasts below.

Besides, the hot and dry exhalation we know is carried first upright, and
cannot therefore move obliquely until it be encountered: wherefore the motion
begins in the air above, and not in places here below.

And yet some imagine that certain particular winds, Particular winds.
which are known but only in some countries, have their immediate motion from
out the caverns of the earth, without any ascent into the sky: and this they
prove, because the blast blows not far, but is like the wind that comes
out of a pair of bellows, strong near the coming forth; but far off, is not
perceived.

Upon thought of which let it also be known, that the Why the wind blows not
always one way.
blowing of the wind sometimes one way and sometimes another way, depends
upon no other cause then upon the situation of the place from whence the
exhalation arises: and that it is sometimes stirred up one where, sometimes
another where, proceeds from the operation of the heavens.

Also know, that winds diametrally opposite cannot Opposite (...).
blow together under one and the same Horizon with a continued blast. For if
they be of equal strength, the one will be as powerful as the other, and so
not one give place to either. Or if their forces be unequal, then the one will
overcome the other, and so the conquered must upon necessity give place to the
conqueror, and rather join unwilling forces with him, then be against him.

Yet nevertheless, if they be obliquely contrary, they Oblique winds.
may blow together: and by how much they are the more oblique, by so much they
stir up the greater strivings and tempestuous blasts.

But if the exhalation be little, tenuous or thin, then Whis^ing winds.
we have only a pleasant whisking wind, such as may be called aura, by which
the air is gently moved.

Also know, that it is as possible to see the wind as The matter of wind not
obvious to the sight.
the air, their substances being too tenuous to be perceived; unless in a
storm-winde, whose matter is an exhalation so thick that it darkens the air:
of which more shall be spoken afterward; as also of whi^lwindes, and the like.

Last of all (as it is observed, and found by experience) the Fulk.
general profit of wind, by the unspeakable wisdom of the eternal God, is
wonderful great unto his creatures. For besides the alteration of the weather
and change of seasons, from dryness to rain, from rain to dryness, from cold
to heat, from heat to cold with frost and snow, which all are necessary; there
is yet an universal commodity that rises by the only moving of the air:
which were it not continually moved and stirred, would soon putrify, and being
putrified would be a deadly poison and infection to all that breathe upon the
earth. Wherefore, although we know not the particular place from whence it is
raised, or where it is laid down, as Iste locus vult, qu^d ventus sensibus
deprehendi nequeat; and certus locus, ubi ventus flar^ incipias and desi^at,
notari non possit: vis enim ejus tantum sentiat^* Havenreut.
Christ means, John the third: yet it teaches the admired providence of the
Almighty; insomuch that we may worthily cry out with the Psalm. 104. 24.
Psalmist, and say, Oh Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom thou have
made them all.

Artic. 3. Of the division of winds, and of their names and number.
THe Ancients (as Plin. Lib. 2. cap. 47.
Pliny witnesses) observed only four winds, East, West, North, and South:
but the following ages added eight; making the whole number to be twelve: Four
whereof were principal, and called Cardinal winds; because they blew a
quatuor mundi cardinibus, from the four quarters of the world: The other eight
they called Laterall; because they were (as it were) side companions with the
former four. The Cardinal were called by these names

1. Solanus, Subsolanus, or the East wind. 2. Notus, Auster, or the South
wind. 3. Zephyrus, Favonius, or the West wind. 4. Aquilo, Septentrio, or the
North wind.
And again, the laterall were called by these names that follow, and thus
placed from the Cardinal.

As first, the East has on the Southern side Eurus, or Vulturnus: and on the
Northern side Coecias, or Hellespontus.

Secondly, the South wind has on the East side Phoenix or Euronotus: and on
the West side Lybonotus, or Austro-Africus; so called because it declineth from
the South something toward Africa.

Thirdly, the West has on the South side Lybs, or Africus; so called from
Lybia and Africa, the Regions from whence they proceed: and on the North side
there is Corus or Caurus, called also Origan. de effect. cap. 5.
Iapix, and Olympias; because it blows from the mountain Olympus.

Fourthly, the North has on the West side Cyrcius, called also Thraschias,
from (...), converto, because it uses to overturn many things with it. The
Spaniards call it Ibid.
Gallicus, because it is observed to blow from the coasts of new Gallicia, a
Mexicanian province. And (...) the East side of the North point there is
blustering Boreas, which is a bellowing wind, blowing with a loud hollow
sound; and is therefore derived by Aulus Gellius in his Lib. 2. cap. 22.
Attick nights, (...). This division Aristotle also assenteth unto, making
three winds in every quarter; as in the second book of his Meteors, at the
sixth chapter, may be seen.

But the mariners make 20 more besides these: insomuch The mariners reckon 32
winds
that the whole circumference of the Horizon is divided into two and thirty
equal parts, which they call and distinguish by several names. And now
observe in this division, that there be four Cardinal winds, as before:
four middle winds, which are just in the midst between each Cardine: eight
laterall, already mentioned: and sixteen collateral: making, in the whole
sum, the aforesaid number of two and thirty.

Know therefore that the Cardinal, and middle winds, are properly the
principal: the other being less principal and subordinate: divided therefore
into laterall and collateral; as has been mentioned.

And as for those middle ones, they be such as we call South-west, South-east,
North-west, and North-east winds. Notolybicus is the South-west wind; and
Notapeliotes the South-east. Borrholybicus is the North-west wind; and
Borrhapeliotes the North-east.

The rest, being sixteen in number, and collateral, have their places, one
between each of the other: and so the circumference is divided into 32 parts,
as before I showed. Now the names of these sixteen are borrowed from those
lateralls with whom they have the greatest neighborhood, by Orig. Ephesians. lib.
de effect, cap. 6.
adding Meso and Upon to them. For Meso comes from (...), medius; because it is
in the middle between a principal and a laterall wind: and Upon comes from
(...), sub; because it is as it were subject to that laterall wind next unto
which it is placed, and from whence it takes the name. As for example: Eurus
is a laterall wind, a little from the East toward the South: and this has on
each side of it one collateral. That which is between Notapeliotes, or the
South-east wind and it, is called Mes'eurus, being middle between a principal
and a laterall. But that which is between the East and it, is called Up'eurus,
as being subject unto Eurus. And by observing this order you may give names
unto all the rest: for Meso and Upon will compound them.

Yet nevertheless ordinarily the mariners name them thus. As North, North and
by West, North North West, North West and by North, North West, North West and
by West, West North West, West and by North, West. West and by South, West
South West, South West and by West, South West, South West and by South, South
South West, South and by West, South. South and by East, South South East,
South East and by South, South East, South East and by East, East South East,
East and by South, East. East and by North, East North East, North East and by
East, North East, North East and by North, North North East, North and by East.
And then North again, as in the beginning.

Artic. 4. The nature and quality of the winds.
IT may well appear by that which already has been written concerning the
generation of winds, that every wind in it self, or in respect of the matter
causing it, is of an hot and dry quality. If therefore, blowing from any
quarter, we find it other, it is by accident, and not through any inherent
property: for winds do evermore participate of the nature of that place by
which they pass: If by snowie mountains, then bring they with them the cold of
those mountains; if by marshes, contagion; if by woods, their blast is broken;
if by sandy plains, they are warm; if by moist watery places, they are wet.

And therefore for particular winds, the Winds blowing into the haven and
famous city of Panormus, or Palermo in S^cilie.
Panormi in Sicil are extreme hot; for before they pierce thither, they scour
through the plains of Sicil; and taking heat from the sands, they carry it
into the city. The South wind at Genua is cold, because it passes the sea,
and takes coldness thereof without touching the land before it arive. But the
North wind which blows through France (says In a book called a general
description of the world.
one) comes from the sea, and taking some measure of heat by the saltness
thereof, and finding no mountains covered with ice or snow in his passage,
augmenteth his heat by passing over the fields of Normandy, Champaigne, the
isle of France, and other provinces, even to the hills of Auvergne: which being
moderately heated by the South wind on the one side, and the North wind on
the other, brings forth every where excellent pastures, and feedings for
cattle and sheep, besides diverse sorts of medicinable plants and most perfect
simples. Also in Origan. Ephem. de effect. cap. 5.
some places it is found that the Eastern wind moisteneth, and the Western
wind brings drought: and in other some the Western moisteneth, and the other
dries. So that it is possible for one and the same wind to have a diverse
quality; although not in it self, yet by accident; as at the first was
mentioned.

Yet nevertheless generally, and in most places, the North, with his
associates, is cold and dry: the South, Their qualities according as they
commonly blow.
with his companions, is warm and moist: and the East, with his adherents, is
far more dry then the Western and his near neighbor winds.

The reasons whereof may be. First, for the North, Norths quality.
because it blows over many snowie mountains, and arises from a climate
which has little neighborhood with the sun, where the vapors be few, and
the exhalations many that arise out of sundry islands by the way. Unto which
also add, because the exhalation passes not far before it come at us, that
therefore it seldom brings rain: for the exhalation has not time enough to
spend the driest portion of it, so as the South wind does; who passes both
over more waterie places, and also comes further before we feel it.

Secondly, for the South wind, it comes over the Souths quality.
Mediterranean sea, out of which the sun begets abundance of waterie vapors,
which mix themselves with the winds, causing them thereupon to be the blowers
in of rain. And as for their heat, it is because they blow from the Equator
where heat is most predominant. Also know that a long and gentle South wind
may sometimes cause clearenesse and fair weather, most commonly in the summer
season, because it is by nature hot; and therefore blowing for a certain space,
it so warmeth the air, that the vapors which otherwise would produce rain,
are not suffered to be knit, but are attenuated and made so thin that they come
to nothing; or being any thing, they prove only barren clouds, affording
little rain.

Thirdly, the East wind is found to be the driest, because Easts quality.
it comes over a great continent of land lying toward the East, out of which
many dry and earthie exhalations are drawn. In winter these winds are very
cold and freezing; but in summer they are pleasantly warm, but healthful: and
if at any time they blow up rain (which is not ordinary) they then continue it
by the space of a whole day; even as the like also sometimes happens from the
North. The reason of which Why the East and North winds sometimes bring rain
for a whole day.
I take to be, because (perhaps) their lateralls, not being absolutely of the
same quality, may arise together with them, and so bring rain; especially, if
at the same time there be any other working in nature apt to moisten the sky
with vapors. For it is affirmed that Eurus on the one side, and Coecias on the
other side, being two laterall winds pertinent to the East, do naturally raise
clouds, and often turn them into rain; as do also Upocoecias, and Mes'eurus,
their collateralls. And so also Cyrcius may do, and Borrholybicus, being on the
West side of the North, if either of them happen to arise and join, although
but weakly, with the Northern blast. For in their own sole blowings they beget
both snow and hail; either of which may fall down in drops of rain, when the
mixture of qualities is found to be diverse.

Fourthly, the Western wind is far more moist West winds quality.
then the East, because it passes over the great ocean of the Atlantic sea,
which must needs cast out many waterie and moist vapors, and they cannot but
beget rain and showers. It is said also to be of a cold temper; but surely not
of an absolute coldness: for it is found by experience that a direct Zephyrus
or Favonius, with their collateralls, Mesocorus, and Up'africus, are warm and
pleasant, bringing sometimes hot showers, sometimes warm and clear weather.
And therefore it is determined by certain authors, that this wind may blow
from a cold place, and yet bring heat. For although (in regard of the place
over which it comes) it be cold; yet in respect of the time when it usually
blows, it is hot. Which Lib. 1. carm. od. 4.
Horace also pointed at, saying,

Solvitur acris hyems great a vice veris and Favoni. The winter sharp is loosed
by the kind
Return of Spring, and of the Western wind.
Or will you hear what others say? Lemnius (as Origanus relates) affirms
that this Western wind and his collateralls are of a changing temper. For
although in the beginning of the Spring they be pleasing and gentle, and are
found to recreate and cherish all things, seeing they are warmed by the
moderate heat of the sun, which makes them bring out the beauty of trees,
and flowers, to the view of the world; and also causes the blood and good
humors to appear, which in winter lay hid, as if they were not; casting away
also the clouds of the mind, and begetting jocundnesse in the heart: yet
nevertheless, Autumn ending, and the circuit of the year enclining to
Winter, the foresaid winds do blow unkindely, striking the sea and land with
many a tempestuous blast, and unwished breathings.

Moreover, this also may be observed, that the long The effects of a
long-continuing wind, at certain seasons.
continuance of the winds in any of these quarters, produces these and the
like effects.

As first, the East wind breeds in choleric bodies sharp fevers, raging
madness, and perilous apostumations.

Secondly, the South wind breeds corrupt humors, and in hot bodies cramps,
giddiness in the head, or the falling sickness, pestilence and cruel fevers,
viz. when they blow long in the winter. This is held to be the most unwholesome
wind.

Thirdly, the West wind breeds phlegm in moist bodies; it procures sleep,
causes apoplexies, and the like; and is never so churlish as when winter
begins to approach.

And last of all, the North wind is good against the pestilence; and yet in
cold bodies it breeds plurifies, coughs, gouts, and (in some) squincies and
sore throats: but yet of all winds it is held to be the wholesomest, although
it be sharp in our winter months.

And this also note, that a continual still summer is a A sign of plague and
earthquake.
sign of plague or earthquake: for a standing air putrifieth, and an enclosed
wind shakes the ground.

Artic. 5. Of whirlwindes, storm-windes, and fired whirlwindes.
A Whirlwinde, is a wind breaking out of a cloud, rolling or winding round
about: which may be caused two manner of ways.

First, when two or more contrary winds, blowing from diverse places, meet
together.

Secondly, when the matter of wind, being an hot and dry exhalation, breaks
out of a cloud in diverse parts of it, coming through the said holes with more
then an ordinary violence. Or rather thus; Imagine a windy exhalation bursting
out of a cloud, to be so driven, that by the way it happens to be pent
between two clouds on either side of it; against which, beating it self, and
finding a repercussion, it is forced to turn and whirl about; even as we see in
the streets of cities when the wind is beaten from two walls, and meets in
the midst of the street: for then there is made a little whirl-puffe, which
whisking round about takes up the dust or straws and blows them about, as
does the great and fearful whirlwinde it self; which has brought not only
amazement and terror to mortals, but also much harm and mischief. Lib. 2.
cap. 48.
Pliny is persuaded that vinegar thrown into one of these blasts will break
it, because vinegar is of a cold quality, and the exhalation hot: and
therefore the one is as it were quelled and quenched by Typhon.
the other. The Greeks call a whirlwinde (...), quod est verberare.
(...); the Latinists turbo, or vortex.

Also a sudden storm-winde is called by the Greeks, (...); and by the Latins,
procella: and this happens, (...).
either when a windy exhalation is thrown down, and encompassed in a thin
course of clouds newly overcast, or else when a windy exhalation is come to an
extraordinary thickness, and violently moved out of a cloud, to the darkening
of the air, without inflammation or burning: for when it burns they call it
(...), a (...) Prester.
incendo, to burn, or set on fire. And this last is that which we call a fired
whirlwinde, being an exhaled blast set on fire either by an Antiperistasis, by
repercussion, or violent detrusion from the cloud wherein it was enclosed; for
it is made apt to be fired in regard that it consists of an exhalation which
has more fattie substance in it then other winds which burn not: And know
that it differs from lightning chiefly in these respects: first, because
lightning consists of a more subtle and thin matter: for although a fired
whirlwinde have a more thin spirit or blast then a whirlwinde, or a stormy
wind; yet it is not so tenuous as the spirit of fulmen, or lightning.
Secondly, because lightning is more flamie and less breathie; the one having
more windy spirits in it then the other.

The conclusion of this days work.
ANd thus at the last I have let you take a view with A conclusion repeating
the sum ne of this days work.
me of what is pertinent to this days work. We have seen (good reader) the
framing of the out-spread Firmament, with the lifting up of the waters over it*
we have examined the nature of the heavens, and scarce found them of a
quint-essence: we have searched what heavens they were which Moses meant when
he said, God called the firmament Heavens. From thence we proceeded to the
several regions of the air, examining their temperatures and qualities; and
thereupon we fell into an ample consideration of such appearances as are
usually seen in any of those Regions; discoursing at large both of fiery,
waterie, and aierie Meteors.

And this being all which this day affords, I may here make and end, and say

That eve and morn conclude the second day,
And in his work God finds no decay.
CHAP. VI. Wherein is contained a survey of the third days work; together with
such things as are pertinent to it.
Sect. 1. Showing into how many main parts the business of this day may be
distinguished.
BEing come from the second to the third days work, I cannot say with Aeneid.
lib. 1.
Virgil now, Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus avena: But rather on the
contrary,

Ille ego qui superis volitabam nuper in oris,
Nunc humilis sequor arva soli, nunc tenuia presso
Ore loquor --
Because in the former day, the work belonging to it, compelled my winged pen
to soar aloft, not suffering her to come unto the ground till now. For she was
to walk above the Firmament, and view the out-spread buildings laid in the
flowing waters: then through the Regions of the liquid air she was to trace a
path; which finished, she must be content to frame her self unto a lower pitch,
before any leave be granted to ascend again. And indeed I think it is what both
she and I desired; for we were long detained there.

And now, having both of us obtained our wishes, we find that Gods inspired
penman, holy Moses, so sets down the admired work of his Almighty maker,
done on this third day of the world, that into three main parts it may be
severed: for by viewing the words which he has written of it, the same will be
apparent. And God (says he) said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together unto one place, and let the drie-land appear: and it was so.

And God called the drie-land Earth, and the gathering together of the waters
called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.

And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and
the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self, upon
the earth: and it was so.

And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind;
and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in it self, after his kind: and
God saw that it was good.

And the evening and the morning were the third day.

This is the sum of all; which (as before was said) consists of three
several parts.

The first whereof concerns the gathering together of the waters, in these
words, And God said, Let the waters under heaven be gathered together unto one
place.

The second concerns the drying of the ground, in these words, And let the
drie-land appear.

The third is pertinent to the sprouting and springing of the earth, in these
words, And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, etc.

All which in their orders are severally to be discussed, together with such
other things as are pertinent to the said division.

And concerning the two first, observe that God bestows as it were sirnames on
them; calling the gathering together of the waters, Seas: and the drie-land he
calls Earth.

Sect. 2. Of the gathering together of the waters, which God called Seas.
Water and earth are the two lowest elements; and this was that day which
brought them to perfection: for until now they were confused; because their
matter, although not quite void of form, received at this time a better form of
due distinction and more comely ornament. The informitie was expressed before,
when Moses said that the earth was void and invisible, because covered with
waters: but the formitie is then expected and declared when the waters are
gathered, and the drie-land made apparent.

It is a wonder (sure) to think what a confused tyranny the waters made by
their effusion; for they did rather tyrannize then orderly subdue or govern
this inferior mirie mass: wherefore it seemed good to the Almighty maker,
first to divorce one from the other, before he gave them leave so to be joined
each to other, that both together might make one globie body; which (according
to the best approved writers) is one and twenty thousand and six hundred miles
in compass.

But concerning this gathering together of the waters, there arise certain
questions, which may not altogether be forgotten.

As first, it is enquired, How the waters were gathered Questions concerning
the waters which are said to be gathered together.
together.

Secondly, How it can be said that they were gathered to one place; seeing
there be many seas, lakes, rivers, and fountains that are far asunder.

Thirdly, Whether they be higher then the earth.

Fourthly, Whether there be more water then earth.

Fifthly, Whether the earth be founded upon the waters.

Sixthly, Why the seas be salt, and rivers fresh.

Seventhly and lastly, What causes an ebbing and flowing in the sea, rather
then in rivers.

Concerning the first of these questions, those who Quest. 1. Which shows how
the waters were gathered together.
think that there be no Antipodes, supposed that the waters did run together
and cover the other part of the earth which is opposite to this where we dwell.
But the experience of skillful navigatours and famous travelers, yea and
reason it self, does cry against it.

Others imagine that it was some mighty wind which dried them up; or that the
fervent heat of the sun effected it. But both think amiss; because the
drie-land (says one) appearing all at once, was so prepared by a greater power
then either of the wind or sun, which could not work it at once, nor
scarcely in a long continuance of time: neither was the sun made until the
next day after. Dixit igitur and factum est; he spoke the word only, and by
the power of that word it was done. For the efficient cause of the sea was the
only word of God; the material was the waters; the formal was their
gathering together; and the final partly was, that the drie-land might
appear. Ezekiels Ezekiel. 1. 16.
wheels were one within the compass of another: and so was the earth, water,
and air, before the powerful word of God commanded this their gathering: the
earth within the water; the water within the air; and the air within the
concave of the Firmament. Which if they had all for ever so remained, and man
made as he is, the world had been no house for him to dwell in, neither had it
been a work so full of never ended admiration as now it is.

Perhaps the pores and holes of the ground were full before this gathering; yet
nevertheless their bodies must be willing to be made the beds for more. That
they were full, it proceeds from the nature of the water, falling downwards
and filling them. That being full, they are yet made capable of more, might
proceed both from a more close composure of the not hollow parts of the earth,
and also by making these waters thicker then they were before. For whilst the
not hollow parts were made more solid, the hollow could not choose but be Job
38. 10.
enlarged: and whilst the thin and vapourie waters were better thickened and
condensed, the outface of the ground could not be obscured, but show it self as
one released from out a waterie prison. Some add unto this their heaping
together in the high and wide seas, whereby it comes to pass that they flow
to and fro at floods and ebbs, and do often force out water-springs from out
the highest mountains: which last, whether it be so or no, shall be examined
afterward.

The next question was, how it can be said that they Quest. 2. Showing how they
were gathered to one place.
were gathered to one place; seeing there be many seas, lakes, rivers and
fountains that are far asunder.

It was a strange conceit of him who thought that this one place unto which the
waters were gathered, was separate so from the earth that the waters by
themselves should make a globe, and have their proper center; for leaving to
descend toward the center of the earth, they were gathered to a center of
their own, and so the drie-land appeared.

But this opinion is very false, and worthy to be reckoned amongst absurdities:
for (as the Esaias 40. 22.
Prophet Esaias writes) the Lord is said to sit upon the circle of the earth.
Now experience shows that it is not the earth alone, but the earth and sea
together that make one globe or circle.

This one place then whither the waters were gathered, was not a place
separated from the earth, being in the air or elsewhere, but was in the very
body of the earth it self. Neither was it one place strictly taken, as it meant
one point or angle of the earth: or, as if there were no Antipodes, half the
earth under us was to be covered with water.

But rather it is called one place, because in the whole globe of the earth,
every place is either water or land: or (if not so) because there is but one
body of all the waters that are: for every part of the water is joined unto the
whole as it were with arms and legs, and veins diversely dilated and stretched
out. So that either under the earth, or above the earth, all the waters are
joined together: which also the wise man witnesses, Eccles. 1. 7.

But happily some may think, because this gathering together of the waters is
called Seas, that therefore the one place, unto which they were gathered, is
not to be understood of every collection or gathering of water, but only of
the sea.

Well, be it so. And if this rather then the other be the meaning of Moses his
words, it may be answered, that although the sea be diverse in name, yet all
seas are so continued together, that one sea is perpetually joined with
another: and thereupon the name given, is not Sea, but Seas; as in the text is
manifest.

Yea and hereupon it also is, that Geographers make these waters come under a
fourefold division. For they either call this gathered water, Oceanus, Mare,
Fretum, or Sinus.

1. Oceanus, the ocean, is that general collection of all waters, which
environeth the world on every side. 2. Mare, the sea, is a part of the ocean,
to which we cannot come but through some strait. 3. Fretum, a strait, is a part
of the ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and opening a way to the sea. 4.
Sinus, a creek, or bay, is a sea contained within a crooked shore, thrusting
out (as it were) two arms to embrace the lovely presence of it.
Object. But perhaps you will say that the Caspian sea is a sea by it self, and
therefore all seas join not the one unto the other.

Answ. To which it is answered, that this sea is either as a Dr. Fulk in his
Met. lib. 4. says that some lakes are so great that they bear the names of
seas: among which he reckons this Caspian sea.
lake in respect of the contiguous or joining seas; or else it was no sea in
the beginning of the world, but began only at the ceasing of the Flood, and
was caused by the waters coming down from the Caspian hills, settling themselves
in those declive and bottomie places where the said sea is. Pliny and Solinus
are persuaded that it joyneth it self unto other seas by running into the
Scythian or Northern ocean through some occult passages under ground; which is
not improbable. But howsoever, this we are sure of, that the river Volga is
joined to it, being as another sea, and having no less then seventie mouths
to empty it self: which river is also joined to the river Don, and that has
great acquaintance with the Euxine sea. Besides, Volga is not a stranger to As
Duina major, and Duina minor called also Onega. Look into the maps of Russia or
Moscovia.
other waters which fall either into the Scythian or Baltic ocean: insomuch
that it may be said, this Caspian sea is tied (as it were) with certain strings
to Viz. the Euxine, Baltic, and Scythian or Northern seas.
three other seas: and so, not only all waters are made one body, like as
before I showed, but (if this gathering must needs be referred to the seas)
even all seas also shake hands, and by one means or other mutually embrace one
the other.

A third question is, Whether the waters be Quest. 3. Showing whether the
waters be higher then the earth.
higher then the earth. Concerning which there be authors on both sides; some
affirming, some denying.

That they be higher then the earth, it is thus affirmed.

First, because water is a body not so heavy as earth.

Secondly, it is observed by sailers, that their ships fly faster to the shore
then from it; whereof no reason can be given, but the height of the water above
the land.

Thirdly, to such as stand on the shore, the sea seems to swell into the form
of an hill, till it put a bound to their sight.

Fourthly, it is Herodot. in ^terpe, and in lib. sequent. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 39.
written of Sesostris King of Egypt, and after him of Darius King of Persia,
that they would have cut the earth and joined Nilus and the Red sea together;
but finding the Red sea higher then the land of Egypt, they gave over their
enterprise, lest the whole country should be drowned.

Fifthly, the arising of springs out of the highest mountains does declare it,
because the water cannot be forced higher then the head of the fountain
opposite to it. As for example. Like as we see a spring that rises in an hill,
conveyed in lead unto a lower ground, will force his waters to ascend unto the
height it bears at the fountain: even so the waters which stand above the
mountains, do force out springs of water, by necessary and natural cause, out
of the highest mountains.

Sixthly, the Psalm. 104.
Psalmist does witness the same, affirming moreover that God Almighty has
made the waters to stand on an heap, and has set them a bound which they shall
not pass, nor turn again to cover the earth. And Jer. 5. 22. Fear ye not me,
says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand
for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it; and
though the waves thereof rage, yet can they not prevail? Thus on the one side.

But notwithstanding all this, methinks the other part (yet choose which you
will) is most probable.

For first the water indeed is a body not so heavy an earth, yet heavy
enough to descend, not being of an aspiring nature, but presses eagerly
toward the same center that a stone or any part of the earth coveteth: It
cannot therefore possibly be above the earth, although not so heavy as earth,
unless there were no hollow places in the ground to receive it. But God
Almighty, in gathering them, provided lodgings for them, lest they should turn
again and cover the earth: which also is insinuated by the Hebrew word Kava,
signifying to congregate or gather together; from whence the Latin word Cavus,
hollow, may seem to be derived. Besides, should it be alleged that the hollow
places could not be deep enough to receive them, what were this but to curtall
the earths Diameter or thickness? for suppose the waters stood above the hills
before they were gathered to one place; yet know that even the Semidiameter of
the earth is deeper by no few miles then the highest hill. Suppose you could
imagine an hill to be above a thousand miles high (which is impossible) yet the
earths Semidiameter would be two thousand, four hundred, and above 36 miles
deeper then that height. As for example; if the earth be 21600 miles in
compass, then the Diameter will be 6872 8/11 miles; and if the Diameter be
6872 8/11 miles, then the Semidiameter must be half so much, viz. 3436 4/11
miles.

Secondly, suppose it be observed by sailers that their ships fly faster to the
shore then from it: this proves not the sea higher then the land. For know
that it is no wonder to see a ship sail more speedily homewards then outward;
because when it approaches to the shore, it comes with a continued motion
which makes it the swifter: but when it goes from the shore, it does but begin
its motion, and is therefore slower then before. This (if need were) might be
proved by many plain and familiar examples.

Thirdly, suppose that the sea seems, to such as stand on the shore, to swell
higher and higher, till it put a bound to the sight; this rather proves the
sphericall roundnesse of the earth and sea, then any thing else; showing that
both together make one globie body. Which, why it is perceived rather in the
water then the land, this may be a reason; namely because the sea, being a
plain and liquid element, and spacious enough, does better show it then the
earth, which hinders our full view by reason of many woods, trees, and other
fixed obstacles which the sight meets and encountreth by the way.

Fourthly, although Sesostris K. of Egypt, and after him Darius K. of Persia,
dared not to make a cut out of the Red sea into Nilus, for fear of drowning the
country, because they supposed that the sea lay three cubits higher then the
land of Egypt: yet (as some report; how truly, I cannot tell) the Ptolomies,
kings of Egypt, effected the work without any danger of inundation. But suppose
they had not done it, or suppose it were granted that the Red sea were higher
then the plains of Egypt; yet it follows not (unless one swallow can make a
summer) that the sea in general is every where higher then the earth. As for
the height of the Red sea above the land near adjoining to it, Met. lib. 1.
cap. 14.
Aristotle seems to give a reason, persuading himself that there is such a
change in the universe, as that that which has been sea is sometimes land, and
that which has been land is sometimes sea: and so he thinks of those low
grounds near the Red sea, that they have been gained from the sea. The like we
may also think of many places in the Netherlands, and of that small part of sea
which is between Dover and Callis; as Verstegan proves in his restitution of
decayed antiquities, cap. 4. page 97.

Fifthly, suppose that certain springs arise out of the highest mountains, must
the sea therefore needs be higher then those mountains? surely I think not. For
albeit I be not of Aristotle's mind, nor of their opinions who do not derive
the rivers from the seas, nor make subscription unto them who give a sucking
and an attractive power to the veins of the earth; yet I find it as a thing
possible, although that part of the sea which lies opposite to the head of the
fountain, or to the place where the water first breaks out, be lower then the
ground, that the said water may nevertheless easily ascend, and not break
forth until it find a place convenient. Now this ascent is caused by the sea,
which, seeing it is a vast body, is very ponderous and heavy, and cannot be
thrust back by the water at the head of the fountain opposite to it, but rather
it does potently and strenuously crowd on the said water through the hollow
ports and passages of the earth, until at the last it springs forth.

Were it so indeed that there were an equal weight of both waters, (I mean of
the seawater driving, and of the spring water arising) then the ascent of the
one could not be higher then the superficies of the other: but seeing the
weights are unequal (which De subtle lib. 3. page 123.
Cardan did not well consider) the stronger and heavier must needs drive on the
weaker and lighter, causing it sometimes to ascend even above it self.

Sixthly and lastly, that which the Psalmist witnesses concerning the standing
of the waters on an heap, I take to be nothing else but the gathering of them
to one place, so and in such a manner, that their coming together may be called
Seas, and their forsaking the land be called Earth: for if one place of
Scripture be expounded by another, it will appear to be even so. First,
because it is said, Ecclesiastes 1. 7. All the rivers go into the sea: but the
water has his natural course downwards, and cannot be forced up, but by the
heavier weight; as has been showed. Secondly, because it is said Psalm. 107.
23. They go down to the sea in ships: down, as to the lower place; and not up,
as to the higher. And for that alleged out of Jeremy, viz. Fear ye not me?
etc. The Prophet speaks there of no miraculous work against nature, but of the
ordinary providence of God by natural means, keeping back and bounding the
sea; as at the 24. verse is manifest. For there he gives the like instance of
the rain; which we know is not wrought by miracle, and yet it shows the
watchful providence of God, preserving the world by the natural course of the
creatures.

Judge then if they be not mistaken, who would have the sea higher then the
earth.

The fourth question is, Whether there be more water Quest. 4. Showing whether
there be more water then earth.
then earth.

Now here I am persuaded that the answer may be either double or doubtful. For
if we have respect to the known parts of the world, then I think there may be
more sea then land. But if we have respect to all, both known and unknown, then
perhaps there may be as much land as sea: For we see that in the maps of the
world, the Southern parts are not known, and therefore they write Terra
Australis nondum cognita: which whether it be sea or land, is uncertain.
Pareus, upon Genesis, is persuaded that the land is more then the sea,
alleging a proof out of 2. Esdr. 6. 42.
Esdras, where it is said that when God commanded the waters to be gathered, he
gathered them into the seventh part of the earth, and dried up the six other
parts: which although it be Apocryphal in respect of the authority of the
book, yet (says he) it serves to show that the waters are not more then the
earth.

The next question is, Whether the earth be founded Quest. 5* Showing upon what
the earth is founded.
upon the waters.

The Psalmist seems to affirm it, Psalm. 24. verse 2. For (according to the
common reading) it is, He has founded it upon the seas, and prepared it upon
the floods.

To which it is answered, that if the earth (as it is) be the receptacle for
the waters, or holds the waters in the concavities of it, how can it be that
the waters are in stead of a foundation? Job says, He hangs the earth upon
nothing, chap. 26. 7. If upon nothing, then not upon the waters, for they are
something. And again, even the Psalmist also says, The foundation of the earth
cannot be moved, Psalm. 104. 5. If not moved, then not founded upon the waters,
for they are moveable; flitting to and fro, sometimes this way, sometimes that
way, and never standing still.

Wherefore when the Psalmist says, The earth is founded upon the seas, he
means that it is so placed above them, as that it is made fit to be a place
for habitation: And so Expositours understand the Hebrew word Gnal; viz. in
such a sense that it does signify above, and not upon: In which sense, the
waters that it sustaineth do not hold it, but are holden by it: for they are in
it tanquam in utre, as in a certain vessel; and do always strive to come as
near the center as is possible.

For conclusion then of this question, thus much must be known; namely, that
when God made the world, he made Wisd. 11. 22.
all things in number, weight, and measure: insomuch that the earth (although
it be hanged upon Job 26. 7.
nothing) is so equally poysed on every side, that it cannot but be firmly
upheld; and no more fall then the sun out of the firmament, or the stars out
of heaven. For has not man sometimes showed an admired portion of skill in
this or that rare work which he has wrought, and effected by nothing else but
only the deep and profound rules of art? yes surely has he. And if man be so
potent as to make his skill admired, yea and by those who are men as well as
he; what may we think of the Maker of men, but that his art is much more then
commendable, and his wisdom much more then matchless; so that the world, and
all the parts thereof, afford nothing but matter of wonder? It is therefore an
acclamation which deserves impression in the hearts of us mortal men; Oh God,
how manifold are thy works* in wisdom thou have made them all: And being made,
his providence does sustain them.

The sixth question is concerning the saltness of the Quest 6. Showing why the
sea is salt* and rivers fresh.
sea, and freshness of rivers.

Aristotle, in his second book of Meteors, at the 3. chapter, sets down
(besides his own) three opinions concerning this saltness. One whereof is,
that the waters overflowing the earth in the beginning of the world, were so
dried up by the heat of the sun, that not only the drie-land appeared, but
all those waters which remained (being the sea) were so sucked and robbed of
their sweet savor, that they could not but be salt.

Another opinion agreeing to that of Plato, who generating the sea ex tartaro,
or from great and deep gulfs in the earth, or (with others) drawing it through
the bowels of the earth, gave occasion to think that the water in it self was
sweet, and yet became salt by reason of the diverse savours that it met withal
in the ground or veins of the earth. Which cause, by the (...). (...) Arist. de
Met. lib. 2. cap. 1.
interpretours of Aristotle, is also attributed to Anaxagoras and Metrodorus,
as being pleasing to them. For as water strained through ashes is endued with a
certain tart and salt kind of acrimonie; so the sea is made salt by some such
kind of earth through which it passes: which is as others have also thought,
who suppose that the saltness of Mineralls does much conduce to this purpose.

A third was the opinion of Empedocles, who affirmed that the sea was but the
sweat of the earth, being (as it were) roasted by the heat of the sun; and was
therefore salt, because all sweat is of such a savor.

Now these three opinions Aristotle endeavored to confute by several reasons,
showing other causes of the seas saltness. And indeed had it been so with him
that he could have repaired unto Moses, then had the first opinion been struck
dead more easily then it was; because Moses would have told him that the drying
of the earth, and gathering of the waters, were one day elder then either sun
or stars.

And for the second, if it be taken in a qualified sense, it is not much
amiss: for although Aristotle says that if it be a true opinion, then rivers
would be salt as well as seas, because they run in the veins of the earth;
yet know that all and every vein is not of one and the same temper; as is
apparent by the differing quality of springing waters.

As for the third, it seems rather a ridiculous then philosophical opinion:
for sweat is but a small part of that humor contained in any body that
yields sweat; but the sea is not the smallest part of humor in the body of
the earth: therefore it neither causes the sea, nor saltness of it.

But beside all these, there are other opinions also. Wherefore some again have
attributed the cause to adust vapors, partly let fall on the sea, and partly
raised from it to the brinks and face thereof; Others to the motion of the sea;
Some to under-earth, or rather Lyd. d^ ^ig. for. cap. 8, and 9.
under-sea fires, of a bituminous nature, causing both the motion and saltnes
also; Others to an hot and dry aspiration exhaled out of the viae. under the
water.
earth, and mixed with the water of the sea.

But that which follows seems absolutely the best, namely that it is
effected by the working of the sun, which draws out the purer and finer
parts, leaving the grosser and more base behind; even as in this little world
of our bodies, the purest part of our nourishment being employed in and on the
body, the urine and other excrements remaining do retain a perfect saltness.
Unto which opinion they also assent, who affirm that the saltness is radically
or originally in the matter of the water; which must be so understood as the
water has in it an earthy kind of substance of a drying nature: which (as I
suppose) was not first in the matter of the waters before they were gathered
unto this one place where now they are; because, as is reported and written,
there be salt mines in sundry places, as in a certain hill in Barbary, out of
which perfect salt is dug, and used for salt after it is made clean and
beaten small. All which does greatly commend the providence and wisdom of God:
For it is not unlike but that the The sea made salt by the substance of the
ground: that is my opinion.
sea was by his wisdom and providence gathered into such salt valleys of the
earth, as were otherwise barren and unfruitful: with which substance, the
gathered water being mixed, must needs partake both of an earthy matter, and
also of a salt savor; yet so, as this salt savor cannot be drawn out, and
sensibly perceived in the mixture of many sweet humors joined with it, without
a separation first made by the heat of the sun, of the thinner parts from the
thicker: And so the sun is a disponent, though not a productive cause of this
saltness.

Now this opinion may be strengthened by many reasons.

First, because seawater, when it is boiled, does evaporate a dewie or watrie
humor, which being collected and kept together, has a sweet taste or savor.

Secondly, because vapors drawn from the sea and turned into rain, are void of
saltness.

Thirdly, because the sea in summer, and toward the South (as Aristotle
affirms) is more salt then elsewhere; which comes to pass in that the
sun, at that time and place, draws away more of the sweet humors then at
other times.

Fourthly, because the sea is fresher toward the bottom, then at the top; as
some have found by using practices to experience it.

Fifthly, because (as Aristotle again testifyeth) if an empty vessel sealed up
with wax, be by some means or other caused to sink into the sea, and there let
lie for a certain space, it will at the last be filled with very fresh and
sweet water, issuing in through the insensible small pores of the wax: for by
this manner of passing into the vessel, the thin is strained from the thick:
yea by this means, the earthy and adust part, which carries the saltness in
it, is excluded, whilst the other is admitted. For in every salt savor, two
things are required; viz. an adustion, and an earthie kind of substance of a
drying nature: both which are found in the sea. For (according to the
testimony of Physicians) seawater does heat and dry more then other waters,
and is also more ponderous or heavy; yea and it does more easily sustain a
heavy burden, giving it less leave to sink then the fresh silver-seeming
streams.

And thus we see how the sea comes to be salt. It follows to show why rivers
be not salt, as well as seas. Of rivers; and from whence they proceed.


Now for the better explaining of this, the first thing considerable will be
concerning the original of fountains and rivers.

Aristotle handled them amongst Meteors of a watery Arist. de Met. lib. 1. cap.
13.
kind, because he supposed that there was the same original of rivers within
the earth, which was of watery Meteors in the air above the earth. For if this
air (says he) coming near to the nature of a vapor, is by cold turned into
water; then the air which is in the caverns of the earth, may be, by the same
cause, condensed into water also. According to which grounds, we cannot but
make this the original of fountains and rivers; namely, that they are
engendered in the hollow concavities of the earth, and derive both their birth
and continual sustenance from the air; which piercing the open chinks or
chasma's of the earth, and congealed by the cold of those places, dissolveth
into water (as we see the air in winter nights to be melted into a pearlie
dew, sticking on our glass windows) and being grown to some quantity, it will
either find a way, or make a way to vent its superfluity. All which agrees
very well to the nature of the air, which seeing it is hot and moist, the heat
being gone it is thickened, and so easily turned into water.

And as for a continual running of rivers caused by this water, it is (says
Aristotle) by a perpetual succession of new air.

But to this opinion we may not absolutely make subscription; for although air
may be thus converted into water, yet the sole matter of rivers cannot come
from hence: it may happily be an helping cause, but not a prime, or principal
cause. For first, since the air is a thin subtle body, there is necessarily
required an abundance of air to make but a little quantity of water; insomuch
that it is not doubted by some without cause, whether the dens and hollow
places of the earth be vast enough to receive so much air as can make water
enough to run along, until it break out into a river or spring. Secondly,
there be many fountains which have (as it were) a kind of ebbing and flowing
at certain direct and set times, which they keep as constantly as the very sea
it self. As for example, among other strange rivers, Lib. 2. cap. 103.
Pliny makes mention of Dodon, Jupiters fountain, which evermore decreaseth
from midnight until noon; thence it increases until midnight again. And in
the island Delus, the fountain of Inopus (as he also affirms) keeps his
course with Nilus. Also he makes mention of a little island in the sea over
against the river Timavus or Brenta in Italy, having certain fountains in it
which increase and decrease, according to the ebbing and flowing of the vast
body of Amphitrite or the sea.

Wherefore the wise man Siracides thought more truly (Ecclus. 40. 11.)
concerning these things; affirming that all things which are of the earth shall
turn to the earth again: and that which is of the waters does turn again into
the sea. Which saying of his I do not say is much strengthened, but absolutely
confirmed by one more authentic then it self; namely by that of Solomon,
Eccles. 1. 7. where it is witnessed that all rivers run into the sea, yet the
sea is not full: unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again. Which testimony makes it plain that the sea is the principal
cause of all rivers: and if therefore Aristotle's Aeriall vapors are partly a
cause of springs.
aeriall vapors have any thing to do in this generation, it is as much as
nothing: yet that which they are able to do, I imagine they perform, joining
themselves with the currents which come from the sea; and so they run
together in the veins of the earth, either until free leave be given them to
come abroad, or that (like Hannibal in the Alps) they work themselves a way.

Now in this there is little or no difference between Solomon and Plato,
together with the ancient Philosophers before him, although Aristotle
dissenteth. For that which Solomon calls the sea, Goclen. Disput. Phys. cap.
39. ex Plat. in Phaed.
Plato calls the great Plato did but express Moses meaning, Genesis 7. 11. in
other words.
gulf of the earth; saying, (...) id est, Ad illum hiatum and omnes fluvii
confluunt, and ex hoc vicissim omnes effluunt: that is, Into this gulf all
rivers do both flow or assemble themselves, and also by their courses come or
flow out again.

But what need more words? It is without controversy How springs come to be
fresh, seeing the sea is salt.
that rivers have their first original from the sea: that is the fountainhead
from whence all fountains have their heads. Neither can the saltness of the
sea, and freshness of rivers, stop this current.

For concerning springs, it is true indeed that they are fresh; and this
freshness, notwithstanding their salt original, may be ascribed to
percolation and straining through the narrow spungie passages of the earth,
which makes them leave behind (as an exacted toll) the color, thickness, and
saltness. So that you see, sea water (though in it self of a salt and brackish
savor) by passing through diverse windings and turnings of the earth, is
deprived of all unpleasantnesse: and by how much the spring-heads of rivers are
Putei prope mare, falsi; longius, minus; procul, nihil. Ial. Scal. exercitat.
50.
remote from the sea, by so much are their waters affected with a delightful
relish: yea and why they ascend up to the highest mountains, already has been
declared. Unto which may be added, that they come not with a direct course from
the sea unto those hills; neither do they ascend directly upwards on the
sudden, but by degrees: and so, winding themselves through many crooked
passages and turnings, they do (as it were) scrue themselves up to the
convenientest place of breaking out; and cannot go back, because the sea is a
far heavier body then the vein that comes from it; even as the blood in our
veins is nothing in proportion to the liver, from whence each vein of blood
has its first beginning.

But I draw toward a conclusion, adding in the last The benefit and use of
waters.
place, that of waters (be they seas, or rivers) we have a threefold use and
benefit.

First, that out of them, drink may be afforded to man and beast; as it is
Psalm. 104. 11. They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses
quench their thirst, etc.

Secondly, that running through the earth, as blood through the body, by
interlacing it, and sometimes overwhelming it, they make the earth able to
produce those fruits which are necessary for the life of man: which benefit of
overflowing, so fattens the whole land of Egypt, that the priests of that
country did thereupon ascribe the beginning of time, or of every thing that
now is, to that time of the year when their Nilus overflowed, or when it first
began to lift up it self above the banks, and diffuse an ample portion of
manuring bounty into the lap of the land: which is as good to them as if
Jupiter should descend in a golden shower. And for other places, where there be
no such luckie floods, there it is found that these bounteous watrie bodies
yielding vapors, do purchase for them such dropping showers of rain, that the
valleys stand so thick with corn, that they laugh and sing: and therefore these
are great benefits challenging most humble thanks; as it is Psalm. 107.

The third is, that they can quell the rage of the hottest element, and keep
our mansions from cinders, or a flamie conversion into ashes.

The fourth is, that they yield us an easiness and speediness of conduct and
traffic, by which each place partaketh of the blessings of every place.

Yea these, and many more, are the benefits of water, without which the life of
man could not be sustained. But here I contract my sails, and end this
question: for by coming on the shore, I shall the better view that which
remains concerning this liquid element. Wherefore it follows.

The next and last question propounded, was concerning Quest. 7. Wherein is
showed the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the sea.
the fluxion and refluxion of the sea; wherein I purpose (as near as I can) to
show, both why seas have that alternate motion, as also why such murmuring
brooks and rivers, as do not ebb and flow, are destitute of the foresaid
courses.

The motion of the sea is either natural, or violent. The first is performs
on its own accord: the other it does not, but by some external force
compelling it.

The first, being a natural motion, is such as is in every other water; namely
that all waters do evermore flow into the lowest place, because they have an
heaviness or ponderositie in them. And thus the ocean naturally flows from
the North, where it is highest, unto the South as the lower place: for Zanch.
Tom. 3. lib. 4 cap. 1. quest. ^. these. 1.
there, in regard of the great cold, the waters are not only kept from drying
up, but also increased, whilst much air is turned into water: whereas in the
South, by reason of great heat, they are always sucked up and diminished. Now
this motion is called a motion of Equation; because it is for this end, namely
that the superficies of the water may be made equal, and distant alike on
every side from the center of gravitie.

The other, being that which depends upon some external cause, is such as
may be distinguished into a threefold motion. One is rapt, and caused by force
of the heavens, whereby it flows from Note that this is pertinent to the
openest seas, as the Atlantic and Southseas, and especially between the
Tropicks, where is a constant Easterly breath caused by the superior motions
which draw together with them, not only the element of fire, but of the air
and water also.
East to West. The second is a motion of Libration, in which the sea striving
to poise it self equally, does (as it were) wave from one opposite shore to
another. And note that this is only in such as are but strait and narrow seas,
being a kind of trepidation in them, or (as I said before) a motion of
Libration; just like a rising and falling of the beam of an equall-poised
balance, which will not stand still, but be continually waving to and fro. The
third and last is Reciprocatio, or Aestus maris, called the ebbing and flowing
of the sea.

The cause of which has added no little trouble, nor small perplexity, to the
brains of the best and greatest Philosophers. Aristotle, that master of
knowledge, helps us little or nothing in this question. And yet De placi^.
^los. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Plutarch affirms that he attributed the cause to the motion of the sun.
Dr. Fulk. (...). li^. 4.
Others have gathered from him that he seemed to teach, it was by certain
exhalations which be under the water, causing it to be driven to and fro
according to contrary bounds and limits. But howsoever he taught, or whatsoever
he thought, this we find, that nothing troubled him more. For (as Antiquarum
lecti* (...) lib. 29. cap. ^.
Coelius Rhodiginus writes) when he had studied long about it, and at the last
being weary, he died through the tediousness of such an intricate doubt. Iu^.
Mart. Greg. Naz. Aesc^ines orat. contra ^tes. L. Valla Dialog. de lib.
arbitri^, etc.
Some say he drowned himself in Negropont, or Euripus, because he could find
no reason why it had so various a fluxion and refluxion, ebbing and flowing
seven times a day at the Livie says that it is not seven times a day; but
^emere in modum venti nunc huc, nun^ il^c rapitur. lib. 8. dec. 3.
least; adding, before that his untimely and disastrous precipitation, these
words, (...)* Quandoquidem Aristoteles non cepit Euripum, Euripus capiat
Aristotelem; That is, Although Aristotle has not taken Euripus, yet Euripus
shall take Aristotle: meaning that that should end him, whose cause could not
be comprehended by him.

But leaving Aristotle, we shall find as little help from his master Plato,
who (as did also the Stoics) attributed the cause to the breath of the world.
Such also have been the fancies of others; among whom, Kepler may not be
forgotten, who in good earnest affirms and believes that the earth is a
great living creature, which with the mighty bellows of her lungs first
draws in the waters into her hollow bowels, then by breathing respires them
out again. A pretty fiction this; and well worthy the pen of some fabling
poet, rather then to be spoken in good sober sadness, and affirmed as a truth.

Others would have the cause to be by reason of waters in the holes of the
earth forced out by spirits; which comes something near to that before
concerning the breath of the world.

A third sort attribute the cause to the circular motion of the earth;
affirming that there is a daily motion of the earth round about the heavens,
which it performs in 24 hours: the heavens in the mean time only seeming to
move, and not moving in very deed. This opinion came first from the
Pythagoreans, and is defended by the Copernicanians as an effect of the
foresaid motion. As for example; the earth moving swiftly round, the water not
able to follow the motion, is left behind, and caused to flow to and fro; like
as in a broad shallow vessel may be seen: for put water in such a vessel, and
let it be swiftly pulled forward, and then you shall see that by being left
behind, it will beat it self against the one side, before the other can at all
partake of its company: and so it is also in the earth, leaving the waters
behind whilst it moves.

But if this opinion be true; first tell me how it comes The earth has no
circular motion.
to pass that the sea does not ebb and flow always at one and the same time,
but alters his course, and is every day about one hour later then other.
Secondly, show me why the tides are at one time of the month higher then at
another. Thirdly, let me be informed why broad lakes and large rivers do not
flow as well as seas. Fourthly, let me be rightly instructed how it comes to
pass that things tend to the earth as their center, if the sun (as
Copernicus and his followers imagine) be the center of the world. Fifthly, show
me why the air in the middle Region is not rather hot then cold: for surely if
the earth should move round with a diurnall motion, as they maintain, then the
middle Region must be either far higher then it is, or else the air would be
so heated by going round, that the coldness in it would be either little or
none at all; for it is a ruled case, that Remotio a motu circulari dat quietem,
frigiditatem, et gravitatem; sicut propinquitas dat motum, calorem, et
levitatem: and thereupon it comes to pass that we have coldness in the middle
Region, the cause first beginning it being in respect of the hills which hinder
the air from following the motion of the heavens; as in Viz. chap. 4. sect. 2.
and chap. 5. sect. 2. Paragraph 1.
two several places of the second days work I have declared. Sixthly, I would
also know why an arrow being shot upright should fall near upon the same place
where the shooter stands, and not rather fall beyond him, seeing the earth
must needs carry him far away whilst the arrow flies up and falls down
again: or why should a stone, being perpendicularly let fall on the West side
of a tower, fall just at the foot of it; or on the East side, fall at all, and
not rather be forced to knock against it? We see that a man in a ship at sea,
throwing a stone upright, is carried away before the stone falls; and if it
be mounted up in any reasonable height, not only he which cast it, but the
ship also is gone. Now why it should be otherwise in the motion of the earth, I
do not well perceive. If you say that the earth equally carries the shooter,
air, arrow, tower, and stone; then methinks you are plainly convinced by the
former instance of the ship: or if not by that, then by the various flying of
clouds, and of birds; nay, of the smallest grasshopper, fly, flea, or gnat,
whose motion is not tied to any one quarter of the world, but thither only
whither their own strength shall carry them: some flying one way, some another
way, at one and the same time. We see that the wind sometimes hinders the
flight of those pretty creatures; but we could never yet perceive that they
were hindered by the air; which must needs hinder them if it were carried
always one way by the motion of the earth: for from that effect of the earths
motion, this effect must needs also be produced.

Armed with these reasons, 'twere superfluous
To join our forces with Copernicus.
But perhaps you will say it is a thing impossible for so vast a body as the
heavens to move daily about the earth, and be no longer then 24 hours before
one revolution be accomplished: for if the compass were no L^sberg* (...)* i^
(...) terra di^r. page 7.
more then such a distance would make as is from hence to Saturns sphere, the
motion must extend, in one first scruple or minute of time, to 55804 miles; and
in a moment, to 930 miles: which is a thing impossible for any Physical body
to perform.

Unto which I must first answer, that in these mensurations we must not think
to come so near the truth, as in those things which are subject to sense, and
under our hands: For we often times fail, yea even in them, much more therefore
in those which are remote, and (as it were) quite absent, by reason of their
manifold distance.

Secondly, I also answer, that the wonder is not more in the swiftness of the
motion, then in the largeness of the circumference: for that which is but a
slow motion in a little circuit (although it be one and the same motion still)
must needs be an extraordinary motion in a greater circle; and so, I say, the
wonder is not more in the motion then in the largeness of the circumference.
Wherefore, he that was able, by the power of his word, to make such a
large-compassed body, was also able so to make it, that it should endure to
undergo the swiftest motion that the quickest thought can keep pace with, or
possibly be forged in imagination: For his works are wonderful, and in wisdom
he has made them all.

Besides, do but go on a while, and adhere a little to the sect of Copernicus,
and then you shall find so large a space between the convexitie of Saturns
sphere, and the concavitie of the eighth sphere (being more then 20 times the
distance of Saturn from us, and yet void of bodies, and serving to no other
purpose but to salve the annual motion of the earth) so great a distance, I
say, that thereby that proportion is quite taken away which God the Creator
has observed in all other things; making them all Wi^d. 11. 22.
in number, weight and measure, in an excellent portion and harmony.

Last of all, let me demand how the earths motion and heavens rest can agree
with holy Scripture. It is true indeed (as they allege) that the grounds of
Astronomy are not taught us in Gods book: yet when I hear the voice of the
everlasting and sacred Spirit say thus, Jo^h. 10. 12, 13.
Sun stand thou still, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, I cannot be
persuaded either to think, teach, or write, that the earth stood still: but the
sun stood, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves on
their enemies. Neither do I think after this that it was the earth which went
back, but the sun upon Ahaz Esaias 38. 8.
his dial in the days of Ezekias. For when God had made the earth, what said
he? did he bid it move round about the heavens, that thereby days, weeks,
months and years might be produced? No. What then? This was its office, and
this that which it should do; namely Motus terra is nothing but Germinatio
terr^.
bud and bring forth fruit for the use of man. And for motion, it was
absolutely and directly bestowed upon the heavens and stars: witness those
very words appointing to the sun and moon their courses; setting them in the
heavens so as they should never rest, but be for signs, and for seasons, for
days and for years. And Genesis 1.
so also the wise Ecclus. 46. 4.
Siracides understood it, saying, Did not the sun go back by his means, and
was not one day as long as two?

I conclude therefore, and concluding cannot forget that sweet meditation of a
religious and learned Bish. Hall.
Prelate, saying, Heaven ever moves, yet is that the place of our rest: Earth
ever rests, yet is that the place of our travel and unrest.

And now, laying all together, if the cause be taken away, the effect
perishes. My meaning is no more but thus; that seeing the earth is void of
motion, the ebbing and flowing of the sea cannot be caused by it, but depends
upon some other thing.

Or again, were it so that the earth had such a motion, I should scarce believe
that this ebbing and flowing depended on it. For (as I said before) if this
were the cause, it could never be that the course of ebbs and floods should
keep such a regular alteration as they do day by day: Neither could it produce
a cause why the tides should be more at one time of the month then at another:
Nor yet (as some suppose) could the waters be suffered to flow back again, but
always must be going on as fast as they can, toward the Eastern part of the
world. But I leave this and come to another.

It was a mad fancy of him who attributed the cause to an Angel, which should
stand in a certain place of the world, and sometimes heave up the earth above
the waters, sometimes constraining it to sink below them. In an ebb, he heaves
it up; and in a flood he lets it sink.

As improbable also is that of some others who imagine one Angel to be an Angel
of the water, whose office is (as in the pool of Bethesda) to move the waters
to and fro: and for proof of this, that place is alleged in the Revel. 16. 5.
Revelation, where when the vials were poured out upon the kingdom of the
beast, one of the Angels is called an Angel of the waters. But know that the
same answer made before concerning the moving of the winds, will serve to stop
this gap. Or were it so that we must be tied to a literal sense, the
compulsion overthrows the assertion; because he is called an Angel of the
waters, not for that he causes them to ebb and flow, but because it was his
office to corrupt them and turn them into blood.

More probable was their opinion who attribute the cause to certain
subterranean or under-sea fires, whose matter is of near akin to the matter of
the Moon; and therefore, according to her motion, they continue their times of
burning: and burning, they make the sea so to boil as that it is a tide or
high water; but going out, the sea sinks again.

But now if this opinion were true, then the water in a tide would be thinner,
through the heat which causes it to ascend, thinner then at other times: and
so a ship carrying one and the same weight, would sink deeper in a flood then
in an ebb; which experience shows to be otherwise. Yea were it so that there
were such supposed fires in the bottom of the sea, causing it to swell up like
boiled water, then it would also follow that the seawater would be so hot that
it might not be touched: For if the heat of the supposed fire be sufficient to
make it ascend, it is sufficient also to make it hot: which would appear
lesser in an ebb then in a flood.

Wherefore, omitting these and the like opinions, the This is the most probable
cause why the Sea ebbs and flows.
most allowable is to attribute this flux and reflux, to the effects of the
diverse appearances of the Moon: For we see by experience, that according to the
courses of the Moon, the tides are both ordered and altered. By which it is not
improbable that the waters are drawn by the power of the Moon, following her
daily motion, even as she is carried with the Primum Mobile. Yea were it not so
that the sea were hindered by some accident, some have supposed that these
waters would go round from East to West in 24 hours; and so round again, even
day by day. The accident hindering this circular motion, is in regard that the
West ocean sea is shot in between the firm land of America on the West part,
and the main land of Africa and Europe on the East part. But were it so that
there were no such accidental let in the sea, to be hindered by the land, it
would orderly follow the Moon, and go daily round: And seeing also it is
hindered by such an impediment, it is a probable conjecture to think, that it
cannot but be forced to retire; for the firm land beats it back again. Thus Mr
William Bourn, in the 5 book of his treasure for travelers, chap. 6.
determines.

Others there be who attributing the cause to the moon, do demonstrate it after
another manner; namely that through her influence she causes these alternate
motions: and this influence of hers works according to the quadrate and
opposite aspects of her position in the heavens; or according to the quadrate
and opposite configurations from that place where she was at the beginning. For
the seas, Sir Christopher Heydon, in his defense of Judicial Astron. chap. 21.
page 432.
says a well learned writer, begin to flow when the moon by her diurn rapt
motion from East to West, comes to the nine a clock point in the morning, or
is South-east: then they will continue flowing until she come to a quadrate
aspect, or to 90 degrees, which will be about 3 of the clock in the afternoon,
or be South-west when they cease from flowing and begin to ebb, continuing so
until she come to 180 degrees, or the opposite place, which will be somewhat
after nine of the clock at night, being the opposite place to that from which
she began her flowing. Then again they begin to flow, and so continue until
she attain to 270 degrees from her first place, which will be after three in
the morning. And then lastly they begin to ebb, and so continue still, until
the moon come to that place where she was at the beginning: for there the flood
begins again. Thus it is ordinarily; yet her illumination, the sun and other
stars may hasten, hinder, or something alter the moons influence, as we see
in spring-tides, at the change and full; and neap-tides, at quarters and half
quarters of the moon: confessed by Idem, page* 433. cap* 21.
those who have been great masters in Astrology.

And let this also be known, that though the moon have dominion over all moist
bodies, yet not alike, because of other causes concurring; as the indisposition
or unfitness of the subject, or for want of matter, and the like
considerations. As for example, though it be probable that there be tides in
mari Atlantico, yet they are Why all seas do not ebb and flow
not to be perceived, by reason of the vast wideness and profunditie thereof:
in other places also of the sea are no tides, being hindered by the strength of
some current, Why fresh waters do not ebb and flow.
which prevails: and in fresh water there is no tide, because of the raritie,
thinness, and subtlety thereof, which cannot retain the influence of the moon.

And note also that in such havens and rivers as ebb and flow, there may be
great diversity; which comes to pass both according to the indraught, as
also by reason of the crooked and narrow points and turnings of the banks,
which do let and stay the tide from that which is the common and ordinary
course in the main body of the sea: but afterward, when it is in, and has
taken his sway, then it cannot so soon reverse back, but must continue until
the water behind it be descended or ebbed into the sea. The river Thames may
serve as an instance in this: for it is not a full sea in all places of it at
one instant, being three parts of a flood at the lands end, before it can be
any flood at London. But were it so that there were no creeks, islands,
straits, turnings, or other accidental hindrances, then there should be no
difference found in any sea, but the whole body should be swayed up and down
with a constant course: whereas since it is otherwise, the times for every such
place must be once found out, that thereby they may be known for ever.

Wherefore the cavils of some men are nothing worth, who by bringing particular
and rare (perhaps vain) examples, do think to take away this power from the
moon. For since this lunar regiment is pertinent to most seas, and that all our
ocean does follow her; the exceptions taken from certain straits, creeks,
bays, or such like places, ought to be referred to accidental hindrances; as
to the unaptnesse of the places, rocks, qualities of the regions, differing
nature of the waters* or other secret and unknown impediments; such as manifest
themselves in Cambaia. For it is reported, that there, although the tides keep
their course with the moon, yet it is contrary to the course they hold in these
parts; for they are said to increase, not with the full of the moon, but with
the wane; and so the sea-crabs do likewise: amongst other things the nature of
the water and quality of the region may much avail to this, if it be true. And
in the island of Socotora (says Mr Purchase) Don John of Castro observed many
days, and found (contrary both to the Indian and our wont) that when the moon
rises, it is full sea, and as the moon ascends, the tide descends and ebbeth,
being dead low water when the moon is in the meridian. These things are thus
reported, and if they should be true, yet we must know that they are but in
particular seas, as I said before, where a general and universal cause may be
much hindered, and in a manner seem as if it were altered.

They that descend the brinie waves
Of liquid Thetis floods,
And in their ships of brittle staves Psalm. 107. 23* 24.

Trade to augment their goods;
These men behold, and in the deeps they see
How great Gods wonders of the waters be.
I conclude therefore, and cannot but say, that this is as great a secret, to
be in every point discussed and unfolded, as any nature can afford: Arcanum
enim naturae magnum est, It is a great secret of nature, and gives us therefore
principal occasion to magnify the power of God, whose name only is
excellent, and whose power above heaven and earth.

Last of all, this is the final cause of the seas motion: God has ordained it
for the purging and preserving of the waters. For as the air is purged by
winds, and as it were renewed by moving to and fro; so this motion keeps the
waters of the sea from putrefaction.

An Appendix to the former Section, wherein the properties and virtues of
certain strange rivers, wells, and fountains, are declared.
I Do not well know how to end this discourse of waters, before I have spoken
something of the strange properties that are in certain rivers, wells, and
fountains. Some are hot, because they are generated and flow out of veins of
brimstone, or receive heat from those places where subterranean fires are
nourished. For this is a general rule, that all waters differ according to the
quality of the place from whence they arise. Some again are sour or sharp
like vinegar; and these run through veins of allome, copperas, or such
mineralls. Some may be bitter, that flow out of such earth as is bitter by
adustion or otherwise. Some may be salt, whose current is through a salt vein.
And some may be sweet; these are such that be well strained through good earth,
or run through such mineralls as be of a sweet taste.

Our baths in the West country, and S. Anne of Buckstones well in the North
part of England, and many other elsewhere, are hot. Aristotle writes of a well
in Sicilie, Water used in stead of vinegar.
whose water the inhabitants used for vinegar: and in diverse places of Germany
be springs which harbor much sharpness. In Bohemia, near to the city called
Water used in stead of burnt wine.
Bilen, is a well (says Dr Fulk) that the people use to drink of in the
morning, in stead of burnt wine. And some (says he) have the taste of wine; as
in Paphlagonia Water which makes men drunk*
is a well, that makes men drunk which drink of it: now this is, because that
water receives the fumositie of brimstone, and other minerals, through which
it runs: and retaining their virtue, it fills and entoxicateth the brain,
as wine does. For it is possible that fountains may draw such efficacy from
the mines of brimstone, that they may fill their brains with fume that drink
thereof, who also become drunk therewith. To which purpose Ovid speaks thus,

Quam quicunque parum moderato gutture traxit,
Haud aliter titubat, quam si mer a vina bibisset.
Which whosoever draws with an immoderate throat,
Trips, as his brains in mere good wine did float.
And Du Bartas also,

Salonian fountain, and thou Andrian spring,
Out of what cellars do you daily bring
The oil and wine that you abound with so?
O earth, do these within thine entralls grow?
What? be there vines and orchards under ground?
Is Bacchus trade and Pallas art there found?
Ortelius, in his Theater of the world, makes mention A water which is deadly
to beasts, but not to men.
of a fountain in Ireland, whose water kills all those beasts that drink
thereof, but not the people, although they use it ordinarily.

It is also reported, that near to the isle Ormus, there A purging killing
water.
is a great fountain found, the water whereof is as green as the field in
springtime, and salt as the sea. He which drinks but a little of it, is
incontinently taken with a violent scowring; and he that drinks very much
thereof, dies without remedy.

Aelianus makes mention of a fountain in Boeotia near A water which makes
horses mad.
to Thebes, which causes horses to run mad, if they drink of it.

Pliny speaks of a water in Sclavonia which A cold burning water.
is extremely cold; yet if a man cast his cloth cloak upon it, it is
incontinently set on fire. A water which will both ros^ and bake.


Ortelius again speaks of a boiling fountain, which will presently seethe all
kind of meat put into it: it will also bake paste into bread, as in an oven
well heated. This is said to be in the isle of Grontland.

The river Hypanis in Scythia every day brings forth A river which breeds
flies.
little bladders, out of which come certain flies. They are bred in the
morning, fledge at noon, and dead at night: wherein mankind is also like them.
For his birth is as his morning; his strongest time, or his middle time (be his
time long or short) is as his noon; and his night is that, when he takes leave
of the world, and is laid in the grave to sleep with his fathers: For this has
been the state of every one, since first the world had any one. The day
breaking, the Sun arises; the Sun arising continues moving; the Sun
moving, noontime makes; noontime made, the Sun declines; the Sun declining
threatens setting; the Sun setting, night comes; and night coming our life
is ended. Thus runs away our time. If he that made the heavens Sun, has
set our lives Sun but a small circumference, it will the sooner climb into
the noon, the sooner fall into the night. The morning, noon, and evening (as to
those flies) these three conclude our living.

Clitumnus, says Propertius, lib. 3. is a river or spring A water which makes
oxen white.
in Italy which makes oxen that drink of it, white. Dr. Fulk yields this
reason, namely because the quality of the water is very phlegmatic, Fulk. Met.
lib. 4.

Pliny speaks of the river Melas in Boeotia, which Water which makes sheep
black or white.
makes sheep black: But Cephisus, another stream which flows out of the same
lake, makes them white. See Plin. in the 103. chap. of his 2 book.

Pliny also, in the former book and chapter, makes Water which makes them red.
mention of the river Xanthus, which will make the flocks turn red, if they
drink the water. Solinus affirms the like of a fountain in Arabia near to
the Red Sea, saying, in littore maris istius fontem esse, quem si oves
biberint, mutent vellerum qualitatem, at fulvo postmodum nigrescant color. To
which purpose we may hear Du Bartas descant thus,

Plin. lib. 31. cap 2. See also (...). 2* cap. 103.
Cerona, Xanth, and Cephisus, do make
The thirsty flocks, that of their waters take,
Black, red, and white: And near the crimson deep,
The Arabian fountain makes crimson sheep.
Seneca speaks of a river which makes horses red. A water like to the former.
Now these things may be, as Dr. Fulk yields probable conjecture, in that the
quality of the water may alter the complexion; and the complexion being
altered, the color of their wool and hairs may be changed. Aristotle, in his
3 book, chap. 12, de histor. animal. makes mention of such like waters also:
as there is a river in Assyria, called Psychrus, of that coldness, which
causes the sheep that drink thereof to yean black lambs: in Antandria there
are two rivers, the one makes the sheep white, the other black: the river
Scamander does die them yellow. Dr. Will. in his Hexap. on Genesis ex Aristot.

Pliny makes mention of the Hammonian fountain, A water cold in the day, and
hot in the ^ight.
saying, Iovis Hammonis fons interdiu frigidus, noctibus fervet; The fountain
of Jupiter Hammon is cold in the day time, and hot in the night. Like unto
which is that which he calls the fountain of the Sun; excepting that the
water is sweet at noon, and bitter at midnight: but for the times of cold and
heat, it is like to the other fountain. lib. 2. cap. 103. Some seem to think
that this may be the reason, namely, that the cold humidity of the night
nourishes the heat, and by an Antiperistasis causes it to reinforce it self
inward: But by day (the Sunne-beams sucking up that heat which is in the
surface, that is to say, above) the water remains cold. Others determine
thus, saying that this may be by the same reason that well-water is colder in
summer then it is in winter.

We have in England, wells which make wood and all A water turning wood into
stone.
things else that be cast into them, stones: the cause whereof is great cold. A
river which rests every seventh day.


Josephus, de Bello Iudaic. lib. 7. cap. 24. writes that there is a river in
Palestine, which passes between two cities, called by these names, viz. Arcen,
and Raphane^, which river is admirable for an extraordinary singularity:
namely, that having entertained his violent and swift course for the space of
six days, on the seventh it remains dry: which being past, it runs as
before; and therefore is called the river of the Sabbath: In his 3 day.
Du Bartas calls it the Jews religious river,

Keeping his waves from working on that day
Which God ordained a sacred rest for ay.
In Idumea was a well, which one quarter of the year A strange well in Id^mea.
was troubled and muddy, the next quarter bloody, the third green, and the
fourth clear. Isiodore makes mention of this, and it is called the fountain of
Job.

Seneca and others affirm that there be rivers whose Poisoning waters.
waters are poison: now this may be, in regard that they run through poisonous
mineralls, and receive infection from their fume, and the like. Such is the
water Nonacrinis in Arcadia: of which it is recorded, that no vessel of
silver, brass, or iron, can hold it, but it breaks in pieces; only a mules
hoof and nothing else can contain it. Plutarch. See also Just. lib. 12. and
Curt. lib. 10.
Some write that Alexander the great, through the treachery and plots of
Antipater, was poisoned with this water. Curtius calls it the water of Styx,
lib. 10. juxta finem.

In an isle of Pontus, the river Astaces overfloweth the A water which makes
cattle give black milk.
fields; in which whatsoever sheep or other milch cattle be fed, they always
give black milk. This river Pliny forgets not, lib. 2. cap. 103.

It is reported that in Poland is a fountain so pestilent, Poisoning waters.
that the very vapor thereof kills beasts when they approach unto it.

There be some waters which make men mad who Water which makes men m^d.
drink of them. Which is, in a manner, by the same reason that other fountains
have made men drunk.

Some again spoil the memory, and make men very A water that spoils the
memory.
forgetful: which may very well be, by procuring obstructions in the brain.
Fulk.

Seneca speaks of a water, that being drunk provokes A water which procures
lust.
unto lust. Pliny, in the second chapter of his 31 book, speaks of certain
waters in the Region of Campania, which will take away barrenness from women,
and madness from men. And in Sicilia are two springs: one makes a woman
fruitful; the other, barren.

The foresaid Pliny, in the same book and chapter, A water which causes
barren nesse, and another which causes the teeth to fall, etc.
says that the river Amphrysus or Aphrodisium, causes barrenness.

And again, in his 25 book and 3 chapter, he speaks of a strange water in
Germany, which being drunk, causes the teeth to fall out within two years,
and the joints of the knees to be loosed.

Lechnus, a spring of Arcadia, is said to be good against abortions.

In Sardinia be hot wells that heal sore eyes: and in Italy is a well which
heals wounds of the eyes. In the isle of Chios is said to be a well which
makes men abhor lust: and in the same country, another whose property is to
make men For this (...) (...). (...) (...). 2 where (...) you may (...) of
another that sharpe^eth the senses.
dull-witted. Now these and the like qualities may as well be in waters which
are mixed with diverse mineralls and kinds of earth, as in herbs, roots,
fruits, and the like.

The lake Pentasium (as Solinus says) is deadly to serpents, and wholesome to
men. And in Italy, the lake Clitorie causes those that drink of it, to
abhor wine. Fulk. Met. lib. 4.

Ortelius, in the description of Scotland, makes mention Fountains of oil.
of diverse fountains, that yield forth oil in great quantity: which comes to
pass by reason of the viscositie or fatness of the earth where they pass,
and from whence they arise. The like may be also said concerning pitchie
streams, etc.

Some waters are of that temper, that men sink not in Waters of a strange
temper.
them, although they know not how to swim. The like lake is said to be in
Syria, in which (as Seneca relates) no heavy thing will sink.

That which Pliny writes of the fountain Dodone, Of the fountain Dodone.
lib. 2. cap. 103. is very strange: whereupon Du Bartas makes this descant,

What should I of the Illyrian fountain tell?
What shall I say of the Dodonean well?
Whereof the first sets any clothes on fire;
The other does quench (who but will this admire?)
A burning torch; and when the same is quenched,
Lights it again, if it again be drenched.
There be some wells, whose waters rise and fall, according to the ebbing and
flowing of the sea, or of some great river unto which they are near adjoined.
The reason therefore of this is plain.

But strange is that which Dr Fulk mentions of the Waters which work miracles.
river Rhene in Germany, which will drown In which he was deceived: it was
rather to try their strength, and make them hardy; as Verstegan well
declares, Restit^. cap. 2. page 45.
bastard children that be cast into it, but drive to land them that be lawfully
begotten. Or is not this strange which he also mentions of a certain well in
Sicilia, whereof if thieves drink, they are made blind by the efficacy of the
water? The like I find in other authors concerning certain fountains in
Sardinia: for it is said that they have this mavelous property; namely, that
if there be a cause to draw any one to his oath, he that is perjured and
drinks thereof, becomes blind, and the true witness sees more clearly
then he did before. Solinus and Isiodore report it.

Solinus also and D^ (...) cap. 51, and 52.
Aristotle make mention of a water called the Eleusinian or Halesinian spring,
which, through the noise of singing or music, is moved as if it danced or
capered up and down: whereas at other times it is still and quiet. But I
conclude, and (as that D^ (...). 3 day.
honored Poet) cannot but say,

Sure in the legend of absurdest fables
I should enroll most of these admirables,
Save for the reverence of the unstained credit
Of many a witness, where I yerst have read it;
And saving that our gain-spurr'd Pilots find,
In our days, waters of more wondrous kind.
Unto which (in things that are strange, and not fabulous) We ought to make the
best uses of the strangest things.
let this also be added, that God Almighty has proposed infinite secrets to
men, under the key of his wisdom, that he might thereby humble them; and that,
seeing what mere nothings they are, they might acknowledge that all are
ignorant of more then they know: for indeed this is a rule, Maxima pars eorum
quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus; The greatest part of those
things which we know, is the least part of those things which we know not.

Sect. 3. Of the drie-land appearing after the gathering of the waters.
THe waters were no sooner gathered, but the drieland then appeared: and this
may be called the second part of the third days work. For the end of the
gathering of the waters was, that the earth might show it self; and not only
so, but that also it might appear solid and dry.

Two things therefore (says Pareus) did the earth in this act principally
receive: one was that it might be conspicuous; the other, that it might be
solid and dry: and both depended upon the law of great necessity.

For first, had it been continually covered with waters, how could it have been
a place for habitation? either man must have been otherwise then he is, or else
the earth must, as it was, be uncovered.

Secondly, were it uncovered, and not also dry and solid, it could not
conveniently have bore up those living creatures, weights, and other things,
which tread and press upon it. Whereupon Expositours well witness, that earth
is so named from the Hebrew Erets: which (say they) implies a thing trod and
run upon by the creatures on it, and heavenly orbs about it. The same word
spoken of particular places, is englished land; as the land or earth of Canaan,
and the like.

Here then it appears, that this was that time when the earth received her
proper elementarie quality: which it had potentially before, but not actually
till now. Now therefore, it being not only uncovered, but also made dry, it
might easily be distinguished from the other three elements of fire, air, and
water. For the proper quality of the fire is heat; of the air, is H^iditas
non est ^stimanda ex irrigatione, sed ex propria de^nitione, quod scilic et
difficulter alieno termino cl^uditur. Iam vide^us ^quam includi facilius certis
limitibus quam a^rem, ergo etc. Quod autem aqua magis ^ectat, id fit propter
crassiorem substantiam. Cum e^im humiditas aqua in den^ore materia h^reat, ideo
est magis unita* and proinde efficacio^ ad humectand^m. Aeris vero humi^tas tam
cr^ssam substantiam, si^ut ^qua, non habet, and prop^erea tantum madorem
corporibus (...) ^equit: and quod quandoque exicc^re videatur, id non est per
se, sed per accidens, (...) per exhalationes, etc.
moisture; of the water, is coldness; and of the earth, is dryness. These
qualities, I say, are most proper and peculiar to them: yet so, as the air is
not only moist, but of a moderate heat, as being nearest to the element of
fire; the water not only cold, but also moist, as coming nearest to the nature
of air; and the earth, not only dry, but something cold, as being host or
landlord to the water: and upon these terms the elements are combined together;
there being in all an harmonious order; pointing to him, who, in number,
weight, and measure, has constituted all things.

I will not go about to prove that the earth is the center of the world, for
fear I should be like to him, who disputed whether snow were white: only I
will add, that even as an infant is potentially rational by nature, but is
made rational in act, by youth or years; so it was with the earth, both
before and after the drying of it. Unto which let this also be joined, that the
earth is not so arid or dry that it is void of all moisture: for then it would
be dissolved and fall into dust. But it is arid and dry, that it might be solid
and firm; retaining in the mean time, even in the solid parts of it, such a
conveniencie of humor, that all parts may both be glewed together, and also
have sufficient nutriment for the things, which, like to a teeming mother, she
either brings forth, or nourishes in her womb.

Thus was the earth prepared: and thus was it made a fit habitation for man to
dwell on. But, as if man were not always worthy to tread upon such a solid
foundation, we see it often shakes, and quakes, and rocks, and rends it self:
as if it showed that he which made it, threatened, by this trembling, the
impiety of the world, and ruins of those which dwell upon the earth. For
though the Efficiens est calor solis, and simul ignis subterraneus, quibus
suppeditant tres superiores planetae.
efficient, Causa materialis est spiritus seu vapor, in terrae visceribus
conclusus, exire contendens.
material, and Forma est ipsa concussio terrae and agitatio exhalationum
terrae inclusatum.
formal causes of an earthquake be natural; yet the final is the
signification of an angry God, moved by the execrable crimes of a wicked
people: according to that of David in the 18 Psalm at the 7 verse, The earth
trembled and quaked: the very foundations of the hills also shook and were
removed, because he was wroth.

Fear chills our hearts. What heart can fear dissemble
When steeples stagger, and huge mountains tremble?
The Romans, in times past, commanded by public edict, that prayers and
supplications should be made in time of an earthquake: but they must call upon
no god by name, as on their other holy days, for fear they mistook that god
unto whom it belonged.

And the most ancient of the Grecians called Neptune the shaker and mover of
the earth; because they supposed that the cause proceeded from the fluctuations
and flowings of waters up and down in the hollow places under ground.

Others thought that the shaking proceeded from the downfalls of subterranean
dens or caves; and that sometimes whole mountains sunk in, and they caused the
trembling.

But by that which I said before in the generation of The cause of earthquakes.
winds, it appears, that what it is, which is the cause of winds above the
earth, is also the cause of trembling and shaking in the earth. For when it
happens that air and windy spirits or Exhalations be shut up within the
caverns of the earth, or have such passage as is too narrow for them, they then
striving to break their prisons, shake the earth, and make it tremble. Now this
imprisonment is said to be caused thus; namely, when the earth, which is dry by
nature, happens to be watered by continual rains; then, not only the pores
and caverns thereof are stopped and closed up, but even the air and
Exhalations within the earth, are increased. To which purpose, Dr. Fulk, in the
third book of his Meteors, writes, saying* The great caves and dens of the
earth must needs be full of air continually (for there is no vacuum in
nature:) but when by the heat of the Sun, the moisture of the earth is
resolved, many Exhalations are generated, as well within the earth, as without;
and whereas the places were full before, so that they could hold or receive no
more except part of that which is in them be let out, it must needs follow that
in such countries where the earth has few pores, or else where they be stopped
with moisture, that there, I say, these Exhalations striving to get out, do
either rend the earth, or lift it up; that thereby either a free passage may be
had, or else room enough to abide within. I am persuaded, that as in other
winds, there be also in this, subterranean fires, which help to move and
stir the Vapors and Exhalations. Neither do I think that the Sun is the
only cause of shutting the pores of the ground: for then, earthquakes would in
a manner be as frequent and common, as dryings after a rain: Some of the other
Planets therefore have their operation in this effect. Which (as Astrologers
witness) is Saturn, being of an astringent nature: and chiefly in earthie
signs, must this be produced. For (say they) Origa^ de effect. cap. 9. ex
Holy. etc.
if Saturn have the sole dominion either in the revolution of the world, or in
any great conjunction, or in the ecliptic place, and be strong in earthie
signs (such as be Taurus* Virgo, and Capricorn) and shall behold the Moon,
when she is impedite, with a quadrate or opposite aspect, then he foresheweth
that there will be an earthquake. And questionless this is not altogether
idle: For the influence of the Planets is diverse, and may as well (according to
their places and positions) work these effects, as have any power at all in the
changes and alterations of the air, in the producing of Meteors, cherishing of
plants, and the like. And happily it is not Saturn only, nor the bright beams
of the Sun, but other of the Planets also being conveniently placed and
disposed, which helps forward this sad effect.

Authors vary about the kinds of earthquakes; some making more, some fewer
kinds.

Aristotle, De Meteoris lib. 2. cap. 8. makes only The kinds of earthquakes.
two; Tremor, and Pulsus; a Trembling, and a Beating. Some add a third, which
they call Hiatus. Others make seven. And some add only four: to which may be
joined a fifth.

The first is, when the whole force of the wind drives to one place, there
being no contrary motion to let or hinder it. Many hills and buildings have
been rushed down by this kind of earthquake, especially when the wind causing
it, was strong: For if it be a feeble wind, it only loses or unfasteneth
foundations: if less feeble, then without further harm, the earth only
shakes, like one sick of an ague. This is called a laterall, or side-long
shaking.

The second is not so much laterall as perpendicular or upright; which is when
the earth with great violence is so lifted up, that the buildings are like to
fall, and by and by sinketh down again: For after the wind, that caused the
earth to swell, is broke out of prison, the earth returns to his old place
even as it was before.

The third kind is Hiatus, a gaping, rending or cleaving of the earth, one
part being driven so far from another, that whole towns, cities, hills,
rocks, rivers, seas, and the like, are swallowed up and never seen again.

The fourth is a shaking that causes sinking; and is far differing from the
former: For now the earth splitteth not, but sinketh; this being in such
places, where, though the surface of the ground be solid, yet it has but a
salt foundation; which being moistened with water driven through it by the
force of the shaking Exhalation, is turned into water also. Thus was the
Atlantic Ocean caused to be a sea, whereas before it was an island; according
to the Pl^t. (...) Ti^.
testimony of famous Plato, who lived in his flourishing fame about 366 years
before Christ was born: and before his time it was that this island sunk.

Where, by the way, in a word or two may be discussed, A digression touching
the new found world.
not so much how the late discovered parts of the world came to be peopled, as
how at the first to be unknown.

Concerning which, this I think may be supposed, that America was sometimes
part of that great land which Plato calls the Atlantic island, and that the
Kings of that island had some intercourse between the people of Europe and
Africa. Some have related that they were the sons of Neptune, and did govern
part of Europe and Africa, as well as of the said island: in which regard there
was knowledge of the late known parts long ago. But when it happened that this
island became a sea, time wore out the remembrance of remote countries: and
that upon this occasion, namely by reason of the mud and dirt, and other
rubbish of the island. For when it sunk, it became a sea, which at the first
was full of mud; and thereupon could not be sailed, until a long ^me after:
yea so long, that such as were the seamen in those days, were either dead
before the sea came to be clear again, or else sunk with the island: the
residue, being little expert in the art of navigation, might, as necessity
taught them, sail in some certain boats from island to island; but not
venturing further, their memory perished. And not only so, but also thus:
this island sinking, might so damp up the sea, that neither those that were in
these parts, did ever attempt to seek any land that ways to the Westwards; nor
yet those who were remaining upon that part of the island that did not sink,
would ever attempt to seek any land unto the Eastwards: and so the one forgot
the other.

More I might say touching this thing: but this (perhaps) is more then enough.
Yet that such an island was, and swallowed by an earthquake, I am verily
persuaded: and if America joined not to the West part of it, yet surely it
could not be far distant, because Plato deseribes it as a great island:
neither do I think that there was much sea between Africa and the said island.
But I leave this digression and proceed.

The fifth kind of earthquake is contrary to the former: for as before the
ground sinks down, so now it is cast up, like as in the second kind already
mentioned: only this is the difference, that now it returns not to its place
again, but remains a great mountain: an emblem whereof may be seen in the
busy mole casting up hills in a plain ground. And note that if such a rising
be in the sea, it not only causes overflowings, but produces likewise many
islands, such as were never seen before. And thus there may be five several
kinds of earthquakes.

Know also that an earthquake has both his Antecedentia, The attendants of an
earthquake
and Subsequentia.

The Antecedentia are the signs which go before it, and show that it will be.

The Consequentia or Subsequentia, are the effects which follow after it, and
show that it has been.

As for the Antecedentia, or signs, they be of these Signs of an earthquake.
sorts chiefly.

First, a great tranquillity or calmnesse of the air, mixed with some cold:
the reason of which is, because the exhalation which should be blowing abroad,
is within the earth.

Secondly, the sun is observed to look very dim certain days before,
although there be no clouds: the reason of which is, because the wind which
should have purged and dissolved the gross air, is taken prisoner and
enclosed within the bowels of the earth.

Thirdly, the birds fly not, but sit still beyond their ordinary wont, and
seem as if they were not fearful to let any one come near them: the reason of
which is, because either the pent exhalation sends some strange alteration
into the air, which slenderly breaths out of some insensible pores of the
earth; which it may do though the exhalation comes not out: or else it is that
they are scarce able to fly for want of some gentle gales for their wings to
strike upon; it being a thing well known, that birds fly more willingly, and
cheerfully, when the air is of such a temper.

Fourthly, the weather is calm, and yet the water of the sea is troubled and
rages mightily: the reason of which is, because the great plenty of spirits
or wind in the bottom of the sea begins to labor for passage that way,
and finding none, is sent back again; whereupon soon after it shakes the land.
This is evermore a certain sign.

Fifthly, the water in the bottom of pits and deep wells is troubled,
ascending and moving as if it boiled, stinking, and is infected: the reason of
which is, because the exhalation being pent, and striving to get forth, moves
some stinking mineralls and other poisonous stuff to the springs of those
waters; and they, with the struggling exhalation, stir and attaint them.

Sixthly, there is a long thin cloud seen in a clear sky, either a little
before sunne-setting, or soon after: now this is caused by reason of the
calmnesse of the air; even as Aristotle observes, that in a quiet sea, the
waves float to the shore, long and straight. I do not think that this alone can
be any more then a very remote sign, unless it be joined with some of the
other signs already mentioned: for although such a cloud may be seen, yet
every calm brings not an earthquake, neither are all places alike subject to
them.

The last sign, and that which cannot but be infallible, is the great noise
and sound which is heard under the earth, like to a groaning, or very
thundering. And yet some say, that this is not always attended with an
earthquake: for if the wind find any way large enough to get out, it shakes
not the earth. Now this noise is made by the struggling of the wind under the
earth.

Next after the Antecedentia, the Consequentia of earthquakes would be
considered; and these (as I said) Effects of earthquakes.
be their effects: which indeed be not so much the effects of the earthquake,
as of the exhalation causing the earthquake.

The first whereof may be the ruin of buildings, and such like things,
together with the death of many people. About the 29 year before the birth of
Christ, was an Lanquet in his chron.
earthquake in Jury, whereby thirty thousand people perished. In the fifth
year of Tiberius Emperor of Rome, Tacit. lib. 2. an^al. ^seb. chron.
thirteen cities of Asia were destroyed in one night by an earthquake. Some say
but twelve. Lanq. chron. In the 66 year of Christ, E^eb. ibid.
three cities of Asia were also, by the like accident, overthrown; namely,
Laodicea, Hieropoli^, and Colossus. Again, in the year of Christ 79, three
Idem.
cities of Cyprus came to the like ruin: and in the year following was a
great death of people at Rome. And in the year 114, Lanquet in his chron.
Antioch was much hurt by an earthquake: at which time, the Emperor Tr^jan
being in those parts, escaped the danger very difficultly. Eusebius places it
in the second year of the 223 Olympiad: and Bucholcerus sets it in the
year of Christ one hundred and eleven. Eusebius makes mention of another
before this, in the 7 year of Trajan: and this was that, which in Asia,
Greece, and Calabria, overthrew nine several cities. About the year of Christ
Eus^.
180, or 182, the city Smyrna came to the like ruin: for the restoration
whereof, the Emperor remitted ten years tribute. About the year of Christ
369, Eusebius again tells of an earthquake, which was in a manner all over
the world, to the great damage of many towns and people. The like was in the
year 551: at which time, a quave of the earth swallowed a middle part of the
city Misia, with many of the inhabitants, where the voice of them that were
swallowed, was heard crying for help and succor. He also, in the year 562,
mentions another, wherewith the city Berintho was overthrown; and the isles,
called C^y, grievously shaken. Again, he writes of a great tempest and
earthquake in the year 1456, wherein (as he has it out of Chronica
chronicorum) there perished about Puell and Naples, 40 thousand people. Also,
Fromond. M^t. lib. 4. but Lanquet names the year 1508.
in the year 1509, the city of Constantinople was sorely shaken, innumerable
houses and towers were cast to the ground, and chiefly the palace of the great
Turk; insomuch that he was forced to fly to another place. Thirteen thousand
perished in this calamity. Again, in Idem.
the year 1531, in the city Lisbon, a thousand four hundred houses were
overthrown (or, as some say, one thousand five hundred) and above six hundred
so shaken that they were ready to fall, and their churches cast unto the
ground, lying like heaps of stones. This earthquake was attended with a
terrible plague and pestilence. And thus do these examples confirm the first
effect.

A second is the turning of plain ground into mountains, and raising up of
islands in the sea, as Thia, in the time of Pliny; and Therasia, which (as
Seneca witnesses) was made an island even in the sight of the mariners, or
whilst they were looking on. Thus also Delos, Rhodos, and sundry others, came
to be islands.

A third effect is the throwing down of mountains, and sinking of islands, and
such like. Thus perished the Atlantic island, as I showed before: yea thus
also perished, by the breach of the earth, those famous cities of Achaia, viz.
Helice and Buris: of which Ovid writes thus,

Si quaras Helicen and Burin, Achaeidas urbes,
Invenies sub aquis: Et adhuc ostendere nautae
Inclinata solent cum moenibus oppida mersis.
If thou would Helice and wished Buris find,
Th'Achaean cities, (never lost in mind)
The water hides them: and the shipmen show
Those ruined towns and drowned walls as they row.
A fourth effect is the cutting the neck of some Isthmus from the continent:
and thus Britain was Verstegan, in his restitution, cap. 4.
severed from France; Africa from Spain; and Sicilie from Italy, with the like.

A fifth is the translation of mountains, buildings, trees etc. unto some other
places: of which we may find testimony in good authors of credit. Albertus
calls this motion, a vection or a carrying.

A sixth is the breaking out of rivers and fountains in some new places: which
happens by the breaches made in the earth amongst water-springs, through the
violence of the Exhalation.

A seventh is plague and pestilence, caused by the poisonous fume of the
Exhalation: such as was in the year 1531, before mentioned, when Lisbon was so
strangely shaken: For putrid Exhalations infect the Air; and the Air, us.

An eighth effect is famine; which may be by reason of the shocks and shakings
of the earth, making it thereby become as it were sick and steril. Or else it
may be by reason that the long pent vapor carries with it a blasting hurtful
fume.

A ninth is sometimes the discovering of new burning hills; which may happen
when the abundance of Brimstone and sulphurous matter that is under ground, is
set on fire through the violent motion of the Exhalation: and so it breaks
forth.

A tenth is (or else should be) the fear of a Deity. For if it be the Lords
will by this work of his, in his handmaid nature, to shake it, no land can be
sure, no place so strong that can defend us. Nay, the more strong, the more
dangerous: For the higher, the greater fall. With the wi^e man therefore I will
say, I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put
to it, nor any thing taken from it: And God does it, that men should fear
before him, Ecclesiastes 3. 14.

Last of all, this I will add: and it is a saying of one, well worthy to be
remembered. The whole earth (says he) is nothing but the center or point of the
world. This is all the matter of our glory; this our seat. Here we bear
honors; here we exercise rule; here we desire riches; and here mankind
troubles and turmoileth himself: here we wage war, yea civil war; and make
the very earth become soft and fat with the crimson blood of our mutual
slaughters. This is that place where we drive away from us our near
neighbors, ditch in his grounds to ours, and so measure our demeans by driving
others from our coasts, that thereby we may be like to him who can freely
triumph in any part of the earth. But what of all this? When time, by ending
us, has put a measure to our covetousness; then, after all, what a small
portion shall he obtain, who is dead and gone from all? O amatores mundi, cujus
rei gratia militatis? Oh ye lovers of the world, for the sake of what thing is
it that you strive?

Let any judge, whether this lower Ball
(Whose endless greatness we admire so all)
Seem not a point, compared with the upper Sphere,
Whose turning turns the rest in their career.
Lo then the guerdon of your pinching pain:
A needles point, a mote, a mite you gain:
A nit, a nothing (did you all possess)
Or, if then nothing any thing be less.
"Why then should man this nothing thus respect,
"As he, for it, Heavens Kingdom should neglect?
If thou feed'st well, if feet and back be clad,
What more to thee can Kingly riches add?
Not house, not land, not heaps of gold and treasure,
(When sickness of thy body has took seizure)
Can thence remove it, neither can thou find
A force in them to cure a troubled mind.
Which if man could well remember, he would cease to spend himself for nothing;
and willingly subscribe to the lamentation made by the (...) trag.
Poet, under the person of Hecuba, upon the ruin of Troy; saying,

Quicunque regno fidit, and magna potens dominatur aula,
Animumque rebus credulum laetis dedit,
Me videat, and te, Troja: non unquam tulit
Documenta sors majora, quam fragili loco
Starent superbi --
Which is (as B^rkley in his Sum. bonum. edit. 2. lib. 2.
one translates it) thus,

He that his confidence puts in a Crown,
Or in his Palace potently does frown,
And takes, with prosperous fortunes, all his joy;
Let him but look on me, and thee, O Troy.
Chance, by no greater influence, could declare,
In what a fickle state all proud things are.
To this purpose also serves that Epigram of Ausonius, wherein he feigneth
Diogenes to see the rich King Cresus among the dead: and there Diogenes himself
has as good an estate as he.

Effigiem Rex Croese tuam, ditissime Regum,
Vidit apud manes Diogenes Cynicus.
Constitit; utque procul solito majore cachinno
Concussus, dixit, Quid tibi divitiae
Nunc prosunt, Regum Rex O ditissime, cum sis
Sicut ego solus, me quoque pauperior?
Nam quaecunque habui, mecum fero: cum nihil ipse
Ex tantis tecum, Croese, feras opibus.
Amongst the ghosts Diogenes beheld
Thee Cresus, of all kings, with most wealth swelled.
This 'twas he did conclude; and as one moved
With greater laughing then his wont behooved,
He far off said, Thou richest once of kings,
Speak; (to this place below) what profit brings
All thy late pomp? for ought that I now spy,
We are alike; nay thou more poor then I.
For naught was what I had; I brought that store:
Thou had much wealth; yet now then I no more.
Like unto which, is that example of him, who lying at length upon the ground,
and rising, by chance espied the print that his body at the full length made:
he breaks out into this, or the like speech, saying, Lo here, what a small
piece of ground will serve us when we die* and yet living, we seek to conquer
kingdoms. To which we may join that worthy command of famous Saladine, who
being ready to depart this life, called for his standard bearer, giving him in
charge that he should go and take his winding sheet, and hanging it on his
pike, he should go out with it, and tell to his camp, that of all his triumphs,
of all his conquests, and of all his victories, he had nothing left unto him
now but only that to wrap up his body for his burial.

Are all men mortal? are all born to die?
Can none on earth possess eternity?
Sure, he that looks upon the worlds frail stage,
And views the actions of this present age,
He cannot but with eyes indiff'rent see
That mortals here would fain immortal be.
For by the symptoms is the sickness found;
And by the thoughts that equalize the ground,
Transcending rarely from that pitch, on high
Up to the court above the azure sky,
No hard thing it is, a judgment true to give,
That such descendents here would ever live,
But souls, inspired with the gales of grace,
Esteem the witching world no resting place;
A place of travel, not a place of stay;
Such well devoted pilgrims count this way:
For sure the world is but a gaudie ball,
Whose quilt is vanity, no joy at all.
Rouse then thy mind (witcht mortal) from the ground,
Think of that place where true joys may be found:
Choke not thy soul with earth: for thou do win
Naught for thy care, but punishment of sin:
Rouse* then (I say) thy thoughts; think what it is
To be partaker of eternal bliss.
For when the drie-land God did make appear,
'Twas not that man should think his heaven's here.
Sect. 4. Concerning the sprouting, springing, and fructification of the earth.
I Am now come to that which I called the third and last part of this days
work: and it is the budding, and fructification of the earth. For after God had
discovered it, and made it dry, he commands it to bring forth every green
thing; as grass, herbs, trees, etc. by which he caused it to change a
mourning, black, and sad-russet weed, into a green, gallant, rich, enameled
robe; and, ladylike, to paint it self in braverie; having green grassie locks,
whose hair does not more adorn then profit; whose rosy cheeks are not more
admired, then, for their virtues, wished: whose frank, free, fragrant, fruitful
breasts do so nourish her own children, sprung from her never resting womb,
that they again add nourishment to other things; both man and beast gaining by
her never ending labors. For God, by saying Let it bring forth, did not only
give an ability or power of bringing forth, but brought that power also into
act; causing this act to be so begun, that it might be continued from thence to
the very end of time. And to this purpose we see it is, that the herb must
bring forth seed, and the tree bear fruit. For God would not that either the
herb should be sterill, or the tree barren; but with their seeds and fruits,
according to their kinds: by which it was, and is, that their kinds both
were, and are preserved. For first we see the buds spring up; these at the
first are tender, but afterward, growing a little older, we call them herbs:
the herbs, being of convenient growth, bring forth flowers: under the flowers,
grow and wax ripe the seeds: the seeds being ripe and cast into the ground, do
again bring forth the tender buds; and they herbs in their several kinds; and
so on, as before: by which you may see, how God has constituted a never ending
course in nature; being the same in the trees also, as well as in the herbs.
For their tender branches do not grow to be woodie, but by little and little;
then they aspire to the height and name of trees; and being trees, they
blossom; from their blossoms arise fruits; and within their fruits be seeds;
and in those seeds rests the power of other sprouts, or tender shoots.

Now some would observe from hence, that here is mention made of three kind of
plants and fruits that the earth brings forth; viz. the bud, the herb, and
the tree: which by others are distinguished into herbs, shrubs, and trees. But
I rather think the bud is to be exempted, and not taken as one peculiar thing
proper to a kind of its own. For (as I have already showed) that which is the
bud, may be taken, either for the tender shoot of any herb or grass, or else
for the tender and unwoodie branches of shrubs and trees: for that which they
be in their sprouting, they are not in their perfection: neither are they in
their perfection what they be in sprouting.

And is it not an endless wonder to see the variety, The variety and virtue
of herbs and trees.
growth, power and virtue of these, the earths rich liveries? some great, some
less; some little, some low; some large, some long; some, whose virtue excells
in this; some, whose power appears in that: some hot and moist; some cold and
dry: some hot and dry; some cold and moist. Of all which I purpose to give my
reader a taste, that thereby he may be driven to admire the rest.

Herbs hot and moist.
ANd first of all I begin with Basil: in Greek it is (...), Basil.
or (...); in Latin, Ocimum, Basilicum, or R^gium. This is an herb hot in the
second degree, and somewhat moist. Ger. in his Herb. out of Galen ^imp. li^. 8.
Galen would not that this herb should be taken inwardly, because it has a
kind of superfluous moisture joined to it; but being applied outwardly, it is
good to digest, distribute, or concoct. We in England seldom or never eat it:
yet we greatly esteem it, because it smells sweet, and (as some think)
comfort the brain. But know that weak brains are rather hurt then helped by
it; for the say our is strong: and therefore much smelled unto, it proeureth
the headaeh: and (as the author of the haven of health affirms out of
Hollerius) Basil has a strong property beyond all these. For (says he) a
certain Italian, by often smelling to Basil, had a A scorpion bred in the brain
by the smell of Basil.
scorpion bred in his brain, and after vehement and long pain he died thereof*
Moreover, that we shun the eating of it, is also necessary; because, if it be
chewed, and laid afterward into the sun, it engenders worms. Mr Thomas
Hill, in his art of gardening, testifies that the seeds of Basil* put up into
the nose, procure sneezing; and being mixed with shoemakers black, do take A
medicine for warts.
away warts, killing them to the very roots.

The wild Mallow is called in Greek (...), signifying Mallows.
a (...) of pain: and in Latin, it is Malva sylvestris. It has a certain
moderate and middle heat in it, together with some moisture. The leaves stamped
with a little How to (...) from ^inging.
honey, and one anointed with them shall not be stung by bees, wasps, or the
like.

Borage is a common herb, and yet some account a Borage.
fourefold difference in it; as thus, Garden Borage, whiteflowred Borage, never
dying Borage (so called, because fair blew flowers, ripe seeds, and buds for
new flowers, may be seen all at once on it) and also another kind of Borage,
which is little differing from the former, excepting that the flowers look fair
and red. This herb is hot and moist in the first degree.

Unto this may be joined Buglosse, which, according Buglosse.
to Dioscorides (as Mr. Gerard writes) is the true Borage: whereupon, Herb.
page 654.
says he, many are of an opinion that the one is but a degenerate kind from
the other. In the Greek it is called (...); and in the Latin, Lingua bubula.
Pliny gives a reason of this name; which is, because it is like an oxes
tongue. Moreover, he likewise Good to make one merry.
calls it Euphrosynum, from the effect; namely, because it makes a man merry
and joyful: For (...) is Laetitia; and (...) signifies some such thing as
does laetitiam adferre, or bring mirth: which he witnesses of this herb to be
true, saying that being put into wine it increases the delights of the mind*
Plin. lib. 25. cap. 8.

The like is also said of Borage; Ego Borage gaudia semper ago* In which regard
the distilled water of Borage or An excellent (...), ter made of ^orage, etc.
being good against melancholy and sadness.
Buglosse, with the leaves and flowers, being drunk with wine, cannot but be
good, comfortable, and pleasant for the brain and heart: it increases wit and
memory, engenders good blood, and puts away melancholy and madness, as
the author of the haven of health affirms.

The herbs following are hot and dry.
NExt unto Buglosse, I mention Balm or Baum, because Balm,
the water of it also being drunk in wine, is good to comfort the heart, to
drive away all melancholy and sadness: in which regard it is not amiss to
have them all distilled together. Moreover I find it recorded that (...) take
great delight in ^alm.
the hives of bees being rubbed with the leaves of this herb, causes the bees
to keep well together, and allureth others to come unto them: For, says Lib.
21. cap. 20.
Pliny, they delight in no herb or flower more; and therefore they fly not
away from such hives as are either rubbed with the leaves, or anointed with the
juice of this herb: and hereupon it comes to be called Apiastrum; which is as
much as to say, The bees star, or guide. For when they are strayed far from
home, by the help of this herb they find their way again. But the common
Latin name is Melissa, or Citrago. It is also called in some authors,
Melissophyllum, and Meliphyllon.

This is an herb which is hot and dry in the second degree; A medicine for the
Mother.
and good to be either eaten, or smelled unto by them who are subject to the
Mother. Gerard.

Pliny writes a strange secret in a kind of Balm, Balm is good to close up
wounds.
which he calls Iron-wort; viz. that the leaves close up wounds without any
peril of inflammation: and also that it is of so great virtue (which you may
believe as you list) that though it be but tied to his sword which gave the
wound, it stancheth the blood.

Sage, called in Greek (...), is Salvia in the Latin: Sage.
and amongst the many kinds which some observe, there are principally two; the
greater, and the lesser. Some say it is hot and dry in the third degree: some
name not the third so much, as the end of the second: others determine that it
is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

This is an herb which has many and singular properties; insomuch that the
Salern school makes this demand,

Cur moriatur homo cui Salvia crescit in horto? As if it should be said, such
is the virtue of Sage, that if it were possible, it would cause Clotho evermore
to hold the distaffe, and Lachesis to spin perpetually; yea, Atropos must
forbear to cut in two the thread of life: such a desire has Sage to make a man
immortal.

The Latin and English names speak greatly for the commendation of it. For
Salvia takes the name of safety; and Sage is a name of wisdom.

Since then the name betokens wise and saving,
We count it natures friend, and worth the having.
Beside these names, some call it the Holy herb, because Sage is good for
childe-bearing women.
women with child, if they be like to come before their time, and are troubled
with abortments, do eat thereof to their great good: For it makes them
fruitful, retains the birth, and gives life unto it. Ger. in his Herball.
Good for the brain.


Moreover, Sage is singular good for the brain and head, quickens the memory
and senses, strengthens Good against the palsy.
the sinews, is good against the palsy, and stays a shaking in any part of
the body. The most of which properties are expressed in these two verses
following,

Salvia confortat nervos, manuumque tremorem
Tollit, and ejus open febris acuta fugit.
Sage makes the sinews strong, the palsy cures;
And by its help no ague long endures.
Also, the juice of this herb drunk with honey, is good Good against spitting
of blood.
for those that spit and vomit blood: for it stops the flux thereof
incontinently.

And last of all, although I omit many virtues in this herb, yet one thing must
not be forgotten. The leaves of Good against a stitch in the side.
the red Sage put into a wooden dish, wherein are put very quick coals, with
some ashes in the bottom of the dish to keep the same from burning, and a
little vinegar sprinkled upon the leaves lying upon the coals, and so wrapped
in a linen cloth, and holden very hot unto the side of those that are troubled
with a grievous stitch, they take away the pain presently, and also greatly
help the extremity of a plurisie. Ger.

Rue, or Herb-grace, in Latin is called Ruta, in Greek (...); which is, quod
caliditate sua^ (...), semen quasi congelat. If it be wild Rue, and not such
as grows in gardens, then it is hot and dry in the fourth degree: but garden
Rue is a degree cooler and moister. Lib. 19. cap. 8.
Pliny writes that there is such friendship between it and the fig tree, that
it prospers no where so well as under that tree; delighting also (as he
affirms) to grow in funnie places. It is an enemy to the Toad, as being a An
antip^thy between the Toad and Rue.
great enemy to poison: And excellent is that medicine approved by
Mithridates, King of Pontus in Asia, Good against poison.
who lived in the days of Pompey, viz. that if any do eat fasting two dry
wall-nuts, as many figs, and twenty leaves of Rue, with one grain of salt,
nothing which is venomous may that day hurt him; it being also an excellent
preservative against the pestilence. Which also the Salern school teaches, in
these words,

Allia, Ruta, Pyra, and Raphanus, cum Theriaca, Nux,
Praestant antidotum contra lethale venenum.
Garlic, Rue, Pears, and Radishes will make,
With Triacle and Nut,
An antidote, which will fell poison slake,
And door of danger shut.
Moreover, Schola Salerni sets down some other properties of it, thus;

Ruta comesta recens, oculos caligine purgat;
Ruta viris coitum minuit, mulieribus auget.
Upon which occasion, one once gave it this commendation,

Rue is a noble herb, to give it right: Good for the sight*

For, chew it fasting, it will purge the sight.
One quality thereof yet blame I must: Rue makes men chaste, but not women.

It makes men chaste, and women fills with lust.
Which last property is caused, in regard that the nature of women is waterish
and cold: now Rue (we know) heateth and dries; whereupon it stirs them the
more to carnal lust: but it diminishes the nature of men, which is of
temperature like to the air, viz. hot and moist; working thereupon a contrary
effect from that which it does in women.

Also, for those who are feeble in their sight, let them A precious wate^ for
the eyes.
distill Rue and white roses together, and putting the water thereof into their
eyes, it will open their windows and let in more light. To which join also this
other experiment, taken out of Schola Salerni;

Feniculus, Verbena, Rosa, and Chelidonia, Ruta,
Ex istis fit aqua quae lumina reddit acuta.
Fennel, Vervine, Rose, Celandine and Rue,
Do water make which will the sight renew.
What other properties are pertinent to it, may be seen at large in Pliny,
lib. 19. cap. 8. and lib. 20. cap. 13. As also in Gerard, and such others as
have set forth herballs.

I will add therefore but one thing more; namely that A note for
garden*we^ders.
the weeding of this herb with bare hands whilst the dew hangs on the
leaves, does cause dangerous blisters and sores; which may again be helped with
sallet oil or the juice of hemlock, as Mr Thomas Hill in his art of gardening
has declared.

Dill is called in Greek (...), in Latin Anethum and Dill.
Anetum; and in English, sometimes Anet as well as Dill. It brings forth
flowers and seeds in August; and, as some write, it is hot and dry in the
second degree: but Gerard, out of Galen, affirms, that it is hot in the end
of the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the same, or in the end of
the first degree. The decoction of the tops of this herb dried, together with
the seed being Dill i^ good to expel ^inde, provo^ (...), engender mi^ i^
nurses breasts.
drunk, provokes urine, allayeth gripings, hickets, and windiness; engenders
milk in nurses breasts, with such like other secrets. And of the green herb it
is said, that it procures fleep, sound, and secure; according to which we have
an old saying, that

Whosoever wearetb Vervine or Dill,
May be bold to sleep on every hill.
And from hence happily it was, that garlands made of An old custom.
this herb were used to be worn at riotous feasts, that thereby they might not
only sleep, but sleep without danger.

Rosemarie, which some call the garland rose, or in Latin Rosemarie.
Rosmarinus coronaria, because, in times past, women have been accustomed to
make garlands or crowns of it, is an herb which is hot and dry in the second
degree, and of an astringent or binding quality. The Greeks call it (...),
from (...), Thus, or arbor thurifera; and so also Lib. 19. cap. ^lt.
Pliny names it, because it has a root like to the frankincense tree; or
because the flowers smell much like to turpentine, or frankincense: which
flowers, if they be distilled, and if a few cloves, mace, Good against a
stinking breath.
cinnamon, and a little anniseed be steeped in their water for a few days
together, and drunk at morning and evening first and last, it takes away the
stench of the mouth and breath, and makes it very sweet, quickening the senses
and memory, strengthens the sinewie parts, and is best for those who have a
cold moist brain. The same wine that Rosemarie and the flowers have been To
make the face fair.
sodden in, is good to wash the face and hands that they may look fair and
clear.

Also the conserve of Rosemarie flowers, taken every To prevent the palsy, and
strengthen the stomach. To cure melancholy.
morning fasting, is good against tremblings, faintings, palsies, etc. helping
those who have a trembling at the heart, or are troubled with a dumb palsy,
or are subject to vomit up their meat. And for dull melancholy men, take the
Note also that the flowers boiled in Goats milk, are good for the P^issick. You
must keep covered* and drink it cold.
flowers and make them into powder, bind them to the right arm in a linen
cloth, and this powder (by working upon the veins) shall make a man more merry
and lightsome then ordinary. Take also the To cure a stuffing in the head.
rind of the Rosemarie and make powder thereof, then drink it in a little
wine, and it helps you of the pose or stuffing in the head, if it proceed
from the coldness of your brain. Also the wood of the stalk burnt to coals,
and To sco^re the teeth, and kill the worms in them.
made into powder, and put into a linen cloth, is excellent to rub the teeth
that they may look white, and to kill the worms in them if there be any, or to
keep them from breeding if there be none. These, and sundry other, are the
properties of Rosemarie.

I could wish that there were a greater plenty of this herb in England then
there is. France has great store; insomuch that at Provence it is used for a
common fuel, the unlaboured grounds do so abound with it.

Of Aconite or Wolf-bane there be many kinds; Wolf-bane.
and the forces of them all are extremely pernicious An incurable poison.
and poisonsome: for it is reported that if either man or beast be wounded with
an arrow, knife, sword, or any other instrument dipped in the juice of this
herb, they die incurably within half an hour after.

And know that it is called Wolf-bane, because men hunting for wolves, used to
poison pieces of raw flesh with the juice of this herb, and lay them as baits,
on which the wolves eating, die presently.

It has a root like a scorpion, shining within like alabaster. Poets feign
(because it is such a venomous herb) that Cerberus, the three-headed dog of
hell, being dragged up in a chain of Adamant by Hercules, did cast some of his
venime upon it, whereby it became so venomous.

Yet nevertheless, as great and deadly a poisoner as it A str^ge property in
a posso^g herb.
is, the juice of it cures the burning bite of stinging serpents, if it be
taken and applied to the place grieved. Whereupon Du Bartas calls it

A valiant venime, and courageous plant,
Disdainful poison, noble combatant,
That scorneth aid, and loves alone to fight,
That none partake the glory of his might.
For if he find our bodies 'fore-possest
With other poison, th^n he lets us rest,
And with his rival enters secret strife,
By both whose deaths man keeps his wished life.
Mullet, or Flea-bane, in Greek (...), in Latin Conyza, Flea-bane.
is hot and dry in the third degree.

This herb burned, and smoked where flies, gnats, Good to drive away gnats and
(...), etc.
fleas, or any venomous things are, does drive them away.

Ladies mantle, or great Sanicle, is an herb of a drying Ladies mantle.
nature. It is good to keep down maidens paps or dugs; and when they be great
and flaggie, it makes them lesser An herb for maids.
and harder. Ger. Herb. page 803.

Butterwort is a kind of Sanicle; and it is hot and Butterwort.
dry in the third degree. It is reported that when sheep eat of this herb
(which is but when the want of other How sheep may* catch a rot.
meat compells them) they then catch a rot.

Yet nevertheless, if it be bruised, the juice makes a good ointment for the
dugs of cattle or kine, when they be either bitten by any venomous worm,
chapped, rifted, or hurt by other means. It is requisite that farmers and An
excellent herb for farmers.
husbandmens wives should be well acquainted with this herb; as also that
shepherds should know what ground abounds with it, that thereby they may
prevent a mischief in their flock.

Horehound, called in Greek (...), in Latin Marrubium, Horehound
is an herb hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The syrup of this herb does wonderfully and above A come for a cough of the
(...).
credit ease such as have lien sick very long of a cough or consumption of the
lungs: the like does Saffron, bringing Saffron.
breath again, when one is even at deaths door, if ten or twenty grains at
the most (for too much is hurtful) be given in new or sweet wine. Saffron is
hot in the second degree, and dry in the first. And of it thus writes the
Salern Trans. by (...) John Harington*
school,

Take Saffron, if your heart make glad you will;
But not too much, for that the heart may kill.
Hyssop, in Greek (...), and in Latin Hyssopus, is an Hyssop.
herb hot and dry in the third degree; whose chief virtues are briefly
comprehended in these few verses of Schola Salerni, Hyssop purges the breast,
and puts a good color in the face.


Hyssopusque herba est, purgans e pectore phlegma:
Ad pulmonis opus cum melle coquenda jugata.
Vultibus eximium fertur praestare colorem.
The Hyssop is an herb to purge and cleanse
Raw flegmes and hurtful humors from the breast:
The same unto the lungs great comfort lends,
With honey boild: but far above the rest,
It gives good color, and complexion mends,
And is therefore with women in request.
Mr. Gerard sets down the virtues of it thus;

1. A decoction of Hyssop made with figs, and gargled Good for the throat.
in the mouth and throat, ripeneth and breaks the tumors and impostumes of
the mouth and throat, and also eases the difficulty of swallowing, coming by
cold rheums. 2. The same made with figs, honey, water, and Rue, and Good for the
lungs and breath*
drunk, helps the inflammation of the lungs, the old cough, shortness of
breath, and the obstructions or stoppings of the breast. 3. The syrup or juice
taken with the syrup of vinegar, Good against worms.
purges tough and clammie phlegm by stool, and drives forth worms, if it be
eaten with figs. 4. And the water (says he) is also good for the forenamed
diseases; but nothing so speedy and forcible.
Watercresses, which the Latins call Nasturtium Watercresses.
aquaticum, or Sisymbrium aquaticum, and the Greeks (...), are of nature hot
and dry. They help maidens of Good against the green sickness.
the green sickness, and send their accustomed lively color again into their
faces, if they take them thus, viz. chop them and boil them in the broth of
flesh, and use to eat such broth for a month together at morning, noon, and
night.

Also being taken in the same manner they provoke Good against the stone.
urine, waste the stone and drive it out. Ger. page 201.

Sothornwood, in Greek (...), which name it also Sothernwood.
retains in the Latin, is hot and dry in the end of the third degree.

It is said that the ashes of burnt Sothernwood brought to Good to make the
beard grow.
a powder, and tempered with the oil of radish or some other thin oil, cure the
pilling of the hair from the head, and cause the beard to grow quickly. The
same does also the juice of this herb mixed with the oil of Dill.

Pliny writes (which you may believe as you list) A strange (...).
that a branch of this herb laid under the pillow of the bed, does greatly move
a desire to the venereall act; and is of force against all charms that have
been to hinder it. Plin. lib. 21. cap. 21.

There is an herb called Herba Paris, One Berrie, or One Berrie
Herb-Truelove; so called because at the top of the stalk Good against
peevishness.
it bears four leaves like unto a true-lovers knot. This herb is good for
such as are peevish and childishly foolish for they know not what; let them
drink half a spoonful of the powder, or of the berries at morn and even. Ger.

Dittanie, called of the Greeks (...), and in Latin Dittanie.
Dictamnum, is an herb hot and dry. There are two kinds of it; Dittanie of
Crete, and Bastard Dittanie.

That which is the true Dittanie, is of wonderful operation. Lib. 25. cap. ^.
Pliny says that it grows only in Crete or Candie; and is beneficial to
the wounded Dear: For An herb for the wounded Deer*
the wild Goats and Dear in Candie, when they be wounded with arrows or
darts, do shake them out by eating of this herb; and it also heals their
wounds.

The Bastard Dittanie has virtues somewhat like to the first, but not of such
great force. And of the first, Du Bartas writes thus,

But I suppose not that the earth does yield
In hill or dale, in forest or in field,
A rarer plant then Candian Dittanie,
Which wounded Dear eating, immediately
Not only cure their wounds exceeding well,
But against the shooter do the shaft repel.
Cummin, in the Greek (...), and in Latin Cuminum, Cummin.
is hot and dry in the third degree.

The seeds of this herb sodden in water, if the face be To make the face fair.
washed with the same, do cause it to be clear and fair: yet use it not too
often; for then it breeds palenesse: it is good therefore for such as be
high-colored, or have too much blood in their cheeks.

Moreover, chew this seed in your mouth after the eating of onions, garlic, or
leeks, and it takes away their smell.

Also, it stops a bleeding at the nose, being tempered For bleeding at the
nose.
with vinegar and smelt unto.

Mint is in Greek (...); from (...) Sweet, and from Mint.
(...) Smell: and this, says Lib. 19. cap. 8. and lib. 20. cap. 14.
Pliny, is the reason why it is not rather called (...). Moreover, as he also
affirms, Good for students.
the smell of it stirs up the mind, and must therefore be good for
students; good also against the biting of Scorpions.

But let the good huswife never use to rub her milkbowls A note for good
huswives.
with Mints: For Mints put into milk will not suffer the milk to curd, although
the runnet or running (as they call it) be put unto it. This herb is hot and
dry in the third degree; and, as Schola Salerni witnesses, is Good to kill
worms.
good against worms.

The worms that gnaw the womb and never stint,
Are killed, purged, and driven away by Mint.
Mustard, or Senvie, called in Greek by some (...), by Mustard.
others (...), and in Latin Sinapi or Sinapium, is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, and is mavelous good against a voice that is hoarse: wherefore if any
be given to music, To make one sing clear.
and would fain have a clear voice to sing, let him make mustard seeds into
powder, and work the same with honey into little balls, of the which let him
swallow one or two down every morning fastin^* and in short time his voice will
be clear.

Moreover, Mustard has another good property, which must not be forgotten;
and this it is,

(...)* John Haringtons trans. of Schola Salerni. How a woman may save her
credit.
She that has hap a husband bad to bury,
And is therefore in heart not sad, but merry,
Yet if in show good manners she would keep,
Onyons and Mustard Seed will make her weep.
Peniryall, or Pudding-grasse, in Greek (...), and Peniryall.
in Latin Pulegium, or Pulegium regale (for difference between it and wild
Thyme, which some call Pulegium montanum) is an herb hot and dry in the third
degree, Good against drowsinesse.
and good for such as are daily moved to sleep: For let them but take the fresh
Peniryall and hold it in their mouth, under their tongue; and by often applying
the fresh herb, they shall drive away the desire of sleep.

Moreover, according to Schola Salerni,

Let them that unto choler much incline, Good against choler and the gout.

Drink Peniryall steeped in their wine:
And some affirm that they have found by trial,
That Gouts great pain is eased by Peniryall.
Brionie, or the White vine, as it is commonly called, Brionie.
is of two kinds: the one white, the other black; besides the wild one, which
is Brionia sylvestris. This plant is called in Greek (...), in Latin Vitis
alba: but according to Pliny, it is Brionia, or Madon.

White Brionie is in all parts hot and dry, exceeding the third degree.

It scoureth the skin, takes away wrinkles, freckles, Good against scarres,
spots, freckles, etc.
sunne-burning, black marks, spots, and scarres of the face, if the juice be
tempered with the meal of vetches, or tares, or of fenugreek: or boil^d in oil
till it be consumed, it takes away black and blew spots which come of stripes.

And, as Galen affirms, it is a plant profitable for tanners, An herb for
tanners.
to thicken their leather hides with. Ger. ex Galen.

Madwort, or Moon-wort, in Greek (...), in Latin Madwort.
Alyssum, or Lunaria, is an herb of a temperature meanly dry, and very like to
Horehound, but rougher and more full of prickles about the flowers; the color
of which flowers are tending to blew: the leaves are small and fashioned
something like an heart, with a crooked line along the same, diverse tufts
depending on a long tail, on both sides: somewhat long, flat, and divided on
the one side by crooked flittings, which seem to be round holes; the entry
whereof is raised both on the one part, and on the other. The stalks thereof
are made with hollow angles, garnished with gross branches* and the grain in
the cod, is made like a crescent with two horns; from whence it is called
Moon-wort, or Lunaria. Thus I find it described: and note also that the root
is slender, and about some four fingers long.

I meet sometimes with many strange reports concerning This is an herb of a
strange property. For it is an herb that unshoeth horses, and the like.
this herb: and who more highly esteem it then the Alchymists? because it
seems to be a thing very proper to them, and peculiar for their use in making
of silver. The Italians call it, Unshoe-the-horse; because, if they tread upon
it, they lose their shoes, and are freed from their locks and fetters.

Oh Moon-wort tell us where thou hid'st the smith, Du (...).

Hammer and pincers thou unshoo'st them with.
Alas! what look or iron engine is it
That can thy subtle secret strength resist,
Since the best Farrier cannot set a shoe
So sure, but thou with speed can it undo?
These secrets are strange, and somewhat are they strengthened by that which
Pliny writes of the woodpecker, who, by the means of a certain herb, draws
the wedges out of the holes in trees, which shepherds have driven in: yea
nails, or any other such like wedges, are fetched out by the virtue of this
herb. Thus Pliny relates, and he alleges one Trebias for his witness. See
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 18.

Mr Gerard says that it is sown now and then in gardens, especially for the
rareness of it; but the seed (says he) is brought over either from Spain or
Italy. But why may it not grow in other places? I remember what a friend of
mine, of good credit, once told me, that his grandfather had a close, wherein
it was a common thing to find their horses unfettered in the morning, although
they were fast shackled over night: he named also the place; but I have now
forgotten it. Here do I suppose might grow some of this herb, if there be any
such to work these feats.

But to omit these strange narrations, let me acquaint Good against the biting
of a mad dog.
you with that excellent property which Galen mentions; namely, that if it
be given to such as are enraged by the biting of a mad dog, it does perfectly
cure them. Ger. Herb. page 380. It is therefore also called Madwort.

Parsley is an herb hot and dry; hot in the second degree, Parsley.
and dry almost in the third. There be many kinds of Parsley; and every one
of them, according to the Greek, are called (...); and in Latin, Apium,
Petrapium, and the like. But know that there is Apium hortense, garden Parsley;
and Apium palustre, water Parsley (which is Smallage) and Apium montanum,
mountain Parsley; and Petrapium, or Petroselinum Macedonicum, which we in
England call stone Parsley. Moreover, some say that Alisanders are called the
great Parsley: and again, there is Apium sylvestre, wild Parsley.

Elianus reports, in the 13 book of his variable How sick Hearts cure
themselves.
history, that when the Hearts stand in need of a remedy against any dangerous
disease, they then use to eat wild Parsley.

There be generally two sorts of Thyme; the wild and Thyme.
the garden Thyme: and both are hot and dry in the third degree.

The wild is called in Greek (...), in Latin Serpillum, a serpendo, from
creeping: for so it grows, and creeps upon the ground from place to place.

The garden Thyme is called Thymum durius, and in Greek (...), which is a
general name for all kind of Thyme.

Bees are greatly delighted with this herb: and for Good against the falling
sickness, and troubled minds.
such as are subject to the falling sickness, let them use to smell unto it.
Also, it being made into powder, is good for such as be fearful, melancholy,
and troubled in mind, if it be taken in Mead, or a honied vinegar which is
called Oximel. Ger.

Arsmart, or water Pepper, grows almost in every waterish Water Pepper.
plash, or near unto the brims of rivers, ditches, and running brooks. In
Greek it is (...), in Latin Hydropiper, or Piper aquaticum. It is hot and dry
of temper.

The leaves of this herb rubbed upon a tired jades An herb which will help the
tiring of a jade.
back, and a good handful or two laid under the saddle, does wonderfully
refresh the wearied horse, and causes him to travel much the better: and note
that this is to be done as soon as he begins to tire.

Peionie, in Greek (...), in Latin Paeonia, and Dulcifida, Peionie.
is an herb meanly hot and dry.

The black grains or seeds of the male Peionie bruised, and given to drink in
mead or wine, help melancholy dreams, cure the disease called Ephialtes, or
Night A medicine for the Mare, melancholy dreams, falling sickness, etc.
mare. A syrup made of the flowers does greatly help the falling sickness.
And, as Galen has found by sure and evident experience, (says Mr Gerard) the
fresh root tied about the necks of children, does the like cure: but unto those
that are grown, the said root must be administered in some syrup or decoction,
and taken inwardly, or else it helps not.

Spear-wort or Bane-wort, is an herb which if it be taken Spearwort.
in wardly, is deadly. It grows by ditches and rivers sides, and waterish
places.

Cunning beggars do use to stamp the leaves of this An herb which beggars use
to blister their arms and legs withal.
herb and lay them to their legs and arms, which cause such filthy ulcers as
we daily see among such wicked vagabonds (for they will raise blains and
blisters) and by this practice they hope to move the people to the more pity.
But let not the abuse extirpate the right use: for the learned affirm that it
prevails much toward the drawing of a plague sore from the heart and inward
parts. In Greek it is called (...), and in Latin Ranunculus longifolius.
Moreover, it has also the name of Bane-wort, because when sheep feed on it,
they have their livers enflamed, their guts and entrails fretted and blistered
by it. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

Sulphur-wort or Hogs fennel, in Greek is (...), in Sulphurwort.
Latin Peucedanus, or Feniculum porcinum. It is hot in the second, and dry in
the beginning of the third deg^ee; and is used with good success against the
ruptures and Good for young children.
burstnings of young children; being very good to be applied to their navels,
if they start out over much.

Feverfew, called in Greek (...), or else (...), Feverfew.
and in Latin Parthenium, is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

This herb dried and made into powder, is good Good against a Vertig^.
against a swimming and turning in the head, if some two drammes of it be taken
with honey or sweet wine. Good to drive away sadness.


Also it is good for such as be melancholy, sad, pensive, and not desiring to
speak.

Mouseare, or Pilosella, is hot and dry. The decoction Mouseare.
or the juice of this herb is of such excellency, that if Good ^o harden edge
tools.
steel-edged tools glowing hot be often cooled therein, it makes them so hard
that they will cut stone or iron, be it never so hard, without turning the edge
or waxing dull.

Celandine, or Swallow-wort, in Greek is (...), in Celandine.
Latin Chelidonium. This herb is hot and dry in the third degree. Some say
that it was thus named because (as Lib. 25. cap. 8.
Pliny writes) it springs at the coming of the swallows, and withers at
their departure: which, I suppose, is false, seeing it may be found all the
year. That therefore which he writes in his 8 book, the 27 chapter, did
rather occasion the name: For (says he) the swallows have demonstrated unto
us, that Celandine is good for the sight, because when the eyes of their young
ones be out, they cure them again with this herb. Whereupon one writes out of
Schola Salerni, thus,

An herb there is takes of the Swallows name,
And by the Swallows gets no little fame;
For Pliny writes (though some thereof make doubt)
It helps young Swallows eyes when they are out.
Also, the root being chewed is reported to be good for Good for the tooth ach.
the toothache.

Angelica is hot and dry in the third degree. It is an enemy Angelica.
to poisons, and cures pestilent diseases, if it be used in time: yea the very
root chewed in the mouth is good against infection.

Contagious air, ingendring pestilence, Du Bart.

Infects not those who in their mouths have taken
Angelica, that happy counter-bane.
Dragon is an herb much like to Angelica in operation, Dragon.
if the distilled water be drunk: only observe that the Ill for women with
child.
smell of Dragon flowers are hurtful to women newly conceived with child. Ger.

Sowbread, or Swines-bread, is an herb hot and dry in Sowbread.
the third degree. In Greek it is (...), and in Latin Tuber terrae.

This herb is also dangerous for women with child A dangerous herb for women
with child.
either to touch, take, come near, or stride over it: For, without
controversy (as Mr Gerard affirms) it makes them be delivered before their
times. He therefore, having it growing in his garden, used to set sticks or
bars, that such a danger might be shunned. And this effect he attributes to
the extraordinary natural attractive virtue in it. Dioscorides and Matthiolus
do not deny the said mavelous operation: and Du Bartas remembers it thus,

If over it a childe-great woman stride,
Instant abortion often does betide.
Lavender (as is supposed) is but the female plant of Lavender.
that which we call Spike: and being sweet in smell, it is used in baths and
waters to wash the hands: in which regard it is called Lavender or Lavander,
from the Latin word Lavo, to wash.

Leek is hot and dry: the Greeks call it (...), the Leeks.
Latins Porrum; according to which name, Nero the Emperor was called. For,
because he took great pleasure in this root, he was named in scorn, and called
Porrophagus. The discommoditie of Leeks.


Leeks are not good for hot and choleric bodies; because if they be eaten
often, they engender naughty blood, hurt the head, dull the sight, and make
one to be troubled and affrighted with terrible dreams.

The like may be said of Onions. Onions.
And yet (according Good against barrenness and bleeding.
to some) the water of the distilled roots, being done in June, and drunk often
by women that are barren, helps them: As also the same water helps the
bleeding at the nose, if fine cotton be dipped in it, and put up into the
nostrils.

And of Onions it is likewise written, that if they be Good against warts.
bruised, and mixed with salt and honey, they will then destroy warts, and make
them fall off by the very roots.

Also there is another property in Onions, which (when I had little else to
do) I observed in this following Epigram,

He that a bad wife follows to the grave, A medicine to be used at the death of
a shrew.

And knows not how, for joy, a tear to crave,
May Onions use to make him weep in show;
For who can weep indeed to lose a shrew?
Garlic, called in Greek (...), and in Latin Allium, Garlic.
is hot and dry (as Galen writes) even unto the fourth degree. It is called
the country man's Triacle, and has many good properties: And amongst other
things, one thing very strange I find recorded of it; viz. that though the
often eating of it do harm the whole and perfect sight, yet the moisture or
juice infused into Good for the eyes.
the eyes, does comfort a dull sight. It is said that the strong smell of
Garlic is put away by chewing of Cummin-seed, or by eating a green bean or two
after it.

Also I find that if a woman doubt of her being with How, when a woman
doubts, she may know whether she be with child.
child, let there be set all night by her bed side some Garlic, and if she
smell it not, then she may conclude that she has conceived, or is with child.

Sleep not presently after the eating of Radish, for that will cause a stinking
breath. Parsnep.


And withal let this be noted, that the Parsnep and Carret.
Carret are hot and dry about the third degree. The Turnep.
Turnep is hot and moist: This is a root which is eaten Swine eat no Turnept.
of men, but loathed of swine. The Skirret is moderately Skirret.
hot and moist. The Artichoke is hot and dry unto the second Artichoke.
degree. The Elocampane is hot in the third, but dry Elecampane.
in the second degree: and the chief virtues of it are to open the breast, or
to help shortness of wind caused by tough fle^, me, which stops the lungs.
Also it opens oppilations of the liver and spleen, and comfort the
stomach, as says Schola Salerni,

Enula campana, haec reddit praecordia sana, etc. Elecampane strengthens each
inward part, The virtues of Elecampane.

Asswageth grief of mind, and cheers the heart.
A little looseness is thereby provoken;
It quelleth wrath, and makes a man fair-spoken.
The Rape is also of an hot temper. And Tarragon is Rape.
hot and dry to the third degree. The Red Darnell is hot Tarragon.
also, and good to be drunk for pissing the bed. Red Darnell.


Of Tabaco, or (as it is commonly called) Tobacco, there be principally two
kinds, says Mr Gerard: one Tobacco.
greater, the other less. The greater was first found in The kinds of
Tobacco, and where it was first found.
those provinces of America which we call the West Indies. The lesser comes
from Trinidada, an island near unto the continent of the said Indies. To which
some have added a third sort. And since the first discovery, there have been
plantations made in other places.

The people of America call it Petum: Others, Sacra The names of Tobacco.
herba, Sancta herba, and Sanasancta Indorum. The reason being (as I take it)
because when the Moors and Indians have ^ainted, either for want of food or
rest, this has been a present remedy unto them to supply the one, and help
them to the other. And some have called it Hyosoyamus Peruvianus, or Henbane of
Peru; which also Mr Gerard assenteth unto, verily thinking that it is a Species
Hyoscyami, (for there be more kinds of Henbane then one) chiefly in regard of
the quality; because it brings drow^inesse, troubles the senses, and makes
a man, as it were, drunk, by taking of the fume only. Of some it is named
Nic^tiana exotica: and by Nicholas Monardis it is named Tabaco. Which said
Monardis witnesses that it is hot and dry in the second degree. The quality
of Tobacco.


The Physical and chirurgicall uses of it, are not a few; and being taken in a
pipe it helps aches in any part of The virtues of Tobacco.
the body; being good also for the kidneys by expelling wind. But beware of
cold after it; neither take it wantonly, nor immoderately. And know that some
commend the syrup before the smoke: yet the smoke (say they) physically taken
is to be tolerated, and may do some good for rheums, and the forenamed
maladies: which, whilst some might cure, they make them The use of things is
many times turned into an abuse.
worse. For we see that the use is too frequently turned into an abuse, and the
remedy is proved a disease; and all through a wanton and immoderate use. For
Omne nimium vertitur in vitium.

To quaffe, roar, swear, and drink Tobacco well, A lesson for swearing swilling
swaggerers.

Is fit for such as pledge sick healths in hell:
Where wanting wine, and ale, and beer to drink,
Their cups are filled with smoke, fire, fume, and stink.
I remember an excellent salve which I am taught to make of green Tobacco: the
receipt whereof is thus. Take the leaves of Tobacco two pounds, hogs grease
An excellent s^lve to be made with the green leaves of Tobacco.
one pound: stamp the herb small in a stone mortar, putting thereto a small cup
full of red or claret wine: stir them well together, cover the mortar from
filth, and so let it rest until the morning: then put it to the fire and let
it boil gently, continually stirring it until the wine be consumed; then
strain it and set it to the fire again, putting thereto one pound of the juice
of the herb, and of Venice turpentine 4 ounces; boil them all together to the
consumption of the juice: then add thereto two ounces of round Aristochia, or
Birthwort, in most fine powder, with wax sufficient to give it a body: and so
thou have made an accurate salve for wounds, or for old filthy ulcers of the
legs, etc.

The women of America (as Gerard mentions in his The Indian women take no
Tobacco.
Herball) do not use to take Tobacco, because they persuade themselves it is
too strong for the constitution of their bodies: and yet some women of England
use it often, as well as men. And, questionless, those natives amongst whom it
grows, may take more at once then When Tobacco came first into England.
any one of us. It is said that Sir Francis Drakes mariners brought the first
of this herb into England in the year 1585, which was in the 28 year of Q.
Elizabeth, and 3 years before Tilburie camp.

Betonie, in Greek (...), in Latin Betonica and Vetonica, Betonie.
is hot and dry in the second degree.

This herb has an infinite number of sovereign virtues, being very good for
the head; taken by some in a pipe, as Tobacco, and not seldom mixed with
Tobacco: it helps also the bitings of mad dogs by drinking the juice or
powder of it, and by binding the green leaves to the bitten place.

Pliny relates a strange property pertinent to this herb: for, Lib. 25. cap.
8.
says he, if fell serpents be enclosed round about with it, they fall at such
odds that they kill each other presently. This herb is also good to help women
in their travail.

And thus hitherto I have spoken of such parcels of dame Tellus store, as are
only hot of temper: unto which I might add yet thousands more; whether they
be such as are pleasant in show, sweet in smell, delicate in taste, wholesome
in operation, and the like: but the earth you know is large: and because I am
to see something every where, I cannot stay long any where; lest the fourth day
dawn, before the third be finished.

These herbs following are cold and moist.
IN the next place therefore I must bring to your admirations some other
parcels of another temper, wherein you may likewise see Gods wisdom
flourishing: for at which soever we look, there is a secret virtue that he has
infused into every one. In which regard, divine Du Bartas thus,

Good Lord! how many gasping souls have escaped
By th'aid of herbs, for whom the grave has gap't;
Who even about to touch the Stygian strand,
Have yet beguiled grim Pluto's greedy hand!
Oh sacred simples that our life sustain,
And when it flies can call it back again!
It Is not alone your liquour, inly taken,
That often defends us from so many a bane;
But even your savor, yea, your neighborhood
For some diseases is exceeding good.
As for example, Yarrow (as most men say) when the Yarrow.
leaves are green and chewed, does help the toothache. For the toothach,
head^ach, etc.
Also the leaves being put into the nose, do make it bleed, and is a remedy
for the megrim, a pain in the head. It is an herb meanly cold in temper, and
called in Greek (...), in Latin Achillea, because it was first found out by
Achilles the disciple of Chiron, and with it he cured his wounds. Vide Plin.
lib. 25. cap. 5.

Sowthistle is cold: the Greeks call it (...); the Latins, Sowthistle.
Sonchi. If it be given in broth, it increases milk An herb for n^r, se^.
in nurses breasts, causing the children nursed by them, to have a good color
and clear complexion.

Groundsell is said to have mixed faculties: for it cools, Groundsell.
and withal digesteth. The Latins call it Senecio, because it quickly waxes
old: some also call it Herbutum.

The leaves of this herb stamped and strained into Good against the f^et, etc.
milk, and drunk, are good against the Red-gum and frets in children.

Comfrey is somewhat cold of quality, and of a clammie Comfrey.
and gluing moisture. It is highly commended of the learned for curing of
wounds, especially of the intrals and inward parts, and for burstings and
ruptures; insomuch that they affirm the slimie substance of the root Good for
to ^ure any wrinch in the back, and the like grief.
made in a posset of ale, and given to be drunk, cures the pain in the back
gotten by any violent motion, as wrestling, and the like; to which some add
the overmuch use of Venus: for in four or five days they are perfectly
healed, although there be an involuntarie fluxus seminis gotten thereby. In
Greek it is called (...), in Latin Symphytum, and Solidago, or Consolida
major. Lilies.


The Water-lilies are also highly esteemed for their Good against the same
infirmities.
virtues in curing some of the like infirmities: for those which are skillful
do affirm that a decoction of the white or yellow Water-lilie made of the
seeds, roots, or leaves, is singular good against nocturnall pollutions, caused
by dreams, or otherwise. The same cure is also wrought by the green leaves laid
upon the region of the back in the small, and two or three times a day removed,
and fresh applied. Ger.

The Greeks call this Water-lilie (...); the Latins Nymph^a: because it takes
such delight to grow in the water.

Lactuoa, in Greek (...), and in English Lettice, is Lettice.
temperately hot and moist in the second degree.

It cools a hot stomach called heart-burning: and, in nurses that are hot and
dry, it procures milk; otherwise Harm in too much (...).
not. But it must never be eaten immoderately: for ancient authors affirm, that
generally it hinders conception by wasting of sperm; and if it be not
eschewed of women with child, it is a great means to make them bring forth
children either raging in mind, or foolish in wit.

Also, the use of Lettice is to be avoided of all that be Another hurt in
Lettice.
short-winded, and spit blood, or be ^legmatick; they may not eat it often. Yet
he that would live honestly unmarried, let him not refuse this medicine set
forth by Dioscorides and Galen (as the author of the haven of Good to proc^re
chastity.
health affirms) viz. let him bruise Lettice seeds, and often put them in his
drink, etc.

Purslain is cold in the third degree, and moist in Purslain.
the second. The Greeks call it (...), the Latins Portulaca.

The juice of this herb is good against fluxes; for it Good against fluxes and
thirst.
greatly stops them. And note that the very herb holden under the tongue,
puts away thirst and dryness.

Violet, in Greek (...), in Latin Viola, is cold and moist; Violets.
being cold in the first degree, and moist in the second. The leaves inwardly
taken do greatly cool, moisten, and Good for costive bodies.
make the body loose or soluble: or outwardly applied, do ^itigate all kind of
hot inflammations.

These herbs following are cold and dry.
MAdder is called in Greek (...), in Latin Madder.
Rubia; and of its temperature the learned are not fully agreed: yet Mr Gerard
says it is cold and dry. It is good to give the decoction of the roots to
bursten and Good against bru^les.
bruised folks; which roots do also plentifully provoke urine: and (as some
affirm) the very holding of the root or handling of it, dies the handlers
urine into a perfect A strange property in Madder.
red color, appearing as if he pissed blood. Whereupon says Du Bartas,

O wondrous Woad, which touching but the skin,
Imparts his color to the parts within*
But note that this must be understood of the root held long in the hand, and
freshly gathered: for being kept and transported, it has not this virtue.
Pliny attributes more unto it: for, says he, the only sight of this herb
heals the Jaundise. But in this last property, let the reader use his
liberty.

Willow-wort, or Loose-strife, is an herb cold and dry, Willowwort.
whose first virtues were found out by Lysimachus the son of Agathocles, and
one of Alexanders captains, from whom it is called Lysimachium, or Lysimachia.
Pliny writes of this herb that it is of such strange virtue, that when Pli^.
lib. 25. cap. 7.
Oxen at the plough are striving and unrulie, let it be put into their yokes,
and presently they are appeased and quieted. This herb is contrary to Betonie;
which, in these two verses, you may remember,

As Betonie breaks friendships ancient bands, Du (...).

So Willow-wort makes wonted hate shake hands.
Shepherds purse, or Bursa pastoris, is cold and dry: Shepherds purse.
the leaves bruised are good to heal green bleeding wounds: And also the
decoction of it does stop the Good against green wounds, fluxes of blood, etc.
lask, the spitting and pissing of blood, and all other bloody fluxes.

Sen-green or Housleek, is always green, both in Housleek.
summer and winter: Whereupon it is called in Greek (...), which is as much as
Semper vivens, or always living. It is cold in the third degree, and somewhat
drying. Good against corns.
The juice hereof takes away corns from the toes and feet, better then any
thing that you can easily get: Let them be washed and bathed therewith, and as
it were day and night emplastred with the skin of the said Housleek, and you
shall find remedy.

Sorrel or soure-Dock, in Latin Acida, in Greek (...), Sorrel.
is cold and dry; being cold in the third degree, and dry in the second.

The seeds of Sorrel drunk in gross red wine, stop the lask and bloody flux.
Also if one fasting do chew Good against the l^sk, and infection.
some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it marvellously preserves from
infections. Eliots castle of Health.

Plantain, called in Greek (...), which is Lambestongue, Plantain.
and in Latin Plantago, is cold and dry in the third degree.

The juice of Plantain drunk (like unto Housleek) stops the bloody flux, or
spitting or pissing of blood. And the leaves stamped and made into a Tansie,
with the To stay fluxes.
yelks of eggs, stay the inordinate flux of terms, although it has continued
many years. Ger. page 341. But To provolte fluxes.
on the contrary, the decoction of Cammomill or Germander, made in wine, and
drunk, voideth wind, and procures them to flow.

And thus also I have given you a taste of some cool as well as hot herbs. And
in most of these, as in such other things of the same nature, I must confess,
that as I have seen a description of the world set forth by such whose reading
was their furthest travel; so, out of good Authors, and skillful Herbalists,
I have both learned and taught these secrets. Unto which I have yet a few more
that I intend to add; and because these are the most strange, I have reserved
them unto the last place.

These herbs which follow, are herbs of more then ordinary properties.
AS first the noble Pli^. lib. 2^. cap. 2.
Nepenthe, an herb which being steeped and drunk in wine, expels sadness.

2. Then is there the herb Hippurin, or Hippice, of which Pliny Lib. 26. cap.
13.
writes that it is admirable in stenching blood, insomuch that the cure is
performed by the very touch of it; being also very good to keep one from hunger
and thirst, while it is kept in the mouth.

3. Also, there is Nyctilops or Nyctegretum, an herb which in the night Idem
lib. 21. cap. 11.
shines a far off: and, above all other creatures, at the first sight it
scareth Geese.

4. Pythagoras tells of the herb (...). (...). 24. cap. 17.
Callicia, which will turn water into ice.

5. Ophiusta is an herb growing in Ethiopia: it is of a wannish color,
dangerous to be looked on: and being drunk, it does so terrify the mind with
a fight of angry and dreadful serpents, that through the fear of them men have
Idem ibid.
sometimes killed themselves.

6. H^mlock (as some relate out of Gal^n, in his book De temperamentis) is meat
to storks, and poison to men.

7. Sardonia, or Crow-foot (as some write out of Solinus) is an herb which
moves laughter.

8. Upon a mountain of Cypres called Arcadi^, is an A bleeding herb.
herb or plant growing, which if a man cut, there issues a liquour like warm
blood: if with this blood, thus warm, one man should touch another, he would
love him affectionately whom he touches. Contrariwise, if the blood be cold,
the touch will engender hatred. My author calls this plant, Flabia. See Du
Bart. Summarie.

9. Moreover, in the same author I find (as he has it from one Rhamnusius,
in his Navigations) that in the island called Australle, there is an herb
found, upon which whosoever lies down, he is first taken with an heaviness of
the head, then wi^h sleeping, and consequently with death.

10. Magicians make use of the herb Anacrampseros, which (as I find in Li^.
24. cap. 17.
Pliny) by the very touch thereof causes love to grow between man and man,
abolishing all former hatred.

11. The like is reported in a manner of the herb Sowbread, which being made
into little flat cakes, and taken inwardly, is a good amorous medicine, and
will make one in love. Ger.

12. Also they report, says Dioscorides, that the herb Snap-draggon or
Calves-snout being hanged about one, preserves a man from being bewitched, and
makes him gracious in the sight of the people. Gerard. ex Dioscor.

13. Enchanters also make great brags of the herb Ethiopis (which, I think,
some call by the name of Moly)

14. And of the herb Achimedis: the first whereof being cast into rivers, will
dry them up; or being applied to any thing locked or shut, will presently open
it: the other being cast into an army in the time of battle, causes the
soldiers to be in fear, and run away. Thus say some. Neither has Pliny
forgotten these two last herbs: but he mentions them with a kind of derision,
as in the 26 book and 4 chapter of his natural history is apparent; where he
wondereth why enchanters would not make use of them in time of danger and
extremity. And for mine own part, this I cannot but say, that it is It is
pity that natures secrets should be so^led by magic.
great pity the secrets of nature should be soiled by infamous magic, and by
the superstitious ignorance of sorcerers.

15. Unto these, Apollodorus has added the herb Aeschynomen, which draws in
the leaves when the hand of any one approaches to touch it.

16. Like unto which is the herb Sentida, growing in Purcha^ Pilgrim. part. 1.
lib. 5. cap. 12.
India: for if any one come near and touch it, or throw sand, or any thing
else upon it, presently it becomes as if it were withered, and closes up the
leaves; so continuing as long as the man stands by: but so soon as he is
gone, it opens fresh and fair: and touching it again, it withers as before.

These, you see, are rarities: and being now ready to Here the author
begins to speak of trees.
pass away from them, I should come to speak something of grain; as wheat,
rye, barley, lintels, oats, peace, beans, rice, with such other like; and gladly
would I do it, but that (me thinks) I am called another way: for lo I have
discovered the tops of yonder trees; and one by one, I mean to view them.

Vitex, or the chaste tree (which the Greeks call (...), Ag^s ^stus.
and (...), because, says Lib. 24. cap. 9
Pliny, certain matrons among the Athenians, desirous to live chaste, did lay
the leaves of it in their beds under them) is called in the Latin Salix
marina, or Salix amerina, or Piper agreste, or Agnus Ibid.
castus. And, as Pliny writes, it is of two kinds; the greater, and the
lesser. The first grows up much like a willow tree: but the other brancheth
out and spreads more, having whiter and downier leaves then the former. Our
Mr Gerard.
countreyman, and an excellent Herbalist, says that it grows up after the
manner of a bushie shrubbe or hedge tree, having many twiggie branches, very
pliant and easy to be bent like unto the willow: the flowers are of a light
blew color, and very sweet in smell; the leaves long and narrow; and the fruit
small and round like unto the grains of pepper. And note that the flowers grow
at the uppermost end of the branches, ^lustering close together.

Some say that it is a plant hot and dry in the second degree; others name the
third.

It is a singular medicine for such as would live chaste, in what sort soever
it be taken, whether in powder, or decoction, or the leaves worn about the
body.

Also it drives away windiness of the stomach, opens and cures the
stoppings of the liver and spleen, with sundry such other needful cures.

Willow is of a much like nature; and therefore it is yet Willow.
From whence came the first use of willow garlands.
a custom, that he which is deprived of his love, must wear a willow garland.
Also the green boughs with their leaves may well be brought into chambers, and
set about the beds of those who are sick of agues: for they do mightily cool
the heat of the air; which thing cannot but be a wonderful refreshing to the
sick patient.

Tamarisk is a little tree well known; the decoction Tamarisk.
of whose branches being drunk in wine, and a little Good for the spleen or
milt.
vinegar, is of great virtue against the hardness or stopping of the spleen or
milt: for this tree does by nature so waste the milt, that swine which have
been daily fed out of a vessel made thereof, have been found to have no milt at
all.

Rose is cold in the first degree and dry in the second, Rose.
somewhat binding, especially the white Rose. The red The temper and virtue of
Roses.
is less cold, more dry, etc. As for the damask and musk Rose, it is hot, and
moist withal. The damask water is sweetest; but the red is wholesomest. And of
the red Rose leaves a conserve may be made, which is good, not Conserve of
Roses, what it is good for.
only to cool, but also to comfort the principal parts of the body, viz. the
head, heart, stomach, liver, spleen, and reins. Thus you may make it. Take the
buds of red How to make the conserve.
Roses somewhat before they be ready to spread; cut the red part of the leaves
from the white, shake out the yellow seeds: then take the red leaves and beat
them very small in a stone mortar with a pestle of wood; and unto every ounce
of Roses put three ounces of sugar, by little and little, in the time of the
beating, and beat them all together until they be perfectly incorporated: then
put it in a glass or gallipot; stop it close, and set it in the sun for a
season, and it is made. And know that it will remain in full virtue for a year
or two, but then it decays.

Myrtle is a little low tree growing in some hot countries, Myrtle.
having small dark leaves, bearing berries which Good against, fluxes.
are of a binding nature, and good to stop any issue of blood. This is a tender
plant, not able to endure any cold; and (as authors affirm) it was wont to be
worn of the Myrtle garlands.
Roman captains garland-wise in triumph; namely then, when they had obtained
any victory without slaughter of men. Also in times past this tree was
consecrated to Venus: and thereupon I find in Pliny, that amongst the Romans
there was an altar belonging to Venus, which they call by the name of Murtia.
The said author also affirms, that before pepper was found out, the myrtle
Myrtle berries used for pepper.
berries served in stead thereof. See Plin. lib. 15. cap. 29.

Ebone is a tree growing in India and Ethiopia, in taste Ebone.
A smoke good for the eyes.
being sharp and biting. If it be burnt, it yields a sweet smell, the smoke
whereof is not offensive, but good against many diseases of the eyes: as also
the green wood is so full of sap, and withal so fattie, that it will flame
like a candle. Some have said that it bears neither fruit nor leaves; but this
is a false opinion, as they have witnessed who have seen the tree, and taken
the true picture of it. The outward parts are white, but within it is black.
That which grows in India, is not in such estimation as the Ethiopian Ebone;
for it is spotted with white and yellow.

Sethim is a kind of tree something like a White-thorn; Sethim.
the timber whereof never rotteth. Of this tree, Noah, according to Gods
command, made the ark; as we read in Genesis.

Palm, or Date trees, are both one. This tree grows Palm.
plentifully in Egypt, and other parts of Africa; but those which are in
Palestine and Syria are the best: they grow likewise in most places of the East
and West Indies.

The branches of this tree were wont to be carried as A token of victory.
a token of victory, because they are of this nature, viz. that they will
shoot upward, though oppressed with never so great* weight: neither do the
leaves of it ever fall. Elianus remembers another property; for (says he)
the report runs thus, that in Delus the Olive tree and Laton^ delivered by
the Date.
the Date tree flourish most fruitfully, which when Latona had touched, she was
suddenly disburdened of childebirth, whereas before she could not be delivered.
Elian. lib. 5. Also they grow by couples, male and female: but the female is
only fruitful.

The Plane tree, called Platanus, is a spreading tree Plane.
with broad leaves: in times past it was greatly esteemed in Italy for the
shadow thereof; insomuch that (as Pliny reports) they often bedewed it with
wine to make it grow. The old Romans were wont to banquet much A banqueting
tree.
under these trees. And there is, says Pliny, no greater commendation of this
tree, then that it keeps away the sun in summer, and entertaineth it in
winter.

We read of Xerxes King of Persia, that he was strangely enamoured on this
tree, having it in such singular admiration that he became a servant to it. For
in Lydia (as Elianus Va^ish. (...). lib. 2.
writes) when Xerxes happened to see a tall and lofty fair Plane tree, he
made a whole days tarriance by it; and, no necessity constraining him so to
do, he pitched his pavilions and tents in the void and empty places round
about the same. He also hanged precious jewels of great value upon it, adorning
and beautifying the boughs and branches with chains of gold, with bracelets and
tablets, with spangles and such like costly things, yielding thereunto great
worship and reverence; appointing also an overseer to keep, preserve, and
defend the same from all casualties. This was a strange crotchet; and little or
nothing the better was the poor tree for all this love and braverie.

Pepper (whereof there are diverse sorts) grows at Pepper.
the foot of other trees, climbing upon them like to ivy, and is in bunches
like grapes.

Ginger grows like young reeds, with a root like a Ginger.
lilie: it is plentiful in Malabar, or Malavar, a province in India intra
Gangem.

Cinnamon is the inner bark of a tree as big as an olive; Cinnamon.
with leaves like bay leaves, and fruit like an olive: the drying of the bark
makes it roll together. Within three years the tree yields another bark, as
before. They of Ormuz call it Darchini, that is, wood of China: and selling it
at Alexandria, they call it Cinnamonium, which is, quasi Amomum ex Sina
delatum. Purch. ex Garcia ab horto.

The Nutmegge-tree is like a peach or pear tree, and Nutmegge and Mace.
grows most in Banda an island in Asia, and in Iava. The fruit is like a
peach, the inner part whereof is the Nutmegge, which is covered and interlaced
with the Mace. For when the fruit is ripe, the first and outermost part
opens, as it is with our walnuts; then the Mace flourishes in a fair red
color, which in the ripening becomes yellow.

Cloves grow in the Moluccos on trees, like bay-trees, Cloves.
yielding blossoms, first white, then green, afterward red, then hard; and
this hard thing is the Clove. When they be green they yield the pleasantest
smell in the world. And (as it is reported) being ripe they are of such an
extraordinary heat and dryness, that in two days they will suck out and dry
up such vessels of water, as shall happen to stand in the same room where they
are. These spices and drugs, with many other, are the fruits of India.

The Cypress is a tree growing on dry mountains, and Cypress.
most commonly in hot countries. It is very tall, and the timber thereof is
yellowish and of a pleasant smell, especially being set near to the fire; and
of such durable nature, that it does neither rot nor wax old, nor yet cleaves
or chappeth it self. See Plin. lib. 16. cap. 33, and 42.

The Pine is a tree of the same nature, not subject to Pine.
worms or rottenness, and therefore much used, where it grows, to make
ships. The leaves are hard-pointed, sharp and narrow, continuing green all the
year; and the shadow thereof Phin. lib. ^7. cap. 12.
will not suffer any plant to grow under it.

Cedar is a tall great tree which grows in Africa, Cedar.
and Syria; many of them upon mount Libanus. They be straight and upright like
the Firre-tree: their leaves are small, thick, and of a sweet smell. This tree
has fruit on it all times of the year, which fruit is like to that of the
Fur and Pine Tree, but greater and harder: and at this day (as some affirm)
there are found upon mount Libanus, Cedars planted by King Solomon: the truth
of which I will not stand to justify.

Terebinth is a tree from whence Turpentine issues. Terebinth.


Picea is a tree that droppeth pitch; it grows in Picea.
Greece, Italy, France, Germany, and all the cold regions even unto Russia. It
remains always green like unto the Pine; and, by some, is supposed to be a
wild kind of Pine: especially seeing the Pine affords Rosin, Pitch and
Tar. Yet some attribute Pitch to the great Cedar, Rosin to the wild Pines
chiefly, and Tar to the Pine called the Torch-Pine.

There is a tree in India, called the Indian Coquo, or Cocus.
Cocus, being the most strange and profitable tree in the world; of which in
the islands of Maldiva they make and furnish whole ships: so that (save the men
themselves, Mr (...) pilgrim. part 1. lib. 5. cap. 12.
says one) there is nothing of the ship or in the ship, neither tackling,
merchandise, or ought else, but what this tree yields. It grows high and
slender, the wood is of a spungie substance, easy to be sewed, when they make
vessels thereof, with cords made of Cocus. It has a continual succession of
fruits, and is never without some: they grow like a kind of nut, which is of a
very large size, having two sorts of husks as our walnuts; the uppermost
whereof is hairy like hemp, and of this they make cordage; and of the next they
make drinking-cups. When the fruit within these shells is almost ripe, it is
full of water, which, as it ripeneth, changes into a white harder substance:
at the first this liquour is sweet, but with the ripening grows sour. The
tree affords a very medicinable juice; and, if it stand one hour in the sun,
it is good vinegar; but distilled, it may be used in stead of wine or
Aqua-vitae. There be ways also to make sugar of it, and of the meat in the nut
dried they make oil: Of the pith or heart of the tree they make paper: of the
leaves they make coverings for their houses, tents, mattes, and the like. Nay,
their apparel, firing, and other necessary commodities, they gather from this
tree. Thus some. Or, according to others, it is thus described. In the isle of
Zebus there is a fruit which they call Cocos, formed like a Melon, but more
long then thick: It is enclosed with diverse little skins, so strong and good
as those that environ a Date stone. The islanders make thread of the skins,
as strong and good as that which is of hemp. The fruit has a rind like a dry
Gourd, but far more hard: which, being burned and beaten to powder, serves
for medicine. The inward nut is like unto butter; being both as white, and as
soft, and besides that, very savoury and cordial. They make use of this fruit
also in diverse other things. For if they would have oil, they turn and toss it
up and down diverse times: then they let it settle some few days, at which time
the meat will be converted into a liquour like oil, very sweet and wholesome,
wherewith they oftentimes anoint themselves. If they put it into water, the
kernel is converted into sugar; if they leave it in the sun, it is turned
into vinegar. Toward the bottom of the tree they use to make a hole and
gather diligently into a great cane the liquour that distilleth, which amongst
them is of as much esteem as the best wine in these parts: for it is a very
pleasant and wholesome drink.

There is also among the Indians a tree called Arbore Arbore de raise.
de raise, or the tree of roots, called also the Indian fig tree, and by some
affirmed (with more confidence then reason, says one) to be the tree of Adams
transgression. It grows out of the ground, as other trees, and yields many
boughs, which yield certain threads of the color of gold, which growing
downwards to the earth do there take root again, making as it were new trees,
or a wood of trees, covering sometimes the best part of a mile.

There is also another tree which some call the Indian Arbore triste.
mourner, or Arbore triste, the sad and sorrowful tree. It has this
property, that in the day time and at sunnesetting you shall not see a flower
on it: but within half an hour after, it is full of flowers, which at the
sunne-rising fall off, the leaves shutting themselves from the suns presence,
and the tree seeming as if it were dead. The Indians have a fable of one
Parisatico, who had a daughter, with whom the sun was in love; but lightly
forsaking her, he grew amorous of another: whereupon this damosel slew her
self, and of the ashes of her burned carcass came this tree. A pretty fiction
this: Ovid himself has not a better.

In the island of Hierro (being one of the seven islands A weeping tree.
of the Canaries) is a tree which distilleth water incessantly from the leaves
thereof, in so great abundance, that not only it suffices those of the island
(for there is no other water in the island) but also might furnish the
necessary uses of a far greater number of people. This strange tree is
always covered with a little mist, which vanishes by degrees, according as
the sun shows himself.

When the Spaniards (says my author) took upon them to conquer this isle,
they found themselves almost discomfited, because they saw neither fountains,
springs, nor rivers: and enquiring of the islanders where they had their water,
they answered that they used none but rainwater, and in the mean time kept
their trees covered, hoping by this subtlety to drive the Spaniards out of the
isle again. But it was not long before one of their women, entertained by a
Spaniard, discovered the tree with the properties of it; which he at the first
held for a fable, until his own witness saw it was true; whereupon he was
almost ravished with the miracle: but the woman was put to death by the
islanders, for her treachery.

In the north parts of Scotland and in the islands adjacent Barnacle tree.
called Orchades, are certain trees found whereon there grows a certain kind
of shellfish, of a white color, but somewhat tending to a ruffet; wherein are
contained little living creatures: For in time of maturitie the shells do open,
and out of them by little and little grow those living creatures; which falling
into the water when they drop out of their shells, do become fowls, such as we
call Barnacles or Brant Geese: but the other that fall upon the land, perish
and come to nothing. Mr Gerard affirms that he has seen as much in
Lancashire, in a small island which is called the Pile of Foulders: for there
be certain boughs of old trees, and other such like rubbish cast up by the sea,
whereon hangs a certain spume or froth, which in time breeds unto a shell:
out of which by degrees comes forth a creature in shape like a bird; sending
out first a string or lace, as it were, of silk finely woven, and of a whitish
color; then follow the legs, and afterward more and more, till at the last it
hangs by the bill: soon after it comes to maturitie and falls into the
sea, where it gathers feathers, and grows to a fowl bigger then a mallard,
and something less then a goose, being somewhat colored like to our mag-pies.
This Mr Gerard testifies to be true upon his own knowledge; as in his Herball
is apparent.

And thus (gentle reader) I would here end, not only this Chapter and Section,
but also the first part of my book, were it not that I have a desire to speak a
word or two of things growing under ground, and within the earth: which, as
briefly as I can, shall be handled in the following Appendix.
An Appendix to the two former Sections; discoursing somewhat concerning
Metalls, and such like things as are under ground.
IN the second days work I had occasion to speak of Fiery, Aierie, and Watery
Meteors: all which by the Philosophers are named bodies imperfectly mixed, being
but a little durable. And now, being to speak of things under ground, I am come
to bodies more perfectly mixed, and of a longer continuance, because they
consist of a more solid and constant concretion of Elements.

Their names in general, are either Mineralia, Mineralls; Fossilia; or Metalla.

They are Mineralia, because they are generated in Mines; that is, in the
veins, pores, and bowels of the earth.

They are Fossilia, from Fodio, to dig, because they are dug out of the
earth.

And they are Metalla, Metalls, from the Greek word (...), which is to search,
or find out; because, with much labor and cost, they are sought out of the
veins and bowels of the earth.

That name which I insist upon, is this last: And that the kinds of Metalls
may the better be remembered, this short table would be observed.

Metalls are either Principal which are of themselves; as Sulphur and
Mercury, being (as it were) the father and mother of all metalls.
Less principal derived from the principal, more pliable pure more Gold.
Silver.
less; having either more Brimstone, or Quicksilver.


less pliable Hard stones common solid shining. not shining.
full of pores, as the Pumex and Tophus.
precious more noble, shining more. less noble, shining less.


Brittle, or of a friable nature; easy to be brought into crumbes: And these
are all kinds of precious earths, and sucks of the earth: as Terra Lemnia,
Samos, Bitumen, Sal, etc.





Of these kinds I purpose to speak a word or two, which shall be as it were to
explain the table to such as know it not.

The first, or principal metalls, are Sulphur, and Mercury: These are of
themselves, because other metalls do not help to make them, but they help to
make other metalls.

Sulphur or Brimstone, is said by some to be the fat of Brimstone.
the earth with fiery heat decocted unto his hardness; which is the cause that
it so speedily is enflamed, and burns even in water.

Or thus. Sulphur is a metallic substance or matter, consisting of a more
subtle Exhalation, fat and unctuous, shut up within the veins of the earth. It
will burn sooner then the fat of beasts: for although it be fatter then
Brimstone, yet it is far colder.

Mercury or Quicksilver is a slimie water, mixed with Quicksilver.
a pure white earth; which metal, for the matter whereof it does consist, is
thin, cold and heavy.

Or thus. Quicksilver is a metallic matter, consisting of a waterie vapor,
more subtle then ordinary, which is mixed with earth to conglutinate or knit it
together; and, by the heat of Sulphur, it is digested into what it is. It
pierces metalls, because of the extreme thinness; which, together with the
heat of it, makes it be in continual motion: and the motion, by a Metaphor,
causes it to be called Quicksilver. Moreover, it is also called Mercury,
because as Mercury is joined to all the Planets, so this to all metalls: or as
Mercury is moved many ways, so this is apt for any motion.

The less principal metals are derived from these Metalls derived from the
two first.
first. I call them less principal because they are not of themselves, but
produced by the help of the other two.

These I divide into two sorts; the pliable, and the less pliable.

Pliable metals are pure: and that, either more or less. Pliable metalls of
the purest kind.
The more pure, are Gold and Silver.

Gold is the only purest of all metals, and is composed Gold.
of a most pure red Sulphur, and of the like Quicksilver: they are red, but not
burning. This metal is only perfect; all other be corruptible. It is perfect,
because it is concocted with sufficient heat, and mixture of Sulphur: whereas
all other metals, either are not so well concocted, or else they have not the
due quantity of brimstone: and (as it is affirmed by the Alchymists) because
nature in all her works seeks the best end, she intends of all metals to
make gold: but being hindered, either for want of good mixture, or good
concoction, she brings forth other metals; although not so precious, yet in
their several uses, every way as profitable, if not more: for it is scarce a
question f whether there be more Moors iliopia
use to the necessity of man's life, in Iron and Lead, then is in Gold and
Silver. Gold never rusteth, both because of the pureness of its parents, free
from poisonous infection; and also because it is so solidly composed that no
air (which causes all things to corrupt) can be received into it.

This perfection, together with the rareness, and beauty of it, has caused
fond mortals to dote so much upon it as they do. Nay, will not one pound or
ounce of this go further then ten, either ounces or pounds of honesty? The
Poets saying agrees to it,

Aurea nunc vere sunt secula, plurimus auro Venit honos. This is the golden
age, not that of old:
For now all honor's to be bought with gold.
And hereupon I think it is, that most men dispraise this metal, and yet but
few who would not have it.

Diversas hominum videam cum sparsa per arts
Ingenia, est cunctis ars tamen una viris.
Omnibus idem animus gratos sibi quaerere nummos:
Omnis inexhaustas undique poscit opes.
When I behold the wits of men inclined
To diverse arts, I all of them do find
In this one art to meet; they shun no pain
Wished wealth to heap up, and augment their gain.
Nay, they are not common fetches and plots, but strange and bloody damned
practices which are often used to get and obtain the riches of the world. Which
Ovid could discern a long while since; and therefore he says,

Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum: Metamorph. lib. 1.

Iamque nocens ferrum, ferroque nocentius aurum.
Riches (those fond enticements unto ill)
Are dug up; and iron which does kill.
But Gold it is which does more harm to men
Then iron blades, though steeled, though sharp, though keen.
Or, as another says,

Aurum, de^tructor vitae, princepsque malorum,
O quam difficiles nectis ubique dolos!
O utinam natum nunquam mortalibus esses,
Dulcia suppeditas quae nocumenta viris!
Gold, life's destroyer, and of mischiefs chief,
Oh what strait wiles do thou knit, past belief!
Would thou had never been born to mortal wights,
Since harm to men rests in thy false delights!
These are the complaints. But it is neither in Gold nor Iron or the like, that
these evils rest; the causes of ill ought rather to be imputed to the devil and
wicked men. For true it is,

All goods are good to good men that well use them,
But they are bad to fools who do abuse them.
And thereupon says Du Bartas,

I know to man the earth seems (altogether)
No more a mother, but a step-dame rather;
Because (alas) unto our loss she bears
Bloud-shedding Steel, and Gold, the ground of cares:
As if these metals, and not man's amiss,
Had made sin mount unto the height it is:
To pick a lock, to take his neighbors purse,
To break a house, or to do something worse;
To cut his parents throat, to kill his prince,
To spoil his country, murder innocence.
For, as a cask, through want of use grown fustie,
Makes with his stink the best Greek malmsey mustie:
So Gods best gifts, usurpt by wicked ones,
To poison turn through their contagions.
What pains do not men take to win gold? every man has one way or other to
hunt after it: but the Alchymist, despising all other ways, as slow,
unnatural, and unprofitable, labors, either to help nature in her work, as
of unperfect metals to make perfect, or else to force nature to his purpose, by
his quintessences and Elixers; so that what by purging, what by concocting,
what by mixing of Sulphur and Quicksilver, and much other like stuff, at
length he turns the wrong side of his gown outward, all the teeth out of his
head, and his body from health to a palsy, and then he is a Philosopher, and
so he must, nay, will be called.

It is said of Gold that it waxes cold toward daylight: insomuch that they
who wear rings of it, may perceive when the day is ready to dawn.

Silver is the most pure metal next unto Gold: it has Silver.
an indifferent good concoction, but it wants sufficient heat in the mixture,
and thereupon it looks pale. It is a metal begotten of pure white Mercury,
and of clear white Brimstone or Sulphur.

The less pure pliable metalls, consist some of them of Pliable metalls less
pure.
more Brimstone; some, of more Quicksilver: neither are any of these two so
pure, as those in the mixture of Gold and Silver.

Brass is an impure metal, consisting most of a red and Brass and Copper.
thick Sulphur, and of a little Quicksilver something impure: that which comes
from Cyprus is called Copper, and is the purest, as being of best digestion,
and nearest unto Gold; Some say Brass is not naturally, but artificially made.
Brass, Latten, and such like, being no other then diverse kinds of Copper. In
ancient time, this metal was in greater esteem then Iron: for they did not
only make their armor of it, but their bucklers also and their lances;
because they would not be worn, either with age or use.

Copperas is a mineral of a near nature unto Brass or Copperas.
Copper: it is said by some to be mixed of humors strained by drops into small
holes. And perhaps it is nothing else but the more raw and impure substance of
that which is the matter of Copper, with less Quicksilver in it, and that also
of a baser quality. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, vehemently
binding, being of great force to season and preserve raw flesh, (as some
affirm) and is also good to beget sound flesh in festered sores, and to stench
blood. It is of a green, yellow, and a sky color: but the best has white
spots in it. See more afterward in Vitriol.

Iron is a common metal, necessary for the use of Iron.
man's life, engendered of a most impure Quicksilver mixed with a thick Sulphur
impure and adust. Or thus; It is an impure metal consisting of much crude,
earthie, adust Sulphur, and a modicum of filthy and bad Mercury. This (says
the Philosopher) although it be hard, yet by daily use it is worn and wasted:
the reason being in regard that it has in it least of Mercury, and most of an
earthie Sulphur. The quenching it in water makes it harder and harder: but if
it be quenched in the juice of How to soften Iron.
bean-shells or mallows, it becomes soft: and so also does the often heating
it, and cooling it without quenching. Lib. 54. cap. 14.
Pliny calls it optimum pessimumque vitae instrumentum, the best and worst
instrument of life.

Steel is a kind of Iron, but the purest and the hardest; Steel.
or Iron refined. Natural steel, which we call Chalybs, in times past was
gotten out of a place in Thracia, where the people called Chalybes inhabited:
their use was to go naked, and dig this metal out of the earth.

Metalls consisting most of Mercury, are these; Lead, and Tin.

Lead is a raw and indigested metal, but of better digestion Lead.
then commixtion: for it is mixed with a gross earthie substance, which
causes it to be in color so black, and so ready to foul. It is begotten of
much unpure, thick, and drossie Mercury; and by refining is made whiter. The
kinds of this are varied by reason of the matter whereof it consists, and by
reason of the heat by which it is deco^ted: and thereupon it comes to pass
that we have one sort which we call Black-lead; another far whiter and
clearer, as being better concocted, and more purely composed. It is of a cold
and binding nature; and if it lie in the wet, moisture will increase the
weight. England has store of it.

Tin, whereof great plenty also grows in the Tin.
West parts of England, in beauty and color comes nearest unto Silver; and
of Silver wants nothing but soliditie and hardness. Some think that it is
composed of Silver and Lead: but the more common opinion is, that the greatest
part of it is Mercury, white without, and red within, having a portion also of
Brimstone or Sulphur not well mixed, being as it were Lead whited with Silver:
for it is a raw and undigested metal, very porous and uncompact, which causes
it to crash when it is either broken or bitten. And thus far of metalls
pliable. Metalls (...) pliable which are ^ard.


The less pliable (as I showed in the table) are either hard, or brittle; and
cannot be easily hammered, wrought, or melted to a desired form.

The hard ones, are all kind of stones. And of stones, Stones.
together with bodies friable or brittle, it is doubted whether they be in the
number of metalls or no; because there is great difference in the matter of
their composure, etc.

To which it is answered, that although they be not in the number of such kind
of metalls as are pliable, and will melt; nor yet abound with that matter of
mixture which they do: nevertheless they may bear the name of metalls,
according to that general name specified in the derivation of the word
Metalla. And in that regard I made a difference of metalls, and drew them out
in the former table. Wherefore I proceed: and following them who derive stones
after this manner, I say that stones are bodies perfectly mixed, without life,
hard, of What stones are, and whereof they (...).
a dry and an earthie exhalation, mixed with a certain unctuositie; and by the
durance of time, together with the force of heat and cold, and a mineral
virtue, conglutinated or knit together. Or thus; they be engendered of a watrie
moisture, and fat earth mixed hard together. By which it appears that the
matter of stones is a watrie humor, and a thick unctuous earth: which is not
so to be understood as if the other two elements were separated from their
mixture; but because they have not such precedencie as the former. And for
their efficient causes besides the mineral virtue, it is said to be heat and
cold. Heat brings the slow humid unctuous matter through the thin parts of
the earth (as the Philosophers affirm) and cold condenseth it, and makes it
thick. They live not with a vegetative life, as plants and Stones live not a
vegetative life.
trees which have their nourishment from within; but their augmentation
proceeds from an outward accretion by the (...) of particulars adhering to
them, when they lie in place convenient: and, in time, their virtues may be
abated, by being long out of their right Ubi; in which regard some supposed
that they had life, and died.

The common stones are of a more impure and gross Common stones.
matter then the other. Some whereof are solid; some more full of pores.

In the solid, the parts are more continued, and better compacted: yet so, as
some have a kind of shining in them; others are dark and dull. The shining
solid stones, are chiefly all kind of marbles: of which I find three sorts.
1. Alabaster; which is of color very clear and Alabaster.
white. The Greeks call it (...) and about Thebes in Egypt it is especially
found; there being the greatest plenty of it. 2. Ophites, which is a kind of
marble having Ophites. Porphyrites.
spots like a serpent. 3. Porphyrites, which is the red marble, mixed or
interlaced with white spots. The not shining solid stones are these, and the
like: 1. The Flint. 2. The Marchasite, or that whereof they make Flint.
Marchasite. Cos. Corticula.
milstones; which being struck with Steel, procures fire, like to the Flint. 3.
Cos, which is of power to sharpen edgetools; wherefore we commonly call it a
whetstone. 4. Corticula, or Lydius lapis; which is of force to try the truth
in metalls: we therefore call it a touchstone. 5. Smiris, which is an hard
stone wherewith glasiers cut Smiris.
their glass: some call this an Emery. 6. Those which Saxum.
we name wheaten stones, or any kind of rockie stone; or such as may be
comprehended under the word Saxum.

Common stones less solid, are the Pumex and Tophus. Pumex.
1. The Pumex is of a spungie nature, and is apt to swim by reason of the
light matter whereof it consists. Tophus.
2. The Tophus is a sand or gravel stone that may easily be rubbed to crumbes.
Precious stones.


But come now to precious stones: and amongst them we have the noble, and the
less noble: both which sorts are begotten of a more subtle and thin matter
then common stones, and fostered with a more singular influence of the heavens.
My task were (in a manner) endless to reckon (...). lib. 37.
all sorts: yet some must be remembered.

The more noble precious stones, are, 1. The Adamant Adamant.
or Diamond, the most precious of all stones, and the hardest; insomuch as it
cutteth glass, and yields not either to stroke of hammer or fire:
notwithstanding it is softened with Some say that the blood of a Deer or Lion
will also molli^ie ^t, and make it ^it to be broken: melted Lead also mixed
therewith in a burning furnace, does the like.
Goats blood being warm, soon after she has eaten pa^sley or drunken wine.

Pliny makes 6 kinds of Adamant: The 1. is Adamas Indicus, being near akin
to crystal; for in color and clearenesse it is much like it: and in quantity
it is in bigness as a filbert or hasell nut. The 2. is Adamas Arabicus, like
to the other, excepting that it is something less. The 3. is called Cenchros,
answering in bigness to the grain of Millet. The 4. kind is Adamas
Macedonicus; and this is like to the seed of a Cucumber. The 5. is Adamas
Cypricus; this is found in Cyprus, and tends somewhat to the color of
brass. The 6. is called the Some say, that it has power to set variance
between men.
Siderite; which, although it be heavier then the other, yet it is of less
virtue and esteem; the color whereof is like to the color of iron: And this,
as also that of Cyprus, are termed by Lib. 37. cap. 4.
Pliny, degenerate kinds; because they will be broken by the hammer, or
otherwise with blows; and may also be cut or rased by other Adamants. All
these kinds, the two first only excepted, are said to have their place of
generation amongst the Gold, and in golden Mines.

2. The Sapphire is a very clear gem, very hard and of Sapphire.
a sky color, growing in the East, and specially in India: the best sort has
in it as it were cloves enclining to a certain redness. This stone is said to
be of a cold nature: and being drunk it preserves chastity, corroborateth the
heart, helps against the stinging of serpents, poison and pestilence.

3. The Pliny makes 12 sorts of this stone, lib. 37. cap. 5.
Smaradge is of a green transparent color, Smaradge.
making the air green near about it. The quality of this stone, in physic,
is much like to the former, or of more virtue: for it is said to defend the
wearer from the falling sickness. And so greatly does it favor chastity,
that if it be worn whilst the man and the woman accompany themselves
together, it breaks in the very act. Hyacinth.


4. The Hyacinth is of a watrish color, or rather something What false friends
are like unto.
blew like a violet. It is exceeding hard, and cloudy in the dark, but pure and
clear by day: like unto a false flattering friend, whose blithe looks are
only seen in time of prosperity; but gone when the cloudie night of dark
adversity begins to approach: For where true friends are knit in love,
there sorrows are shared equally; and best are they perceived in a doubtful
matter.

Si fueris felix, multos numerabis amicos:
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.
Whilst thou art happy, many friends thou have:

But cloudie times those many friends do waste. Moreover, this stone is of a
cold quality, moderating the spirits of the heart and of the other parts; also
it causes mirth, and being worn obtains favor, as some report.

5. The Amethyst is a gem or precious stone, which Amethyst.
in color resembles a deep claret wine; and (as Aristotle affirms no less.
some suppose) it has power to resist drunkenness.

6. The Carbuncle (of which Pliny writes in his 37 Carbuncle
book and 7 chapter) is a gem shining with a light like fire, representing a
flame. Some say it is the noblest, and has most virtues of any precious stone.

7. The Calcedon is of near nature to the Carbuncle: Calcedon.
it is of a purple color, and shines like a star: it is said to expel
sadness and fear, by purging and chearing the spirits: it also hinders ill
and fearful visions or dreams in a man's sleep.

8. The Rubie is a red gem, shining in dark like a spark Rubie.
of fire: it clears the sight, and expels sad and fearful dreams.

9. The Chrysolite is a stone of a golden color, Chrysolite.
and shining, but brightest in the morning. It is good against melancholy; and
fire is much hurtful unto it.

10. The Astarite is a clear shining Crystalline stone, Astarite.
having in the midst the image of a full moon: or being turned about, the sun
or the moon may be seen shining within it. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 9. Selenite.
A stone which follows the course of the Moon.


11. The Selenite is a transparent gem like glass: it has a kind of spot in
it which bears the image of the moon, increasing and decreasing as the moon;
and therefore it is called the Moon-stone. Ibid. cap. 10. It is of a white,
black, and yellow color: and the scrapings of it heal the falling sickness.

12. The Sard^nix is a clear gem, in color representing the nail of a man's
hand: it preserves The Indians therefore used to hang it about their necks.
chastnesse, and heals ulcers about the nails. Albertus Magnus witnesses
that if it be hanged about the neck, it does greatly corroborate the strength
of the body.

13. Achates is a stone of diverse colors, insomuch Achates.
that the colors of other gems are not sufficient for it: sometime it is black
with white veins and yellow: sometime it is as it were sprinkled with blood;
and (like a Prot^us) is of so many colors that one would scarce believe it
were one and the same stone. Eagles (as is said) lay it How Eagles keep their
young from poison.
in their nests to preserve their young from poison. And Pyrrhus, K. of Epirus,
had one of these gems in a ring, in which were the nine Muses to be seen, and
Apollo with his harp; not engraven by art (says Plin. lib. 37. cap. 1.
Pliny) sed sponte naturae it a discurrentibus maculis, but on natures own
accord the spots being so disposed. Pliny also shows the diverse kinds of
this stone in the 10 chapter of his 37 book, affirming that it is good against
poison, and stinging of scorpions; and is supposed to procure eloquence, and
make men wise and fair-spoken. See more in Scal. Exerc. 117.

14. Sardius is a kind of Onyx, of a blackish or deep Sardius.
yellow color. Ibid. cap. 7.
Pliny says it is a common stone, and was found first about Sardis, but the
best are near Babylon. Some call it a It helps to stop fluxes; and is g^od
ag^st pyles in the fundament.
Corneoll. It stops bleedings at the nose, sharpens the wit, and makes men
cheerful and merry, and set in a ring it restrains anger.

15. Jasper is a green stone, pointed with spots like Jasper.
drops of blood. Topaz.


16 The Ibid. cap. 8.
Topaz is a precious stone whereof there be two kinds; one of gold color
casting beams in the sun; the other of a saffron color, not so good as the
other. This stone being put into boiling water does so presently A stone that
will suddenly cool seething water.
cool it, that one may forthwith pull it out with his hand, and feel no
scalding heat: or being laid to a wound, it stencheth blood. Emerald.


17. The Emerald is a precious stone of a green color, something like unto the
Smaradge.

18. The Opall is a precious stone of diverse colors, Opall.
wherein appears the fiery shining of the Carbuncle, the purple color of the
Amethyst, and the green show of the Emerald, very strangely mixed together.

19. Turcois is dark, of a sky color, and greenish. It Turcois.
helps weak eyes and spirits, refreshes the heart; and, A compassionate
stone; the reason whereof is showed in Corrall.
if the wearer of it be not well, it changes color and looks pale and dim,
but increases to his perfectness as the wearer recovereth to his health.

The sympathizing Turcois true does tell,
By looking pale, the wearer is not well.
Now follow some such as are less noble gemmes.

1. Crystal is a kind of Ice made of waters which Crystal.
congeal themselves by a vehement and very long cold, as for the space of 10 or
12 continual years. There is some quantity thereof found in the Alps, and
other cold mountains: and being polished, men make thereof works of diverse
fashions; as Vessels, Glasses, Mirrours or Looking-glasses, and other common
things. His quality is Good against Laxes.
said to be binding; and therefore his powder is helpful in Laxes, and
increases milk in women's breasts. Also another kind is sometimes found in the
earth; as in some places of Germany.

2. Corrall is a stone growing in the sea like a slimie Corrall.
shrub, which by the air presently is made hard and turned into a stone. The
Greeks call it (...); which is as much as if you should say, Astonie shrub. It
is taken up full of moss, but being unbarked, it appears clear in its
proper color.

The red and branchie Corrall comes something near in nature to the Turcois;
for when it is worn by those who are shortly to fall sick, it waxes pale and
wan: the reason whereof may be, in that his tender substance How it comes to
pass that there seems to be compassion in a stone.
is affected by the bad vapor, which is not so soon perceived in the body,
because at the first it is not strong enough to afflict it. This stone, they
say, is good against the falling sickness, sore eyes, and the stone. Also know
that there be 3 kinds of Corrall; white, black, and red.

Haematites, or the Bloudstone, is a stone outwardly of a Bloudstone
bloody color, inwardly like iron; and of such hardness that the file can
scarcely bite it. The quality of this stone is to stench blood, either in a
wound, or at the nose: also, it will eat proud flesh out of a sore. It is to be
found either in Ethiopia or Arabia.

4. Magnes, or the Loadstone, is colored like iron, Loadstone.
but blewer, and tending to a sky color: it has virtue not only to draw
iron to it self, but also to make any iron on which it is rubbed, to draw iron
also. It respects the North and South pole; and loses not this secret
virtue, unless it be rubbed with onions or garlic: which is certainly true,
as may be proved by cutting any of the foresaid roots with a knife touched by
the Loadstone. Some affirm, that physically used, it purges the dropsy, and
helps the flux.

Also, it is supposed that there are certain magneticall hills, or mountains of
Loadstone under the artick pole, and they are the causes why things touched
with this stone, tend always that way. But learned In his exercises against
Cardan.
Scaliger (as well he might) laugheth at this conceit. Again, others (with
better probability) are persuaded that the Loadstone inclines toward the
stars of the pole by a secret sympathy; even as certain flowers and plants
turn themselves with the sun. And for the attractive virtue which it also
has in drawing iron, it is supposed to be also by a kind of sympathy and
likeness of substance; there being two causes of attraction: one is
Similitudo; and the other is Fuga vacui. Heat draws in Fuga vacui; and in the
similitude of substance, every part is supposed to draw its own proper
nourishment. Whereupon (says Magir. Phys. where, by experience he
contradicts Scaliger.
one) since iron is as it were the aliment or nourishment of the Loadstone, it
therefore draws iron to it. And, that iron is a kind of nourishment to the
said stone, appears in that the filed dust of iron covering it does long
preserve it; and in tract of time the dust will be consumed; augmenting thereby
the accretion of the stone. Not that it eats, or is nourished by it as a
thing having life: but even as the elements are moved to their places, as being
their end and perfection; so it is in the attraction between this stone and
iron, and the accretion which is caused by their real contaction.

This I think may be supposed. But I leave it to the readers further inquiry,
and abler examination.

5. Asbestos is a stone of an iron color, which being Asbestos.
once fired can hardly be ever quenched. Pliny says that it is to be found in
the mountains of Arcadia. Lib. 37. cap. 10.

6. Dendritis is a white precious stone, which being Dendritis.
put under a tree, keeps the ax that cutteth it, from dulling. Idem, lib. 37.
cap. 11.

7. Galactites is of an ash color; it seems to sweat Galactites.
out a kind of liquour like unto milk. Lib. 37. cap. 10.
Pliny says it increases milk in nurses, and keeps the mouth of the child
moist if it be hanged about the neck, etc. some also say that it helps
running of the eyes, and ulcers.

8. Amphitane is a precious stone of gold color, Amphitane.
square, and of the nature of the Loadstone almost, excepting that it is said
to draw gold unto it. Pliny says A stone which has po^er to draw gold to it.
that this stone is also called Chrysocolla, and is found in a part of India
where the ants cast up gold from their hills. Lib. 37. cap. 10.

9. Androdamas is a stone hard, and heavy; bright Androdamas.
like silver, and in form like diverse little squares. It puts away rage of
lechery: and (as the magicians think, Pli^. Ibid.
says Pliny) it stops the force of fury and anger.

10. Pansebastos is a precious stone taking away barrenness. Pansebastos.


11. There is also in Pliny, mention made of the stone Lapis Thracius.
Thracius, which being steeped in water burns and sprinkles, but it is
quenched with oil.

12. Amiantus is a stone like unto alume: this, being Amiantus.
put into the fire, is not hurt nor slurried, but rather more bright and
clear. Unto which, one patient in troubles One patient in trouble, what he may
be likened unto.
and adversities, may be likened: for his afflictions harm him not, but better
him; making him look in the midst of a fiery trial, not like one slurried
with repining, but clear and beautiful in the sight of heaven, by refining.

But I conclude; and with him who writes thus, cannot but say,

Oh mickle is the powerful good that lies
In herbs, trees, stones, and their true qualities:
For naught so vile that on the earth does live,
But to the earth some secret good does give.
And naught so rich on either rock or shelf,
But, if unknown, lies useless to it self.
Therefore who thus does make their secrets known,
Does profit others, and not hurt his own.
Now follow metalls of a more friable and brittle nature. These which follow
are called metals of a more brittle nature.
They are more mollified bodies, may be easily brought into crumbes or dust,
are called precious earths something clammie, and of a middle nature between
stones and the less pliable metalls.

First I begin with Terra In Constantinople the Apothecaries and Druggists ^ell
of this ^rth in cakes, on which are stamped certain Arabian characters. On the
sixth of August it is dug forth at Lemnos with many ceremonies.
Lemnia, which is an exceeding Earth of Lemnos.
red earth of Lemnos isle, dug in a red hill. In old time this had Diana's
seal upon it, printed by her priests, who were only wont to wash this earth:
and now, in Silesia and Hassia, there is almost as good earth found. It is of
force to resist poison, and to heal old putrified or festered wounds.

2. Cinoper is a soft red stone, found in mines; otherwise called Vermilion: of
which Pliny speaks in his 33 book at the 7 chapter, saying, that in times
past it Vermilion.
was not only of great, but of sacred esteem among the Romans: for they
painted their gods with it; as he tells us of Jupiters image, whose face was
colored with Vermilion. So Virgil also, speaking of the shepherds god Pan,
says that he was seen,

Sanguineis Ebuli baccis, Minio que rubentem, (...). 10.
With bloody Walwort berries stained,
And with Vermilion red.
Neither were their gods alone thus beautified, but their own bodies also, in
public feasts and triumphing solemnities; as we read again in Pliny, that
Camillus, when he triumphed in Rome, was painted with this Vermilion.

3. Bo^ Armenian, or Bole Armoniack, is of a pale red Bole Armoniack.
color, as easy to break as chalk; being of a very binding Good against the
plague.
nature, and of great virtue against the plague: and seeing it dries, it
profits against all fluxes.

4. Oker is a light clayie earth, of a red or yellow color. Oker.


5. That which the Grecians call Arsenick, the Latins Arsenick.
call Auripigmentum: but I had rather that Arsenick should be the general
name, and that it be divided into 3 kinds; namely, into white, red, and yellow
Orpment. The white is that which is the common rats-bane. Red Arsenick is
called Sandaracha; of a bright red color, used of painters, and found in mines
of gold and silver. Yellow Orpment is the right Auripigmentum; it is like unto
Brimstone. This (if it be our common Arsenick) is a very dangerous drug: for it
is hot and burning, so as it gnaweth the stomach, and pierces the bowels,
producing a fever with an intolerable and an unquenchable thirst.

6. Red lead comes something near to the nature of Red lead.
Vermilion: and (as Plin. lib. 33. cap. 7.
Pliny writes out of Homer) was used by the Trojans, and honored before they
knew Vermilion. For (as Theophrastus in Pliny witnesses) Callias of Athens
first found out Vermilion, thinking indeed to draw gold out of it. Howbeit, Red
lead is no mineral, but made artificially.

7. Terra Samia is a white, stiff, and tough earth Earth of Samos.
coming from the isle Samos. Pliny makes two kinds of it: the one more
glutinous then the other; the other more ^loddie, less glutinous, and whiter.
He says there be those who prefer the first as best. They Good against
spitting of blood.
are either of them good against spitting of blood. Lib. 35. cap. 16.

8. Chalk is a white earth, which was first found in Chalk.
Creet, and therefore in Latin it is called Creta: But now we find of it in
many other places. Pliny makes many kinds of Chalk; all which are not white:
as in his 34 book at the 17 chapter is apparent; Fullers earth being Fullers
earth. Brown Umber. Lime-Chalk.
a chief kind among them: and that, by others, is called Creta Tasconia. Brown
Umber comes also near to the nature of the said earth.

Calx is Lime-Chalk, which after it is burnt will be fired with water, but
quenched with oil; as authors write. It is called Calx viva, because it
contains a kind of hid fire in it.

10 Ampelite is a pitchie earth, cleaving and black; being Black* earth like
our coals.
much like to that which we call Pit or Sea-coal, as some imagine: and (happily)
the diversity of climate causes the difference. There is also found another
earth, which Lib. 35. cap. 16.
Pliny calls Pignitis, and some others Pnigitis, and it is as black as this.

11. Bitumen is a fat and tough moisture, like Pitch; Bitumen.
and is called Earthy Pitch. Or thus: It is a kind of clay or natural Lime,
clammie like Pitch; and is to be found in many countries of Asia. They who
builded the tower of Babel, used this in stead of Mortar, as appears in Genesis
chapter the 11. And so did others also in old time, making it in like manner
burn in lamps in stead of oil.

This pitchie earth is of two kinds: For it is either Two kinds of Bitumen.
Hard, or Liquid.

The Hard is more strongly concreted then the other; Hard Bitumen.
being like unto clods of the earth, or coals. Or (as some affirm) it is tough
and moist at the first, swimming on the water, but being taken forth it waxes
Three kinds of hard Bitumen.
hard. Of this kind is 1 Asphaltus, 2 Pissasphaltus, 3 Succinum.

Asphaltus is a black Bitumen, hard like stone-pitch, Asphaltus.
clear, and smelling scarce so ill as Pitch. It is found throughout Babylon,
and especially in the lake Asphaltites; near unto which stood those cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah, that were consumed with fire and Worldly vanities like to
Sodom apples.
brimstone: and where also do as yet grow apples, which (according to Solinus)
are fair and fresh without, but within are full of Sulphur; and being handled
they fall all to ashes: In which they are Emblemes of the vanities of this
world, always seeming more then they are.

Pissasphaltus is said to be Mummie, or a kind of Bitumen Pissasphaltus.
somewhat As having more pitch in it according to Pli^. lib 35. cap. 15.
differing from Asphaltus, and is not seldom found in clods rolling from mount
Ceravine to Mummie.
the Sea; as authors witness. In stead of this, it is supposed that we have
counterfeit Mummie often out of Syria, Egypt and some other places, which is
taken from poor men's bodies that die there: For in stead of Myrrh, Aloes,
Cassia, etc. (which the rich men have P^ore folk are gl^d of any thing.
in their burialls and embalmings) the poor are dressed and stuffed up with
Bitumen. This therefore which is but counter feit, is nothing else but a
corrupted humor taken out of old tombs, which there droppeth from embalmed
bodies: and most ridiculously (in my opinion) do they err who say it is made
of man's flesh boiled in Pitch. It is hot Good against bruistes, etc.
in the second degree, and good against all bruisings, spitting of blood, and
diverse other diseases.

Succinum is a Bituminous suck or juice of the earth, Succinum.
being hard as if it were a kind of stone. It is of three colors; White,
Yellow, and Black. The White and Amber. Iet.
Yellow are called Amber: and the Black is Iet.

They make beads of Amber. And some would have this Amber to be rather a gum
growing on a tree, then to be a suck of the earth. The tree, by some, is called
Ibex Romana. But (as others report out of Dioscorides) it falls in manner of
a liquour from Poplar trees into the river Po in Italy, where it congealeth
and becomes hard, in that form as we see it.

Iet has more plenty of fatness in it then Amber; and therefore it will burn
like a candle, and smells like the Pine Tree. It has an attractive virtue in
it to draw chafe, straws, and such other light stuff unto it, especially if
it be rubbed till it be hot. And these are the kinds of Hard Bitumen. Soft
Bitumen, and his kinds.


The Liquid and soft, is like an oily moisture flowing, and is of diverse
colors according to the variety of the place: but the white is said to be
most precious. And for the kinds, the chief are these; Naphtha, and Amber of
Arabia.

Naphtha, is a liquid Bitume like unto chalkie Naphtha.
clay, or (as it were) the fat of Bitume; whereunto if fire be put, it kindles
in such wise, that if a little water Water cannot quench this liquour.
be cast thereon, it burns more vehemently: And indeed it has in it such a
fiery force, that it will draw fire unto it, although it be far off. When it
is found to flow out of rocks, then it is called Naphtha Petreolum; and by
some, taken for oil. In the island Sicilie are fountains, from whence great
store of this liquour flows, which they frequently burn in Lamps.

Amber of Arabia, is Bitume of an ash color, and of a Amber of Arabia.
fragrant sweet smell, desired and sought after as a most precious merchandise.
It is found in Arabia felix, near unto a town which is called Sichris. Howbeit
Olaus Magnus calls that Amber, which is Sperma Ce^: but then it is
Ambergreese, and rather the spawn then the seed.

12. From Bitume, I come to Alume: which is Alume.
said to be a salt sweat of the earth, according to Pliny; Lib. 35. cap. ^5.
congealing it self with a glutinous earth and water.

It is either white or black.
The white is either clear or thick.
The clear is softer and fatter then the other: Roch-Alume.
This is Roch-Alume; and if paper be washed with this, it will bear ink very
well, although it be bad.

The thick is more hard, and of a grayer color. Harder Alume.
Black Alume is found in Cyprus: and with this, gold is Black Alume.
purified and purged. They that desire more, may read Pliny in his 35 book at
the 15 chapter.

13. Vitriol is a suck of the earth concreted, obtaining Vitriol.
the perspicuitie of glass: some call it Cha^canthum, which word may signify
either Copperas or Vitriol. This suck is very poisonous.

14. Salt is called Sal, a saliendo; because when it is Salt.
put into the fire, it skippeth and dan^eth. It is a friable metal, begotten
of a waterish and earthie moisture, mixed and decocted together: the efficient
cause whereof is the heat of the sun and other stars; who, out of a salt
matter, drawing away the thinner and the sweeter parts, leave the earthie still
behind, which being thoroughly roasted by heat, become salt. For there be two
things requisite in a salt savor: The first, are dry and earthie parts; The
other, is an adustion of the said parts, as Philosophers witness. Salt has
force to bind, to scowre and purge, to disperse, make thin, and the like:
which thing Physicians can best declare.

There be 2 kinds; Natural and Artificial. The Natural, Salt is either
Natural, or Artificial*
is dug Salt. The Artificial, is made or boiled Salt.

Dug Salts are gotten either from the earth, or from the waters; as some
distinguish.

Salts dug out of the earth, be principally of four kinds.

The first is Salt Ammonaick. This is found in Africa Salt Ammonaick.
under sand, and is something like unto alume. It is said to be hot and dry in
the fourth degree, and serves to purge slimie humors. Some affirm that that
which Apothecaries sell in black clods, is made of Camels stale; and because
store of Camels be in Armenia, it is called Arm^niack.

The second is Salt of Indie, of which you may read Salt of Indie.
in Pliny, lib. 31. cap. 7. that it is dug out of mount Oramene; and that
the King has there a greater yearly pension or custom, then out of gold and
precious stones.

The third is called Salt-gem, which is a kind of glittering Salt-gem.
Salt; white, and shining after the manner of Crystal. Sometimes it is also
called stony, marblie Salt; Salt Dacian, or Sarmatick Salt.

The fourth is called Salt-nitre: and this is that which we call Saltpeter,
found in dry places under ground, and in hollow rocks.

Of this is made that fatal dust, called Pulvis Bombardicus, Gunne-powder and
gunnes how invented, and when.
or Gunne-powder: the invention whereof was after this manner. A Germane Monk
or Friar, of the order of S. Francis, whose name was Bertholdus Swart, being
very studious in Alchymie, was one evening (for the finding out of some (...)
Vi^gil says he was making a medicine. Lib. 2. cap. 7. de Invent.
experiment) very busy in tempering brimstone, sulphurous powder of dried
earth, and certain other ingredients, in a mortar, which he covered with a
stone: and growing dark, he took a tinderbox to light him a candle; into which
whilst he assayed to strike some fire, a spark by chance flew into the mortar,
where catching hold of the brimstone and saltpeter, it fired with a sudden
flash, and violently blew up the stone. The cunning Chemist, guessing which of
his ingredients it was that produced this effect, never left till he found it
out: then taking an iron pipe he crammed it full of the said ingredient,
together with some stones; and putting fire to it, he saw that with great fury
and noise it discharged it self. Soon after, he communicated this his invention
to the Venetians, who having been often vanquished by the Genowaies, did, by
help of these bombards or gunnes, give them a notable discomfiture: which was
in the year^ of our Lord 1380, as Bucholcerus writes in his chronology,
saying, Hoc tempore BOMBARD Ae ad hominum perniciem inventae sunt and
excogitat^ a Bertholdo Nigro Chymista, and (ut quidam volunt) Monacho Germano.
Wherein we see that he calls them bombards invented for the ruin of men. For
by these (says he) it comes to pass, that now (in a manner) all the force of
the footmen, all the splendor of the horse, and all right warlike power, does
shamefully cease, lie dead, faint, and dull. Polydore also says, Polyd. Virg.
lib. (...).
that of all other instruments which ever were devised to the destruction of
man, the gunnes be most devilish. In which regard (since he was not well
instructed concerning the Almains name that invented them) he adds yet thus
much more, saying, For the invention he received this benefit, that his name
was never known, lest he might for this abominable device be cursed, and evil
spoken of as long as the world remains. And in the continuation of Carions
chronicle, by Lib. 5. page ^17.
Caspar Peucer, it is also said, that about the beginning of Wanceslaus his
reign That raging kind of engine and tormenting torture (which from the sound
we call a Bombarda voca^ a bombo, id est, (...), qui (...) (...). B^ch. in
(...).
bombard) was found out by a Monk, the devil being the chiefest enginer or
master-workman. For it was their care, that seeing the authority of idle
superstitions should decline and fade by little and little, (which through
these authors had bewitched the minds of mortals, and cast them into eternal
destruction) this might therefore succeed, by them, the same authors, as
another kind of mischief, which should rage against their bodies, as that
other had done against their souls. To this purpose Peucer. And indeed an
experiment of his speech we then beheld, when the upholders of that tottering
kingdom would have traitorously tried to have In the powder treason, Anno Dom.
1605.
sent at once, even all the peers of this our land piecemeal into the air.
But he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord himself
was our keeper, so that their sulphurous fire could neither burn us by day,
nor s^are us by night: although Faux were taken the night before, among the
barrells, and wished that then (since he had done so much, and could do no more)
his match with fire had touched the powder.

Oh never let the mem'rie of that day
Fly from our hearts, or dully slide away.
God thought on us, that we remembering this,
Might think on him whose hand defends his.
But whither am I transported now? These four, although they be the principal
kinds of salt dug from the ground, yet there be other also: amongst which,
Salt of Spain.
those Spanish mountains would be remembered, where there is a salt cut out, and
drawn as stones are out of a quarrie; in which place it afterward increases,
and fills up the gap with more salt again. Du Bartas calls this the
brine-quar-hill in Arragon.

And as for Salt dug out of waters or watrie places, Salt not dug from
under ground.
or not dug from under ground, it is thus caused; namely, by the heat of the
sun percocting those waters which are extremely salt. For when salt waters
are thoroughly concocted by the sun, they are so dried, congealed, and
thickened, that in their shores, by their banks, and often upon their very
surfaces or superficies, they render liberally good store of Salt. Thus in the
summer time is the Tarentine lake (of which Pliny (...). lib. 31. cap. 7.
speaks) turned into ^alt: the salt being in the surface of the waters, to
the depth of a man's knee. So also in Sicilie, in the lake Coranicus. And in
some rivers, the water is known to run underneath in its ordinary course,
whilst the uppermost part is turned into salt: as about the Caspian (...)
about the ^an se^. (...) the breadth of a wain.
straits, which are called the rivers of salt; and also near the Mardi and
Armenians, whose countries are in Asia.

But leaving these, I come to the second kind of Salt, Boiled Salt.
which is artificial and made, or boiled salt. For although the matter be
natural, yet the making is by art. From whence it comes to pass, that of one
and the same salt water, this man will boil better Salt then that man; and he
then another. Yea, some, out of water less salt, will boil and make better
Salt, then others out of fountains more salt.

Many be the places where they make Salt after this manner, by boiling of salt
water: neither is this kingdom of ours destitute of such fountains or wells.
For at the towns called the Witches in Cheshire, there is a brinie water, which
by boiling is turned into white Salt. And the same water is said to be as good
to powder any kind of flesh, as brine: for within 24 hours it will powder
beef sufficiently. A great blessing of God to raise up such springs for our use
so far within the land: as also an evident argument, that the Sea is made
salt by the substance of the ground; of which I have spoken my mind already.

And here unto all this, I could add the necessity of Salts necessity.
Salt; which is such, that we cannot well live without it: and therefore it is
the first thing that is set on the table, and ought to be the last taken away;
according as one translateth out of Schola Salerni, saying,

Salt should be last removed, and first set down
At table of a Knight, or country clown.
This, I confess (as pertinent) might be added; but it is now high time to put
a period to the discourse of this days work. Take the rest therefore, all in
one word; and then it is thus,

The eve and morn conclude the third of days,
And God gives to his work deserved praise.
CHAP. VII. Concerning the fourth day; together with such things as are
pertinent to the work done in it.
Sect. 1. Being as it were a kind of entrance into this days work, which
treats of the stars and lights.
THe structure of the earth being adorned with herbs, trees, and plants, in the
third or former day; Moses now returns to show both how and when God beautified
the heavens; bedecking that vaulted roof with shining lights and beauteous
stars: which like glittering saphires, or golden spangles in a well wrought
canopie, do show the admired work of the worlds brave palace.

And seeing this was not done before the sprouting of the earth, it may well be
granted that they are but foolish naturalists who will presume to bind Gods
mighty hand in natures bands, and tie him so to second causes, as if he were no
free or voluntary agent, but must be always bound to work by means.

And again, the Text declares that the sun, moon, and stars, were all unmade
before this present day: and yet it says there was light before. But it was
then a dispersed shining, and now united to these bright lamps of heaven: that
that riding, and they running like fiery chariots, might not only rule the
day and night, but also distinguish the better, and more harmoniously, the
days from nights, seasons, weeks, months, and years; and not only so, but
be also for signs of something else.

Also, God made them, says the Text. See then the folly of those who make them
gods* and vainly do adore them. For let it be observed, that although the sun
and moon be called the greatest lights, yet if they be worshipped, they are
abused to the greatest darkness: and they that deifie them, may damnifie
themselves by being as blind as the heathen Gentiles, and as superstitiously
addicted as some (of old) amongst the Jews; whose answer to the Prophet Jeremie
was, that they would not do according to his teaching, but follow rather the
desperate bent of their own bows, in worshipping the moon as Queen of heaven.
As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth
cut of our own mouth to burn incense to the The moon, as in Job, chap. 31. 26.
Queen of heaven, and to pour out drinkofferings unto her, as we have done, we
and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem. Of which they give this reason: For then (say they) we
had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil, Jer. 44. 16, 17. By
which last words it well appears, that it was fear, as much as any thing
else, which made them thus advance this practice. And truly fear is an effect
proceeding from the nature of superstition, and so far prevailing, that it
will there make gods, where it doubts most of danger: as the Egyptians did,
in making fortune a goddess. For they kept an annual feast in honor of her
deity; giving thanks for the year which was past, and earnestly imploring her
favor for the year to come. It was Plu^archs observation, that the
superstitious always think the gods ready to do hurt. By means whereof he
accounts them in worse case then malefactors or fugitives, who if they once
recover the Altar, are there secured from fear, where nevertheless the
superstitious are in greatest thraldom: And from hence arose that ancient
saying, Primus in orb deos fecit timor: And hence it also was that the
heathen, in institution of their sacrifices, did offer as well to all their
gods that they should not hurt them, as for any help they expected from them.
An example whereof we have again among the poor silly Indians, who sacrifice
their children unto the devil at this very day, because they be mainly afraid
of him. And of old (as it is storied) we have the example of Alexander Magnus,
who sacrificed to the sun, moon, and earth, that thereby he might divert the
evil luck, which (as he feared) was portended by an Eclipse but a little
before. And the Jews did not only burn incense to the Queen of heaven, but
offer up cakes unto her also, as in Jer. 7. 18. From which kind of idolatry
Job did thus acquit himself, saying, If I have beheld the sun when it shined,
or the moon when it walked in brightness: or if my heart has secretly enticed
my mouth to kiss my hand unto it, or by way of worshipping it: then this were
iniquity that ought to be punished, chap. 31. verse 26. It ought indeed to be
punished, because God Almighty had forbidden it; as in Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Beware
lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the sun, and the
moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, should be driven to
worship and serve them, which the LORD thy God has divided unto all nations
under the whole heaven. And in Jerem. chap. 10. verse. 2. Learn not the way of
the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven: for the heathen are
dismayed at them: Which is, as if it should be said, The way of the heathen is
to worship their gods with a servile fear, and attribute divine honor to the
creature. But you which are my people, do not you so: for God wills not that
the works of his hands should be worshipped. Or thus, He there teaches them to
have their trust so firmly fixed on him, that what disaster soever the heavens
in the course of nature should threaten unto them, they ought not to fear it.
For, Astra regunt homines, sed Deus astra regit.

And again, Moses in the text calls the sun and moon two great lights: the
greatest of which (even the sun it self) seems to our eyes but little, and
yet by rules of art is found Greater then (...); and ^gger then the (...) 140
times, according to (...).
far greater then the earth; that thereby we may learn not to trust our
senses too much in heavenly things.

Last of all, let me prevent a question. The moon is less then any star: For
Tycho makes Mercury but 19 times less then the earth; whereas the moon is
less by 42 times: how then can the moon be called a great light, seeing her
body is no bigger? Take this Or this; Di^ (...) magna, (...) and (...). Quia
(...) stell^ sunt (...), (...); (...) magis sentitur i^ istis (...), and ^tiam
(...) sens^ major apparet.
answer; The sun and moon are called great lights, partly from their nature
and effects; because they give more light then other stars. The sun
appears alone in the day, not because he is alone, but because through his
exceeding brightness the other stars cannot be seen. The moon also in her
brightness obscureth many stars; and being more beautiful then any other,
has worthily the chief Aquin. ex Chrysostom. Hom. 6.
pre-eminence in ruling the night, as the Scripture speaks. Or thus, They be
called great lights (say some) according to the custom of the Scripture,
speaking according to the capacity of the simple: for in outward appearance
they are the greatest. And yet as great as the greatest is, if one should go
about to persuade the vulgar that the earth is of a far less circuit, they
would scarce believe it; making the sun of the bigness of some wheel, and
the moon as much in compass as the breadth of a bushel: howbeit In his He ^met.
S. Ambrose gives sensible and apparent reasons of greatness in the sun and
moon, even by daily experience. For first, they appear of like quantity to
all the world, whereas herds of cattle being espied far off seem as ants, and
a ship discerned far in the seas, seems no bigger then a flying dove. They
show of the same greatness in India, and in England. They enlighten all parts
of the earth alike, and appear the same indifferently to all; and therefore
must needs be of an extraordinary bigness. And secondly, as soon as the sun
arises, all the stars are hid; which shows his greatness. And further, if
the sun were not of such greatness as Artists give unto it, how could all
the world be enlightened by it?

Sect. 2. Of the Matter, Place, and Motion of the Stars; with other like
things which are also pertinent.
Artic. 1. That they consist most of a fiery matter, and are cherished by the
waters above the heavens.
BY Heaven and Earth, which Moses says were created in the beginning, we are
to understand all and every part of the whole Universe: whose matter was
created at once, and made as it were the storehouse for all things else; as
already in the first days work I have declared. Howbeit some contend, that
the stars and lights of heaven were not made out of any matter either of the
earth, or the waters, or of heaven, or any thing beside; but immediately out of
nothing. Which certainly is scarce agreeable to the whole scope of creation:
For, in the beginning, the matter of all was made. And perhaps, as it was
proper to the earth to bring forth herbs, grass, and trees, at the command of
God in the third days work; so also (perhaps) it was as proper to the heavens,
in some sort, to afford the matter of the luminaries and otherstarres, as soon
as God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven. And herein those
Philosophers were not much amiss, who defined the stars to be the thicker
part of their orbs. Yet nevertheless not so to be followed, as if the heavens
afforded any solid orbs; unto which, as the knots in a tree, or the nails in a
wheel, or the gemme in a ring, the stars are joined. For besides that which I
have already spoken of the whole space within the concavitle of the firmament,
viz. that it is but air; yet purer and purer the higher we climb: which I
proved in the second day, both by opticall demonstration, height, consumption,
and motion of Comets, with the like; besides that (I say) there be other
reasons also to declare it. For not only certain Poets have confessed as much,
calling the Sky Spirabile coeli numen, as we read in Virgil; or a Liquid
heaven, as Ovid tells us* saying, Et liquidum spisso secrevit ab aere coelum:
nor yet is it confirmed by the testimony of Pliny alone, who followed herein
the opinion of ancient Philosophers; but even reason also and exquisite modern
observations have made it plain. For suppose there were solid orbs, or that
this concave were not filled with liquid air, would it not follow that there
should be as it were penetratio corporum, or that one Sphere should cut another
in sunder? Questionless it would. For the Planets move so up and down that
they often enterfeir and cut one another orbs, now higher, and then lower; as
Mars amongst the rest, which sometimes (as Epit. Astron. lib. 4.
Kepler confirms by his own and Tycho's accurate observations) comes nearer the
earth then the Sun, and is again eftsoons aloft in Jupiters sphere. And does
not Tycho's Hypothesis and Systema of the world make it also plain, that the
sphere of the Sun must be interfected by the orbs of Venus, Mars, and
Mercury? which could not be if the heavens were impenetrable, or differed toto
genere from this soft air wherein we live and move. And now see this figure,
framed according to Tycho's demonstration.



Thus Tycho describes the ways and situations of the Planets. The stars
therefore move in the heavens as birds in the air, or fishes in the sea, and
the like: yet so, as their bounds are set; which with great regularitie, to the
admiration of their Maker, they constantly come unto, and depart away from, in
their appointed times and determined orders; and therefore said to be set in
the firmament of heaven, verse. 17. those of the fixed ones being as equally
distant one from another, now, and at this very day, as at the first, when God
Almighty made them: and those of the wandering ones as constant in their
courses, as ever yet from the first time they began to move. Whereupon says
Tycho, Semper judicavi naturalem motus Ty^h. in Epist* ad (...).
scientiam, singulis Planetis congenitam, vel potius a Deo inditam esse, qua in
liquidissimo and tenuissimo ^there cursus sui normam regularissime and
constantissime observare coguntur. Yet nevertheless we may not think that
therefore they are living creatures, animated with a soul, and endued with life
and reason; but rather, and in very deed (as even now I said) let this be an
argument to show and declare the admired wisdom of their Make^: according to
that of David in the 19 Psalm, Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work. For, The sun
comes forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoycath as a giant to
run his course. And yet again it is a thing very probable, that those amongst
the Jews who made cakes for the Queen of heaven, who burnt incense to the
Sun, Moon, Planets, and host of heaven, who dedicated horses and chariots to
the Sun, did not only do it because they worshipped them as gods, but also
because (like Plat^ (...), with other his followers. see also Cic. de (...).
(...). lib. 2.
some amongst the Philosophers, and others amongst the Orig^ and his followers.
Fathers) they thought them to be living creatures. Sure we are that Moses puts
them not into his catalogue amongst such creatures as he reckons to have
life: and therefore who will say they live?

They may move, and yet be inanimate; as fire, which is of power to move, waste
and consume: air enclosed is able to shake the earth: water carries ships,
boats, and barges; flows this way, and that way, yet is no living creature,
has no soul, mind, or reason.

Also, it may be granted that they are daily nourished by vapourie humors, and
are (as it were) fed by such kind of food; yet no living creatures. For no man
will deny a transmutation of the elements, but rather easily grant that they
one nourish another for conservation of the Universe: And in such a kind, or
not far differing, it is that the stars may be nourished by watrie humors,
and have their beams made wholesome to the world, although they be no living
creatures. All which may be cap. 4. and cap. 1.
seen more largely proved in Lydiats Praelectio Astronomica: where having
discoursed of the matter of the heavens and stars, as also of the portions
and transmutation of the elements, he proves that there is such a penury of
water here below, that it cannot be supplied (ad mundi, non dicit aeternitatem,
sed diuturnitatem, propter inaequales elementorum transmutationes) not supplied
without the consumption of the air, were not the waters divided. The one part
whereof is circa mundi medium; from whence may be had in readiness always
that which is sufficient to water and fructify the earth, and leave a place
for habitation. The other circa mundi extremum, as in a great treasure and
plentiful storehouse, from whence ( per mediam aeris naturam) both the stars
are cherished, their beams made wholesome to the world, and also the expense of
these lower waters salved in what is needful: for the earth, as a bad debtor,
either sends back none, or little of that which it borrowed, not being easily
turned into any other element. From whence (says he) we may answer that
question amongst the ancient Ethnic Philosophers, mentioned by Plutarch,
(...), Unde nutriatur mundus.

And indeed for mine own part I also think, that the stars are of such a
nature or substance, that (in their kind) they stand in need of daily
sustentation, like a lamp which can burn no longer then the oil lasts which
ever feeds it. For the heavens are subject to change and alteration; neither is
there any necessity compelling us to attribute a quintessence to either of
them (especially seeing we are certain that the world is not eternal) but that
we may as well and as probably grant them to be of the same nature with the
elements; as formerly I have related. Which being granted, I suppose them to be
chiefly of a fiery nature: and this (perhaps) they took from the Or, A luce
primava, which was made in the first day: in which see more.
highest part of the air, in the supreme height of heaven, which reaches to
the utmost extent of the out-spread firmament. For there is that which we call
the Elementarie fire; there, I say, and not in a lower place: although
Aristotle would have it in concavo lunae, or next under the orb of the moon; of
which see more in the second days work.

And herein I do willingly also embrace the opinion of Plato, that the stars
for the most part are fiery: yet so, as they in some sort participate also of
the other elements; that thereby their bodies may be (as it were) glewed
together, and firmly concreted into a durable lump: differing no otherwise from
a Comet then ice does from crystal, or a clear solid gemme from bright
brittle glass. An experiment whereof we have in that new star of Cassiopea's
chair; which, because it was of a more solid composition then ordinary comets,
and of a nearer nature to the matter of the continuing stars, did therefore
appear like one of them, and lasted a long while with them before it was
extinguished: for had it not been exalted to a great perfection and solid
composition of the parts, it had been gone, extinct, and vanished, a long while
sooner. And in granting to them something of every element (although their
greatest portion, especially in the sun, be fiery) it comes to pass that
they have differing qualities: of which see more afterward in the
Astrologicall part of this days work. Neither shall I need to stand upon it as
a thing necessary for me to prove, whether they make warm the air and us by
any heat which is formally in them, or by the attrition made with their beams.
Only know, that it is hotter in summer then in winter, because when the beams
of the sun come nearest to a perpendicular trajection, their heat is the
greater, because their reflection is the stronger.

But leaving this, give me leave to proceed, and to prosecute more fully the
matter in hand, that thereby I may show my meaning now more clearly concerning
the daily nourishment of these bright heavenly lamps. For (as has been said)
seeing their chiefest matter is of that nature of which it appears to be,
they must of necessity be nourished out of some storehouse or other;
otherwise the world comes to decay, and impavidum ferient ruinae, and the very
ruins will strike him who fears it not. For satisfaction therefore in this, it
cannot be amiss to remember the opinion amongst sundry of the ancient
Philosophers, who said the truth, and yet erred in declaring it: as Cleanthes,
who allowed the matter of the sun to be fiery, and that it was nourished by
humors attracted from the ocean. Also Anaximander and Diogenes, after whom
Epicurus, and the Stoics, thought in like manner, that the sun was nourished
by waters: and lest it should perish through any defect of aliment, they fondly
supposed that the oblique motion which it had from one Tropic to another, was
to find out moist humors, that thereby it might live perpetually. Now these
things very worthily were held by Aristotle to be ridiculous and absurd; as in
the second book of his Meteors, at the second chapter, is apparent. Yet
nevertheless succeeding times did in a manner pitch still upon the same
tenants, and would not only have the sun and rest of the Planets, but even
all the other stars nourished by vapors and watrie humors, as well as they.
For amongst others, it was Cicero's opinion in his second book De natura
deorum; making the sea, and waters of the earth, their daily storehouse. See
also Seneca in his 6 book and 16 chapter of Natural questions; and Plutarch in
libello de Iside; and Pliny in his Natural history, lib 2. cap. 9. whose
words are these, Sydera vero haud dubie humore terreno pasci, etc. These indeed
spoke the truth, but (as I said before) they erred in declaring it. For it is
nothing probable, neither may it be granted, that all the seas, or waters in
the world, are able to afford moisture enough for such a purpose.

And therefore smile I at those fable-forgers, Du Bart.

Whose busie-idle style so stiffly urges
The heavens bright Saphires to be living creatures
Ranging for food, and hungry fodder-eaters;
Still sucking up (in their eternal motion)
The earth for meat, and for their drink the ocean.
Nor can I see how the earth and sea should feed
So many stars, whose greatness does exceed
So many times (if starre-divines say troth)
The greatness of the earth and ocean both:
For here our cattle in a month will eat
Sev'n times the bulk of their own bulk in meat.
Wherefore be pleased to call to mind what was formerly mentioned in the
second day, concerning the waters above the heavens, set apart from these below
by the out-spread Firmament: but how it is that there they are, and that the
out-spread Firmament is able to uphold them, let the alleged reasons in the
foresaid day be again remembered. And then observe, that these waters were
certainly separated for some purpose: for Deus and Natura nihil faciunt
frustra; God and Nature make nothing in vain. He made all things in number,
weight, and measure, Wisd. 11. 22.
says Solomon; so that there is nothing which was not made for something. I do
therefore consent again to those who Lydiat. Praelect. Astron. and lib. d^
Orig. Font. cap. 10.
suppose that these waters do daily nourish and cherish the stars; thereby
also so tempering and ordering their beams, that they may remain wholesome to
the world; turning also and attenuating those drops, with which they are
cherished, into thin air: and so doing, nature is kept from perishing before
her time.

Neither let it seem strange although the stars be granted to consist most of
a Igneae sunt, sive a ^uce primaevae facta: and sic, lux est essevtia stel
l^rum. Ign^ (...) non al^ud qu^m calor densatus, sive (...) compacta. Pa^ric.
fiery temper, that therefore they cannot be cherished by watrie humors: for
it is certain that fires are endued with sundry qualities or forces, according
to the diverse mixtion of matter, or diverse disposition of the subject. From
whence it comes to pass that a bituminous flame is not quenched, but nourished
in water; and the fire of lightning is said to burn the fiercer when we strive
to quench it. These waters therefore, sweating (in the likeness of thin
vapors) through the utmost extent, or roof of the outspread Firmament (which
was made strong by stretching out, and by which they are upholden) do both
supply that decay of air which otherwise would be, and also do so temper and
cherish the diuturnitie of the stars, that thereby they shall continue until
the end of the world. Elementorum transmutationes (says (...).
one) sunt inaequales, ergo and proportiones; ac majores quidem eorum, quae
facilius transmutentur in alia: and hoc ex necessitate, non dico ad mundi
aeternitatem, sed diuturnitatem. Aqua autem multo magis mutatur in terram, quam
terra in ipsam: and aer hoc aquae damnum, sine maximo sui dispendio, resarcire
nullo modo potest nisi ab aquis supercoelestibus. And (perhaps) the daily
wasting of these waters may be the cause that the world is perceived to have a
successive declination, and to grow old as does a garment; until at the last,
age (for want of matter to keep an harmonious transmutation in the conservation
of it) shall (according to the determined purpose of Almighty God) suffer it to
end, as being worn out, and little able to continue any longer. Which, when it
shall be, or how he intends to shorten it, rests only in the secret counsel
of the holy Trinity: the divine word nevertheless testifying, that (as tokens
before it) there shall be signs in the Matthew. 24. 29. Mark 13. 25. Luke 21. 26.
sun and the moon, in the heavens and stars. For the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Cadent de coelo stellae
(says Ger^rd. loc. (...). ^. page (...).
one) non ratione substantiae, sed lucis; quia lumen suum retrahent; and
obscure reddent. Which saying agrees directly to my meaning, when I speak of
the waters wasting. For as the elements before, from time to time, have
suffered a transmutation, and shall now begin to devour one another: so the
stars shall fade, and (perhaps) be weakened in their qualities, by having the
less powerful elementarie part in them turned by the more powerful; or if
not so, yet much altered by that sensible decay in the waters above the heavens.

And thus, though I differ from Aristotle and the Peripateticks, yet I have not
much declined from the paths of other ancient Philosophers, or from the steps
of Plato: in which, how far (in my judgment) we may follow the Academicall
sect, the Stoics, and those of Epicurus, has been related. Howbeit I leave
all free to the more judicious; though for mine own part I think thus of the
worlds Systema. Let therefore those of the adverse part pitch their censure
with the more favor: and so I proceed to the following articles.

Artic. 2. Of their order and place in the sky: and how it comes to pass that
one star is higher then another.
HAving already showed that the whole concave of the heavens is filled with no
firmer matter then soft and penetrable air, and that the stars have no solid
orbs to uphold and move them, it may not unfitly be questioned how they should
hang in such a weak yielding place, and yet (according to their times) keep
such several certain distances one from another, as we see they do.

To which, perhaps, some would answer, that every star, in respect of his
either more or less fiery quality, does either more or less ascend from the
center; and so, according to his gravitie or levitie, rest naturally higher or
lower as in his proper place: the air having a like power in the upholding of
fiery bodies, which the water has in carrying of airie bodies. For as a piece
of Brasill, or Lignum vitae, will sink lower into the water then some lighter
kind of wood wherein there is more air: In like manner that star which has
most of his matter from the more gross elements, takes his place in the lowest
room; whereas the lighter ones are naturally seated higher. And indeed this is
an answer which would serve the turn and bear out the matter well enough, if
there were no stars but those which we call the fixed stars; for they are
never observed to be higher or lower, but always of one and the same distance
from the center. But seeing there be Planets likewise whose distances are
unconstant, and whose places are at some one time far more absent from the
earth then at some other; nay, Mars is sometimes nearer then the sun: seeing
it is so (I say) their gravitie or levitie cannot absolutely be the cause: but
rather ought this to be referred to that infused force which his hand first
gave them who placed them there. For as the Sea being stirred by the moon to a
lofty flux, and having lifted up his rolling waves above the neighboring
banks, would in all probability overflow the earth, if the Almighty had not
infused it with some occult quality, saying, Hitherto shall thou come, and no
further; as we read in Job: So likewise the stars would not keep their high
and low places at certain infallible times so as they do, and be so orderly in
their motions as they are, were it not from the power first put into them when
they were placed in the firmament: of which I spoke but a little before, when I
showed they were no living creatures. For conclusion therefore, I like well of
the former reason if it be referred to the fixed stars; but as concerning the
Planets, we see that it holds not in all and every part, nor yet is
absolutely found sufficient. And yet for further satisfaction of the curious,
let it be supposed that the air is ever thinnest in that place whereunto the
sun is nearest: so that though the Planets naturally have but one place, yet
accidentally they may be found either higher or lower* according to their
approaching to or from the place of the sun; like as may be seen in one and
the same weight, if it be proved how unequally it will sink in diverse waters,
and in waters of a differing thickness. Of which read more in Mr Lydiat his
Praelectio Astronomica, in the fourth and eighth chapters. But in the mean
time, and ever after, admire the wisdom of thy Maker, and praise his holy
name: For he has so done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
perpetual remembrance.

O never let these works forgotten be:
Their art is more then humane eyes can see.
Sect. 3. Of the offices given to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in the day of
their creation.
Paragr. 1. Showing that their first office is to shine upon the earth, to rule
over the day and night, etc.
Artic. 1. Of light, what it is: and whether the Sun be the only fountain of
light.
THe former part of my discourse hitherto in this days work, was chiefly
founded upon these words, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven; and
upon these, And God made the stars also. But now I come to speak of their
offices: The first whereof is that exquisite one above the rest; I mean their
bright and radiant shining, by which the dismal clouds of foggie darkness are
daintily devoured, and the sweet comeliness of the worlds ornament made
apparent. For without light all things would appear like the face of hell or
horror, and each parcel of the worlds fabric lie buried in black obscurity,
and dismal squalour. Whereupon one speaks worthily, saying, that amongst
those But how it is a quality see afterward.
qualities subject to sense, there is none more fit to show the due decorum and
comely beauty of the worlds brave structure, none more fit then light. For
where it spreads it self (either above us, or below us) all things are then
encompast with such a splendor, as if a golden garment were dilated over them,
or curiously put upon them. Let it not then be ashamed to shine and show it
self to the praise of him who made it; For, Praise him sun and moon: praise him
oh ye stars and light, was David's song. But to proceed.

Authors make a difference between Lux and Lumen. It is called Lux as it is in
the fountain, that is, in a body which is lucid of it self; as in the sun:
so says Zanchius. But it is Lumen as it is in some Medium, that is, in corpore
diaphano, as is the air, or water. Lumen enim nihil aliud est quam lux,
lucisve imago, in corpore diaphano. From whence may be gathered, that that
primarie light, which we comprehend under the name of Lux, is no other thing
then the more noble part of that essence which is either in the sun, moon, or
stars: and so far as a corporeal substance may be given to fire, it may be
also attributed to that which is properly called light; being in and of those
lamps of heaven which were made ex primava luce chiefly, and so came to appear
of a fiery color. Whereupon Patricius, writing against the Peripateticks,
says, Lux est essentia stellarum. Nihil enim aliud flamma quam lumen densius;
and lumen, non aliud quam flamma rarior. Calor quoque, non aliud quam ignis
rarefactus atque diffusus; and ignis, non aliud quam calor densatus, sive lux
compacta. Take therefore my meaning rightly, lest I be supposed to be much
mistaken.

And again, concerning Radius, which is a Beam or Ray, it is no primarie light
neither: but rather (as Patricius also writes) it is Fulgor a Luce exiliens in
rectam and acutam figuram, seu in modum Pyramidis and Coni promicans. To which,
Scaliger is affirming; saying, Lux est alia in corpore lucido, ab eo non
exiens; and alia a corpore lucis exiens, ut Lumen and Radius. And Zaharel also
says, Lux, alia est proprie dicta in astris ipsis; alia, a luce producta in
perspicuo. Whereupon I cannot but be persuaded, that light in it self, properly
and primarily taken, must be an essential property; as formerly I have
related: but to the air, or other things enlightened by it, it is an Observe
this difference: because light commonly taken is said to be a quality.
accidental quality approved of God as good, both to himself and the future
creatures. For although it be commonly said of compound things, that they are
such as we may distinguish of them in ipsam essentiam susceptricem, and in eam
quae ipsi accidit qualitatem: yet here the case proves otherwise; because the
sun and stars have susceptam semel, secumque immixtam lucem. And again (as
says Theodoret) Lucem quidem condidit ut voluit. Quemadmodum vero firmamento
aquas divisit, ita lucem illam dividens ut voluit, luminaria magna ac parva in
coelo collocavit.

And as touching the brightness of the stars, the sun may well be called
Oculus mundi, The eye of the world. For he is indeed the chief fountain from
whence the whole world receives luster; shining alone, and enlightening our
whole hemisphere, when all the other stars are hid. From whence some
Philosophers and Astronomers have been of opinion that the fixed stars shine
not but with a borrowed light from the sun. Plutarch, in his 2 book and 17
chap. of the opinions of Philosophers, says that Metrodorus, and his disciples
the Epicures, have been of this mind. But according to the minds of the best
authors, and nearest equipage to truth, the stars are called lights, as well
as the sun and moon; although there be a difference between them, either of
more or less. For Paul distinguishes between 1. Cor. 15. 41.
the stars and sun, non privatione lucis, sed tantum gradu. And when God
said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, he made not the sun
alone, but the sun, moon, and stars: the light in the stars being in very
deed darkened by that in the sun; which does but differ in degree from that
in them: Whereupon it is that the stars show themselves by night only when
the sun is hid, or in some deep pit whither the sunne-beams cannot pierce. If
therefore we cannot see them, Id non solis, non stellarum culpa fit, sed
oculorum nostrorum hic est defectus: ob solaris enim luminis copiam ac vigorem
debilitantur.

Also, some add their influences; as that of the Little dog, the Pl^iadas,
and others, being plain testimonies of their native light: For if they had not
their proper and p^culiar light (being fo far distant from the inferior
bodies) it is thought they could not alter them in such sort as they sometimes
do: and evermore the further they be from the sun, the better and brighter we
see them.

And as for the diversity of their influence, the differing quality of the
subject causes this diversity. So that though this light, for the first three
days, was but one in quality, it came to have diverse effects as soon as it
was taken and bestowed upon the stars and lights. And (perhaps) as there is
in them the more of this fire, the ^otter is their quality: but little fire,
and more water, the moister and cooler; and so also, the more earthy substance,
the darker.

Neither do I think that we may altogether exempt The
the moon from her native light. For although she shines to us with a borrowed
light, yet it is no consequence to say, she has therefore no own proper light.
There is (says Goclenius) a double light of the moon; Proper, and Strange. The
Proper is that which is Homogeneall to it self, or lux congenita, a light
begotten together with the moon, and essential to it, although it be but weak.
The other is that which it borrows from the sun; as is seen in eclipses and
monthly revolutions: For she is one while full, another while hid; one while
horned, another while half lightened; which is but in respect of us, who cannot
see what light she borrows, but as she approaches from the sun: for
otherwise she is half lightened always. Or (if you please) consider it thus,
that as a well polished Mirror transporteth the light of the fire, or the
sun, against a wall or a floor; so the moon receives her light from the
sun, and reflecteth it in the night upon the earth: for the sun, being then
absent, gives an abundant and free leave to see it. And again, as in a Mirror,
which has behind it his foil of lead scratched and torn, a man may perceive
certain spots; So in the moon, because her body The Macul^ l^.
is in some places rare and transparent, and in other places massy, thick, and
solid, there appear certain Maculae or blemishes: for those places and parts
are not of a fit temper to reflect the light of the sun.

But if it be so in the moon, why may not the other stars shine likewise with
a borrowed light as well as she?

I answer, Because we have not the like reasons to declare it. Neither is it
like (says Patricius) that that unmeasurable company of fixed stars in the
highest part of heaven (which is so much more noble then the place of the
sun, by how much it comes nearer to the Heaven of heavens) should shine but
by the light of the sun: For neither in them, nor in any other of the
Planets, does any man see a waxing and waning of light; nor yet are they ever
eclipsed, but show always of one and the same brightness: and therefore it is
not the same reason between the moon and them. Perhaps, if their bodies were
composed in the same manner with the body of the moon, or had the like
proportions and temperaments that she has, it might be so* but her lowness
shows her gravitie; and her gravitie her soliditie; and her soliditie shows,
not only her own light to be weak through a want of that fiery matter, or lux
primaeva, which is in the other stars in a differing degree, but also her
aptness for reflection is declared to be such, as she may well shine by a
borrowed light.

Howbeit I do also think that the stars have aliquid lucis alienae, which
they receive from the sun. To which Patricius also assenteth (as he is
mentioned by Cap. 10. quest. 7.
Casman in the first part of his Astrology) saying, Tribuit quidem omnibus,
sed lucere nequaquam facit. Nam and ipsa flammae sunt, and sua essentia lux
sunt, non minus and suis viribus lucere possunt, and lucent. Sed lumen suum eis
sol addit, lucemque eorum reddit lucidiorem. Lucem ergo eis non indit, sed
insitam adauget: meaning that the suns light inereaseth the light of the
stars, making it the brighter and the clearer: which must be understood of
them, so long as they are at a convenient distance from the sun. For if they
be too near, either the lesser light is obscured by the greater (as is seen in
the Planets, being often hid by the beams of the sun) or else such a dark
star as Mercury, will with the loss of his light show us his dark body,
which sometimes happens, being then seen as a spot in the sun: For if you
take Mercury in his best hue, he has but a cloudie countenance, and a leaden
look; which therefore argues that he has a thick body and little light: of
which I shall need to say no more.

Artic. 2. Of the twinkling of stars, or vibration of their light.
THe twinkling of the stars is the vibration or trembling of their light. Or
rather thus; It is when the light of any star seems to tremble. For indeed,
to speak properly, the stars themselves do not twinkle, as we think they do;
but either from the trembling of the eye, or motion of the air, this
appearance proceeds. For when the eye looks long at a sensible object whose
brightness excels the sense, it then begins to faint, and being weak and
weary, is possessed with a kind of trembling; and thereupon we think that the
star it self twinkleth. Also the Optic Masters confess and prove, that the
forms of the stars are comprehended of the sight reflectly, and not rightly:
that is, a right line drawn from the eye falls not into the center of the
star, but into the form of it reflected and refracted in the air to the
sight. Now it is manifest, that as the air has one motion proper to it, which
is upwards; so has it another motion improper, caused by the revolution of the
heavens every 24 hours, which draws all the airie region about therewith: by
which means the apparent form of the stars is distracted, seeming to cast
forth sparkles, called twinkling. For if the body move wherein the form of the
star appears, it must be so: which we may well prove by a piece of silver
in the bottom of a swift running brook, or by the reflection of the stars
seen in the same: for by the running of the water the reflected form is
distracted, and as it were broken: and so it is likewise in the air with the
stars.

But may not this twinkling be seen in the Planets as well as in the other
stars? I answer, that not always, yet sometimes it may: and this is but when
a watrie vapor is near unto them, which is carried and tossed of the winds
with a various motion: for then the forms of the Planets also being refracted
in the said vapor, appear to the sight as if they twinkled. Now this is most
of all perceived in the East at the time of their rising: whereupon it comes to
pass that the common people A reason of the Suns dancing.
have supposed they have sometimes seen the sun dance, and as it were hop up
and down; which, why some have attributed it to such and such days, is See
Seal. Exer. 63. and Goclenius Disput. Phys.
fabulous: For this may be upon any day when the sun meets with a fit portion
of vapors at the time of his rising; and the other Planets may also in some
sort sometimes show it, when they have climbed to an indifferent height above
the Horizon: which because it is not ordinary, some have falsely supposed that
the Planets twinkle not at all. And again, let this be remembered, that (if
there be fit vapors rightly placed) Mars and Venus twinkle more then Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mercury: but otherwise this appearance is neither in Mars nor
Venus, nor any of the rest.

Parag. 2. Of that other office which was given to the stars; viz. that they
should be for signs, etc.
Artic. 1. That the stars are signs of future events; and that by their
natural qualities, they work upon the inferior world, and all the parts of
the same.
IF I should expound the words of Moses so nicely as some have done, the
stars must then either signify nothing in the course of nature, or else be
for signs only of seasons (as Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter) and of days
and years. Which exposition does certainly tie up the sense in too strait
bands: For it is plain enough that Moses very positively sets down as a
distinct office by it self, that they were made for signs: And then he
proceeds, adding therewithal, And let them be for seasons, and for days,
and for years.

In consideration whereof, the sentence certainly must be divided.

And first let us observe out of it, that the stars, by a divine ordination,
were set in the heavens to be for signs of future events: wherefore it is
said, Let them be for signs.

Secondly, they were appointed to be (as it were) heavenly clocks, and
remarkable measures, by their motions defining and discerning Time and the
parts thereof, as days, weeks, months and years: And therefore it is also
added, And let them be for seasons, and for days, and for years. Of which two
offices I purpose to discourse a while; beginning with the first, as being most
pertinent to this Paragraph.

And lest it may be thought that Moses his meaning is here mistaken by me,
besides other things that I purpose to remember, I would have him compared with
the Prophet Jeremie, in the 10 chap. at the 2 verse. where, when the Prophet
commands the people that they should not learn the way of the Heathen, he
calls the stars (like unto Moses in this very text) The signs of heaven.
From whence Pr^fat. in lib. Scho^eri de juaiciis nativit.
Melancthon gathers, that the Prophet does not only name them signs, but
also shows that they were set to be signs of portending something. For, Non
ait Ieremias, nihil esse signa coeli; sed, A signis nolite timere. Imo cum
nominat signa, portendi aliquid affirmat. And Luther also affirms, in his
commentary upon the words of Moses, Simpliciter lunam cum sole and stellis in
firmamento coeli Moses dicit positas, ut essent signa futurorum eventuum, sicut
experientia de Eclipsibus, magnis conjunctionibus, and aliis quibusdam
Meteoris, docet. Which is, Moses plainly says, that the moon, with the sun
and stars, were placed in the firmament of heaven that they should be for
signs of future events, as experience teaches us in Eclipses, great
conjunctions, Meteors, and the like. To which may be also joined the testimony
of learned Philo, alleged by Sr Christapher Heidon in his defense of Judicial
Astrology. This man (says he) was familiar with Peter the Apostle, and with
Mark: and in diverse places, but specially in his book De Mundi fabricatione, in
his exposition of that in the 1 of Genesis, viz. LET THEM BE FOR SIGNS, he
thus speaks, saying, They were created, not only that they might fill the
world with their light, but also that they might be for signs of future
things. For by their rising, setting, defections, apparitions, occultations,
and other differences of motion, they teach men to conjecture of the event of
things: as of plenty and dearth; of the growing up or decay of creatures
animate; of clear weather and storms; of calms and winds; of overflowings and
of droughts; of the quiet motion of the sea, and the boisterous times of waves;
of the anniversarie changes of times, either when the Summer shall be tossed
with tempests, or the Winter scorched with heat; or when the Spring shall be
clothed with the nature of Autumn, or Autumn imitate the Spring. Yea (says
he) by these some have foreshewed when there should be a shaking or trembling
of the earth, with infinite other things which have certainly come to pass,
insomuch that it may be truly said, The stars were appointed for signs and
seasons. Thus far Philo: then which what can be plainer?

Neither are we to take them as bare, naked, and simple The Stars are causes
as well as signs.
signs only, but as causes also of worldly events: which whilst some have
denied, what do they but run mad with reason, and plainly oppose themselves
to more then common sense? For it is certain that the same thing may be both a
sign and a cause: a cause, as it works to an effect; and a sign, as, being
presented to the sense, it leads us to the knowledge of the effect: And
therefore when the stars are called signs, their causalitie is not excluded.
Howbeit, in some things, when they work upon a subject not immediately but by
accident, they be then occasions rather then causes.

But let me enlarge my self upon this discourse a little more: and because some
have denied that the stars have any virtue at all, or that we ought to
attribute no more power to them then to the signs at an Inne-keepers post or
tradesmans shop, I purpose to show the vanity of that error as plainly as I
can, both by Scripture, and also by daily experience.

And first for Scripture; Those oracles tell us that great is the force and
dominion which the stars have; heaven being the admired instrument of the
glorious God, whereby he governs the frame of this corruptible world. For had
the heavens and stars no force at all, the Scriptures would never distinguish
between the sweet influences of the Pleiades, and the binding virtues of Orion:
but the Scripture makes such a distinction: therefore the stars have their
power. The minor is proved out of the book of Job, chap. 38. 31. where the
words are these, Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? or loose
the bands of Orion? by which speech the Almighty does not only show that the
stars have their virtues, but also declare that their power and virtue is
such as no man on earth is able to restrain, unloose, or bind it: and here S.
Austin also teaches us, that God comprehends all the rest of the stars, by
the figure Synechdoche, putting the part for the whole; which is an intimation
that the rest have their several virtues, as well as these. For further proof
whereof see, concerning some of the other, in Deuteronomie, chap. 33. 14. Of
Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of
heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath, and for the
precious things brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put
forth by the moon: where we see that the sun and moon have power to thrust
forth the fruits of the earth. And again, Hoses 2. 21.
I will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth: where see
last of all, that the vegetation of the fruits of the earth depends not upon
one or two constellations, but upon the whole heavens.

Also were the stars and lights without power, the Scriptures would never
tell us of their dominion over the earth: but the Scripture speaks of their
dominion: therefore they be not destitute of power and virtue. The minor is
proved in Genesis, chap. 2. 1. and in the second book of Kings, chap. 17. 16.
and chap. 21. 3. and chap. 23. 5. and in Jeremie, chap. 19. 13. and in Zeph.
chap. 1. 5. and in the Acts, chap. 7 42. For in all these places the holy Ghost
calls the stars, the host and armies of heaven; thereby amplifying the
divine power of God by the force and power of these glorious creatures: and
this also is further confirmed by that in the song of Deborah, Judge. 5. 20.
where it is expressly testified that The stars fought from heaven, the
stars in their courses fought against Sisera. Thus far Scripture.

And now let experience also speak, that thereby they who will not frame their
understandings to be taught by the one, but will seek for strange expositions,
may be forced to yield and acknowledge the truth by compulsion of this other:
in the front whereof, I cannot but remember the noble Du Ban.
Poets saying,

Senseless is he, who (without blush) denies
What to sound senses most apparent lies:
And' against experience he that spits fallacians,
Is to be hist from learned disputations:
And such is he, that does affirm the stars
To have no force on these inferiors.
1. As for example, when the sun shifts his habitation, how diversely are the
seasons differing! insomuch that although the frostie beard of winter makes us
tremble and shiver through extremity of cold, the warm luster of the summers
rays causes us on the contrary to sweat and as it were pant through heat.

2. Also the terrible accidents that succeed eclipses may not be forgotten nor
vilipended: for these testify that the sun, by his heat and light,
quickens, after an admirable fashion, all earthly creatures, being as it were
the sourse and conserver of vital heat; and that the moon also has a great
power over inferior bodies. For if it were otherwise, such lights coming to be
hidden from the earth, where there is a continual revolution of generation and
corruption, could not cause after their eclipses the nature of inferior things
to be so altered and weakened as they are, both in the elements, and also in
bodies composed of them.

3. And furthermore, who sees not how orderly the tides keep their course with
the moon? of which I have spoken in the third days work.

4. Also, it is an observation that seldom fails, viz. that we have thunder
and lightning in the summer time at the meeting of Mars with Jupiter, Sol, or
Mercury; and for the most part great winds, when Sol and Jupiter, or Jupiter
and Mercury, or Mercury and Sol, are in conjunction.

5. And again, the increase and decrease of bodies, or of marrow, blood, and
humors in the body, according to the increase and decrease of the moon, does
speak for that horned queen, and signify that her virtue is not little. For as
she fills with light, the marrow abounds in bones, the blood in veins, the sap
in trees, the meat and moisture in the oister, crab, and creafish.

6. Moreover, experience also teaches, that all such wood as is cut for
timber, if it be not cut after the full moon, will soon be rotten.

7. Also those pease which are sown in the increase, never leave blooming. And
(as some report) the pomegranate will bear no fruit any longer then just so
many years as the moon was days old when it was first set and planted. The
Heliotropium, with certain other flowers and plants, we likewise see that they
keep their course with the sun. And Pliny reports in his 37 book at the 10
chapter, that the Selenite is a stone which has the image of the moon in it,
increasing and decreasing according to her course in the heavens. And does not
Cardan also report for certain (as Sir Christopher Heydon (...) it may be
affirmed that the heavens in some sort do work upon men's minds and
dispositions. And hereupon it comes to pass that Mars does sometimes sow the
seeds of war by his working upon adult choler, and the like. Or the air
being greatly out of tune, causes not only many sicknesses, but strange
disorders of the mind; and they breaking out into act, do many times disturb
states, translate kingdoms, work unluckie disasters and the like: of which I
spoke before in the Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Parag. 4. Artic. 1.
second days work.

And now know that if the operation of the heavens in this, be but so far
forth as the soul depends upon the bodily instruments, all that is done to the
soul is but an inclination: for there can be no compulsion where the cause is
so remote. And therefore let it be observed that it is one thing to cause,
another thing to occasion; or one thing to infer a necessity, another thing
to give an inclination: The former we cannot aver to be in the power of the
stars, forasmuch as man's will, which is the commandresse of his actions, is
absolutely free from any compulsion, and not at all subject to any natural
necessity or external coaction. Howbeit we cannot deny a certain inclination,
because the soul of man is too much How our minds do sympaih^se with the body,
see in the 2 day, Chap. 5. Sect. 2. Parag. 4. Artic. 1. prop^ (...).
indulgent to the body, by whose motion (as one worthily observes) it is
rather persuaded then commanded. There is therefore no Chaldean fate to be
feared, nor any necessity to be imposed upon the wills of men; but only an
inclination: and this inclination is not caused by an immediate working of the
stars on the intellectual part or mind of man, but occasioned rather,
mediately, or so far forth as the soul depends on the temperaments and
material organs of the body. In which regard I hope never to be afraid of the
signs of heaven, neither is there cause why I should ever curse my stars,
seeing I know in this the utmost of their power. And as it was said to that
Apostle, My grace is sufficient for thee; so may every one take it for granted,
that there is a second birth which overswayes the first. To which purpose one
makes this an observation,

Just age -- Sapiens dominabitur astris;
Et manibus summi stant elementa Dei.
Do godly deeds, so shall thou rule the stars:
For then God holds the elements from wars.
Or, as another not unfitly also speaks,

Qui sapit, ille animum fortunae praeparat omni,
Praevisumque potest art levare malum.
The wise, for every chance does fit his mind,
And by his art makes coming evils kind.
And in a word, that pithie ^hirons. lib. 5.
saying of Ioannes de Indagine shall close this Article, Quaeris a me quantum
in nobis operantur actra? dico, etc. Do thou demand of me how far the
stars work upon us? I say, they do but incline, and that so gently, that if
we will be ruled by reason, they have no power over us; but if we follow our
own nature and be led by sense, they do as much in us as in brute beasts, and
we are no better. For, agunt, non cogunt, is all that may be said.

Artic. 2. Whether it be not a derogation from the perfection of things
created, to grant that the stars have any kind of power over the actions of
men.
AS for the power which the stars can have in this kind, I have, in the end
of the former Article, already declared. Howbeit, that I may leave as few
scruples behind me as I can, my purpose is to clear this question a little
more. For it has been the serious persuasion of not a few, that (according to
the tenent of Basil, in his Hexameron, and some others) the dispositions of men
may not be imputed any whit to the stars, without wrong either to God or
them. If (say they) vicious inclinations or evil actions be stirred up by the
stars, then God should be the cause of humane outrages, wickedness, and the
like. Or again, if the moderation of our actions Hyparius Method. Theol. lib. 2.
depends upon the stars, then many absurdities would follow. For first, those
stars whose aspect is said to be evil, should either of themselves be created
evil by their maker; or else it must be that in respect of their own wills they
made themselves evil afterward: neither of which may be affirmed. Not the
first, because every thing the God made was very good, Genesis 1. Not the second,
because seeing the stars are inanimate and creatures without life and soul, it
were wickedness to attribute a will unto them.

To all which objections and doubts it may be thus answered, viz. that the
stars are no malicious agents, voluntarily striving to do mischief to the
world; but rather such as do harmlesly send down their natural influences and
powers into the universe: and had it been that man had not fallen, their
inclinations in him had been no inclinations, nor their power in occasioning
felt any jot at all: The evil proceeds from the nature of man, who lost his
purity and strength of will, in yielding to that which was forbidden: it comes
not from the stars, but from our selves. And so Pr^fat. in lib. Ioh. Sch^. de
judici^ Nativ.
Melancthon does in effect answer to that of Basil, saying, that we ought in
this to consider what excellency of condition our humane nature has lost; and
thereby observe how grievous and evil sin is, by which our temperatures are
become brutish; and not rashly condemn, or without consideration go throw the
stars out of heaven. For in this present state of things ( Ne nunc quidem
stellas scelerum causas esse, they be his own words) we say not, that the
stars are causes of our sin; in regard, that though our inclinations rise
from them, yet they are not sole or chief causes of our actions, but our will
is the principal cause thereof, which was first created in perfect liberty,
by which it both had power to withstand, even as still it ought to refrain all
inordinate inclinations. Non enim fatalem necessitatem constituimus, nec cogi
Neronem a stellis, etc. For we do not constitute fatal necessity, nor affirm
that Nero was compelled by the stars unto his so great and monstrous sins:
but yielding to his lusts he willingly entertained those rages, which the devil
more and more instigated, and so became worse then his nature (though bad
enough) had made him. Hitherto Melancthon to that of Basil. Wherefore when we
fall into a due consideration of these things, and find that it was the fall
of our first parents which has induced this disproportion between our natures
and the influences of the stars, we shall soon see where the fault rests,
namely in our selves. For (as that worthy Sir Christopher Hey don.
Knight observes) we must consider, that the impression or operation of every
agent is always answerable, not to the power of it self, but to the capacity
and aptness of the patient: according to which rule, the stars produce their
effects, even as the subject or matter is, in which their influence does work.
Which is but as I said before, viz. that if man had not fallen, their
inclinations in him had been no inclinations, nor their power in occasioning
felt any jot at all. For as the fire hurts sore eyes, but warmeth cold hands;
so the stars are formaliter bona, although effective (according to the unapt
quality of the subject) they produce a sad effect. Or, to use again the words
of the said author, as we see the wine, which is healthful and comfortable to
some, how quickly it hurts the constitution of another who has but a weak
brain; so the sun does soften and melt wax, but stiffen and make clay hard:
yet no man for this affirms either the wine to be drunk, or the sun to be
formally soft, or hard. Wherefore (says he) by this I may boldly conclude,
that although it be confessed, that the stars are efficient causes of our
inclinations; yet there is no consequence to conclude them such themselves as
the effects are that they produce: for where the fault rests, has been
declared. Furthermore, he also proves against those who say the stars are
tainted in being causes by accident, or occasions many times of ill, he proves
(I say) that every occasion to sin is not to be accounted a provocation to
sin, or to be held unlawful: for if this were admitted, we must also pollute
God himself with sin, because he has made fair women, and sweet wine, by
means whereof many men fall; yet nevertheless none will deny them to be good:
for they have their lawful use and right end. Wherefore he does here also
excellently conclude, that as no man will say, that the Physician or his
medicines do sin, though, when they restore a spent and difeased body,
accidentally they procure lust: no more are the stars to be accounted bad or
to sin, though in constituting the temperature of our bodies, they may be
truly confessed causes by accident, or occasions of sin. The question is
therefore resolved, that it is no derogation from the perfection of things
created although we grant the stars to have a kind of power over the actions
of men: which power, both how and what it is, has been declared.

Artic. 3. Of predictions, or whether the signs of heaven may be understood or
searched into.
THey be David's words, that The works of the Lord are great, and sought out of
those who have pleasure therein. And Moses here, in testifying that God created
the stars for signs, does likewise show that they may be understood;
otherwise to us they were no signs at all. Neither do I doubt, but that even
Moses himself, and Daniel likewise, who were Act. 7. 22. Dan. 1. 17.
brought up, the one in the learning of the Egyptians, the other in the skill
of the Caldeans, did understand the signification of these signs. And from
whence was it that those nations had their knowledge, but from Noah and
Abraham; if Josephus or Berosus may be credited? For concerning Noah, do not
those authors story, that soon after the flood he taught the Armenians and
Scythians the secrets of these things? Whereupon they said, that he
participated of a divine spirit. So also Abraham, that Father of many nations,
did equally instruct the Caldeans and Egyptians: although indeed afterward it
was their bold adventure to mix magic, and superstitious vain inventions, with
this their lawful skill.

And for us, experience has traveled in the manifestation The natures of the
stars may be known.
of the several qualities belonging to the lamps of heaven. For as we know the
fire to be hot, the water moist, this herb to be cold, that to be dry: so also
by observation, it does manifestly appear that the sun gives heat and
cherishes, the moon moisteneth, Mars dries; and so of the rest. Or thus,
Saturn is cold and dry, stirs up and increases melancholy. Jupiter is
temperately hot and moist, works most upon sanguine complexions, stirring up
and increasing that humor. Mars, through his heat and immoderate dryness,
stirs up and increases choler; and so, often proves an accidental cause of
brawlings, fightings, wars, and the like, beside such sicknesses as may come
by the superabundancie of that humor. Sol is moderately hot and dry, greatly
cherishing all kind of creatures. Venus is cold and moist, but it is in a
temperate manner; and as for her operation it is seen most in phlegmatic
complexions. Mercury is said to be dry in respect of his own nature, but
joined to any of the other Planets, he puts upon him their natures, and works
as they work. Then follows (the Moon, and she is well known to be the mistress
of moisture. Neither can you truly say that it is impossible to find their
natures to be either thus or thus: for it is but 30 years that the longest of
these did ever spend in his periodicall revolution: and but 72 years (as Tycho
teaches) can run about whilst the fixed stars alter one degree in their
longitude. Insomuch that Saturn (whose period is but 30 years) comes twice to
the same point of heaven before the eighth sphere is moved one degree: and
Jupiter (whose revolution is 12 years) comes 6 times to the same place: and
Mars (who accomplisheth his period in little less then 2 years) meets 36
times with the same stars in the same place: and as for the Sun, Venus,
Mercury, and the Moon, their meetings with them be oftener. Also it is certain
that the great conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, is once every 20 years; and
Mars and Saturn visit each other in less then every two years: by means
whereof it is no hard thing, or as a thing impossible, to find out the simple
natures either of the Planets or fixed stars.

And from these natures thus known, and their mixtures, and places observed, it
is that the effect is foreseen and the judgment given: which, if it be
modestly, carefully, deeply, and deliberately done, by one well versed or
conversant in these things, does for the most part happen as is foretold: for
the most part, I say, and not always. For as the Physician knows that the
same portion of either single or mixed simples, will not work upon all bodies
alike; so neither can the like portion and power of qualities stir up, or
work always ad idem, but may sometimes receive either intention or remission,
according to the indisposed aptness of the subject, the elements or elementary
bodies not always admitting of their powers alike; or when they be overswayed
by more potent and prevailing operations. For universal and particular causes
do many times differ, and then the one hinders the operation of the other. As
for example, particular causes (as the conjunction of Venus and the Moon, or
some such like meeting) may promise rain, snow, or sleet, when universal
causes (which are not so easily seen) do often turn it into more fair and warm
weather. And so also particular influences may seem to work upon such or such
humors, and thereupon make the body subject to this or that sickness, and
the mind inclined to this or that kind of action, with many such other like
things: howbeit it may so happen that nature may be at this time so abstrusely
shut up, that what we see not may overpower and work beyond what we see.

A man had need therefore have Argus his eyes to pierce thoroughly into these
causes, and examine without rashness either what may help or what may hinder;
otherwise his judgment may fail him even in things wrought by the course of
nature (for of other things he ought not to judge.) And indeed when there is a
diverse mixture of qualities, all in a manner of equal portions (as it may
sometimes be) how hard a thing is it then to find out (without a sound
judgment) the true event! for there be many difficulties proceeding from the
weakness of our judgments. And for that again which I said before of natures
abstruse kind of working, although I be no Stoic to tie Gods mighty hand to
second causes, yet I verily suppose that all things are not beyond the course
of nature which seem to be extraordinary; but even many strange seeming things
are wrought by the power of nature: as sometimes in unwonted storms, tempests,
droughts, strange appearances, or other like accidents. And this again I also
think, that one man may see the cause when another cannot: whereupon it comes
to pass that there is such diversity of judgments and thwarting of opinions
many times about one and the same thing. Also I might add something (which one
or other will be ready to object) concerning the devils permission in raising
unwonted winds, storms, and such like. Or I might speak, not only of Gods
power, but of his providence likewise in disposing his creatures to manifest
their operation rather in one place then in another; which is an act proceeding
from his secret purpose and divine wisdom: as when the clouds (according to
his decree) do disburden themselves of their weary drops rather here then
there, or there then here: For, says he in the 4 chap. of Amos, at the 7 verse.
I have caused it to rain upon one city, and it has not rained upon another,
and the city where it has not rained was barren. But I shall not need to
meddle further: For (notwithstanding these difficulties) it is manifest enough
that the signs of heaven may be both sought into, and also in some ample
measure understood.

For it is true that God Almighty having both set and foreseen the course of
nature long before, does now uphold it by his providence, instrumentally to
perform his will. Neither every day does he make the windows of heaven to stand
open, or the fountains of the great deep to be broken up; nor yet does he every
day make the sun or moon to stand still, or the shadow to go back, or an
Eclipse to be at a quite contrary time, or the moon again to arise before her
usual course: but has undoubtedly left his works to be sought out of all
those who take pleasure therein; and, according to that portion of sound
judgment which he has given to every one, they may understand either more or
less of these signs: For as one star differs from another in luster and
beauty; so one man's knowledge and better judgment transcends not seldom
above the rest. Neither can the devil every day have it in his commission to go
and blow down houses upon the heads of Jobs children. Nay (says one) if these
significations are not to be considered, why are they so divinely written and
painted in the heavens? Surely it were impiety altogether to pluck or draw
away our minds from the observation of these things. For if the heavens (as
they do) declare the glory of God, or the firmament show forth his handie
work, we may well believe that they express what God effects by them: for
otherwise every thing which God created, does declare his handie work as well
as they. Eclipses, conjunctions, prodigious sights, flashings, comets, new
stars, what are they but the Oracles of God? by which, changes, alterations,
and sundry calamities are threatened to the world: And these, if any one
contemn them, what does he but despise the admonitions of God? Also, how much
these observations have profited the Commonwealth, let Thales teach us: For
they that have Thales his skill, may by these signs judge of cheapnesse and
plenty, of dearth and deernesse, with other like things whose knowledge cannot
but be profitable to the life of man.

Only beware that more be not attributed to the heavens, The signs of heaven
must not be abused.
then to him that made the heavens; not more to the servants then to the
Master, as they did who made them gods; or they who trust and rely upon them,
not daring to take a journey, or begin a work, or speak with a friend about any
business, without a needless consultation.

Also know that the observing of these signs must not be mixed with magical
spells, as charmers do, when in stead of using, they come to abusing of herbs:
For as the herbs on the ground were not made to be abused in such damned and
forbidden practices; no more were the stars in the sky. Neither ought the
observing of these signs to be mixed with charactericall practices,
diabolical or superstitious divinations, making of images under such or such a
constellation, dangerous elections of times, either to procure good or bring
down ill from heaven, as they did who blasphemously maintained, that men are
long-lived and their souls go to heaven when Saturn is in Leo: or they, who
have not quaked to affirm, that when the Moon is joined with Jupiter in the
head of the Dragon, whatsoever a man then asks at the hands of God, he shall
receive. Neither ought we to fly unto them for finding of things lost: for
where you cannot argue from the cause to the effect, their use is unlawful.
Nor may we use them in the contingencie of things when the cause is unknown or
indeterminate. Nor were they made to decide horarie questions, or sortilegious
demands. Nor yet may we erect figures, thereby to answer to certain questions:
as to know whether a man shall have the thing he hops or looks for; to know
what shall become of a man's secret enemies; to know of the speedy or slack
return of him that takes in hand any journey, and of such things as shall
happen in the journey; or to know, by the eighth house, whether a man shall
enjoy the goods and dowry of his wife; or by the seventh, whether a man shall
obtain that woman in marriage which he desires; or by the sixth, to know
whether a man shall keep or leave his servant; with other the like questions,
of which can be given or known no cause, why the stars should ever be thought
to effect them: in so much that it is a kind of wonder to think how it should
come to pass, that ever any one could forge out such inquiries to be answered
from the signs of heaven. For the stars were not made to justify the
dangerous practices of wicked impostours, nor to give answer to the causeless
curiosities of superstitious demanders; but made to be both signs and causes
of such things as already I have mentioned: for when the state of the question
is come beyond the course of the four principal qualities of cold, heat,
moisture, and dryness, it will find succor neither in sound philosophy, nor
in the holy Word of written verity.

Last of all, let this one thing be remembered, that the constellations (as is
well known, and apparently perceived of Astronomers) by reason of a slow motion
which the fixed stars has, sliding from the equinoctial point about one
degree in 72 years, are now removed into other signs of the divided Zodiac,
causing those signs, by the quality of the stars which are now in them, to
be of another nature: as Aries which was hot and dry in the days of Ptolomie,
is (by reason that the stars of Pisces are moved thither) cold and moist: and
Taurus which was cold and dry, is now of the nature of the stars of Aries,
that is, hot and dry: and so of all the residue of the fixed stars, they are
removed into new houses, or other mansions. Which if it be not proportionably
considered, let any mean capacity judge how gross an error may heedlessely
be produced by an unskilful artist.

Parag. 3. Of that other office given to the stars; viz. that they were
appointed to be heavenly clocks, and remarkable measurers of time and the parts
thereof. This office is laid down in these words, And let them be for seasons,
and for days, and years.
Artic. 1. Of Seasons.
IF we take seasons, days, and years together, it is no hard thing to see how
the whole and parts are joined. For Tempus is the whole: and Annus is pars
temporis: and Dies is pars anni. Not that these are the only parts of time;
but because the other do chiefly consist of these. Howbeit, seeing they be laid
down severally, it is fit they be explained sunderly. And first of Seasons.

We need not with the Jews understand here their feasts only, and anniversarie
days of solemnity; for then this distinction of seasons had not been in use
till after the coming out of Egypt: neither is it enough to apply them to the
monthly revolution of the moon, or to the suns changing into a new sign or
partition of the Zodiac. But by the name of Seasons, we ought rather to be led
unto those Quatuor anni Cardines, or four Quarters of the year, when the
reviving sun crosses the Equinoctial, and again touches upon either
solstice: which last, is (as it were) solis statio, because the days seem to
stand at a stay: and the two other have their names from equal day and night,
because the days and nights are then of equal length, Sol cheerfully riding
in his gold-like fiery chariot, just in the midst between the Artick and
Antartick Poles. For these were those seasons which God again established for
ever, when he renewed that face upon the decayed world, which by the impartial
Flood was blemished: saying, (as it is in Genesis chap 8. 22.) While the earth
remains, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter
shall not cease.

And as for us, we commonly call these times by the names of Spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter.

The Spring is a time never unwelcome, nor unwished: Spring.
for the weather begins then to appear like a pitiful and truly
kinde-hearted cherisher; and Sol ascending, disperseth the superfluous humors,
stirs up the blood in our bodies, and sap in herbs and trees; clothing the
earth with sweet new liveries, and plants with boughs and beauteous branches:
nay the harmless choristers of the rebounding woods and echoing groves, do
then begin to tune again their sugared throats, and ravish revived mortals with
their melodious aires; bidding good morning to the day, and morrow to the morn.
For no sooner can Aurora wake, and peep above the purple verges of the Eastern
hills, but cheerfully they chaunt her out a mirthfull cantilene: whilst in the
mean time, sweet-breathing Zephyrus plays with the wanton tresses of his late
dead, and decayed, but now again revived mistress; and in comely hue does
beauteous Flora prank her self, cheerfully coming forth to meet her kind
sweet-causing lover. The pretty lambs are now at play, whilst the watchful
shepherd sits piping on an hill to please that queen of his heart, his dearest
shepherdess, whom ruthfully he moves to grant his suit, and pity his
complaint.

Ver praebet flores, says the Poet; and from Or thus, (...) and (...)* and^.
viresco it may well be said to take the name. For will you hear?

The mealie mountains which were late unseen,
Change now their coats, all into lusty green.
The gardens prank them with their flowrie buds;
The ^^^ds with grass, with leaves the naked woods.
Sweet Zephyrus begins to busse his Flora, Partly out of Du Bart.

Swift-winged fingers to salute Aurora;
And wanton Cupid, through this universe,
With pleasing wounds, each creatures heart' gins pierce.
"Yea Titans presence does again revive
"As well things sensible as vegetive.
But next after Spring we reckon Summer; which Summer.
may well be called the mother of plenty and daughter of bounty. For the
earth has now her lap full of every kind of grain, her belly is big and
ready to be delivered, that she might thereby enrich the weary labourer, and
feed each hungry soul. Formosa est messibus Aestas, says Ovid: Summers beauty
consists in his fruitful fields of corn.

-- For now he crowns his Ceres
With gilded ears, as yellow as her hair is;
Till th'reaper, panting both for heat and pain,
With crooked rasor crops the tufted plain.
In Latin we call it Aestas; which is, because this season derives the name ab
aestu, from the exceeding heat: and so also does the English word Summer
express it. For Summer is a word taken out of the Germane language; and in the
Germane tongue it is said to be Sunne-mehr, that is, plus solis, or more sun
then at other times.

And now come to Autumn (for Autumn is the next Autumn
Quarter) and this is a season which brings that to perfection, which the
Spring and Summer has but begun. For now the barns are full, the presses and
fats overflow with an abundance of wine and oil, and men do now eat the late
gathered labors of their hands, and joy in the surpassing plenty that the
earth has brought them. This time is indeed the years very harbor; or (if
you will) it is like unto a kinde-hearted prodigal, who by little and little
gives all away so freely, that in conclusion there is nothing left him. He
takes his name therefore from Autumno, which signifies to make ripe; for as
fast as he can see the fruits ripened or brought to perfection, he yields them
up to others. Or else it is Autumn, a bonorum anni augmentatione; as some
suppose.

The earth by degrees her lovely beauty ba^es,
Fills others full with her dear delicates:
The apron and the osier-basket (both)
Catch dainty fruits to please each dainty tooth:
Until at last trees, gardens, meads and all,
Are naked stripped and robbed quite of all.
And here in this Quarter was undoubtedly the beginning of the first year: For
that it should be so, we have grounds both in reason, Scripture, and other
writings; as in the second chapter of this book I have proved at large.

But leaving Autumn, look now at Winter: it is a Winter.
season which can boast of little. For it lies entrenched with gloomie mists of
night, and weeps almost as often as it wants the sun, or finds it hid within
the compass of a close cloud. Nay see but with what a palsy pace it comes.
He that of late was sweating in the fields, casting off his clothes, and
fainting through heat, is now glad to call for more and thicker garments, and
not ashamed by the help of fire to mitigate the freezing cold. For Winter is
like unto an old man with a gray head and white beard; insomuch that when
hoarie-headed Hy^ms does but brush or shake his hairs, the trees and herbs, (as
I may so say) in stead of leaves, are periwigd with snow: Or if he does but let
his churlish breath blow out upon us, the waters are turned soon into a
crystal crust, and without wonder men are seen to walk upon it, Et celsis
dependet stiria tectis; yea and the drops hang frozen then at the eaves of
houses.

That therefore of Ovid must needs be true, Igne levatur Hyems. To which let
that A cup of good wine.
Bacchi massicus humor be also added: For these two will now do wondrous well;
according to that of the noble Poet,

All lusks in sloth; and till this quarters end,
Bacchus, and Vulcan both, must us befriend.
This season is called by the Latins Hyems, which seems to be derived from
the Greek word Which in Latin is Pl^.
(...), signifying to make moist or wet: And in Hebrew (as some affirm) it is
called Choreph, coming of the root Charaph, which signifies to reproach or
disgrace; because when winter comes, the earth is as it were disgraced and
exposed to reproach, in being spoiled of all its pleasant greenness, beauty
and splendor.

And in a word to shut up all, thus you may remember these seasons, together
with their sundry qualities;

Poma dat Autumnus: Formosa est messibus Aestas:
Ver praebet Flores: Igne levatur Hyems. Ovid.
Autumn gives fruit: And corn makes Summer fair: Spring shows us gayes: Fire
helps cold Winters air.

Artic. 2. Of Days.
A Day is either artificial or natural.

1. The artificial is from sunne-rising to sunnesetting, agreeable to the
words of our Joh. 11. 9.
Savior, when he demanded if there were not twelve hours in the day.

Now this kind of day is not always equal, but varies according to the
suns unequal time of rising and setting: and thereupon the hours likewise
are to be reckoned according to the days proportionable difference; being
(even as the days) longer in Summer then in Winter.

Also for this artificial day, Ioannes de sacro Bosco divides it into four
quarters; calling the first rubens, the second splendens, the third urens, and
the fourth tepens.

2. And as for that which is a day natural, it evermore contains the just
number of 24 equal hours; in which space of time the sun is carried by the
motion of the Primum Mobile from any one part of heaven until it comes to the
same point again.

This kind of day amongst diverse nations has diverse beginnings.

England, the 17 Provinces, some part of Germany, Midnight.
the Mysians, and the Romans, account from midnight until midnight; because
at that time (as is supposed) our Lord was born: and from hence, as Verstegan
thinks, came the word Seanight, being a week of days and nights, or a
Sennight.

The Babylonians, Persians, Norimbergians, etc. begin Sunrising.
at sunne-rising, (and so do our Which in them or all within the Parenthesis,
though it be here inserted, is meant of the artificial day.
lawyers in England, ending again at sunne-setting: for he who has a sum of
money to pay on a set day by bond, neither before nor after sun need tender
his money:) These, I say, begin at one sunne-rising, accounting until the
next; according to that of Lib. 2. cap. 77.
Pliny, Babylonii (says he) inter duos solis exortus.

And as for the Umbrians, Arabians, and Astronomers, Noon.
they reckon from noon until noon again.

But the Athenians, Jews, Silesians, Italians, Bohemians, Evening.
etc. account always from the evening or setting of the sun; beginning their
day when the night approaches and the sun departs, being as it were gone
to his bed or western rest.

1. They who begin from midnight may seem to have this warrant, viz. that the
sun is then again returning toward our Hemisphere; and (as I said before)
midnight is that time when the sun of righteousness arose to the world. For
it is supposed that Christ Which is but an uncertain supposition.
was born about the middle of the night, whilst the shepherds were keeping
watch over their flocks. The day therefore begins from midnight.

2. Again, they who account from the time of sunnerising have this plea, saying
that the day is fitly to take beginning, when the cause thereof, viz. the
sun, does first appear and show himself to the inhabitants of the world,
calling them out unto their daily labors, and summoning them by his beauteous
light to arise, and leave their sleepie beds. Therefore when the sun arises,
the day begins.

3. Also, they who reckon from noon, suppose that they ought to account from
that time when the sun is in the most Which they suppose to be the place it
was first let in when it was made.
eminent place of heaven, and has the greatest number of eyes enlightened by
it. And as for Astronomicall calculations, this also is the fittest time,
because it falls always at one and the same certainty. The day therefore
begins from noon.

4. Last of all, they who begin from the setting of the The natural beginning
of the day is from sunsetting. Genesis 1.
sun have the truest and strongest plea. For this beginning is agreeable to
the whole progress of the worlds creation, and best fitteth the divine
institution of natural days; being in very deed a true (...) of night and
day, as of right it ought to be. For darkness was before the diurnall light:
and God (says the Apostle) commanded that light should shine out of darkness.
And so the evening, as well as the morning, was pertinent to one and the same
day; of which see more in the first days work.

Artic. 3. Of Years.
A Year, being the chief and most usual part of time, whereby the ages of
men, of the world, and other things are principally measured, is the
periodicall revolution of the sun through Mazzaroth, or the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, Job 38. 32. For by the suns uncessant motion, a set number of
days are as it were wheeled about to terminate one year, and to give each
season his due period of time. And in a true measured year, there is not
always a set or certain equality: For there is either the great, or the
lesser quantity. In the greatest quantity a year has 365 days, 5 hours,
56 minutes, and 53 seconds; And in the least quantity, 365 days, 5 hours, 44
minutes, and 38 seconds.

But if we reckon according to the course of the moon, then a year is that
space of time wherein the moon, after some conjunctions with the sun, is
again in conjunction with him, not far from that place where she first met
him. Or if we reckon by the other stars, it is then that space of time which
the sun spends after his departure from any star, until he returns to
the said star again.

And in all these, the sun has the chiefest pre-eminence, is the only guide,
and most remarkable measurer. Whereupon I may not omit what I find observed by
Expositours, viz. that a year has the name in Hebrew from Shanah, signifying
a changing or iteration: which is in regard of the suns returning, after a
years end, to the same point of heaven where it began. And as for the circuit
of the moon, which we commonly term a month, it is derived from another word
signifying to ronew; because in that space the moon is again renewed: neither
is it found in any place of Scripture, that these names are perverted, or the
one of them taken to signify the other; but by the one (say they) is meant a
year, and by the other a month. See Gib. on Genesis chap. 5.* quest. 2. and
Ainsworth on Genesis 1. 14.

In Latin the year is called Annus, because we may say of it, revolvitur ut
annulus. For as in a ring the parts touch one another, circularly joining each
to other; so also the year rolleth it self back again by the same steps that
it ever went; whereupon it came to pass that the Egyptians, amongst other
their hieroglyphics, used to paint out the year like a snake winding her self
as round as a ring, holding her tail in her mouth: Et sic sua per vestigia
volvitur annus. The name likewise (...), which it has from the Greek, is
agreeable to the foresaid derivation. And all this concerning natural years.

But as for Political years, they be those which are diversely used by diverse
nations in their accounting of times: and they differ in lengths according as
the computatours fail in skill to regulate them to the motion of the heavens.

That which we now use is the Julian year, instituted by Julius Caesar, who, by
the help of Sosigines an Egyptian, an expert Mathematician, amended the old
Roman year, and brought it to that form in which we now have it, making it to
consist of 365 days, and 6 hours: which 6 hours are not reckoned every
year, but once every fourth year, being then increased to the just length of
a day, which is always inserted or put in the next before the 6 Calends of
March, causing the said Calends to be twice repeated: from whence that year is
called Bissextile of bis and sex, twice six; or Leap-yeare, because by this
adding of a day, from thenceforth the fixed holidays and the like, do as it
were skip or leap one day further into the week then they were the former year.

Now the mean length of the Tropicall year being defined to have no more then
365 days, 5 hours, and 49 minutes, shows that this Julian year is somewhat
greater then it should be, exceeding the exactest measure which can be had, by
the quantity of eleven minutes or there abouts; causing thereby by little and
little to be an apparent anticipation of the Equinoctial and Solstitiall
points: insomuch that the Vernall equinox, whose place at the first Council of
Nice, was upon the 21 day of March, is now come to be upon the 10 day of March.
The reformation of which error has been wished for by diverse learned men; and
in some sort performed by Pope Gregory the 13 (using likewise in it the help
of Christopher Clavius, and some others) who in the year 1582, brought back
the Equinoctial day to the same place it was at the said Nicene Council, by
cutting off 10 days in the month of October, writing in the Calender next
after the fourth day the fifteenth day: by means whereof all their months
begin ten days sooner then ours, as do also all those feasts whose place is
fixed and not moveable.

Now in this reformation it was likewise ordered, that the year should consist
of 365 days, 5 hours, and 49 minutes. And, that the Equinox might not be
subject any more to anticipation in 400 years, they thought it fit to omit
three Leap-yeares; The first whereof will fall into the year of Christ 1715;
the second into the year 1848; and the third into the year 1982, if God
suffer the frame of the world to stand so long.

Howbeit in thus doing, although the alteration will be very little, yet the
reformation is not exactly true, because there is an inequality of
anticipation in the Equinoctial, as the great Masters in Astronomy teach us,
being (as they say) in some ages more, and in some less. But seeing (as I
said) the alteration will be very little, if it ever come to that, it is fit
the Leap-year be then omitted.

And thus am I come now to the end likewise of this fourth days work, wherein,
after my plain manner, I have discoursed upon every such thing as is pertinent
to the work done in it. Let me therefore concluding say with Moses.

The Eve and Morn confine the fourth of days,
And God gives to his work deserved praise.
CHAP. VIII. Concerning the creatures created in the Fifth day of the world:
and they were Fishes, and Fowls.
Sect. 1. Of Fishes, their kinds, properties, etc.
NOw follow the works of the Fifth day: which when I consider, I cannot but
admire the harmonious order which the Almighty observes in the whole
progress of his creating. For as yet the world was but like an empty house
without inhabitants; a stately structure, having no moving creature with life
and sense to be living in it; not so much as a poor fly, a fish, or a bird to
taste the goodness of things created and made. But in this and the next day
(the building thus framed, and cheer provided) he brought as it were his guests
to participate of his delicates, always provided that things inferior should
serve things superior: making his best work last, namely Man, unto whom the
other works were put in subordination; to show (me thinks) that the end is the
perfection of every thing.

And now see, the first day was for the matter: The second brought it into a
better form, stretched out the heavens, and lifted up the waters which are
above them. The third did not only show the face of the earth by the gathering
together of those waters under heaven, but also adorned it with herbs, trees,
and plants. The fourth beautifies the vaulted roof of the sparkling firmament
with funne, moon, and stars. In the fifth and sixth he makes all kinds of
living creatures; furnishing first of all the waters and air with their
inhabitants; and last of all the earth.

And for those many creatures in the waters and air, their creation was
effected in this fifth days work; so that every kind of fish, and all kind
of birds were now produced. God only said it, and it was done; as by viewing
the text of Moses will appear: For in all his works he spoke the word and they
were made, he commanded and they were created.

But to proceed. We need divide the whole of this day into no more then two
parts: The one of Fishes, the other of Birds.

That of fishes is the foremost, and therefore the variety of those creatures
would be first admired.

And see how Moses ushers them. The greater ones are placed in the forefront:
For God (says he) made great whales. And then he proceeds to add something
concerning the other species of smaller creatures living and moving in the
water; saying, And every living creature that moves, which the waters brought
forth abundantly after their kind.

Pareus, and other Expositours also, by the word The Whale
which is commonly translated great whales, understand the biggest kind of
sea-beasts and monstrous fishes of the largest greatness. And indeed the
epithet great, is not added to the whale without cause: For the word Dr. Will.
on Genesis
tannin signifies a serpent, dragon, or a great fish: and the whale or great
fish is the greatest of all living creatures, as in Job 41. 33. In the earth
there is none like him. His jaws are likened to doors, verse. 14. his scales to
shields, verse. 15. Out of his nostrills goes smoke, as out of a seething pot
or caldron, verse. 20. he makes the sea to boil like a pot, verse. 31.

Munster writes that near unto Iseland there be Munst. Cos^og.
great whales whose bigness equalizeth the hills and mighty mountains, which
are sometimes openly seen; and these (says he) will drown and overthrow ships
except they be affrighted with the sound of trumpets and drums, or except
some round and empty vessels be cast unto them, wherewith they may play and
sport them, because they are much delighted with such things. But above all,
this he affirms to be a good remedy against such dangerous whales; to wit,
that which the Apothecaries call Castoreum, tempered with water and cast into
the sea: for by this as by a poison they are utterly driven and banished to the
bottom.

Other authors mention far greater whales then these: And Olaus Magnus
writes, that there are many (...) Mag. lib. ^1*
kinds of whales. For some he affirms to be roughskinned and bristled, and
these contain in length 240 feet, and in breadth 120. others are smooth and
plain, and these are less, being taken in the North and Western ocean. Some
again have jaws with long and terrible teeth of 12 or 14 feet in length: and
the two dog-teeth are far longer then the rest, like unto horns, or the tusks
of a boar or elephant. This kind of whale has eyes so ample and large, that
sometimes 15, 20, or more men may sit in the compass of one eye: and about
either eye there be 250 horns Idem Ibid.
ad rigidam vel placidam, anteriorem vel posteriorem motionem and
ventilationem; serving also to defend the eyes, either in a tempestuous season*
or when this fish is assaulted by any other sea-beast. Physeter or the
Whirl-pool-whale has a large wide mouth, but round: This is a cruel fish to
the mariners, and will sometimes lift up his head above the sail-yard, casting
up so much water through certain pipes in his forehead, that (as the foresaid
author witnesses) great and strong ships are either compelled to sink, or
else are exposed to great and manifest danger. Sometimes again by laying his
head upon either end of the ship, he drowns it by his over-loading weight.

Some call the Whirl-pool-whales, Balaenae. But howsoever, Balaena is reckoned
amongst the whales, and is differing from the Prister or Physeter which before
I called the Whirl-pool-whale. Olaus Magnus speaking of the Balaena, says that
it has no gills, but certain Fistulae The love of the Balaena toward her
young ones.
are in stead thereof, placed in the forepart of the head, and that it is a
fish which shows great love and affection toward her young ones: For when they
are little, being faint and weak, she takes them into her mouth to secure them
from tempestuous surges; and when the tempest is over, she spues them again out
into the sea. A An instruction from the Balaena (...) careful parents.
fit emblem this, to teach all sorts of parents either in Church,
Commonwealth, or private families, to provide for, and not destroy those under
them; as also to secure them from dangers whenever they arise.

When this Balaena and her male-whale accompany Ambergreese comes from the
Whale.
together (for they increase by copulation) they scatter much of their seed in
the waters, which being found by the mariners is taken and sold as a precious
drugge. Some call it Ambra, or Ambergreese, affirming that it is good contra
guttas, and against the palsy and resolution The virtues of this Amber.
of sinews, if it be used as an ointment: good also to be drunk down against
the falling sickness, and swounding; having also great power of strengthening
the inward parts. It is commonly white, and sometimes counterfeited with the
dust of Lignum aloes, and the sweet gum Storax, sea-mosse, and the like; but
that which is How to know whether it be without sophistication.
sophisticated may be easily known, because it will soon be dissolved like wax:
whereas that which is without sophistication How to know whether it be without
sophistication*
is more solid and less easy to be made liquid. Thus affirms Olaus magnus:
howbeit others write that Ambergreese is the spawn of the whale. But Avioen is
persuaded that it grows in the sea: and some again only write, that it is cast
up on the shore and found cleaving to stones there; the fume whereof is good
against the falling sickness, and comfortable to the brain.

Munster writes that many in Iseland, of the bones and ribs of the biggest
whales, make posts and sparres for the building of their houses: and how great
profit proceeds from the oil of the whale, no man is ignorant.

Lib. 9. ca^. 62. See also (...). Hist. de (...). lib. 10. cap. ^. (...). de
i^dust. (...).
Pliny writes of a little fish called Musculus, The great whale is beholding
to the little Musculus.
which is a great friend to the whale: for the whale being big would many times
endanger her self between rocks and narrow straits, were it not for this little
fish, which swimmeth as a guide before her. Whereupon Du Bartas descants thus,

A little fish that swimming still before
Directs him safe from rock, from shelf and shore:
Much like a child that loving leads about
His aged father when his eyes be out;
Still wafting him through every way so right,
That reft of eyes he seems not reft of sight.
Which office of that little fish, may serve as a fit emblem An emblem drawn
from the Whale and Musculus; showing that the me^nest ought not to be contemned.
to teach great ones and superiors, that they ought not to contemn their
inferiors; for they are not always able so to subsist of themselves, that
they never stand in need of their helps who are but mean and base in the eyes
of greatness: there may come a time when the meanest person may do some good,
and therefore there is no time wherein we ought to scorn such a one, how mean
soever he be.

Furthermore, as the whale is befriended by the Musculus, so also he is as much
infested by the Pl^. lib. 9. (...). 6.
Ork; for The Ork dares ^ght with the whale.
albeit the Ork be less then the whale, yet it is a nimbler fish, and cruel
withal, having sharp teeth, with which, as with an admired weapon, she cruelly
wounds the whale in the belly, and then floating into a shallow place,
endangers the whale to follow after.

The Sword-fish called Xiphia, is little like to any other The Sword-fish.
fish: he has an horrid head like an owl; a deep mouth as if it were some
immensive pit; ougly eyes, with a back and a bill like a sword.

There is also another great fish called Serra, or a Saw-fish, having an hard
copled head with teeth like a The Sawfish.
saw, standing in manner of a comb upon the head of a cock: with which, the
said fish when she wants a prey, cutteth the bottom of ships, that the men
being cast away, a prey may be provided by feeding on their carcases.

The Monoceros, or fish with one horn, may fitly be The Unicorn of the sea.
called the Sea-unicorn: it is a sea monster, having a great horn in his
forehead wherewith he is able to pierce through a ship. Howbeit his cruelty is
much hindered in regard that it has pleased the Almighty to make him very slow
in motion, whereby those who fear him have advantage given them to fly away.

The Sea-elephant is a fish which often goes on shore The Seaelephant.
and sleeps in the rocks, hanging by his two Elephantlike teeth (but both they
and his body are far bigger then the land-elephant) and being espied by men
at sea, they call to others on the shore, by whose help, using nets and gins
and other instruments for that purpose, they together invelope his body, and
then suddenly assaulting and awaking him, he leaps with a violent rush as if he
would leap into the sea, but being hampered and entangled by the fishers
engines, he cannot; he is compelled therefore to yield himself to their mercy:
who having killed him do first skin him, then take out his fat; and of his
skin they make thongs, which are sold for a great price, as being very strong
and such as will never rot. Olaus magnus commends his teeth above the other
parts of his body. Lib. 21. This fish thus sleeping An emblem drawn from the
Sea-elephant, concerning sleep in sin.
and caught suddenly, may be as a fit emblem of those men who coming out of
their right way, do fall asleep in sin; and at last when death awakes them
they think to go to heaven, or leap into the ways of godliness, but then it
is too late: for they are taken as surely and as suddenly, as was that fool in
the Gospel, who thought he had goods laid up for many years.

The Crocodile, seeing it lives in the waters as well, or The Crocodile.
rather then on land, I reckon among the fishes. They be commonly found about
the river Nilus in Egypt, and Ganges in India; and (as Munster writes in his
cosmographie) it waxes of a little thing to a very great beast. For his eggs
are much like unto goose eggs, but the young which comes of them takes
increase to 16 or 18 cubits in length. He lives almost as long as a man, his
back is hard and full of scales; he wants a tongue, but has cruel teeth, two
whereof be far more terrible then the other, and much longer: his eyes are
said to be very dull in the water, but mavelous quick-sighted when he is out
of it; his tail extends it self to an ample length, and his bitings are so
sharp and cruel that they can never be healed: he has also short feet and
sharp claws or nails, wherewith he helps to catch and dismember either man or
beast which he can lay hold on: howbeit, it is said that he flies from those
that persecute him, and persecutes those that fly him. Munst.

When he has devoured a man and eaten up all but A dissembl^ like unto the
Crocodile.
the head, he will sit and weep over it, as if he expressed a great portion of
sorrow for his cruel fact: but it is nothing so. For when he weeps, it is
because his hungry paunch wants such another prey. And from hence the proverb
took beginning, viz. Lacrymae Crocodili, Crocodile tears: which is then
verified, when one weeps cunningly without sorrow, dissembling heaviness out
of craftiness: like unto many rich men's heirs, who mourn in their gowns, when
they laugh in their sleeves; or like to other dissemblers of the same nature,
who have sorrow (...).
in their eyes, but joy and craftiness in their hearts.

It is reported by some Aelian. var. hist. lib. 1.
authors, that the dogs in An emblem from the dog and Crocodile.
Egypt use to lap their water running, when they come at Nilus, for fear of the
Crocodiles there. Which cannot but be a fit pattern for us in the use of
pleasures: for How we ought to use pleasure.
true it is, we may not stand to take a hearty draught, for then delights be
dangerous; howbeit we may refresh our selves with them as we go on our way, and
may take them, but may not be taken by them: for when they detain us and cause
us to stand still, then their sweet waters have fierce Crocodiles; or if not
so, they have strange Tarantula's, whose sting causes to die laughing.

Porcus marinus, or the Sea-hog, is a strange kind of The Seahog.
fish, headed like an hog, with teeth and tusks like a boar, and a bending back
like a creature begotten among swine: only his tail and hinder parts is like
to the tail of other fishes, and his four legs are like to the legs of a
dragon. Such a fish as this was taken up in the Germane ocean, in the year of
our Lord 1537, as Olaus witnesses in his 21 book.

But in Bermuda, or in the sea about the Summer islands, they have Sea-hogs of
another kind and fashion, nothing so big nor terrible, without legs, good for
food, and like to hogs in their heads.

Moreover, Olaus again makes mention of another The Swam-fisk.
fish, which they of Norvegia call a Swam-fisk: and this is the most greedy
and gluttonous of all fishes. For it is continually feeding and filling it
self, even up to the very mouth, until he can hold no more; and his prey is
upon other the smaller fishes. This likewise is his quality and condition;
when he is in fear of any danger, he will so wind up himself and cover his
head with the skin and substance of his own body, that he is then but like
unto a piece of a dead fish, and nothing like himself. Which feat he seldom
does without hurt or damage: For still fearing that there be those about him
who will prey upon him and devour him, he is compelled for lack of meat to
feed upon the substance of his own body; choosing rather to be devoured in
part, then to be consumed by other more strong and powerful fishes. These and
such like are taken for their fat and oil, rather then for any thing else which
is useful in them.

And unto this fish I cannot but liken all greedy cormorants Covetous
cormorants like to the Swam-fisk.
and covetous devourers of other men, being never satisfied with the measure of
their oppressions, but lay house to house, and field to field, until there be
no more place; as the prophet Esaias speaks, chap. 5. 8. For they covet fields,
and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a
man and his house, even a man and his heritage, Mich. 2. 2. But at the last,
when they must give an account for all the things that they have done, then
being oppressed by fear, as they oppressed others with cruelty, they would be
glad to hide their heads, and rather consume their own selves then be given up
to the tormentours; saying with them in the Revelation, Let the hills fall upon
us, and the mountains cover us from the wrath of him who sits upon the throne.
But it is madness to run from punishment, and not from sin. And therefore to
possess all things, is to possess God the possessour of all things. For
omission and commission, are a wicked man's confusion; and oppressors may
verily look to feast the devil: for while they devour the poor, the devil
devoures them.

Equus marinus, the Seahorse, is most of all seen between The Seahorse.
Britain and Norway. In the Northern seas he will sometimes sleep upon a piece
of ice as it floateth upon the waters: and seldom do the fishermen desire to
take them in their voyages to those parts, but when they take few Whales. He
has an head like an horse, and will sometimes neigh; his feet are cloven like
to the feet of a cow, and he seeks his repast as well on the land as in the
sea: but his hinder parts are like to other fishes, and his tail like theirs.
Ola. lib. 21.

There be also Sea-cows and Calves, so called because The Seacow and calf.
they do much resemble such kind of creatures living upon land. The Sea-cow is
a great, strong, and fierce monster, bringing forth young like her self: she is
said to be big ten months, and then delivered; sometimes of two: but oftenest
she has but one, and this follows her up and down whithersoever she goes.
Olaus writes, that the Sea-calf is a great devourer of herrings, insomuch that
coming to the side of a net wherein they are hanged, she will eat them up one
by one until few are left. And in the Indies the Spaniards use to catch a
mighty fish, having large teats and dugs.

And those who live at Bermuda or the Summer Islands, The Tortoise.
are much beholden to that fish which they call the Turtle or the Tortoise: she
will come on the shore and lay her Concerning which fish see Elian also, Var.
Histor. lib. 1.
eggs in the sands, a bushel in the belly of some one; which being taken in
time are very good and wholesome meat, and sweet: but if they lie long, the
sun will hatch them. They have harping irons to catch these fishes; and being
taken, one of them will serve to feast about fifty men at a meal. And indeed
those seas afford variety of very good fish, pleasant and dainty, as I have
heard them say who lived there.

But above all, the Mermaids and Men-fish seem to The Mermaids and Mermen.
me the most strange fish in the waters. Some have supposed them to be devils
or spirits, in regard of their whooping noise that they make. For (as if they
had power to raise extraordinary storms and tempests) the winds blow, seas
rage, and clouds drop, presently after they seem to call. Questionless natures
instinct works in them a quicker insight, and more sudden feeling and foresight
of these things, then is in man; which we see even in other creatures upon
earth, as in fowls, who feeling the alteration of the air in their feathers
and quills, do plainly prognosticate a change of weather before it appears to
us. And of these, not only the poets, but Plin. lib. 9. cap. 5.
others also have written. The Poets feign there were three Olaus Mag. lib. 21.
cap. 1. Hist. Nether. lib. 2. page 116. Alex. ^b Alexand. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Genial. Dier^m.
Mermaids or Sirens; in their upper parts like maidens, and in their lower part
fishes: which dwelling in the sea of Sicilie would allure sailers to them, and
afterward devour them; being first brought asleep with hearkening to their
sweet singing. Their names (they say) were Parthenope, Lygia, and Leucasia;
wherefore sometime alluring women are said to be Sirens.

Neither can I but admire what I find recorded in A story of a Sea-woman.
the history of the Netherlands, of a Sea-woman who was taken up in the
streights of a broken dike near to the towns of Campen and Edam, brought
thither by a seatempest and high tide, where floating up and down and not
finding a passage out again (by reason that the breach was stopped after the
flood) was espied by certain women and their servants as they went to milk
their kine in the neighboring pastures, who at the first were afraid of her,
but seeing her often they resolved to take her, which they did; and bringing
her home, she suffered her self to be clothed, fed with bread, milk, and other
meats, and would often strive to steal again into the sea, but being carefully
watched she could not: moreover she learned to spinne, and perform other petty
offices of women; but at the first they cleansed her of the seamosse which did
stick about her. She was brought from Edam and kept at Harlem, where she would
obey her mistress, and (as she was taught) kneel down with her before the
crucifix, never spoke, but lived dumb and continued alive (as some say)
fifteen years; then she died. This is credibly reported by the Petit. transl.
by ^d. Grimston.
author of that history, by the writer of the chronicles of Holland, and in a
book called the Theater of cities. They took her in the year of our Lord 1403.

Moreover Lib. 9. cap. 5.
Pliny tells us of Tritons, and Nereides, which were Mermen, or Men-fish of
the sea. And in the year 1526 (as the author of Du Bartas his summarie
reports) there was taken in Norway, near to a seaport called Elpoch, a
certain fish resembling a mitred Bishop, who was kept alive some few days
after his taking. And (as the said author writes) there was one Ferdinand
Alvares, secretary to the storehouse of the Indians, who faithfully
witnesses that he had seen not far off from the Promontorie of the Moon, a
young Seaman coming out of the waters, who stole fishes from the fishermen,
and eat them raw. Neither is Olaus Magnus silent in these things: For in his 21
book, and first chapter, having mentioned fishes like to dogs, cows, calves,
horses, asses, lions, eagles, dragons, and what not? he also says, Sunt and
belluae in mari quasi hominis figuram imitantes, lugubres in cantu, ut
Nereides: etiam marini homines, toto corpore absoluta similitudine, etc. that
is, There be monsters in the sea, as it were imitating the shape of a man,
having a doleful kind of sound or singing, as the Nereides: There be also
Seamen of an absolute proportion in their whole body: these are sometimes seen
to climb up the ships in the night times, and suddenly to depresse that (...)
upon which they sit; and if they abide long, the whole ship sinketh. Yea (says
he) this I add from out the faithful assertions of the Norway fishers, that
when such are taken, if they be not presently let go again, there arises such
a fierce tempest, with an horrid noise of those kind of creatures, and other
sea monsters there assembled, that a man would think the very heaven were
falling, and the vaulted roof of the world running to ruin; insomuch that the
fishermen have much ado to escape with their lives: whereupon they confirmed it
as a law amongst them, that if any chanced to hang such a fish upon his hook,
he should suddenly cut the line and let him go. But these sudden tempests are
very strange, and how they arise with such violent speed, exceeds the bounds of
ordinary admiration. Whereupon it is again supposed that these monsters are
very devils, and by their power such strange storms are raised. Howbeit for my
part I think otherwise, and do much rather affirm that these storms (in my
judgment) are thus raised, namely by the thickening and breaking of the air;
which the snortling, rushing, and howling of these beasts assembled in an
innumerable company, causes. For it is certain that sounds will break and
alter the air (as I have heard it of a city, freed from the plague by the
thundering noise of cannons) and also I suppose that the violent rushing of
these beasts causes much water to fly up and thicken the air, and by their
howling and snortling under the waters, they do blow up and as it were
attenuate the waves, and make them arise in a thinner substance then at other
times; so that nature having all these helps, in an instant works to the
amazement of the mariners, and often to the danger of their lives.

Besides, shall we think that spirits use to feed, and will be so foolish as go
and hang themselves on an hook for a bait? They may have occult qualities (as
the Loadstone has) to work strange feats, and yet be neither spirits nor
devils: for experience likewise teaches, that they die either sooner or later
after their taking; neither can a spirit have flesh and bones as they have. But
to conclude, Alexander ab Alexandro, in the third book of his geniall days,
has written one whole chapter (viz. the 8) concerning these seamen, affirming
that it is no fabulous report to say there be such: he describes them to be
fish in their lower parts, and like to men in their upper parts; affirming
moreover that they be very venereous and desirous of women, loving them, or
lusting after them. Whereupon he relates a story of a certain woman who was
taken up and carried to the sea by one of these Mermen, concubitus causa, that
he might couple himself with her. Which monster the inhabitants took soon
after; but refusing meat, he died: and they then made this law, that no woman
should adventure to come near the sea, except her husband were with her. This
happened in Epirus, a country of Greece.

In the kingdom of Congo, which lies in the African Another Hog-fish.
part of the world, there is in the river Zaire, another kind of hog-fish
differing from that already mentioned. It is called Ambize, Angulo, or
Hog-fish. It has as it were two hands, and a tail like a target, which eats
like pork, and whereof they make lard, and has not the savor or taste of
fish. It feeds on the grass that grows on the banks of the river, and
never goes out: it has a mouth like the mozell of an ox; and there be of them
that weigh five hundred pound apiece. Purchase.

In the West sea there is a fish called the Pontarof, a The Pontarof.
cruel monster, that takes great pleasure to carry away young children,
loving to play and sport with them. Du Bart. Summar. ex Oviedo, lib. 13.

The fishes called Sharks are most ravenous devourers, The Shark
and in the waters upon the coasts of Africa, they have been seen with six or
seven other smaller fishes, guarded with blew and green, attending like
serving-men.

And omitting many, whether in the newfound The Dolphin.
world, in the Norway seas, or elsewhere, I come now to the Dolphin, that king
of fishes; then whom there is not any which is swifter, none more charitable to
his fellows, and (which is above all the rest) none more loving to man. Pliny
has written much of this fish, in his ninth book, at the eighth chapter; and
so have others also: affirming that he is not only sociable and desirous of
man's company, but delighted also in sweet and sensecharming music.

Amongst the fishes that did swiftly throng Du (...).

To dance the measures of his mournful song,
There was a Dolphin did the best afford
His nimble motions to the trembling chord.
But whether that in the story of Arion be true, I am not able to say. Perhaps
their censure is none of the worst, What may be thought of A^ions story.
who persuade themselves it is a fable which was invented by those who had
heard of that famous history of the Prophet Jonas: for diverse stories of the
Bible have been in this manner changed by the Pagans; as amongst the rest, that
of Sennache^ib was very counterfeitly told by Herodotus, when he makes mention
of a great company of mice (as he had his relation from the priests of Egypt)
who came by night and eat off the feathers from his arrows, Herod. lib. 2. And
the flood of Deucalion is related by Ovid, as if Noah's flood and that were all
one. And the Grecians fable, upon the suns going back in Hezechiahs time,
that at the (...).
birth of Hercules the sun made a longer night then at other times.

Howbeit this scruple may not take away the love of The Dolphin is loving and
kind
the Dolphin toward man. For besides those things related in Pliny, of a boy
feeding a Dolphin, and carried on his back over the waters to school, with such
like things in the said author; others also have in a manner written to the
same purpose. And amongst the rest, Elian tells A story to the same purpose.
a story of a Dolphin and a boy: this boy being very fair, used with his
companions to play by the sea side, and to wash with them in the water,
practicing likewise to swim: which being perceived by a Dolphin frequenting
that coast, the Dolphin fell into a great liking with this boy above the rest,
and used very familiarly to swim by him side by side: the boy at the first
was fearful of this his unwonted companion; but through custom he and the
Dolphin grew so familiar, that they would be friendly antagonists, and contend
together in swimming each by other: insomuch that sometimes the boy would get
upon the Dolphins back, and ride through the waterie territories of Neptunes
kingdom, as upon some proud pransing horse, and the Dolphin at all times would
bring him safely to the shore again; of which the people in the adjoining city
were eyewitnesses, and that not seldom. At last it chanced that the boy, not
careful how he sat upon the fishes back, but unadvisedly laying his belly too
close, was by the sharp pricks growing there, wounded to death. And now the
Dolphin perceiving by the weight of his body, and by the blood which stained
the waters, that the boy was dead, speedily swimmeth with all his force to the
land, and there laying him down, for very sorrow died by him. In memory
whereof, let these few lines be added,

The fish would live, but that the boy must die:
The dying boy the living fish torments.
The fish tormented has no time to cry;
But with his grief his life he sadly vents.
Oh where is love or grief so firm as this?
Of such true love and grief most men do miss.
The Sea-fox is a fish that has a long tail, and is subtle in The Seafox.
his chase, having a strong sent as the Land-fox has. He ^seth to swallow his
young into his belly in time of danger (as the Balaena does) which some also
attribute to the Dolphin. This fish and the Amia use to deceive the fisherman,
either by leaping at, or by sucking up so much of his line, that they may be
sure to bite off the hook. Aelian. var. hist. lib. 1.

The Cantharus is an admired pattern of chastity. The chaste Cantharus
Elian Hist. animal. lib. 1. cap. 26.
speaks of the ardent love of this Cantharus, and says that between him and
the adulterous Sargon, is great enmity: for he will fight as courageously for
his mate, as Paris could fight for Helena; being in this the true emblem of a
loyal couple, who hate defiled sheets, loving and living constantly together.

Like unto which is the Mullet; who albeit she be a The Mullet.
fearful fish (as Pliny tells us, lib. 9. cap. 17.) and will hide her head
for fear; yet seeing her male taken, she follows after him as far as she
can, choosing rather to die with him, then to be left her self alone.

But the Sargon is contrary; for this is an adulterous The Sargon.
fish, daily changing mates; and not so content, uses to go on the grassie
shore, horning the he-goats who had horns before. For (as Hist. animal. lib. 1.
cap. 23.
Elian writes) his lustful love toward the she-goat is so furious, that the
fishermen use to take these fishes by covering themselves with a goats skin.

And does not this fish bear a true emblem against An emblem against
adultery.
adulterers? Yes surely does it. For those who make horns on other men's heads,
do but make engines to toss themselves to hell.

Caprae refert scortum, similis fit Sargus amanti, Alcia^. Emb.

Qui miser obscoeno captus amore perit.
The goat, a harlot does resemble well;
The Sargus like unto the lover is,
Who (poor wretch*) taken, is condemned to hell,
And for his lust deprived of heavenly bliss.
Howbeit, a Ten in the hundred, or a Fox-furr'd-clouted-pated fornicatour, who
to his tenants wife is sometimes a lecherous administratour, cannot see it;
neither will such believe that whores are the hackneys which men ride upon into
Devils-ditch: for thither do they gallop, like the deceived Sargus, caught by
the fisher in the skin of a goat.

Hoga is said to be a fish as big as a mackerell, or (as A fish with wings.
some say) no bigger then a herring. This fish has It affords a (...) emblem
concerning thriving.
wings, which do not so much help her by flying to escape a far greater fish,
as endanger her to the merciless cruelty of another enemy; I mean a certain
seafowl, which waits but for such an opportunity to devour her. Neither can it
fly high or far, or longer then her moistened wings keep wet; nor yet swim
fast, having exchanged finnes for wings. So (says one) have I seen men thrive
worse that have two trades, then such as have been skillful or thriftie in one.

The birds that watch for these fishes, are in feathers as big as crows, but in
flesh little bigger then a sparrow, and are wiser to hunt after others then to
save themselves; for they be so tame that they will light upon the hatches of
ships, and suffer themselves to be taken. So have I Harm watch, harm catch.
seen some so eager to hurt others, that in the mean time they have run
themselves into as great a danger: and well worthy are they of such a reward.
For if a treacherous Haman provide a gallows for an harmless Mordecai, it is
no pity to see the preparer give it hansell, or first hanged. Neither will any
one mourn to see an Achitophels craftiness catch himself in his own wiliness.

He that will others guide to Charybs shelf,
On Scylla's rock may fearlesse split himself.
The Remora is a small fish which cleaves to the bottom The Remora.
of a ship, and does as strongly as strangely stay it, called therefore by some
the Stop-ship. Of which there can be no more reason given, then of the
loadstones drawing iron: neither is it possible to show the cause of all
secrets in nature.

The properties of the Cramp-fish are in a manner as The Torpedo.
strange. For the nature of it is to make the hands of such as touch it
benumbed, albeit they touch it with a long pole. Plin. lib. 32. cap. 1. He is
called in latin Torpedo, which is a name proceeding from his benumming
quality. Some attribute the property of this secret to the air which issues
from the body of the Torpedo; supposing it to be so subtle, that passing
along by the line and the pole, it affects and afflicts the arms of the
fisherman. Many authors have written of this fish, as Plutarch, Pliny, Elian,
Aristotle, and sundry others. It is said to be of the form and greatness of a
Thornback, and (as I said) of a fell and a banefull breath; wherewith she does
not only benumme the fishers hand, but also the neighboring fishes who come
near her, that so being as if they were dead, she may the more easily prey
upon them: like many a rich man, slain by his heir, in hope to possess his
lands.

The Barble is a fish that will not meddle with the The Barble
bait, until with her tail she have unhooked it from the hook. This fish
carries a wary jealousy always with it, and will not be deceived by all the
baits the fisher can devise. Plutarch, in his book De industria animalium,
sets down the careful circumspection of this creature; affirming moreover
that if with the beating of her tail she can do no good, she then opening her
mouth a little, does only touch the bait with the tip of her lips, Against
^nesse.
and gnaw it round about. Which is indeed a fit emblem against the rashness
of those who will not look before they leap, but are so fool-hardie that
without either fear or wit they will undertake strange projects, and believe
every fair word; as if the grass had no snakes, or a sugared pill no inward
bitterness.

The Scolopendra is a fish more credulous, but of as The Scolopendra.
strange a property: For, as Pliny writes in his ninth book and 43 chapter
(to which De animal. lib. 13. cap. 23.
Elian is not opposite) this is a fish which refuses not the bait, but feeling
himself taken with the hook casts out his bowels, and then having loosed the
hook swalloweth them again.

Now this is a fit emblem of all such as have swallowed An emblem from this
fish, of swallowing the baits of sin.
down the deceitful baits of sin; aptly affording this instruction, that if
they will be safe and secure, they must search themselves. For if those baits
which we have swallowed, through the seeming good of deceitful sin, if they,
I say, be not vomited up again, there is a hook which will hold us fast, and
hale us headlong into misery.

The Sturgeon is a fish whose scales turn backwards, The Sturgeon.
and therefore he swimmeth against the stream. So have I seen some effect their
projects by means and ways, An emblem concerning thriving.
contrary to the common course of men. Nay, some have been so happy as to
thrive in respect of themselves, when others could not but judge that the world
must needs go backwards with them.

The Calamarie is sometimes called the Sea-clerk, The Calamarie.
having as it were a knife and a pen. Some call him the Ink-horn-fish, because
he has a black skin like ink, which serves him in stead of blood. And of
these fishes there be more kinds then one: for the Cuttle has also an inkie
juice in stead of blood. You may see three figures of this fish in the fourth
book of Gesners history of fishes; and Li^. 9. cap. 29.
Pliny, speaking of these fishes, affirms that both male and female, when
they find themselves so far forth discovered, that if they cannot be hid
they must be taken, do then cast this their ink into the water; and so by
coloring it, they obscure and darken it: and the water being darkened, they
escape.

For through the clouds of this black inkie night,
They dazzling pass the greedy fishers sight.
The Purple is a kind of shellfish, from whence is gathered The Purple.
a most necessary juice for the dying of silks and such like things. This juice
is in the midst of her mouth and jaws, and is to be had in the spring time;
for at other times she is barren and wants it. She loses her life with the
loss of this juice, and lives no longer then this abides in her: Wherefore
Munster in his cosmography gives this counsel, to take them alive; adding
moreover that she is a great devourer of little shellfish. She has (says he)
a long tongue which is always moving; and by this she gets her prey. Some
say that they differ in color according to their nearness or farnesse from
the sun: whereupon it comes to pass that in Africa they have as it were a
violet color, and at Tyrus a redder color.

Polypus is a fish with many feet, and a round head The Polypus.
near unto them; it is a great enemy to the Lobster: and (as Elian, and other
authors write) they can often change their color, and by that project devour
other fishes. Their use and custom is to he lurking closely by the sides and
roots of rocks, changing themselves into the color of the same thing unto
which they cleave; insomuch that they seem as a part of the rock: whither when
the foolish fish swim, they fall into danger: for whilst they dread nothing,
these Polypodes suddenly prey upon (...) ^sons (...) to (...) Polypus.
them and devour them. And indeed this is the constancy and unfeared
treachery, which is often found in many men, who will be any thing for their
own ends, and nothing without them; sparing none for their own purposes, nor
loving any but to effect them. Their heads indeed may well be near their feet:
for they prize the trash we trample on, far above the joys of heaven; else
would they never work their fond purposes by deceitful means, and damage
others to help themselves.

Amongst the several sorts of shell-fishes, the glistering The Pearlfish.
Pearl-fish deserves remembrance; not only in respect of her self, but also in
regard of the Prawn, another fish and her companion: for between these two
there is a most firm league of friendship, much kindness, and such
familiarity as cannot but breed admiration in the reader. They have a subtle
kind of hunting, which being ended, they divide their prey in loving manner:
for seeing they one help the other in the getting of it, they likewise join in
the equal sharing. And in few words, thus it is: (of which ye may read in
Pliny, Plutarch, Elian, etc.) When the Pearl-fish gapeth wide, she has a
curious glistering within her shell, by which she allureth the small fry to
come swimming into her: which when her companion the Prawn perceives, he gives
her a secret touch with one of his prickles; whereupon she shuts her gaping
shell, and so incloseth her wished prey: then (as I said) they equally share
The Pearl and the Prawn emblemes of cheating.
them out and feed themselves. And thus day by day they get their livings, like
a combined knot of cheaters, who have no other trade then the cunning deceit of
quaint cousenage; hooking in the simpler sort with such subtle tricks, that be
their purses stuffed with either more or less, they know a way to sound the
bottom, and send them lighter home; lighter in purse, though heavier in heart.

The foresaid authors make mention of the Gilthead The Gilthead.
or Golden-eye, which helps the one the other out of a snare, or from off an
hook: for if the ensnared fish cannot help himself by loosing the snare with
his tail, then will his companion put to his mouth, and set him free. Or if the
one see the other hanged on a hook, it may be easily observed how his free mate
will skip at the line, and never leave till he have broke it off. An emblem of
friendship.
Which may serve well to teach us, that we ought not to leave our friends in
danger, but do the best and utmost that we can to set them free. For a friend
is never known till such an occasion shall discover him: at other times we have
friends enough.

The Plaice, if it be well grown, and something The Plaice
thick, is said to be a passing good fish: It takes the name from Placeo, to
please, because it pleases the palate.

That fish which we call the Sole is a very wholesome The Sole and Whiting
fish: And so is the Whiting, often entertained in the court.

I have heard the Gurnard likewise much commended. Gurnard.


But the Conger is hard of substance, and therefore not Conger.
easy to be digested.

And so also is the Salmon hard of digestion, although it Salmon.
be a pleasant fish, and very sweet, especially the belly. Whereupon it comes
to pass that we do not eat it hot, or presently after it is boiled.

The Ray or Thornback is scarce so wholesome as other Thornback.
fish; for Physicians write that it makes men subject to the falling evil, by
reason that it is a fish full of superfluous juice. Howbeit the pricks which
grow without A medicine against the stone.
upon the skin, if they be pulled up by the roots, dried, made into powder,
and given fasting in White or Rhenish wine, is an excellent medicine to avoid
gravel and to break the stone.

Herring is a fish common and cheap, very dangerous Herring.
if they be not moderately eaten fresh; for we often see that want of care in
the eating of them, casts many into fevers. And as for Red Herrings and Red
Sprats, they must needs have little wholesomenesse or nourishment in them: for,
if we may believe the learned, they give as good nourishment to the body, as
rustie Bacon.

We read that in the river Ganges are Eeles of an extraordinary Eeles.
bigness and length. This fish is never better moved from his nest then in a
thunder. They be not bred out of spawn as other fishes, but from the slime and
dirt of the earth, as the common opinion goes: and of all fishes which are
tooth some, these are the least wholesome. They breed agues, stop and hurt the
voice, procure the stone by reason of their great sliminesse, and do also
dispose a man to the gowt by breeding such matter as brings pain in the joints.
But know that after Eeles and E^mpreys* we should drink good strong wine; and
indeed generally with all kinds of fish, wine is very wholesome.

The Shad is never is season but in the spring; for at The Shad.
other times it is full of bones.

And in the choice of fish this is a rule, that such as have seals and ^innes
are best: for many scales and ^innes betoken the pureness of their substance,
as the physicians tell us.

The Gogion is a dainty fish, and found as well in the The Gogion or Gudgion.
sea as in fresh waters; of which there be sundry sorts: but the best live in
sandy places, and about rocks.

The Tench is commonly called the Physician of other T^ (...)
fishes: for when they be hurt, they heal themselves again by touching the
Tench, finding the slime of his body to be as a sovereign salve.

The Perch uses to wound others with his sharp fins, The Perch and Pike.
whereupon the Pike or Pickerell dares not devour him. Both these give the
body pure nourishment, by reason of their firm and hard substance.

The Rock, Dace, Chevine, Bream, Smelt, and Carp, are good. But the Trout is
admirable: for this is so sound in The Trout
nourishment, that when we would speak of one who is sound indeed, we say that
he is as sound as a Trout. This is in some kind a foolish fish, and an emblem
of one who loves to be flattered: for when he is once in his hold, you may take
him with your hands by tickling, rubbing, or clawing him under the belly.

I will not say who else is like this fish, for fear I should offend some
squeamish dame: but let not her anger show her wantonness; and so we are both
charmed to hold our peace: she, to salve her own credit; and I, to end this
present section: wherein I do confess I might have spoken of sundry other
fishes, but I had rather send my reader to Gesner and such other ample
authors, then tire him with my relations.

Sect. 2. Containing the second part of this fifth day, which is of Birds, or
Fowl, flying in the open firmament of heaven.
FRom fishes I must come to birds, from the water to the air, and teach my pen
to fly a while with the feathered fowls, as before it was swimming with the
fearful silent fish.

And now why God has joined the creation of fish and fowl together, may
without curiosity be observed; to wit, because he would in every work and part
thereof continue an harmonious order. Great is the likeness between fish and
fowl, whether it be that we consider the natural place wherein either of them
live, or that we consider their resemblance in parts, or their manner of
motion. For first, the place of fishes is the water; the place of fowls the
air: both which are diaphanous, clear, moist, and easy yielding elements.
Secondly, that which finnes be to fishes, wings and feathers are to birds. And
thirdly, that which swimming is to fishes in the waters, flying is to birds in
the air. The one moves himself by his sins, the other by his wings. The one
cuts and glideth through the liquid air, the other shoots and darteth through
the humid water. The one makes paths in that subtle concave between heaven and
earth, the other draws furrows in the ploughed sea: and both tracts are
indiscernible; either place again closing and no longer open then their native
dwellers flit through their yielding gates.

And first of all me thinks I see the lofty Eagle, king The Eagle
of birds, towering on high in the heaven-aspiring air.

And amongst all fowls, the Eagle only can move her self straight upward and
downward, perpendicularly, without any collateral declining. Munster. This
bird is commended for her faithfulness toward other birds in some kind,
though sometimes she show her self cruel. They all stand in awe of her: and
when she has gotten meat she uses to communicate it unto such fowls as do
accompany with her; only this some affirm, that when she has no more to make
distribution of, then she will attach some of her guests, and for lack of food,
dismember them. Her sight is sharp and quick, insomuch that being in the
highest part of the air, she can easily see what falls on the land, and
thereupon the sooner find her prey. It is said that she can gaze upon the
sun and not be blind, and will fight eagerly against the Dragon: for the
Dragon greedily coveting the Eagles eggs, causes many conflicts to be between
them.

The Poets have called her Joves bird, and Jupiters armor-bearer, because she
is never hurt with lightning. She is a bird tenderly affected toward her
young; insomuch that she will endanger her own body to secure them, bearing
her young ones on her back when she perceives them to be assaulted with
arrows. Hares, Hearts, Geese and Cranes, are such creatures as this bird uses
to prey upon. And for her practice in killing the Heart, thus it is: when she
labors to drive the Heart headlong to ruin, she gathers (says Munster)
much dust as she flies, and sitting upon the Hearts horns, shakes it into his
eyes, and with her wings beats him about the mouth, until at last the poor
Heart is glad to fall fainting to the ground.

The Eagle builds her nest in the rocks and high places; and the property of
the young Eagle is, when she finds a dead carcass, first of all to pick out
the eye. And so (says one) do all seducing heretics, first put out the right
eye of knowledge, that thereby they may the better lead along their seduced
Proselites.

And note that although the Eagle be very tender over her young, yet when they
be able to fly of themselves, she casts them out of her nest; because she
would have them shift and no longer depend upon their damme. Which is a good
example, says the same author, Parents ought not to bring up their children
in idleness; by an example taken from the Eagle.
for domestical discipline; namely, that parents should not bring up their
children in idleness, but even from their youth exercise them in honest
labor, training them up to some vocation.

Moreover, Aristotle writes, that when the Eagle waxes old, the upper part of
her bill so grows over and increases, that in the end she dies of famine.
But Augustine observes further that when the Eagle is thus overgrown, she
beats her bill upon a rock, and so by striking off her cumbersome part, she
recovereth her strength and eating; to which the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm. 103.
5. Which makes thee young and lusty as an Eagle.

The Phoenix, says Munster, is a noble bird, and is but The Phoenix.
one in the world. Cornelius Valerius (whom Lib. 10. cap. 2.
Pliny mentions) does witness that when Quintus Plautius and Sex. Papinius
were Consuls, one was seen to fly into Egypt. And Tacitus also writes, that
when Lucius (...). lib. 6.
(...) and P^ulus Fabi^s were Consul^, another was likewise seen to fly
thither* and yet not another, but the same rather; for there was not above two
years difference in the time of this appearance; Vitellius and Fabius being
Consuls in the year of the city 786, and Plautius with Papinius in the year
788. Lib. 58.
Dion was persuaded that this bird thus showing her self, did betoken the death
of Tiberius: but our countreyman Lib. de emend. temp. and alio quo^ lib. cap.
22.
Mr Lydiat rather thinks, that it pointed out the time when Christ, that true
Phoenix, did both die and rise again: and so also thinks Carrion, in his chron.
lib. 3.

This bird (if we may believe what is written) is about the bigness of an
Eagle, having a glittering brightness in the feathers of her neck, like unto
gold; in other parts purple, with an azured tail, but so as in some places it
is of a rose color: her head has on it a plume or tuft of feathers. Some say
she lives five hundred years; others give her six hundred and sixty: and, as
Pliny writes, this bird has her settled habitation in Arabia Felix. When she
waxes old, she is said to make her a nest of Cassia, with branches of the
frankincense tree, into which she puts other odours, and so dies upon them:
and then, out of her bones and marrow, there springs first a little worm,
which afterward comes to be a young Phoenix.

Howbeit many think that all this is fabulous: for (besides the differing
reports which go of this bird) what species or kind of any creature can be
rehearsed, whereof there is never but one? and whereas the Lord said to all his
creatures, Increase and multiply, this benediction should take no place in the
Phoenix which multiplieth not. And again, seeing all creatures which came into
the Ark, came by two and two, the male and female, it must needs follow that
the Phoenix by this means perished. And so says one, As for the Phoenix, I (and
not I alone) think it a fable, because it agrees neither to reason nor
likelihood, but plainly disagreeth to the history of the creation and of Noah's
flood, in both which God made all male and female, and commanded them to
increase and multiply.

The Griffon is a creature (if there be any such; The Griffon.
for many doubt it) which whether I may reckon amongst the birds or beasts, I
cannot tell. Howbeit as I find him marked by See also (...). Cosmog.
Aelianus, he is thus described; namely that he is a kind of beast with four
feet, keeping most of all in India, being as mighty in strength as a lion: he
has wings and crooked talons, black on the back, and in the forepart purple.
His wings be somewhat white, his bill and mouth like an eagles bill, his eyes
fiery; he is hard to be taken except he be young, he makes his nest in the
high mountains, and fights with every kind of beast, saving the lion and
elephant: he diggeth up gold in desert places, and gives repulse to those that
come near him. But (as I said) some doubt whether there be any such creature
or no: which, for my part, shall be left to every man's liberty.

The Ostrich is compounded as it were of a bird and The Ostrich.
a beast, and is especially found in Africa: he is partly like a camel in his
long legs and feet, partly like a sparrow in his head and bill, though much
greater. Some say his head is covered with small hairs, his eyes be gross and
black, his neck is long, and (as I said) his bill is short and sharp like a
sparrows bill, and his feet has as it were a bipartite hoof. He is said to
exceed the height of a man on horseback; and as for his wings they help him
little: howbeit we make much use of his feathers, as is well known. And in one
thing he is like the woodcock; for hiding his head he never fears his body.
Job speaks that he is forgetful; for when this bird Job 39. 14, 15.
has laid her eggs (which she hides in the sand, and are hatched by the
sun) she forgets them, until the young come forth, and then the males are
forced to feed and cherish them. So have I seen many mothers refusing The
Ostrich like women who will not nurse their children.
to nurse their children; and, if they could, would have others likewise bear
them: but putting them forth, I believe many perish for want of care and due
attendance: for it is not possible that a nurse should have that tender
affection which belongs to a mother; and many times, with the nurses milk, the
children suck the nurses vices. Necessity therefore, and a prudent choice,
should seek out nurses; as we see it Genesis 21. 7. Moreover it is said, that this
bird is of such strong digestion that she will eat iron: and when she sees
that she cannot avoid taking, she casts stones with her claws against her
followers, by which she often hurts them.

Ibis is a tall strong bird, having a bill of great length; Ibis.
he does exceeding much good in destroying serpents. These birds live in Egypt,
and the serpents brought out of Lybia thither, by the Southern wind, are
killed by them, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 28. See also afterward in the Stork.

The Kite is well known: she is a fowl which flies The Kite.
softly until she epsy her prey; she has quick eyes, will fly high into the
air in hot clear weather, and by the turning of her tail she directs her
body, even as a great lazy ship is ordered by the helm. Aristotle observes
that all such fowls as have talons, cannot devour any meat but flesh: and if
any other food be thrust into their mouths, they cannot eat it.

There is great enmity between the kite and the raven, Emblemes from the Kite*
concerning the covetous gripers of this world.
it being an usual thing for the kite to rob the raven, as being better in
talons and flying. So have I seen the gripers and catchpoles of this world
destroy one another, the less mighty always devoured by the Envy shadowed
forth.
stronger and more potent. And (me thinks) the kites feeding upon carrion, is a
fit emblem of the envious person, who rejoices in the fall of others: for
there be many in the world who care not what men fall, so they may rise;
building their own houses out of the blood and ruin of others.

Howbeit, it is observed by Aristotle, that the kite being a ravenous bird,
brings forth but two young ones at a time; wherein nature has been very
provident and careful, to suffer such ravenous fowls to increase no faster.
And so (says one) it is commonly seen in the world, that many rich cormorants
(or corn-vorants rather) are either childlesse and have no children, or else
they abound not in many; and yet we can see no end of their scraping, pinching,
and oppressing. There is one alone (says Solomon) and there is not a second,
which has neither son nor brother, and yet there is no end of all his
travel, Eccles. 4. 8.

The Raven also is a fowl given to rapacitie and devouring The Raven
of flesh, great of body, slow in slight, sharp in sight, frequenting much the
countries of Italy, Spain, Egypt, and about the Alps. But this (says Munster)
is to be understood of the great kind of ravens.

This fowl does greatly above all others covet men's carcases, and (as some
think) by a singular instinct and natural gift, it has understanding of man's
death, presaging it a few days before. But whether that be true or not, this
is certain, that it haunteth places of battle, with solitary ruins; and like
to the young eagles, it picketh out the eye of a dead corpse first of all,
because (as some suppose) he sees his own image in the clearness of the eye;
and so like coveteth the like. The fox An emblem from the Fox and Raven,
concerning compa^ions in ill, etc.
and this bird are very friendly, but both at enmity with the hawk; that being
the chiefest cause of their familiarity. And so have I seen one man love
another the better, for hating him whom he abhors: or one, like the fox,
will sometimes plot another ruin, that the other, like the raven, may prey
upon him.

Munster tells us that the skin of a raven well Good to help digestion.
tewed and dressed with the feathers on it, is exceeding good to be laid to a
weak and sickly stomach; for it greatly helps digestion.

And again, she is noted for an unkind bird to her young ones, * expelling
them out of their nest before Plin. lib. 10. cap. 1^.
their full and complete time, leaving them to their selves before they are
able to shift; and so crying for food, God by his providence provideth for
them: whereupon it is said, that the young ravens cry unto God: or, which
feeds the young ravens that call upon him, Psalm. 147. 9. And in this act,
these and the like birds are emblemes Against such a^ want natural affection.
of such as want natural affection. And indeed the young ones afterward prove
as cruel to their dammes: for when they be old, and have their bills
overgrown, they die of famine, not sharpning their bills again, by beating them
on a stone, as the eagle does: * neither Aelian. de animal. lib. 3. cap. 43.
will their young ones help them, but rather sometimes set upon them, when they
are not able to resist. It is not good therefore to use children too harshly in
their minority, Children should not be used too harshly in their minority.
lest when Senes come to be Pueri again, they find as little favor at their
hands as they showed before. And of this, parents, masters, tutours, and
guardians should be careful; learning their lesson from these unnatural
birds. But more I may spare to add; for the well affected are also well
instructed to put a difference between foolish cockering, and cruel handling:
knowing with Prove. 13. 24. and chap. 23. 13.
Solomon that Where the rod is spared, the child is spoiled: and with Paul
confessing likewise, that they ought not to be bitter to them, lest thereby
they provoke them to wrath, Ephesians. 6. 4. Moreover, let it be observed that some
authors affirm there is also the raven of the sea, which is like in proportion
to the other raven, only differing in color, as being white: Now Aristotle
thinks that this happens by reason of some passion or accident in the
generation. Neither (as is thought) does the raven conceive by conjunction of
male and female, but rather by a kind of billing at the mouth, which Lib. 10.
cap. 12.
Pliny mentions as an opinion of the common people; saying, Ore eos parere
aut coire vulgus The eggs of ravens are naught for big be^ed women.
arbitratur: ideoque gravidas, si ederint corvinum ovum, per os partum reddere;
which is very strange, if it should be true: and therefore Aristotle denies
it; only thinking that their billing or kissing is but like unto that amongst
the doves. And as for the English name Raven, given to this bird, it is so
called of ravening and devouring: In Greek it is (...), of (...), which
signifies Crocitare, to croke; and in Latin, Corvus; under which name we
comprehend the crows as well as the ravens.

The ancient Emperors of Rome, and other heathen Princes, had their
Soothsayers, and beholders of birds: now these gave great heed to the ravens,
and would diligently look upon their eyes; marking, in time of war, to what
part they turned: for they supposed that the raven did presage which side
should perish in battle; and would always therefore have her eye fixed or
turned that way, or to that party; as it were showing her longing desire to be
feeding on their carcases. Which is somewhat confirmed by that which Pliny
writes of the ravens flying out of Athens and Peloponnesus; saying, Nam cum
Mediae hospites occisi sunt, omnes e Peloponneso and Attica regione volaverunt.
Plin. ibid. Which flocking to the fight was for their fat prey, as though there
had been in them some sense of the present action.

Furthermore, this I find again recorded by Plin. lib. 10. cap. 43. that when
Marcus Servilius and C. Cestius were Consuls, there was a solemn funeral of a
raven celebrated at Rome, upon the fifth calends of April: and this being so
near the time of our Saviors passion as it was, did (as some observe) not
unfitly shadow forth the devils funeral, and destruction of his kingdom among
the Gentiles. For as the raven delights in solitary or desert mansions,
Isai. 34. 11. so does the devil walk through desert places, as we see it,
Matthew. 12. 43. In which resemblance, he is fitly called the devils bird: and
this funeral may as well prove the time of Christ's death and burial, as Dions
Phoenix, appearing about the same time, was used by Carrion, and Mr Lydiat, to
show the year of his resurrection.

The Pelican is that bird which Lib. 10. cap. 47.
Pliny calls Onocratalus, The Pelican.
and is much like the swanne in shape and proportion, excepting in the
wideness of his gullet and capacity of his maw. Of this fowl there be two
sorts; one that lives by the waters, another which is the Pelican of the
desert.

This is a melancholy bird, and takes the name of Pelican, from the Greek
(...), comes from (...), perforo, to beat or pierce.
(...), so called of smiting or piercing: which is in regard that by piercing
his breast he reviveth his young ones with his own blood, when they are bitten
and killed of serpents: or having killed them with his bill, he reviveth them
again by his blood after three days. Or else this name belongs unto him from
piercing the shel-fishes and picking out their meat to feed his young. For,
according to the testimony of Aristotle, the dammes use to catch such fish and
swallow them into their stomachs, and when they have there so warmed them that
their shells may gape, they do again cast them up; and so pick out their meat
in an easy manner. In like sort have I seen those, who have done more Policy
is better then strength.
by policy, then others or they could do by strength; neither is violence
always the readiest way: for sometimes art may be more then arms, and gentle
usage have power to charm, when rigor helps to enrage.

The Stork is a famous bird for natural love to his The Stork.
parents, whom he feeds being old and feeble, as they fed him being young:
the Egyptians and the Thessalians Plin. lib. 10. cap. 23.
so esteemed this bird, that there was a great penalty laid upon any that
should kill him. His English name Stork comes from (...) in Greek, which is
Amor in Latin; proceeding from his forenamed kindness and natural love to
his damme; being also humane and loving to mankind, delighting to build in the
tops of houses and chimneys, as is usual to be seen in Germany; whereby it is
evident, that he loves the society of man: There ought to be society amongst
men.
which (says one) shows their disposition to be unnatural, which do shun
the company of men, and of a superstitious mind, retire themselves into
desert and solitary places, as Hermites, Anchorites, and such like. Dr Will. on
Levit.

And now the reason why he was in such esteem in Egypt and Thessasie, was for
his great service he did them in killing of serpents, and other venomous
things. From whence men first learned to purge by clyster.
Pliny calls him Ciconia: and from the Stork Ibis, men first learned to purge
by clyster; for with his bill he conveyeth salt water up into his body below,
and so purges himself.

The Heron or Hernsew is a fowl that lives about The Heron
waters, and yet she does so abhor rain and tempests, that she seeks to
avoid them by flying on high. She has her nest in very lofty trees, and
shows as it were a natural hatred against the gossehawk and other kind of
hawks: and so likewise does the hawk seek her destruction continually. When
they fight above in the air, they labor both especially for this one thing,
that the one might ascend and be above the other: Now if the hawk gets the
upper place, he overthrows and vanquisheth the heron with a mavelous
earnest flight; but if the her on get above the hawk, then with his dung he
defiles the hawk and so destroys him: for his dung is a poison to the hawk,
rotting and putrefying his feathers.

This bird is Avis furibunda, a furious bird; and so in Latin she is called
Ardea, of ardeo, to burn: chiefly because she is an angry creature, or because
she is greatly enflamed with lust; or else because the dung of this bird does
as it were burn or consume what it touches.

Of Hawks there be many and several kinds; as the The Hawk
Falcon, Merlin, Lannar, Tassell, and sundry others. Howbeit the Tassells are
supposed to be the males of such birds as live by prey: as the Tassell of the
Saker is called a Hobbie, or Mongrell hawk* that of the Sparrowhawk, a Musket;
that of the Lannar, a Lannaret; and so of the rest. Now some again distinguish
these birds, three several ways. First by the form and fashion of their
body; some being great, as the Gossehawk, Faulcon, Gerfaulcon, etc. some
small, as the Merlin, Musket, Sparrow-hawk, Hobbie, and such others. Secondly
by their game, as some for the phesant, some for the partridge, some for the
hernshaw, some for the duck and mallard, some for one thing and some for
another. Thirdly they are said to differ in the manner of their following the
game; as such know better then my self, who use to keep and manage hawks.

And if hither I may bring other birds of prey, I would join to these the Kite,
Ringtail, Buzzard, Bittor, and such like.

Olaus Magnus makes mention of brave generous falcons Olaus Mag. lib. 19.
in the more northern parts of the world, which live upon the spoil of fish,
and build their nests upon high mountains: and for all kinds of hawks
generally, he accounts them the best which are bred thereabouts: adding
moreover that an hawk is fearful of nothing more then a Peacock: and as for
little infants, he says that there is none, either bird or beast kept tame at
home, which more desires to hurt them, then the Apes and biggest Hawks. So
have I seen some maintain and cherish Emblemes from the Ape and Hawk,
concerning treachery and ruin to a man's house.
those in their own families, perhaps at their own tables, who upon occasion
have proved the first to do them mischief; nay, no occasion but fit
opportunity is enough for such: as Brutus conspired the death of Caesar. Or
again, I have seen those delight in that, which has been the readiest way to
their houses ruin.

The delicate Partridge is a bird well known: she The Partridge.
brings forth young, which like chickens will run as soon as they can creep
out of the shell. They are supposed to live 16 years. They cover the shell of
their eggs with a soft dust sprinkled over them, and never lodge whereabouts
they breed, being very lascivious wanton birds; as Pliny tells us, lib. 10.
cap. 33. And as Physicians write, the flesh of this bird is admirably good and
wholesome, especially for weak persons: for it comfort the stomach, makes
them lusty, and helps the memory. Neither do I marvel (says one) that
gentlemen be at such cost to keep hawks, and take such toil to kill Partridges
and Phesants: for besides the pastime and pleasure in hawking, the flesh of
these birds is very pleasant, and every morsel as good as gold.

Well may we wish that pleasure to succeed,
Which brings to man such treasure in his need.
The Phesants are said to come first of all from about The Phesant.
the river Phasis, which is a famous river in Colchos; where they were found,
and from whence they were brought by the Argonauts: Li^. 1^. cap. 4^.
Pliny therefore calls them Phasianae; and we, Phesants. This is a princely
dish: but The Mallard.
the Mallard is nothing wholesome; according to that of Schola Salerni,

Good sport it is to see a Mallard killed,
But with their flesh your flesh should not be filled. Schol. Salern^.
translated by Sir John Her.

The Capon, Hen, and Chicken, Partridge, Quail,
The Heath-cock wholesome is, the Dove, the Rail;
The Phesant, Woodcock, Lark, and Thrush be good,
And all that do not much delight in mud.
But do you not hear sweet Philomel? hark how she The Nightingale.
plays the silent world asleep. This is a bird much addicted to watching; for
she sits all the night singing upon a bough, with the Aelian. (...). hist.
lib. 12.
sharp end of a thorn against her breast to keep her waking. Her very throat is
able to ravish the dullest ear, and so much the more is her music beyond
compare, in that from so small a creature such dainty aires are warbled forth.
The Latins call her Philomela; that is, a bird loving to sing: and what Stoic
but would love to hear her, and give her thanks for her dainty dittie? Should
man strive to marry his industrious lays with hers, he could not be so much
rapt with his own as with her delicious notes: for sure she seems to have

So many tunes, whose harmony excells Du Bart.

Our voice, our viols, and all music else.
The pretty Lark chants with a sugared throat, so does The Lark, Blackbird,
Linot, Finch, Mavis, Redbreast, Wren, Thrush, and Starling.
the Blackbird, Linot, the several kinds of Finches, the mirthfull Mavis,
Red-breast, Wren, Thrush, and Starling.

But all is nothing to the Nightingale,
Breathing so sweetly from a breast so small.
The Owl is another night-bird; her cry is dismal, and The Owl.
she her self rightly styled The hate and scorn of all the birds beside. And of
Owls there be many kinds.

The great Owl in Greek is called (...), of (...) clamo* Bubo.
or from the doleful noise which she makes: and so in Latin it is Bubo. This
Owl keeps in desert places, is like in shape to another Owl, has talons like
the Eagle, and is very near as great. He is thought to be an ominous bird, as
he was to Agrippa, Ios. Antiq. lib. 18. 1. which must be understood when he is
seen in the day; as again in the Council of Constance one appeared before Pope
John the 22. And of all night-birds, those are held to be the most dismal, Qui
glutiunt vocem velut strangulati; that is, which throtle out a kind of
croaking voice, like one that is strangled, or ratleth in the throat.

And of this sound is that hoarse bird which is commonly The Night-raven.
called the Night-raven, or Night-crow. This also is said to be a kind of owl,
and (as authors witness) will take mice like a cat, and many times catch and
destroy moles. In Greek, some name him (...); and (...) is clamo, to cry or
make a noise: but in Latin he is Nycticorax, from (...) nox, and (...) corvus;
which in English is the Night-crow, or Night-raven. And as for his color, it
is black like other crows. See Gesner de avibus, lib. 3.

Again, there is another kind named the Scriech-owl, The Scriechowl.
which the Latins understand by the word Strix, and the Greeks by the word
(...). Some (in old time) have fabled strange things of this bird, namely that
it sucked out the blood of infants lying in their cradles, and with the very
eyes of it did effascinate children, or change their favors: whereupon some
have used the same word for a witch, a fairie, or hagge.

But perhaps that which is most commonly called the Noctua.
Scriech-owl, is comprehended under one of the kinds of the Noctua: or else it
may be another Scriech-owl. For there be 4 several Noctua's, as Gesner
writes. One is of a large bigness, and has feathers growing on her head like
ears. A second is less; white on the throat and breast, speckled on her other
parts with a white and muddie color. A third is also less then the former,
and spotted with white and ash color. And a fourth is also less then this, of
the same color, inhabiting most of all among rocks, and such like places. The
Noctua in Latin, in the Greek is called (...), from the glaring, or color of
her eyes. And as for the Scriech-owl, she is known by nothing better then her
cry.

Also there is Ulula; and this is that which we call the The Howlet.
Howlet, or the Madge. All the owls are solitary birds, some dwelling in
deserts, some in churches and in ruinous buildings: and this delights to sit
sleeping in a tree, using there likewise to build her nest; frequenting barns
and other such like places for the love of mice, young birds, and little
chickens. She is of a gray color in the most of her body.

Some say that the eggs of an Owl broken and put into To make a drunkard loathe
^is liquour.
the cups of a drunkard, or one desirous to follow drinking, will so work with
him, that he will suddenly loathe his good liquour, and be displeased with
drinking.

The Bat may be next; because she uses to fly abroad The Bat.
in the twilight: called therefore vespertilio in the Latin, and (...) in
Greek. It is a creature between a bird and a beast, for it has a mouth, teeth,
members of generation like a beast, brings forth young ones alive, laying no
eggs, etc. Only it flies in the night, and has wings like a bird. It is
therefore called by some a Flittermouse, and is no bird but a winged mouse; for
she creeps with her wings, is without feathers, and flies with a kind of
skin, as bees and flies do; excepting that the Bats wing has a far thicker
and stronger skin. And this creature thus mungrell-like, cannot (as you know)
look very lovely.

But not to keep you longer amongst these birds of night, The Cuckoe.
for fear some one or other should affright you, let us now go walk and hear
the Cuckoe sing. This is a bird so called by reason of his cry; and from
thence comes the Greek (...), and the Latin Cuculus: for the noise which this
bird makes, and the song which she sings, is nothing but Cuckoe. This is her
note; which note she neither varieth nor changes until she be wearing away.

Olaus Magnus calls her the Annunciatrix optatae Lib. 19.
laetitiae; which is not in respect of her sweet singing, but because when she
comes, then comes that cheerful time of the year, the wished and the welcome
spring.

She loses her voice commonly about the end of July, or somewhat before;
faltring and doubling in her note when summer is wearing out. So have I seen
those who in time of prosperity have been very cheerful, False friends.
forward, and observant of others, attending them with fair words and great
shows of love: but when times change, they also changed; showing themselves
dull and backward, and yet showing themselves then no other then they were. For
these be friends who will abide no winter, but falter now, even as they
flattered before, never remembering their former words, how plain and fair
soever they seemed;

Iura, fides, ubi nunc? commissaque dextera dextr^,
Quique erat in falso plurimus ore Deus?
Whereas a true friend indeed, is only known in time of trouble. For it is a
certain rule, Amicorum idem affectus, Friends are always like-affected:
according to that of the Poet,

Et flesti, and nostros vidisti flentis ocellos: Ovid. Epist.

Miscuimus lacrymas moestus uterque suas.
Thou did weep, and did my moist eyes see:
We mixed grief, and wept for thee and me.
Furthermore, this is a fowl hated of every other bird, because she spoileth
their nests and eats their eggs.

Neither is she very fruitful; for one at a time is enough for her: neither is
this one hatched but by some other of a differing kind; for she does not build
any nest, but lays her egg in the nest of another, which hatcheth it up as
her own. Nay it so falls out, that the poor, silly, and deceived bird thus
beguiled, neglects her nearer brood, as being better pleased with the beauty
of the Cuckoes young, until at the last this stranger thus brought forth and
being ready to fly, destroy his nurse, and kill her for her kindness. So have
I heard of some, no better rewarded for their good entertainment and watchful
care. For benefits received are little remembered: and where men sometimes look
for love, they are wickedly repayed with hate and harm. Adulterous m^n like the
Cuckoe.


Also there appears from hence another emblem. For in the Cuckoe is
deciphered the wicked practice of adulterous men, who are not ashamed filthily
to defile their neighbors bed: From whence we call them cuckolds, who suffer
this wrong and yet are innocent; whereas indeed the lustful Goat that acts
all, and performs the villainy, is the very cuckold; and the other (poor
honest man) wronged not only in his bed, but in his name, is the harmless
patient of what he cannot help. Yet this I will say, that whilst many make
Peacocks of their wives, they do also make Woodcocks (although not Cuckoes) of
themselves: in which, whom they may thank, it is soon perceived; or whom they
may blame, their folly tells. For signs hanged forth are but the callers in
of guests; and baits presented allure*fish: and as nothing sooner invites the
thief to cut a purse then show of money, so nothing sooner occasions an
enticement to disloyalty, then the gaudie vestments of an immodest wife; as in
this following Epigram may appear,

A lusty lad that past along Cheapside,
Incontinent a gallant less espied:
Whose tempting breasts (as to the sale laid out)
Invites: and thus this youngster 'gins to flout.
Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
No, Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold:
But wherefore ask you? and there made a stop.
To buy (quoth he) if not, shut up your shop.
The Swallow is a bird likewise which comes in the The Swallow.
Spring, and goes away again before Winter. Some think that they repair into
those countries where they may rest upon the sides of such warm mountains as
lie open to the heat of the shining sun; and that there they have been found
naked, and without their feathers. Plin.

But Olaus Magnus, in the nineteenth book of his Northern History, writes
otherwise; saying, Although the writers of many natural things have recorded
that the Swallows change their stations, going, when winter comes, into hotter
countries: yet in the northern waters, Fishermen often times by chance draw up
in their nets an abundance of Swallows, hanging together in manner of a
conglomerated mass. Adding moreover, that in the beginning of Autumn they
gather themselves together among the canes or reeds; where, providing
themselves to sink into the waters, they join bill to bill, wing to wing, and
foot to foot. For it is observed (says he) that at that time having finished
their sweet singing, they descend in such a manner; and quietly again, after
the beginning of the Spring, they fly out thence and repair their former nests.

This the said author affirms with much confidence; and does likewise say,
that some young men have taken this mass, and by heating of it, the Swallows
have been again disjoined, beginning to fly: but they lived not long, because
their time should have been a great while more to bring them to perfection.
This I confess is strange, but why may it not as And so much the rather,
because they are seen in hotter countr^ when they be gone from hence; neither
can any one show a cause for every thing in Nature.
well be, as that of the Barnacle or Brant-geese; of which it is certain that
they first grow on trees? See more of them in the third day.

Elian says that the Swallow is a watchful bird, and sleeps but by halves
and fits (as we say) which is no sound kind of rest. And again, her swiftness
in flying is commendable; and as for her diligence and dexterity in building a
nest, it deserves praise: insomuch that some have said, The Swallow taught men
first to build. Plutarch de indust* animal.

Flying she sings, and singing seeks where (...)

She'r ^ouse with ounning, not with cost, may r^ar.
Her little beak she loads with brittle straws,
Her wings with water, and with earth her claws,
Whereof she mortar makes, and therewithal
Aptly she builds her semicircle wall.
Next after the Swallow, I may come to the Turtle. It The Turtle
is a bird which sings not, but has a kind of groaning in stead of singing;
true to her mate, of admired chastity, lives long, is absent from us in
winter; and (as some think) being gone, she loses her feathers; as Pliny
likewise writes of the Swallow.

She is also a very harmless creature, and without gall. Innocence to be
learned from the Dove.
Which if man could frame himself to be, the serpents wisdom would not hurt
him, nor lean-fac'd envy sojourn with him. But being more wise then innocent,
he makes others groan more at his wrongs, and under his burdens, then he
himself either does or did for his own sins.

Columbus, the Dove or Pigeon, may be next, because The Pigeon.
it is near of nature to the Turtle. These fowls sit upon their eggs by
course, and afterward when they be changed from egg^s to young ones, the cock
does feed and foster them. They commonly bring forth two at a brood, the one a
cock, the other a hen; and have young about ten times in a year. But some
which write of Egypt (says Aelianus) declare that the Pigeons in that country
breed twelve times in a year.

Neither does the cock tread the hen, before he has courteously saluted her
with a kiss. For the hen will not have company with him, until that first
debt be duly paid. Some (who write of India) report that there be Pigeons in
that country of a yellow color. And as for Stock-doves, they differ from
Pigeons, because the Pigeon is somewhat bigger, and not altogether so wild.
But the Ring-dove is much greater then any of them, and is thought to live
about thirty or forty years.

Furthermore, Pigeons take great delight to sit by the banks of waters and
crystal streams: which some think to be, in regard that (like women) they love
to behold themselves, as in a mirror or glass. And if nature has taught them
that piece of pride, it brings them no small profit: for whilst they thus sit
by the water side, they can soon perceive when the Hawk is coming toward them,
because his shadow or image will appear in the water; and so being
forewarned, they cannot but be fore-armed, and prepared against such mischief
as that devouring bird intends to them.

These fowls be naturally very hot and moist, wherefore they be not good for
those that be choleric or inclined to any fevers: but to them which be
phlegmatic and pure melancholy, they are very wholesome, and be easily digested.

The Sparrow dies quickly, is very lascivious, and if The Sparrow.
it be a cock, lives not above a (...)* hinketh so: but I suppose, that
although their time be short, yet it may be more then a year.
year; if a hen, it has a longer time. Plin.

They be of a very hot nature; and (as Geminianus writes) will, without harm,
sometimes feed on the seeds of henbane. Their flesh is hard to digest, they
stir up Venus, especially the cock sparrows. But being boiled in broth, they
are restorative, and good for weak or aged persons.

Elian, in the 13 book of his variable history, speaking A story of a Sparrow.
of Xeno^rates how he was much inclined to pity, tells a story of a Sparrow
which flew into his bosom. As this man (says he) on a time was sitting in a
sunnie place, a little chirping Sparrow pursued by an Hawk by whom she was
almost wearied to death, and fainting in flight, fled into the bosom of
Xenocrates; which when he saw, he entertained her with delight, and harbored
her very tenderly till all dangers were past, and then he gave her free passage
to fly whither she would; uttering these words when he cast her up into the
air, Hosti supplicem non prodidi, I have not given one craving succor, into
the hands of his enemy. And (indeed) to help the helpless, harbor the
houselesse, deliver the distressed, and defend the wronged, ad astra usque
^ollit, nay supra astra rather; and is a divine practice worth recording, and
not unworthy imitation.

The Peacock is a bird well known, and much admired The Peacock.
for his dainty colored feathers, which, when he spreads them against the
sun, have a curious luster, and look like gemmes. Howbeit his black feet make
him ashamed of his fair tail; and therefore when he sees them (as angry with
nature, or grieved for that deformity) he hangs down his starrie plumes, and
walks slowly in a discontented fit of solitary sadness; like one deeply
possessed with dull melancholy: from whence it is said, that he has a theevish
pace, and a hellish voice.

Neither is he other then a perfect emblem of deep An example of envy.
envy. For (...) lib 4. cap. 43.
some write that his dung is very medicinable and useful to man in many
things; which he therefore striveth to hide, and conceal: being indeed the
right trick of devilish envy, which is best pleased when she can but exclude
the communication of such things as would do good, if they might be had.

The flesh of these fowls, if they be old, is hard of digestion; and so do
physicians likewise write of the Turkie-cocks: but yet the chickens of either
of them about half a year old, are good and wholesome.

But I leave this bird, and come to the Cock. He it is The Cock.
who is a constant herald to the newborn day, and a diligent watch to the
silent night, altering in his note as the day approaches: for in the deadest
time he crows more deeply then when the night is wearing out; showing thereby
as it were the differing hours, and changing watches.

It is said that the shrill voice of this commanding The Cock ^eth the Lion.
fowl, will ^ep in aw the grimme and fierce Lion: so Pliny writes; but others
have said the contrary, because it has been found that Lions have sometimes
strangled Cocks and Hens without fear: and yet perhaps this might be through
the antipathie which is between them. For in this it is free for every one to
think what he pleases.

Neither is it now any other then a common sport to Cock-fights.
see such creatures enter battle with their weaponedwounding heels, and cruel
pecking beaks. The original of which (as Var. hist. lib. 2.
Aelianus writes) was after this manner.

When the Athenians had vanquished the Persians in A story concerning
Cock-fighting
a battle, they made a law, that upon one day in every year, there should,
upon the open theater, be a Cockfighting kept to be seen of all; that observing
how they fought and endangered themselves for nothing, others might learn not
to be daunted when their country lay at the stake, but fight with courage
unresistable; because they then fought for something. To which purpose it is
recorded, that when Themistocles was captain, and Ibid.
spectatour of such a Cock-contention, he spoke thus to his soldiers: These
two Cocks (says he) endanger themselves, as we see, to the death, not for
their countries cause, not for the household gods, not for the privileges of
their ho^able ancestors, not for renown, not for liberty, not for ^fe and
children: but only for this, that the one might not (...)-crow or beat the
other. And therefore the hearts of ^he Athenians ought rather to be stored with
stoutnesse and audacitie, that thereby they may purchase perpetual remembrance.

Close by his side stands the courageous Cock, Du ^art.

Crest-creatures king, the peasants trusty clock,
True morning watch, Aurora's trumpeter,
The lions terror, true Astronomer,
Who leaves his bed when Sol begins to rise,
And when sun sets, then to his roost he flies.
The Crane is said to be a shifting bird: it has high The Crane
legs, a long beak and neck; which finding no food in winter in the northern
regions, by reason of the great cold, retire themselves into more temperate
countries, and in summer return to the north again.

They fly by companies, feed together, love their own kind, and appoint one
to be king over them: and if at any time they fight among themselves, presently
they be again reconciled, and keep their society as before. They have a watch,
and watch by course; there being in the claw of that Crane whose turn it is to
wake, a little stone, that so if by chance this watching bird should fall
asleep, the stone falling down might again awake him. Gemin. ex Aristot.

Moreover it is said, that when they do alight upon the ground, their king is
first, and he also first raises himself from the earth and looks round about
him, to see whether any one be coming, that thereby giving warning, they might
defend themselves. Which is (indeed) a fit emblem of careful pastors, good
magistrates, Care ought to be in Pasto^rs, Magistrates, and Governors; taught
by an example from the Crane.
and honest governors, whose part it is to be at all times vigilant for the
good of those over whom they are. Nay, their captain and their watching, does
not only show the care which ought to be in governors, but also the
necessity of government is deciphered by it.

And again it is reported, that when these birds fly out of Cilicia, over the
mountains Taurus, each of them carries in his mouth a peble stone, lest by
their chattering they should be seized upon by the Eagles. So have I seen The
tongue has brought many to mischief.
those whose unbridled tongues have but brought them to mischief, and rouzed
the Eagles about their ears: whereas in little meddling is much rest; and
nothing said is soon amended. The wise man therefore will wear discretion as a
stone upon the tip of his tongue, lest chattering such words as he knows not
what, he meet with that which he looks not for.

And now I could speak of the wars which the Cranes have against the Pigmies,
whom Du Bartas calls Dwarfs of the North: but I had rather refer you
concerning this to Pliny, in the second chapter of his seventh book.
Physicians tell us that the Crane is hard of digestion, and makes ill juice;
but being hanged up a day or two before he be eaten, he is the more tender, and
less unwholesome.

The silver Swan is a white bird, living in marshes and The Swan.
calm rivers; very loving unto his fellow, the male to the female, whom when he
draws to him, with his long neck he does as it were embrace her: wherefore in
greek he is called (...), of (...), to embrace or kiss; whence also is derived
the Latin Cygnus. They do one defend the other, and sit upon their nest by
turns, and equally have care of their young ones when they be hatched: neither
can the he-Swan endure that the she should company with another; in which they
be a perfect pattern of A pattern of matrimonial love.
chaste, mutual, and matrimonial love. Howbeit they will sometimes fight very
fiercely with their own kind: and against the Eagles they have cruel
battles, striving not so much to obtain rule, as to revenge their injuries.

It is likewise said that they sometimes sing, but never more sweetly then when
they be dying and exchanging life for death: of which some doubt, and approve
it as a thing only spoken in a poetical manner; yet Aristotle is against
them, affirming that many have heard them sing in the Assyrian sea. To which
purpose, Martial has this epigram,

Dulcia defecta modulatur carmina lingua
Cantator cygnus funeris ipse sui.
Sweet strains he chaunteth out with his dying tongue,
And is the singer of his fun'rall song.
Wherein he is a perfect emblem and pattern to us, that Death ought to be
cheerful.
our death ought to be cheerful, and life not so dear unto us as it is. And
from hence came the proverb, Cygnea cantio, which is but a lightning against
death.

I formerly made mention of the Raven: but beside The Seacrow.
the Raven there described, there is also a Sea-raven or Sea-crow, which is a
bird very black unless it be on the breast and belly, upon which they be of
an ash color. They hunt after fish, and have toothed bills like unto the
reapers sickle, with which they can hold even an eele, as slipperie as it is.
The dung of this bird is of an evil nature: for it will rot both the boughs and
barks of such trees as it falls upon; and so it is also said that the dung of
the Heron does. Olaus, lib. 19.

The said author speaks of another Sea-crow, which in seven days builds her
nest, and in the next seven lays her eggs and brings forth young: and of
another which he calls Morfex, or Humusculus, so called because she must beat
the water with her tail before she can fly. She is black all over, and with
the residue of her company uses to build her nest upon the tops of high
trees, growing near to such places where be store of fish, which they catch
and devour very greedily: and of these birds there be great store in the more
Northern parts of the world. But they have especially two enemies: A bird
called Platea.
the one is a bird which Olaus calls Platea; the other is a fish which is
called Raia.

The Platea lies in wait for these crows, and flies at them when they have
gotten their prey, and never leaves biting them upon their heads, until she
cause them to Policy is better then strength.
leave it. This bird uses to swallow down an abundance of whole cockles into
her belly, and there having warmed them, she casts them up, and then their
shells gaping like unto the roasted oister, give her leave to take out their meat
and eat it: which shows (as I said once before, in the description of another
bird) that policy is better then strength, and in the hardest matters
prevails best. The Ray kills the Sea-crows.


The other enemy is not a bird, but that fish which we call the Ray. For
whilst the devouring Crows be diving under water to catch their prey, they
themselves are caught by this fish and devoured suddenly, lest otherwise they
might want a revenger of their rapacitie even where and whilst they do the
wrong. Howbeit this Ray is a loving fish to man: for swimming in the waters,
and being greedily pursued by the devouring Sea-dogs, the Ray defends him, and
will not leave him until he be out of danger.

There be also an abundance of other birds in those parts of strange
properties, and names scarce known: of which, they who have a desire, may read
more in Olaus Magnus, the nineteenth book of his Northern history.

The Plover is Avis pluvialis, and a fowl well known: The Plover.
howbeit some have thought that they live only by the wind, and eat nothing
at all; but they deceive themselves in this opinion, as experience teaches.
For they have not only been seen to feed, but taken also with meat in their
crops. And that which first occasioned this error, was their quick digestion;
for they commonly eat things that are easily digested, and soon consumed.
Plover, See the haven of health, page 136.
says one, is thought to be a dainty dish and right wholesome, yet it is slow
of digestion, nourishes little, and increases melancholy. The like he
affirms of the Lapwing: but the Teal he yields to be somewhat better.

Moreover, the Plover flying high does signify rain: which bird Olaus
describes after this manner: There is, says he, a bird which we call Avis
Pluvialis, about the bigness of a Partridge, supposed to live by nothing but
air, because her belly uses to be empty of meat, and yet she is very fat:
her feathers are diversely colored, some with white, some with black, and some
with saffron color: and this bird the fowlers thus hunt; by throwing up into
the air short heavy clubs: for by so doing they cause her to descend, and
being descended, they catch her in their nets, laid ready for the same purpose.

Upupa or the* Lapwing is a bastard-plover. This is a The Lapwing.
querulous bird, flying up and down lapping and clapping with her wings; from
whence she is called a Lapwing: and in Latin she is named Up^a, from pu, pu,
which is the cry that she makes; there y securing her nest and young ones
from our finding. F^ by this practice she will draw us away from them (...)
far as she can. The comb or crest upon her head, g^ve Ovid a fit occasion to
feign a tale of a Tere^s ^ex Thra^. Meta. lib. 6.
king turned into a Lapwing, whose crown does yet appear upon the head of this
bird.

The Lapwings fight often with the Swallows, Jackdaws, and Pies, and by their
much crying do signify rain. And as for their young, being as it were half
hatched, they will run from their nests with the shells on their heads.

The Osprey is a ravenous bird which hovereth over The Osprey.
pools to take fish; having one claw foot, and another flat. The Charadrion.


Galgulus-Icterus or the Charadrion, is a bird unto which some ascribe this
strange property, viz. that if any who has the Jaundise look upon him, and the
bird on him, the bird then takes the disease and dies, but the An emblem^
from the cure done by this bird, concerning our cure wrought by Christ.
man is cured, made sound, and lives. Such are we, by nature sick unto death,
but by Christ (who died for our sins and rose again for our justification) we
are cured, made sound, and live.

Porphyrio is a bird drinking as though he did bite the Porphyrio.
water; his bill and legs are red and long.

Haleyon or the King-fisher is a bird which makes her The Kingfisher.
nest in winter upon the sea, during which time there is a calm and quiet
season: whereupon we call those days Halcyon days, wherein we have peace,
rest, and quietness. They live also about rivers, lay five eggs, and (as Lib.
10. cap. 3^.
Pliny witnesses) are seven days in preparing their nests, and in the other
seven they bring forth their young.

The Poets have a fiction of Alcyone and Ceyx, who Ovid. Met. lib. 11.
were turned into these birds: For when Alcyone heard that her husband Ceyx was
drowned in his way home from a certain voyage, she cast her self into the sea,
and then for the pity which the gods had of them, they were both transformed
into Halcyons. But without any fiction, this we are sure of, that it is a
strange bird, and as it were natures dearest darling; seeing that in favor of
her nests and young, the waters leave their raging, the winds their blowing,
tempests have forgot to rise, and days appear with quiet calms.

The Pirate (dwelling always in his bark) D^ (...).

Her building days desiredly does mark:
And the rich merchant resolutely venters,
So soon as the Halcyon in her brood-bed enters.
For so long as her quiet couch she keeps,
The He names only the ^icilian sea.
boiling sea exceeding calmly sleeps.
This is a bird which feeds upon fish, and by diving after them, catches
them; as is not seldom seen.

In the Summer islands, amongst other things, we hear Bermuda birds.
of variety of fowls. For upon the discovery of those parts by Sr. George
Summers, and Sr. Thomas Gates, an abundance of fowl were taken. They took a
thousand of one sort in two or three hours, being as big as a Pigeon, and
laying speckled eggs upon the sand, as big as hens eggs; which they would
daily come and lay, although men sat down amongst them. Purch.

There also is another fowl that lives in holes like cony-holes; their eggs
like to hen-egges, both in quantity and quality. And other birds were there
found so tame and gentle, that whistling to them, they would come and gaze on
you, while with your stick you might kill them. Idem.

But in Asia, in one of the Molucco islands named Tidore, Birds of Paradise.
is a strange bird which they call Mamucos, or birds of Paradise: they have
less flesh then the body makes show of; their legs be in length about an
hand-breadth, their head small, their bill long, their feathers fair and of a
singular beauteous color: Authors write that they have no wings, neither do
they fly, but are born up in the air by the subtlety of their plumes, and
lightness of their bodies. They are never seen (says my author) upon the
ground but dead, neither do they corrupt or rot in any ^ort. There is no man
knows from whence they issue, neither where they breed up their young ones,
nor whereupon they nourish themselves. The islanders believe that they make
their nests in Paradise, and tell many fables thereupon: which persuasion the
Moors first put into their heads. They call them Manucodiata, or holy birds,
and have them in religious account; insomuch that some of them have believed
that souls are immortal, by the consideration of such a bird. And as for the
sustenance which keeps this fowl alive, although it be hard to say upon what it
is maintained, I do easily think that we may listen to them, who suppose that
they nourish themselves, and maintain their lives by the dew that falls, and
the flowers of the spices. See Gesner de Avibus, lib. 3.

Some have written that it is a bird without legs: but Mr. Purchase in two
several places alleges the testimony of one Who also writes that he saw a
tree in the East Indies, the leaves of which changed themselves into birds, who
lived but 8 hours. Du Bart. Sum. And of birds in the Moluccos as big as hens,
with horns in stead of crests: They lay their eggs in the s^nd, and there they
be hatched.
Pigafetta, who witnesses that it is a bird having two feet as well as other
birds; but as soon as they be taken, they are cut off, with a great part of
their body, where of a little is left with the head and neck, which being
hardened and dried in the sun, seem to be so bred. And other authors
witness that there was one of them sold to the Emperor in the year 1605,
which had legs on it.

Cardan likewise mentions this bird; but seeing his report is differing from
our modern writers and travelers, I forbear to rehearse it: Howbeit they who
read Gesner shall see it in his third book of birds, together with a figure of
this fowl.

But out of Asia look yet once again into America: and The Cucuios.
then you shall see as strange a winged creature, as any we have heard of yet;
I mean the New Spains Cucuios, which whether I may call it bird, or beetle, I
cannot tell. He is very little, and of the thickness of a man's thumb or there
abouts; but amongst the works of God, he is a most admirable wonder. For he
carries four lights with him, which Like unto which are those birds mentioned
by Pliny and Solinus, Plin. lib. 10. cap 47.
shine in the night; two in the seat of his eyes, and two which he shows when
he opens his wings. And as for his wings, he has two very strong and hard,
under which he has two other little wings very thin, which appear not but
when he extends his other to fly. The Indians use them in stead of candles,
and (says my See Purch. and Du Bart. summary, page 240.
author) if a man tie five or six of them together, they yield as much light
as a torch.

And lo, just now, as if it were by the light of this Bees.
creature, me thinks I see the painful and industrious Bees fly flocking to
their hives.

These be those winged workmen, which whether their profit or admiration be
greater, I am scarce able to say. For they do not only busily bestirre
themselves to gather honey, which is very useful in the life of man; but they
do work it up in most strange manner, and keep it in their waxen cells so
rarely built, that all the men which the world affords are not able to do the
like. Neither is this all; for they live so, as they may be true patterns of
needful government, keeping themselves under the subjection of a king, and
order of laws. They may well be likewise said to have the sovereignty and
preeminence above all others of this kind, because the rest come far short
of their perfections.

It is a creature having four wings, and bloudlesse, the only crafts-master
of honey. Their eyes are somewhat of a horny substance, hid deep in their
bodies, as is also their sting; which when they lose they die: -- Vitam in
vulnere ponunt; because their sting and entrails come away together. They want
neither tongue nor teeth; and out of their short feet or stumps, there grow
forth as it were two fingers, wherein they carry a littlestone, for the poysing
their bodies in stormy, windy, tempestuous weather; it being a great means to
keep them from blowing away and losing their home.

Neither can it be denied, but that by nature they are much different: for some
(says Topsel in his Hist. of Serpents.
one) are more domestical and tam^, and others again are altogether wild,
uplandish and agrestiall. Those former are much delighted with the familiar
friendship, custom, and company of men; but the other can in no wise brook or
endure them, and therefore they keep their trade of hony-making in old trees,
caves, and such like other holes.

As for their breathing, I do not believe it; howbeit they may pant, move, or
stir (as the heart or brain does) and by transpiration be comforted and made
lively: for they be much refreshed by the air which passes through their
divided places, insomuch that they always use great diligence and care to
preserve them from being stopped: for as soon as they be stopped in those
passages, they die; as we see if at any time they chance to fall into oil, or
the like liquour which may stop their pores.

Some make three kings amongst them, differing in color, as black, red, and
divers-coloured; but perhaps there is rather one king in a company, the other
like kings may be esteemed as viceroyes. In their breeding they actually couple
together, after which they lay eggs, sitting upon them for the space of five and
forty days; then do they hatch their young ones, which at the first come
forth much like to white worms, except the king, who only is said to be
hatched with wings. And sometimes there is a kind of Be bred out of
putrefaction, as authors write. A rotten horse breeds Wasps; a dead calf
Bees, if the West wind blow; from an ass proceed Humble-bees; of a mule,
Hornets, etc. And whether the Bees, in Sampsons dead Lion, were bred any where
else, no man knows.

They have a Commonweal, and are governed by a king, as before was mentioned:
and him they reverence and honor, being always ready to do according to his
pleasure. He is of body far bigger then the honey Bees, has shorter wings,
but a brighter and more goodly head then they. There is always excellent
discipline, and very good government among them: for at the mouths of the
hives there be some which stand like warders placed at the gates of a castle,
to see who goes in and out. And having rested quietly all night, there is one
which with a humming noise does call them up, whereupon they prepare to fly
abroad about their business: but if they make no haste to look out, or go not
far from home, it is a certain sign of no good weather. When they be busy
at their work, the Bees which go abroad return home with laden thighs, full of
the substance of the flowers; and this especially is said to be an office of
the younger Bees: for some of the other do only earrie water; and the elder
ones remaining at home, do busily lay up, carefully dispose, and curiously
dress what the other bring in. Such as be sluggish among them, are diligently
observed, and bitterly punished: and as for the drones, they are supposed by
some to be the female Bees, which they drive out of their hives when breeding
time is past; and therefore they do ill who use to kill the drones before.
Others again think that the female Be is no drone, but rather bred among the
Bees, and being idle, and unapt for work, is driven away either in the busiest
time, or time of dearth. And yet perhaps it may be the female, which having
done as much as can be naturally required from her, must not think much to be
driven away, but leave her room to a succeding generation.

I said before, that in the morning there is one among them which calls them
up, and so in like manner at night they leave their buzzing by degrees, at last
hearing as it were a proclamation through their hive to go to rest: and so the
watch being appointed, and all things set in order, they all make themselves
ready to go to bed. So long as the king lives, so long the whole swarm
enjoys the benefit of peace; but he being dead, there is great disorder. The
king keeps his court by himself, in the highest room and largest part of the
whole palace, his lodging being very curiously made. And if at any time any of
them chance to die, they be carried out of the hive, as it were upon the
shoulders of the other Bees, who will suffer nothing in their houses which may
pollute them: but if they be only sick, then have they a medicinal aliment of
honey, drawn from annise, saffron, and Hyacinths, by which they are cured.
Topsell.

And when they be ready to swarm, they dare not take their flight until their
king lead the way; unto whose side they strive to fly, as near as they can.
Some Tops. bist. S^rp.
say, if their king be such as tenders the good of the other Bees, he goes but
seldom abroad: and straggling often from home, they will rid themselves of him.
But when he dies through age, they carry him forth in solemn manner, and
behave themselves as at some sad funeral. Neither is he so tied to his home
but that he may sometimes go abroad to refresh his aged body, whom they
accompany in a sweet obedientiall manner; and if it chance that he grow weary
and faint by the way, they bear him back again upon their wings, and with great
commiseration pity his decayed estate. Moreover they will not suffer a dead
Be to be in their hives, but carry him forth as to his burial, lest he
should corrupt their pure and cleanly decked dwellings.

Vespa, the Wasp, is an angry creature: they make them Wasps.
nests most But sometimes in tha^ched houses.
commonly in the ground; their combs be round, much after the fashion of a
broad toadstool; and their cells are diversely fashioned. They be very tenderly
affected to their females when they are with young, and will not suffer them to
take any pains, but lay the whole burden upon themselves. Like unto the Bees,
they affect a kingly government; and in case they have no leader, they make
their nests in holes of clay, walls, and the like; where they live like
vagabonds and gather nothing. They do often times rob the Bees, and (as I said)
be very angry creatures, implacable, and very noxious to those who disturb
their nests. Aristophanes calls all those maids which are fine, slender, and
pretty small in the waste, (...), resembling them to Wasps; which by Topsell
is interpreted, as if he should name them Wasp-wasted-wenches: the reason
whereof is, because the body of a Wasp seems to be fastened together to the
midst of the breast, with a certain thin fine thread as it were; and to be as
if they had no loins at all. And as your finest bodied wenches are like them in
their waste, so sometimes too like them in their sting; by which their best
beauty is eclipsed: and better were it to endure the continual droppings and
thunderings of a rainie day, then the waspish harms of wicked women, whether it
be that they carry their stings either in tongue or tail.

The Hornet is called by the Grecians (...), because Hornets.
with their sting they raise an Anthrax or carbuncle, with a vehement
inflammation of the whole part about it: and in Latin it is called Crabro.
These creatures do not gather their meat from flowers, but for the most part
they live upon flesh and stinking carrion, which makes them delight so much in
dunghills. They use likewise to catch flies, and hunt after small birds, which
if they can but sting, they kill. Mr Topsell makes mention of a A fight between
a Sparrow and a Hornet.
strange combat between an Hornet and a Sparrow, which he himself saw, at a
town called Duckworth in Huntingtonshire; and the Sparrow lost the day: for
being wounded by the Hornets sting, the bird fell to the ground, and the Hornet
greedily sucked her blood. The said author writes that their life is but
short, never above two years: and as for their combs, they be wrought with
greater cunning, more exquisite art, and curious conceit, then those either of
Wasps or Bees; neither need we doubt (says he) but that they bring forth young
by the sides of their cells, and perform such other offices in their breeding
as the Bees and Wasps do.

The Gray or Badger is their greatest enemy; for in the The Badger on enemy
to the Hornet.
full of the moon he uses to make forcible entrance into their holes, and
without fear he is able to spoil their nests. And albeit they most commonly
feed upon flesh, yet they do greatly love all kind of sweet things, and oil,
with other matter of a greasy substance.

And for to make a medicine against the sting of bees, A good medicine against
stinging.
hornets, or wasps, do thus. Take of opium, of the seed of henbane and
camphire, of each a like quantity, and incorporate them with rose water or
juice of willows, and lay it upon the wounded place, applying on the top of it
a linen cloth, which must be first thoroughly wetted in wine, and this is good
to assuage the pain. Vinegar and camphire are also excellent to wash any such
place.

Cantharides are flies whose juice is poison: they shine Cantharides.
like gold, and must be carefully used in any experiment, otherwise they do
much harm; as the unskilful and adventurous have sometimes proved to their own
cost.

Pyrausta is a fly so called from (...) ignis; because it Pyrausta.
lives in the fire, and dies without it. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 36.

Tarantula is a little fly, frequent in Italie^ it will many Tarantula.
times sting the people, whereupon they presently fall a laughing; and if
music be not forthwith brought them, they cannot choose but in a mortal
merry fit take leave of the world and Like unto which is an herb in Sardinia,
of which if any ^at much, they perish and die laughing. It is like to Balm
gentle. (...).
die. Neither can they at all be cured, unless by hearing music: and (as it
is reported) if the cure be not thoroughly done, they dance ever after at the
sound of musicks pleasing strains: showing thereby, that this is a creature, an
admired creature, and of a strange property.

Bombyx is commonly called the Silkworm: but whether Bombyx.
I may name it a worm or a fly, I cannot tell. For sometimes it is a worm,
sometimes a fly, and sometimes neither worm nor fly, but a little seed, which
the dying flies leave behind them.

As for example; when these dainty creatures have made them little husken
houses, and spunne out the just length of their silken webs, they eat out
themselves from those prisons; and (although they were worms before) yet then
they appear with their pretty wings, and fly about a while: in which space
the male accompanying with the female, does as it were tread her; and then,
laying some certain eggs, like little seeds, they cease to live any longer:
from which seeds proceed more young ones (at the first like maggots) and they
do as their dammes before them, and then die.

And let this creature end my discourse concerning the things done in this
fifth day; wherein, not able to mention all, I have touched at some; and those
so excellent, as I could have spent more time in their better view, were it not
that the succeeding day hastens his dawning. In the phrase of Moses I will
therefore conclude, and concluding say,

The Eve and Morn confine the fifth of days,
And God gives to his work deserved praise.
CHAP. IX. This ninth chapter concerns the creatures made in the sixth and
last day; namely creatures living neither in the air, nor water, but upon the
earth: and these be of two sorts, the brute beasts, and Man.
This chapter has two Sections.
Sect. 1. Wherein is both a division and entrance into this days work; as also
a discourse of the first part of it, concerning the brute beasts, whose
creation was in the first part of the day.
THe just period of the fifth day being come to an end, the sixth approaches;
wherein God Almighty shuts up the creation of every species: and after all,
he rests from his works, and watches by his providence over each part and
parcel of the world which he had made.

And in this day he first produced the brute beasts living upon the face of the
earth: then he comes to the creation of man, and makes him the Colophon, or
conclusion of all things else; in whose nature he placed the greatest dignity
of any creature that is visible: for man is of a middle between the beasts and
Angels, transcending the one, and yet not worthy to equalize the other; as
afterward, when I come to that particular, shall be declared, with other
things pertinent to his creation.

And now, that the terrestrial beasts and he should be made both in one day,
is worth observing: for had he been to live in the air, he might have seen the
sun with the flying fowls, and have been created when they were made: or had
his habitation been in the waters, the fish and he might both at once have been
produced. But being made, neither to swim with the fishes, nor fly with the
birds, but live upon the earth, it was most harmonious that the terrestrial
beasts, and his creation, should in the same day the one succeed the other. And
that the end might show the perfection of the work, the prioritie of time is
given to the beasts; but the excellency and prioritie of all appears in man,
who was made Lord of the creatures, and in whom God had placed a surpassing
condition, and (by far) a more noble nature. For whereas they are led by
sense, he has reason; whereas they look downwards and grovelling from the sky,
his countenance is erect, and his looks are mixed with majesty; whereas they
are animate without an immortal soul, he lives when he dies, and has a soul
which death it self knows not how to kill: and whereas their bodies fall and
never rise again, his rises when it is fallen, and is like seed sown, which
sprouteth up when the time is come.

If this then be both the order and cause of such an The creation of beasts.
order in this days work, I must leave the most excellent piece until the
last, and begin first to look and observe how the beasts, in their several
kinds and dainty squadrons, march up and down, and walk from out the shop of
their Creator; being brought to perfection even as soon as that powerful word
who spoke it, did only say it, Let them be.

It would (I confess) require no small volume to discourse of all. Howbeit
even in a few, the glory of their Maker will well appear: and with that
thought let us name some, by which we may admire the rest.

And first consider what a strong vast creature the The Elephant.
mighty Elephant is known to be. There is no creature (says Topsel.
one) among all the beasts of the world which has so great and ample
demonstration of the power and wisdom of Almighty God, as the Elephant; both
for proportion of body, and disposition of spirit: and it is admirable to
behold the industry of our ancient forefathers, and noble desire to benefit us
their posterity, by searching into the qualities of every beast, to discover
what benefits or harms may come by them to mankind: having never been afraid
of the wildest, but they tamed them; and the greatest, but they also set upon
them: witness this beast of which we now speak, being like a living mountain
in quantity and outward appearance, yet by them so handled, as no little dog
could be made more serviceable, tame, or tractable.

They are usually bred in the Plin. lib. 8. cap. 11
hot eastern countries; for by reason they cannot well endure the cold, they
delight most in the East and South; as in India, and some places of Africa. And
before the days of Alexander Magnus, there were never any in Europe: but when
he fought against (...). lib. 8.
Porus King of India, he became master of many: and how bravely they fought at
the first for their masters, and received many wounds, Curtius has related.

These Indian Elephants are most commonly Topsel.
nine cubits high, and five cubits broad; and in Africa they be about eleven
foot high, and of bigness proportionable to their height.

Their color is for the most part mouse-coloured, or black; and yet there was
And in Pegu the King has many; it being part of his royal title, King of the
White Elephants. See Mr. Purch. in his Pilgr. of Asia, lib. 5.
once one in Ethiopia, all white, as Mr. Topsell relates. They have a skin
so hard (excepting on their belly) that it is a very hard matter, and in a
manner impossible, to pierce it with any sword, spear, or iron. It has on it
very few hairs, and is very full of chaps or crevises, in which there is such a
savor as invites the flies to a continual feast: howbeit they pay deerly for
their cheer; for although the Elephant cannot make use of his tail to drive
them away, yet by shrinking of himself close together, he incloseth the flies
within the chaps, and so kills them. He has a long trunked nose, mighty
teeth, four whereof be within his mouth serving to grind his meat, and two
hang forth; as afterward shall be showed. He has a tail slender and short,
and legs of an infinite strength; his head is very great, so that a man's head
may as easily be thrust into it, as his finger into the mouth of a dog: but yet
his ears and eyes are not equivalent to the residue of his other parts: for
his ears are small, and their matter like to the wings of a Bat or Dragon; and
some (bred in some places) have no ears at all. Their eyes likewise are like
the eyes of swine, but very red. Two of their teeth (as I said) grow far out
of their mouths, one of which they always keep sharp to revenge injuries and
defend themselves, and the other is less sharp, being often used to root up
plants and trees for their meat; and commonly they grow out to the length of
ten feet: this is that which we call Ivory, and of which many pretty things
are cut by artists.

Munster reports how these beasts are taken; namely, by the cunning cutting
down of a tree, against which they use to lean and stay themselves. For this
beast, Munst. cosmog.
says he, having fed till he is full, betaketh himself to rest, and leaning to
a tree he sleeps, for he cannot bend his joints as other beasts do; not
because he wants joints, but because his sinews are more strong, and closely
knit his joints together; or else because there is much flesh between the
skin and bones; or because his skin is so crustie, like to armor, and
unfit to bend. Now when The way to catch Elephants.
the people perceive any such tree as is worn and made foul by the Elephants
leaning against it, they come in the absence of the said beast, and cut it
almost quite through, close by the ground; insomuch that being ready to fall,
it cannot stand when the Elephant comes to rest against it, but by giving way
causes him to fall together with it; and then he lies helpless upon the
ground all the night with his belly upward, and not being able to bend his legs
and arise, he is caught in the morning by those who before had cut the tree
with purpose to deceive him.

The said author also mentions another way whereby they of India sometimes
take and tame them. For there be Elephants (says he) in India which be very
wild and fierce, but they are easily made tame; namely thus. The people
intending to catch them, compass some clean place with a deep ditch of about
four or five furlongs in compass, and in one place only they make a bridge
very strait and narrow, being the way to enter in* then they set three or four
female Elephants which they have already These (...) are anoin^ed with a
certain oil, which causes the wild Elephant to follow them.
tamed, and they themselves lie watching privily till the time that the wild
Elephants come and pass over the bridge: then on the sudden do they Some say
they are chased in, as is also the tame Elephant trained up on purpose for such
huntings. Purch. of Asia, lib. 5.
stop the passage, and afterward bring some of their strongest tame Elephants
to fight with these wild ones thus enclosed: besides which, they do likewise
punish them with hunger and lack of meat; and when they be wearied with
fighting, they which are bold hardy fellows (by help of the tame Elephants to
shelter them) will privily creep under their bellies and suddenly chain and
fetter them. After this they move their tame Elephants again to beat the wild
until their fetters cast them to the ground, and then they yoke them to the
necks of their tame ones, and lay chains upon them that thereby they may pass
on quietly: and at last bringing them home, they fasten their legs and necks to
a strong pillar, and so by hunger and society tame them; teaching them at the
last when they begin to feed them, to be obedient to their masters in such
manner as best pleases them: and then they will grow so loving, gentle, mild,
serviceable, and docil, as is indeed a wonder. And if by chance any of them
shall happen through fury to kill his keeper, he will show so much sorrow, and
take it so heavily, that he abstaineth from his meat, and sometimes even pineth
to death; like unto that Dolphin, which in the former day I mentioned, who
using to carry a boy upon his back, one day by mere accident happened to kill
him with one of his prickles, not closely couched, before the lad was mounted
on his watery steed.

The little mouse is sometimes offensive to this beast, The mouse is offensive
to the Elephant.
and will strive to run into the trunk of his nose; neither can he endure to
eat more of his meat if he see but a mouse run over it.

But above all, he has two fierce enemies; viz. the Dragon, and the admired
great Rhinoceros, who coming to fight with the Elephant, first whetteth his
horn growing upon his snout, and then grapling close, he wounds the Elephant
into his belly; for elsewhere the force of his fury cannot enter. Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 20.

And as for the Dragon, he likewise fights furiously, because his delight is
to suck the blood of the Elephant, which is cooling to his hot nature: but
drinking too largely of it, (as he will do if he can) down falls the Elephant
for lack of blood, and down likewise falls the Dragon, because he has sucked
too much: and so both die striving together. Ibid. cap. 12. or, as Munst.
some say, the Elephant dying falls upon the Dragon, and so kills his foe who
killed him.

And in this fight the Dragon deals most cunningly: for first he sits
watching upon a tree, and when the Elephant is come near unto that place, he
suddenly skips and cleaves round about him: and if then the Elephant begin to
beat him off against a rock or tree, he claspeth close about his legs, and
seldom does the combat cease without the death of both the fighters. An
emblem from the Elephant.
A fit emblem this, of those who fall whilst they suck the blood of others,
and perish in such gains as are purchased by the harms of those whom they
strive to subvert.

Moreover, the Elephants have such a kind of modesty The marriage bed must
not be abused.
and shamefastness, that the male never covers the female but in secret; and
this never but once in two years; and that, when the male is five years old,
and the female ten. From whence, Gemin. lib. 5. cap. 60.
Geminianus gathers this instruction. By this example (says he) men are taught
honestly to use the acts belonging to their conjugall or matrimonial estate,
both according to the place and time. Arise and let us pray (says young Tobias
to Tobit 8. 4, 7, 8.
his wife) that God would have pity on us. And in praying he likewise said, I
take her not for lust, but uprightly: therefore mercifully ordain, that we may
become aged together. And she said with him, Amen. Of which careful
continence, Geminianus gives this reason why it ought to be in us; because we
are children of the light, and may Ezekiel. 8. 6. and 22. 10. Levit. 18. 19.
not do as the heathens who know not God. Whereupon See Mr. Perk. in his Aurea
(...).
S. Augustine says, that they commit adultery with their wives, who in the
use of wedlock have neither regard of seemlinesse, nor honesty. And Hierome
likewise makes this assertion, that nothing is more shameless then to make a
strumpet of a wife: meaning when they turn the remedy into a disease, through
a lustful, immodest, and immoderate use of the marriage bed.

Furthermore, the Elephants are long-lived, they have great pleasure in good
water, are very impatient of cold, and many of them live Munst.
almost 200 years.

Also there is one singular property yet more to be A pattern for great men.
observed in them, viz. that even the wild ones living in deserts will direct
and defend strangers and travelers. For if an Elephant shall find a man
wandering in his way; first of all, that he may not be affrighted, the Elephant
goes a little wide out of the path and stands still: then by little and
little going before him, he shows him the way; and if a Dragon chance to meet
this man thus traveling, the Elephant then opposes himself to the Dragon, and
powerfully defends the helpless Gemin. lib. 5. cap. 96.
man, who is not able to defend himself. So ought it to be chiefly amongst
great men, and those who are mighty; they should not injure strangers and
travelers (as many do) when they come into their territories, but rather by
themselves, or theirs, they should direct and succor them from the hurts and
harms of evil men.

The Rhinoceros is a beast every way admirable, both The Rhinoceros.
for the outward shape, quantity, and greatness, and also for the inward
courage, disposition, and mildness. For this beast is next to the Elephant,
every way as strange, and in a manner exceeding him, unless it be in his
quantity or height of stature: for although he may be as long, or perhaps
longer then an Elephant, yet he is not so tall, neither are his legs so long;
and for the length, it must be a large Rhinoceros which can measure with the
Elephant, for ordinarily the Elephant exceeds, according to the testimony of
Strabo alleged by Mr Topsell.

In the Purch. 5 book of Asia.
kingdom of Bengala great numbers of these beasts may be found: their color
is like the rind or bark of a box-tree; their skin upon the upper part is
all wrinkled, and of such firmnesle and hardness that no dart is able to
pierce it; and being wrinkled, it appears as if they were armed with shields,
or set over with scales, which go also down along their legs to the very hoofs
which are parted into four distinct claws. Moreover, upon the nose of this
beast there grows a hard and sharp horn, crooking a little toward the crown
of his head, but not so high; it is flat and not round, and so sharp and strong
that it will pierce through things of exceeding hardness: and from hence it is
that he is called a Rhinoceros in the Greek; by which word is signified a
Topsell.
Nose-horned beast. He is headed somewhat like to a wild Boar, and has again
another horn growing upon his withers, but it is a small one. The manner of his
fight with the Elephant I have already mentioned: and as for his horn, teeth,
flesh, blood, claws, and whatsoever he has without and within his body, it is
good against poison, and (as Purch. ibid. ex (...).
authors write) is much accounted of throughout all India. The reason of which
virtue is thought to proceed from the sovereign powers which are in those
herbs that Bengala yields; for in other places they are nothing so precious.
Some have thought this to be the right Unicorn: but of that fancy see more, as
follows.

Monoceros is a beast with one horn, called therefore by The Unicorn.
the name of an Unicorn: and albeit there be many horned beasts which may
improperly be called Unicorns, yet that which is the right Unicorn indeed, is
like unto a colt of two years and a half old, which has naturally but one
horn, and that a very rich one, which grows out of the middle of his
forehead; being a horn of such virtue as is in no beasts horn besides: which
whilst some have gone about to deny, they have secretly blinded the eyes of
the world from their full view of the greatness of Gods great works. For were
it not said that the horn were excellent and of surpassing power, I persuade my
self it would never be doubted whether there were an Unicorn or no. But that
there is such a peculiar Deuteronomy. 33. 17. Isai. 34. 7. Job 39. 9. Psalm. 92. 10.
beast, the Scripture, both in Deuteronomie, Isaiah, Job, and the book of
Psalms, does bear us witness: In all which places how do Expositours
translate the original word, but thus, Unicornis, or Monoceros, which in
English is an Unicorn?

And again, it is the testimony of Ludovicus Vertomannus, alleged by Gesner,
Topsell, and others, that he himself saw a couple of the true Unicorns at Mecha
in Arabia; one whereof had a horn of three cubits, being of the bigness of a
colt two years and an half old; the other was much less, and his horn
shorter, about a spanne long, for he was but young: and both these were sent to
the Sultan of Mecha, for a rare present, by the King of Ethiopia, who ever
desires to be in league with the said Sultan, thinking nothing too dear to
maintain his amity. And certainly he could not send him a gift more welcome,
especially this being a beast so rare and seldom seen; which may be, in regard
that it is a creature delighting in nothing more then in a remote and solitary
life.

The color of these thus sent was like a weasel-coloured Horse; the head like
the head of a Heart; the neck not very long, and the mane growing all on one
side; their legs slender and lean, like the legs of an hind; the hoofs on
the forefeet cloven, and the hinder legs somewhat shaggie. The nearest (of
any beast better known) is the Indian Ass, and Indian Horse; excepting that
their hoofs are whole and not cloven, and their color somewhat differing: for
there is a horn grows out between their two eyes, like to the true Unicorn. By
which it appears that of Unicorns there is one principal kind only; the
rest are less principal, and subordinate to him whose horn is the strongest,
sharpest, and of the greatest virtue. For in granting more kinds then one, I
do not understand every beast with one horn; but only such Monocerots as have
in their horns virtue against poison: like unto those horses of India mentioned
but even now, and of which Mr Topsell writes that they have Hearts heads, and
one horn, of which their Kings and Princes make cups to drink their drink
against poison, finding a great preservative to be in the said horn. Munster
says that the King of Ethiopia has some store of these beasts; and Mr Topsell
names two kingdoms in India (the one called Niem, the other Lamber) which be
likewise stored with them.

Moreover concerning the horn, it is neither light nor A description of the
Unicorns horn.
hollow, nor yet smooth like other horns, but hard as iron, rough as any file,
revolved into many plaits, sharper then any dart, straight and not crooked, and
every where black, except at the top or point. It has many sovereign virtues,
and with an admirable dexterity expels poison: insomuch that being put upon
a table furnished with many junkets and banqueting dishes, it will quickly
descrie whether there be any poison or venime amongst them; for if there be,
then presently the horn is covered with a kind of sweat or dew. And (as it is
reported) when this beast comes to drink, he first dippeth his horn in the
water, that thereby he may drive away the poison when venomous beasts have
drunk before him.

And again I find it recorded that the Indian and How hunters take them.
Ethiopian hunters catch of those Unicorns which be in their country, after
this manner. They take a goodly strong and beautiful young man, whom they
clothe in the apparel of a woman, besetting him with diverse flowers and
odoriferous spices, setting him where the Unicorns use to come; and when they
see this young man, whom they take to be a woman, they come very lovingly and
lay their heads down in his lap: (for above all creatures they do great
reverence to virgins and young maids) and then the hunters having notice given
them, suddenly come, and finding him asleep, they will deal so with him, as
that before he goes, he must leave his horn behind him.

These, and many other things more, concerning this beast may be read in the
large writings of Gesner and Topsel, whither I would wish the more inquisitive
to have recourse.

Africa breeds many Lions, and the colder the place The Lion.
is, the gentler they be: and in time of their coupling, eight or ten will
follow one female, whereupon arise very terrible and bloody battles among
them. They engender backward; and so does the Camel, Elephant, Rhinoceros,
Ounce, and Tiger. They spare women rather then men, and prey not at all on
infants, except in case of much hunger: and albeit the Lion be a fierce and
cruel beast, yet he is said to show great clemency to the humble and such as
prostrate themselves submissively before him; which he will the sooner do when
he has lately filled his belly with a former prey. The male uses not to feed
with the female, but either of them apart by themselves. The Lioness or
She-lion is the fiercest, and always the most cruel. Their tail is a token of
their inward meaning: for if it stirs not, he is gentle and peaceable; but
moving, he is angry. These beasts will keep revenge in mind a long while,
either against man or beast that has hurt them. And in like A story of a Lion.
manner they will as long be mindful of a benefit, and do their best to make
requital, as is famous by that story of Androdus who was slave to a senator
of Rome; and one named Mentor, a man of Syracusa, upon whom a Lion fawned to
have him help his diseased foot.

For, concerning the first; when Androdus fled from his master by reason of
some hard usage that he received at his hands, by chance he happened to take up
his lodging in a cave; which (unknown to him) was a Lions den: where when he
had been a while, not long before night the Lion came home from hunting, and
having gotten an hurt upon his foot, he no sooner espied the trembling man in
this fearful place, but he comes gently unto him, stretching forth his foot,
and making moan as though he desired help. The poor slave at the first
expected nothing but death, neither did he think of any thing more then to have
his sepulcher in the Lions belly; but at the last perceiving what the matter
was, he took the Lion by his paw, searched the wound, pulled out a thorn, bound
up his foot, and gave him ease: which kind office being performed, was first
of all requited with a daily portion of provision which the Lion would bring in
for this his guest; and he poor helpless man would roast it in the sun as
well as he could, and then eat it. But being weary of this kind of diet, and
as weary of his solitary life, he went away; for whose absence, the Lion (as
himself could hear) made great mourning and lamentation. And see how it
happened; this man did no sooner depart then he was taken by some whom his
master sent to seek him: and then (alas) there is no way for him but one; die
he must. Neither shall his death be other then a tearing in pieces by cruel
beasts: for the Romans had a custom to sit in their theaters and behold such
bloody games, and direful pastimes; and therefore they would catch and keep
beasts on purpose. But it fortuned that amongst other beasts taken this Lion
was one, who being brought into the theater, greedily rent in pieces such as
were thrown unto him: yet when his old guests turn came, he forgot his fury
and turned it into fawning, by which the poor slave perceived what Lion it
was, and thereupon gathered up his spirits, renewing again his old acquaintance
with his former friend, even to the admiration of all the beholders. And the
matter being known and related to them, he had not only pardon for his life,
but the Lion also was bestowed on him to wait upon him. Aelianus reports this
story, and so does Aulus Gellius in his Attick nights. Hic est Leo hospes
hominis; hic est homo medicus Leonis, was that which the people would say when
they saw him lead along his Lion through the streets: Here goes (say they)
the Lion which was the man's host; and there is the man who was the Lions
Physician.

And to show that the Lion delights not to kill his prey before he be ready
to eat it, appears by another story which I find related by Mr Topsell, in
his history of foure-footed beasts.

A certain English man being turned Moor, and living Another story of a Lion.
in Barbary, was told of a Lion which lay lurking not far off; and he, to
show his valor, being half drunk, would needs undertake to go and kill him in
the place where he was: whereupon he armed himself with a sword, dagger, and
musket; having also a long large knife about him. And when he came to the place
where the Lion was, that he might show himself valorous, he would not kill him
as he lay asleep, but touches him with the end of his musket that he might
awake: which being performed, the beast suddenly mounted up and eagerly sets
upon this fool-hardie champion, throwing him presently down to the ground:
whereupon he could think of no other but a speedy execution. But seeing the
Lions belly was lately filled with a former prey, he forbeareth to kill him;
only he stands over him and keeps him down with his paws, intending so to
hold him until he had a stomach to prey upon him. But in the mean time, this
champion studying how to acquit himself, between hope and fear, draws out his
long barbarian knife (for he had his hands at liberty) and with it he wounds
the Lion two or three times: but he, desirous to possess his prey against his
need, never regarded from whence the wounds came, and thereupon he falls at the
last fainting to the ground, and so dying delivers his prisoner against his
will, who now might triumph in a conquest that was altogether beyond either
hope or expectation.

These creatures delight much to feed on Camels flesh, and on the flesh of
Apes: howbeit when they eat Apes, it is more for Aeli^. (...). ^ist. lib. 1*
Physic then for food: and sometimes they will catch the young Elephants.
Neither do they drink often or overmuch; and having eaten to satietie, they use
to fast Munst.
three days before they feed again. Their bones (says Munster) be sound and
not hollow, insomuch that some affirm fire may be struck out of them as from a
flint: and sometimes being too fiercely exasperated to anger, they are in such
a heat, that it even He is truly valiant that can overcome himself.
burns them up, and kills them. So have I seen some very powerful, and
exquisite in many things, and yet but slaves to their own passions; ruling
others, but not able to command themselves: although there be few but know,
that it is a Forti^r est. qui se, quam qui fortiffu^ vincit (...).
greater point of valor to subdue a man's self, then to conquer a strong and
mighty city.

What Pliny has written of this beast, may be seen at large in the sixteenth
chapter of his eighth book; to whom, and others, I refer such as desire more.

Tigers, like lions, are bred in the East, South, and hot The Tiger.
countries, because their generation desires an abundance of heat. It is a
beast of a wonderful swiftness: and in the proportion of his body he is like
to the And note tha^ his Mustachios are holden for mortal poisen; causing men
to die mad if they be given in meat* Purch.
Lioness, footed like a Cat, and spotted like a Panther, excepting that the
spots belong and all of a color. Generally they be cruel, sharp, ravenous,
and never so tamed but sometimes they return to their former natures: but above
all, in the time of their lust, or when they be robbed of their young, they are
most raging and furious. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 18.
Pliny has described the manner how the hunters get away their whelps very
commonly. They come upon horseback, and finding the old Tigers from home, they
take up their young ones and post away as fast as they can; and on the sudden
they find themselves pursued, wherefore when the old one comes near them,
they let fall one of her whelps on purpose, that whilst she is carrying that
to her nest, they may escape securely with the rest. And sometimes they make
round spheres of Munster, Topsell.
glass which they cast before her when she comes, and thinking (by reason of
her own shadow) that she sees her young ones there, she rolleth it to her
den, where she breaks it with her claws, and finding her self deluded
runs after the hunters again, by which time they are gone too far for her
to find.

There is an Topsell.
herb near the river Ganges, growing like Buglosse, the juice whereof is such
that if it be poured into the mouth of their dens, they dare not come forth,
but will lie howling there till they die.

The Panther is a beast little differing from a Leopard The Panther.
or Libbard: Plin. lib. 8. cap. 17.
some think they differ in nothing but in sex. In Greek the general name is
Panther; the special names, Pordalis and Pardalis. Pordalis is taken for the
male, and Pardalis for the female. And in Latin it is called Pardus and
Panthera: where it must be again observed that Pardus signifies the male
Panther, and Panthera the female. Neither is the difference between the Leopard
and Panther only in sex, but rather in respect of a How the Leopard is
begotten.
mixed and simple generation: for there is no Leopard or Libbard, but such as is
begotten between the Lion and the Panther, or the Panther and the Lioness.

This is a beast which has variety of colors, a sweet breath, and is very
fierce and wild, insomuch that some have therefore called him a Dog-wolf; and
yet being full, he is gentle enough. He sleeps three days (says Munster)
and after the third day he washes himself and cries out, and with a sweet
savor which comes from his breath, he gathers the wild beasts together,
being led by the smell: and then (says Pliny) does he hide his head very
cunningly, lest his looks should affright them; whereupon, whilst they gaze
upon him, he catches his prey of which he pleases. So have I known An emblem
from the Panther, concerning fair tongues and false hearts.
some hide their ill meanings with fair and sweet-breathed words; having honey
in their mouths, but gall in their hearts; and a direful intent cruelly to
hurt when they seem most of all to please. For sugared speeches will catch the
credulous; neither is all gold that fairly glisters.

Now the reason why these beasts have such a sweet breath, I take to be in
regard that they are so much delighted with all kind of spices and dainty
aromaticall trees: insomuch that (as Topsell.
some affirm) they will go many hundred miles in time of the year when these
things are in season; and all for the love they bear to them. But above all,
their chief delight is in the gum of camphorie, watching that tree very
carefully, to the end they may preserve it for their own use.

Of Camels there be chiefly three sorts: the first called The Camel.
Hugiun, of great stature and strength, able to carry a Purch.
thousand pound weight: the second less, with two bunches on the back, and
sometimes one upon the breast; these are called Becheti, are found only in
Asia, and are fit both for carriage, and to ride on. The third sort is meagre
and small, not used to burdens, yet able to travel above an hundred miles in
one day: this kind they call Raguahill.

The Arabian and Bactrian Camels, although they want horns, yet they have Plin.
lib. 8. cap. 18.
teeth but on one side. And of all the sorts, their necks are long and nimble,
by which the whole body is much relieved, seeing it can reach to most parts;
their heads are small, and feet fleshie, in which regard they use to be shod
with leather for fear of graveling; I mean such as are tame and made
serviceable. They love grass, especially the blades of barley; and when they
drink, the water must not be clear but muddie. The surname therefore of the
Camel, is Trouble-bank; for they will Plin. ibid.
mud the water with their feet, otherwise they take no delight to drink it. So
have I seen some, never better pleased then when they trouble the clear
fountains of justice and pure doctrine, with the muddie streams of injustice
and error. Or some, never better cheered then when they may drink An emblem
from the Camel, concerning those who prefer earth before heaven.
deeply of the dirtie puddles of worldly wealth, little regarding the sweet
taste of the water of life, which is a clear river running from the throne of
God and the Lamb, Rev. 22. And as for the bunch upon the Camels back, the
Scripture does thereby express the swelling pride and confidence of rich
worldly men, who as hardly enter into the kingdom of God, as the Camel with
his bunched back can go through the Matthew. 19. 24.
eye of a needle.

The Horse and the Camel are great adversaries; and The Horse and Camel great
enemies.*
with his very sight and strong smell, the horse is terrified. Cyrus therefore
being excelled by the Babylonians in horsemanship, used this stratagem of the
Camels.

And as for our fine stuffes, as grogeram, and chamblet, Stuffes made of Camels
hair.
they be made of Camels hair, as some affirm: as also there is a courser hairie
cloth to be made of the worst of this hair, such as was that garment worn by
John Baptist in the wilderness.

And of the Camels this one property more; when their A lesson of patience and
humility taught by the Camel.
masters load them they will bow themselves, and stoup down to the very ground
with their knees, patiently enduring to take up their burden. So have I seen
some, as willingly humbled under the cross, and as patiently stouping to take
it up, and follow their master Christ who went before them. For it is a true
rule, that God can and does love his children well, although he make no wantons
of them.

Moreover the Dromedarie is a kind of Camel, but less, The Dromedarie.
and far more swift.

And as for the Cameleopardus, he is begotten by a The Cameleopard.
mixed generation between the Camel, and Leopard or Panther.

The Hyaena, as it is described by Lib. 8. cap. 30.
Pliny, is a beast The Hyaena
whose neck has no joint, and therefore he stirs not his neck but with
bending about his whole body. He will imitate humane voice, and drawing near
to the sheep-coats, having heard the name of some of the shepherds, he will
call him, and when he comes, devour him. His eyes have many colors; and the
touch of his shadow makes a dog not able to bark. And (as the Magicians would
make us believe) this beast has the power of incantation: they therefore tell
many strange things which they be able to do.

Neither is this any other then the Topsell.
common or vulgar Hyaena, which is likewise called Lupus vespertinus, a wolf of
the night, being in quantity of body very like a Wolf, but much more rough in
his hair, and bristled all along his back like a horses mane, the middle
whereof is somewhat crooked. His color is yellowish, but speckled on the sides
with blew spots.

The second kind is called Idem, Page 439.
Papio or Dabuh, bigger and rougher then the former, with feet something like
to a man's hand. They breed much about Cesarea; and their custom is, being
gathered together, for one of them to go before his company singing and
howling, and all the rest answering him with a kind of correspondent tune;
whose voices are so shrill and sounding, that although they be remote and far
off, men may hear them as if they were hard by: and when one of them is slain,
the residue flock about his carcass, howling as if they should make funeral
lamentations for the dead. They sometimes, being compelled by hunger, will
search into the silent graves of dead men.

The third kind is the Corcuta, and this happens The Corcuta.
when the Lioness and the Hyaena do engender together.

The fourth is Mantichora; he is bred among the Indians, The Mantichora.
having a treble row of teeth beneath and above, with a broad face fashioned
like to the face of a man, a beard both on his chin and upper lip; his eyes are
gray, and his color red, and in the shape of his body and legs like to a Lion.
His tail is long and slender, armed at the end with sharp quils, with which he
wounds the hunters when they set upon him; and this is strange, that the
quils being darted off do presently grow again. And as for his chief delight,
it is to eat man's flesh.

The Zebra is a beast which amongst Purch. lib. of Africa, cap. 1.
all creatures Zebra.
both for beauty and comeliness is admirably pleasing. He resembles a horse
of exquisite composition, but not altogether so swift, all overlaid with
partie-coloured laces and gards, from head to tail. In Africa they abound, and
live in great herds together.

In the country of Sardinia there is a certain beast Muflo.
which they call Muflo, the like whereof (as Munst. Cos. Epit.
some affirm) is not in all Europe. It has a skin and hairs like unto a Deer
or Heart, crooked horns like unto a Ram, which bend backward about the ears.
In bigness he may be compared to a Buck: he feeds only upon grass and
herbs, and keeps most about mountains, is very swift in running, and his
flesh is very good to be eaten.

In Virginia there is a beast called Ovassom, which The Ovassom.
has a head like a Swine, a tail like a Rat, as big as a Cat, and has under
his belly a bag, wherein they carry their young. Purch.

Moreover I find in the said author, that their Dogs Virginia Dogs, Wolves,
Foxes, etc.
in that country bark not, their Wolves are not much bigger then our Foxes,
and their Foxes like our silverhaired Conies, and of a differing smell from
ours.

The Wolf is a ravenous and devouring beast, and The Wolf.
rightly surnamed Spoil-park; and those of the common sort have grizled hairs,
being white under the belly, a great head, and armed with big and long teeth,
sparkling eyes, and short pricked ears; and for his feet, they be something
like to the feet of a Lion. He is therefore called Lupus from Leopes; quia
pedem quasi pedes Leonis habet.

Where these creatures live, the people are much infested with them: they will
sometimes steal from their folds abroad, and sometimes do them mischief at
home. When they come to the sheep-folds, they observe which way the Ge^in. lib.
5. 6. 39
wind blows, and then they come marching against it, that thereby they may
the better deceive the shepherd and his dogs. And when they prey upon Goats,
they Ibid.
hide themselves under the leaves of Or else come with the green leaves and
small boughs of Osrers, etc.
trees that they may the more easily obtain their desire. When they catch
little children, it is said that they will play with them for a while (as the
cat plays with the mouse) and at the last devour them.

Pliny and Olaus Magnus write, that Egypt and Africa Plin. lib. 8. cap. 22.
bring forth but small Wolves in respect of those which are in the Northern
parts of the world: and as the Elephant is impatient of cold, so these beasts
do as much detest heat. And again there be certain mountains which part the
kingdoms of Swetia and Norway, upon which Ola. Mag. lib. 18.
live whole herds of white Wolves.

Tops.
Some say that if the heart of a Wolf be kept dry, it will render a most
fragrant or sweet smell; and in the bladder of a Wolf is a certain stone of a
saffron or honey color, which inwardly contains as it were certain weak
shining stars. But this (me thinks) is strange. The Ravens are in perpetual
enmity with Wolves, and the antipathie of their natures is so violent, that if
a Raven eat of the carcass of a beast which the Wolf has either killed or
formerly tasted of, she presently Ibid.
dies: and again it is reported that when a Wolf espieth a single passenger
traveling by the way, if he thinks himself not able to set upon him, he will
make such a piteous howling that his companions suddenly come to help him.

Romulus and Remus were said to be nursed by a she-Wolf: Romulus and Remus not
nursed by a Wolf.
but Lupa, signifying a devouring Harlot, may rather be applied to Laurentia
the wife of Faustulus, who had played the harlot with certain shepherds.

Wolves have no society but with beasts of their own kind: and above all
creatures, they and dogs are most subject to madness; the reason of which is,
because their bodies are choleric, and their brains increase and decrease with
the moon.

And as for their several kinds, see more in Gesner, Topsell, Olaus Magnus,
and such others.

Vulpes, the Fox, is a subtle crafty creature. They differ The Fox.
in color according to the climate wherein they be bred, and sometimes also in
quantity. The urine of this beast falling upon any herb or grass, dries it
up, and causes it to wither. His fat or grease is good against the cramp or
gout: and so also is his skin, if it be wrapped about the grieved place;
testified by Olaus Magnus in the eighteenth book of his Northern history.

Moreover, concerning the subtilties of this beast, they The subtilties of the
Fox.
be in a manner infinite. By putting his tail into the water he will catch an
abundance of crabs and lobsters at his pleasure; for they take great delight to
hang and enwrap themselves into such brushie stuff, and he has as great
delight to fish them out.

And again, when cold, snow, and hunger shall oppress him, coming near some
farm or mansion house, he feigneth a kind of barking like a dog, that
thereby the household beasts may more confidently keep themselves without fear,
being often used to the barking of a dog: and so having gotten himself near
unto his prey, he will lie upon his back with his belly upwards, mouth open,
tongue out, and every way seeming as if he were dead; then the hens, or geese,
or what else is fit for him, are suddenly surprised and cunningly caught,
whilst they little dreamed of such a subtilty.

Sometimes again he will roll himself in red earth, and besmearing himself with
it as if he were bloody, he will again lie on the ground, verily seeming as if
he were dead, by means whereof he inviteth the fowls to come and prey upon him:
but he deceives them in his crafty wiliness; and being deceived, they are
taken.

Also, he sometimes escapes the danger of dogs by a counterfeit barking, by
which he feigneth himself to be one of their kind. And by his subtlety he
escapes from the snares, and that not seldom: for if he be taken by the foot
and cannot free himself, he will prostrate himself upon the ground, and show no
appearance either of life or breath: insomuch that when he comes who set the
snare, and finds him in this posture, he will suppose him to be no other then
he seems; and then loosing the snare without any thought that he should
escape, he suddenly rises and runs away. The like was credibly reported to
me of a Fox, creeping into a man's house at a little hole, who filling himself
too full, knew not how to get out; whereupon in the morning he was found as
dead: the man kicks him about the house, and at the last throws him out of
doors on the dunghill; where he was no sooner with joy arrived, but up he
starts, and finds his legs as ready to carry him as he was willing to
escape.

Moreover, being hunted he will sometimes run among a flock of sheep or
goats, and get upon the back of some one or other of them, forcing that sheep
or goat to run; the rest follow, insomuch that the hunters are unwillingly
compelled to call in their dogs, for fear they should seize upon, or harm the
flocks.

And to rid himself from fleas, he has this device, How the Fox catches fleas.
reported by Olaus Magnus. He takes in his mouth a little wisp of soft hay,
with which he wrappeth a little hair; and coming to a river, he puts himself
in, all but the head: then when the fleas are come up so high as his head, he
sinketh lower, even till the hay in his mouth touch the water; by means whereof
the fleas are driven thither: and being there, he lets the wisp go, and so
cleares himself.

In like sort he Topsell.
deceives the Hedge-hogge; for when the Hedge-hogge perceives the Fox coming
to him, he rolleth himself together like a football, and so nothing appears
outward but his prickles, which the Fox cannot endure to take into his mouth,
and therefore the crafty Fox, to compass his desire, licketh gently the face
and snout of the Hedge-hogge, by that means bringing him to unfold himself
again, and to stand upon his legs; which being done, he instantly devoureth
him by poisoning him with the urine that he makes upon the Hedge-hogges face.

He has a trick likewise to Ge^in. lib. ^. cap. 39.
revenge himself upon the Brock or Badger; for there is great enmity between
them: the Fox therefore finding the Badger gone from home, for the spite he
bears him, will come and with his piss defile the Badgers den: whereupon he
is forced to forsake it and seek a new.

But was not that a cunning tame Fox who would stand A cunning trick of a tame
Fox.
all the day quietly chained according to his masters mind, and when night
came would slip his collar, and go out to kill the neighbors geese; and before
morning come again, and put his head within his collar, presenting himself to
his master, as if he had never gone out?

Moreover, the young whelps of the Fox, when they An emblem from the Fox and
her young, concerning false friends.
can find no more milk in the paps of their damme, will bite them with their
teeth, and rend and tear them, reputing them as strangers. So have I seen
fraudulent friends, who will love no longer then you feed them. Tam diu stat,
quamdiu utilitas durat, says (...).
one; They abide so long as there is profit for them: according to that of
Seneca, Qui utilitatis causa assumptus fuerit, tam diu placebit, quamdiu utilis
erit. And indeed it is too true, as common experience bears witness.

Lynx is a spotted beast much like a Wolf; it has a The Lynx.
more piercing sight then any creature in the world. And of Lynxes it is said
there be two kinds; the one a greater, which hunteth Hearts and great beasts;
the other a smaller, which hunteth Wilde-cats and Hares. Of this last kind
Olaus Magnus writes, that there be some of them in the Northern woods of
Suetia and Norway: and generally there be many countries both in Europe, Asia,
and Africa, which abound with both kinds. But above all, those which are bred
in Europe are commended for the best spotted: and in Europe, those of Scotland
and Swetia are Tops. ex Bello^.
most beautiful.

He is a beast as ravening as a Wolf, but more crafty; and, as he finds his
opportunity, will prey upon man as well as beast. Howbeit, in the summer time
they be very weak, and live faintly among the rocks, never straying far from
home, hurting no man until the Autumn. And for the manner of catching their
prey, most commonly it is thus; They will get up into trees, and there lie in
wait for their booty until they epsy it under the boughs, and then suddenly
do they leap into the neck of it, whether it be Idem ibid.
a man or great beast; wherein they fix their claws so fast, that no violence
can shake them off: and then with the sharpness of their teeth, they first
bite into the skull, and eat out the brains.

The ancient Pagans dedicated this beast to Bacchus, feigning that when he
triumphed in his chariot of vinebranches, he was drawn by Tigers and Lynxes.

They love their young ones very entirely: and that some should think they are
bred between a Wolf and a Hind, is utterly without reason, seeing there is
such hostility and adverse disposition in their natures.

It is reported that when they be taken they will shed forth many tears, and
weep very pitifully: and their urine congealed, turns it self into a precious
stone, which for brightness resembles the Amber being a stone of sovereign
virtue: and they, knowing their An emblem of envy.
urine to be thus beneficial, rather then man should find it, they use to
hide it in the earth or sand; and yet they are deceived: for (as Lib. 37. cap.
3.
Pliny writes) it is there soonest of all converted into a stone, and not
seldom found. Which, by Lib. 5. cap. 71.
Geminianus, is rightly made an emblem of the envious man, who will not only
endeavor to do hurt, but be heartily sorry if by chance it be his hap to do
any one good.

The Beaver is a beast of a very hot nature, living both The Beaver.
in the water and on the land, and differs from an Otter only in the tail.
Germany, Spain, France, Italy, and diverse other places abound with these
beasts. His stones are much used in physic, the hunters therefore catch him
that they may geld him; whereupon he is called Castor: for it is but a fable to
say he biteth out his own stones when they come to take him; for indeed they
lie too close in his body to be pulled out with his teeth. These stones, and
genitalls, the Physicians call Castoreum: and as for his skin and hairs,
their use is also excellent.

The Otter is something less then a Beaver, and may The Otter.
well be called A dog of the water: and (as Mr Topsell thinks) is, without
all doubt, a kind of Beaver. It is a sharp-biting beast, never letting his
hold go until he make the bones to crack between his teeth: and as for the
females, they use to give suck to their whelps, until they be almost as big as
themselves.

Olaus Magnus calls them Lib. 18.
Lutrae, quadrato ore mordaces; and tells us that some great men in Suetia
keep tame Otters in their houses, which are so tractable that the cook of the
kitchen can send them into the fishponds to bring him fish for his masters
dinner.

Their skins (besides other uses) if they be worn A medicine for the megrim,
and palsy.
in caps, or stocking-soles, are good and wholesome against the palsy, megrim,
and other pains of the head. Topsell.

Sciurus, the Squirrell, is a quick nimble creature The Squirrell.
which will skip from tree to tree with great facility. When she is out of her
nest, her tail serves to secure her both from sun and rain. Howbeit, it is
sometimes a hurt unto her: for the hairs of it be so thick, that striving to
swim over a river, her tail is so laden with water, that sinking she
drowneth. Wherefore nature has taught her this pretty piece of policy;
namely, to get upon a little piece of wood, which swimming Olaus Mag. ibid.
wafts her securely over: and wanting a sail, her bushie tail set up and spread
abroad, supplies the room of that defect.

Plin. lib. 8. cap. 38.
Pliny says they have great foresight in the change of weather, and will
therefore stop up the hole of their nest on that side from whence the tempest
is like to blow, opening a passage in the contrary place, or side opposite to
it. The like whereunto is affirmed of the Hedgehog also.

Their skins are exceeding warm, and their tails profitable to make brushes:
their flesh is tender, and in a manner comparable to the flesh of Kids or
Conies; and yet not very wholesome, except the squirrell were a black one

When this beast is hunted, she cannot be driven to the ground to creep into
hedges, unless extremity of faintness cause her so to do through an
unwilling compulsion: for such ( Tops. page 658.
says one) is the stately mind of this little beast, that while her limbs
and strength lasts, she tarrieth and saves her self in the tops of tall
trees, disdaining to come down for every harm or hurt which she feels;
knowing indeed her greatest danger to rest below, among the dogs and busy
hunters. From whence An emblem from the hunted Squirrell, concerning the small
security in things on earth.
may be gathered a perfect pattern for us, to be secured from all the wiles and
hungry chasings of the treacherous devil; namely that we keep above in the
lofty palaces of heavenly meditations: for there is small security in things
on earth; and greatest ought to be our fear of danger, when we leave to look
and think of heaven.

But I come to another beast; which in Topsells history A strange beast called
a Su.
is thus described. There is in the Newfound World far into the South, a
strange and terrible beast, which they of the country where it lives, call a
Su; so named because it lives near the water, and su in their language
signifies water. It is a creature of a very deformed shape, monstrous
presence, a great ravener, and altogether untameable. She has a mighty great
tail, which is brushie, fierce talons, and a cruel look. Now when hunters (for
the desire of her skin) shall set upon her, she flies very swift, carrying
her young ones upon her back, and covers them with her broad tail. And the
hunter, not daring to encounter with her but by treachery, is forced to this
project; namely to dig great holes in the ground and cover them over with
boughs, sticks, and earth: which he does so weakly, that if the beast chance at
any time to come upon it, she and her young ones fall down into the pit, where
they have no way but one, they must be taken. But this cruel, untameable,
impatient, violent, ravening, and bloody beast, perceiving that her natural
strength cannot deliver her, first of all, to save her young ones (as she
supposes) she destroys them all with her own teeth, so that never any of
them could be taken and tamed; and then howleth and roareth at the hunters who
come about her; but now they need not fear her, she is secure enough: whereupon
they use means quickly to dispatch her, and by fatal blows to stop her mouth
from bawling. Then they take off her skin, and leave her carcass in the
earth: and of what use her skin is, I have not heard.

The Hedgehog is a beast well known, about the The Hedgehog
bigness of a conie, but like to a Swine; having her body beset with and
compassed all over with sharp t^orny hairs, or pricking bristles, which she
sets up or keeps down at her pleasure: and by these she defends her self
from those who seek her life; which is attributed to her as a kind of craft
and wiliness. Some therefore have likened a deceitful man unto this beast,
who turns and windeth himself for all advantages, and is now this, then that,
and sometimes neither this nor that.

Between him and the Tops. page 279.
Serpent there is mortal hatred: for it is said that the serpent will seek out
the hedge-hogs den, and then falls upon him with purpose to kill him, but the
Hedgehog draws himself up together round like a football, so that nothing
appears but his thornie pricks: where at the Serpent biteth in vain, for the
more she labors to annoy the Hedgehog, the more she is wounded and harmeth
her self; howbeit the height of her mind, and hate of her heart be such, that
they will not suffer her to let him go, till one or both parties be destroyed:
yea it sometimes so happens, that the least creature has the best success,
and gets the conquest. So have I seen some provoke others to their An emblem
from the Serpent and Hedge hog, concerning mean estates.
own ruin: for if proud minds and high spirits could always have their
wished ends, the low shrubs should never thrive, nor mean estates enjoy the
sun.

Moreover (as is reported) this beast alters and The Hedgehog changes his
nest. The emblem detecteth Timeservers, and unconstant Professors.
changes her nest according to the blowing of the North or Southern wind. So
have I heard of those, whose care has been to apply themselves unto the times,
apt to turn with every wind, altering their judgments and opinions in time of
persecution, from-that which they held in time of peace and quiet: whereas a
hardy soldier is never known but in a winter siege, nor a true Christian but
in a fiery trial.

Next after the Hedgehog I may mention the Porcupine, The Porcupine, or
Mountain Hedgehog.
or Porcuspine, from Porcus and spina; so called, because he is, as it were, a
thornie-hog, or another Hedgehog something differing from the former: for the
vulgar Hedgehog is Ericius sylvestris, and the Porcupine Ericius montanus.
This beast is usually bred in India and Africa, and brought up and down in
Europe to be seen for money.

The general proportion of his body is like a Swines; and seldom is it that
they be bigger then a pig of half a year old. But in the particular members
there is some difference, as in his ears which are like to the ears of a Man,
his mouth somewhat like to the mouth of a Hare, but with a longer slit, and
with three of his foreteeth in his upper jaw hanging out of his mouth: his two
hinder feet are something like the feet of a Bear, and those before like the
feet of a Badger; and in a word, his body is beset with certain sharp quills
or prickles, which, when he is hunted, he can dart off either in the mouths of
the dogs, or legs of the hunters. And of these quills men make wholesome
tooth-picks; for it is said that if we scrape our teeth with these, they will
never be loose. Topsell.

Armadilio is a beast in India like unto a young pig, The Armadill.
covered over with small shells like unto armor: it lives like a mole in the
ground.

The Alborach is a fair white beast like an ass, frequent The Alborach.
in the Turkish territories, upon which beast Mahomet was carried up to heaven;
as the blasphemous Priests of that nation persuade the silly pilgrims of
Mecha. Idem.

The Hare is a fearful creature and well known to The Hare.
every one. Gesner describes her amply in his history of beasts, as also
Topsell, Lib. 8. cap. 55.
Pliny, North. hist. lib. 1^*
Olaus Magnus, and such others. Now the cause of fear in this creature, is in
regard that she has no other arms to defend her from being taken, but her
little pretty nimble legs and swift running. It is said that when they watch
they shut their eyes, and when they sleep they open them; which how how true it
is, I know not: howbeit the Egyptians, when they would signify an open and
manifest matter, used to picture an Hare sleeping.

Moreover, it is easily seen that the Hare has longer legs behind then
before, and so runs faster up the hill then down; contrary to almost any
other beast, for they make more speed downward then up. Whereby (says Willet
on L^vit.
one) may be signified, that whereas most men in the world go down the way
which leads to destruction, he which is good, will imitate the watchful
Hare, and climb up cheerfully the way to heaven: which was An emblem from the
Hare, concerning the ways to heaven and hell.
prefigured by ascending up to Sion, the mountain of the Lord, Psalm. 24. 3.

And again, the Hare has very long ears, is quick in Another.
hearing, but dull of sight; which, to apply it as an emblem, may be thus:
the Idem ibid.
ear, being the instrument of hearing, is sensus doctrinae, the sense of
doctrine, and gate How to use our hearing and seeing.
to let in good instruction; but the eye, being the sense of seeing, is the
instrument of delight and vanity. Wherefore we should be swift to hear things
for our instruction, and shut our eyes from beholding things that tend to
vanity.

The Conie is a beast near of kind to the Hare: in The Conie
some countries they Topsell.
begin to breed being but six months old, but in England at a year old, and
so continue bearing every month, or at the least seven times in one year.
Their young are blind at the first, and (like whelps) see not until they be
nine days old; neither has their damme any suck for them till she has been
six or seven hours with the male, or at least she cannot suckle them for the
desire that she has to accompany the buck, which if she be not presently
permitted to do, she will have no propensitie any more until 14 days after.

The males will Markhams Meth.
kill the young ones, if they come at them, as the he-cat uses to do; and
therefore it is thought that the females use to cover up their nests with
earth, and keep them close until they be ready to run. Their flesh is Haven
of health, page 119.
commendable, light of digestion, wholesome, cleanly, nourishes temperately
and firmly: and what commodity a good warren of conies brings toward the
keeping of a good house, men who love hospitality know very well. Howbeit they
have sometimes proved dangerous about cities and castles by undermining their
walls: for (as Pliny writes in the 29 chapter of his eighth book) there was a
town in Spain overthrown by the digging of conies; and one again in Thessalie
destroyed by the casting of moles. It is not good therefore to let them have a
freedom of breeding too near our houses for fear of damage. To conclude,
Mark. ibid.
they use not to live very long, and chiefly they take delight in hard and
sandy grounds which are dry; for they have no greater enemy then the wet:
from whence it proceeds that their greatest infirmity is rottenness. And
therefore for those who keep tame conies, Markham teaches that they shall
only take the finest, sweetest, and driest hay that they can get, and mix it
very well with the herb hare-thistle, and therewith feed their conies; which
medicine will both cure and prevent the foresaid malady. And note, that in
India there is a little beast called a Pig-conie, with short round ears, and a
body somewhat rounder and fuller then our conies.

The Ferret, in Latin is called Viverra, quasi vivens in The Ferret
terra, as living in the earth, creeping into, and searching in the holes
thereof; by which means they infest no creature more then the conie. This is a
bold and audacious beast (though little) and an enemy to all other, except
their own kind: and when they take a prey, their custom and manner is, only
to suck in the blood as they bite it, and not to eat the flesh; and if at any
time their prey shall be taken from them, they fall a squeaking and crying.
Such (says one) are the rich men of this world, An emblem from the Ferret,
concerning covetous rich men.
who yell, and cry out., when they part with their riches; weeping and wailing
for the loss of such things, as they have hunted after, with as much
greediness as want of pity: in whose commendation, I think as much may be
said, as was once by a preacher at the black funeral of an usurer; of whom
there is this story.

A great rich usurer, having purchased a mighty A story of an usurer.
estate, was at the last sent for by death to leave the world: and lying upon
his bed, the Doctors and Physicians finding his sickness to be mortal, give
him over. Then do his friends about him send for a Divine to come and comfort
him; who willingly tells him of many comforts for his souls health, and amongst
other things puts him in mind of this, viz. that he had been a great purchaser
upon earth, but now he must study for another purchase, which was the kingdom
of heaven. Now the usurer turning upon the other side, at the hearing of the
word purchase, answered, I will not give more then according to fifteen years
for a purchase, and so died. Afterward, this gentleman preaching at his
funeral, in the conclusion of his sermon said only thus; Brethren, it is now
expected that I should speak something concerning our brother here deceased: I
will end it in few words, namely these: How he lived, you know; how he died, I
know; and where his soul now is, God Almighty knows.

The Poul-cat, or Fitch, in Latin is called Putorius, a The Poulcat.
Putore, because of his ill smell; for when they are provoked or stirred, they
stink grievously. Their delight is to suck eggs, kill and eat Hens and
Chickens: and it is worth observing, that their craft in devouring their prey
is singular; for to the intent that the silly creatures to be devoured may not
betray them to the housekeepers, the first part that they lay hold on with
their mouths is the head of the Hen or Chicken, by which means they bite off
their heads and so keep them from crying.

The Weasel in Latin is called Mustela, from (...) and The Weasel.
(...), of snatching up of mice: for (though an enemy to pullen) she devoureth
and destroys mice: and because she has been often seen to carry her young
ones in her mouth, some have thereupon supposed, that she conceived by the ear
and brought forth by the mouth: and for this cause Aristeas (mentioned by
Gesner and Topsell) writes that the Jews were forbidden to eat them; for this
their action is an emblem (says he) of folly and foolish men, which can keep
no secrets but utter all that they hear: for there be many, who when they have
heard tales with their ears, enlarge them with their tongues, and by adding to
reports turn mole-hills into mountains, and sic crescit eundo; because as many
have itching ears, so some have scratching and augmenting tongues, desiring to
be heard as the reporters of news. But the Egyptians turn it into another
sign, and say that their copulation at the ear, and generation at the mouth,
are emblemes of speech, which is first taught to the ear, and then uttered by
the tongue. All which are pretty fancies, although they be founded upon a
mistaken ground; as before I showed.

Howbeit, this is recorded for a truth, that whereas the Basilisk kills all
creatures with her poison that approach unto her, or contend with her, the
Weasell only is found to match her; witnessed not only by Lib. 8. cap. 21.
Pliny, but by others also, who besides this Weasell know not of any other
beast in the world, which is able to stand in contention against the
Cockatrice. But note that Rue is hateful to a Serpent, and good against
poison; the Weasel therefore uses to eat of this herb both before and after
the battle; so well has nature taught her to find a preservative against her
venomous and hurtful adversary: and on the contrary, so well is nature
pleased, that no beast should be without his match. An emblem from the Weasel,
concerning the use of an enemy.
In a word, seeing the Weasell (as I said before) will destroy mice as well as
hurt pullen, it serves as an emblem to demonstrate, that one sometime may
make use of an enemy; and though every thing be not good for one thing, yet it
does not follow that it is therefore good for nothing. But I leave the Weasell,
and come to the Mole.

The Mole is a creature well known; the snout of it is The Mole.
like to the nose of a Shrew-mouse; and as for eyes or sight, she wants
either: only the (...)* (...). 11. c. 37.
place where the eyes should stand, have a little black spot like a millet or
poppie seed. In Latin she is therefore called Talpa, from the Greek word
(...), blind. And yet ( Topsel.
says one) by dissection of a Mole great with young, it has been proved that
the young ones before birth have eyes, but after birth living continually in
the dark earth without light, these their seeming eyes cease to grow to any
perfection.

And some again have also witnessed, that although the Mole be blind all her
life time, yet she Gem^. ex Arist.
begins to open her eyes in dying: which Idem lib. 5. c. 29. and Dr. Will.
on Levit. cap. 1^. An emblem from the Mole. A sinner, though blind in life,
sees in death.
I find thus applied, and it is a pretty emblem. This serves to decipher
the state of a worldly man, who neither sees heaven, nor thinks of hell, in
his life time, until he be dying: and then beginning to feel that which before
he either not believed, or not regarded, he looks up and sees. For in morte,
velit nolit, says Ibid. cap. 29.
Geminianus, even against his will he is then compelled to open his eyes, and
acknowledge his sins, although before he could not see them. It was the case
of Dives to live and die in this black mistie blindness, for he had no grace
to look up till he was in torments, and then (alas) it was too late. Yet herein
was that saying of Gregory plainly verified; Oculos, quos culpa claudit, poena
aperit.

The Martins and Ermins be small beasts, as little, or The Ermin
less then a Squirrell; the furre of whose skins is precious and of great
esteem, worn only by kings and noble personages: and although these beasts be
not bred in England, yet there be plenty of them in many places beyond the
seas: Meaning the Martins.
they are said to have a sweet smell in their dung or excrement, like the
Musk-cat; which proceeds rather from the nature of the beast then from the
meat which she eats: and for an ease to gouty legs, it is good to apply these
Martins skins.

The Zibeth or Sivet-cat, is a beast bigger then any Cat, The Sivetcat.
and lesser then a Badger, having a sharp face like a Martin; a short, round,
blunt ear, black without, but pale within; the eye of a blew skie-colour, the
foot and leg black, and more broad or open then a Cats: It has black claws, a
black nose, and is spotted all over the body, but on the nose, with certain
other marks notably described by Gesner and Topsell in their book of beasts.

This is a beast given much to cleanliness, and from this beast proceeds
that precious drug which we call Sivet. It is an excrement not growing in the
cod or secret part only, but in a peculiar receptacle by it self, increasing
every day to the weight of a groat: and who they be which keep of these Cats
tame, or enclosed, must remember to take away this distilled liquour every
second or third day, or else the beast does rub it forth of his own accord.

That creature which men call a Mus-cat, or Muskcat, The Musk-cat.
does much resemble a Roe, both in greatness, fashion and hair, excepting that
it has thicker and grayer hairs: the feet also are hooved, and in the province
of Cathay these Cats are found. This beast is that from whence the Musk
proceeds, which grows in the navell or in a little bag near unto it; and
of it self it comes to be ripe, whereupon the beast itcheth, and is pained: he
therefore rubbeth himself upon stones, rocks, and trees till he break the bag;
then the liquour runs forth, and the wound closes: but soon after, the bag
comes to be full again.

The common or vulgar Cat is a creature well known, The Cat.
and being young it is very wanton, and sportfull; but waxing older, very sad
and melancholy. It is called a Cat, from the Latin word Cautus, signifying
wary; for a Cat is a watchful and wary beast, seldom overtaken, and most
attendant to her sport and prey: she is also very cleanly and neat, oftentimes
licking her own body to keep it smooth and fair, which she can do in every
part but her head; she uses therefore to wash her face with her feet, which
she licketh and moisteneth with her tongue: and it is observed by some, that if
she put her feet beyond the crown of her head in this kind of washing, it is a
sign of rain.

And again, it is ordinary to be known, that the Why the male Cat eats his
young.
male Cat will eat up the young kitlings if he can find where they are: the
reason of which is, because he is desirous of copulation, and during the time
that the females give suck they cannot be drawn unto it.

Moreover, it has been usual for many men to play Wherein Cats be dangerous.
and sport with these creatures: in which regard, Topsell very fitly calls a
Cat, the idle man's pastime: affirming further that many have paid dearly for
their unadvised sporting. Whereupon he tells a story of A story showing the
danger of making Cats too familiar.
a certain company of Monks much given to nourish and play with Cats, whereby
they were so infected, that within a short space none of them were able either
to say, read, pray, or sing, in all the monastery: the reason of which is,
because the savor and breath of Cats destroy the lungs, and consume the
radical humor. Wherefore it is a means to bring any into a consumption, who
shall suffer these creatures to lie with them upon their beds, for their breath
(especially in a close chamber) infecteth the air: therefore they be also
dangerous in time of pestilence, and apt to bring home venomous infection; in
which regard it is very expedient to kill them in such perilous times, as they
use to do in cities and great towns.

And note that above all things the Cat abhors wet or water; from whence
arose that proverb,

Catus vult piscem, sed non vult tangere lympham. Fain would the Cat some
fishes eat,
But loath to wet her foot so neat.
In which she is a fit emblem of those, who will shrink to encounter with that
pain which harbors and brings forth their wished gain. For be it so that we
desire the sweetness of the well relisht kernel, then must we likewise crack
the hard shell; for Difficilia quae pulchra, Excellent things are hard to come
by.

Olaus Magnus makes mention of an abundance of Lib. 18. ^
wild Cats in Scandivania, and where he speaks of the Lynxes, he shows
that they devour many of these Cats: affirming moreover that the skins of
these creatures are good against the sharp cold of winter; whereupon those of
Scythia and Moscovia use them for garments.

The Mouse is a creat^re commonly of a dunne color; The Mouse.
howbeit in differing places they have differing colors: for in some countries
they be not dunne or ash-colored, but blackish; in some again they be white,
in some yellow, and in other some brown. In Greek he is called (...), and in
Latin Mus, from (...), mutire, of the piping noise which he makes. Gemin.
lib. 5. cap. 6.
Some say that mice increase and decrease in the quantity of their bodies,
according to the course of the moon, being ever least when the light of that
horned lamp is furthest from the full. The like also I find recorded of Cats
eyes; for (as Mr Topsell writes) the Egyptians observed in the eyes of a Cat,
the increase of the moonlight: and in the male, his eyes do also vary with
the sun; for when the sun arises, the apple of his eye is long; toward
noon it is round; and at the evening it cannot be seen at all, but the whole
eye shows alike.

Var. hist. lib. 1.
Aelianus writes that Mice excel all living creatures in the knowledge and
experience of things to come; for when any old house, habitation, tenement, or
other dwelling place waxes ruinous and ready to fall, they perceive it first;
and out of that their foresight, they make present avoidance from their holes,
and betake themselves to flight even as fast as their little legs will give
them leave, and so they seek some other place wherein they may dwell with more
security.

I remember a story of a man eaten up with Mice; by A story of a Bishop eaten
up with Mice.
which we are taught that no humane device can withstand Gods judgments. There
was (says Munster) a certain Bishop of Magunce named Hatto, who formerly had
been the Abbot of Fulden, and in his time there was great famine in that
country: this Bishop, when he perceived the poor to faint, and to be
oppressed with hunger, gathered together a great number of them into a large
barn, and setting it on fire he burnt them up; saying, that they little
differed from Mice, and were profitable for nothing, for they did but consume
and waste the corn. Which damned trick and devilish tyranny, the great God of
heaven would not suffer to go away unrevenged, for he commanded the Mice by
great flocks to invade this Bishop and set upon him without pity, vexing him
both night and day with purpose to devour him. Whereupon he flees for refuge
into a certain tower compassed by the water of Rhene, thinking himself to be
then safe, and free from their greedy gnawings and cruel bitings; but he was
much deceived: for the Mice followed him, and like speedy executioners to
perform the just judgment of God, came swimming over, and at the last gnawed
such holes into his body, that they let in death, who suddenly sends out his
soul to give an account for this foul deed. Which accident was done in the
year of our Lord 914, and the tower ever since called the tower of Mice.
Munster Cosmog.

Moreover, amongst other things which the Mouse takes great delight to eat, he
uses to watch for the gaping oister, and seeing it open, he thrusts in his
head; which when the oister feels, she presently closes her shell again, and
so crusheth the Mouses head in pieces. Whereupon one made this emblem,
Captivus ob gulam: An emblem from the Mouse, concerning those who destroy
themselves to serve their bellies.
whereby he deeiphereth the condition of those men who destroy themselves to
serve their bellies. Or (as another speaks) such are here signified which are
altogether given to their belly, and to carnal pleasure; for satisfaction
whereof, multa pericula sustinent, they undergo many dangers, and pay deerly
for their folly.

The Shrew-mouse is called by the Hollanders, Molmusse, The Shrewmouse.
because it resembles a mole. For it has a long and sharp snout like a mole,
teeth very small, but so as they stand double in their mouth, for they have
four rows, two beneath, and two above; and as for the tail, it is both
slender and short. In Latin it is called Mus araneus, because it contains in
it poison, or venime like a spider; and if at any time it bite either man or
beast, the truth of this will be too apparent. But commonly it is called a
Shrew-mouse; and from the venomous biting of this beast, we have an English
imprecation, I beshrew thee: in which words we do indeed wish some such evil as
the biting of this mouse. And again, because a cursed scold or brawling wife is
esteemed none of the least evils, we therefore call such a one a Shrew.

The Dormouse is a beast which ends his old age every The Dormouse.
winter, and when summer comes, reviveth again: which Epiphan.
some have therefore made an emblem of the resurrection. They are exceeding
sleepie, and fatted with it. Their hair is short, and in color variable, only
their belly is always white: and for mine own part, I ever thought them to be
no bigger then an ordinary mouse, but in Gesner and Topsell they are said to be
greater in quantity then a squirrell.

The Alpine Mouse, or Mouse of the Alps, is of near The Alpine Mouse.
akin to the dormouse: it is almost as big as a conie, and not much unlike it,
saving that their ears be shorter, and their tails longer. Munster does thus
express their natures, saying; they be much given to sleep, and when they are
waking, they be either playing and skipping to and fro, or else doing
something; as gnawing with their teeth, scraping with their nails, or else
carrying in their mouths either straw, rags, or soft hay, or any such thing
that may be good for their nests. When they live thus wild upon great hills
and mountains, and are minded to go and seek their prey or food, one of them
stands in an high place to give notice to the rest when any enemy or danger
approaches; which when he perceives, he barketh, and then all the other catch
as much hay as they can, and so come running away.

But this is strange; Munst. Co^m.
Sometimes one and sometimes another lies down upon his back, and as much soft
hay as may be laid upon his breast and belly, he claspeth and keeps fast
with his feet, and then another of his fellows gets him by the tail, and so
with his prey draws him home. About autumn they begin to hide themselves in
their nests, the which they make so close that no air or water can hurt them:
then do they lie hidden and sleep all the whole winter, yea six or seven
months without any meat, rolling themselves round like unto a Hedgehog. Now
the inhabitants do oftentimes observe and mark the place of their nests, and
then digging away the earth until they come at them, they find them so
oppressed with deep sleep that they carry them and their nests to their
houses, where they may keep them sleeping until the summer, if they do not
heat them at the fire, or the warm sun.

The Rat is four times so big as the common Mouse, The Rat.
being of a blackish duskie color, and is thought to belong to the kind of
Mice: Howbeit you shall sometimes see a Rat exceeding the common stature, and
this the Germans call Topsel.
The King of Rats, because of his larger and greater body; adding moreover that
the lesser bring him meat, and he lies idle: and yet this (perhaps) may be in
respect of his old age, not being able to hunt for himself. Dogs.


There be of Dogs diverse kinds, neither is there any region in the world where
these are not bred. And of these kinds some are for hunting, some for fighting
and defense, some for the Boar, Bull or Bear, some for the Hare, Cony or
Hedgehog, and some for one thing, some for another. They bring forth their
young ones blind, which An emblem from Dogs, being a caveat against too great
haste in any action.
is in regard that they scratch their dams when they stir in their bellies,
which makes her therefore bring them to their birth before they be come to
their eyes or sight, as is in many other creatures beside: and from hence arose
the proverb, Canis festinans caecos parit catulos, The hastening bitch brings
forth blind whelps. Which is a fit emblem against all rashness and
overhastie speed in any action: for haste makes waste, and sudden projects are
seldom ripe.

But of all Dogs the Greyhound may take the first place; The Greyhound.
he exceeds in swiftnes, and is preserved for the chase. This is the Grecian
Dog, called therefore a Greyhound.

The Hound is of a duller temper, whose only glory The Hound.
is in his smell: and of Hounds there be sundry sorts, but the least is the
Beagle.

In the next rank we may place the Spaniel, whereof The Spaniel.
there is one for the land, and another for the water; and as the Hounds were
for beasts, so these are for birds.

Then there is the Mastive, whose virtue is only in The M^stive.
his courage, strength, sharpness of teeth, and aptness to encounter with any
fierce wild beast; against which they are so cunning, that but seldom or
never do they part any other then victours; and how fiercely they will fight
with their own kind, is apparent: nay sometimes they have fought in defense of
their masters, and either kept them safe from harms, or detected the murderers,
or else in some other kind showed their love; as a little after I purpose to
declare.

And these (perhaps) at the first were the chief kinds (unless the Tumbler
and Lurcher ought to be reckoned by themselves:) for concerning Mongrels, they
came by commixtion of kind; which is thought to be first invented by hunters,
for the amendment of some natural defect which they might find in those of a
single kind. And then again, these Mongrels mixing likewise diversely, have
produced those several seeming kinds which now are.

And as for your mimick Dogs, it is supposed that they came first from a
commixtion of Dogs with Apes, or Apes with Bitches. Other Curres have had
either Wolves, Foxes, or some such like creatures to be their Sires; as many
think.

Bark. in his Sum. ^onum. A story of a loving Dog.
Lysimachus had a Dog which waited on him both in the wars and elsewhere: at
the last dying and being brought to be burned (according to the custom of the
country) the poor Dog leaped into the flames, and was burned with him. And
when Titus Sabinius, with his family, was put to death at Rome, one of their
Dogs would never be driven from his master, and being offered meat, he took it
up and carried it to the mouth of his dead master, endeavoring to have him
eat; and when the dead carcass was cast into the river Tyber, the Dog swam
after, laboring by all means possible to lift his master out of the waters.
Neither is it other then a credible Another story.
report out of Plutarch, that as King Pyrrhus marched with his army, he
happened to pass by a Dog which guarded the body of his master, who lay dead
upon the highway; which when the King had beheld a while as a pitiful
spectacle, he was advertised that this was the third day of the poor Dogs
fasting and watching there. Whereupon the king commanded the body to be buried,
and the Dog for his fidelity and love to be kept and cherished. Not long after
the King happened to make a muster of his army, to see how well they were
furnished; and the Dog being by, remained sad and mute, until at the last he
espied the parties who murdered his late master, and then he flies upon them
with such a wonderful force and fury that they had like to have been torn in
pieces by him, turning himself now this way, and then that way, earnestly
beholding the King as if he desired justice, howling most pitifully; whereupon
the King caused the said men to be committed, examined, and racked: and then
not able to conceal it any longer, they confess the fact and are put to death.
The like also was once Another story.
known to happen in France: for one gentleman having killed another, the murder
was discovered by the Dog of the slain man, in like manner as before; only the
circumstances did a little differ: for the Dog and the suspected person were
put both together in a single combat for clearing of the matter; and when the
murderer could not defend himself from the fury of the detecting Dog, he
confessed the whole matter: in memory whereof the manner of the fight was
painted forth, and kept to be seen many years after.

Of Apes there be sundry kinds, and many of them in Apes.
some thing or other do resemble either men or women; as the common Ape, the
Breeding in islands on the further side of Ganges, and in the Eastern mountains
of India.
Satyr, the Norvegian monsters, the Prasi^n Apes which are bred in India, the
Bearded Ape living in Ethiopia and India likewise, the Cepus or Martin Munkey;
all which either in their shape or countenance come near to men: as also the
Sphinx, which has an head, face, and breasts like to a woman. Besides which
there is the common Munkey, the Baboon, the Tartarine, not much differing from
a Baboon; and the Satyrine monster, bearing the shape of a terrible beast, and
fit only to be joined to the story of Satyrs. Then again there is the
Simivulpa OF Apish-Fox; and in America a very deformed creature which may be
fitly called the Bear-Ape; and another which is called the Sagoin. Unto which
(as not impertinent) may be also added the Lamia, which is a beast living in
Lybia, with paps, a face, head, and hair like a woman, though in every other
part like a terrible beast, full of scales, and a devourer of such passengers
as (at unawares) shall happen to come near her. And as for the Fayrie tales of
the Lamiae, they nothing belong to this creature: neither be those common
reports of Sphinx his Aenigma in the Theban language signifies an inrode or
warlike incursion; wherefore the people complained in this sort: This Gre^ian
Sphinx robs us in setting upon us with an ^nigma, but no man knows after
what manner she makes this ^nigma. Tops. history of beasts, page 18.
riddle, any other then fables. Howbeit there is a true story of one, whose
name was Sphinx, slain by Oedipus; which he could not do till he had scaled
that strong fort which she had firmly builded for her own defense; and unto all
but Oedipus, it proved as a thing impregnable. As for aenigma, what it was, the
margent shows.

But to proceed and leave this digression, the common Apes must be again
remembered. They be very nimble and active creatures; and for their greatest
delight, it is to imitate man in his actions.

About the mountains called Emodii, which be certain Alexander deceived by Apes.
hills in India, there is (says Munster) a large wood full of great Apes,
which when Alexander and his soldiers saw standing afar off, they supposed
them to be enemies, and therefore were purposed to fight and set upon them: but
some natives of that country being present, showed to Alexander that it was
nothing but an assembly of Apes, whose contention was to imitate such things as
they had seen; whereupon the King turns his battle into laughing, and his
fighting into merry disport and pastime.

Moreover, I have sometimes read how these Apes are How to (...)* wild Apes.
taken. The hunters intending to catch them, use to come and set full dishes of
water within sight of the Apes; and then they begin to wash their eyes and
face: which done, the water is suddenly taken and conveyed away, and in the
stead thereof, pots full of birdlime or such like stuff, are set in their
places. Then the hunters depart a little from them; and the Apes, observing how
they before had washed their face and eyes, come now presently down from the
trees, and thinking to do as the men did, they daub and anoint their eyes and
mouths with birdlime, so and in such a manner, that neither knowing or fearing
any thing, they are suddenly made a prey, and taken alive.

And again, there is also another device mentioned by Plin. lib. ^. cap. 54.
Pliny, and this it is. They who use to catch Apes, take unto themselves
buskins, and put them on in the sight of the Apes, and so depart; leaving
behind them other buskins inwardly besmeared with some such stuff as was
mentioned before, with which they mix some hairs that the deceit may not
appear: then do the Apes take them up, and plucking them upon their legs and
thighs, they are so besnared and entangled, that thinking to run away they
are deceived. Aelianus also writes that when the Lions be sick, they catch and
eat Apes, not for hunger, but for physic.

And for the Ape, this also is her practice: when she An emblem from the Ape
and her (...).
has two young ones to be nourished at onc^, that which she loves (...)*
(...) ^. lib 5* cap. 10.
best shall be always held and hugged in her arms; but the other being less
regarded, is more roughly used, and glad to sit upon the back of his damme,
open to all dangers, little or nothing respected: and yet it so happens, that
the neglected one commonly fares best. For whilst the other is hugged too
hard, his damme kills him with kindness; but this rejected one lives,
although he wants the taste of foolish cockering. So have I sometimes seen it
amongst the fond sort of partial Against the fondness of parents.
parents, that with too much love they often hurt some of their children,
whilst the other left unto their hardest shifts, thrive and prosper in a
harmless course. Non amo nimium diligentes, is therefore worth observing;
because omne nimium is turned into vitium; and the readiest way to be soonest
hurt, is to be fostred up in the fondest manner. For as he that flatters an
usurer, claws the devil; so he that spares the rod, spoils the child.

Geminianus mentions the like custom of the foolish Ape, but he applies the
emblem otherwise, directing it as an example to decipher out the folly of a
covetous The folly of a covetous man.
man, who bears up and down in the arms of his affection, that fondling which
he loves, namely the world; but leaves and neglects other things wherein his
love should show it self, casting them upon his back and as it were behind
him, although afterward it be his hap to suffer for it. For when any
necessity shall urge the Ape to run, she casts down the young one in her
arms; but the other behind her, sits still and hinders her course; so that
being oppressed she is taken. In like manner when he, whose only love and joy
was in the world, is compelled by death to fly away, he lets go that which
was his best beloved, and thinking to escape the eager pursuit of his fierce
tormentours, he is deceived; because the neglect of things to be regarded,
lies heavy on him, and they help now to make him wretched. It is better
therefore to be poor then wicked; for it is not thy poverty, but thy sins,
which shut thee ou^ from God: and (fond fooll) do not they take pains without
gains, labor in vain, and traffic ill, who lose their souls to ^ll their
bags? For (as Isaac showed in blessing In them who are blessed, the dew of
heaven is before the fatness of the earth.
him who was to be blessed) the dew of heaven must go before the fragrant
fatness of the fertile earth; but in him who lost the blessing, the earths
fatness goes before, and takes place of the dew of heaven.

But do you not see the pawing Bear? he is a creature The Bear.
well known, and such a one as is found in diverse places of the world. Lib. ^.
(...). 3^.
Pliny describes this beast at large, not only showing the time and manner
of their birth, but also of their retreating to their caves, long time of
fasting, and of sleeping there. They bring forth young within the space of
thirty days after their time of copulation, which at the first be shapelesse
and void of form, without eyes, without hair, their nails only appearing and
hanging out, each whelp being little bigger then a mouse; and these, by
licking, are molded into fashion, and day by day brought to perfection.

This beast can fast many days, and, by sucking his foremost feet, assuage or
somewhat mitigate his hunger. Some say that they can be without meat 40 days,
and then when they come abroad they are filled beyond measure; which voracitie,
and want of moderation, they help again by vomiting, and are provoked unto it
by eating of ants. But above all other things, they love to feed on honey:
whereupon they will fearlesly disturb the bees, and search into hollow trees
for such repast; not altogether to fill their bellies, but most of all to help
a dimnesse in their dull eyes. Moscovia has many such breeding bees: and
Munster tells a story how a Bear seeking for honey, was the cause of delivering
a man out of an hollow tree. There was (says he) a poor countreyman A ^orie
of a man saved by a Bear.
who used to search the woods and trees for the gain and profit of honey, and
espying at the length a very great hollow tree, he climbed up into the top of
it, and leaped down into the trunk or body, sinking and sticking fast in a
great heap of honey even to the breast and almost to the throat: and having
continued two days in this sweet prison, during which time he fed himself with
honey, all hope of deliverance was quite gone; for it was impossible he should
climb up and get out, neither could his voice be heard although he cried with
an open mouth, especially in such a solitude and vast place of wood and trees:
so that now being destitute of all help and consolation, he began utterly to
despair; and yet by a mavelous, strange, and (as it were) an incredible
chance, he escaped: for it so fell out that he was delivered and drawn forth by
the help and benefit of a great Bear, which seeking for honey, chanced to happen
upon this tree: the Bear scaleth it, and lets her self down into the
hollownesse thereof, with her back-parts first, in manner and fashion of man
when he climbeth. Now the man in the tree perceiving this, in a great fear and
affrightment, he claspeth fast about the reins and loins of the Bear, who being
thereupon terrified as much as the man, is forced to climb up again, and
violently to quit her self from the tree (the man in the mean time using great
noises and many outcries) and so by this accident, a wished, but hopeles
liberty was procured: for the Bear being feared, drew up the man and knew not
of it.

And note that in Bears their head is very weak, being contrary to the Lion,
whose head is always strong. And therefore when necessity urges that the
Bear must needs tumble down from some high rock, she tumbleth and rolleth with
her head covered between her claws, and oftentimes by dusts and knocks, in
gravel and sand, they are almost exanimate and without life.

Neither is it seldom that their tender heads catch deadly wounds, although
they cannot quickly feel them, by reason of their ardent love to honey. For (as
N^rth. (...). lib. 1^.
Olaus Magnus mentions) in Russia and the neighbor countries they use to
catch Bears with a certain engine like the head of a great nail beset round
with sharp iron pegs, which they hang upon a bough just before that hole where
the Bear fetches his honey, who coming according to his wonted custom, strives
to thrust it away with his head, but the more he puts it from him, the stronger
it comes back upon him; howbeit he being greedy of the honey in the tree,
cease not to push against the engine, until at last his many knocks cause
him faintingly to fall. So have I seen many perish An emblem concerning the
end of sins sweetness.
through their own vain and fond delights: for as the sweetness of honey
causes the death of the Bear; so the delight in sin causes the death of the
soul. Gemin. lib. 5. c. 35.
Geminianus applies it thus; saying, that as the hony-seeking Bear destroys
her self by her own folly, in beating back the piercing hammer; so man, who
seeks after the pleasures and delights of sin, wounds himself by pushing
against the pricks: for the word of God, as a Jer. 23. 29.
hammer breaking the rocks, resists both him and his sin; which whilst he
Psalm. 50. 17.
casts from him, it does more strongly impinge upon him, and will at the last
Romans 2. 16.
day judge him to perdition.

The Bugill is of the same kind with Kine and Oxen, The Bugill.
and so is that other beast which we call a Byson.

The Byson is a kind of wild Bull, never tamed, and Wild Bulls.
bred most commonly in the North parts of the world. He is also called Taurus
Paeonicus, The Paeonian Bull: of which there be two kinds, the greater and the
less. Neither do I think these to be any other then those wild Bulls of
Prussia mentioned by Munster, in his book of Cosmography, saying, There be
wild Bulls in the woods of Prussia like unto the common sort of Bulls,
excepting that they have shorter horns, and a long beard under the chinne. They
be cruel, and spare neither man nor beast; and when any snares or deceit is
prepared and set to take them, or if they be wounded with arrows or the like,
they labor most vehemently to revenge their wounds upon him that gave them;
which if they cannot do, then through madness, by rushing and stumbling on
trees, they kill themselves. (...) hurt themselves because they cannot hurt
others.


A frantic beast, which, when he takes harm
And cannot give, dies whilst revenge is warm.
Such savage beasts there be in humane shape,
Whose moodie madness makes them desperate;
And 'cause they cannot harm their hurting foe,
They harm themselves, and show their malice so.
The Elk cannot live but in a cold country, as in Russia, The Elk.
Prussia, Hungaria, Illyria, Swetia, Riga, and such like. Olaus Magnus has
written much of this beast, and so has Topsell out of Albertus, Gesner, and
others; and Pliny describes it to be a beast much like an Ox, excepting for
his hair: but others call it Equi-Cervus, a Horse-Hart, because it has horns
like an Heart, and is used in some countries to draw men in coaches and
chariots, through great snows and over ice. They be exceeding swift and strong,
and will run more miles in one day, then a horse can in three, as Topsell
mentions in his history of foure-footed beasts.

The Buffe has an head and horns like an Heart, the The Buffe.
body like a Bull or Cow, as also the feet; and most commonly the color of an
Ass: Howbeit, being hunted he is said to change his color; which (as (...).
some imagine) comes to pass, like as in a man whose countenance changes in
time of fear. This is that beast of whose skin men make them Buffe-leather
jackets; and in Scythia it serves to make breast-plates, of strength able to
defend from the sly force of a fierce dart.

Of Dear there be more kinds then one. Amongst Of Dear.
those which be termed Fallow-Deere, there is the Buck and the Do; the one
being the male, the other the female. And concerning the Red Dear, there is
the Heart and Hind; the Heart being the he, and the Hind the she.

Then again there is another sort bearing the names of Roes; of which the male
is the Roe-buck, and the female the Do.

These creatures are said to be their own Physicians, and (as it were) not
needing the help of man, can cure themselves through a secret instinct of
nature, and the providence of God their maker: for by feeding on that precious
herb Dictamnum, or Dittanie, mentioned before in the third days work, they
cure themselves of their cruel wounds, and so become whole again: and for
other ills, they have other herbs. The males are horned, which they cast off
once every spring; and being disarmed Pollards, they use to keep themselves
close hidden, Gemi^. lib. 5* c. 42.
and go not forth to relief but by night; and as they grow bigger and bigger
they harden in the sun, they in the mean time making some proof of their
strength against hard trees: and when they perceive them to be tough and strong
enough, then they dare boldly go abroad, thinking themselves well armed now
again. Lib. 8. cap. 32.
Pliny says, they can endure to swim thirty miles endwayes: and when they are
to pass any great river, to go to Rut in some isle or forest, they assemble
themselves together in herds; and knowing the strongest and best swimmer, they
put him in the forefront, and then he which comes the second, stays up his
head upon the back of the first, and all the rest in like manner evenunto the
last: but the foremost being weary, the second ever takes his place, and he
goes back unto the hindmost.

The said author also witnesses, that the right horn of an Heart is of a
sovereign and precious virtue: and as a thing confessed of all, the Heart is
known to fill up the number of many years; as was proved by the Hearts of
Alexander, caught about an hundred years after his death, with rings and
collars on them showing no less. Being hunted and ready to be taken by the
hounds, they will for their last refuge fly to houses and places of resort,
choosing rather to yield unto man then dogs.

They go to Rut about the midst of September, and at the end of eight months
they bring forth young, sometimes two calves at once: and these they practice
to a nimble using of their legs from the very beginning; leading them up to
high rocks, and teaching them to leap, run, and fly away as occasion serves.
A fit emblem of careful parents, who teach their children An emblem from the
Heart; showing that children should be taught betimes*
whilst their years be green, instructing them betimes in the right way
wherein they ought to walk; according to that of Solomon, Train up a child in
the way he should go: and when he is old he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.
6.

And again, in their flying to man when the hounds oppress Another.
them, they be fit emblemes of those who fly to that God in the cloudie days
of dark affliction, whom before they sought not after: for says the Lord, In
their affliction they will seek me early. And is it not often seen, that Misery
can open those Our eyes are opened in affliction.
eyes which happiness has closed, and abate that Tympanie which prosperity
has ingendered? Yes verily. For as the waters of the sun, which Curtius
mentions, are cold at noon when the Air is hottest, and hot at midnight when
the Air is coldest; so it is with us: our zeal is coldest in the sunneshine of
prosperity, but gathers heat when trouble comes: And if trouble cannot do it,
nothing can.

Moreover, this also is not impertinent. I have read of Another emblem
concerning those who sorrow to part with earth, although they may gain heaven.
the Heart (says one) that he weeps every year for the shedding of his head,
though it be to make room for a better. So do I see the worldling go away
sorrowful at this very saying, Go, sell all that thou have, though it be for
treasure in heaven: the reason of which is, because men do not look at what
they are to have, but what they are to part with; and at any time will be for
one bird in the hand, rather then five in the bush: yet slight it not, but mark
it well; He that consults with his body for the saving of his soul, will never
bring it to heaven: neither is it any harm to lose the worse for finding of the
better, nor any thing in hand too deer for that happiness which is yet to
come. No matter therefore though we sow in tears, so we may reap in joy: for
as the difference between time and eternity is unspeakable; so it is also,
betwixt heaven and earth.

Also, this I likewise find, that when the Heart is Gemin. lib. 5. Another
emblem.
taken by the hounds, or any other device of the hunters, he will then shed
forth tears as well as when he casts his head. So should a penitent and a
watchful sinner, who is careful to avoid the wiles of the devil, he should
not cease to weep when he sees how he is overtaken; We should weep for sin,
by the example of the Heart.
for there is one on high who marks his tears, and puts them up into his
bottle; always pleased to see a sorrowful bespotted soul baptized in the
pearled drops of repentant dew. But to proceed.

Tragelaphus is a kind of Deer-goat, of which Gesner Tragelaphus.
makes two forts; the first whereof has horns like a Deer; the second like a
Goat, but more crooked and bending backward.

There is likewise another beast, most common in the The Rangifer.
Northern parts; Olaus calls him the Rangifer: he also has horns like a
Deer, and on him men use to ride in stead of horses.

The common Goats are easily known; but the Syrian The Goat.
Goats are differing, having long flapping ears like a deep-mouthed hound: and
of these there be two kinds, the greater and the less. Then again there is
another Goat called the Rock-goat, differing from the rest: and as for the Kid,
it is a young Goat, a sucker, or one newly taken from the damme.

The Badger fights upon his back, and so makes use The Badger.
both of his teeth and claws: the Fox makes no den, but drives away the
Badger out of his, by pissing in it.

Sheep naturally be of a hot disposition, weak, tender, Sheep.
harmless, and so far from greediness, that they will live of less food
then any other beast of their bigness. They be also pitiful amongst
themselves; for when they perceive any one of their fellows to be sick and
fainting through heat, they will stand together and keep away the sun. The
rams and ewes are fit for generation from two years of age until they be
ten: neither do we find any thing, either in them, or without them, which is
not of some good use and profit. And note that the ewes bear their young ones
in their bodies, an hundred and fifty days, and no longer, according to the
common account. I have heard of sheep in some countries which have yellow
fleeces; but here with us, they be always either black, white, or of a color
near to a russet. It is strange how in a great flock, every lamb should know
his own damme: and pretty sport is it, to see how they will play, and skip up
and down. Howbeit the shepherds find much trouble in one property belonging
to these dancing creatures; for if one lamb chance to skip into a river or
ditch, the rest (if they be by) will suddenly follow and do the like. In which
they be emblemes An emblem from the Lambs, concerning those who often perish
by following the steps of the greatest multitude.
of those, who will rather strive to do as the most then as the best* and yet
goodness goes not by multitude; for the most are commonly the worst: neither
is a way always to be chosen for the number or quantity of companions, but
for the quality; and better is it to go to heaven with strangers, then to hell
with our friends. Dives therefore would have sent from the dead, to have it
told his brethren. What? that the way to happiness is to follow goodness,
although it be but grex pusillus, a small and little flock.

Mares are said to have their full increase in five The Horse
years, but the Horse not till six. And there be some who write that an Horse
should not be broken or tamed until two years of age: and first of all he is
to be rubbed and chafed, and used with flattering and gentle words, his stable
should be laid with stone, and by little and little he must be used to go upon
the stones that his feet might be hardened. At the beginning let not him who
shall fit or break him be too rough, nor weary him with running, but prove and
turn him gently on both sides, and touch him rather with the stick then spur.

They are said not only to have knowledge of their riders and keepers, but
also of their generation and descent, knowing their sires and dammes in such
wise, that (as Pliny says) they will refuse to couple or engender with them:
which how true it is, the breeders of Horses be the best witnesses. They be apt
to learn, having a greater love to exercise then any other beast. Their courage
and valor is infinite, and being once trained unto it, they take an exceeding
delight in the wars, and will (as it were) prepare themselves man-like for
the same. Neither has it been but sometimes, and that not seldom known, how
they have Pli^. lib. ^. cap. 4^.
mourned for the loss or death of their masters: and how apt they be to endure
labor, there is none but knows.

But to know a good Horse and his age, these be his The marks of a good Horse.
marks. He should be of one color, excepting some mark or star to grace him;
his mane ought to be thick and standing up, his loins strong, his head short,
his neck must be erect, his ears small according to the proportion of his
head, a broad breast, a mean belly, short hips, a large tail and somewhat
curled, straight legs and equal knees, steadfast hoofs and gross, and yet not
too big nor too small, and in his legs not so much flesh as bone.

As for his age, when he is two years old and an half, How to know the age of
an Horse.
his middle teeth both above and beneath do fall; when he is three years old,
he easteth those which be like unto dogs teeth and brings forth new; before
six, his upper double teeth do fall, and at six he supplieth his want again: at
seven likewise he has all equal, and from thence (some say) his teeth begin
to be hollow: at ten his temples are also hollow, his teeth stick out, and his
brows sometimes wax gray. But of this enough.

The Gulon or Ierf is a beast in the North parts of Suetia: The Ierf.
A fit emblem against g^uttonie and drunkenness
Olaus Magnus has largely described it in the eighteenth book of his Northern
history, affirming that it is the most insatiable and devouring creature that
is: for having killed his prey or found some carcass, he feeds without giving
over, until his belly be so full that it will hold no more, but strouteth out
and is puffed up like a bag-pipe; then to ease himself, he thrusts in between
two narrow trees, and straineth out backwards that which he has eaten, and so
being made empty, returns again and fills himself as before, and then
straineth it out between the two trees, and returns to the carcass to eat
again; and thus he continues until he has devoured all: which being
consumed, he hunteth after more, in this sort continually passing his life.
Which beast (as is worthily * observed) is a fit emblem By Sir Richard Bark.
in his Su^* (...).
of those riotous and gluttonous men, who pass whole days and nights in
eating and drinking; and when they have filled themselves so full that their
bodies will hold no more, they vomit up what they have taken, and then return
to their carowsing cups and cheer again, as though this only were their
felicity, and end for which the mighty God had made them. But let them know,
that (although many live as if they came but into this world to make merry and
away) ruin will follow riot: and it were well for such men, as they have lived
like beasts, if they could likewise die like beasts, never to live again: but
(alas) they cannot; here is their misery, that they only leave their pleasures
behind them, and not their sins.* For when Esau sells his birthright for a
mess of pottage, he may wish for a blessing and not find it, although he seek
with tears; or when Balthazar spends his time in damned quaffing, in stead of
quenching his thirst he may drown his soul: for unless there were weight in
vanity, or substance in deceiving pleasure, these men put into the balance are
found too light. Wherefore, let not eating and drinking take away our stomachs
to spiritual things, but let us eat to live, and live to praise the Lord.

The flesh of this Ierf is nothing wholesome for food, but their skins are
precious, and used of great men to be worn in garments: and as for his name,
the natives call him Ierf; but in Latin he is Gulo, videlicet a gulositate,
from his gluttonous feeding.

And one thing more is yet observable. When the hunters come to catch him, they
lay a fresh carcass in the place where he haunteth; that being filled, and as
it were wedged in between his trees, they may set upon him and take him with
ease. So is it often a wretched Another emblem, concerning those who are
suddenly taken away in the very act of their sins.
man's case, to perish by means of that wherein he took delight; and suddenly to
be taken away, even whilst he follows his wonted course. But this is strange:
for are men still ignorant, and yet to learn what this life is? It is a jo^ney
unto death, and every day does make it shorter: and sometimes the nearer it
comes, the further we are from thinking of it. For security is a great enemy
to prevention; and upon thought that we shall not die yet, it comes to pass
that we seldom prepare to die at all.

Make not therefore the last first, and first last; lest by being caught in thy
sins, neither first nor last thou come at heaven.

The Gorgon or Catoblepas is for the most part bred in The Gorgon.
Lybia and Hesperia. It is a fearful and terrible beast to look upon, it has
eyelids thick and high, eyes not very great, but fiery, and as it were of a
bloody color. He never uses to look directly forward, nor upward, but
always down to the earth: and from his crown to his nose he has a long
hanging mane, by reason whereof his looks are fearful. Moreover, his feet be
cloven, and his body all over as if it were full of scales. As for his meat, it
is deadly and poysonfull herbs; and if at any time this strange beast shall see
a Bull or other creature whereof he is afraid, he presently causes his mane to
stand upright, and gaping wide he sends forth a horrible filthy breath, which
infecteth and poysoneth the air over his head and about him, insomuch that
such creatures as draw in the breath of that air, are grievously afflicted,
and losing both voice and sight, they fall into deadly convulsions. Topsell.

Next unto which I may mention the Cockatrice or The Basilisk.
Basilisk,, and so come to serpents. Now this is the King of serpents; not for
his magnitude or greatness, but for his stately pace and magnanimous mind:
for the head and half part of his body he always carries upright, and has a
kind of crest like a crown upon his head. This creature is in thickness as
big as a man's wrist, and of length proportionable to that thickness: his eyes
are red in a kind of cloudy blackness, as if fire were mixed with smoke. His
poison is a very hot and venomous poison, drying up and scorching the grass as
if it were burned, infecting the air round about him, so as no other creature
can live near him: in which he is like to the Gorgon, whom last of all I
mentioned.

And amongst all living creatures, there is none that perishes sooner by the
poison of a Cockatrice, then man; for with his sight he kills him: which is,
Tops. Hist. of serpents, page 125
because the beams of the Cockatrices eyes do corrupt the visible spirit of a
man; as is affirmed: which being corrupted, all the other spirits of life
coming from the heart and brain, are thereby corrupted also; and so the man
dies. His hissing likewise is said to be as bad, in regard that it blasteth
trees, kills birds, etc. by poisoning of the air. If any thing beslain by
it, the same also proves venomous to such as touch it: only a Weasell kills
it; as in the description of that beast I have already showed.

That they be bred out of an egg, laid by an old cock, is scarce credible:
howbeit, Idem ibid*
some affirm with great confidence, that when the cock waxes old, and cease
to tread his hens any longer, there grows in him, of his corrupted seed, a
little egg with a thin filme in the stead of a shell, and this being hatched
by the Toad, or some such like creature, brings forth a venomous worm,
although not this Basilisk, that King of serpents. Pliny describes the
Cockatrice not to be above twelve inches long, in which regard Mr Topsell
thinks this not to be the main and great Cockatrice, but rather that worm
bred out of the former egg: wherein I wish every man's judgment to be his own.

Yet though this be a nocuous creature, it much magnifieth A note concerning
nocuous creatures.
the power of God, in being able to make such a one by the power of his word:
and as for us, both concerning this and all other hurtful things, to us (I
say) is shown the miserable condition which sin has made us subject to: for
before they might have been Adams play-fellows, all at his beck, at his service
and command, none having power to hurt him, because there was no thing in him
then for harm to work upon. But (...) proceed.

The Boas is a serpent of an extraordinary bigness; it The Boas.
can swallow down a little child whole without breaking any bone: for as
Topsell writes out of Solinus, in the days of Claudius the Emperor, there
was such a one taken at Rome with a child in his belly.

The Lati^es call it Boa and Bova, from Bos, because it desires (and so do all
Snakes and Adders) to suck the milk of Cows, insomuch that he will never kill
them until their milk be dried up: and then he will eat their flesh, as before
he had sucked their milk.

The Dragon is the greatest of all serpents, as some The Dragon.
write; and has sharp teeth set like a saw, but his strength rests in his
tail rather then in his teeth; and therefore when he fights with the Elephant,
he claspeth close about his legs: and sometimes he kills him, but most
commonly both die together; the Elephant for want of blood, and the Dragon
through too great fill of blood, or else by the weight of the Elephants body
falling on him.

He is sometimes in the Munst. Epit. cos.
waters, and lies often in his den; he sleeps seldom, but watches almost
continually; he devoureth beasts and fowls; and for his eyesight, it is very
sharp, so that in the mountains he sees his prey afar off. He is bred most
commonly in India and Ethiopia, his greatest poison being in his tongue and
gall: wherefore the Ethiopians cut away the tongue and eat the flesh. Munst.
Cosm.

Pliny says that through the strength of poison in his tongue, it is always
lift up; and sometimes through the heat of the said poison lurking there, his
breath is so hot as if he breathed fire, by which contagious blast he Munst.
sometimes so tainteth the air, that the pestilence proceeds thereof. His
wings will carry him to seek his prey, when and where occasion serves.

The Dipsas is another kind of serpent, and those The Dipsas.
whom he stingeth die with thirst.

But those whom the Hypnale stingeth, die with sleep. Hypnale.


Such as are stung by the Prester, die with swelling. Prester.


And the wounds of the Haemorrhois procure unstanchable Haemorrhois.
bleeding.

The Dart takes name from his swift darting or leaping The Dart.
upon a man to wound and kill him. His use and custom is to get up into trees
and hedges, and suddenly to dart from thence.

The Amphisbena or Double-head, goes both ways, The Amphisbena.
or moves circularly with crooked windings, because he has two heads and no
tail, having a head at both ends: which (says P^rch. An emblem concerning
government.
one) is a fit emblem of popular sedition; for where the people will rule
their Prince, needs must their motion be crooked; and where there be two heads,
it is as if there were no head at all. Africa abounds with these, and sundry
the other serpents.

Cerastes is a serpent bred also in Africa, having two Cerastes.
horns on his head, in manner of a snail; and from thence it is that he takes
his name, being called by the Grecians (...), that is to say, horned. He is
about a cubit in length, and of a sable color. His biting, for the most part,
is incurable: and with his horns he can fashion out (as it were) a little
coronet, whereby he P^rch.
allureth the birds unto him, and then (lying hidden in the sands, all but the
head) he cunningly devoureth them. Solinus, and some others say, he has not
only two, but four horns; as may be seen in Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 23.

The Viper has a body long and slender, like an eele The Viper.
or snake; a broad head, red and flaming eyes: and as for his teeth, they be
enclosed (as it were) in a little bladder, in which he carries his poison,
from thence infusing it into the wound which he has bitten. Pli^. lib. 1^.
cap. 62.
Some authors write, that when the Vipers engender, the male puts his head
into the females mouth, which she (being overcome with the pleasure of
copulation) biteth off; affirming moreover, that their young use to gnaw
themselves out of their dammes bellies, there being thereby an end both of male
and female, the one in the time of conception, the other in the time of birth,
and are therefore called Vipers, viz. a vi pariendo: but others allege the
testimony of one James Grevin, who, in the 7 chapter of his 1 book of venimes,
produces the witness of * Aristotle, saying that the Viper puts Hist.
(...). lib. 5. cap. ^lt.
forth her young ones, infolded in a membrane, which breaks about the third
day; and also that sometimes those which are within the belly issue forth,
having gnawn asunder the foresaid membrane.

The Slow-worm has dark eyes and dull ears, and The Slowworm.
can hear or see but little. His skin is thick, his color is of a pale
blew, intermixed on the sides with some few blackish spots: he seldom hurts,
unless by chance he be provoked.

As for the Snake, Adder, and such like, they be common The Adder
amongst us; and so is that other already mentioned; viz. the Slow-worm.
Howbeit we find that the Adder is a crafty and a subtle creature, biting
suddenly the passers by; whereupon Jacob said that his son Dan should be
Coluber in via, Genesis 49.

This, and other serpents, who change their coats when they cast off their
skins, do first of all by fasting make their flesh low and abated, and then
by sliding through a narrow passage, they slip them off. Which may be a fit
emblem of those, who when they go about An Emblem* from the Adder* casting
h^s skin, concer^ing the (...) of abstinence and ^asting, if it be rightly used.
to cast off their old and former sins, know that an humbling of themselves
before God, in abstinence and fasting, is very good, and a great help to fit
them for repentance: for it is certain, that if our belly be our god, then
gula does not only make way for Galen, and Bacchus for Aesculapius, but even
for Tophet also. Whereupon we find, that Dives in hell was not upbraided only
because he fared deliciously, but because it was every day. And how hard a
thing it is for a man to serve any other god then his belly, who is
continually used to stuff his paunch, the common practices of careless livers
make apparent; for whilst they sleep, and eat, and play, they never think of
heaven, nor can be fitted to slip off their old sins: but on the contrary, a
retired humbleness will make them both fearful, and careful how they walk.
Blame not Paul then if this be part of his b^asting, that he could out-fast, or
out-watch the rest of the Apostles: for (says S. Hierome) Ardentes diaboli
sagittae, jejuniorum and vigiliarum frigore restinguendae sunt.

Mr Purchase writes that they have Snakes and Adders African Snakes and Adders.
in Africa, whereof some are called Imbumas, five and twenty spans long,
living in land and water, not venomous but ravenous, whose custom is to lurk
in trees, waiting there for their prey; and having taken it, they devour
horns, hoofs, and all, although it be a Heart: and then swollen with this so
huge a meal, they be as it were drunk and sleepie, and altogether unweldie for
the space of five or six days. Moreover he affirms that the Pagan Negroes
roast and eat them as great dainties. A great serpent.


^ib. 6 cap. 3.
Aulus Gellius shows how Attilius Regulus, the Roman Consul, in the first
Punick war, encountered with a huge serpent at the river Bagrada, being
forced to plant his engines and artillery against him; and killing him, his
skin was sent to Rome for a monument, being no less then 120 foot in length.

In the kingdom of Congo be certain great Dragons Dragons in Congo.
with wings, in bigness like to rams, having long tails, and in their chaps
diverse jaws of teeth, of blew and green color; they have two feet, and feed
on flesh.

The Pagan Negroes Purch.
pray to them as gods, for which cause the great lords of the country keep
them, that thereby they may make a gain of the peoples devotion when they offer
their gifts and oblations.

The Scorpion is a venomous insect, somewhat fashioned The Scorpion.
like a crab, lobster, or creyfish; they have many legs, and carry their
stings in their tails: sometimes they eat their young ones and are of diverse
colors; the female is the biggest, and has the sharpest sting. And note, that
of the Scorpion is made an oil which is good against the stinging of Scorpions:
and so are lovesick youngsters cured; for when nothing will help them, they
may again be healed by enjoying her who gave the wound.

The Asp is something like to a land-snake, but with The Asp.
a broader back; their eyes are red and flaming, and out of their foreheads
grow two pieces of flesh like an hard skin: and for their poison, it is in a
manner incurable. Pliny writes that they go always two and two together,
Plin. lib. 8. cap. 23.
and if one of them be slain, the other will follow eagerly, and seek up and
down after him that slew his mate: but it is the Topsell.
providence of God Almighty to give as many remedies against evil, as there be
evils in the world. For the dullness of this serpents sight, and slownesse of
her pace, does keep her from many mischiefs which otherwise would be done. The
best way to cure their stings, is presently to cut off the member bitten.

There be See the author of (...). Summarie.
they who make three sorts of them; that is to say, the Terrestrial (five
handfulls long) the Hirundiner (colored like a Swallow, and is but a handful
long) and last of all the Spitter, greater then the other. Their biting causes
death within few hours: that of the Hirundiner is sudden, of the Spitter
somewhat slower, beginning first with a dimnesse or trouble in the eyes, then
with a swelling in the face, after that it proceeds to a deafness, and last
of all it brings death.

Caelius Rhodiginus writes that the Kings of Egypt did wear the pictures of
Asps in their crowns, whereby they signified the invincible power of
principality in this creature, whose wounds cannot easily be cured; making it
thereby an emblem of the power and wrath of a King: and the priests of Egypt
and those of Ethiopia did likewise wear very long caps, having toward their
top a thing like a navel, about which were the forms of winding Asps; to
signify to the people, that those who resist God and the King, shall perish by
unresistable violence. Topsell.

The Chameleons are admirable for their aierie subtance, The Chameleon.
and for the changeableness of their colors; (...) (if you will) for their
aierie sustenance, although they sometimes hunt and eat flies. He is of the
form and greatness of a Lizzard, but has higher legs: his ribs join in his
belly as in fishes, his muzzle is long, and his tail small toward the end,
and turning inwards; his skin is rough, his eyes hollow, and his nails
crooked: and when he moves himself, he cra^leth slowly like a Tortoise. See
Plin. in his 8 book, chap 33.

H^ tongue is almost half a foot long, which he can dart ^rth as swiftly as an
arrow shot from a bow; it has a big ^ot on the tip thereof, and is as catching
and holding as ^lue; which when he darteth forth, he can fasten to the
Grasse-hoppers, Caterpillars, and Flies, thereby drawing them down into his
throat.

He changes into all and every color, excepting Why the Chameleon changes
color.
white and red; whereof there be diverse opinions: some think that he changes
through fear; but this is not like, for though fear alter the color, as we,
when we are afraid, wax wan and pale, yet it will not change the body into
every color: others think that by reason of his transparencie he takes color
from those things which are near him, as the fish called Polypus takes the
similitude of the rocks and stones, where he lies to deceive the fish: and
some again join both together, for the Chameleon being in fear, swells by
drawing in the air, and then his skin being thereby pent, is the smoother, and
the apter to receive the impression of the colors of things objected; agreeing
in this to that of Aristotle, saying, that his color is changed being puffed up
with wind. But be the cause from whence it will, it affords a fit emblem An
emblem against flattery.
or lively representation of flatterers, and time-servers who fit themselves
for all companies, times, and occasions flattering any one, thereby to make fit
use of every one.

The Lizzard is a little creature much like the Eve, The Lizzard.
but without poison, breeding in Italy and in many other countries; the dung of
which beast clears the sight and takes away spots in the eye: the head
thereof being bruised and applied, will draw out a thorn or any other thing
sticking in the flesh.

The Salamander is a small venomous beast with ^ure The Salamander.
feet, and a short tail; it does somewhat resemb^ the shape of a Lizzard,
according to Pliny, lib. 10. c^. 67. And as for his constitution, it is so
cold, that (like (...)) if he do but touch the fire, he puts it out. They be
common in India, in the isle of Madagascar; as Mr Purchase ^lledgeth, where he
treats of the creatures, Plants, and fruits of India.

But stay; it is time to stop: I know not how to mention The conclusion of the
first Section.
every thing; and yet there is nothing which is not worthy admiration. I made
(I must confess) as much haste as I could, and yet me thinks I see both these,
and thousands more, run from me flocking all together, as if they meant to
dance attendance now on Man's creation; and not only show to him their due
obedience and humble welcome into the world, his stately palace, but also wait
to have their names according to their natures. For whatsoever Adam called
every living Genesis 2. 19.
creature, that was (says Moses) the name thereof.

Let us now then come to him, for whose sake all things else were made: for God
made the world for Man, and Man for himself. It was therefore a dainty fancy
of Hug. in didase. lib. 1.
one, who brought in the World speaking to Man after this manner. Vide homo,
dicit Mundus, quomodo amavit te, qui propter te fecit me. Servio tibi, quia
factus sum propter te, ut servias illi qui fecit and me and te; me propter te,
and te propter se. See oh man (says the World) how he has loved thee, who
made me for thee. I serve thee, because I am made for thee, that thou may
serve him who made both me and thee; me for thee, and thee for himself. This I
will therefore add:

Herbs cure our flesh: for us the winds do blow,
The earth does rest, heaven move, and fountains flow.
United waters round the world about
Ship us, new treasures, kingdoms to find out.
The lower give us drink; the higher meat,
By dropping on the ground, nigh parcht with heat.
Night curtains draws, the stars have us to bed
When Phoebus sets, and day does hide his head.
One world is Man, another does attend him;
He treads on that which often times does befriend him.
Grant therefore (Lord) that as the world serves me,
I may a servant to thy greatness be.
Sect. 2. The creation of Man, being created male and female, and made
according to the image of God: together with the institution of Marriage, and
blessing given to that estate.
THough Mankind were the last, yet not the least. God only spoke his
powerful word, and then the other creatures were produced: but now he calls a
council, and does consult, not out of need, but rather to show the excellency
of his work; or indeed, to show himself: he speaks not therefore to the Angels
but the Trinity, saying, Let us make man. Wherein the Father, as the first in
order, speaks to the Son and holy Spirit: and the Son and Spirit, speak
and decree it with the Father: and the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all Three
in One, and One in Three, create a creature to be the other creatures lord. He
was therefore the last, as the end of all the rest; the last in execution, but
first in intention; the Map, Epitome, and Compendium of what was made before
him.

Three worlds there are, and Mankind is the fourth: The first is Elementarie;
the second a Celestial world; the third Angelical; and the fourth is Man, the
little world. In the first is ignis urens, a burning fire: and this in the
heavens, is ignis fovens, a nourishing and quickening fire: but in those
creatures above, seated in the supercelestiall world, it is ignis ardens, and
amor Seraphicus, an ardent, burning, and Seraphicall love: and in the fourth
are all these found at once. For first, as man's body is compounded of the
Elements, he has his share of that warm fire in him. The influence of the
Planets working on him, does likewise show the second. And for the third, their
hearts who burn within them, do declare it.

Neither was he made like other creatures, with a grovelling look, or downward
countenance, but with an erected visage beholding the heavens, and with lordly
looks well mixed with majesty.

He has a body whose members are either Principal and Radical, or else
Less principal and Official.

His heart, liver, and brain, contain the vital, natural, The spirits, heart,
liver, brain, arteries, veins, and nerves.
and animal spirits; and these are carried by the arteries, veins, and nerves.
The arteries carry the vital spirits from the heart. The veins carry the
natural spirits from the liver, giving nourishment to every part. And the
nerves carry the animal spirits from the brain, being spirits for sense and
motion, and therefore called animal spirits: howbeit, the motive nerves spring
from the marrow in the back; and the sensitive come from the brain. Also know,
that under every vein is an artery: for The veins and the arteries go together.
wheresoever there goes a vein to give nutriment, there goes an artery to
bring the spirit of life. Neither is it but that the arteries lie deeper in the
flesh then the veins, because they carry and keep in them more precious blood
then the veins keep; and are therefore, not only further from outward dangers,
but clothed also in two coats, whereas the veins have but one. Whereupon it is
no hard thing to distinguish between these two vessels of blood, if we can but
remember that the artery is a vessel of blood spiritual or vital; and the
vein, a vessel of blood nutrimentall: for (as I said before) the veins have
their beginning from the liver, bringing from thence nutritive blood to nourish
every member of the body.

Moreover, his heart is the seat of all the passions; as in Passions have their
seat in the heart.
one instance may suffice: for being transported with fear, we call back the
blood to the heart, as to the place where fear prevails, the blood going
thither (as it were) to comfort and cherish the heart. And whereas it may seem
that our anger is seated in the gall, love in the liver, and melancholy in the
spleen: it is answered, that those humors placed in the gall, liver, and
spleen, are The humors stir up the passions.
not the seat of the passions and affections; but they are the occasion whereby
the passions are stirred up: as the abundance of blood in the liver, stirs
up the passion of love, which nevertheless is placed and seated in the heart;
and so of the rest.

And again, seeing the vital spirits proceed from the The heart lives first
and dies last
heart, it cannot be denied, but that this member lives first, and dies last.

And as the heart was the seat of all the passions, so The head.
the head is a seat and place for all the senses, except the touch; for that is
not only in one place, but in all and every place, being spread quite through
the whole body or isle of man.

The eyes are the windows of the body; and albeit a The eyes.
man have two eyes in his head, yet he receives but one sight at once, because
the optic nerves meet both in one.

The ears be like certain doors, with labyrinthicall The ears.
e^tries, and crooked windings: and here again, although the ears be two, yet
a man can hear but one sound at once, because his acoustick nerves (like to
the optic nerves) meet both in one.

His tongue discerns tastes: and albeit he have two The tongue.
eyes, and as many ears, yet his tongue is single and alone. A man should
therefore hear and see more then he speaks; and when he speaks, not wrong
his heart and secret thoughts, by uttering words with a double tongue: for
bilinguis is more then God made him; and double tongues shall be rooted out.
Besides, the lungs be The lungs.
the bellows of the voice, and are seated close to the heart; to teach us, that
speech ought to be the interpreter of the heart, and not that a man may speak
one thing and think another.

The nose serves not only as a gutter for the excrements The nose.
of the brain to flow and pass through, but also for a pipe of respiration to
give and take our living breath, and to conduct the air, and odoriferous
smells, up to the brain, for the conservation and recreation of the animal
spirits.

When the head is in danger, the hand casts it self up The hand.
to save it. And in giving hands to man, the special providence of God is to
be marked: for he has made him to take his meat with his hand, and has not
left him to gather and take it up with his lips, as the beasts do; because that
would be a means to hinder his speech by thickening his lips: as experience
teaches in those, who either by nature, or by accident, have thick swollen
lips, causing them to speak in the mouth, uttering their words very badly, and
indistinctly. Neither could there be so many quick conceits of the mind, or
curious inventions of sundry artists, brought to perfection, without such an
isntrumental help as the hand.

The feet be the bases of the body, carrying man like The feet.
a lordly creature, with his face from earth, and eyes to heaven; that he might
thither strive to come at last, where he inhabiteth who gave him these, and all
his other members else, which now I cannot stand to dilate upon at large. And
when he had them all, and was framed out like a curious piece, God breathed in
his nostrils The soul.
the breath of life, and man became a living soul: he then took his second
part, when his first was finished, neither was that second made till then: for
in the infusion it was created, and in the creation it was infused, to be the
dweller in that house built out of clay, and reared from the dust.

And in this last piece, God stamped his image; for it How man was made
according to Gods image.
consisted not in the figure of the body any otherwise then as the organe of
the soul, and in that regard being a weapon with it unto righteousness, it had
some shadow thereof. For, to put all out of doubt, the Apostle shows how we
are to understand the image of God in man; in one place speaking thus, Which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. And in
another place, Put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him who created him, Coloss. 3. 10. By which it appears that this
image consists, not so much in any resemblance between the substance of the
soul and the essence of God (though both be immortal) nor yet in the natural
faculties thereof, as of understanding, will, and memory, taken as emblemes of
the Trinity; but in the knowledge and illumination, holiness and justice of
the soul, which are now wrought in man by grace, and then were given by
creation. For that image is now lost, and cannot be had till it be renewed: but
the substance of the reasonable soul, with the natural faculties and powers
thereof are not lost, therefore therein is not expressed this image according
to which mankind was made. Mankind, and not man alone: for Woman made
according to the image of God, as well as man.
Moses adds, that male and female created he them; to show, that woman as
well as man, was partaker of the same image: the last that had it, and yet the
first that lost it; for though she were the last in creation, yet the first in
transgression, as the Scripture speaks.

But perhaps you will think the Apostle denies this, saying, The man is the
image and glory of God, but the woman 1. Cor. 11. 7.
is the glory of the man. In which it must be considered, that the Apostle
denies not the woman, as she is a How woman is the glory of the man.
creature, to be made in the image of God: but speaking as she is a wife, and
considering of them by themselves, he then is more honorable and must have the
preeminence; in which, the woman is rightly called the glory of the man,
because she was made for him, and put in subjection to him.

A woman's rule should be in such a fashion, Quarl. upon Esther, Med. 3.

Only to guide her household, and her passion:
And her obedience never's out of season,
So long as either husband lasts, or reason.
Ill thrives the hapless family, that shows
A cock that is silent, and a hen that crows.
I know not which live more unnatural lives,
Obeying husbands, or commanding wives.
But to come more nearely to the creation of Woman; she was made whilst Adam
slept: For when he had named the beasts according to their natures, he was cast
into a sleep: and, that God might find a help meet for him, he takes a help
out of him; performing it rather sleeping then waking, that neither Adams sight
might be offended, in seeing his side to be opened, and a rib taken forth, nor
yet his sense of feeling oppressed with the grief thereof: and therefore it is
said, God caused, not a sleep, but an heavy sleep to fall upon man, and he
slept. Which in a mystery signified that deadly sleep of the second Adam upon
the cross, whose stripes were our healing and building up again, whose death
was our life, and out of whose bleeding side was by a divine dispensation
framed his Spouse the Church.

It was then from the side of Man that Woman came, builded up out of a rib
taken from thence: not made out of any part of his head, which (if we seek the
meaning in a mystery) shows that she must not overtop or rule her husband: nor
yet made out of any part of his foot, to show that man may not use her as he
pleases, not trample or contemn her: but made out of a rib, taken from his
side, and near his heart, that thereby he might remember to nourish, love, and
cherish her, and use her like bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

And being thus made, she is married to Adam by God himself, who brought her
unto him, to show (says (...). (...). 1. (...). 1. cap. 3* (...)
one) the sacred authority of marriage, and of parents in marriage: a mutual
consent and gratulation follows likewise between the parties, lest any one
should tyrannically abuse his fatherly power, and force a marriage without
either love or liking. And thus are two made one flesh; in regard of one
original, equal right, mutual consent, and bodily conjunction.

Flesh of his flesh, and bone made of his bone (...). (...).

He framed woman, making two of one.
But broke in two, he did a new ordain
That these same two should be made one again:
Till singling death this sacred knot undo,
And part this new-made one, once more in two.
Yea since of rib first framed was a wife,
Let ribs be Hi'roglyphicks of their life.
Ribs coast the heart, and guard it round about,
And like a trusty watch keep danger out;
So tender wives should loyally impart
Their watchful care to fence their spouses heart.
All members else from out their places rove,
But ribs are firmly fixed, and seldom move:
Women (like ribs) must keep their wonted home,
And not (like Dinah that was ravished) rome.
If ribs be over-bent, or handled rough,
They break; if let alone, they bend enough:
Women must (unconstrained) be pliant still,
And gently bending to their husbands will.
The sacred Academy of man's life,
Is holy Wedlock in a happy wife.
And last of all, being thus made and married, they are blessed with the (...)
of increase, and multiplication in their own kind. A glorious pair, and a
goodly couple sure they were, having neither fault to hide, nor shame: and yet
not so much glorious in the ornaments of beauty (which made them each to other
amiable) as in the majesty and sovereign power ingrafted in them, to cause
the creatures with an awful fear and respective dread, come gently to them,
submitting like subjects to their King. Or, as one speaks,

-- Him he made Ide^ ibid.

The sov'raigne Lord of all; him all obeyed,
Yielding their lives (as tribute) to their King;
Both fish, and bird, and beast, and every thing.
Naked these couple were, but not ashamed: and yet not impudent or shameless
creatures; for shame is the fruit of sin: and therefore before sin entered,
this nakedness of their bodies showed the nakedness and simplicity of their
minds. All which continued, till the sly envies of subtle Satan buzzed in
their ears a cunningly deceiving note, and tainted their eyes with curiosity.
For the fairness of the apple helped to hatch the foulness of the fault, gave
longing to the palate and action to the hand, to reach and convey it to the
curious taste; and yet the taste could not then discern, how death and it went
down together.

And (certainly) if this fell not out, or happened in the evening, end, or Genesis
3. ^*
cool of this day, it was soon after; as in the second chapter of this book I
have declared. Wherefore I will now conclude, and concluding say,

God Genesis 1. 31.
saw the works which he had made,
And good he found them all:
If therefore now they faint or fade,
It Is 'cause Man caught a fall.
For every creature See Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
groneth deep;
A change they wish to see:
They travail, seek, they want and weep
Till sons of God be free.
For then they likewise freedom have,
No longer kept in pain:
Come therefore quickly (Lord) we crave,
Renew this world again:
And in its kind (it being free)
'Twill praise thy name as well as we.
FINIS.
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
A Table of the principal and most remarkable matters contained in this book.
ABraham: he had skill in the signs of heaven, and taught the same to the
Egyptians 347 The second age of the world was from the flood to Abraham 16
Achates the Eagles stone 295 Adam: he fell soon after his creation 36, 37
Adamant or Diamond, the most precious of all stones: and how to soften it 292
Adder and his properties 490 Adultery. An emblem against it by an example
taken from the Sargon 381. Adulterous men like to the Cuckoe 406 Aeschynomen, a
strange kind of herb 273 Affliction opens the eyes of security 480. One
patient in trouble like to the stone Amiantus 299. False friends fly away in
affliction 293. 405. Affliction ought to be taken patiently, by an emblem from
the Camel 444 Ages of the world 15. There be six ages, but not of equal
thousands 16 Agnus castus, and the properties 274 Air. From the earth to the
highest Firmament nothing but air 116. See more in the word Regions. Alabaster
291 Alborach a beast frequent in Turkey, on which they fable Mahomet was
carried into heaven 457 Alexander deceived by Apes 472 Alpine-mouse, and the
strange properties of it 468 Alume and the several kinds thereof 304 Amber
303, 304. Amber-greese 368 America. A conjecture how America came at the first
to be unknown 233 Amethyst, a stone of power to resist drunkenness 294
Amiantus, a stone which the fire cannot hurt 299 Amphisbena, a serpent with two
heads 489 Ampelite, a black pitchie earth of the same nature with our coals 301
Amphitane, a stone of near nature to the lodestone 298 Anacrampseros, an herb
causing love 272. Sowbread is of the same quality ibid. Androdamas is a stone
stopping anger and fury 299 Angels, when they were created 53. How Manna is
said to be Angels food 157. The oath of the 7th Angel in the Revelation 27
Angelica, and the virtues thereof 261 Anger restrained by the Sardius 295. as
also by the Androdamas 299 Antiperistasis, what it is 92 Apes and their kinds
471 Arbore de Raise, or the tree of roots growing in India, and called the
Indian fig tree 280 Arbore triste, or the sad tree 281 Arguments to prove that
the world began and must also end 2, 3 Arions story how to be credited 379
Aristotle 1. he drowned himself in Euripus 210 Armadill, an Indian beast 457
Arsmart, or Water-pepper 259 Arsnick rightly described, and the kinds thereof
300 Artichoke 264 Asbestos, a strange stone which being once fired, cannot be
quenched 298 Asp 492 Asphaltus or black Bitumen 302 Asterite, a stone bearing
in it the image of the sun 294 Astrologers many times too busy 10. bold and
wicked 351, 352, and sequent. Atheists kick against the pricks 4 Atlantic
island was once, and had kings reigning in it, but now it is a sea 233 Autumn
described 356. The world was made in Autumn 32* 41, 42, 43, etc.
B
BAck. Good against strains in the back 268 Badger 482 Balaena, a kind of
whale. Their love to their young; with an instruction from thence 368 Barble a
wary fish 383 Barnacles or Geese which grow upon a tree 282 Barrenness. Good
against barrenness 262 Bartas a divine Poet 4. His opinion of the worlds end
9. His description of the worlds ages 17. His opinion of the worlds beginning
4. His opinion of the Chaos 49. His opinion of the waters above the heavens 63,
64. His opinion of the Regions 85. His opinion of wheat rained 147. His opinion
of strange waters 227. His commendation of the virtues of herbs 267. His
opinion opposite to those who make the stars living creatures 322 Basil and
the virtues thereof 244 Basilisk or Cockatrice 486 Bat 404 Baum or Balm 245. It
is good to close wounds 246. Bees are much delighted with Baum ibid. Beam, a
burning Meteor 90 Beams or streams seeming to burn 133 Beard. Good to make the
beard grow 254 Bear 475. A story of a man saved by a Bear ibid. Bears love
honey 476 Beasts. Brute beasts not to be renewed in the end of the world 6
Beaver and his properties 452 Beauty. The beauty of the heavenly bodies after
the world is purged by fire 7 Bees 420. They lose their life with their sting
ibid. Difference of bees ibid. Their king and commonweal 421. They never
breathe ibid. The female be supposed to be the drone 422. Their order of going
to rest and work ibid. Their physic 423. The manner of their swarming ibid.
How to keep them from stinging 244. See more in Thyme and Baum. Good against
their stinging 425 Beggars. How cunning beggars use to blister their arms and
legs 260 Belly. The belly destroys many, by an emblem taken from the mouse
467 Bermuda-birds and their properties 418 Betonie and the sundry virtues
thereof 266 Birds of Paradise 418 Bitumen and the kinds 302 Blackbird 402
Blasting Dew 158 Bleeding. A bleeding herb 272 For bleeding at the nose 255
Blood. Times when it rained blood, together with the cause 149 Bloud-stone or
the Haematite 297 Spitting of blood, and how to help it 247. 303 Boas and the
properties 488 Body. Our bodies follow the temper of the air 104. 341. The
parts of the body 497, 498, 499 Boldness. We must not be too bold in things
above our reach 9 Bole-armoniack what it is, and what it is good for 300
Bombyx, or the Silkworm 425 Borage 245 Boy. A story of a Boy and a Dolphin
380 Brain. Things good for the brain 247. A Scorpion bred in the brain 244. The
animal spirits go from the brain 497 Brass and Copper 288 Bream 388 Breath.
Good against a stinking breath 250 Brionie and the properties 256 Brown Umber
301 Bruises. Good against bruises 269 Bubo or the great Owl 402. He is thought
to be an ominous bird 403 Buffe and his properties 478 Bugill and Byson
described 477 Buglosse. See Borage. Bulls and their natures 477, 478
Burstnings: good against them in children 260. Good against them in old folks
269 Butterwort and the properties thereof 252
C
CAjetane confuted, together with Bellarmine, concerning Noah's Flood 75
Calamarie, being a fish called the Sea-clerk 384 Calcedon is a stone which
expels sadness 294 Callicia, an herb turning water into ice 272 Camel 443.
The Horse and the Camel great enemies 444. Stuffes made of Camels hair ibid.
The Cameleopard 445 Cantharus a chaste fish, between whom and the Sargon there
is great enmity 381 Cantharides, what they are, and how they be dangerous 425
Captivity. The fourth Age of the world from David to the captivity 16
Carbuncle and the properties thereof 294 Carp described and his goodness 388
Carret roots and their quality, together with the parsnep and turnep 263
Castor and Pollux. See Helena. Cat. Why the male-cat eats up the young
kitlings 464. A story concerning the danger of cats ib. Cedar. Some are
persuaded there be cedars yet in mount Lebanon first planted by King Solomon
278, 279 Celandine 261 Cerastes a kind of Serpent 489 Chalk and the nature
thereof 301 Chameleon described, and why he changes color so often 493
Changing of qualities and not consuming of substance at the end of the world 5
Chaos, and how we may consider of it 48, 49 Chaps, or gapings in the sky, how
they are caused 141 Charadrion, a bird that cures the Iaundise 416, 417 Charms
unlawful 166 Chaste. Rue makes men chaste, and provokes women to lust 248
Chastity. Medicines to procure chastity 269. 274. 293. Smaradge. See more in
Cantharus, as also 295 Chevin and its virtues 388 Children. See Parents.
Chiliasts expect terrene pleasures in the Resurrection, as did also Cerinthus 8
Choler. A medicine against it 256 Crystal, what it is 296. 162 Christ. The
fifth Age of the world from the captivity to Christ 16. The last Age and times
after Christ 17. An emblem of Christ's curing us, taken from the Charadrion 417
Christians wiser then Philosophers 4 Chrysolite, and the virtues of it. It is
good against Melancholy 294 Cinnamon, where and how it grows 277 Cinoper and
Vermilion 300 Cypress tree 278 Circles about the Sun, Moon, and stars.
Their causes 134. Their derivation ibid. Their significations 135 Clouds 143.
Colors in the Clouds 130. 143. Their height 144. Why they hang in the Air
145. Why red clouds are seen only in the Morning and Evening 130. Why they be
of differing colors 144. What they signify ibid. Cloves, how and where they
grow 278 Clyster. From whence men first learned to purge by Clyster 399 Coals,
or black pitchie earth, how it is generated 301, 302 Cock 410. Cock-fightings
411. The Lion daunted by the Cock ibid. Cocus, a very strange tree in India
279, 280. Comets, what they are 98. Their colors 99. Their fashions ibid.
Their strange effects 100. Why Wars, Famines, Deaths, etc. be the effects of
Comets 103. How to guess at the signification of Comets 105. Their several
ends 106. They be often above the Moon 80, 81. 99. 115, 116 Comfrey and the
virtues of it 268 Conger and his goodness 387 Conie. The Conie described 458
Copper 288. Copperas ibid. Corcuta a kind of Hyaena 446 Corns. How to cure
them 270. As also how to take away Warts 244 Corrall and the properties thereof
296, 297 Costivenesse, and how to cure it 269 Covetousness, and Covetous. The
covetous like to the Swam-fisk 373. Covetous rich men often slain by their
heirs, showed by an emblem from the Torpedo 383. They often destroy one
another, showed by an emblem taken from the Kite and Raven 394. They are many
times less fruitful in children then the poor 395. The Ferret is an emblem
of their weeping and unwillingnesse to depart with their riches 459. A story
of an usurer dying ibid. and 460. The folly of a covetous man is showed by an
emblem taken from the Ape 474 Cow. Sea-cow and Calf 374 Crane 412. He teaches
Pastors, Magistrates, and Governors, the duty of their places ibid.
Crocodile and his properties 371 Crow. See Raven. Sea-crow 414 Cuckoe and his
qualities 404. Who are like unto the Cuckoe 405, 406 Cucuios, a creature whose
wings shine like fire 419
D
DAce, or the Dare-fish 388 Daniel was learned in the learning of the Chaldeans
347 Darnell. The virtues of red Darnell 264 Dart, a kind of Serpent 489 David.
The third Age of the World from Abraham to David 16 Day. The natural beginning
of the Day from whence 358, 359. Diverse beginning of Days ibid. The kinds of
Days 358. The intercourse between Day and Night 58, 59 Death ought to be
cheerful 413. A sinner has his eyes opened in Death, showed in an emblem
taken from the Mole 462 Dear and their kinds 478, 479 Dendritis, a stone
which being put under a tree, keeps the ax that cutteth it, from dulling 298
Derogation. No derogation to the perfection of things created, although the
Stars incline some men to ill 343 Devil. He works many times in the Air
153. His knowledge is more excellent then Man's knowledge: and why ibid. Dew,
what it is, and why it falls but in the Morning and Evening 154. No Dew a
sign of Rain: and why 155. Dew hurts Sheep ibid. What may hinder Dew from
falling 156. Three kinds of Dew: Common, Sweet, and Blasting Dew ibid. In
those who are blessed like Jacob, the dew of heaven goes before the fatness of
the earth: but in those who are blessed like Esau, the earths fatness goes
before the dew of heaven 475 Digression. A digression touching the newfound
World 232, 233 Dill and the qualities thereof 249. An old custom concerning
Dill 250 Diogenes mocketh Croesus amongst the dead 240 Dipsas, a serpent so
called 489 Dissembling, and Dissemblers. They be like unto the Crocodile 371.
See more in Flattery: as also page 455 Dittanie, and the virtues of it 254 Dogs
and their kinds 469. They have sometimes showed extraordinary love to their
masters 470, 471 Dolphin described: he is very loving to man 379 Dormouse and
the kinds 467 Dove or Pigeon described 408 Dragon. The herb Dragon 262. A
Meteor of the same name 93. A serpent so called 488. Dragons in Congo 492
Dromedarie, what kind of beast it is 445 Drowsinesse. A medicine to cure it
245. 250. 256 Drunkard, and Drunkenness. See Gluttony. How to make a Drunkard
loath his liquour 404
E
EAgle, King of birds 390. The Poets feign that she carries Jupiters armor
127. Where she builds her nest: and how the young Eagles deal with a dead
carcass 391. The Eagle is a pattern of domestical discipline ibid. Seducing
Heretics like to the young Eagle ibid. See more 295 Earth. The Earth made
solid and conspicuous both at once 227. The Earth the Worlds center 228. It
signifies a thing trodden on ibid. The earth nothing in respect of the heavens
224. The earth has no circular motion, with a confutation of the contrary
opinion 211, 212. The true Motus terrae is Germinatio terrae 214. How it has
sometimes rained earth 151. Earth of Lemnos what it is 300. As also earth of
Samos 301 Earthquakes and their causes 229, 230. Signs of Plague and
Earthquake 185. 234. The kinds of Earthquakes 231. The attendants of
Earthquakes, or the Antecedentia 234. The effects of Earthquakes or the
Consequentia 235, 236 East-winde 183. Why it often blows up rain for a whole
day. See North. Ebbes. See Sea. Eeles, how they are bred, and to whom they are
dangerous meat 388 Ebone described 276. The smoke of it is good for the eyes
ibid. Elecampane, or Enula-campana, together with the virtues of it 264
Elephant. The Sea-Elephant, and how he is taken 370. The Land-Elephant, and how
to catch him 429. The Mouse an enemy to the Elephant 432. And so are the
Dragon and Rhinoceros ibid. The manner of their fight 432, 433. The Elephant
teaches two very good lessons; the one for married folks, the other for great
men 433, 434. As also a third, concerning those who fall in striving to
overcome others ibid. Elias the Rabbin: he was much deceived in his computation
of 6000 years for the time of the Worlds continuance 11, 12 Elk and his
properties; he cannot live but in a cold country page 478 Emerald, and the
virtues of it 296 Enemy. A man may sometimes make use of an Enemy 461 Envy
shadowed forth 410. The Peacock a pattern of Envy ibid. So also is the Lynx
451, 452. Some hurt themselves because they cannot hurt others, showed by an
emblem taken from the wild Bulls of Prussia 478 Ermin described 462 Ethnicks,
and of their most ancient stories 2 Euripus ebbes and flows seven times in a
day 210. Aristotle was drowned there ibid. Exhalations and their kinds 87.
Earthie Exhalations may sometimes climb into the Starrie heaven 115, 116, 117.
121 Eyes 498. A water good for the eyes 249. Another medicine for the same
purpose 248. A smoke good for the eyes 276. A stone good for the same 298. 263.
F
FAce. To make the face fair 250. Another for the same 253. Another 255.
Another 257 Falling sickness. A medicine to cure it 259, 260. Fall of man in
Autumn 35, 36 Farmers. An excellent herb for farmers to cure the dugs of their
cattle 252 Fasting. How fasting is good and commendable 491. 467 Fennel 249
Ferret 459 Feverfew 260* 261 Finch 402 Fire. What place the element of fire
possesses 118. Fire-drakes 93. The heavens seemed to burn 9^, 93. Firmament.
The making of the Firmament 60, 61, 64. Waters above the Firmament. See Waters.
Fishes, their kinds, etc. 365, 366 Fishes rained, and how 147 Flashing Streams
or Darts, a burning Meteor 91 Flatterers, etc. 385. 401. 443. 451. 455, 456.
494. Flea-bane is an herb good to drive away gnats and fleas 252 Flesh rained,
and how 148 Flood of Noah, in what year of the world it came 20, 21. The first
Age from the creation to the Flood 16, 17. How far this Flood was natural,
and how far supernatural 73, 74 Flux. How to stop fluxes 268, 269, 270. How
to provoke fluxes 271 Flying sparks a Meteor 91. Flying lances 92 Foolish
fire, or Ignis fatuus, commonly called Will with a wisp 93, 94 Fountains of oil
225. Of the fountain Dodone 226. The original of fountains and rivers 204. Fox
and his subtilties 448. How the Fox catches fleas 450. A cunning trick of a
tame Fox 451. The Sea-fox 380 Freckles. A medicine to cure them 257 Friendship.
Friends must not be left in danger, by an example taken from the Gilt-head 386,
387. False friends like to the Cuckoe 404, 405. Like to the Fox 451. Like to
the Hyacinth 293 Fret. Good against the fret in children 267 Frogs rained, and
how 147 Frost 159 Fullers earth 301 Fumes and their natures 87
G
GAlactites, a stone sweating out a liquour like milk 298 Galaxia no Meteor
128. It yields a part of that matter which is in New stars 121. What the
Galaxia is 129 Gardeners. A note for those who weed gardens 249 Garlands. From
whence came the first use of willow garlands 274. Garlands made of myrtle 275
Garlic and the properties 263 Goat and his nature 482. Dancing Goats a Meteor
91 Ginger, and how it grows 277 Gluttony and drunkenness made odious by
that beastly practice of the Jerf, or Gulon 48^. 467 God. How God speaks to
men without the tongues of men 102* How his providence works in the course of
nature 350 Gogion a dainty fish 388 Gold the purest of metals, where it grows,
and how 285 Gorgon, a terrible beast 486 Government. An emblem concerning good
government 412. Another concerning bad government 489. The bees have a
commonwealth and admirable government 421, 422 Gout. Good against Choler and
the Gout 256. Eels hurtful for those who are subject to the Gout 388 Groaning
of creatures to be delivered 5 Great. Why great men die (for the most part)
sooner then other men 103. A pattern for great men 434 Green sickness, and
what will help it 254 Groundsell, and the virtues of it 267 Griffon, what kind
of creature it is 393 Gilt-head a pretty fish 386 Gunnes and gunpowder when,
and by whom invented 306. How some have censured the use and invention of
gunnes ibid. and 307 Gurnard a good wholesome fish 387
H
HAil, what it is 162, 163. Winter hail how and where it is made ibid. The
sundry fashions of hailstones 164. Harm by hail ibid. How the heathens used to
secure their fields from hail 165 Hand 499 Hare and his properties 457 Harm
watch, harm catch; as is showed by a certain example taken from that bird which
watches to catch the flying fish 382 Hawks and their kinds 400, 401 Head 498.
The head a seat for all the senses excepting one ibid. Hearing. A man should
hear more then he speaks 498 Heart. The heart is the seat of the passions
497. It lives first and dies last 498 Heavens and their derivation 76, 77.
Not of a quint-essence 77* and sequent. Heavens work upon man, and how 341.
104. How to understand the words Heaven and Earth mentioned in the first of
Genesis page 48. 83. The heavens are not to be consumed according to their
substance in the latter day 5. We look for new heavens and a new earth at the
worlds end, and how 6, 7 Heaven and the ways thither described; as also the
ways to hell 458. They which prefer earth before heaven, are like to the
Camel which chooses muddie water rather then clear 444. An emblem concerning
those who sorrow to part with earth although they may gain heaven 481
Heaviness. There is an herb which first takes a man with an heaviness, then
with sleeping, and last of all with death 272 Hedgehog and his properties 455.
A deceitful man like to the Hedgehog ibid. Other emblemes taken from the
Hedgehog 456. The Porcupine or mountain Hedgehog ibid. and 457 Helena, Castor
and Pollux, with what the Poets write of them 95, 96 Hemerois a kind of
serpent which procures unstanchable bleeding 489 Hemlock and the properties
thereof 272 Herbs of more then ordinary qualities 271 Heron described, together
with the nature of his dung, how it infesteth the Hawk, etc. 399 Herring and
his properties 387. The red herrings and red sprats have little wholesomenesse
in them 387, 388 Hills. High hills 68. Hills before the Flood 71. 73 Hippurin,
an herb which is admirable in stanching of blood 271 Hoga, a fish with wings;
with an emblem concerning thriving, taken from the flying and swimming of this
fish 382 Hog. The Sea-hog 372. Another kind of Sea-hog described 378 Honey. See
Bees. Hony-dew 157. At what time of the year Hony-dews are most common 158
Hore-hound and his properties 252 Hornet. A strange fight between a Sparrow and
an Hornet 424. The Badger an enemy to the Hornet 425 Horse. The properties of
the Horse and Mare 483. The marks of a good Horse ibid. How to know the age of
an Horse 484 Hot things cooled are soonest congealed 160 Housleek or Sen-green
is always green, and therefore called semper vivens. It is good against Corns
270 Houswives. A note for good houswives 255 Humors. The Passions are seated
in the heart, and stirred up by the Humors 497, 498 Hyacinth and the virtues
of it 293 Hyaena and his subtilties 445 Hypanall a serpent so called 489 Hyssop
and the virtues of it 253
J. I.
JAde. An herb to refresh a tired Jade 259 Janus. Whom the Poets pointed at in
their fiction of Ianus with two faces 2 Jasper stone, and the virtues thereof
295 Ibis, a kind of Stork 394. He does much good in destroying serpents ibid.
Jerf or Gulon, a strange beast whose delight is only in feeding 484 Jet and
the properties of it 303 Jews; their computation of 6000 years confuted 11,
12, 13, etc. Ignis fatuus, or foolish fire 93 Infection. Sorrel good against
infection 270 Innocence taught from the Dove or Pigeon, or Turtle rather 408
Iron, and how it grows 289 Israelites. The Manna of the Israelites 156. The
Egyptians did not cause the Israelites to forget their ancient customs 38
Iulus, his head on a flame 97 June. Noah's flood began to cease about the
beginning of June, or end of May 33
K.
KIng-fisher and his properties 417 King of Sweden. His Star 108, 109. The
time of his birth ibid. His speech to his soldiers 112. His speech three days
before his death 113. A Memento of him for aftertimes ibid. Kite and his
properties 394 Knowledge in Devils. See Devils.
L.
LAdanum a sweet dew 158 Ladies mantle, an herb so called, the virtues whereof
are described 252 Ladies threads, a Meteor like unto cobwebs 167. Why there be
spiders in it 168 Lamia a beast so called, and described: she has paps, a
face, head, and hair like a woman 472 Lapis Thracius a strange stone; it
sparkles and burns in water, but is quenched in oil 299 Lapwings and their
properties 416 Lark 402 Latona delivered by help of the Palm Tree 276 Lavender
an herb, and why so called 262 Lead, and how it is generated 289 Leeks, and the
properties thereof. Nero had a nickname given him for eating of Leeks 262.
Leeks are not good for hot choleric bodies ibid. Leopard, how he is begotten
442 Lettice. Harm in too much Lettice 268 Licking lights, or ignis lambens 97
Lights. Why two lights show fair weather, and one light foul 96 Light. The
creation of Light, from page 53 to 58. and page 327, 328, 329, etc. Lightning.
The kinds of Lightning 124. Why we see the Lightning before we hear the
thunder ibid. The worst kind of Lightning 125. Three kinds of Fulmen 126. Not
wholesome to gaze on the Lightning 127 Lilies and their virtues* 268 Linot 402
Lion and his properties 438 Lodestone and the virtues of it 297, 298 Locks. An
herb which will open any thing locked 273 Love. A pattern of Matrimonial love,
taken from the Swan 413 Loyalty. The fish called Cantharus is a pattern of
true Loyalty 381 Lungs. The Lungs are the bellows of the voice, and seated
next the heart: they teach us to tell the truth 498. Hyssop purges the breast
253. A cure for a cough of the Lungs 252. Another for the same 253. Good to
make one sing clear 256. Mists are bad for the Lungs 167 Lynx and his
properties 451 Lyzzard what kind of creature it is 494
M.
MAce. See Nutmeg. Mad. Good against the biting of a mad dog 266. 258 Madder is
good for bruises, and of a strange property 269 Maids. An herb for
great-breasted maids 252 Mallard better for sport then food 401, 402 Mallows
and their virtues 244 Man and his creation 496. The world made to serve Man,
and Man made to serve God 495. The fall was soon after the creation 36, 37
Manna what it is, and whether the Manna of the Israelites were altogether
miraculous 156, 157. How it is Angels food 157 Mantichora, a very strange kind
of beast 446 Marriage. The Marriage bed must not be abused 433. See also 413
Martins and Ermins 462 Mavis 402 Mean. The meanest ought not to be contemned
369 Megrim. A medicine for to cure the Megrim or pain in the head 453. 261
Melancholy. A medicine to cure Melancholy 245. 250* 26^ Mermaids and Mermen,
with strange stories to the same purpose 375 Merry. Good to make one merry 245
Metalls 284, and sequent. Meteors and their kinds 86, 87, 88, etc. Milk. Good
to engender Milk in nurses breasts 249. See more in the word Nurses. Milk
rained, and how 148 Mind. The Mind does somewhat sympathise with the body
104, 341. Good against a troubled mind 259 Mint, an wholesome herb 255. It is
good to kill worms ibid. Mists; they be of two kinds 166. Why they use to
stink ibid. They be very bad for the lungs 167. and a speedy rot for cattle
ibid. How to judge of the weather by a mist ibid. Miracles, or waters of
miraculous virtues 220, and sequent. Mole and his properties 462 Month. The
Hebrew months had no names (excepting fours of them) until after the
captivity 39. The signification of the names belonging to those four 40
Moon-wort or Mad-wort, and the strange properties thereof 257, 258. Moses
skillful in the learning of the Egyptians 347 Mother. A medicine for those who
are troubled with the Mother 246 Mouse described, as also the kinds of mice
465, and sequent. Mouseare or Pilosella 261. It is good to harden edge-tools
ibid. Mufloa a Sardinian beast 446 Mullet and his properties 381 Multitude. An
emblem concerning those who perish by following the multitude 482 Mummie 302.
Counterfeit Mummie 303 Musculus, a little fish, and a friend to the whale 369
Musk-cat 463 Mustard and the properties thereof 256 Myrrhina what it is 157
Myrtle 275. The Roman captains made garlands of it for triumph ibid. It was
consecrated to Venus ibid. Myrtle berries have been used sometimes in the stead
of pepper 276
N
NApeir his opinion concerning the time of the worlds ending 24, 25, 26 Naphtha
a liquid Bitumen, with the kinds and properties thereof 303, 304 Nature. The
course of nature first set, then followed 35 Natures of the stars may be
known 347 Nepenthe, an herb which expels sadness 271 Newfound world, how
it first grew out of knowledge 232 Nightingale, and her commendations 402 Noah
had knowledge in the stars and signs of heaven 347 North-winde 182* Why the
North and East winds sometimes bring rain for a whole day 183 Nose. The nose
purges the brain, and conducteth smells thither 499. Good against bleeding at
the nose 255 Nothing. How the world was made out of Nothing 47, 48 November.
The fifth of November not to be forgotten 307 Nurses. An herb for Nurses to
increase their milk and make their children fair 267. With the Nurses milk the
children sometimes suck the Nurses vices 394. Women who will not nurse their
children, are like unto the Ostrich ibid. Nutmeg and Mace, how and where they
grow 278 Nyctilops, an herb that shines 271
O
OCtober. The World made in October, about the 26 or 27 day: at which time the
sun entered into Libra 40, 41 Oker 300 Olive. The Olive tree is green all the
year 30 One-berrie an herb, called also Herba Paris, or herb True-love 254
Onions and their qualities 262 Opall, a precious stone of diverse colors 269
Ophiusta an herb dangerous to be looked on 272 Ork. The Ork dares fight with
the Whale 370 Osprey, aravenous bird 416 Ostrich and his properties 394 Otter
described 453 Ovassom a Virginia beast 446 Owl and his kinds 402, and sequent.
P
PAlm. The Palm or Date tree described; together with the branches, which are
tokens of victory 276 Palsy. A medicine for the Palsy 256. Other medicines
for the same purpose 416. 447 Panther, what manner of beast it is 442 Paradise.
Birds of Paradise 418 Paradox maintained by Aristotle 1 Parents. They ought to
love their children, by an emblem from the Balaena 368. They must not use
their children too harshly in their minority 396. They ought not to bring up
their children in idleness, by an example taken from the Eagle 391. They ought
not to be too fond over their children, by an example from the foolish Ape 473,
474. They must teach their children betimes, by an example from the Heart 480
Parsley and the kinds thereof 258, 259 Parsnep 263 Partridge 401 Passions,
where they be seated 497 Patience and humility may be learnt from beasts 444
Peacock 410. Men who make peacocks of their wives, make woodcocks of themselves
ibid. Perch and Pike 388 Pearl and Prawn are emblemes of cheating 386
Peevishness. A medicine against it 254 Peionie and the virtues thereof 259
Pelican 398. She teaches that policy is better then strength ibid.
Penie-ryall and the virtues of it 256 Pepper, where and how it grows 277.
Myrtle berries were sometimes used in the stead of pepper 276 Persons. The
persons in the Trinity 45, 46, 47 Peter. S. Peter explained concerning one day
as a thousand years, etc. 13, 14 Philosophers opinions concerning the
beginning and end of the world 1 Phesant 401 Phoenix 391, and sequent. Picea, or
the Pitch tree 279 Pigeon or Dove 408 Pillars, burning Meteors of two kinds,
round and pyramidall 90 Pine Tree 278 Pissasphaltus. See Mummie. Pissing of
bed. A medicine to help it 264 Plaice, and from whence it is so called 387
Plague. Signs of plague and earthquake 185. Good against the plague 270. 300
Plane, a fair goodly tree. The old Romans used to keep banquets under it 277.
Xerxes was strangely enamoured on this tree 278 Plantain, or Lambs tongue,
together with the virtues of it 271 Platea a bird which kills Seacrows 414,
415 Plato page 1. He calls the sea a great gulf 206. His opinion partly
followed concerning the fiery matter of the stars 320 Pleasure. How we
should use our pleasures 372 Plover and his wholesomenesse 415 Poets. Whom they
pointed at by their two-faced Ianus 2 Policy better then strength, proved by
an example taken from the Pelican 398. as also by an example taken from the
bird Platea 415 Polypus a fish with many feet, with an emblem of treacherous
persons 385 Pontarof a monstrous fish 378 Porcupine. See Hedgehog. Porphyrio, a
strange bird 417 Poulcar, together with their cunning 460 Poison. Things good
against poison. 248. An incurable poison 251 Predictions, and how they are
warrantable 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, etc. Prester a serpent, etc. 489
Ptissick. A medicine to cure it; as also for a stuffing in the head 250, 251
Purple, a fish whose juice is very precious 385 Purslain and the qualities
thereof 269 Pyrausta, a fly which lives in the fire 425
Q
Quicksilver; what it is, and why so called 285 Quint-essence. See Heavens
R
RAbbin. The Rabbis conceit of six thousand years is very unsound 10, 11, 12
Rape and his virtues 264 Rain 145. Ordinary and extraordinary rains 146. The
causes of prodigious rains 147, 148, 149, etc. Why it uses to rain when the
wind is down 174 Rainbow 135. His causes 136. His colors and cause of their
differences ibid. The final cause of Rain-bows 137. How to prognosticate of
weather by the Rainbow ibid. The derivation of Iris, a word signifying the
Rainbow 138. There was a Rainbow before the Flood ibid. What the Jews used to
do upon sight of the Rainbow 140. Witty applications from the colors in the
Rainbow 141. A gross opinion concerning the Rainbow 139 Rangifer a beast to
ride on with horns like a Deer 481 Rashness condemned, by an example from the
Barble 383. and by an example from the hastening bitch 469 Rats and their
kinds ibid. Raven 395. An emblem from the Fox and Raven concerning companions
in ill ibid. The Ravens skin helps digestion 396. The Night-Raven 403 Ray or
Thornback 387. His pricks afford a good medicine against the stone ibid.
Red-lead what it is, etc. 301 Red-gumme. Good to cure it 267 Region. No middle
Region until the third day 67. The several Regions of the air, and their
qualities 84, 85, 86, etc. The cause of those differing Regions 68. 86. Remora,
a little fish called the Stopfish, because he is said to stay a ship under sail
382 Rhinoceros 434 Rib. See Woman. Rivers, and from whence they proceed 204,
205, etc. A river that breeds flies 222. A river which rests every seventh
day 224 Robbin-red-breast 402 Roch 388 Romulus and Remus not nursed by a Wolf
448 Rosemary and the many properties thereof 250, 251 Roses. The temper and
virtue of Roses, together with a conserve of Roses, and how to make it 275
Rubie what it is, and for what it is good; viz. to clear the sight, to expel
sadness and fearful dreams 294 Rue and the virtues thereof 248 Rupture. See
Burstnings.
S
Sadness. Good against it 294, 295. 261. 271. Saffron 252, 253 Sage 246. It is
good for childebearing women; good for the brain; good against spitting of
blood; good for a stitch in the side, and good against the palsy 247 Sagoin
472 Salamander 494 Salmon 387 Salt and the kinds 304, 305, 306 Saphir 293
Sardius a kind of Onyx 295 Sardonyx heals ulcers about the nails, and
preserves chastity 295. Some call it a Corneoll ibid. Sargon an adulterous
fish 381 Saw-fish and Sword-fish 370 Scolopendra a fish of a strange property;
and how we ought to resemble this fish 384 Scorpion described 492. How to cure
his sting ibid. A Scorpion has sometimes been bred in the brain 244
Scriech-owl 403 Sea. Why seas be salt and rivers fresh 201. Why Springs be
fresh 206. Why the Sea ebbeth and flows 208, 209, and sequent. Why fresh
Waters and all Seas do not ebb 218 Seasons of the year 354 Security. Small
security on earth, by an example from the Squirrell 454 Selenite, a stone
which follows the course of the Moon 294, 295 Sentida, an herb of a strange
property 273 Servius Tullius, his head burning as he slept 97 Sethim. It was
that wood whereof Noah made the Ark 276 Seven a number of rest 21 Shad 388
Shark 378 Sheep and their natures 482. How sheep may catch (...) rot 155. 252
Shepherds purse 270 Shooting stars a Meteor 92 Shrew. A medicine to be used
at the death of a Shrew 263 Shrew-mouse and his properties showed 467 Sight.
Sight dulled by Leeks 262. Rue eaten fasting, is very good for the sight 248.
See Eyes. Signs. Signs of heaven must not be abused 351, and sequent. Silver
the best metal next to Gold 288 Sin. We should weep for sin, by an
example taken from the Heart 481. We should not sleep in sin, by an example
taken from the Sea-Elephant 371. When the baits of sin are swallowed they
must be vomited up again, by an emblem from the Scolopendra 384. The
sweetness of sin in the end is bitter, by an example from the Bear eating
honey 477. Those who are taken away in the very act of sin, what they are like
unto 485 Sinner. A sinner, though blind in life, sees in death, by an example
taken from the Mole 462 Sivet-cat or the Zibeth 463 Skirret 264 Sleet and the
cause thereof 162 Slow-worm 490 Smaradge. Pliny makes many kinds of this
stone 293 Snapdragon, an herb of a strange property 272 Snow 160. The matter
of Snow 161. Why Snow is white ibid. Snow in the mountains and rain in the
valleys, both out of one cloud; together with the cause thereof 162 Society
ought to be amongst men, by an example taken from the Stork 399 Sole and
Whiting 387 Sorrel and the virtues thereof 270 Sorrow. An emblem concerning
those who sorrow to part with earth for heaven 459. 481 Sothernwood and the
qualities thereof 254 Soul. The Soul breathed into man, infused in the
creation, and created in the infusion 499. God stamped his image in the Soul
ibid. and 500. Souls. Souls cannot appear after death 94, 95 South-winde 182
Sowbread an herb of a strange property 262. 272 Sow-thistle and the virtues
thereof 267 Sparrow and his nature 409 Speare-wort the beggars herb 260
Spheres* A figure showing their motion 317 Sphinx, and the meaning of Aenigma
472 Spleen. A medicine for the spleen 274 Spring. The Spring described 355. The
creation was not in the Spring 30. 32 Squirrell described with his properties
453 Starling 402 Stars 311, 312, and sequent. The Stars not to be
worshipped 312. Their matter and motion 315, 320. They be nourished by the
waters above the heavens, and how 321, 322, 323, 324. The reason of their
differing heights 324, 325. Their offices 327. 334. 354. Why they seem to
twinkle 332. They work upon this inferior world 334, and sequent. New Stars
107. 114, 115. 119. The signification of Cassiopea's Star 108. 114 Steel, and
what it is 289 Stitch. Good to give ease to one troubled with a stitch in the
side 247 Stomach. Good to strengthen the Stomach 250. Good to help digestion
396 Stone in the body, with ^ medicine for it 387. 254 Stones; what they are,
their kinds etc. 290, and sequent. They live not a vegetative life 291. Common
Stones ibid. Precious Stones 292. A Stone which follows the course of the Moon
294. A Stone which will cool seething water 296. A compassionate Stone and the
reason thereof ibid. 297. A Stone of power to draw gold 299. The Loadstone 297.
The Bloud-stone ibid. Stories. A Story of a Sea-woman 375. A story of a Boy
and a Dolphin 380. A story of a Sparrow 409. A story concerning Cock-fighting
411. A story of a Lion 438. Another of a Lion 440. A story of a dying Usurer
459. A story of two much familiarity amongst Cats 464. A story of a Bishop
eaten up with Mice 466. A story of a loving Dog 470. Another ibid. Another
471. A story showing how Alexander was deceived by Apes 472. A story of a Man
saved from death by a Bear 475 Stork 399. Lessons to be learnt from the stork
ibid. Strange. A rule to be observed in Strange sights 131 Students. Mint good
for students 255 Sturgeon 384 Su, a strange beast in the newfound world 454
Sulphurwort; it is good for young children 260 Summer described 356 Sun.
Whether the Sun be the fountain of light 329. Why the Sun has sometimes
seemed to dance 333. The appearance of many Suns 130. Their cause 131. What
they signify ibid. Swallow 406. What strange things some have written of the
swallow 407. It is said that she taught men first to build 408. They cure the
blind eyes of their young ones with an herb; viz. Celandine 261 Swam-fisk, a
fish so called, being the most greedy of all fishes 372, 373 Swanne. The nature
and qualities of the Swanne 413, 414 Swine eat no Turnips 263 Sword-fish 370
T
TAmarisk. It is of great virtue for the hardness of the spleen or milt 274
Tanners. An herb for Tanners in the dressing of Leather 257 Tarragon 264
Tarantula and his strange properties 425 Teeth. Good against the toothache 261.
267. How to scour the Teeth and kill the worms in them 251 Temper. Waters of a
strange temper 220, 221 Tench 388 Terebinth or the Turpentine tree 279 Thirst.
An herb very good for the thirsty 269 Thrive. The thriving of a man that (upon
occasion) is of two* trades. The emblem is taken from the flying fish 382.
Some men thrive in a course which to the vulgar seems contrary, by an example
taken from the Sturgeon 384 Throat. Good for a sore throat 253 Thrush 402
Thunder, what it is 122. A difference in Cracks 123. Thunder sometimes without
Lightning, and so on the contrary ibid. How this may be 124. The making of the
Thunder-stone 125. See more in the word Lightning. Thyme, and the virtues
thereof 259 Time, what it is 45. Times when the World should have ended
according to some men's foolish fancies 18. 22, 23, 24, etc. Tin 290 Toad. An
antipathie between the Toad and Rue 248 Tobacco and the kinds thereof: Where
it was first found, together with the names, qualities and virtues thereof 264,
265. The Indian women take no Tobacco 266. The time when it came first into
England, and by whom it was first brought ibid. A precious salve to be made of
the green leaves 265. A lesson for quaffers ibid. Tongue 498. The Tongue has
brought many to mischief 413. Fair tongues and false hearts 443 Topaz, a very
strange stone which stancheth blood 295, 296 Tophus 292 Torch, a burning Meteor
89 Torpedo, a benumming fish 383 Tortoise 374 Tragelaphus 481 Treachery.
Treacherous persons like to the Polypus 385. Like to the Ape 401. Like to the
Hawk ibid. Trees and their properties 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280,
281, 282. Trinity 46, 47. The Trinity showed in making of Man 496 Trouble.
One patient in trouble what he is like 299 Trout. The Trout commended 388. The
Trout like one that loves to be flattered 389. Wanton Wenches like to the Trout
ibid. Troy and the ruins thereof lamented 240 Turcois, a precious stone good
for weak eyes: it will also show whether he that wears it be well in health
296 Turnep 263 Turtle 408 Tiger and his properties 441
V
VAliant. He is truly valiant that can overcome himself 441 Vapors; their
nature, and why they be warm 87 Veins and Arteries how they differ 497
Vermilion 300. The Romans used to paint their gods with Vermilion ibid.
Vertigo. How to cure it 261 Violets and their virtues 269 Viper 490 Virginia
Dogs 447 Vitriol 304 Unicorn of the sea 370 Unicorn of the land 435. That there
is such a beast 436. A description of the Unicorns horn ibid. How to catch the
Unicorns 437 Urine. Dill is good to provoke Urine 249 Use of things is often
times turned into an abuse 265. We ought to make the best uses of the strangest
things 227* 131, 132
W
WArts and their cure 244. 263 Wasps 423 Watery Meteors 142 Watercresses and
their virtues 253 Waters. Waters above the heavens 62, 63, 64, 65, and sequent.
Their use and profit 322, 323. The Waters gathered together 190. How they were
gathered together 191. How to one place, seeing there be many Seas, Lakes and
Rivers 192. Whether they be higher then the earth 194. Whether there be more
Water then earth 199. The benefit and use of Waters 207. Why fresh Waters do
not ebb and flow 218

Water used in stead of Vinegar 220. Water used in stead of burnt wine ibid.
Water making drunk ibid. A Water deadly to beasts, and not to men 221. A
killing and a purging Water ibid. A Water making horses m^d ibid. A cold Water
setting cloth on fire ibid. A Water which is hot enough either to boil, roast,
^r bake ibid. A Water which makes oxen white 222. A Water which changes the
colors either of sheep or horses ibid. A Water cold in the day and hot in the
night 223. A Water which turueth wood into stone 224. Poyso^ing Waters ibid. A
Water which makes cattle give black milk 224. A Water which makes men mad 225.
A Water which spoils the memory ibid. A Water procuring lust ibid. A Water
causing barrenness ibid.

Weasell and his properties 460, 461 Well. A strange w^ll in Idumea 224
West-winde^ quality 183 Whale 366. Their kinds 367, etc Wheat rained 147
Whirle-windes, Storm-windes, and fired Whirle-windes 185, 186 Willow and
Willow-garlands 274 Willow-wort and his properties: it is of a contrary nature
to the herb Betonie 270 Wind in the body, how to expel it 249 Wind. Diverse
opinions concerning Wind 168, 169. W^nde is more then the motion of the air
171. Poets fictions concerning Wind 172. How God brings the Winds out of
his treasures 169. The Wind not moved by Angels 170. Why it uses to rain when
the wind is down 174. What Wind is, upon what causes it depends, and how it
is moved 173. Why we cannot see the matter of Wind 177. How that place is to
be understood in the 3 of John concerning the blowing of the Wind 178. Air
moved augments the Wind 174. How the Winds are moved, and by what 175. In
what place the motion the Wind begins 176. Particular winds 177. Why the
wind blows not always one way ibid. Opposit^ ibid. Oblique winds ibid.
Whisking winds ibid. The division, names, and number of the Winds 178.
Mariners reckon two and thirty Winds 179. The nature and quality of the
Winds 181. The effects of a long-continuing Wind 184. Why the East and North
winds bring rain sometimes for a whole day together 183 Windows of heaven
opened in the Flood, and what they were 69 Winter described 357. A warm Winter
hurtful 161 Witches; they sell winds to seamen 153 Wood-pecker; how she
uses to unwedge the hole of her nest 258 Wolf and his properties 447 Wolf-bane
and the strange properties thereof 251 Wool rained, and how 152 Woman. She was
made after the image of God as well as the man 500. How she is said to be the
glory of the Man ibid. Why she was made out of a Rib 501. Wherein a woman's
rule ought to consist 501, 502. Childe-bearing women. Sage is good for them
247. The smell of Dragon very bad for those who are newly conceived with child
262. The herb Sow-bread is also very hurtful, and causes instant abortion
ibid. How a doubting woman may know whether she be with child 263. How a woman
burying her husband may save her credit 256 World. The World not eternal, and
must also end 2. The manner how it must end 4. Impostours concerning the end
18, and sequent. When it was created 28, and sequent. Why it was not made
perfect in an instant 50, 51. It decays daily 78, 79 Worms in the belly, with
means to cure them 253. 255 Worms rained, and how 147 Wren 402
Y
YArrow and the properties thereof 267 Years. The examination of the name,
length, diverse beginning, and kind of Years 360, 361, 362, 363
Z
ZAnchie: his opinion of the Jewish tradition which they take from the Rabbin
Elias 13. His opinion of certain strange and prodigious rains 154 Zebra, a
beast of an excellent comeliness 446 Zibeth or the Sivet-cat 463
FINIS.

