A HEAVENLY Voice.

A Sermon tending to call the people of God from among the Romish Babylonians:
Preached at Paul's Cross the 12 of January. 1606.

By William Symonds.

Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowshippe with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but even reprove them rather.

At London Printed by I. R. for Edmund VVeauer, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great North-doore of Paul's Church. 1606.

The Printer to the Reader.
Gentle Reader, this Sermon came to my hands without any Title given to it by
the Author. I have therefore, of my self, adventured to take a Title for it
out of the first words of the Text, calling it a heavenly Voice. This would I
admonish, to stop the mouths of such as happily might cavil or her at it, or
the Author for it.

Farewell.
To the right Honorable and reverend Father in God, Richard Vaughan, Doctor of
Divinity, and Lord Bishop of London, my very good Lord.
RIght Honorable and reverend.
When Moses, upon the top of Pisgah, Deuteronomy, 34, 1, and 3, 27.
did view the Geographie of the promised land, to the East, West, North, and
South, with the Plains, Mountains, and Seas; he departed satisfied, because
his eye was not dim. Joshua, 18, 8, 9.
And when the land was Topographically to be described, to give unto several
men their inheritances, the Suruaiors presented their plots to Joshua, the
Captain of the Lords host; who, by Gods authority, should quiet all questions
that might arise by striuers. But when I climed the Pisgah of the Revelation,
where might be taken the perspectiue of the land, that Christ, with his holy
people, shall possess, by the preaching of the Gospel; taking due notice of
the dimnes of mine eyes, I submitted all my labor to your Lordshippes true,
and perfect sight, and censure.

And now, having drawn a plot of one particular place thereof, laboring to
put the several tenures, in their diverse, yet proper colors, (seeing the
importunity of many would not suffer me to secreate it) I do humbly return
my survey, not only to your Lordships censure; but also to your most fatherly
and Christian patronage. Humbly craving your good Lordship, (seeing all the
tenants will never be pleased with my doing) both to defend me from the cauils,
and calumniations of the contentious, (of whose fury I have had too much
experience:) and also to interpose your honorable authority, that all men may
content themselves with their own lots. My skill is small, and therefore I
desire the just to reprove me, where my hand, or eye has failed: but I dare
be bold to say, that, in that which I was able to do, I have been faithful.
If your Lordship vouchsafe me this honorable favor, to accept, and protect my
labors, I shall be much encouraged to take the like pains in the rest: I
hope, to the glory of almighty God, the benefit of his Church, and
demonstration of my duty unto your good Lordship, whom God evermore preserve
unto eternal happiness. Ianu: 25. 1606.

Your Lordships most humble in all Christian obedience, William Symonds.

A heavenly voice.
Reuelar: 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

Reuelar: 18.5. For her sins are come up to heaven, and God has remembered
her iniquities.


WHen the Lord would prove himself to be GOD, and all that is worshipped
besides him to be vanity, he chooses men to be his Judges, and witnesses; and
the issue to be, Esaias, 41, 23.
that he that can show things to come hereafter, should be known to be God.
Then does he refer himself to themselves, Esaias, 44, 7.
that none is like unto him, that shall call, and shall declare it, and set it
in order before him. By this argument he conuicteth his enemies, to the time
of the Apostles: who were his witnesses, that all things were befallen Christ,
which God before had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets. Acts, 3, 18,
And by this argument he conuicteth all tyrants, Chap, 10, 7,
and heretics of the later, and most perilous times, in this book, showing,
before hand, Cap. 1.19.
to his servants, things present, and to come. And this so perfectly, that
Nothing can be added thereto, Cap. 22, 18, 19
neither any thing diminished from the words of this prophecy.

In the former part of this Book, was handled the story of the Church, which
for her sins, and trial, was, from time to time, trodden underfoot by her
manifold enemies, Cap: 2, 5, 10 16, 22, etc. and cap. 3, 3, 19,
according as the Lord had threatened, and foreshewed in the second and third
Chapters. And this is it which is contained from the beginning to the 15 verse
of the 11 chapter. Thence, to the end of that Chapter, is the prophecy of the
better estate of the Church, both delivered from the hands of her enemies,
destroying them that destroy the earth, and reviving the covenant of Grace,
against all oppositions, unto the ruin of Antichrist.

In the second part of this Book, beginning at the 12 chap: the Lord does
give the Church a more pregnant demonstration of her enemies, and their
proceedings against her, that they may be the better known unto her. Cap. 12,
3.
They are therefore described by the Dragon, presenting the heathen Roman
Empire, the monster compounded of three beasts, Cap. 13.1.
(which cannot be tamed by any art of man) that rises out of the sea: and
signifies the Roman Empire corrupted with the heresy of the Arians: Cap. 13,
14.
and the Image of them both, presenting the Antichristian ecclesiastical
Monarchy of Rome. There is also showed the manner of their prevailing against
her, and how they are overcome, unto the seventh verse of the 20 chapter.
Cap. 13, 3,
The second beast, is destroyed with the sword of many Nations. The third,
namely the ecclesiastical Monarchy, called also Babylon, the Image of the
civil Monarchy, is brought to naught by the preaching of the Gospel, and by
the judgments of God inflicted upon her for his servants sakes, whom she has
killed. And this is generally declared in the 14.15 and 16 chapters, but more
particularly in the 17 and 18 chapters. And because this wicked popish
Antichristian beast, required so diligent a description of her person and
sins, that the Saints might be delivered from so perilous a temptation; that
point is effectually handled in the 17 chapter; insomuch, that the Papists
themselves are enforced to acknowledge her to be Rome.

In this chapter are showed the means, and manner of her destruction. The
means by which her enemies are encouraged to bring her plagues upon her, are
two special doctrines of the word of God, prevailing with Prince and people.
Princes converted to the Gospel, (figured by a mighty Angel, Cap, 18, 1, 2, 3.
that enlighteneth the earth with the glory of the Gospel) do iudicially
decree, that Popish Babylon shall fall into a damnable estate, for her great
sins. Namely, first for troubling of states; secondly, for corruption in
doctrine, with which she has poisoned other Nations; thirdly, for the
immoderate riches of her Merchants, who sold both justice, and the souls of
men. Both Prince and people that obey the Gospel of the kingdom, shall bring
her plagues upon her at once, by embracing, and urging a double doctrine of
exhortation; and that is it which is contained in my text.

Of this doctrine, first is showed the place from whence it comes; to wit,
the Temple of God, and his Christ, even the sincere profession of the Gospel;
which in this book, in a manner, continually is called by the name of Heaven.
Here then, all godly men, both Prince and people do join together in those
wholesome admonitions of the Lord. So that those of the spirit of S. John, who
can well understand the things that are spoken, do hear these heavenly
doctrines enforced by them. And this is the meaning of these words; And I heard
another voice (from that which Princes decreed for their private benefit) from
heaven, say. The matter of the exhortation is double; first to forsake her,
even this popish Babylon, and then to pursue her with just revenge. The
doctrine, or exhortation to forsake her, has the proposition, and the
arguments to enforce it. The proposition has the parties admonished, and their
duty. Their duty is to fly from this confused and cursed Babylon of popery,
in these words, Go out of her. The parties on whom this heavenly voice does
vouchsafe to bestow these holy things, are no deaf Adders, but only such
which by Gods election do belong to God: and by the covenant which they make,
and hold, and by their sufferings, for his sake, are known so to do. And
therefore the voice of Jesus Christ the Lord, by his servant, does call them
from heaven, My people.

The reasons why they should forsake her are two; both drawn from manifest
peril. The first is the peril of contagion, and defiling themselves with
touching this pitch, in these words; That ye be not partakers of her sins.
The second is the peril of vengeance to be inflicted upon her, and all her
accomplices, in these words, and that ye receive not of her plagues. This
argument of her plagues is further enforced; and is proved to be heavy and
certain; first, by the justice of God, that requires great sins to be
grievously punished. Wherefore, seeing her sins exceed, it is not possible
to hope for sparing. The greatness of her sins, is expressed in an usual
prouerbiall speech of the Scripture, when it is said, for her sins are come
up to heaven.

The second reason to prove her plagues to be certain, is the diligence that
GOD now uses, in laying together her faults, that she may receive for every
one of them, that which she has deserved; and that is the purpose of these
words; and God has remembered her iniquities. And thus much of the
interpretation of the first doctrine of exhortation to the people of God. It
remains that we proceed to inform our consciences hereby.

I heard another voice from heaven. Here we see, that those of the spirit of
S. John, Do hear the voice that requires men to separate themselves from
Babylon, and to revenge themselves of her, to come from heaven. By heaven, in
this book for the most part, is not understood the place whether our Lord and
Savior is ascended, Acts. 1, 11,
but the congregation of the faithful, professing the Gospel of Christ, in
his Church, where himself is in the midst. For in the fourth chapter, where
S. John does see a throne set up in heaven, about which are 24 seats, Cap. 4,
2, 4
and 24 elders sitting upon them, in the 5 chapter these Eders do praise
Christ, Cap. 5.10.
that had made them Kings and Priests unto God, that should reign on the
earth. And this is proportionable to the rest of the Scriptures, which do call
the Church of Christ, heavenly Jerusalem; Ephe, 2, 6,
and the kingdom of heaven; and those that are converted thereto, are said to
be made to sit together in heavenly places. The meaning is, that those of the
spirit of Saint John, do hear this heavenly doctrine of God, generally taught
among them that do sincerely profess the Gospel of Christ, Come out of her,
etc. Reward her etc.

Heerevpon it does follow, that the doctrine of separation from this popish
Babylon, and the doctrine of revenge to be inflicted upon her, which is reduced
into laws by godly Princes, converted to the Gospel; and which is dilligently
taught by the Preachers of the word; and is put in execution by good and godly
subjects, whether under Magistrates or private men, is to be acknowledged for
none other but a voice from heaven. And when it is said to be a voice from
heaven, it appears that the doctrine is, and ought to be esteemed, as
effectual as if God did immediately speak from heaven. So that it is all one,
whether God from heaven, does command Noah to make and enter the Arc, or
that an Angel bid Lot get him out of Sodom; or Moses importune the people to
get them from the tents of Dathan, and Abiram, or the Prophets Isaiah and
Jeremy, by their prophecies before hand, do instruct both Prince and people,
to teach, and obey this rule, Get out of Babylon; or the godly Princes, and
Preachers exhort the people of God, to separate themselves from the Roman
popish beast. Every voice, in this kind, is of like weight and authority. We
know that it is blasphemed by these undutiful Babylonians to be tirrannie in
Princes; to be affectation of liberty, and spoil in inferior Magistrates; to
be faction, and ignorance, and heresy in Ministers and people. So do we also
know, that whatsoever the devil says in these serpents: yet Saint John and
those of his spirit, do acknowledge they hear this voice from heaven, even
from Jesus Christ; teaching, and instructing the congregation of all faithful
people, out of his holy word, in the Church. Here therefore let all Christian
Kings, Counsailors, Bishops, and all Magistrates, remember the general Canon
of the Apostle; Heb: 12.25.
See that ye despise not him that speaks: For if they escaped not which
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven.

Moreover, seeing this voice is from heaven, it follows, that whosoever does
teach, by writing, or preaching; or does advise, in deliberations, that any
other course is to be held, that these popish Babylonians are in some things to
be yielded unto, and that some more mild, and gentle proceedings toward them
would do better; such I say, neither can truly, nor may justly be commended,
that this wisdom descends from above, but it is from below, Iam: 3.15.
and is earthly sensual, and devilish. 2 Cor: 6.14 etc.
For they labor to reconcile the things which have no agreement, as
righteousness with unrighteousness, light with darkness, Christ and Beliall, the
belieuer with the infidel, the temple of God with idols; and do with Saul
desire to spare Agag, whom God requires to punnish. Again, if the voice be
from heaven, it shall be established; they that speak otherwise are false
Prophets, and they that strive against it, do kick against the prick. Act:
5.38.39.
Wherefore as Gamaliel faith, in another case, refrain your selves from
opposing it, least ye be found fighters against God.

Come out of her my people. Genesis 14.12. Ioshu: 2 1.8 Judge: 4.11 17. 1 King: 19.7
Here first we see that among the wicked are the children of God. A thing very
commonly noted in the Scripture. Lot was in Sodom; Rahab in Jericho: Iaell
among the Gentiles: Obadiah, that feared God greatly, and saved an hundredth of
the Lords Prophets, was the governor of Ahabs house: and to be short, there
were Saints of Caesar's household, even of Nero, that cruel monster. For good
seed, and weed grow up together; and corn and chafe are on the floor
together. Exodus 6,9.
Yea, we know that in Egypt were many Israelites, that could be contented to
live still, with the onions and flesh pots of Egypt, and in Babylon, were many
Jews, Ezec. 20, 32
that said, We will be like the heathen and families of the countries. Yet were
these the redeemed of the Lord, Ezec. 36, 26
and sanctified by him. In this Book, the same is often showed to be the
condition not only of many godly Christians, but also of the most glorious
Church. For she flies into the wilderness, being mingled among the Gentiles,
and such pretended Christians, as followed the Antichristian Papacy.

Out of this, do arise many godly considerations. First, that such as think
that it is not possible for Christians to live under the government of
unchristian Governors, but that they must loose the name of godly men, and
their number must not be called a Church, do exceedingly bewray their
ignorance, both of the Scriptures in general, and of this book of the
Revelation in particular. The Church of Pergamus, was a Church, Reave. 2, 13
and a golden Candlestick, though she dwelt where satan's throne was. Yea,
that which is more, it had them that maintained the doctrine of Balam, that
taught Balack to put a stumbling block, before the children of Israel: and
also those that maintained the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes. And the Church, is
clothed in the sun, Reave, 12, 1, etc.
treads the Moon under her feet, and is crowned with twelve stars: a
Woman, and a glorious Church, and holy, though she be fled into the wilderness,
and mingled among the Antichristian Babylonians, deprived of public
assembles, sacraments, and discipline, as does appear by this speech; Come out
of her my people. So that here I cannot but reprove the Brownists, or rather
the revived Donatists, which have made a separation from us, and our Church;
which they cannot blame as guilty of the sins of Pergamus, or Sardis, or
Corinth, which notwithstanding are acknowledged to be churches, themselves
being our Judges. Much less are we guilty of the sins of Antichrist, among
who^ were the people of God notwithstanding. Sure their ignorance is much to be
lamented, and their dissoluing of Christian Communion to be detested, and
therefore to be avoided.

Secondly, here we learn to answer the Papists, that demand of us where
our Church has been for these thousand years. It was among them, though they
were not it, as the children of Israel were in Egypt, 2, Kings, 17 and 24.
and Babylon, in Goshen, in Holah, and Habor, and in the Cities of the Medes:
and you were translated into their wonted places, as were the Assyrians into
the cities of Samaria, the seat of the people of GOD. But they say, that the
Israelies were known to be in Goshen, during their servitude in Egypt. The
scripture that says also that the Jews in the captivity were in Holah and
Habor, and in the cities of the Medes, does note the place. But as for your
Goshen, and Holah, and Habor, they were no where to be seen, by such as were as
sharp sighted as the Egyptians or Babylonians. To this I answer, first that it
is no merueile, that they see not the godly among them, partly because, like
the devil, they think that all is their own, and never consider Job, Job,
1.8.
that is an upright and a just man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil:
and partly because of this time, that the question is demanded, Saint John
does say, that the woman the Church, Cap: 12.14.
was in the Wilderness, nourished from the face or sight of the serpent; which
for subtlety and quick sight (whereof this Dragon takes his name) may very
near be compared to the Papists. But they say, where were their assemblies,
their sacraments, and sermons with other services. As if there could be no
Jews in Babylon, Amoc. 6.10
because according to the prophecy, they durst not remember the name of the
Lord; as it does also appear in the book of Ester, wherein the name of the
Lord is not once mentioned. Were Ester, Mordecai, and the people that fasted
and prayed no people of God? Mare 7.6.
Or are the godly bound to bewray, and betray themselves, by casting holy
things to dogs, and pearls before swine, to bring the graces of God in them
into contempt; and themselves into manifest perrill? Secondly, we answer,
that our Church was among them, themselves being our Judges. For when they tell
us with what difficulty they gat the title of supremacy, what masculine
opposition they found, when, at Constantinople, and in the second counsel of
Nice, they would erect the worship of the Dragon, by the adoration of idols;
when they tell us, by what arts, they wrong themselves from the subjection of
Princes; when they proclaim bloody, 5 Deer: de haeres: ad abolendum.
and blasphemous laws againse such as teach and believe any otherwise; then
they teach or believe (for so do they define heretics) when they brag of
the many fires, and wars that they consumed them by, and insult of their
conquests this way; they also tell us, that such as maintained the doctrine of
the Apostles, and such as worshipped the God of their fathers after the way
which they call heresy, were among them, persecuted for the same doctrines,
that we differ from them in: and therefore, by their own confession, our
Church was among them, which in this place is called the people of God.

Thirdly, here we learn that such which do live among the Papists, though
stained with some of their superstitions may be saved: but always with
limitation. First that their sin be of ignorance, and not of presumption:
Number. 15.30.
for there remains no sacrifice for the sins of such. And secondly, that
though they be smitten into the place of Dragons, yet must they not forget God,
Psalm: 44.17.20.
nor deal deceiptfully with his covenant, etc. Nor hold up their hands to any
strange God.

The Lord calls his people out of Babylon, now at hand to be destroyed, for
her sins. For the rule is general, that the Judge of all the earth will not
slay the righteous with the wicked: as Abraham says to God. Genesis 18.25.
For how inextricable soever the perrill seem to be, 2 Pet: 2.9.
the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. The Churches of
the old Testament, had here of plentiful experience, when we read that Noah
was delivered from the flood; Lot from the burning of Sodom: and diverse others
from diverse other great dangers. The Churches also of the new Testament, have
found the hand of God nothing shortened. For besides the manifold deliverances
of the godly in the Acts of the Apostles, it is reported, that when Jerusalem
was to be destroyed, because she knew not the day of her visitation; the godly
were forewarned by a voice from heaven, Eusebius: 3.5.
to get them from Jerusalem to Pella, a City beyond Jorden, there to save
them selves.

The same mercy does the Lord show to his people. For purposing to bring a
final destruction upon that Rome, Cap. 11, 8,
which crucified our Lord Jesus, and after become that Antichristian Babylon,
which is drunken with the blood of Saints, Cap. 17, 6,
and Martyrs of Jesus, he first, by a heavenly voice, calls his people out
of her. By this merciful providence are risen all the protestant Churches; and
the same mercy will the Lord continue, till he has drawn all his people from
among them; and till he bring upon this Babylon, her last and greatest
plagues. Hereby we know, that such as fall unto them, are gathered together
like Baals priests, that none of them be wanting when God will have them
consumed; and they that are gained from them, Luke, 3, 7
are escaped from the vengeance to come.

The people of God must come out from her. What is here meant by Babylon, from
whence the people of God must come, there is no great doubt; for both the
Papists and we do agree, Ributa in 14 Reave. no: 27. etc.
that it signifies Rome under Antichrist, which does revive the sins of the
heathen Emperors: But the difference between us, is, when she is to be called
Babylon. The circumstances of the text, which do convict Rome to be the place,
will also teach us when she is Babylon. She must of force be then Babylon, when
she is guilty of the faults for which this Babylon is said to fall. Supra.
verse 2, 2, 3.
Her first sin is, that All Natitions have drunken of the Wine of the wrath
of her fornications. That is, that all Nations have been afflicted, with
wars, treasons, cruelties, and diverse other calamities, because they would
not submit themselves to to her abominable pride, idolatry, and other
spiritual fornications.

Secondly, when the Kings of the earth hane committed fornication with her,
corrupting themselves, and their kingdoms with filthy superstitions, and
wicked inventions, which they have fetched from her. Thirdly, when the
Merchants of the earth are waxed rich, of the abundance of her pleasures,
getting much money by selling justice, and the souls of men.

Now because Rome has been guilty of these three impieties, for the most
part, these thousand years (as the many lamentable examples do make
demonstration, but especially in these later days, before and in the age in
which we live,) we do confidently, and demonstrably conclude, that Rome, for
these thousand years past, has been; and especially in the time in which
we live now is, the Babylon from whence the people of GOD is to come. The
rule is general, that all godly men, ought, at all times, to separate
themselves from the wicked. For thus says Saint Paul, 2, Cor, 6, 17
Come out from amongst them, and separate your selves, (says the Lord) and
touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.

But as the dangers have been the greater, so have the warnings been more
importunate. Wherefore, seeing Babylon, for her many cruelties and corruptions,
was worthy to be destroyed, Prophets Isaiah and Jeremy, Psalm, 137, 8,
prepared many parables, for those that came after, in due time, to draw the
people of GOD from thence, the plaee of the greatest danger. The same words
which these Prophets used, to draw the posterity of Jacob from that first
Babylon, does S. John here use, to vvithdrawe the people of God from this
second Babylon, more dangerous then ever was that first.

Heerevpon it follows, that what were the sins, and cruelties of that first
Babylon, the same are justly imputed to this second Babylon: What peril the
Jews there were in, the same are the people of God in here; and what equity,
by reason of the condition of the people, or iniquity of the oppressors,
induced the Israelites to depart from Babylon, the same is to prevail with
Christians, to depart from this Antichristian Babylon of Rome.

It was a cursed misery for the children of Israel in the captivity, to be
spoken unto in a strange language, and with a stammering tongue: Esaias, 28, 11
But in this Babylon, the whole religion is in a strange tongue. Wherefore,
seeing strange tongues are a sign to them that believe not, 1. Cor. 14.22.
it is a sign, that they whom God has delivered over to these, which speak
these strange tongues, are in the condemnation of Infidels. The people of God
among the Babylonians, Ierem. 50, 6,
were lost sheep: But here, they that follow this Beast, are in the case of
reprobates, Whose names are not written in the book of life of that Lamb.
Reave. 13, 8,
In the first Babylon, the shepherds of Gods people caused them to go astray:
Ierem, 50, 6
but here, their shepherds like the Scribes and Pharisees, compass sea and
land to make one of their profession, Mat. 23, 15.
and when he is made, he is made two fold more the child of hell, then
themselves: bringing them to meditate, and commit treasons, and to be hanged
when they have done.

All that found the people of God in Babylon, devoured them: Ierem. 50, 7.
and their enemies said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the
Lord: But here, as many as are known, or suspected, to differ from them, are
devoured, body, 5 Deer. de haeresibus.
and soul, and goods, and name, and friends.

And here, I cannot but let them that are seduced know, that now, they suffer
many of them to discourse of Religion, at their tables, and in markets, and
other meetings; whom, if they catch so doing, where they have power in their
hands, or shall find so doing in their native Country, when they shall have
prevailed, such discoursers must to the pot, and suffer as heretics,
notwithstanding now they speak the^ fair for a purpose, and for a while.
Wherefore, flee from the mids of Babell, and depart out of the Land of these
popish Caldeans, Iere. 50, 8, Esaias, 52, 2, 3, 11.
and be ye as the he goats before the flock. Loose the bands from thy
neck, o thou captive daughter. They that rule over the people of God, make
them to howl. Depart, depart ye, go out from thence, and touch no unclean
thing, go out of her, and be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.
Come cleave unto the Lord, Iere, 50.5,
in a perpetual covenant, that shall never be forgotten.

It shall not be with you, as it was with the children of Israel, that came
out of Egypt upon a sudden. For ye shall not go out with have, nor depart
by flying away: Esaias, 52, 32,
but the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will gather you
together. Esaias, 28, 17,
The Lord thy God will teach thee to profit, and lead thee by the way that
thou should go. He will teach you the fear of the Lord, and instruct you
by his holy word, to escape the most unprofitable doctrines of superstitions,
and treasons, which directly tend to the destruction of body and soul, and are
only enforced upon you, by fables, and lies; even by lying prophecies of
alterations, and hopes, which shall never be accomplished. Zac. 14, 12,
For this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all people, that
have fought against Jerusalem, even the profession of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, Heb: 12.22.
their flesh shall consume away, though they stand upon their feet, and their
eyes shall consume in their holes, Hosca: 12.1.
and their tongue shall consume in their mouth. They are fed with the wind, and
follow after the east wind, they increase daily lies, and destruction. But if
ye will embrace the Gospel, John. 17.17. Reave: 7.17.
the word of truth, the Lamb which is in the mids of the throne shall govern
you, even the godly and Christian King shall lead you to the Scriptures the
fountain of living waters, and God shall wipe all tears from your eyes.
Moreover, when it is said by a voice from heaven; come out of her my people, it
is the office of as many as belong to heaven: be he King, or Bishop, or
Minister, or Magistrate, by enticing, as God did the Israelites from Egypt, by
thrusting out, as the Angels did Lot from Sodom; by importuning, as Moses did
the people from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram: or by pulling them out
of the fire, Iud: 23. Zach: 3.2.
as God did Iehoshuah, to call to them that belong to God, to come out from
this Babylon of popery, which is horrible for sin, and to be made horrible
by destruction.

And so much the rather, because the enemy is proud. They insult to see the
slacknes of the Ministry, that are nothing so dilligent to save, as they are
to destroy; they insult for the general coldness, if not Apostasy, that is in
the gentlemen, and their inclination to them wards; they insult that the
commissions against them, do find so many failings; they insult for discord,
their ancient helper; they insult that though the face of the law be against
them, yet the edge is turned from them. Wherefore let them see, that every
heavenly voice, of this Land does cry, come out of her my people, Act. 2.4.
and save your selves from this froward generation.

And here I might have passed to another point, were it not for the
Brownistes, that abuse this place to maintain their wilful sin, Heb.
10.25.26.
in for saking the fellowship that we have among our selves. Let them consider,
whether, the circumstances of this text, and the like, where Babylon is
mentioned in this book, or the Prophets, whence Saint John does borrow his
speech, may truly agree to our Church, which maintains so many co^tradictions
unto Antichristian Babylon. Nay, if it may be proved, that we have departed
from as many corruptions, in doctrine and policy, as did conclude Rome to be
Babylon; and have embraced as many doctrines, as did the children of Israel
that came out of Babylon; either must they find us another Babylon among the
Jews, departed from the captivity; or else their separation is an Apostasy
and no departure from Babylon.

Popish Babylon, like the first Babylon, was builte by such, whereof one did
not understand another speech; Gen: 11.7. Beda Eccles. hist: Lib: 1. cap:
15.27. Act: 2.11. Amos. 6.10. Cap: 13.6.
but with us, as in the times of the Apostles, all men do hear in their own
tongues the wonderful things of God.

Among the Babylonians, it was not lawful for the children of God to remember
the name of the Lord; but we teach all men to reverence the sanctuary of the
Lord, and them that worship therein according to the Gospel. In Babylon, Dani:
3.2.3. Reave: 13.15
the people of God were under a foreign Tyrant, and were constrained to
worship the image of the beast, under pain of death; but we are delivered from
that captivity, and now the Lord is our God, Ezech: 34.24.
and his servant David (a Prince of our own Nation) is our King; as the Lord
did promise. Who sees not then, that we are the people of God, come out of
Babylon; and therefore they that are departed from us, have erred in their
hearts, because they have not known the ways of God, and do blaspheme when
they call us Babylon. But my purpose is to urge that only, which directly
Saint John would have us pursue.

That ye be not partakers of her sins. Here first is to be marked, that such
as will not depart from them, shall be infected by them: Ecclus. 13,1
as it is said, He that touches pitch, shall be defiled therewith. The rule
is general, sin is infectious, and this not only with unrighteousness, but
also with impiety. Prou, 22.25
Make no friendship with an angry man, etc. least thou learn his ways,
says Solomon. But in matters of Religion, a man is exceeding weak, and the
temptation mighty; so that a man soon learneth these wicked ways. Therefore
did the Lord, so often, by Moses, and so earnestly, by Joshua forewarne the
Jews to make no compact with the Nations, Exodus, 23, 33 and 34, 15 Deu, 7, 2,
etc Joshua, 23, 13
and inhabitants of the Land, least they should be unto them a snare, to cause
them to serve other Gods. And as it was foretold, so fell it out, as it is in
the Psalm. They were mingled among the heathen, Psalm. 106, 35
and learned their works. But more perilous is this time of Antichrist: 2, Tim.
3, 1 2, These. 2, 11
because in it, the Lord does send strong delusion, so that if it were
possible, the elect should be deceived. Mat, 22, 24 Reave, 13.8,
No marvel the, if all those whose names are not written in the book of life,
do follow the beast. And to justify the truth hereof, we daily see many
loose fellows, practicing, and undutiful wits, that meditate upon an
alteration, to be daily seduced by the Popish priests, which swarm in the
Land. Insomuch that it is to be supposed, not only by the wit of man, but also
by the Word of God, that except some speedy voice come from heaven, to
command the people to come out from her: and that the Lord send some mighty
North wind, to take away these Popish frogs, which are the spirits of devils,
these traiterous Jesuits and Priests, Cap. 16, 13,
and violently to cast them into the sea, without all question, Exodus: 10.19
many subjects will partake in the traitorous sins, of this Babylonian
tyranny. Their sin is, That as many as will not worship the beast, the Pope,
must be killed. For this doctrine, Reave, 13, 15
the spirit of the beast does continually enforce by all means, what ever
other pretense he make.

Least ye be partakers of her sins, here it is further showed, that the
people of GOD must not communicate with the sins of this Antichristian
Babylon. The rule is general, that the godly must not partake with any
sinners, as the Apostle says, Ephe, 5, 1^
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. And again, Come
out from among them, 2, Cor, 6, 17
and touch no unclean thing. And again, Jude, 23,
Hate the garment that is spotted with the flesh.

To this purpose did Christ admonish his Disciples, not to partake with the
wicked Clergy of his time, saying; Take heed of the leven of the Pharasies,
and Saduces, Mat, 16, 12,
meaning their evil doctrine, and Woluish conditions. And Saint Paul requires
to hold an Angel, or Apostle, Gala. 1, 8, 9,
or any other man, accursed, that brings in any other doctrine, then was at
first received. What marvel is it then, if Saint John, in so perrilous and
damnable a time as this, when the holy City is become an harlot, yea, a
Tyrant, and head of the Gentiles, proud Babylon, Rome, a City drunken with
the blood of the Saints, if (I say) he forbid all people to partake in her
barbarous, blasphemous, and covetous sins, directly contrary to the
salvation of body and soul.

It seems a heavy, and grievous thing, to depart from the consent of so many
Nations, and ages; and to be esteemed scismaticall: But when the commandment
of God, does require us, not to join hand in hand with the wicked to evil,
but to come out from Babylon, the commandment does minister unto us a just
Apology before men, and stablish the conscience before God, to be innocent,
and defensible, in this separation. What are the sins of this popish Babylon,
is partly to be gathered out of Daniell, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiell, and
other scriptures, where mention is made of Babylon. For when Rome is here
called Babylon, we have this liberty, to impute the cruelties, and other sius
of the former Babylon, to this.

In this book more especially, are mentioned these sins, Reu, 9.20, 21.
Idolatry, murder, sorcerie, fornication, theft, and these are further
explaned in other places of this book. In the tenth chapter her sin is, when
Princes have rored as Lions, Cap. 10, 3, 4.
to keep the possession of the people and soil, to cry them down with
thundering execrations, and excommunications. Cap. 11, 7,
In the 11, to make war with the witnesses of Jesus, when they have finished
their testimony. In the thirteen it is said, Cap. 13, 6, 7
that having got power to speak, and do, what her lift, she abuses her
authority to blaspheme, and to make war with the Saints; even to kill all
that are not of her faction. verse 15.


All of her sins may be reduced to these twoheades; The profanation of the
worship of God, and the barbarous overthrow of all charitable communion among
men. When therefore we are commanded not to partake with her sins, we are
forbidden to defile the fear of God with any of her abominations; or to
dissolve Christian Communion with any of her cruelties; and oppressions. A man
may partake in sins, either by joining in the action, or by favoring them
that do it. Wherefore, Romans 1. vit.
we are here required, neither to join with her, in any of her sins, nor to
favor them that do. We have many in our Country that partake manifestly with
this Romish Babylon, in her fornications and superstitions; as does appear by
the many ratles, idols, beads, and such other trumperie, that are found
continually among them. Yea, we have many that have been willing to minister
the cup of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, to Prince and people; as
appears by the many treasons, which are attempted: and the correspondence of
multitudes with the traitors. Yea, that which is more, there are found in
England, (I had almost said in London) schools to train up Gentlemen's
children, in this impious, and rebellious religion, where the Governors
disclaim his sacred Majesty, King James, to be their King, and profess
themselves the Popes subjects. But the holy Ghost here speaks to them all,
Be not partakers with her sins.

Others happily there may be, every way as pestilent, who publicly seem to
favor the Gospel, but covertly, and underhand, favor, and much further this
ungodly, and pestilent religion, playing fast and loose with the state. How
perilous this kind of persons is, may be seen in the story of Constantine the
great. In his time, certain supposed Arian conuerts, abusing the singular
lenity, and credulity of the Emperor, insinuated themselves into the favor
of the Prince, Socr. 1, 10, 18, etc.
wrought themselves into offices, and employments in the common wealth; they
openly seemed to maintain the faith of the Nicaene Creed; but keeping their
old corruption, in their hearts, by all means they could, collaterally, with
slanders and injustice, through the sides of godly men, wounded the holy and
innocent cause. I fear among the Justices of the Land, etc. may be be found
very many such, every way as preiuditiall to the Gospel. Blessed be his mouth
that said, he would remove them, and put better in their rooms; and blessed
be his hand that does it. In the mean space, this heavenly voice does speak
to such, Partake not with her sins. And herein it is required we be the
more circumspect; because her sins are so subtle, that they enter in, and
possess many a man, which does seem to himself, and to others, to hold this
filthy Babylon in singular abomination. But it follows in the next place.

And that ye receive not of her plagues. For such as will continue in a place
to be destroyed, must fcele the smart of the same destruction. Lots wife being
delivered from Sodom, in compassion, would look back toward her old
neighbors, and was turned into a pillar of salt. Remember Lots Wife, Luke 17.32
says Christ. As her sins are many and foul, so are her plagues very many
and heavy. For the better discovering of her sins, she is called the Image
of the beast, which was wounded with the sword, Cap. 13, 14,
and did live, as having as many sins, as were found in the Empire, whether
corrupted by the Arians, or in the hands of the heathen Tyrants. Her plagues
therefore are as many, as are the plagues of the enemies of the Gospel,
mentioned in this Book.

In the sixth chapter, the contempt of the Word of God by the heathen, Reave. 6,
8,
is punished with sword, mortality, famine, and beasts: kinds of plagues
which have much afflicted this popish beast. Wherefore we must know, that when
the Land, or City is punished with wars, or murders, with famine or
pestilence, or other mortality, it is for the sin of such as partake in the
Antichristian sins, of the contempt of the Word of God. For instance, this
City, When upon the death of the late Queen, worthy of eternal memory, it
became to give entertainment, and rest, to such which plotted treasons, and
drifted the rooting out of the Gospel, did lately feel the scourge of
pestilence, the Pale horse: since have we been threatened with the shaking of
the great sword of him that sits on the red horse. Cap. 6, 4.
And if we repent not, by our more zealous embracing of the Word of GOD, which
sits upon the white horse, Verse, 2,
and by coming out from among the popish enemies thereof, we may fear the
experience of Famine, that sits on the black horse. In other places of this
book, the plagues of this Babylon are woeful, by the incursion of fieree
strangers; by the continual wars with unreconcilable and mortal enemies;
by the severity of godly Kings; and by the reprofe of the preachers of the
Gospel. Cap. 9. and 10 and 11. Cap. 16.
In other places, are mentioned the plagues of sores, of bloodshed by sea and
land, of unseasonable and distempered airs, of darkning her kingdom, etc.
When these things also come upon the places where the gospel is professed, we
must know, that it is because of the sins of such, as partake in the sins of
the Babylontan King Abaddon, the great Antichrist. I know the brags, and lies
of that Sect; They persuade their damned Proselytes, that in former times,
before the days of Queen Elizabeth, (whose memory be always blessed) the
times were peaceable, plentiful, holy, and of one mind with them. Howbeit,
their own Writers do make demonstration, that all the world besides, cannot
afford us so many barbarous tragedies, vnspeakeaable dissentions, horrible
impieties, lamentable desolations, and terrible judgments from above.
Insomuch, that the earth, for giving power to this Babylonian beast, has from
time to time been smitten with all manner of plagues. Cap. 11, 6,
Then to deliver our selves from so many calamities, come out of her my people,
and receive not of her plagues, says this heavenly voice.

Many have thought it an excellent policy, to prevent the evils that may come
by barbarous heretics, to come as near unto them as they can. 2, Reg. 16, 2
Chro, 28,
So is it said of Ahaz, King of Judah, that he made an altar according to the
fashion of that of the Aramites of Damascus, drew near to the religion of the
King of Ashur, made peace with him, and gave him large rewards. But all helped
not. For when he called to him for aid, he did not strengthen him, but
afflicted him. Neither found the Jews any better success, with drawing near
to the religion of the Cananites. For then did the Philistims, and other
Gentiles, Read the book of the Judges.
tyrannise over them most extremely. Thanks be to God, we be utterly
departed, from this popish Babylon, in deed. Yet some very small supposed
appearances, that they think we partake with them in, have caused them to be
exceeding confident in their own religion, as it were, by our testimony; They
detest our differences from them, and have presumed, that by one practice or
other, of wit or force, we might easily be reduced again, full and whole to
their subjection. Yea, they have been hereby much exasperated; but nothing
reconciled, notwithstanding their hypocrisies. By this, it may appear how
perrilous it is, as much as in the least seeming to partake with her sins.
But if once all the Princes professing the Gospel, being clean departed from
her, did join together, in that great Hallelu-iah, which David prays for,
Psalm: 67.5.
when he says, let all the people praise thee O God, ye let all the people
praise thee: then should they find the blessing that follows; then shall the
earth bring forth her increase, and God, even our own God, shall give us his
blessing. For so do the godly sing Hallelu-iah, because God has condemned the
great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication. Cap: 19.2.
Now the better to forewarne us of her plagues, he shows that they must
needs be great.

For her sins are come up to heaven. There is no sin so small, which does
not come up to heaven, unto the sight of God; every tear is put in his
bottell, and all these things are written in his book. How be it, the
Scripture is not wont to use this kind of phrase, but whereas sins do so
exceed, that their punnishment cannot be deferred. So the cry of the sins of
Sodom are said to come up to God, that is, to be exceeding grievous. Gen: 18.
20.21. 2 Chro: 28.9.
The sins of Israel, for which he was captiued, were such, that their rage
is said to reach up to heaven; that is, to be excessive; not only in the sight
of God, but also in the sight of men. When finnes seem small, by reason of the
gross ignorance that is in the world, it is one thing; but when, by the
abundance of knowledge, they appear as they be, the case is otherwise; as
Saint Paul says, Act: 17.30.
the time of this ignorance God regarded not: but now he admonishes all men,
every where, to repent. So, while the days were dark, the gross smnes of the
Antichristian Babylonians seemed very small; nay the world did think them
holy, and righteous. But now, that the marvelous light of the Gospel does
shine; her sins, which have gotten a wonderful inctease, are manifestly
discerned to be heaped up to heaven. Besides her sins of cruelty, whereby
she justifies her elder Sister, the first Babylon: both the law and the
Gospel, do prove her sins to be heaped up to heaven. The L'ord, in the
law, does severely condemn the having of many Gods; but there never was Nation
under the sun, that could be compared to this Antichristian Babylon, for
multitude of Gods.

The Lord did always abhor such kinds of worship, as him self had not
prescribed, which yet for the most part consisted in many frivolous
obseruances; but these have not only defiled the worship of God with
abominable inventions; but also have translated the true, and spiritual
worship of God to creatures; nay to idols; Petrus de Natale
nay to figments, as witnesses their fable of Saint George. It is a sin that
God will not hold guiltles to take his name in vain. But these, do not only
abuse the name of God; but also God himself; not only to vanity, but also to
the committing of the greatest abominations; as to curse Kings, and to stir
up rebellion against them, by their Bulls. In the primitive Church, Plim: lib:
10. example: 97. Eus: 3.30.
the Christians did assemble themselves in the morning, praising Christ their
God; and bound themselves with the sacrament, not to commit adultery, not to
murder, not to be perfidious, or traiterous; but these abuse the Sacrament,
which they call their God, and their maker, to unspeakable evils. For Pope
Victor the 2. was poisoned in his Chalice, by his Deacon, Genebrard. Chron.
Paral. vrsp.
and Henry the 7. the Emperor, was poisoned by a Dominican hypocrite, in the
Sacrament. But now, they use the Sacrament to convey the devil into men,
before somewhat honest. For they do bind men by their Sacrament, to murder
Princes, nobles, yea, the whole Parliaments, and the whole Church of God. And
their subject, like Judas Iscariot, who upon receiving of the sop was ouerruled
by the devil to betray his Master, do resolve upon such murders; as the
like is not to be found in the stories of the most infamous tyrants. And so
their sins are come up to heaven.

As for the second table, they teach not only children to dishonor their
parents, and wives to despise their husbands; but also subjects to rebel
against their lawful Princes. Yea, they thrust out the lawful heirs, and
vfurpe the kingdoms and Empire. They arrogate unto themselves power to plant
and depose whom they list. Did. 40. Si papa. in Glosla Deponendus si minus vt:
lis. Fasc. Tem. in Zach. 1.
The cause is counted sufficient to depose a Prince, if he be less for their
profit, and the cause is sufficient to place who^ they list, if he be more for
their profit. They murder, and that in such horrible manner, that they justify
the most abominable persecutors; withes be their endeavor to blow up the
Parliament house, and to fire cities, Read the massacre in Paris, anno. 1572.
to paue streets with dead carcasses, and to stain great rivers with the
blood of the slain. They can give you a reason, why stews of both kinds be
profitable in a common wealth. They teach it for good divinity, for those of
their faction, to rob the goods of the Protestants, which I take to be the
cause that so many Papists be thieues. And I think the popish thieues, if they
were demanded by the Judge, would not let to clear their consciences by their
religion. They condemn the memory of all godly men, and so are the falsest
witnesses that ever trod upon the earth. Generally, there is nothing so
contrary to wholesome doctrine, which among them is not good divinity, if it
may any way serve to advance their greatness. Yea, they have turned that
gracious rule, 1, Tim, 6, 5, 6.
Godliness is great gain, into Gain is great godliness. And as they deal with
the Law, so do they with the covenant of Grace. For they have clean left off
to give knowledge of salvation to the people, by the remission of their sins,
Luke. 1, 77 78.
through the tender mercy of our God, in the blood of Jesus Christ: and souls
are bought and sold at a base price, of silver, and gold, and corruptible
things; 1, Pet, 8, 18,
contrary to the words of S. Peter. Yea, for a small price, Guicciar. lib 13.
an. 1520
and sometimes are set upon a game at tables, as a writer of their own does
acknowledge. And while they thus make vile the blood of Christ, it may justly
be said, that her sins are gone up to heaven: and so being great, are near
unto destruction. A second reason to prove her plagues to be at hand, does
follow.

God has remembered her iniquities. It is true, that in God is neither
forgetfulness, nor recalling to memory. For all things are always present,
Heb, 4, 13
and naked, and bare unto him, with whom we have to do. But the Scripture
speaks of God after the manner of men, for our better understanding. Namely,
that as men, when they purpose to right or revenge the wrongs that are done
them, do call enery partieuler to memory, the better to further their
determination; so God, when he purposes to relieve his servant, or punish
his enemies, is said to Remember his Covenant, and to remember their sins.
So when the Lord does intend to punish, Hosea, 8, 13 and 9, 9.
the Prophet says, The Lord will remember their iniquities, and visit their
sins. Wherefore, when here it is said, that God has remembered her
imquities, it must be supplied, and will visit her sins. As men have their
means to remember things forgotten, so God, by such means, does let it
appear he remembers such things, as men suppose he has forgotten. Men use to
remember their wrongs, when they behold the things in which they are wronged;
so does God remember the cruelties of the Egyptians, Exodus, 2.23 and 3, 9.
when he beholds the burdens of his servant, the children of Israel.
Again, men call to mind, when they have reme^brancers; such unto God, are his
Prophets, and Ministers of his word and Sacraments. For thus says the Widow
of Zarephtah to Elias, when her son was dead, 1, Kings, 17, 18,
What have I to do with thee thou man of God, art thou come to call my sins
to remembrance, and to fley my son? But especially, men recall things to
memory, when the persons that do the wrong, do renew their old manner of
mischief. So does God, when the wicked return to their vomit, and so abuse
the patience of God, by provoking him by the same sins, which they seemed to
have broken off. Such are the sins of the Romish Babylon here spoken of, Ribera
in Apoc. cap. 14, and 18.
as the papists themselves confess. For they say, when Rome shall be guilty of
the sins of the heathen emperors, and persecutors which were before in her
cruel days, Then shall God remember her miquities present and past. And
indeed such are Gods proceedings. For he threatens the man, that leaving his
sm became righteous, that if he forsakes his righteousness, he shall die for his
transgression and sin. vz. Ezec. 18, 24
first and last. Now let every man that has any brains in his head, to judge,
or conscience in his bosom to acknowledge things as they be, consider, and
speak, if he can find any idolatry so sinful, or cruelty so barbarous
among the greatest heathen Emperors, or among the most beastly and bloody
Arians, which may not be justified, being compared with the spiritual
fornications of this Babylonian synagogue of Antichrist, and with her
continual drunkenness with the blood of the Saints. Wherefore, seeing the blood
and ashes, of milions of innocent Martyrs; and the indignities and treasons
offered to so many godly princes, does cry for vengeance; seeing the faithful
preaching, and profession of the gospel, does call for the assistance, and
testimony of the judgments of God; and lastly, seeing that her exceeding rage,
and violent madness, in committing the sins of her abominable impieties,
formerly condemned, does repeat her sins past, how can we think, but God
has remembered her iniquities. And, thanks be unto almighty God, we see, at
this time, the high court of Parliament, now, by the grace of God to be
assembled, so effectually put in mind of her sins, that if now, they do not
awaken, it is to be supposed, that nothing will awaken them, till it be too
late. But we hope, and earnestly pray unto almighty God to see such laws
concluded, as well for the matter, as for the faithful manner of their
execution, both in this parliament, and also in the assemblies of other Princes
abroad, that may prove, that God has so remembered her iniquities; and may make
their hearts to quake that partake in her sins, because they shall see no
remedy, but to receive of her plagues. The same Lord, which was wont to
confirm the word of his servants, Esaias, 44, 26,
and perform the counsel of his Messengers, bring this heavenly voice to so
happy an effect, even for Jesus Christ his sake, who sits at the right hand
of his Father, till all his enemies be made his footestoole. And let all true
Christians say Amen Amen. Hallelu-jah.

FINIS.

